==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Latency control and optimization for precision time
applications in FPGA based communication systems
Daniel Alberto Dik Rodriguez
Supervised by: Associate Professor Michael Stübert Berger, PhD
Co-supervised by: Andreas Magnussen, PhD
Technical University of Denmark
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 2019
==PAGE:2==
Cover image: Image of an FPGA board from https://www.xilinx.com/
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics Engineering
DTU Fotonik
Ørsteds Plads 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel: (+45) 4525 6352
Web: www.fotonik.dtu.dk/
Author e-mail: s171734@student.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Preface
v
Abstract
vi
Acknowledgements
vii
List of Figures
viii
List of Tables
x
Abbreviations
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Organization of the report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the art
3
2.1
FPGA: Technology and Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Connectivity in FPGA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Latency in FPGA Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Method
9
3.1
Design proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Circuit design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Software design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Testing scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
27
4.1
Frequency measurement test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Latency measurement test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
iii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
iv
5
Conclusions and future work
44
Bibliography
46
A Code listings
49
A.1
Circuit design: Top level block
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
A.2
Circuit design: Synchronization block for enabler
. . . . . . . . . .
54
A.3
Circuit design: Synchronization block for counter . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.4
Circuit design: Sampling block
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.5
Circuit design: Frame Analyzer block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.6
Software design: Acquisition of frequency measurements . . . . . .
60
A.7
Software design: Acquisition of latency measurements
. . . . . . .
62
A.8
Software design: Processing of frequency measurements
. . . . . .
62
A.9
Software design: Processing of latency measurements . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Photonics Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a Master
of Science degree in Telecommunication. The research providing the foundation for the
35 ECTS thesis has been conducted over a period of six months from January 4th to
July 4th, 2019 under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Michael Stübert Berger, PhD and
co-supervised by Andreas Magnussen, PhD.
Daniel Alberto Dik Rodriguez
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, July 2019
v
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The expansion of technology continuously increases throughout time, opening doors to
a multitude of solutions. The electronics supporting these advances have considerably
evolved over the last 30 years and today FPGA leads in the design of digital circuits. Due
to its characteristics, FPGAs are speciﬁcally suitable for the development of systems for
time-critical applications, which considers the sending and receiving of information from
one point to another in a ﬁxed and predictable amount of time.
This thesis sets out to address the lack of a standardized way of measuring latency in the
communication layer of FPGA designs, which is critical for the adoption of these circuits
in real-time applications. Hence, this work, proposes an all-digital latency measurement
infrastructure for FPGA-based communication systems. The design allows the measure-
ment of frequency in a desired clock domain and of latency in different functional blocks
of the communication layers. Following the design phase, the system was implemented
in a Xilinx-based Network Interface Card. Finally a set of tests contemplating different
10 Gigabit Ethernet scenarios were designed and performed, allowing the analysis of the
deterministic behavior in the latency measurements.
vi
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my immense gratitude to my supervisor Michael Stübert Berger,
PhD, for his invaluable academic support during my two years of studies. I wish also
to acknowledge the guidance provided by Andreas Magnussen, PhD, in this project,
whom with his expertise encouraged and inspired me to keep myself passionate in the
development of my career.
I am very thankful to the Ecuador Government institution "Secretaria de Educacion
Superior, Ciencia, Tecnologia e Innovacion" for being the sponsoring entity of my schol-
arship for my master studies.
Thank you God for your inﬁnite love. A special thanks to my adorable mother Rosario,
my brother Alberto and all my family for their priceless encouragement throughout my
studies. To conclude, I would like to thank all the wonderful people I have met during
this time for being extraordinary friends and making Denmark my home.
vii
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
10 GbE Architecture [10]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
10 GbE layers functionality [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
GTX transceiver topology [24] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1
Elements of the working environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
NIC design block diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Full system block diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Xilinx PCIe components [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Xilinx PCIe TX and RX Engines [23] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
Circuit design of interface between FPGA top level block and PCIe interface
14
3.7
Frequency measurement circuit design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.8
Latency measurement circuit design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.9
Transmission and reception of 10 GbE frames . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.10 (a) Test 1 conﬁguration (b) Test 2 conﬁguration
. . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.11 GTX transceiver loopback modes [24]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.12 Test 1 Near-end PCS internal loopback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.13 Test 2 Near-end PMA internal loopback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.14 Test 3 External loopback . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Frequency measurement sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Test 1 histogram of sampling frequency for 1 million samples
. . . . .
30
4.3
Test 1 histogram of TX clock frequency for 1 million samples . . . . .
31
4.4
Test 1 histogram of RX clock frequency for 1 million samples
. . . . .
31
4.5
Test 1 histogram of clock counter diﬀerence between TX and RX for 1
million samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
Test 2 histogram of sampling frequency for 1 million samples
. . . . .
33
4.7
Test 2 histogram of TX clock frequency for 1 million samples . . . . .
33
4.8
Test 2 histogram of RX clock frequency for 1 million samples
. . . . .
34
4.9
Test 2 histogram of clock counter diﬀerence between TX and RX for 1
million samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
viii
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
ix
4.10 Latency measurement sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.11 Near-end PCS latency results in clock cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.12 Near-end PCS latency results in time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.13 Near-end PMA latency results in clock cycles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.14 Near-end PCS latency results in time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.15 External latency results in clock cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.16 External latency results in time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
3.1
Computer and FPGA NIC features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
PCIe interface circuit main signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Frequency measurement circuit main signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Latency measurement circuit main signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1
Near-end PCS average latency results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Near-end PMA average latency results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
External average latency results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Transceivers layers average latency results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.5
Transceivers layers latency variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
x
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
ASIC
Application-Speciﬁc Integrated Circuits
CLB
Conﬁgurable Logic Blocks
EoF
End of Frame
FPGA
Field Programmable Gate Array
GbE
Gigabit Ethernet
HDL
Hardware Description Language
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IIoT
Industrial Internet of Things
IP
Intellectual Property
LUT
Lookup Tables
MAC
Medium Access Control
NIC
Network Interfa Card
PCIe
Peripheral Component Interconnect Express
PCS
Physical Coding Sublayer
PD
Phase Detector
PLL
phase Locked loop
PMA
Physical media attachment
PMD
Physical Medium Dependent
PHY
Physical
RAM
Random Access Memory
RX
Receive
SoF
Start of Frame
TLP
Transaction Layer Packet
TSN
Time Sensitive Networking
TX
Transmit
xi
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Throughout the last century humanity has experienced uncountable advances in our way
of living. The great developments of Telecommunications technology have brought us
to the future once envisioned as ﬁction, from the ﬁrst telephone call back in 1876 [29]
to the possibility of photographing a black hole 55 million light-years from Earth [17],
dreams are becoming true at a faster speed than ever before. It is evident how several
industries, such as avionics, aerospace, automotive, and communication among others,
are constantly expanding their applications allowing our world to be explored and our
civilization satisﬁed.
Alongside these great successes, the electronics powering all applications’ operation
are of primary and indispensable importance. All the circuits composing a system serve
as its vital life structure, and over time the way of designing and implementing these
circuits has continuously been developed. From the 1980s Application-Speciﬁc Integrated
Circuits (ASICs) have been an electronic technology option to run desired processes in
a system, and as its name describes, it only worked for a speciﬁc application previously
designed by the manufacturer. On the other hand, Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs), introduced later in 1984, consist of circuits whose logical function run a process
that can be reprogrammed at any time by a user, offering much more ﬂexibility and faster
development. Despite ASIC’s expansion by adding programmability in its product in
order to continue its competitiveness, FPGA in the last 30 years has dominated the market.
FPGA has grown in capacity by more than a factor of 10.000, in performance by a factor
of 100, and cost and energy per operation have both decreased by more than a factor of
1.000 [12]. These parameters deﬁne the positioning of FPGA technology over ASICs,
with a market projection of 10.87% Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) between
2018 and 2023 [20].
With the growth of FPGA-based applications, connectivity has became a priority. Multiple
markets require access to the network to share data among its systems; different industries
develop delicate applications in which time is a critical factor in its operation. This is due
to the need of ensuring the sending of information from one point to another occurs in
a ﬁxed and predictable amount of time. The concept of Smart Cities could be used as
an example of the mentioned real-time applications [18]. The implementation of these
1
==PAGE:13==
1.2. Objectives
2
systems considers building automation in public buildings, smart buses and trains, intelli-
gent trafﬁc control, smart street lighting, sensor-controlled parking management systems,
smart electricity grids, etc [30]. The Time Sensitive Networking (TSN) update to the
IEEE Ethernet standard intends to provide the required mentioned time synchronization
and deterministic network communication over Standard Ethernet to support the needs of
the market [3].
Current FPGA products offer available interface to the Ethernet network supporting
the 10 Gigabit Ethernet IEEE Standard, which considers fast low-latency communication.
Additionally, different vendors are currently developing customization and conﬁgurability
in its products for offering the manufacture of optimized TSN devices and systems. Still,
there is a challenge to introduce ﬁxed delay in FPGA circuit design implementations.
Currently there isn’t a generally accepted, standardised way to measure and quote the
latency of available commercial FPGA fabric offerings and hence make valid comparisons
of their features or performance. Therefore, a measurement mechanism for analyzing the
latency behavior of FPGA circuit designs is needed.
1.2
Objectives
This thesis focuses on the proposal of a latency measurement system for FPGAs. This is
achieved through the following objectives:
1. An understanding of the different layers implemented in a FPGA design based on a
predeﬁned technology and application
2. To study the deﬁnition of latency and its behavior according to an FPGA conﬁguration
with a selection of a target layer for analysis
3. To design a digital circuit for the development of a latency measuring method
4. To validate the operation of the proposed design in real-life FPGA case scenarios
1.3
Organization of the report
This report is organized as follows: Chapter 2 discusses the theory upon which this work is
based, Chapter 3 describes the design of the proposed latency measurement infrastructure,
Chapter 4 illustrates the results after the system implementation, and in Chapter 5 the
conclusions are presented with an analysis of the future work following the achieved
goals. The code describing the digital design and tests is enclosed in Appendix A.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER2
State of the art
2.1
FPGA: Technology and Applications
An FPGA chip is a reconﬁgurable digital circuit that consists of conﬁgurable logic blocks
(CLB) with programmable interconnections and I/O blocks that access external envi-
ronments [22] [28]. CLBs are made of ﬂip-ﬂops and lookup tables (LUTs), and their
conﬁguration allows them to perform any logic function. Hence, FPGAs offer the creation
of customizable circuits for a broad variety of applications in which the design can be
updated at any time after its manufacture and deployment.
An application is designed in a Hardware Description Language (HDL) programming
environment and then programmed on an FPGA[21]. The programming process allows
the loading of the circuit description into an FPGA by its conversion to a stream of bits
that conﬁgures the state of the FPGA memory and determines the logical function that
the FPGA implements. The programming process consists of a number of stages [4].
Synthesis is the ﬁrst stage that transforms the HDL description into a set of boolean gates,
ﬂip-ﬂops and wiring connections, also called boolean network. Technology mapping then
generates a network of LUTs and ﬂip-ﬂops implementing the boolean network. This is
followed by packing, which forms groups of logic blocks, and placement, which deter-
mines which logic block within an FPGA should implement the corresponding logic block
required by the circuit. Finally, routing assigns independent routing resources to every net.
The programming environment allows the design of an HDL application program. Major
FPGA manufacturers have their own proprietary software that involves advanced tools
for each design stage. This includes vendor-speciﬁc intellectual property (IP) modules
that can be added to a design facilitating the development of applications. Xilinx and
Intel are the top vendors in the FPGA market providing a broad variety of products such
as development boards and design environments and tools for the implementation of
any desired circuit. When designing an application, depending on its nature, speciﬁc
products offered by the vendors are available to be chosen considering the requirements
of the project. This includes Low End FPGAs, designed for low power, logic density and
complexity, High End FPGAs, for logic density and high performance, and Mid Range
FPGAs, for a balance between performance and cost [25]. Additionally, vendors provide
customizable IP modules and example designs that can be used as a starting point for
developing new applications or that can be added to a main design.
3
==PAGE:15==
2.2. Connectivity in FPGA
4
The ﬂexibility FPGAs offer creates the opportunity of designing digital circuits for a broad
variety of applications. The main markets Xilinx lists as its targeted products solutions are:
Aerospace and Defense, Emulation and Prototyping, Automotive, Broadcast, Consumer
Electronics, Data Center, High Performance Computing, Industrial, Medical, Test and
Measurement, Wired and Wireless Communications. Hence, FPGA constitutes a growing
technology to be exploited for current and next generation applications [14] [15].
2.2
Connectivity in FPGA
The communication layer in FPGA-based applications has became a priority when design-
ing a new system. The great majority of applications that have been developed require
access to the network for the exchange of data among its components and with other
devices. For these purposes, FPGA-based Network Interface Cards (NICs) have been
designed to ensure the desired connectivity and to serve as a base to build different
applications on top. NICs are connected to a computer through a bus interface provid-
ing connectivity with other computers in the network based on a communication standard.
Figure 2.1: 10 GbE Architecture [10]
==PAGE:16==
2.3. Latency in FPGA Systems
5
The Peripheral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe) provides a bus interface be-
tween a computer and a NIC at high-speed data rates [26]. The communication standard
implemented in a NIC considers the physical and data link layers based on a chosen
networking technology. The 10 Gigabit Ethernet (10 GbE) communication standard,
introduced in 2002 and widely used in electronic trading, proposes the transmission of
Ethernet frames at rates of 10 Gbps and has been a cost-effective solution supporting high-
speed, low latency requirements [10]. Thus, an FPGA-based NIC circuitry implements a
design of both the PCIe interface connection and the 10 GbE communication standard.
The 10 GbE speciﬁcation’s layered model can be seen in Figure 2.1. It illustrates how
the FPGA application on top interacts with the MAC layers and the incoming and out-
going data passes through the PCS, PMA and PMD layers for communicating with the
physical communication medium. The functionality of each of these layers is is shown in
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: 10 GbE layers functionality [10]
For the implementation of the PCIe and the 10 GbE layers in the FPGA, different vendor
products offer their support by hard IP and soft IP on the FPGA chips; these IPs provide
components and libraries for its aggregation to a circuit design ﬂow. Often, the mentioned
IPs, as they are proprietary blocks designed from vendors, have only limited customization
and access available.
2.3
Latency in FPGA Systems
The requirement of high-speed communication increases with the development of evolv-
ing market applications and with the expanding of technology such that an attention
for developing solutions for time-critical applications has grown. The category of these
applications is the one in which data is required to be precisely coordinated over time
[19]. This occurs when a need for time synchronization and deterministic communication
is indispensable for its effective operation. Among the industries and applications which
==PAGE:17==
2.3. Latency in FPGA Systems
6
need to stick to strict timing rules, the following can be listed: Machine Control, Automo-
tive Networks, Distributed Monitoring, and Media Networking; examples that show the
delicacy of its data treatment when the presence of an error could affect dramatically the
application’s main purposes [31].
The TSN update to the Ethernet standard intends to address the mentioned timing and
control needs with the standardization of the speciﬁcations of new features considering
guaranteed packet transport with bounded latency, low packet delay variation, and low
packet loss. With the TSN concept, the opportunities of development for the Industrial
Automation sector have expanded; it enables cooperation between industrial devices from
any vendor and also removes the need for physical separation of critical and non-critical
communication networks [27]. Thus, allowing open data exchange between operations
and enterprise, a concept at the heart of the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Major
industrial vendors are contributing and planning options on the utilization of TSN such as
National Instruments, Siemens, Rockwell Automation, General Electric, Bosch Rexroth,
Mitsubishi, Schneider Electric, among others.
Figure 2.3: GTX transceiver topology [24]
==PAGE:18==
2.3. Latency in FPGA Systems
7
FPGAs’ customization and conﬁgurability allow the development of optimized TSN
devices for different application purposes. Currently, FPGA vendors are working on the
incorporation of proprietary TSN IP modules to provide this new feature in any applica-
tion design. Hence, additional to the requirement of high-speed communications, low
deterministic latency is demanded to be considered in FPGA-based board developments
for reaching the mentioned evolving applications.
The 10 GbE communication standard satisﬁes the desired speed rates and aims to en-
sure low latency requirements. Still, its circuitry implementation doesn’t offer precise
information of the speciﬁc latency at the different layers of the design; MAC, PCS, PMA,
PMD and physical medium. Hence, correct latency measurements are still needed to
serve as an input for the development of the mentioned time-critical applications requiring
determinism in their communication layer [7] [8] [2].
The implementation of the 10 GbE layers in the FPGA varies between vendor prod-
ucts. Xilinx offers a 10GbE PCS/PMA IP core as an interface between the 10 GbE MAC
and the PHY medium [13]. The IP core is implemented by power-efﬁcient transceivers,
in this case a GTX transceiver for line rates from 500 Mbps to 12.5 Gbps [24]. Figure 2.3
illustrates the topology of the GTX transceiver including its functional blocks. Each
transceiver includes an independent transmitter and receiver consisting of a PCS and
PMA each. In the transmitter, parallel data ﬂows from the FPGA logic into the FPGA TX
interface, through the PCS and PMA, and then out the TX driver as high-speed serial data.
In the receiver, high-speed serial data ﬂows from traces on the board into the PMA of the
transceiver RX, into the PCS, and ﬁnally into the FPGA logic.
Considering the circuitry design offered by Xilinx, desired latency measurements are the
ones where each functional block aggregates to the overall system. The transceivers offer
different conﬁguration options for the PCS and PMA enabling and disabling different
blocks based on a desired attribute. From the available vendor documentation, these
conﬁguration settings in the transceiver affect the aggregated latency in the system, which
speciﬁc values are partially available based only on theoretical knowledge and estimations
[16]. Therefore, precise methods for measuring latency in the different functional blocks
of the communication layers are required in order to understand better the latency behavior
of the transceivers for its different conﬁguration options. It also provides speciﬁc latency
information for features and performance comparisons between vendor products to serve
as an input for the development of new applications.
Literature shows different approaches of phase measurement infrastructures as part of
FPGA-based Phase Detector (PD) implementations used in communication systems,
power systems, smart grid applications and in the design of Phase Locked Loops (PLLs)
where the synchronization of the frequency and phase of an input and output signal is
==PAGE:19==
2.3. Latency in FPGA Systems
8
needed [11] [1] [9] [6] [5]. These approaches commonly consider measuring frequencies
from different clocks using digital counters, where measurement results are then processed
in different ways for the speciﬁc phase detection purposes.
Independent digital counters are included in a design counting the number of clock
cycles from speciﬁc clock sources tracking its frequency behavior. The measurement’s
resolution depends on the counter size, and its value is sampled with another independent
clock in order to provide random sampling to each observation. The obtained measured re-
sults are then visualized and processed by external hardware or measurement equipment as
advanced oscilloscopes. Often, these designs are tested only in simulation environments.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER3
Method
3.1
Design proposal
Based on the established project objectives and the theoretical framework presented
in the previous section, this chapter proposes a circuit design of an all-digital latency
measurement infrastructure for the communication layers of an FPGA-based NIC. This
measurement circuit is proposed to be a block part of the complete system of the NIC to
be measured, hence it is included in the design interacting with internal signals. Figure 3.1
illustrates the elements of the working environment, as can be seen it consists of a
computer connected to a NIC which has access to a network through 10 GbE connection.
Table 3.1 describes speciﬁc characteristics of the computer and the FPGA-NIC used in
this implementation design. For this project, it is considered a working NIC implemented
in a Xilinx board with 10 GbE and PCIe capabilities. Additionally, a computer with PCIe
interface and a software for the communication between the computer and the NIC.
Figure 3.1: Elements of the working environment
Element
Features
Computer
1. PCIe interface
2. PCIe software
FPGA NIC
1. Xilinx-based NIC FPGA part: xc7k160tffg676-2
2. GTX transceivers and PCIe interface in board
3. 10 GbE and PCIe implemented
4. Verilog design in Vivado
Table 3.1: Computer and FPGA NIC features
9
==PAGE:21==
3.1. Design proposal
10
The block diagram of the targeted NIC design is illustrated in Figure 3.2; it consists
of a PCIe interface block for its communication with the computer, the 10 GbE layers
block for the external communication with other devices of the network, and on top an
application block.
Figure 3.2: NIC design block diagram
The measurement design goals for the Xilinx FPGA-based NIC considered for this
project are:
a) To design an all-digital measurement infrastructure able to measure without the need
of external analog hardware or measuring equipment as advanced oscilloscopes.
b) To measure frequencies in different clock domains of the circuitry.
c) To measure latency in the different functional blocks of the communication layers of
the NIC.
According to the speciﬁed goals, the measurement infrastructure allocated in the FPGA-
based NIC measuring the desired parameters considers the following general solutions:
a) As the PCIe interface allows communication between the NIC board and the com-
puter, it is proposed to be used as the computer access medium to the measurements
completed in the FPGA for a later software processing of the results. Thus, the
measurements and its access are fully digital in the FPGA and in the computer.
==PAGE:22==
3.1. Design proposal
11
b) The NIC consists of layers which are powered by different clock domains that vary
according to the technology standard and clock sources. To measure frequency in
these layers, the use of digital counters in each desired clock domain is proposed to
be implemented and then sampled with an independent clock for random sampling
purposes. The number of clock cycles counted can then be processed for obtaining the
desired frequency results.
c) Similar to the solution in b), the use of digital counters is proposed, in this case
to measure the number of clock cycles a 10 GbE packet uses to travel through the
different functional blocks of the communication layers. This time measurement is
stamped and allocated in a memory for later access from the computer.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the block diagram of the full system. As can be seen, it consists of
a software layer in the computer and a hardware layer in the NIC board; the software
implementation executes the interaction of the computer with the NIC, and the hardware
layer implementation executes the designs of the PCIe interface circuit, and the frequency
and latency measurements circuits which are managed by a top level block.
Figure 3.3: Full system block diagram
The system infrastructure will allow the computer, from its implemented software, to
request the NIC, from its implemented circuits, for speciﬁc frequency and latency mea-
surements and to access its completed results for further processing.
==PAGE:23==
3.2. Circuit design
12
3.2
Circuit design
This section presents the design proposal of the three circuits conforming the hardware
layer of the full measurement system: the PCIe interface circuit, the Frequency measure-
ment circuit, and the Latency measurement circuit.
3.2.1
PCIe interface circuit
The computer interacts with the top level block of the NIC board through the PCIe
interface block. The implementation of the PCIe circuit block in the FPGA is achieved
by the use of the Xilinx 7 Series FPGAs Integrated Block for PCI Express which is a
conﬁgurable IP product offered by Xilinx for implementing PCIe in FPGA designs [23].
The computer communicates with the NIC’s top level block through the PCIe by the
transmission of Transaction Layer Packets (TLPs) over the bus interface, which writes
and reads data from a desired address; TLPs consist of 32-bit words for address and data.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the general overview block diagram of the Xilinx PCIe implemented
in the NIC board and connected to the top level block; the PCIe consists of a receive
and transmit paths for the exchange of TLPs, which blocks’ signals are illustrated in
Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.4: Xilinx PCIe components [23]
==PAGE:24==
3.2. Circuit design
13
Figure 3.5: Xilinx PCIe TX and RX Engines [23]
It can be seen, among all the signals from the TX and RX engines, the data and
address signals for writing and reading purposes. These signals are proposed to be used
to request the measurements happening in the measurement blocks of the NIC. From the
computer software, whose structure is detailed in Section 3.2, through different values of
the 26-bit address signal, the computer interacts with the top level block of the NIC which
receives the address requirement through the RX Engine and coordinates with the measure-
ment circuits for sending back to the computer the expected results through the TX Engine.
Figure 3.6 presents the circuit design of the interface between the FPGA top level block
with the PCIe address and data signals for the interaction with the measurement circuits.
The top level block receives from the PCIe block in its RX Engine block an address
signal addr_in through m_axis_rx_tdata; based on its values, the Frequency
or the Latency measurement blocks are enabled to sample the measures through the
==PAGE:25==
3.2. Circuit design
14
frequency_sampler and latency_sampler signals respectively. These signals
trigger the operation of the measurement circuits and the expected measured values are
obtained in data_out signal which is sent back to the computer through the TX Engine
s_axis_tx_tdata.
Figure 3.6: Circuit design of interface between FPGA top level block and PCIe interface
In summary, the FPGA top level block receives an address value from the computer
through the PCIe interface circuit. Depending on the address value, the measurement
circuits are enable to measure and results are sent back to the computer. Table 3.2 sum-
marizes the signals participating in this circuit. The different values conﬁgured for the
address to enable the measurement circuits are described in the following sections when
describing in detail how the acquisition of the measurements is realized.
==PAGE:26==
3.2. Circuit design
15
Signal
Description
addr_in [25:0]
Address value requested from the computer
frequency_sampler
Enables access to the Frequency measurement circuit
latency_sampler
Enables access to the Latency measurement circuit
data_out
Signal with the value of the requested measurement
Table 3.2: PCIe interface circuit main signals
3.2.2
Frequency measurement circuit
This circuit implements the measurement of the frequency in a speciﬁc functional block of
the system powered by its corresponding clock domain. The proposal consists of a local
digital clock counter located in the desired clock domain which continuously increases in
every clock cycle, this value is asked to be sampled from the top level block running in
an independent clock domain; this interaction occurs with request and response signals
passing through synchronization blocks for clock domain changes. Figure 3.7 illustrates
the design of the frequency measurement circuit.
The circuit consists of two clock domains: the sampled clock sampled_clk is the one
from which frequency is desired to be measured, and the sampling clock sampling_clk
is the independent clock requesting to measure. As inputs to the circuit, there are the clock
counter signal clk_cnt increasing in every clock cycle of the sampled clock domain and
the sampling signal clk_cnt_sampler coming from the computer through the PCIe
interface and the top level block requesting to measure the clock counter value. Every
time the clk_cnt_sampler signal becomes ‘1’, the value of clk_cnt is sampled
and sent as an output of the circuit as clk_cnt_sampled_sync. In order to make
the sampling, a Synchronization and a Sampling block are included. The Synchroniza-
tion block allows a signal to cross from one clock domain to another in order to avoid
metastability problems. This is needed in this design due to the presence of the two
mentioned sampled and sampling clocks; this block considers a basic synchronizer based
on three ﬂip-ﬂops. The Sampling block allows the clk_cnt value to be registered in a
clk_cnt_sampled signal every time the clk_cnt_sampler_sync becomes high,
this is the clk_cnt_sampler signal after passing through the Synchronization block to
cross to the sampled clock domain. The clk_cnt_sampled signal then passes through
the Synchronization block to cross to the sampling clock domain. Thus, the desired
clock counter is sampled through the ﬁnal output signal clk_cnt_sampled_sync.
Table 3.3 summarizes the signals participating in this circuit.
==PAGE:27==
3.2. Circuit design
16
Figure 3.7: Frequency measurement circuit design
==PAGE:28==
3.2. Circuit design
17
Signal
Description
sampled_clk
Clock domain to be sampled
sampling_clk
Independent clock domain sampling
clk_cnt [27:0]
Counter of clock cycles from sampled_clk
(with 28 bits is possible to count up to 268435455)
clk_cnt_sampler
Signal which enables to sample the value of clk_cnt
(Becomes ’1’ when addr_in[18:17]==1) from PCIe
clk_cnt_sampled_sync
clk_cnt_sampler synchronized to sampled_clk
clk_cnt_sampled [27:0]
Sampled value of clk_cnt
clk_cnt_sampler_sync [27:0]
clk_cnt_sampled synchronized to sampling_clk
Table 3.3: Frequency measurement circuit main signals
3.2.3
Latency measurement circuit
This circuit implements the latency measurement of 10 GbE frames in a desired path
between functional blocks of the FPGA-based NIC communication layers. The proposal
consists of a local digital counter located in the sampling clock domain which continu-
ously increases in every clock cycle; every time a start of frame (SoF) or end of frame
(EoF) of a transmitting or a receiving Ethernet Frame is registered in the MAC layer, the
clock counter value is stamped and saved in a memory block. Thus, the number of clock
cycles a packet takes from its transmitting to its receiving point can be measured. The
different path loops the packet could follow can then be programmed in order to calculate
the time spent in the different functional blocks of the communication layers. Figure 3.8
illustrates the design of the latency measurement circuit.
The circuit consists of three clock domains: the 10 GbE TX clock domain tx_clk
which runs the packets transmission, the 10 GbE RX clock domain rx_clk which runs
the packets reception, and the sampling clock domain sampling_clk which is the
independent clock requesting to measure. As inputs to the circuit, there are the TX
packet signal tx_pkt whose pulse stays high throughout the transmission of all the
frame packets, the RX packet signal rx_pkt whose pulse stays high throughout the
reception of all the frame packets, and ﬁve signals coming from the computer through
the PCIe interface and the top level block: the sampling signal clk_cnt_sampler
requesting to stamp the clock counter and save its value in the TX or RX memory blocks,
the reading signal rd_data requesting to read the saved data from a speciﬁc memory
address rd_addr from the TX memory sel_tx or the RX memory sel_rx, and the
clear signal clear_mem requesting to start saving stamped data from the ﬁrst address of
the TX and RX memories.
==PAGE:29==
3.2. Circuit design
18
Figure 3.8: Latency measurement circuit design
==PAGE:30==
3.2. Circuit design
19
The input tx_pkt and rx_pkt signals, using a similar Synchronization block as the
one described in the previous section, are crossed from their clock domain to the sampling
clock domain. A Frame Analyzer block is implemented for stamping the clock counter for
every start and end of frames. When the clk_cnt_sampler signal becomes ‘1’, the
circuit is enabled. For every TX and RX start and end of frames the local clock counter
clk_cnt is stamped and allocated with start or end of frame information in TX and RX
RAMs where memory address incrementally increases over time as new data is required to
be saved. The start and end of frames occurs when tx_pkt and rx_pkt values change
from ‘0’ to ‘1’ and vice-versa respectively as shown in Figure 3.9 and is calculated with
an XOR operation with the previous value it had. When the rd_data signal becomes
‘1’, depending on the selected memory signal sel_tx=1 for TX memory or sel_rx=1
for RX memory, the data allocated in the speciﬁed requested address rd_addr signal is
sent as an output of the circuit as clk_cnt_sampled.
Figure 3.9: Transmission and reception of 10 GbE frames
The interaction between the top level and this block occurs in a similar way as described in
the previous section; based on the address value received from the PCIe interface different
signals are enabled. Table 3.4 summarizes the signals participating in this circuit.
==PAGE:31==
3.3. Software design
20
Signal
Description
tx_clk
10 GbE TX clock domain
rx_clk
10 GbE RX clock domain
sampling_clk
Independent clock domain sampling
clk_cnt
Counter of clock cycles from sampling_clk
(with 28 bits is possible to count up to 268435455)
tx_pkt
Signal which remains high during the transmission of a frame
rx_pkt
Signal which remains high during the reception of a frame
clk_cnt_sampler
Signal which enables to sample the value of clk_cnt
for every TX and RX SoF and EoF and write its value
in a TX or RX memory respectively
(Becomes ’1’ when addr_in[18:17]==3 from PCIe)
rd_data
Signal which enables to read the sampled values of
TX and RX SoF and EoF from the memories (Becomes
’1’ when addr_in[18:17] ==3 & addr_in[14:13]==1 from PCIe)
sel_tx
Signal indicating to read from the TX memory when
addr_in[16:15]==1 from PCIe
sel_rx
Signal indicating to read from the RX memory when
addr_in[16:15]==0 from PCIe
rd_addr
Memory address desired to read in TX or RX memories
equal to addr_in[14:0] from PCIe
clear_mem
Signal which enables to reset the memories when
addr_in[16:15]==2 from PCIe
Table 3.4: Latency measurement circuit main signals
3.3
Software design
In order to complete the interface between the computer and the FPGA-based NIC, the
design of computer software is also required with the following purposes:
a) Access the PCIe Interface block of the FPGA through the bus interface with transmis-
sion of address signals and reception of data signals for requesting measures to the
measurement circuits.
b) Control the NIC for the transmission and reception of 10 GbE frames for measuring
its latency.
c) Process the measurements acquired from the NIC for ﬁnal results.
The computer considered in this project has a PCIe software tool. This tool is programmed
to request data to the FPGA-NIC based on different address values. Additionally, it allows
the computer to instruct the FPGA-NIC to send 10 GbE frames. This tool is used as
==PAGE:32==
3.4. Testing scenarios
21
a frame for the measurement acquisition software proposed in this system, which is
needed for the interaction between the computer and the NIC for requesting and accessing
measurements. The different testing scenarios presented in the following section are
proposed for the validation of the circuit designs and to test the full system. Part of the
PCIe software code was reprogrammed according to these experiments, including the
conﬁguration of the address values according to the designed measurement circuits and
the storage of all the measurements for further processing.
The measurement processing software considered for this system processes the mea-
surements gathered by the measurement acquisition software for obtaining the ﬁnal
results. The processing of the measurements is conducted according to the mathematical
framework to be discussed in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2. These two software complete
the measurement infrastructure system to fully digitally measure frequency and latency in
an FPGA-based NIC from a computer. The code of the programmed software is included
in the code listing section at the end of this document.
3.4
Testing scenarios
In order to test the designed circuits, different scenarios are proposed considering the
available equipment for both the frequency and latency measurement blocks.
3.4.1
Frequency measurement test
As was presented in Section 3.2.2, the designed circuit with its signals described in
Table 3.3 provides the number of clock cycles between samples in a speciﬁc clock domain
in order to calculate its frequency. The circuit requests as input signals the clock counter
increasing its value in its sampled clock domain, and the sampling clock domain in charge
of sampling the counter value. Thus, for testing purposes sampled and sampling clock
domains are needed to be selected.
In this project the intention of analyzing the 10 GbE communication layers is well
expressed. Hence, the TX and RX frequencies in the Xilinx GTX transceivers imple-
mented in the NIC are targeted to be measured. In order to do so, the clock powering the
data transmission gtx_txclk and the clock from the data reception gtx_txclk are
considered to be measured by independent clock counters. For the sampling clock, as
the PCIe block is implemented in the design and its running clock domain pcie_clk
is independent to the ones being measured, it is selected to serve as the sampling clock.
These clock domain signals are taken from the proprietary Xilinx implemented blocks
and connected to the top level block available for the measurement circuits.
In order to test different behaviors of the frequencies to be measured, two equipment
conﬁgurations are suggested:
==PAGE:33==
3.4. Testing scenarios
22
a) Test 1: FPGA-NIC board connected to an external NIC in order to have asynchronous
clock domains powered by the different NICs as shown in Figure 3.10a.
b) Test 2: FPGA-NIC board connected to itself in order to have synchronous clock domain
powered only by once clock reference in the FPGA-NIC as shown in Figure 3.10b.
Figure 3.10: (a) Test 1 conﬁguration (b) Test 2 conﬁguration
3.4.2
Latency measurement test
The latency measurement circuit presented in Section 3.2.3 with its signals described
in Table 3.4, allows the time stamping of start and end of packets of transmitting and
receiving 10 GbE frames. Hence, scheduling different paths for a 10 GbE frame to travel
in the circuit will permit the measurement of the added latency by the functional blocks
composing each path.
In the Xilinx-based NIC considered in this project, the GTX transceivers implement
the PMA and PCS layers as was previously illustrated in Figure 2.3. These transceivers
have loopback modes which are specialized conﬁgurations of the transceiver datapath
where the trafﬁc stream is folded back to the source as is shown in Figure 3.11. Each
datapath considers the ﬂow of data through different functional blocks. These loopback
modes are considered to be used as paths for the 10 GbE frames; as every path considers
the use of different functional blocks, by measuring the time for each path it will be
possible to estimate the latency of the functional blocks in between every path. It is im-
portant to mention that this measuring approach scenario is possible due to the available
conﬁguration the proprietary Xilinx transceivers have which allows certain functional
blocks of its circuit to be reached. Hence, the designed circuit will allow the measurement
of latency depending on the available permissions a product offers.
Based on the offered transceiver loopback conﬁgurations, the following paths are proposed
==PAGE:34==
3.4. Testing scenarios
23
Figure 3.11: GTX transceiver loopback modes [24]
to be tested for the ﬂow of 10GbE frames measuring the corresponding functional block
per each path.
a) Test 1: Near-end PCS Internal loopback.- Figure 3.12 illustrates the near-end PCS
loopback mode whose path allows a 10 GbE frame to trafﬁc back internally in the NIC
transceiver after the PCS layer and enables the measurement of the TX+RX PCS layer
latency.
b) Test 2: Near-end PMA Internal loopback.- Figure 3.13 illustrates the near-end PMA
loopback mode whose path allows a 10 GbE frame to trafﬁc back internally in the
NIC transceiver after the PMA layer and enables the measurement of the TX+RX
PCS+PMA layer latency. The difference between the Near-end PMA loopback and
the Near-end PCS Internal loopback in Test 1 allows the speciﬁc TX+RX PMA layer
measurement to be obtained.
c) Test 3: External loopback.- Figure 3.14 illustrates an external loopback mode which is
done with a physical connection from the TX to the RX port of the same NIC without
any GTX internal loopback mode. This enables the measurement of the TX+RX
PCS+PMA+PHY layers latency. The difference between this external loopback and the
Near-end PMA loopback in Test 2 allows the speciﬁc TX+RX PHY layer measurement
to be obtained.
==PAGE:35==
3.4. Testing scenarios
24
Figure 3.12: Test 1 Near-end PCS internal loopback
==PAGE:36==
3.4. Testing scenarios
25
Figure 3.13: Test 2 Near-end PMA internal loopback
==PAGE:37==
3.4. Testing scenarios
26
Figure 3.14: Test 3 External loopback
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER4
Results
4.1
Frequency measurement test
For the two testing scenarios proposed in Section 3.4.1, samples of the clock counter
values of TX and RX GTX transceivers are requested from the computer software. One
million samples are programmed through the PCIe interface for statistic purposes where
the clock domain runs at 125 MHz and the sampling frequency varies according to the
computer task processing. With these available values, the GTX TX and RX frequencies
are obtained through the following analysis.
Figure 4.1: Frequency measurement sampling
27
==PAGE:39==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
28
Figure 4.1 illustrates the sampling behavior of the clock counters. Four samples,
Sample0-Sample3, are presented for illustration purposes and the behavior is representa-
tive of all the million programmed samples. Sample_freq is the frequency with which
each sample is requested from the computer. PCIe_clk is the clock running the PCIe in-
terface that is used as the sampling clock with pcie_cnt as the permanently increasing
clock counter for the PCIe clock cycles and npcie as the number of clocks between each
sample. TX_clk is the GTX TX clock with tx_cnt as the permanently increasing clock
counter for the TX clock cycles and ntx as the number of clocks between each sample.
Finally, RX_clk is the GTX RX clock with rx_cnt as the permanently increasing clock
counter for the RX clock cycles and nrx as the number of clocks between each sample.
In every sample the computer receives the three counter values pcie_cnt, tx_cnt and
rx_cnt, and with an initial knowledge of the frequency of the sampling clock domain,
which for this case is the one running the PCIe interface, the frequencies of the sampled
clocks can be obtained by the following mathematical framework.
For this study, the reference theoretical value of the sampling PCIe frequency value
is assumed and represented in (4.1).
F_pcie = 125 MHz
(4.1)
Knowing the reference PCIe clock frequency, the reference PCIe period can be determined
as shown in (4.2).
T_pcie =
1
F_pcie = 8 ns
(4.2)
As mentioned previously, in every sample the computer gets the PCIe clock counter
pcie_cnt. This value in combination with its next sample value are used to obtain the
number of clock cycles npcie in between every sample as presented in (4.3).
npcie[sample(n+1)−sample(n)] = pcie_cnt[sample(n+1)]−pcie_cnt[sample(n)]
(4.3)
As a result, the sample frequency F_s and sample period T_s can be obtained by
multiplying the number of PCIe clocks cycles in between a sample by its corresponding
frequency as shown in (4.4) and (4.5).
T_s = npcie ∗T_pcie (s)
(4.4)
F_s =
1
T_s (Hz)
(4.5)
==PAGE:40==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
29
With the sample frequency and period, the TX and RX frequencies and periods can
then be calculated by dividing the sample period by the number of clocks cycles counted
for the TX and RX in every sample as shown in (4.6), (4.7), (4.8) and (4.9)
T_tx = T_s
ntx (s)
(4.6)
F_tx =
1
T_tx (Hz)
(4.7)
T_rx = T_s
nrx (s)
(4.8)
F_rx =
1
T_rx (Hz)
(4.9)
For analyzing the clocks behavior in synchronous and asynchronous environments, the
difference between the TX and RX clock counters in every sample is considered as
presented in (4.10) in order to obtain the frequency variations between each of them.
ntxrx = ntx −nrx (clock cycles)
(4.10)
The resolution of these measures described in (4.11) and (4.12) depends on the counter
size between every sample that varies according to the sample window.
Res_tx =
1
ntx (ppm)
(4.11)
Res_rx =
1
nrx (ppm)
(4.12)
The explained analysis was programmed as part of the measurement processing soft-
ware described in Section 3.3 in order to process the TX and RX clock counters measures
sampled from the NIC to obtain the following results for the two planned scenario
conﬁgurations.
==PAGE:41==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
30
Figure 4.2: Test 1 histogram of sampling frequency for 1 million samples
4.1.1
Test 1: FPGA-NIC board connected to external NIC
With the setting of the asynchronous clock scenario conﬁguration proposed in Sec-
tion 3.4.1, one million samples of the GTX transceiver TX and RX clock counters were
gathered from the computer through the sampling PCIe clock. Based on the mathematical
framework presented in the previous subsection, the GTX TX and RX frequencies were
obtained for each sample.
The sampling frequency for each sample is illustrated in Figure 4.2. As can be seen, the
average frequency with which the computer requests the one million samples is 318.599
Hz with very small variations from 175 Hz to 350 Hz due to the computer’s task process-
ing time.
To follow, the GTX transceiver TX clock frequency was calculated for each sample
and shown in Figure 4.3. As demonstrated, the obtained frequencies vary in a range from
322.077 MHz to 322.083 MHz with an average value of 322.0797 MHz.
On the other hand, Figure 4.4 presents the GTX transceiver RX clock frequency for
each sample. As shown, the obtained frequencies vary in a range from 322.077 MHz to
322.083 MHz with an average value of 322.0802 MHz.
==PAGE:42==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
31
Figure 4.3: Test 1 histogram of TX clock frequency for 1 million samples
Figure 4.4: Test 1 histogram of RX clock frequency for 1 million samples
==PAGE:43==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
32
Finally, Figure 4.5 illustrates the clock counter difference between TX and RX for
each sample. As can be seen, the obtained differences vary from -4 ppm and 1 ppm with
an average value of -1.6561 ppm.
Figure 4.5: Test 1 histogram of clock counter difference between TX and RX for 1 million
samples
4.1.2
Test 2: FPGA-NIC board connected to itself
With the setting of the synchronous clock scenario conﬁguration proposed in Section 3.4.1,
one million samples of the GTX transceiver TX and RX clock counters were gathered
from the computer through the sampling PCIe clock. Based on the mathematical frame-
work, the GTX TX and RX frequencies were obtained for each sample.
Figure 4.6 illustrates the sampling frequency for each sample. As can be seen, the
average frequency with which the computer requests the one million samples is 318.5047
Hz with small variations from 100 to 350 Hz due to the computer’s task processing time.
Figure 4.7 presents the GTX transceiver TX clock frequency for each sample. As illus-
trated, the obtained frequencies vary in a range from 322.077 MHz to 322.083 MHz with
an average value of 322.0796856492 MHz.
==PAGE:44==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
33
Figure 4.6: Test 2 histogram of sampling frequency for 1 million samples
Figure 4.7: Test 2 histogram of TX clock frequency for 1 million samples
==PAGE:45==
4.1. Frequency measurement test
34
Figure 4.8 presents the GTX transceiver RX clock frequency for each sample. As
shown, the obtained frequencies vary in a range from 322.077 MHz to 322.083 MHz with
an average value of 322.0796846498 MHz.
Figure 4.8: Test 2 histogram of RX clock frequency for 1 million samples
Figure 4.9 illustrates the clock counter difference between TX and RX for each sample.
As demonstrated, the obtained differences vary from -2 ppm and 2 ppm with an average
value of 0 ppm.
4.1.3
Discussion
The 10 GbE standard speciﬁes a serial data rate of 10.3125 Gbps encoded with 66b/64b
line code with a PMA 32 bit conversion clocked at 322.265625 MHz [10]. The theoretical
clock frequency required for the Xilinx GTX transceiver TX and RX clocks is 322.26
MHz [13]. The measured frequencies obtained through the designed measurement circuits
from the two tests results were as expected according to the reference values.
Additionally, it could be seen the expected difference in behavior between TX and
RX GTX clocks when having synchronous and asynchronous environments. In the syn-
chronous clock scenario presented in Test 1, TX and RX frequencies are equal with a
difference of 0 ppm. In the asynchronous clock scenario presented in Test 2, TX and RX
==PAGE:46==
4.2. Latency measurement test
35
Figure 4.9: Test 2 histogram of clock counter difference between TX and RX for 1 million
samples
frequencies vary with a difference of -1.6561 ppm. With the designed 27 bits size of the
clock counters it is possible to count up to 268435455. With the programmed sample
time for the scenarios being tested, an average of a million clock cycles were measured in
every sample for the TX and RX. Hence, the system allows the resolution to be modiﬁed
by changing the sampling window managed by the computer software.
4.2
Latency measurement test
For the three testing scenarios proposed in Section 3.4.2, 1000 10 GbE frames are sent
and received by different loopback modes in the GTX transceiver of the FPGA-based NIC
from the computer software. The number of clock cycles between the transmitted and
the received Start-of-Frame packets are counted by the sampling clock PCIe 125 MHz.
With a period of 8 ns, the sampling clock allows the latency in different layers of the
transceivers to be obtained.
Figure 4.10 illustrates the sampling behavior of the clock counter. As demonstrated,
three frames, Frame0-Frame2, are presented for illustration purposes and the behavior
is representative of the 1000 programmed frames. PCIe_clk is the clock running the
==PAGE:47==
4.2. Latency measurement test
36
PCIe interface that is used as the sampling clock with pcie_cnt as the permanently
increasing clock counter for the PCIe clock cycles. The TX and RX frames are illustrated
with its SoF and EoF packets, which are stamped with the corresponding clock counter
value.
Figure 4.10: Latency measurement sampling
In every frame being sampled, the computer receives the TX and RX SoF and EoF clock
counter stamps tx_SoF_cnt, tx_EoF_cnt, rx_SoF_cnt and rx_EoF_cnt. The
difference between the RX SoF counter and the TX SoF counter values gives the number
of clock cycles cc_txrx_SoF a frame takes from a transmitting to a receiving point as
described in (4.13).
cc_txrx_SoF = rx_SoF_cnt −tx_SoF_cnt (clock cycles)
(4.13)
The same operation between the SoF and EoF counter values of a frame allows the
number of clock cycles the TX and RX frames take to be transmitted and received to be
obtained as presented in (4.14) and (4.15).
cc_tx_frame = tx_EoF_cnt −tx_SoF_cnt (clock cycles)
(4.14)
cc_rx_frame = rx_EoF_cnt −rx_SoF_cnt (clock cycles)
(4.15)
==PAGE:48==
4.2. Latency measurement test
37
The proposed analysis expresses the obtained latency in terms of clock cycles. As
the sampling clock considers the PCIe 125 MHz as the measurement clock, the latency
can be expressed in time time_txrx_SoF by the multiplication of clock cycles by the
PCIe period T_pcie of 8 ns as shown in (4.16).
time_txrx_SoF = cc_txrx_SoF ∗T_pcie (s)
(4.16)
The explained analysis was programmed as part of the measurement processing soft-
ware described in Section 3.3 in order to process the TX and RX clock counters measures
sampled from the NIC to obtain the following results for the two planned scenario
conﬁgurations.
4.2.1
Test 1: Near-end PCS Internal loopback
Figure 4.11 presents the latency results in terms of number of clock cycles of the Near-end
PCS loopback mode. As illustrated, 871 out of the 1000 frames take 8 clock cycles to
transmit and receive a SoF packet when following this path. Figure 4.12 presents the
latency in terms of time based on the PCIe period. The 871 frames take 64 ns to cross the
TX+RX PCS layer of the transceiver. Table 4.1 presents average measurements for the
1000 sampled frames.
Parameter
Value
Description
Frame transmission
clock cycles
5.558 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
SoF and EoF packets of a transmitting frame
Frame reception
clock cycles
5.648 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
SoF and EoF packets of a receiving frame
TX – RX frame
clock cycles
7.983 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
the TX SoF and RX SoF packets
TX – RX frame
latency
63.864 ns
Average time between the TX SoF and
RX SoF packets
Table 4.1: Near-end PCS average latency results
==PAGE:49==
4.2. Latency measurement test
38
Figure 4.11: Near-end PCS latency results in clock cycles
Figure 4.12: Near-end PCS latency results in time
==PAGE:50==
4.2. Latency measurement test
39
4.2.2
Test 2: Near-end PMA Internal loopback
Figure 4.13 presents the latency results in terms of number of clock cycles of the Near-end
PMA loopback mode. As can be seen, 644 out of the 1000 frames take 10 clock cycles
to transmit and receive a SoF packet when following this path. Figure 4.14 presents the
latency in terms of time based on the PCIe period. 644 frames take 80 ns to cross the
TX+RX PCS+PMA layers of the transceiver. Table 4.2 presents average measurements
for the 1000 sampled frames.
Figure 4.13: Near-end PMA latency results in clock cycles
Parameter
Value
Description
Frame transmission
clock cycles
5.556 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
SoF and EoF packets of a transmitting frame
Frame reception
clock cycles
5.594 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
SoF and EoF packets of a receiving frame
TX – RX frame
clock cycles
9.994 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
the TX SoF and RX SoF packets
TX – RX frame
latency
79.952 ns
Average time between the TX SoF and
RX SoF packets
Table 4.2: Near-end PMA average latency results
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Latency measurement test
40
Figure 4.14: Near-end PCS latency results in time
Parameter
Value
Description
Frame transmission
clock cycles
5.537 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
SoF and EoF packets of a transmitting frame
Frame reception
clock cycles
5.609 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
SoF and EoF packets of a receiving frame
TX – RX frame
clock cycles
10.283 clock cycles
Average number of clock cycles between
the TX SoF and RX SoF packets
TX – RX frame
latency
82.264 ns
Average time between the TX SoF and
RX SoF packets
Table 4.3: External average latency results
4.2.3
Test 3: External loopback
Figure 4.15 presents the latency results in terms of number of clock cycles of the external
loopback mode. As can be seen, 717 out of the 1000 frames take 10 clock cycles to
transmit and receive a SoF packet when following this path. Figure 4.16 presents the
latency in terms of time based on the PCIe period. 717 frames take 80 ns to cross the
TX+RX PCS+PMA layers of the transceiver. Table 4.3 presents average measurements
for the 1000 sampled frames.
==PAGE:52==
4.2. Latency measurement test
41
Figure 4.15: External latency results in clock cycles
Figure 4.16: External latency results in time
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Latency measurement test
42
4.2.4
Discussion
Based on the average results for every test presented in Table 4.1, Table 4.2 and Table 4.3,
Table 4.4 illustrates the estimated average latency for every layer in the Xilinx GTX
transceivers.
Description
PCS
TX+RX
PCS+PMA
TX+RX
PMA
TX+RX
PCS+PMA+PHY
TX+RX
Operation
Test 1
Test 2
Test 2 – Test 1
Test 3
Average time
63.864 ns
79.952 ns
16.088 ns
82.264 ns
Description
PCS
PMA
PHY
Operation
PCS TX+RX / 2
PMA TX+RX / 2
Test 3 – Test 2
Average time
31.932 ns
8.044 ns
2.312 ns
Table 4.4: Transceivers layers average latency results
As demonstrated, the estimated average latency in the different communication lay-
ers of the Xilinx-based NIC implemented in this test were obtained with the following
results: 31.932 ns for the PCS layer, 8.044 ns for the PMA layer and 2.312 ns for the
Physical medium.
In order to observe the determinism of the latency values obtained for each layer in
the GTX transceiver of the Xilinx-based NIC, the presented experiment was conducted
for 7 times considering the same scenarios of 1000 frames in different loopback modes.
Every time an experiment was completed the NIC was powered off and up. Table 4.5
illustrates the variations of the latency results between the experiments.
Description
PCS
PMA
PHY
Experiment 1
31.932 ns
8.044 ns
2.312 ns
Experiment 2
31.656 ns
8.524 ns
2.520 ns
Experiment 3
31.876 ns
7.712 ns
3.592 ns
Experiment 4
31.888 ns
7.764 ns
2.864 ns
Experiment 5
31.916 ns
7.848 ns
3.399 ns
Experiment 6
31.992 ns
7.504 ns
3.896 ns
Experiment 7
31.988 ns
7.556 ns
3.504 ns
Table 4.5: Transceivers layers latency variations
==PAGE:54==
4.2. Latency measurement test
43
It could be seen through different testing scenarios the expected operation of the
latency measurement circuit. The experiments were completed in a speciﬁc NIC design
and conﬁguration of the GTX transceivers. Different conﬁgurations can be set based on
the available access resources from the vendor product to sample time and trafﬁc data in
desired blocks of a design.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER5
Conclusions and future work
As seen in Chapter 2, the usage of FPGA in time critical applications is gaining con-
siderable attention, especially in the industrial sector for the deployment of IIoT. These
applications require complete control of the latency in its system.
This thesis conducted research in measuring latency in the communication layer of
FPGA-based systems in order to propose procedures that can support a general standard-
ization. A proper measurement system could allow vendors to include in its products’
speciﬁcations real experimental latency measures which is necessary for the development
of the mentioned applications.
State-of-the-art proposals for measuring frequency behavior in FPGA-based systems
consider the use of settings with analog equipment such as advanced oscilloscopes. This
thesis designed, implemented and tested an all-digital measurement infrastructure able to
measure frequency in a desired clock domain and latency in different functional blocks of
the FPGA-based system communication layers. The proposed infrastructure consisted of
a hardware and a software layer; the hardware layer composed of measurement circuits
implemented in the FPGA-based system and the software layer composed of software
implemented in a computer for accessing the FPGA.
The measurement criteria consisted of digital counters permanently increasing in ev-
ery clock cycle of the clock domains desired to be measured. An independent reference
clock samples the clock counter values that are then processed based on a mathematical
framework for obtaining the last results. The requests and acquisition of the measurements
were conducted from the computer designed software through the PCIe interface.
The circuits were successfully implemented in a Xilinx-based NIC with 10 GbE com-
munication and PCIe interface. GTX transceivers of the NIC run the PCS and PMA
communication layers. The measurement infrastructure was tested in different scenarios
considering the available conﬁgurations the Xilinx-based NIC offered.
For testing the frequency measurement circuit, the GTX TX and RX frequencies were
measured in two scenarios. One having synchronous and the other asynchronous clocks
between TX and RX domains. The measurements were processed by the measurement
processing software in the computer. The results were consistent with the expected fre-
44
==PAGE:56==
45
quency behavior based on a reference theoretical value of 322 MHz, with no frequency
difference in a synchronous environment and frequency variations in an asynchronous
environment.
For testing the latency measurement circuit, 10 GbE frames were sent by the NIC in differ-
ent loopback modes available to be conﬁgured in the GTX transceivers. TX and RX SoF
packets were time stamped when following the different paths and these measurements
processed by the measurement processing software in the computer. The obtained results
showed that for the speciﬁc NIC transceiver conﬁguration used in this implementation, the
latency values were; 31.932 ns for the PCS layer, 8.044 ns for the PMA layer and 2.312
ns for the Physical medium. The experiments were conducted multiple times to observe
the determinism behavior of the latency results evidenced by the expected variations in
the results.
A working frequency and latency measurement environment in a system allows dif-
ferent studies to be performed with the measured data. The following can be listed as
future work:
• Effect of selecting other clock domains as the independent sampling clock
• Use of precise experimental frequency value of the sampling clock for better results
instead of theoretical references
• Impact of the jitter and wander in the measured frequencies
• Analysis of measured phase differences for phase detector applications
• Impact of the variation on the sampling time in the measurement resolution
• Deeper study of the latency behavior on the Xilinx GTX transceivers by setting
different available conﬁgurations
• Implementation and testing of the designed measurement infrastructure in other
FPGA-based NICs
• Use of the measurement infrastructure to evaluate latency performance between
different protocols, vendor products and features.
Based on the presented results, it can be concluded that the goals of this project were
successfully achieved with the design, implementation and testing of a fully digital
measurement infrastructure capable of measuring frequency in different clock domains,
and latency in different functional blocks of the communication layer.
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Q. Zhang, K. Huang, Z. Liu, and Z. Li, “Research and application of all digital
phase-locked loop”, in 2009 Second International Conference on Intelligent Net-
works and Intelligent Systems, Nov. 2009, pp. 122–125. DOI: 10.1109/ICINIS.
2009.40 (cit. on p. 8).
[2]
R. Giordano and A. Aloisio, “Fixed-latency, multi-gigabit serial links with xilinx
fpgas”, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 194–201, Feb.
2011, ISSN: 0018-9499. DOI: 10.1109/TNS.2010.2101083 (cit. on p. 7).
[3]
“Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks - timing and synchro-
nization for time-sensitive applications in bridged local area networks”, IEEE
Std 802.1AS-2011, pp. 1–292, Mar. 2011. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2011.
5741898 (cit. on p. 2).
[4]
U. Farooq, Tree-based heterogeneous FPGA architectures : application speciﬁc
exploration and optimization. New York, NY: Springer, 2012, ISBN: 978-1-4614-
3594-5 (cit. on p. 3).
[5]
S. K. Thompson, Sampling. Wiley, Mar. 2012, ISBN: 0470402318. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.xarg.org/ref/a/0470402318/ (cit. on p. 8).
[6]
A. Hidvégi, P. Geßler, H. Kay, V. Petrosyan, G. Petrosyan, L. Petrosyan, A.
Aghababyan, C. Stechmann, K. Rehlich, and C. Bohm, “Fpga based phase de-
tector for high-speed clocks with pico-seconds resolution”, in 2013 IEEE Nuclear
Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference (2013 NSS/MIC), Oct. 2013,
pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/NSSMIC.2013.6829780 (cit. on p. 8).
[7]
X. Liu, Q. Deng, and Z. Wang, “Design and fpga implementation of high-speed,
ﬁxed-latency serial transceivers”, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, vol. 61,
no. 1, pp. 561–567, Feb. 2014, ISSN: 0018-9499. DOI: 10.1109/TNS.2013.
2296301 (cit. on p. 7).
[8]
J. Wang, X. Hu, T. Schwarz, J. Zhu, J. W. Chapman, T. Dai, and B. Zhou, “Fpga
implementation of a ﬁxed latency scheme in a signal packet router for the upgrade
of atlas forward muon trigger electronics”, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science,
vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 2194–2201, Oct. 2015, ISSN: 0018-9499. DOI: 10.1109/TNS.
2015.2477089 (cit. on p. 7).
46
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
47
[9]
P. Kumar, V. Kumar, and R. Pratap, “Design and implementation of phase detector
on fpga”, in 2017 6th International Conference on Computer Applications In
Electrical Engineering-Recent Advances (CERA), Oct. 2017, pp. 108–110. DOI:
10.1109/CERA.2017.8343310 (cit. on p. 8).
[10]
“Ieee standard for ethernet”, IEEE Std 802.3-2018 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.3-
2015), pp. 1–5600, Aug. 2018. DOI: 10.1109/IEEESTD.2018.8457469
(cit. on pp. 4, 5, 34).
[11]
J. Mitra and T. K. Nayak, “An fpga-based phase measurement system”, IEEE Trans-
actions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 133–142,
Jan. 2018, ISSN: 1063-8210. DOI: 10.1109/TVLSI.2017.2758807 (cit. on
p. 8).
[12]
S. M. S. Trimberger, “Three ages of fpgas: A retrospective on the ﬁrst thirty years
of fpga technology: This paper reﬂects on how moore’s law has driven the design of
fpgas through three epochs: The age of invention, the age of expansion, and the age
of accumulation”, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 16–29,
Spring 2018, ISSN: 1943-0582. DOI: 10.1109/MSSC.2018.2822862 (cit. on
p. 1).
[13]
10g ethernet mac v15.1 logicore ip product guide (pg072), https://www.
xilinx.com/support/documentation/ip_documentation/ten_
gig_eth_mac/v15_1/pg072-ten-gig-eth-mac.pdf, (Accessed on
07/04/2019), (cit. on pp. 7, 34).
[14]
And the winner of best fpga of 2016 is... | ee times, https://www.eetimes.
com/author.asp?doc_id=1331443, (Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on
p. 4).
[15]
Applications, https://www.xilinx.com/applications.html, (Ac-
cessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 4).
[16]
Ar# 42662: 7 series gtx transceivers - tx and rx latency values, https: //
www.xilinx.com/support/answers/42662.html, (Accessed on
07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 7).
[17]
Black hole pictured for ﬁrst time — in spectacular detail, https : / / www .
nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01155-0, (Accessed on 07/03/2019),
(cit. on p. 1).
[18]
Brochure-a4-nospread.indd, https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/
2015/02/5G-Vision-Brochure-v1.pdf, (Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit.
on p. 1).
[19]
CISCO, “Time-sensitive networking: A technical introduction white paper”, Tech.
Rep., (Accessed on 07/04/2019) (cit. on p. 5).
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
48
[20]
Field programmable gate array (fpga) report- 2023 | mrfr, https://www.
marketresearchfuture . com / reports / field - programmable -
gate-array-market-1019, (Accessed on 07/03/2019), (cit. on p. 1).
[21]
Fpga design ﬂow overview, https : / / www . xilinx . com / support /
documentation/sw_manuals/xilinx10/isehelp/ise_c_fpga_
design_flow_overview.htm, (Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 3).
[22]
Fpga fundamentals - national instruments, https://www.ni.com/da-
dk/innovations/white-papers/08/fpga-fundamentals.html,
(Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 3).
[23]
Https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/ip_documentation/pcie_7x/v3_3/pg054-
7series-pcie.pdf, https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/
ip_documentation/pcie_7x/v3_3/pg054-7series-pcie.pdf,
(Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on pp. 12, 13).
[24]
Https://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/user_guides/ug476_7series_transceivers.pdf,
https : / / www . xilinx . com / support / documentation / user _
guides/ug476_7Series_Transceivers.pdf, (Accessed on 07/04/2019),
(cit. on pp. 6, 7, 23).
[25]
Know about fpga architecture and thier applications, https://www.elprocus.
com/fpga-architecture-and-applications/, (Accessed on 07/04/2019),
(cit. on p. 3).
[26]
P. SIG, Pci express base speciﬁcation revision 5.0, version 1.0, https : / /
members.pcisig.com/wg/PCI-SIG/document/13005, (Accessed
on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 5).
[27]
E. U. Simon Brooks, “Wp-01279-time-sensitive-networking-from-theory-to-implementation-
in-industrial-automation.pdf”, Tech. Rep., (Accessed on 07/04/2019) (cit. on p. 6).
[28]
Structure of an fpga – digilent inc. blog, https://blog.digilentinc.
com/structure-of-an-fpga/, (Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 3).
[29]
Telephone call - wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telephone_
call, (Accessed on 07/03/2019), (cit. on p. 1).
[30]
Time sensitive networking (tsn) applied to the smart grid and smart factory,
https://www.iiconsortium.org/barcelona-forum/TSN_for_
IIC_Barcelona_Forum.pdf, (Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 2).
[31]
Time sensitive networking (tsn) frequently asked questions - national instruments,
http : / / www . ni . com / da - dk / innovations / white - papers /
18/time-sensitive-networking--tsn--frequently-asked-
questions.html, (Accessed on 07/04/2019), (cit. on p. 6).
==PAGE:60==
APPENDIXA
Code listings
A.1
Circuit design: Top level block
1
‘ t i m e s c a l e
1 ns
/
1 ps
3
‘ i n c l u d e
" am_regs . vh "
5
(∗
DowngradeIPIdentifiedWarnings = " yes "
∗)
7 module
xilinx_pcie_2_1_ep_7x # (
) ;
9
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
mac156_clk_cnt = ’ h0 ;
11
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_r = ’ h0 ;
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_r = ’ h0 ;
13
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ r = ’ h0 ;
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
msr_clk_cnt_r = ’ h0 ;
15
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_s ;
17
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_s ;
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
19
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
wire
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_s ;
21
wire
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_s ;
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ;
23
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ;
wire
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
25
wire
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
27
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ s ;
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
msr_clk_cnt_s ;
29
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
msr_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
31
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ;
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
msr_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ;
33
wire
pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
wire
msr_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
35
37
wire
am_pcs_rx_clk_s ;
wire
am_pcs_rx_rst_s ;
39
wire
am_pcs_tx_rst_clk_s ;
49
==PAGE:61==
A.1. Circuit design: Top level block
50
wire
am_pcs_tx_clk_s ;
41
wire
measure_clk_s = clk250 ;
wire
m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s = u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ;
43
always @( posedge
am_pcs_rx_clk_s )
begin
45
i f
( am_pcs_rx_rst_s )
begin
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_r <=0;
47
end
e l s e
begin
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_r <= am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_r + 1 ’ b1 ;
49
end
end
51
always @( posedge
am_pcs_tx_clk_s )
begin
i f
( am_pcs_tx_rst_clk_s )
begin
53
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_r <=0;
end
e l s e
begin
55
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_r <= am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_r + 1 ’ b1 ;
end
57
end
59
a s s i g n
am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_s = am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_r ;
a s s i g n
am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_s = am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_r ;
61
always @( posedge
clk250 )
begin
63
i f
( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q )
begin
p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ r <=0;
65
end
e l s e
begin
p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ r
<= p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ r + 1 ’ b1 ;
67
end
end
69
always @( posedge
measure_clk_s )
begin
i f
( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s )
begin
71
msr_clk_cnt_r <=0;
end
e l s e
begin
73
msr_clk_cnt_r <= msr_clk_cnt_r + 1 ’ b1 ;
end
75
end
77
a s s i g n
p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ s = p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ r ;
a s s i g n
msr_clk_cnt_s = msr_clk_cnt_r ;
79
wire
r eg _ rd _ se l _f r am e_ d et _ la _ sa m pl e = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 1 7 ]
==2’h3 && ←-
reg_addr_s [14:13]==2 ’ h0 )
? 1 : 0 ;
81
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ f r a m e _ d e t _ l a _ r e a d = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 1 7 ]
==2’h3 && ←-
reg_addr_s [14:13]==2 ’ h1 )
? 1 : 0 ;
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 8 ]
==11 ’ h203 ) ←-
? 1 : 0 ;
83
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ t x _ r e a d = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 8 ]
==11 ’ h204 ) ←-
? 1 : 0 ;
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ r x _ r e a d = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 8 ]
==11 ’ h205 ) ←-
? 1 : 0 ;
85
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ p c i e _ r e a d = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 8 ]
==11 ’ h206 ) ←-
? 1 : 0 ;
==PAGE:62==
A.1. Circuit design: Top level block
51
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ m s r _ r e a d = ( reg_addr_s [ 1 8 : 8 ]
==11 ’ h207 ) ←-
? 1 : 0 ;
87
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ r x _ s ;
89
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ t x _ s ;
wire
reg_en_sampler_rx_s ;
91
wire
reg_en_sampler_tx_s ;
93
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ p c i e _ s ;
wire
r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ m s r _ s ;
95
wire
reg_en_sampler_pcie_s ;
wire
reg_en_sampler_msr_s ;
97
wire
am_pcs_active_rx_s ;
99
wire
am_pcs_active_tx_s ;
wire
am_pcs_active_rx_sync_s ;
101
wire
am_pcs_active_tx_sync_s ;
103
always @( posedge
clk250 )
begin
i f
( reg_en_s )
begin
105
i f ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ f r a m e _ d e t _ l a _ r e a d ) begin
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= mem_frame_ana_rd_data_s ;
107
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= mem_frame_ana_rd_av_s ;
end
e l s e
i f ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ t x _ r e a d ) begin
109
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
111
end
e l s e
i f ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ r x _ r e a d ) begin
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
113
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
end
e l s e
i f ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ p c i e _ r e a d ) begin
115
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
117
end
e l s e
i f ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ m s r _ r e a d ) begin
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= msr_clk_cnt_sampled_s ;
119
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= msr_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s ;
end
e l s e
begin
121
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= 32 ’ haaaaaaaa ;
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= 1;
123
end
end
e l s e
begin
125
r e g _ d a t a _ r
<= 32 ’ h0 ;
r e g _ d a t a _ v a l _ r <= 0;
127
end
end
129
dd_async_sample
dd_async_gt_clk_sampler_rx_i
131
(
. c l k _ i n _ i ( clk250 ) ,
133
. r s t _ i n _ i ( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ) ,
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_s ) ,
135
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_rx_rst_s ) ,
. d a t a _ i ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r ) ,
==PAGE:63==
A.1. Circuit design: Top level block
52
137
. data_o ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ r x _ s )
) ;
139
dd_async_sample
dd_async_gt_clk_sampler_enable_rx_i
141
(
. c l k _ i n _ i ( clk250 ) ,
143
. r s t _ i n _ i ( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ) ,
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_s ) ,
145
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_rx_rst_s ) ,
. d a t a _ i ( reg_en_s ) ,
147
. data_o ( reg_en_sampler_rx_s )
) ;
149
dd_async_sample
dd_async_gt_clk_sampler_tx_i
151
(
. c l k _ i n _ i ( clk250 ) ,
153
. r s t _ i n _ i ( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ) ,
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_s ) ,
155
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_tx_rst_clk_s ) ,
. d a t a _ i ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r ) ,
157
. data_o ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ t x _ s )
) ;
159
dd_async_sample
dd_async_gt_clk_s am p l er _ e na b l e_ t x _ i
161
(
. c l k _ i n _ i ( clk250 ) ,
163
. r s t _ i n _ i ( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ) ,
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_s ) ,
165
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( am_pcs_tx_rst_clk_s ) ,
. d a t a _ i ( reg_en_s ) ,
167
. data_o ( reg_en_sampler_tx_s )
) ;
169
dd_gt_clk_cnt_sampler
d d _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ r x _ i
171
(
. c l k _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_s ) ,
173
. sampler_i ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ r x _ s ) ,
. e n a b l e _ i ( reg_en_sampler_rx_s ) ,
175
. c l k _ c n t _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_s ) ,
. clk_cnt_o ( am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_s )
177
) ;
179
dd_async_sample_cnt
d d _ a s y n c _ g t _ r x _ c l k _ c n t _ i
(
181
. c l k _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_rx_rst_s ) ,
183
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
185
. d a t a _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_s ) ,
. data_o ( am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ) ,
187
. data_av_o ( am_pcs_rx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s )
) ;
==PAGE:64==
A.1. Circuit design: Top level block
53
189
dd_gt_clk_cnt_sampler
d d _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ t x _ i
191
(
. c l k _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_s ) ,
193
. sampler_i ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ t x _ s ) ,
. e n a b l e _ i ( reg_en_sampler_tx_s ) ,
195
. c l k _ c n t _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_s ) ,
. clk_cnt_o ( am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_s )
197
) ;
199
dd_async_sample_cnt
d d _ a s y n c _ g t _ t x _ c l k _ c n t _ i
(
201
. c l k _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_tx_rst_clk_s ) ,
203
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
205
. d a t a _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_s ) ,
. data_o ( am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ) ,
207
. data_av_o ( am_pcs_tx_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s )
) ;
209
dd_gt_clk_cnt_sampler
d d _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r _ p c i e _ i
211
(
. c l k _ i ( clk250 ) ,
213
. sampler_i ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r ) ,
. e n a b l e _ i ( reg_en_s ) ,
215
. c l k _ c n t _ i ( p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ s ) ,
. clk_cnt_o ( pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_s )
217
) ;
219
dd_async_sample_cnt
d d _ a s y n c _ g t _ p c i e _ c l k _ c n t _ i
(
221
. c l k _ i n _ i ( clk250 ) ,
. r s t _ i n _ i ( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ) ,
223
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
225
. d a t a _ i ( pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_s ) ,
. data_o ( pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ) ,
227
. data_av_o ( pcie_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s )
) ;
229
dd_gt_clk_cnt_sampler
dd_gt_clk_cnt_sampler_msr_i
231
(
. c l k _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
233
. sampler_i ( r e g _ r d _ s e l _ g t _ c l k _ c n t _ s a m p l e r ) ,
. e n a b l e _ i ( reg_en_s ) ,
235
. c l k _ c n t _ i ( msr_clk_cnt_s ) ,
. clk_cnt_o ( msr_clk_cnt_sampled_s )
237
) ;
239
dd_async_sample_cnt
dd_async_gt_msr_clk_cnt_i
(
==PAGE:65==
A.2. Circuit design: Synchronization block for enabler
54
241
. c l k _ i n _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ i n _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
243
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
245
. d a t a _ i ( msr_clk_cnt_sampled_s ) ,
. data_o ( msr_clk_cnt_sampled_sync_s ) ,
247
. data_av_o ( msr_clk_cnt_sampled_av_sync_s )
) ;
249
dd_ frame_logic_analyzer
251
# ( . MEM_SIZE_BITS (10) )
d d _ f r a m e _ l o g i c _ a n a l y z e r _ i
(
253
. clk_wr_i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
. c l k _ r d _ i ( clk250 ) ,
255
. r s t _ i ( u s e r _ r e s e t _ q ) ,
. frame_tx_i ( am_pcs_active_tx_sync_s ) ,
257
. frame_rx_i ( am_pcs_active_rx_sync_s ) ,
. mem_rd_en_i ( re g _r d _s e l_ f ra me _ de t _ l a _ s a m p l e ) ,
259
. mem_rd_addr_i ( reg_addr_s ) ,
. mem_rd_data_o ( mem_frame_ana_rd_data_s ) ,
261
. mem_rd_data_av_o ( mem_frame_ana_rd_av_s )
) ;
263
dd_async_sample
dd_async_sample_tx_frame_i
265
(
. c l k _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_tx_clk_s ) ,
267
. r s t _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_tx_rst_clk_s ) ,
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
269
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
. d a t a _ i ( am_pcs_active_tx_s ) ,
271
. data_o ( am_pcs_active_tx_sync_s )
) ;
273
dd_async_sample
dd_async_sample_rx_frame_i
275
(
. c l k _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_rx_clk_s ) ,
277
. r s t _ i n _ i ( am_pcs_rx_rst_s ) ,
. c l k _ o u t _ i ( measure_clk_s ) ,
279
. r s t _ o u t _ i ( m e a s u r e _ r s t _ c l k _ s ) ,
. d a t a _ i ( am_pcs_active_rx_s ) ,
281
. data_o ( am_pcs_active_rx_sync_s )
) ;
283
endmodule
A.2
Circuit design: Synchronization block for enabler
‘ t i m e s c a l e
1 ns
/
1 ps
2
module
dd_async_sample
==PAGE:66==
A.3. Circuit design: Synchronization block for counter
55
4
(
i n p u t
wire
c l k _ i n _ i ,
6
i n p u t
wire
r s t _ i n _ i ,
i n p u t
wire
clk_out_i ,
8
i n p u t
wire
r s t _ o u t _ i ,
i n p u t
wire
data_i ,
10
outp ut
reg
data_o
) ;
12
reg
r1 ;
14
reg
r2 ;
reg
r3 ;
16
always @( posedge
c l k _ i n _ i )
begin
18
i f
( r s t _ i n _ i )
begin
r1 <=0;
20
end
e l s e
begin
r1 <= d a t a _ i ;
22
end
end
24
always @( posedge
c l k _ o u t _ i )
begin
26
i f
( r s t _ o u t _ i )
begin
r2 <=0;
28
r3 <=0;
data_o <=0;
30
end
e l s e
begin
r2 <= r1 ;
32
r3 <= r2 ;
data_o <= r2 ;
34
end
end
36
endmodule
A.3
Circuit design: Synchronization block for counter
1 ‘ t i m e s c a l e
1 ns
/
1 ps
3 module
dd_async_sample_cnt
(
5
i n p u t
wire
c l k _ i n _ i ,
i n p u t
wire
r s t _ i n _ i ,
7
i n p u t
wire
clk_out_i ,
i n p u t
wire
r s t _ o u t _ i ,
9
i n p u t
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
data_i ,
outp ut
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
data_o ,
11
outp ut
reg
data_av_o
) ;
13
==PAGE:67==
A.4. Circuit design: Sampling block
56
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
r1 ;
15
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
r2 ;
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
r3 ;
17
always @( posedge
c l k _ i n _ i )
begin
19
i f
( r s t _ i n _ i )
begin
r1 <=0;
21
end
e l s e
begin
r1 <= d a t a _ i ;
23
end
end
25
always @( posedge
c l k _ o u t _ i )
begin
27
i f
( r s t _ o u t _ i )
begin
r2 <=0;
29
r3 <=0;
data_o <=0;
31
data_av_o <=0;
end
e l s e
begin
33
r2 <= r1 ;
r3 <= r2 ;
35
data_o <= r2 ;
data_av_o <= 1;
37
end
end
39
41 endmodule
A.4
Circuit design: Sampling block
1 ‘ t i m e s c a l e
1 ns /1 ps
3 module
dd_gt_clk_cnt_sampler
(
5
i n p u t
clk_i ,
i n p u t
sampler_i ,
7
i n p u t
enable_i ,
i n p u t
wire
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
c l k _ c n t _ i ,
9
output
reg
[ 2 7 : 0 ]
clk_cnt_o
) ;
11
always @( posedge
c l k _ i )
begin
13
i f
( sampler_i & e n a b l e _ i )
begin
clk_cnt_o <= c l k _ c n t _ i ;
15
end
end
17
endmodule
==PAGE:68==
A.5. Circuit design: Frame Analyzer block
57
A.5
Circuit design: Frame Analyzer block
‘ t i m e s c a l e
1 ns /1 ps
2
module
d d_frame_logic_analyzer
4
#( parameter
MEM_SIZE_BITS
= 10 ,
6
BUS_SIZE_BITS
= 12
)
8
(
i n p u t
wire
clk_wr_i ,
10
i n p u t
wire
clk_rd_i ,
i n p u t
wire
r s t _ i ,
12
i n p u t
wire
frame_tx_i ,
i n p u t
wire
frame_rx_i ,
14
i n p u t
wire
mem_rd_en_i ,
i n p u t
wire
[ BUS_SIZE_BITS −1+3+2:0]
mem_rd_addr_i ,
16
outp ut
reg
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
mem_rd_data_o ,
outp ut
reg
mem_rd_data_av_o
18
) ;
20
reg
[ 3 0 : 0 ]
t s _ r =0;
reg
s o f _ t x _ r ;
22
reg
e o f _ t x _ r ;
reg
s o f _ r x _ r ;
24
reg
e o f_ r x _ r ;
reg
frame_tx_r ;
26
reg
frame_rx_r ;
reg
frame_tx_det_r =0;
28
reg
frame_rx_det_r =0;
reg
mem_rd_en_r ;
30
reg
s e l _ r x _ r ;
32
wire
[ 1 : 0 ]
hi_addr_s = mem_rd_addr_i [ BUS_SIZE_BITS←-
−1+3+2:BUS_SIZE_BITS −1+3+1];
wire
[ BUS_SIZE_BITS−1+3−2:0] lo_addr_s = mem_rd_addr_i [ BUS_SIZE_BITS←-
−1+3−2:0];
34
wire
mem_rd_data_tx_av_s ;
36
wire
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
mem_rd_data_tx_s ;
wire
mem_rd_data_rx_av_s ;
38
wire
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
mem_rd_data_rx_s ;
wire
s e l _ r x _ s
= hi_addr_s ==2’h0 ? mem_rd_en_i : 0 ;
40
wire
s e l _ t x _ s
= hi_addr_s ==2’h1 ? mem_rd_en_i : 0 ;
wire
c l e a r _ s
= hi_addr_s ==2’h2
? 1 : 0 ;
42
wire
s e l _ r x _ 2 _ s ;
44
a s s i g n
s e l _ r x _ 2 _ s = s e l _ r x _ r ;
46
always @( posedge
clk_wr_i )
begin
t s _ r
<= t s _ r +1;
48
frame_rx_r <= frame_rx_i ;
==PAGE:69==
A.5. Circuit design: Frame Analyzer block
58
frame_tx_r <= frame_tx_i ;
50
frame_rx_det_r <= frame_rx_i
^
frame_rx_r ;
frame_tx_det_r <= frame_tx_i
^
frame_tx_r ;
52
end
54
always @( posedge
c l k _ r d _ i )
begin
mem_rd_en_r <= mem_rd_en_i ;
56
i f ( mem_rd_en_i ) begin
i f ( s e l _ r x _ s ) begin
58
mem_rd_data_o
<= mem_rd_data_rx_s ;
mem_rd_data_av_o <= mem_rd_data_rx_av_s ;
60
end
e l s e
i f ( s e l _ t x _ s ) begin
mem_rd_data_o
<= mem_rd_data_tx_s ;
62
mem_rd_data_av_o <= mem_rd_data_tx_av_s ;
end
e l s e
begin
64
mem_rd_data_o
<= 32 ’ hbbbbbbbb ;
mem_rd_data_av_o <= 1;
66
end
end
e l s e
begin
68
end
70
end
72 dd_frame_logic_analyzer_block
# ( . MEM_SIZE_BITS(MEM_SIZE_BITS) ,
. BUS_SIZE_BITS ( BUS_SIZE_BITS ) )
74
d d _ g t _ l o g i c _ a n a l y z e r _ b l o c k _ r x _ i
(
76
. clk_wr_i ( clk_wr_i ) ,
. c l k _ r d _ i ( c l k _ r d _ i ) ,
78
. r s t _ i ( r s t _ i ) ,
. c l e a r _ i ( c l e a r _ s ) ,
80
. t s _ i ( t s _ r ) ,
. log_en_i ( frame_rx_det_r ) ,
82
. l o g _ d a t a _ i ( frame_rx_i ) ,
. mem_rd_addr_i ( lo_addr_s ) ,
84
. mem_rd_en_i ( s e l _ r x _ s ) ,
. mem_rd_data_o ( mem_rd_data_rx_s ) ,
86
. mem_rd_data_av_o ( mem_rd_data_rx_av_s )
) ;
88
dd_frame_logic_analyzer_block
90
# ( . MEM_SIZE_BITS(MEM_SIZE_BITS) ,
. BUS_SIZE_BITS ( BUS_SIZE_BITS ) )
d d _ g t _ l o g i c _ a n a l y z e r _ b l o c k _ t x _ i
92
(
. clk_wr_i ( clk_wr_i ) ,
94
. c l k _ r d _ i ( c l k _ r d _ i ) ,
. r s t _ i ( r s t _ i ) ,
96
. c l e a r _ i ( c l e a r _ s ) ,
. t s _ i ( t s _ r ) ,
98
. log_en_i ( frame_tx_det_r ) ,
. l o g _ d a t a _ i ( frame_tx_i ) ,
100
. mem_rd_addr_i ( lo_addr_s ) ,
==PAGE:70==
A.5. Circuit design: Frame Analyzer block
59
. mem_rd_en_i ( s e l _ t x _ s ) ,
102
. mem_rd_data_o ( mem_rd_data_tx_s ) ,
. mem_rd_data_av_o ( mem_rd_data_tx_av_s )
104
) ;
106 endmodule
108
module
dd_frame_logic_analyzer_block
110
#( parameter
MEM_SIZE_BITS
= 10 ,
112
BUS_SIZE_BITS
= 12
)
114
(
i n p u t
wire
clk_wr_i ,
116
i n p u t
wire
clk_rd_i ,
i n p u t
wire
r s t _ i ,
118
i n p u t
wire
c l e a r _ i ,
120
i n p u t
wire
[ 3 0 : 0 ]
t s _ i ,
122
i n p u t
wire
log_en_i ,
i n p u t
wire
log_data_i ,
124
i n p u t
wire
[ BUS_SIZE_BITS−1+3−2:0] mem_rd_addr_i ,
126
i n p u t
wire
mem_rd_en_i ,
outp ut
reg
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
mem_rd_data_o ,
128
outp ut
reg
mem_rd_data_av_o
) ;
130
wire
[30+1:0]
wr_log_s = { t s _ i ,
l o g _ d a t a _ i };
132
reg
[31+1 −1:0]
wr_log_r ;
reg
[ BUS_SIZE_BITS −1+3:0]
wr_prt_r ;
134
reg
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
e v e n t _ c n t _ r ;
136
wire
wr_en_s = log_en_i ;
wire
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
mem_rd_data_s ;
138
reg
mem_rd_en_r ;
140
reg
[ 3 1 : 0 ]
mem_rd_data_r ;
reg
mem_rd_data_av_r =0;
142
always @( posedge
clk_wr_i )
begin
144
i f
( r s t _ i
| |
c l e a r _ i )
begin
wr_prt_r
<=0;
146
event_cnt_r <=0;
end
e l s e
begin
148
wr_log_r <= wr_log_s ;
i f ( wr_en_s ) begin
150
wr_prt_r
<= wr_prt_r +1;
e v e n t _ c n t _ r <= e v e n t _ c n t _ r +1;
152
end
==PAGE:71==
A.6. Software design: Acquisition of frequency measurements
60
end
154
end
156
always @( posedge
c l k _ r d _ i )
begin
mem_rd_en_r <= mem_rd_en_i ;
158
i f ( mem_rd_en_i ) begin
mem_rd_data_o
<= mem_rd_data_s ;
160
mem_rd_data_av_o <= mem_rd_en_i ;
162
end
e l s e
begin
164
end
end
166
blk_mem_gen_0 blk_mem_i
168
(
. clka ( clk_wr_i ) ,
170
. ena ( wr_en_s ) ,
. wea ( wr_en_s ) ,
172
. addra ( wr_prt_r ) ,
. dina ( wr_log_s ) ,
174
. clkb ( c l k _ r d _ i ) ,
. enb ( mem_rd_en_i ) ,
176
. addrb ( mem_rd_addr_i ) ,
. doutb ( mem_rd_data_s )
178
) ;
180 endmodule
A.6
Software design: Acquisition of frequency measurements
i n t
samples = 1000000;
2
i n t
t x c n t [ samples ] ;
i n t
r x c n t [ samples ] ;
4
i n t
t x r x _ d i f f [ samples ] ;
i n t
samples_freq [ samples ] ;
6
i n t
s am ples_freq_cnt ;
i n t
samples_cnt ;
8
FILE ∗txcnt_samples ;
FILE ∗rxcnt_samples ;
10
FILE ∗t x r x _ d i f f _ s a m p l e s ;
FILE ∗pcie_tx_rx_samples ;
12
FILE ∗pciecnt_samples ;
FILE ∗msrcnt_samples ;
14
FILE ∗p c i em s r _ d i ff _ s a m p l es ;
16
i f ( p _ r x s t a t ) {
txcnt_samples = fopen ( " txcnt_samples . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
18
rxcnt_samples = fopen ( " rxcnt_samples . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
t x r x _ d i f f _ s a m p l e s = fopen ( " t x r x _ d i f f _ s a m p l e s . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
==PAGE:72==
A.6. Software design: Acquisition of frequency measurements
61
20
pc ie cnt_samples = fopen ( " pciecnt_s amp le s . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
msrcnt_samples = fopen ( " msrcnt_samples . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
22
p c i e m s r _ d i f f_ s a m p l es = fopen ( " p c i e m s r _ d i f f _ s a m p l e s . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
pcie_tx_rx_samples = fopen ( " pcie_tx_rx_samples . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
24
f o r
( samples_cnt = 0;
samples_cnt < samples
;
samples_cnt ++){
u32 addr1 = (0 x203 <<8)+ 0;
26
u32
val1 = hwreg_32 [ addr1 ] ;
u32 addr2 = (0 x204 <<8)+ 0;
28
u32
val2 = hwreg_32 [ addr2 ] ;
/ / t x c n t [ samples_cnt ] = val2 ;
30
u32 addr3 = (0 x205 <<8)+ 0;
u32
val3 = hwreg_32 [ addr3 ] ;
32
/ / u32
val4 = val2 −val3 ;
u32
val4 ;
34
i f
( val3 <= val2 ) {
val4 = val2 −val3 ;
36
}
e l s e
{
val4 = ( val2 + 268435455) −val3 ;
38
}
u32 addr5 = (0 x206 <<8)+ 0;
40
u32
val5 = hwreg_32 [ addr5 ] ;
u32 addr6 = (0 x207 <<8)+ 0;
42
u32
val6 = hwreg_32 [ addr6 ] ;
u32
val7 = val3 −val6 ;
44
f p r i n t f ( txcnt_samples , "%d \ n" , val2 ) ;
f p r i n t f ( rxcnt_samples , "%d \ n" , val3 ) ;
46
f p r i n t f ( t x r x _ d i f f _ s a m p l e s , "%d \ n" , val4 ) ;
f p r i n t f ( pciecnt_samples , "%d \ n" , val5 ) ;
48
f p r i n t f ( msrcnt_samples , "%d \ n" , val6 ) ;
f p r i n t f ( pciemsr_diff_samples , "%d \ n" , val7 ) ;
50
f p r i n t f ( pcie_tx_rx_samples , "%d,%d,%d,%d , \ n" , val5 , val2 , val3 , val4 ) ; ←-
/ / pcie , tx , rx , t x r x _ d i f f
s l e e p ( 2 7 . 2 5 ) ;
52
}
f c l o s e ( txcnt_samples ) ;
54
f c l o s e ( rxcnt_samples ) ;
f c l o s e ( t x r x _ d i f f _ s a m p l e s ) ;
56
f c l o s e ( pciecnt_samples ) ;
f c l o s e ( msrcnt_samples ) ;
58
f c l o s e ( p ci e m s r _ di f f _ s a m pl e s ) ;
f c l o s e ( pcie_tx_rx_samples ) ;
60
/ / f o r
( samples_cnt = 0;
samples_cnt < samples
;
samples_cnt ++){
62
/ / p r i n t f ( " sample %d ,
tx
val %08x ,
rx
val %08x ,
tx / rx
d i f f e r e n c e %08←-
x ,
time %LF ,
time
d i f f %LF \ n " ,
samples_cnt +1 ,
t x c n t [ samples_cnt←-
]
,
r x c n t [ samples_cnt ] ,
t x r x _ d i f f [ samples_cnt ] ,
cpu_clk_t [←-
samples_cnt ] ,
c p u _ c l k _ d i f f [ samples_cnt ] ) ;
/ / }
==PAGE:73==
A.7. Software design: Acquisition of latency measurements
62
A.7
Software design: Acquisition of latency measurements
1
FILE ∗txtime_samples ;
FILE ∗rxtime_samples ;
3
i f ( p _ r x s t a t ) {
/ / / / / / / / / r e s e t
memory address / / / / / /
5
u32
val0 ;
7
u32 addr0 = (0 x760 <<8)+ 0;
val0 = hwreg_32 [ addr0 ] ;
9
p r i n t f ( " addr %06x ,
val %08x
\ n" ,
addr0
,
val0 ) ;
11
/ / / / / / / / / r eading
data / / / / / / / /
txtime_samples = fopen ( " txtime_samples . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
13
rxtime_samples = fopen ( " rxtime_samples . bin " ,
"wb" ) ;
f o r
( i = 0;
i < 200;
i ++){
15
u32
val ;
u32
addr = (0 x600 <<8)+ i ;
17
val = hwreg_32 [ addr ] ;
u32
val1 ;
19
u32 addr1 = (0 x620 <<8)+ 0;
val1 = hwreg_32 [ addr1 ] ;
21
p r i n t f ( " rx
read
i %d ,
addr %06x ,
val %08x
\ n" ,
i ,
addr1
,
val1 ) ;
f p r i n t f ( rxtime_samples , "%08x \ n" , val1 ) ;
23
}
25
f o r
( i = 0;
i < 200;
i ++){
u32
val ;
27
u32
addr = (0 x680 <<8)+ i ;
val = hwreg_32 [ addr ] ;
29
/ / p r i n t f ( " tx
sample
addr %06x ,
val %08x
\ n " ,
addr
,
val ) ;
31
u32
val1 ;
u32 addr1 = (0 x6A0<<8)+ 0;
33
val1 = hwreg_32 [ addr1 ] ;
p r i n t f ( " tx
read
i %d ,
addr %06x ,
val %08x
\ n" ,
i ,
addr1
,
val1 ) ;
35
f p r i n t f ( txtime_samples , "%08x \ n" , val1 ) ;
}
37
f c l o s e ( txtime_samples ) ;
39
f c l o s e ( rxtime_samples ) ;
A.8
Software design: Processing of frequency measurements
1 import
m a t p l o t l i b . pyplot
as
p l t
import numpy as np
3 import
pandas
as pd
import
seaborn
as
sns
5 from os
import
l i s t d i r
==PAGE:74==
A.8. Software design: Processing of frequency measurements
63
from os
import
walk
7 from os . path
import
j o i n
mypath = ’ xx ’
9
f i l e s
= s o r t e d ( l i s t d i r ( mypath ) )
f _ p c i e = 125000000
11 t _ p c i e = 1/ f _ p c i e
13
p r i n t _ r e s u l t s
= False
p r i n t _ r e s u l t s 1
= True
15
f o r
f i l e
in
f i l e s :
17
i f
s t r ( f i l e ) . s t a r t s w i t h ( ’ xx ’ ) :
filename = j o i n ( mypath , f i l e )
19
plotname =
f i l e . s p l i t ( " . " ) [ 0 ]
v = np . l o a d t x t ( filename ,
d e l i m i t e r = ’ , ’ ,
u s e c o l s =(0 ,1 ,2 ,3) , ←-
unpack=True )
21
df = pd . DataFrame ( v )
df1 = df . T
23
df1 . columns = [ ’ p c i e _ c n t ’ , ’ t x _ c n t ’ , ’ rx_ cnt ’ , ’ t x r x _ d i f f ’ ]
25 df1 = df1 . i l o c [ 1 : ]
p c i e _ c n t = df1 . loc [ : ,
’ p c i e _ c n t ’ ] . valu es
27 t x _ c n t = df1 . loc [ : ,
’ t x _ c n t ’ ] . values
rx _cnt = df1 . loc [ : ,
’ rx_cnt ’ ] . values
29
t x r x _ d i f f _ c n t = df1 . loc [ : ,
’ t x r x _ d i f f ’ ] . v alue s
31 n_pcie ,
n_tx ,
n_rx = np . zeros ( len ( p c i e _ c n t ) −1) , np . zeros ( len ( p c i e _ c n t )←-
−1) , np . zeros ( len ( p c i e _ c n t ) −1)
n_txrx = np . zeros ( len ( p c i e _ c n t ) −1)
33 f o r
i
in
range ( len ( p c i e _ c n t ) −1) :
i f
p c i e _ c n t [ i +1] > p c i e _ c n t [ i ] :
35
n_pcie [ i ]= p c i e _ c n t [ i +1] −p c i e _ c n t [ i ]
e l s e :
37
n_pcie [ i ]=( p c i e _ c n t [ i +1] + 268435455) −p c i e _ c n t [ i ]
i f
t x _ c n t [ i +1] > t x _ c n t [ i ] :
39
n_tx [ i ]= t x _ c n t [ i +1] −t x _ c n t [ i ]
e l s e :
41
n_tx [ i ]=( t x _ c n t [ i +1] + 268435455) −t x _ c n t [ i ]
i f
rx _cnt [ i +1] > rx_cnt [ i ] :
43
n_rx [ i ]= rx_cnt [ i +1] −rx_cnt [ i ]
e l s e :
45
n_rx [ i ]=( rx_cnt [ i +1] + 268435455) −rx _cn t [ i ]
n_txrx [ i ] = n_tx [ i ] −n_rx [ i ]
47
mean_n_pcie = n_pcie . mean ( )
49 mean_n_tx = n_tx . mean ( )
mean_n_rx = n_rx . mean ( )
51 mean_n_txrx = n_txrx . mean ( )
53 f_s ,
f_rx ,
f _ t x = np . zeros ( len ( n_pcie ) ) , np . zeros ( len ( n_rx ) ) , np . zeros (←-
len ( n_tx ) )
==PAGE:75==
A.9. Software design: Processing of latency measurements
64
t_s ,
t_tx ,
t _ r x = np . zeros ( len ( f_s ) ) , np . zeros ( len ( f_rx ) ) , np . zeros ( len←-
( f _ t x ) )
55
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( f_s ) ) :
57
t _ s [ i ] = t _ p c i e ∗n_pcie [ i ]
f_s [ i ] = 1
/
t _ s [ i ]
59
t _ t x [ i ] = t _ s [ i ]
/
n_tx [ i ]
f _ t x [ i ] = 1
/
t _ t x [ i ]
61
t _ r x [ i ] = t _ s [ i ]
/
n_rx [ i ]
f_rx [ i ] = 1
/
t _ r x [ i ]
63
mean_fs = f_s . mean ( )
65 mean_ftx = f _ t x . mean ( )
mean_frx = f_rx . mean ( )
67 mean_ts = 1/ f_s . mean ( )
mean_ttx = 1/ f _ t x . mean ( )
69 mean_trx = 1/ f_rx . mean ( )
71 # p l o t
f o r
f_s ,
f_tx ,
f_tx ,
_rx
and
n_txrx
73 ax =
p l t . h i s t ( x=f_s ,
bins =80 ,
f a c e c o l o r = ’ #0504 aa ’ ,
alpha =0.7 ,
rwidth←-
=0.85)
p l t . x l a b e l ( ’ Frequency −Hz ’ )
75
p l t . y l a b e l ( ’Number of
r e p e t i t i o n s ’ )
p l t . t i t l e ( ’ Sampling
frequency ’ )
77
p l t . t e x t (150 ,
325000 ,
r ’ Samples :
1
m i l l i o n ’ )
79
p l t . t e x t (150 ,
275000 ,
r ’ Sampling
clock :
PCIe 125 MHz’ )
81
p l t . g r i d ( True )
p l t . show ( )
A.9
Software design: Processing of latency measurements
import
m a t p l o t l i b . pyplot
as
p l t
2 import numpy as np
import
pandas
as pd
4 import
seaborn
as
sns
import
b i n a s c i i
6 from os
import
l i s t d i r
from os
import
walk
8 from os . path
import
j o i n
mypath = ’ xx ’
10
f i l e s
= s o r t e d ( l i s t d i r ( mypath ) )
f _ p c i e = 125000000
12 t _ p c i e = 1/ f _ p c i e
14 f o r
f i l e
in
f i l e s :
i f
s t r ( f i l e ) . s t a r t s w i t h ( ’ xx ’ ) :
16
filename = j o i n ( mypath , f i l e )
==PAGE:76==
A.9. Software design: Processing of latency measurements
65
plotname =
f i l e . s p l i t ( " . " ) [ 0 ]
18
txtimes_hex = [ ]
t x t i m e s _ b i n = [ ]
20
with
open ( filename ,
’ r ’ )
as
f i l e h a n d l e :
f o r
l i n e
in
f i l e h a n d l e :
22
c u r r e n t P l a c e = l i n e [: −1]
txtimes_hex . append ( c u r r e n t P l a c e )
24
t x t i m e s _ b i n = [ ]
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( txtimes_hex ) ) :
26
l = bin ( i n t ( txtimes_hex [ i ] ,
16) ) [ 2 : ]
t x t i m e s _ b i n . append ( l )
28
t x t i m e s _ i n t = [ ]
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( t x t i m e s _ b i n ) ) :
30
l =
i n t ( t x t i m e s _ b i n [ i ] ,
2)
t x t i m e s _ i n t . append ( l )
32
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s
= [ ]
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ d e s = [ ]
34
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( t x t i m e s _ b i n ) ) :
l = ( ( 1 << 31) −1) & ( i n t ( t x t i m e s _ b i n [ i ] ,
2) >> (2 −1) )
36
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s . append ( l )
l = ( ( 1 << 1) −1) & ( i n t ( t x t i m e s _ b i n [ i ] ,
2) >> (1 −1) )
38
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ d e s . append ( l )
i f
s t r ( f i l e ) . s t a r t s w i t h ( ’1bb ’ ) :
40
filename = j o i n ( mypath , f i l e )
plotname =
f i l e . s p l i t ( " . " ) [ 0 ]
42
rxtimes_hex = [ ]
r x t i m e s _ b i n = [ ]
44
with
open ( filename ,
’ r ’ )
as
f i l e h a n d l e :
f o r
l i n e
in
f i l e h a n d l e :
46
c u r r e n t P l a c e = l i n e [: −1]
rxtimes_hex . append ( c u r r e n t P l a c e )
48
r x t i m e s _ b i n = [ ]
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( rxtimes_hex ) ) :
50
l = bin ( i n t ( rxtimes_hex [ i ] ,
16) ) [ 2 : ]
r x t i m e s _ b i n . append ( l )
52
r x t i m e s _ i n t = [ ]
54
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( r x t i m e s _ b i n ) ) :
l =
i n t ( r x t i m e s _ b i n [ i ] ,
2)
56
r x t i m e s _ i n t . append ( l )
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s = [ ]
58
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ d e s = [ ]
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( r x t i m e s _ b i n ) ) :
60
l = ( ( 1 << 31) −1) & ( i n t ( r x t i m e s _ b i n [ i ] ,
2) >> (2 −1) )
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s . append ( l )
62
l = ( ( 1 << 1) −1) & ( i n t ( r x t i m e s _ b i n [ i ] ,
2) >> (1 −1) )
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ d e s . append ( l )
64
df = pd . DataFrame ({ ’ t x _ t s ’ :
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s ,
’ tx_des ’ : ←-
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ d e s ,
’ r x _ t s ’ :
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s ,
’ rx_des ’ : ←-
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ d e s })
p r i n t ( pd . DataFrame ( df ) )
66
==PAGE:77==
A.9. Software design: Processing of latency measurements
66
tx_pkt_time ,
rx_pkt_time ,
pkt_latency ,
p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c , ←-
p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c 2
= np . zeros ( len ( t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s ) −1) , np . zeros ( len (←-
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s ) −1) , np . zeros ( 0 ) , np . zeros (1000) , np . zeros (999)
68 f o r
i
in
range (0 , len ( t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s ) −1,2) :
j = i
/
2
70
i f
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i +1] > t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ] :
tx_pkt_time [ i ] =
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i +1] −t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]
72
e l s e :
tx_pkt_time [ i ] = ( t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i +1] + 2147483647) −←-
t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]
74
i f
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i +1] > r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ] :
rx_pkt_time [ i ] = r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i +1] −r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]
76
e l s e :
rx_pkt_time [ i ] = ( r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i +1] + 2147483647) −←-
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]
78
i f
r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ] > t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ] :
l = r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ] −t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]
80
p k t _ l a t e n c y = np . append ( pkt_latency , l )
e l s e :
82
l = ( r x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]+
2147483647) −t x t i m e s _ i n t _ t s [ i ]
p k t _ l a t e n c y = np . append ( pkt_latency , l )
84
p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c = t _ p c i e ∗p k t _ l a t e n c y
86
mean_tx_pkt_time = tx_pkt_time . mean ( )
88 mean_rx_pkt_time = rx_pkt_time . mean ( )
mean_pkt_latency = p k t _ l a t e n c y . mean ( )
90 mean_pkt_latency_sec = p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c . mean ( )
l e n _ p k t _ l a t e n c y = len ( p k t _ l a t e n c y )
92
p r i n t ( " p k t _ l a t e n c y " , p k t _ l a t e n c y )
94
p r i n t ( " p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c " , p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c )
p r i n t ( " mean_tx_pkt_time " , mean_tx_pkt_time )
96
p r i n t ( " mean_rx_pkt_time " , mean_rx_pkt_time )
p r i n t ( " mean_pkt_latency " , mean_pkt_latency )
98
p r i n t ( " mean_pkt_latency_sec " , mean_pkt_latency_sec )
p r i n t ( " l e n _ p k t _ l a t e n c y " , l e n _ p k t _ l a t e n c y )
100
# f o r
p k t _ l a t e n c y
and
p k t _ l a t e n c y _ s e c
102 ax =
p l t . h i s t ( x= pkt_latency ,
bins = ’ auto ’ ,
f a c e c o l o r = ’ #0504 aa ’ ,
alpha←-
=0.7 ,
rwidth =0.85)
p l t . x l a b e l ( ’ clock
c y c l e s ’ )
104
p l t . y l a b e l ( ’Number of
r e p e t i t i o n s ’ )
p l t . t i t l e ( ’ Clock
c y c l e s
between TX and RX S t a r t −of−Frame
packet ’ )
106
p l t . t e x t ( 6 . 5 ,
900 ,
r ’ Loopback :
E x t e r n a l ’ )
108
p l t . t e x t ( 6 . 5 ,
825 ,
r ’ Samples :
1000 10GbE frames ’ )
p l t . t e x t ( 6 . 5 ,
750 ,
r ’ Sampling
clock :
PCIe 125 MHz’ )
110
p l t . a x i s ( [ 6 ,
12 ,
0 ,
1000])
112
p l t . g r i d ( True )
p l t . show ( )
