==PAGE:1==
Design, Fabrication and Characterization
of an Anodic Bonded Row-Column
Addressed CMUT Array
by
Magnus Galsg˚ard Petersen (s144092)
Supervisiors: PhD student Andreas Spandet Havreland and Prof. Erik
Vilain Thomsen
Master thesis
Technical University of Denmark
28. of June 2019
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer (CMUT) is a promising competitor to the tra-
ditional piezoelectric transducer for ultrasonic medical imaging. These have been studied for over
20 years, and the main focus have so far been on fabrication methods based on Local oxidation of
silicon (LOCOS) and fusion bonding, which have been proven to produce functioning CMUTs. This
method does, however, also have drawbacks, such as substrate coupling between CMUT elements
in row-column designs and long fabrication time. In this thesis, an approach using a glass wafer as
bottom substrate is presented, which enables anodic bonding to be utilized and signiﬁcantly reduces
substrate coupling at the same time due to the insulating nature of the glass. The anodic bonding
holds several advantages over fusion bonding; it can be made at low temperatures below eutectic
bonding temperature of gold, is less aﬀected by surface roughness and particle contamination and
generally that the fabrication process made around this type of bonding can be completed in a
shorter period of time compared to the traditional LOCOS approach.
Two runs of linear arrays of anodic bonded CMUTs with diﬀerent designs were fabricated and
characterized. Both electrical and acoustic characterization was performed, and it was proven that
the fabrication method presented in this thesis could produce functioning and time stable anodic
bonded CMUTs. The fabrication was made using polished In-house made silicon on insulator (IHM-
SOI) wafers to deﬁne the top plate. These can be fabricated with a desired device layer thickness
in just a few days, and thus provides a great deal of freedom in the design process. To increase
the yield from the fabrication, both design and fabrication process optimization was done. With
the optimizations, the fabrication process can be completed within a 7-10 days, which is a lot faster
than the fusion bonded approach.
Based on the best performing designs of the linear CMUT arrays, a row-column addressed CMUT
design was developed.
This design included several variations of the row-column arrays aimed
towards easy characterization and to solve issues met during the fabrication of the linear arrays.
The fabrication of the row-column design could unfortunately not be completed within the time
span of this thesis due to complications with the wafer bonder in the DTU Nanolab cleanroom.
i
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment for obtaining a Master of Science degree
in Physics and Nanotechnology engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (Danmarks
Tekniske Universitet).
The project has been conducted in the time period from January 28. to June 28., 2019, and has had
an oﬃcial workload of 30 ETCS-points.
All fabrication for this project, has been done in the DTU Nanolab cleanroom. The characterization
of these devices, has been conducted in using the probe station owned by the MEMS-applied sensors
group.
This project has been supervised by PhD student Andreas Spandet Havreland and Prof. Erik Vilain
Thomsen, who both always were available and ready to guide and discuss throughout the project. I
am grateful for the time and energy they both have put into this project.
A huge thanks needs to be said to all the members of the MEMS-applied sensors group for always
keeping their oﬃce doors open, taking their time to help with questions and generally contributing
to a great working environment. Last, but not least, I would like to thank my girlfriend Lærke Ishøy,
for all the support she has given throughout the entire project.
DTU, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, 28. of June, 2019
Magnus Galsg˚ard Petersen
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ABCMUT Anodic Bonded Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer. 8
ASE Advanced Silicon Etcher. 37
BHF Buﬀered hydrochloric acid. 23
CMUT Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer. i, 3
IHMSOI In-house made silicon on insulator. i, 8, 67
LOCOS Local oxidation of silicon. i, 6
LPCVD Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition. 18
PL Photoluminescence. 32
PVD Physical vapor deposition. 21
RCA Radio Corporation of America. 28
RCABCMUT Row-Column Anodic Bonded Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer. 8
SOI Silicon on insulator. 8
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acronyms
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acronyms
v
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Medical imaging with ultrasound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Fabrication of anodic bonded CMUTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Previous work on CMUTs at DTU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Development and state-of-the-art anodic bonded CMUTs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Project aim and thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
Plate deﬂection and resonance frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Energy and force analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Anodic bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Anodic bonding mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Design study of linear ABCMUT arrays
17
3.1
IHMSOI wafers as top plate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Fabrication of IHMSOI wafers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Surface roughness of IHMSOI wafers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Fabrication process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Cavity deﬁnition on bottom substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Bottom electrode deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Anodic bonding using commercial SOI wafers and IHMSOI wafers . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Thinning of IHMSOI wafer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.5
Top electrode deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2.6
Etching access to bottom electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
1
==PAGE:10==
2
CONTENTS
3.3.1
Test elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3.2
Device arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.3
Acoustical measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Process optimization
49
4.1
Identiﬁcation of key problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
Fabrication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2.1
Wafer Bonding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.2
Etching of handle and BOX layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.3
Plate bow above contact pads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Design and fabrication of row-column addressed CMUT arrays
57
5.1
The row-column design variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Fabrication of RCABCMUTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2.1
New alignment marks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2.2
Anodic bonding and thinning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Chapter summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Conclusion & Outlook
67
Appendices
71
A Row-column designs
73
B Process ﬂow
83
C Project Plan
91
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this chapter, an introduction to the ﬁeld of ultrasound imaging will be given. The piezo electric
transducer and the Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer (CMUT) will be discussed as
facilitators for ultrasound generation and detection. There will be a section where previous work
on CMUTs within the MEMS-applied sensors group is presented, and lastly a section providing an
outline of the thesis for the reader.
1.1
Medical imaging with ultrasound
Medical imaging by ultrasound is a non-invasive point-of-care diagnostic method.
It is done by
making a transducer emit sound pulses with a frequency between 1 and 30 MHz into the object that
is being diagnosed. The pressure waves will then, in a homogeneous medium propagate through the
object, while exerting some of its energy as heat. If at some point, the pressure wave hits an object
of diﬀerent acoustic impedance, part of the pressure wave will be reﬂected as an echo. This echo
can then be picked up by the transducer, and by knowing the speed of sound in the scanned object
as well as the time between the pulse was emitted until the echo was picked up, one can determine
the distance to the second object. By using an array of transducers, signals from a cross sectional
planes can be detected, thereby forming the images that can be used for diagnostics.
The most common transducer used for this method is the piezo electric transducer. The piezo electric
eﬀect was already found in 1880 by Jaques and Pierre Curie, who found that if force was applied to
a quarz crystal, charges were generated due to the stress and strain. [6]. This eﬀect also works the
other way around, where applying a potential across the piezoelectric material leads to a strain. If
one does this with an AC potential of high enough frequency, the strain will cause pressure wavers
to be emitted. The issue by using piezo electric materials, is that they usually are made from stiﬀ
ceramics, which causes the acoustic impedance of the transducer to be high. Therefore, eﬃcient
matching layers have to be used for the transducer to be on humans tissue[4]. Furthermore, the
stiﬀness also causes the transducer to keep vibrating some time after the potential is turned oﬀ.
Therefore, the pulses become long, resulting in lower bandwidth and lower depth resolution [4].
CMUTs are another type of transducer, which could be used for ultrasonic imaging.
A CMUT
generally consist of a bottom electrode, a cavity and a top electrode. If a potential is applied across
top and bottom electrode, the top plate will be drawn towards the bottom of the cavity due to the
electrostatic force. By pulsing with an AC potential of MHz frequency, the top plate with instead
vibrate and emit ultrasonic pulses. A sketch of a CMUT can be seen in Figure 1.1.
The advantages of CMUTs compared to the piezo electric transducers, are that CMUTs have broader
bandwidth, lower acoustic impedance, and can be fabricated with very small dimensions, thus min-
imizing the footprint of the transducers [23]. Furthermore, arrays of CMUTs can be designed to
3
==PAGE:12==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1:
Sketch of a CMUT crossection.
When an AC and DC voltage is applied to the top and
bottom electrodes, the top will vibrate and thus emit pressure waves. By controlling the frequency of the
AC potential, the frequency of the emitted pressure waves can be controlled as well
make 3D imaging possible [3]. These are some of the key features of CMUTs, which make them
promising for the future generation of ultrasonic imaging.
1.2
Fabrication of anodic bonded CMUTs
An example of the fabrication of anodic bonded CMUTs made my Oralkan et al. is illustrated in
Figure 1.2 [27]. In their work, a fabrication process including a nitride isolation layer is presented.
In steps (a)-(d), the bottom substrate is fabricated, where cavities and the bottom electrodes are
deﬁned. Step (e) is an anodic bonding step, where an SOI wafer is bonded on top of the fabricated
bottom stubstrate. In step (f) the SOI wafer is thinned down, so that only the device layer is left
on top of the bottom substrate, only separated by a nitride layer. Step (g) is another etch step,
where the arrays are separated and access to the bottom electrode is obtained. Step (h) is a nitride
deposition step, which creates a vacuum sealing of the cavities. Step (i) is a nitride etch, to gain
access to the bottom electrode without breaking the vacuum sealing.
Step (j) is where the top
electrode is deﬁned through metal deposition and lift-oﬀprocesses.
In this thesis, a slightly diﬀerent approach without the use of nitride was used, as vacuum sealing
was not necessary. Furthermore, the cavity deﬁnition was made not only using photoresist, but a
hard mask of chromium deﬁned directly on the wafer. This will be described in detail in chapter 3.
1.3
Previous work on CMUTs at DTU
The CMUT research in the MEMS-applied sensors group at DTU began with a project made by
Thomas Pedersen with prof. Erik V. Thomsen as supervisor. Since then, many bachelor, master
and PhD projects have been made, to develop the technology further, and also to branch into
other applications than medical imaging only.
Notable mentions in this perspective is the work
by Thomas Lehrmann Christiansen, Mette Funding La Cour and Søren Elmin Diederichsen, whose
projects mainly focused on developing suiting fabrication methods and designs, as well as describing
==PAGE:13==
1.3. PREVIOUS WORK ON CMUTS AT DTU
5
Figure 1.2:
An sketch showing an example of a fabrication method for anodic bonded CMUTs.
(a)
Photoresist coated glass substrate. (b) Cavity pattern deﬁnition by UV-lithography (c) Etch of glass to
deﬁne cavities (d) Metal deposition and lift-oﬀfor bottom electrodes (e) Anodic bonding (f) Silicon and
oxide etch (g) Silicon and nitride etch for array separation and access to bottom electrode pads (h) Silicon
nitride deposition for sealing (i) Silicon nitride etch (j) Metal deposition and lift-oﬀfor top electrodes. This
ﬁgure is borrowed from [27].
the theory behind both electric and mechanical characteristics of the CMUTs. Furthermore, current
post doc. Mathias Engholm both worked with process development and simulations of the CMUTs
in PZﬂex (now OnScale), developing models showing the pressure output from a CMUT array. The
MEMS-applied sensors group also was a part of a 5-year project in collaboration with BK Medical,
Center for Fast Ultrasound at DTU (CFU) and Rigshospitalet in Copenhagen, which was partly
funded by Innovation fund Denmark, where development of the CMUT techonology for medical
imaging was the main goal. This was realised as a functioning CMUT array was fabricated, mounted
in a probe and used for ultrasound imaging of human tissue. An image taken using this probe can
be seen in Figure 1.3.
This project was carried out between 2012 and 2017.
From 2017 a new
large project was initiated with the same collaborators, this time focusing on super resolution. This
project is intended to carry on until 2021.
==PAGE:14==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.3: Ultrasound image of Søren E. Diederichsens carotid artery, acquired with the Tabla IV probe,
in which a transducer produced by the MEMS-Applied sensors group at DTU was used.
The previous projects in the MEMS-applied sensors group regarding CMUTs, have mainly focused
on fabrication methods where Local oxidation of silicon (LOCOS) and double LOCOS were used,
and the preferred bonding method was fusion bonding. These fabrication methods are generally long
and complicated, even though they have been through a lot of process development. Furthermore,
the fusion bonding process requires super clean surfaces, as even a few particles can completely ruin
a bond. Therefore, this thesis will focus on another fabrication process, in which anodic bonding is
used. The entire fabrication process is signiﬁcantly shorter than the LOCOS based ones, and anodic
bonding is not as sensible to particles as fusion bonding. A similar type of fabrication was done by
Mathias Engholm in 2016, and since then, Lotte Hendriksen and Nicolai A. Michaelsen have spent
their master projects on further investigation of the subject. Therefore, this thesis will aim to further
develop the process from what previously have been achieved.
1.4
Development and state-of-the-art anodic bonded CMUTs
The ﬁrst example of anodic bonded CMUTs know by the author was published in 2009 by Olcum
et al. [20]. The CMUTs fabricated in their work, were aimed for underwater testing at frequencies
in the kHz regime. Therefore, the dimensions of the CMUTs were signiﬁcantly larger than what
would be used for the ultrasound (MHz) regime. They proved that it was possible to fabricate and
emit pressure under water with anodic bonded CMUTs with radii between 4-6 mm, and membrane
==PAGE:15==
1.5. PROJECT AIM AND THESIS OUTLINE
7
thickness of 380 µm. In 2012, Olcum et al. published a new article regarding optimizing pressure
output from CMUTs [26]. Again, a fabrication method involving anodic bonding was used, and
this time aimed towards the MHz regime. In their work, it was found that larger dimension of the
CMUT itself and a thicker top plate to keep the center frequency high, would increase pressure
output. Notably, their measurements were made with AC bias only, and no DC. This was done
to prevent the CMUTs from charging. Thus, the spring softning eﬀect, that usually is created by
the DC bias was not exploited here. In 2014, a fabrication approach using SOI wafers and anodic
bonding to glass wafers were carried out by Bellaredj et al. [2]. In their work, it was shown that this
fabrication method was possible, however, the center frequency of the CMUTs deviated from what
was expected. They suggested that the stress in the SOI wafers during the fabrication process, and
especially during the anodic bonding step, should be investigated to resolve this matter. In 2017, the
fabrication was extended to include through-glass-via interconnections by Zhang et al. [28]. This
fabrication method enabled vacuum sealing of the CMUTs, and showed small parasitic impedance
when electrical characterization was performed. The state-of-the-art within anodic bonded CMUTs
were published in 2018 by Sandars et al. [22]. They presented a functioning 32+32 row-column
design, made by anodic bonding. Both electrical and acoustic characterization were made, which
showed that the CMUT worked as intended. Notably, they found that the diﬀerence one normally
can see between electrical responses from rows and columns due to substrate coupling when silicon
wafers are used as bottom substrate, was eﬀectively eliminated by the insulating properties of the
glass wafer. The pressure ﬁeld was found to be symmetric both for single-element and entire row
activation. Microscope images of the array from their publication can be seen in ﬁgures 1.4 and 1.5.
Figure 1.4: Microscope image of the 32+32 an-
odic bonded row-column CMUT array from [22].
As seen, the design was made so that intersec-
tions between rows and columns included 9 indi-
vidual CMUT cells. The dimensions of each cell
was 68µm × 68µm
Figure 1.5:
Zoom in on the 32+32 anodic
bonded row-column CMUT array from [22]. The
individual CMUT cells can be seen underneath
the top electrodes.
1.5
Project aim and thesis outline
The aim for this project is to create a row-column addressed CMUT design, applicable for anodic
bonding process. Furthermore, a functioning fabrication process have to be developed to realise
this, and thus this will be the main focus of this thesis. The fabrication process will be based on a
previous project made by the author[21], and the process will be developed based on the experiences
during the project.
==PAGE:16==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
A secondary aim is to implement In-house made silicon on insulator (IHMSOI) wafers to achieve more
freedom regarding design of CMUTs. This is done through a small study, where surface roughness is
investigated, to see whether a suﬃcient bond can be obtained. If this is the case, both a fabrication
run using commercial available SOI wafers and IHMSOI wafers will be carried out.
The thesis itself will consist of 5 more chapters:
Theory
In this chapter relevant equations for the design- and characterization process will be derived and
presented. Furthermore, the anodic bonding process and the mechanisms behind will be explained.
Design study of linear ABCMUT arrays
This chapter will also provide knowledge of the feasibility of using IHMSOI wafers as top plate.
Furthermore, it will include a fabrication section, describing the entire fabrication process of the
Anodic Bonded Capacitive Micromachined Ultrasonic Transducer (ABCMUT). The characterization
of these CMUTs will be presented in the end of this chapter.
Process optimization
In this chapter, issues from the ﬁrst run of ABCMUTs will be discussed, and an optimized process
presented. The outcome of the fabrication with this process, will then be characterized and the data
further analyzed to work towards a design and fabrication process for a row-column design.
Design and fabrication of RCABCMUT arrays
In this chapter, the design of the new Row-Column Anodic Bonded Capacitive Micromachined
Ultrasonic Transducer (RCABCMUT) will be presented.
The diﬀerent design variations will be
explained and the critical fabrication steps will be discussed.
Conclusion & outlook In this chapter the main results of the thesis will be presented. Furthermore,
ideas for future development of the RCABCMUTs will be suggested.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this chapter, relevant CMUT theory and governing equations will be derived and explained. This
theory will both act as a foundation of how CMUTs work, and will also provide useful knowledge
for the design process of the row-column addressed CMUTs.
Knowing the correlation between
geometrical design parameters and performance parameters such as pull-in voltage, center frequency
and capacitance of the CMUTs, allows for optimization of the design prior to fabrication.
2.1
Plate deﬂection and resonance frequency
To describe the deﬂection of plates above the CMUT cavities, a general understanding of plate
deﬂection needs to be established. Starting by a simple monolayered isotropic plate, the Kirchoﬀ-
Love isotropic plate equation, can be used to describe the deﬂection [24]
∂4w
∂x4 + 2
∂4w
∂x2 + ∂y2 + ∂4w
∂y4 = p
Di
(2.1)
Where w(x, y) is the deﬂection surface, p is the applied pressure and Di is the isotropic ﬂexural
rigidity given by
Di =
Eh3
12(1 −ν2)
(2.2)
Where E is Young’s modulus for the material, h is the thickness of the plate and ν is Poisson’s ratio.
Equation (2.1) can be solved analytically for a clamped circular plate with radius a on which a
uniform pressure p0 is applied. To simplify the calculations, the coordinate system is changed to
polar coordinates. The equation can then be written as[10]
1
r
∂
∂r

r ∂
∂r
 1
r
∂
∂r

r∂w
∂r

= p0
Di
(2.3)
The general solution to this equation is
w(r) =
p0
64Di
r4 + C1 + C2r2 + C3 ln r + C4r2 ln r
(2.4)
Where Cn are constants. These can be determined using the boundary conditions for the system:
9
==PAGE:18==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
w(a) = 0
(2.5)
w′(a) = 0
(2.6)
w′(0) = 0
(2.7)
w(0) = ﬁnite
(2.8)
One obtains the ﬁnal solution as
w(r) = w0

1 −
r
a
22
(2.9)
With the center deﬂection given by
w0 = p0a4
64Di
(2.10)
The deﬂection of the plate can then be used to determine the center frequency of the CMUTs. To
do so, the Rayleigh-Ritz method can be used, where the center frequency ω0 is given by
ω2
0 =
2W
R R
A hρw(r)2rdrdθ =
2W
R
hρw(r)22πrdr
(2.11)
Where W is the strain energy, h is the thickness of the plate, ρ is the density of the plate and w(r, θ)
is the deﬂection surface of the area of the plate. To calculate ω0, one must therefore initially ﬁnd
the strain energy. This can be calculated by considering the strain energy in the entire elastic body
of the plate. By considering a thin silicon top plate, shear stress and strains can be neglected and
thus, the strain energy can be calculated as
W = 1
2
Z Z Z
σ1ϵ1 + σ2ϵ2 + σ6ϵ6dxdydz
(2.12)
Where σn and ϵn are the stress and strain in x−, y−and z−directions expressed in 6-vector notation.
This has been calculated for a circular geometry in [16], and yields:
W = 32Deffπw2
0
3a2
(2.13)
Where Deff is the eﬀective ﬂexural rigidity, which includes the relevant stiﬀness coeﬃcients from
the stiﬀness matrix [16], w0 is the center deﬂection of the plate and a is the radius of the plate.
The resonance frequency can now be calculated by inserting (2.13) in (2.11) and calculating the
remaining integral:
ω2
0 =
64Deffπw2
0
3a2
R
hρw(r)22πrdr
(2.14)
=
64Deffπw2
0
3a2
a2
10hρw2
02π
(2.15)
= 320Deff
3a4hρ
(2.16)
==PAGE:19==
2.2. ENERGY AND FORCE ANALYSIS
11
If it is assumed that the plate is isotropic, Deff can be changed to Di, and by inserting that, one
obtains
ω0 =
s
80Eh2
9ρ(1 −ν2)a4
(2.17)
Thus, for the design process of the thesis, one can keep in mind that
ω0 ∝h
a2
(2.18)
Normally, the main design parameter in this case would be the radius, a, of the CMUTs, as the
thickness of the plate usually is limited by the availability of commercial SOI wafers. In this thesis,
both parameters could be controlled since IHMSOI wafers were used as toplate and thus the device
layer could be fabricated with a desired thickness.
2.2
Energy and force analysis
The forces acting on the top plate of the CMUT can be determined by energy considerations. To
start, the total energy of the top plate, Utot, consists of three terms; a strain term which resembles
a spring, Us, an electrical term, Uc, from the capacitor and ﬁnally a pressure term, Up, if the plate
is aﬀected by some external pressure. In total, this can be expressed as
Utot = Us −Uc −Up
(2.19)
For this analysis, the circular geometry will again be used as an example, and thus the strain energy
have already been calculated:
Us = 32Diπw2
0
3a2
(2.20)
This can be rewritten in terms of a spring constant as
Us = 1
2k0w2
0
(2.21)
with
k0 = 64Diπ
3a2
(2.22)
The electrical term of the capacitor can be written as [16]
Ue = 1
2C(w0)V 2
(2.23)
Where C(w0) is the capacitance of the CMUT, which depends on the deﬂection proﬁle and geometry,
and V is the applied voltage.
The last term needed for Utot is the pressure term. To calculate this, one can consider the work done
by a uniform pressure, p0, acting on the area of a CMUT:
Up =
Z Z
A
p0w(r)dA = p0w0
Z Z
A
˜w(r)dA = p0w0A0
(2.24)
==PAGE:20==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Where ˜w(r) is the part of the deﬂection surface which is dependant on position, and A0 = 1
3πa2
The total energy can now be written as
Utot = 1
2k0w2
0 −1
2C(w0)V 2 −p0w0A0
(2.25)
From (2.25), the total force acting on the system can now be found.
Ftot = ∂Utot
∂w0
= k0w0 −1
2C′(w0)V 2 −p0A0
(2.26)
The system can be modelled as a spring-mass system with an eﬀective spring constant keff. This
spring constant can now be found by diﬀerentiating Ftot with respect to w0.
keff = k0 −1
2C′′(w0)V 2
(2.27)
This eﬀective spring constant is equal to the spring constant from the strain energy if no potential
is applied. However, as voltage is increased, the eﬀective spring constant decreases and one achieves
what is called ”spring softening”. Notably, there will be a voltage, at which the eﬀective spring
constant becomes zero. At this point, the top plate will snap down onto the bottom electrode, which
is called ”pull-in”.
VP I =
s
2k0
C′′(wP I)
(2.28)
By inserting this voltage in (2.26), an expression for the deﬂection at which pull-in happens can be
found
k0wP I = 1
2
2k0
C′′(wP I)C′(wP I) + p0A0
(2.29)
wP I = C′(wP I)
C′′(wP I) + p0A0
(2.30)
The capacitance of the CMUTs in this thesis can be described as
C =
ε0A
g −w(r)
(2.31)
Where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, A is the area of the CMUT, g is the gap between top and
bottom electrode when no voltage is applied and w(r) is the deﬂection of the top plate due to an
applied voltage.
In the simplest model, the CMUT can be considered a parallel plate capacitor, and thus the r
dependency of the deﬂection is eliminated.
Furthermore, to simplify the equation further, it is
assumed that the CMUT is not aﬀected by any external pressure, thus p0 = 0.
Then pull-in
deﬂection for the CMUT can then be found:
wP I =
ε0A
(g −wP I)2
(g −wP I)3
2ε0A
(2.32)
= g −wP I
2
(2.33)
= g
3
(2.34)
==PAGE:21==
2.2. ENERGY AND FORCE ANALYSIS
13
With this expression, the pull-in voltage of the same type of CMUT can be determined as
VP I =
s
2kpara
(g −wP I)3
2ε0A
(2.35)
=
s
8
27
kparag3
ε0A
(2.36)
(2.37)
Where kpara is the spring constant when the CMUT is modelled as a parallel plate capacitor, where
one on the plates is suspended by a spring.
To obtain a more accurate model for the CMUTs, the r dependency of the deﬂection needs to be
taken into account. The circular geometry is again used.
Ccirc =
Z 2π
0
Z a
0
ε0r
g −w(r)drdθ = ε0
g
Z 2π
0
Z a
0
r
1 −η ˜w(r)drdθ
(2.38)
Where η = w0
g , and ˜w(r) is the r dependency of w(r). Evaluating the integral becomes signiﬁcantly
easier by introducing a shift of variables, thus the new variable ξ is deﬁned as
ξ = √η

1 −
r
a
2
(2.39)
dξ
dr = −√η 2r
a2
(2.40)
⇔dr = −1
√η
a2
2rdξ
(2.41)
With this change of variables, a change in limits in the integral needs to be made as well, and one
obtains
Ccirc = −a2πε0
g
r1
η
Z 0
√η
1
1 −ξ2 dξ
(2.42)
Evaluating the integral yiels
Ccirc = a2πε0
g
r1
η arctanh(√η) = C0
r g
w0
arctanh
w0
g

(2.43)
Where C0 = a2πε0
g
Inserting Ccirc in the expression for VP I, again assuming no external forces aﬀecting the CMUT,
yields [17]
VP Icirc =
s
89.4459 g2
a2C0
Di
(2.44)
The pull-in deﬂection can be found as well [17]
==PAGE:22==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
wP Icirc = 0.463g
(2.45)
In this thesis, a square geometry is used for the CMUTs, and therefore, the the derived expressions
for wP I and VP I are not entirely accurate. The square geometry can be approximated by a circle
with a diameter equal to the side length of the square. However, in [17], more accurate expressions
for the square geometry have been calculated:
VP Isquare =
s
2.95118g2ξs
C0L2
.
(2.46)
where ξs = 385.637GPa and 2L is the side length of the square CMUTs [17]. The pull-in deﬂection
is for the square geometry given by
wP Isquare = 0.466g
(2.47)
As seen, the diﬀerence between the square model and the circular model is small, and the scaling
regarding the geometrical parameters are essentially the same. Therefore, for designing a new CMUT
design one can keep in mind that
VP I ∝
r
g3h3
a4
(2.48)
Where a is the radius of circular CMUTs and in the case of squares, a is half the side length. h is
the thickness of the plate and g is the gap distance.
2.3
Anodic bonding
A crucial step in the fabrication process for the CMUTs in this thesis is anodic bonding. Therefore,
this section will provide some background knowledge about anodic bonding applications in a more
general perspective and the anodic bonding mechanism itself.
Anodic bonding was ﬁrst invented in 1966 by Pommerantz and was pattented in 1968 by Pommerantz,
Wallis and Dorsey [1]. At the time, the patent description included bringing an inorganic insulator
in contact with a semi-conductor or metal and heating the stack to increase the conductance of the
insulator. The insulator was negatively polarised thus creating an electrostatic force of attraction
between the metal and itself. The same principle is used for MEMS-applications today, with silicon-
glass bonds being the most frequent variation. The usage within MEMS-technology is mainly for
packaging and vacuum sealing [14, 18, 5].
One of the issues with anodic bonding is the heating of the substrates. Since the wafers are made
from diﬀerent materials, they will have a diﬀerent thermal expansion coeﬃcient leading to a thermal
mismatch. The thermal mismatch causes stress and strain in the wafer stack, making it bow or
even break in worst case. It is therefore crucial to ﬁnd materials with matching thermal expansion
coeﬃcients and processing parameters which induces as low stress and strain as possible. The thermal
strain can be described as:
ϵt =
Z Troom
Tbond
α1(T) −α2(T)dT ≈(α1 −α2)∆T
(2.49)
Where ϵt is the thermal strain, TBond is the bonding temperature, TRoom is the room temperature,
α1 is the thermal expansion coeﬃcient of one of the materials and α2 is the thermal expansion
coeﬃcient of the other material.
==PAGE:23==
2.3. ANODIC BONDING
15
Figure 2.1:
Sketch of the anodic bonding mechanism.
Sodium ions are transported through the glass
wafers, setting up a depletion layer. An electrostatic force attracts the two wafers together enabling the
formation of strong siloxane bonds. This ﬁgure is taken from [1], page 180.
For this thesis, boroﬂoat and silicon were used for the anodic bonding. These materials were suitable
as the thermal expansions coeﬃcients match closely [13]:
αBoro = 3.2510 × 10−6K−1
(2.50)
αSi = 2.310 × 10−6K−1
(2.51)
It should be noted that these are linear thermal expansion coeﬃcients which only applies until the
temperature approaches ≈500◦C. However, since the bottom electrodes were made of gold, the
bonding temperature had to be kept below the eutectic bonding temperature between gold and
silicon, which is ≈365◦C, and thus well within the linear region [25]. If one fails to do so, the top
plate might get bonded directly onto the bottom electrode, thereby short circuiting the element.
2.3.1
Anodic bonding mechanism
During anodic bonding, the temperature is elevated to a certain point, usually in the range of
300 −500◦C [1]. This is done to enable sodium ions to move through the glass, when the negative
polarisation of the glass is initiated. This causes a build-up of negative charge at the silicon-boroﬂoat
interface. At the same time, the silicon wafer becomes positively charged, but the atoms are trapped
in the crystal formation and can not drift. The eﬀect of these two phenomenons is that an electrostatic
force of attraction between the two wafers is set up. This setup can be seen sketched in Figure 2.1.
The distance between the wafers becomes so small that strong siloxane bond can be formed. How
exactly these bond are formed is still to be determined[1], but it is known that these are what makes
the anodic bonding technique work.
The ion movement through the glass wafer creates a measurable current. This current will be highest
immediately when the potential is applied across the wafer stack, and decrease as a function of time.
==PAGE:24==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.2:
Plot of current vs.
time for anodic bond processes.
The dependency of initial intimately
contacted area (IICA) between the two wafers can also be seen. This ﬁgure is taken from [12]
The peak current depends on how large an area of the wafers that are intimately in contact with
each other [12]. Therefore, it is important that the two wafers have as low surface roughness as
possible, so that the largest possible area will be closely contacted from the beginning of the bonding
process. The current vs. time characteristics together with the dependency of initial intimately
contacted area (IICA) can be seen in Figure 2.2 [12]. It is seen that not only does the peak current
increase in magnitude with a higher IICA, the peak also happens earlier in the process. Based on
this knowledge, it was decided to make a study on the surface roughness of polished IHMSOI wafers,
to see whether this was suﬃciently low to be feasible for this type of bonding.
Generally, it is believed that when the current drops below 10 % of the initial value, the bonding
process is done [1]. In the DTU Nanolab cleanroom, the anodic bonding process is run in three
voltage steps, each step with higher voltage than the last.
Each of these steps stops when the
current reaches 10 % of the initial peak value.
2.4
Chapter summary
In this chapter relevant equations regarding the electrical and mechanical properties of CMUTs have
been derived and presented. The main focus have been on the pull-in deﬂection, wP I, the pull-in
voltage VP I, the center frequency ω0, and how geometrical parameters such as shape and dimensions
relates to these. This will both be relevant for the design- and characterization process. Furthermore,
background knowledge behind anodic bonding have been presented, which is one of the critical steps
of the fabrication process of the CMUTs.
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Design study of linear ABCMUT
arrays
This chapter will describe fabrication and characterization of linear ABCMUTs. It will be based
on a previous project made by the author [21], as most of the fabrication process will be the same.
This part of the project is a design study, where a functional fabrication process and design is found.
Based on this, a row-column ABCMUT will be designed.
3.1
IHMSOI wafers as top plate
In a previous master thesis in the MEMS-applied sensors group, Nicolai A. Michaelsen investigated
the use of IHMSOI wafers as the top plate for the devices [19]. If this was possible, one would get an
increased freedom in the design of the CMUTs, as the thickness of the top plate plays a signiﬁcant
role in important parameters such as center frequency, pull-in voltage and pressure output. This
approach did, however, not work as intended, as the IHMSOI wafer broke during thinning of the
handle layer with KOH etching. It was possible that the ﬁndings in that experiment could be due
to the surface roughness being to high, which essentially could form small channels in the bonding
interface, where the KOH could get into the cavities and thus destroy the top plate from underneath.
As an approach to solve this issue, polishing of the poly-Si device layer was tried out in this project.
3.1.1
Fabrication of IHMSOI wafers
The wafers used for this experiment were left-over wafers fabricated by Nicolai A. Michaelsen during
his master thesis and new IHMSOI wafers fabricated by PhD student Andreas S. Havreland. They
consist of a double side polished Si wafer with a thickness of 350 ±15µm, a layer of SiO2 of 150
nm and ﬁnally a 2µm layer of poly-Si. Both the oxide thickness and poly-Si layer thickness were
consideres too thin, therefore new IHMSOI wafers made by PhD student Andreas S. Havreland,
where the oxide layer was expanded to 400 nm and the poly-Si layer to 3 µm was also used.
The oxide layer is grown in a furnace process, using a dry oxidation technique. Here, the furnace is
elevated to 1100◦C, and O2 gas is let in. The oxygen will form SiO2 through the following reaction:
Si(s) + O2(g) −→SiO2(s)
(3.1)
This reaction always take place at the surface, and therefore, as the oxygen later in the process have
to diﬀuse through the formed SiO2 to reach the pure silicon interface where it can react. To describe
the process and be able to calculate processing times for diﬀerent layer thicknesses, a MATLAB
17
==PAGE:26==
18
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
script based on the Deal-Grove model was used. The Deal-Grove model for oxidation of silicon ﬁts
well for wet oxidation (using water vapor instead of pure oxygen), however, the model needs a slight
modiﬁcation to describe the dry method. The model consist of a linear and a parabolic term:
t = x2
0 −x2
i
B
x0 −xi
B
A
(3.2)
Where B and B
A are Deal-Grove parameters, depending on crystal orientation of the substrate,
temperature and pressure, x0 is the desired thickness of the ﬁnal oxide, xi is an initial oxide thickness,
and t is the processing time. To account for the dry oxidation instead of the wet, and initial thickness
of xi = 200˚A can be used[11].
From experience, it is known that the day-to-day form of the furnace itself also impacts the processing
time. Therefore, the MATLAB script takes previous data from the same processing temperature
from a logbook, and ﬁts a Deal-Grove model to it before calculating the processing time needed. To
grow 400 nm oxide, an oxidation time of 8 hours and 30 minutes were used.
The poly-Si deposition is made as a Low Pressure Chemical Vapor Deposition (LPCVD) process in
a furnace. As this process is a deposition and not based on a reaction and diﬀusion as the oxidation
is, the deposition rate is linear. The recipe used was POLYBOR, in which the furnace was heated to
625◦C, and gas ﬂow of both SiH4 and B2H6 was chosen. From this a boron doped poly-Si layer can
be formed. Again, the actual processing time could be calculated based on a linear ﬁt to the data
from previous processes from the Nanolab logbook of the furnace. The process to achieve 3 µm was
done in two steps of 2 hours and 30 minutes each due to DTU Nanolab regulations for the poly-Si
furnace. Afterwards, to decrease potential stress in the poly-Si layer, an annealing process was done
at 1100◦C for 1 hour and 10 minutes.
The last and newest part of the fabrication, is polishing. This is done with the Logitech CM62 Orbis
Chemical Mechanical Polisher (CMP) tool. The tool consists of a fumehood with drain, a rotating
polishing plate, a chuck on which the wafer is mounted that also rotates while sweeping in the lateral
direction, a slurry dispensing system and a controller. An image of the tool can be seen in Figure
3.1
The slurry is water mixed with SiO2 particles with dimensions < 100 nm. The slurry is guided onto
the polishing plate through tubes, and the wafer chuck presses the substrate against the plate while
rotating. Thus, the slurry physically grind away material from the wafer, and thereby even out the
surface.
Andreas S. Havreland and Mathias Engholm experimented with diﬀerent polishing times to see when
suﬃcient polishing was achieved. It was found that already after 1 minute and 30 seconds minutes
of polishing with an applied pressure of 6 psi, a suﬃcient polishing was achieved. After polishing,
the color gradient known from commercial SOI wafers were seen, which indicates that only small
height variations are present on the wafer. Using these processing parameters, ≈100 nm of poly-Si
is removed during the process.
3.1.2
Surface roughness of IHMSOI wafers
To establish a measure of the surface roughness prior to the polishing, a measurement using the
optical proﬁler Sensofar was conducted. To be able to correlate the eﬀect of the polishing, it was
essential that the same settings before and after polishing were used. The settings can be seen in
Table 3.1.
==PAGE:27==
3.1. IHMSOI WAFERS AS TOP PLATE
19
Figure 3.1: Image of the CMP tool used for polishing of the IHMSOI wafers for this project. In the center
of the fumehood, the large polishing plate is seen. The tubes hanging above the plate dispenses the polishing
slurry. The black chuck to the right is where the wafer is mounted, and the chuck to the left has a brush
underneath which evens out the slurry on the polishing plate. This image is borrowed from the manual of
the tool made by DTU Nanolab.
Parameter
Value
Objective
100x magniﬁcation, 0.70 NA
Objective type
Interferometic
Measurement type
Topography, PSI
Table 3.1:
Settings used for Sensofar surface roughness mesurements before and after polishing of the
IHMSOI wafers.
The surface roughness was prior to polishing measured to be 7 nm on average, with the largest
measured height diﬀerence of 71 nm. This can be seen in Figure 3.2. After polishing the roughness
was reduced to < 1nm with the largest measured height diﬀerence of 4.7 nm. It should be noted
that due to the roughness being this low, imperfections of the optical setup in the Sensofar has a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the measurement. This can be seen as the red/white area on the lefthand side
of Figure 3.3. The measurement did, however, show a signiﬁcant improvement in surface roughness,
and therefore it was decided to include a run using polished IHMSOI wafers for the design test of
the linear ABCMUTs.
==PAGE:28==
20
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.2: Surface roughness measurement before polishing of an IHMSOI wafer. The surface roughness
is ≈7nm on average with the highest detected peak of 71 nm
Figure 3.3: Surface roughness measurement after polishing of an IHMSOI wafer. The red/white seen on the
left in this image is caused by the optical equipment rather than the actual surface. This was concluded after
moving the wafer and taking new measurement, where the same pattern appeared. The surface roughness is
≈0.5 nm, however, as the maximum of the scale is limited by the optical equipment, it might be even lower.
The peak value is 4.7 nm, and thus all together a signiﬁcant improvement from before polishing was done.
3.2
Fabrication process
The fabrication process for the linear CMUT arrays, is based on a fabrication process the author of
this thesis followed during a special course prior to this master thesis[21]. In overview, it involves 6
steps, which can be seen in Figure 3.4
1. Cavity deﬁnition on bottom substrate
2. Bottom electrode deﬁnition
3. Anodic bonding of boroﬂoat wafer to SOI wafer
==PAGE:29==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
21
Figure 3.4: Sketch of the fabrication process. This is only an overview, the six steps shown here each
have several substeps which will be explained in detail later in this chapter. It should be noted that this
fabrication is shown when an IHMSOI wafer is used.
4. Thinning of IHMSOI/SOI wafer
5. Top electrode deﬁnition
6. Etching access to bottom electrode
The critical steps of this fabrication process is the bottom electrode deﬁnition, the anodic bonding
and the thinning of the IHMSOI/SOI wafer. This will be explained in greater detail later in this
chapter. Several diﬀerent design variations were made to investigate whether one of these would be
better in performance and yield compared to the others. The diﬀerent designs can be seen in Figure
3.5. As seen the variations relates to placement of connections between the CMUT cells, the width
of these connections and the dimensions of the CMUT cells. Since it is known that the capacitance
of an element depends on the area of the CMUTs, the diﬀerent designs are expected to have diﬀerent
minimum capacitances.
3.2.1
Cavity deﬁnition on bottom substrate
First, the boroﬂoat wafers were put in a 250◦C oven to dehydrate to ensure a good adhesion between
the chromium, which was going to be deposited in the next fabrication step, and the boroﬂoat
wafer itself. The wafers were left in the oven for 7 days, as the e-beam evaporation tool did not
have chromium available as a target in the week processing was initiated. Normally, 24 hours of
dehydration should be suﬃcient.
After dehydration, chromium were deposited by a Physical vapor deposition (PVD) process. The
target (chromium) was locally heated by an electron beam, and thus evaporated with a rate deter-
mined by the intensity of the electron beam. As the chamber were pumped down to low pressure
(≈10−6mtorr), the evaporated metal particles were able to travel through the chamber and condense
on the wafer surface thereby forming a thin ﬁlm. This process was done using the Temescal ma-
chine. This machine allows processing of up to 4 wafers at a time, and as 11 wafers were processed,
==PAGE:30==
22
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.5: The diﬀerent design variations of the linear arrays of anodic bonded CMUTs. As seen the
designs have been varied in placement of connection between each CMUT cell (through corners of through
center), the side length of the CMUT cell, L, and the width of the connections between the CMUT cells, Wc
3 runs were made. Furthermore, the wafer carriers in the machine rotates both around their own
axis as well as around the center of the chamber. This rotational motion ensures good uniformity
in thickness across the wafers. The ﬁnal thickness of the chromium layer was set to 150 nm and the
deposition rate to 10 ˚A/s.
The layer of chromium had to be patterned to act as a hard mask for an etching process. To do so,
a UV-lithography process was performed. This process consisted of 3 steps: Spin coating, exposure
with UV-light and development. The spin coating step is where photoresist is spun onto the substrate
with a thickness deﬁned by spin speed. For this process 2.2 µm AZ 5214 E resist was used, as this is
a positive resist. Positive photoresists have a compound which initiates a chain scissoring reaction
when exposed to UV light. This reaction cuts the long polymer chains in smaller pieces, and thus
the areas which are exposed during the second step of the lithography process will become soluble
in the developer. Therefore, the resist will be removed from exposed areas during the third and ﬁnal
step of the lithography process. The machine used for spin coating of the AZ 5214 E resist was the
Gamma UV spin coater.
The second step of the UV-lithography process was carried out using the MA-6 aligner. Since this
was the ﬁrst lithography process, no alignment was necessary.
To deﬁne the desired pattern, a
shadow mask was used. A hard contact exposure was done (meaning that the mask was in contact
with the wafer surface during exposure), for 10 seconds with a constant intensity of 11 mW/cm2.
This yielded a dose of D = t · I = 10s · 11mW/cm2 = 110mJ/cm2.
When exposure was ﬁnished, the wafers were developed in the TMAH UV-developer. This was done
using a recipe with single puddle development for 90 seconds.
==PAGE:31==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
23
Figure 3.6: Macroscopic image of wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” after the ﬁrst chromium etch.
The wafer is transparent where chromium is removed. The green color comes from the photoresist.
The pattern deﬁned in the photoresist then had to be transferred to chromium underneath. This
was done using ”Chrome Etch 18”, which is a chemical that etches chromium with an etchrate of 150
nm/min. It was easy to see when the etch was ﬁnished, as the patterned area became transparent
when chromium was removed. As the layer had a thickness of 150 nm, the etch was expected to take
approximately one minute. This etch was performed in a glass beaker inside an acid/bases fume
hood. After the etch was ﬁnished, the chrome etch 18 chemical was poured back into the bottle, as
one can reuse it. Based on experience from the special course made by the author, processing one
wafer at a time is in this step recommended. The reason being that one needs to handle the wafers
quickly to avoid any redeposition of chromium or other particles, when they are transferred from the
etch beaker to the water bath.
An image of the one of the wafers after completed chromium etch can be seen in Figure 3.6. The
resist layer on top of the chromium is what causes the color gradient seen in this image.
To be able to later determine the etch depth of the cavities, a height proﬁle measurement was done
using the Dektak XT machine. This can be seen in Figure 3.7. As seen, the height of the mask layer
itself was 2.315 µm. This result is not precise as the thickness of the photo resist varied across the
wafer, which could be seen as a color gradient. It did, however, give a starting point, from which an
approximated cavity depth could be found after etching with BHF.
The hard mask of chromium was completed, and the step of etching out the cavities could be
initiated. This was done using Buﬀered hydrochloric acid (BHF) which is a solution consisting of
hydroﬂuoric acid with an added 12% ammoniumﬂouride buﬀer agent. The reason why BHF was
used instead of a more concentrated HF solution was to gain better control of the process. BHF
generally etches slower than HF, and thus the depth of the cavities can more easily be controlled
==PAGE:32==
24
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.7: Height proﬁle measurement from wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” made using the
Dektak XT tool. The height diﬀerence between places covered with both resist and chromium down to the
pure boroﬂoat wafer was measured to 2.315 µm.
[7]. The etch rate of the solution used in this project was ≈24nm/min, and thus to obtain a depth
of 570 nm, a 24 minute long etch was performed. This included a small overetch, however, one can
later adjust the metal layer thicknesses to achieve the eﬀective gap height that is wanted. The depth
of 570 nm was chosen to so that the eﬀective gap height could end up being 400 nm after the bottom
electrode metal layers were made. A thing to note about BHF etching is that it is an isotropic etch.
Therefore, an underetch underneath the chromium pattern will happen and the dimensions of the
cavities increase corresponding to the depth of the etch. After etching, the wafers were rinsed in a
water bath and spin dried. There was no visible change in the appearance of the wafers.
After this step, another height proﬁle was made using the Dektak. This can be seen in Figure 3.8. By
comparing the ﬁrst Dektak measurement with this one, one can see that the etch depth obtained was
2889nm −2315nm = 574nm. Again the Dektak measurement is not precise due to the photoresist
on top, however, it does give a good indication that a depth close to the target was obtained.
After Dektak measurement, the photoresist was removed from the wafers in the resist strip wet bench.
This wet bench consists of three baths; one with ”Remover 1165” which dissolves the photoresist,
one with ethanol (normally IPA, however due to IPA shortage ethanol was used) which dissolves any
leftover remover 1165 on the wafer as this is not soluble in water, and ﬁnally a water bath to rinse
the wafers. The wafers were dipped into the remover 1165 bath for 10 minutes, then transferred
to the ethanol bath and stayed there for three minutes and ﬁnally a 5 minutes rinse in the water
bath. When this was completed, the hard mask of chromium had to be removed. This was done as
an identical process as that of the ﬁrst chromium etch. The result was clean boroﬂoat wafers with
cavities, and to ensure that acceptable cavity depth was achieved, another height proﬁle was made
using the Dektak XT. Since the etching of the cavities were made in two batches (one with 5 wafers
and one with 6), a measurement on a wafer from each batch was made. These can be seen in ﬁgures
3.9 and 3.10. As seen, the depths were 599 nm and 607 nm respectively.
3.2.2
Bottom electrode deﬁnition
The bottom electrodes ideally consist of two layers: A 20 nm chromium layer which works as adhesion
layer and a 150 nm gold layer which serves as the actual electrode. The thickness of the gold layer
can be changed depending on the depth of the cavities, if a speciﬁc gap depth is wanted. In this
==PAGE:33==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
25
Figure 3.8: Height proﬁle measurement on wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” made using the Dek-
tak XT tool after etching of cavities. The height diﬀerence between places covered with both resist and
chromium down to the pure boroﬂoat wafer was measured to 2.889 µm.
Figure 3.9: Height proﬁle measurement on wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” made using the Dek-
tak XT tool. The depth of the cavity was measured to 600 nm.
project, the aim was to obtain a gap depth of approximately 400 nm, and thus the the thickness of
the gold layer was adjusted to 180 nm.
To deﬁne the areas where metal should be deposited, a UV-lithography process was made. Prior to
this lithography process, the wafers were once again placed in a 250◦C oven, to remove water and
thus increase the adhesion of photoresist to the surface of the wafers.
For the photolithography, a 2.0 µm thick negative photoresist, AZ nLOF 2020, was spin coated onto
the wafers with the Gamma UV spin coater. As it is a negative resist, crosslinking of the polymer
chains is obtained when exposed to UV light, eﬀectively making exposed regions insoluble in the
developer. The exposure was done through mask 2, where all areas where metal is to be deposited
is covered by chromium.
The exposure was done as hard contact with constant intensity of 11
mW/cm2 for 11 seconds using the MA-6 aligner. Afterwards, it was developed using the TMAH
==PAGE:34==
26
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.10: Height proﬁle measurement on wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 1” made using the Dek-
tak XT tool. The depth of the cavity was measured to 607 nm.
UV-developer.
In this lithography process, alignment is diﬃcult, as one has to align to cavities in a glass wafer,
which means that the contrast is bad. Furthermore, the cavities were etched with an isotropic process
and therefore, the alignment marks became bigger than designed. The criteria for the alignment in
this step was that metal only was deposited inside the dedicated cavities and connections. Therefore,
microscope images both in bright- and in dark ﬁeld were taken, which can be seen in ﬁgures 3.11
and 3.12. Using dark ﬁeld makes edges stand out clearly and thus enables one to see if the pattern
of the photoresist was within the desired regions. As seen, the pattern was well deﬁned inside the
cavities, and thus further processing could be done.
Figure
3.11:
Bright ﬁeld image of wafer
”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 10”.
The pat-
tern was well deﬁned within the edges of the cavi-
ties and connections, and thus further processing
could be done.
Figure
3.12:
Dark
ﬁeld
image
of
wafer
”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 10”. The edges
could in this mode be seen more clearly, and also
showed that the pattern was deﬁned within the
cavities and connections.
The next step was to deposit the metal used for bottom electrodes. As previously stated, the bottom
electrode consists of two layers; a chromium adhesion layer and a gold electrode layer. Both of these
metals could be deposited using the Temescal e-beam evaporater in a single recipe, and therefore
this tool was used. The recipe was edited so that a ﬁnal thickness of 20 nm chromium was deposited
with a deposition rate of 5 ˚A/sec. Afterwards, a 180 nm gold layer was deposited with a deposition
rate of 10 ˚A/sec. An image of one of the wafers after this step can be seen in Figure 3.13.
==PAGE:35==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
27
Figure 3.13: Macroscopic image of wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” after metal deposition. As
the layers of metal only were 200 nm, the pattern of the CMUT arrays can easily be seen underneath.
Since there was photoresist underneath the metal at all places except where the bottom electrodes
should be deﬁned, a lift-oﬀprocess could be made. This was done using the lift-oﬀwet bench which
contain exactly the same three baths as the resist strip wet bench; remover 1165, ethanol and water
rinse. For the lift-oﬀprocess, ultrasonic agitation signiﬁcantly reduces the process time and thus
this was turned on during processing in both the remover 1165 and ethanol baths. Furthermore, the
using ultrasonic agitation in the ethanol bath also shakes oﬀparticles which might have redeposited
during transferring between the baths. The required processing time can vary from wafer to wafer,
and therefore the lift-oﬀprocess was made in two batches; one with 5 wafers and one with 6 wafers.
An image of one of the wafers after lift-oﬀcan be seen in Figure 3.14.
After the lift-oﬀprocess, all of the wafers were checked to see whether the metal was conﬁned inside
the cavities and connections as intended. It was found that all except wafer
”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” had suﬃcient alignment of the metal layers. The miss alignment
on this wafer can be seen in Figure 3.15. Since the metal on this wafer also was deposited outside
of the cavities, it is expected that this will cause the arrays to be short circuited as the metal
will establish a direct contact between top and bottom electrode. An image displaying this miss
alignment can be seen in Figure 3.15.
To verify that the gap height was as intended another height proﬁle measurement was made using
the Dektak XT machine. Again a measurement from each of the two batches from the cavity etching
was taken, as there could be a small diﬀerence between them due to the diﬀerent cavity depth. This
can be seen in ﬁgures 3.16 and 3.17. As seen a gap heights of 412 nm and 422 nm were obtained
and thus the bottom substrates were ready for anodic bonding.
==PAGE:36==
28
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.14: Macroscopic image of wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” after completed lift-oﬀpro-
cess. The metal only remained within the desired areas, and the rest was removed.
3.2.3
Anodic bonding using commercial SOI wafers and IHMSOI wafers
Minimizing the amount of particles present on the wafers before bonding is essential to obtain a strong
bond. Therefore, both the bottom substrates and the SOI wafers were thoroughly cleaned prior to
bonding. The SOI wafer was cleaned by a standard Radio Corporation of America (RCA) cleaning
process. The name of this cleaning procedure comes from the company where it was developed, and
has now become a standardized method of how to clean silicon wafers. The process includes three
solutions (disregarding water baths for rinsing) which the wafers were dipped in; RCA1, RCA2 and
an hydroﬂouric acid (HF (5% wt)) solution. The RCA1 is a mixture of ammonia hydroxide (NH4OH
(25-29% wt)), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2 (30% wt)) and water (H2O) mixed in the ratio 1:1:5. The
purpose of this solution is to remove light organic particles and trace metals. The RCA2 solution
consists of hydrochloric acid (HCL (37% wt)) hydrogen peroxide (H2O2 (30% wt)) and water (H2O)
mixed in the ratio 1:1:5. This solution removes alkali ions, residual trace metals and metal oxides.
The HF solution is included in the process, as both RCA1 and RCA2 oxidizes the surface of the
wafer, and thus an HF dip will remove the grown oxide.
The process of this cleaning can be seen in Table 3.2
To clean the bottom substrate, i.e. the boroﬂoat wafers which have cavities and bottom electrodes
deﬁned upon them, a Piranha solution was used. This solution consist of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and
H2O2 in the ratio 4:1. Contrary to normal chemical protocols, the acid is in this case added ﬁrst
when mixing the solution, as the hydrogen peroxide initiates a rather violent reaction, in which a
lot of heat is formed. This solution very eﬀectively removes organic particles from the surface of
the wafer. The boroﬂoat wafers were dipped into this solution for 45 seconds and were afterwards
cleaned for 5 minutes in a quick dump rinse water bath.
==PAGE:37==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
29
Figure 3.15: Microscope image of wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 11” after completed lift-oﬀprocess.
Some metal was deposited outside of the cavities, which is suspected to cause short circuiting of the arrays.
Figure 3.16: Height proﬁle measurement on wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 1” made using the Dek-
tak XT tool. The height of the gap was measured to 412 nm. It can also be seen that the metal was deposited
a small distance away from the edge of the cavities as intended.
==PAGE:38==
30
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.17:
Height proﬁle measurement on wafer ”WAFR 20190128 ABCMUT 10” made using the
Dektak XT tool. The height of the gap was measured to 422 nm. It can also be seen that the metal was
deposited a small distance away from the edge of the cavities as intended.
Solution/bath
Time
RCA 1
10 min
Quick dump rinse (Water)
3 min
HF dip
30 sec
Water rinse in bath dedicated for after HF dip
20 sec
Bubble rinse (Water)
3 min
RCA 2
10 min
Quick dump rinse (Water)
3 min
HF dip
30 sec
Water rinse in bath dedicated for after HF dip
20 sec
Bubble rinse (water)
5 min
Table 3.2: RCA cleaning process table. After the wafers have been through this process they are spin
dried.
After the cleaning process, the SOI wafers and boroﬂoat wafers were put together, so that the device
layer of the SOI faced the cavity side of the boroﬂoat wafer. This was done to minimize the amount
of particles which potentially could deposit onto the wafers before bonding and thus create voids in
the bond.
The bonding process was done using wafer bonder 02 in the DTU Nanolab cleanroom. Based on
previous experience both by the author and of Nicolai A. Michaelsen during his master thesis [19], a
bonding process with three voltage steps were chosen; -250 V, -450 V and ﬁnally -600 V for bonding
with the commercial SOI wafer. During the process, the temperature was kept at 350◦C, as this
temperature allows alkali ions in the boroﬂoat wafer to move i.e. the wafer becomes conductive, while
being below the eutectic bonding temperature for Si-Au bonds. What happens when the voltage is
applied to the wafer stack while at the elevated temperature is that sodium ions in the boroﬂoat
wafer moves towards the electrode, thus leaving a negatively charged and oxygen rich surface. The
electrostatic force created by the charge separation will force the two wafers close together, and the
oxygen then reacts with the silicon surface of the SOI wafer and thus forms a thin oxide layer. This
layer keeps the two wafer bonded together and the process is irreversible and creates a strong bond.
The bonding machine measures the current as a function of time during the bonding process, and also
==PAGE:39==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
31
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time [min]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Current [mA]
Anodic bonding - Current vs Time
Recipe 1: -250 V, -350 V, -600 V
Recipe 2: -300 V, -600 V, -800 V
Figure 3.18: Current during the bonding steps for both recipes. The peak currents are gets higher when
using recipe 2 compared to recipe 1, but are still far from the 10-14 mA that one expects from this kind of
process.
monitors the total charge which have moved due to this current. Based on previous experience in the
MEMS-applied sensors group, peak currents when the diﬀerent voltage steps are initiates normally
have magnitudes around 10-14 mA for good anodic bonds. However, it was observed that all three
peak currents seen for the bonding in this case were lower than 3 mA. The low peak currents were
also observed during the bonding process in the special course made by the author, which were due to
a layer of what appeared to be salt on the electrode in the machine. As the same electrode was used
for this bonding process, it is still believed to be the main reason. A secondary contribution to this
could be that the SOI wafer used in this case had an oxide layer on the backside, and thus lowered
the electrical contact between the anode and the wafer stack. The process was set to automatically
move to the next voltage step, when the current decreased to 10 % of the peak value. Since the peaks
were much lower than normal, it took more > 30min for each step to reach this point. Therefore,
the steps were manually skipped when the current was at ≈0.5 mA.
The polished IHMSOI wafers were also bonded with the same tool and using three voltage step as
well. It was, however, decided to try higher voltages for one of the wafers to see whether it aﬀected
peak currents and the bond quality or not. Thus one bond was processed with the steps -250V,
-450V and 600V and one with -300V, -600V and -800V. The peak currents from the high voltage
process was observed to be 4.11 mA, 3.82 mA and 2.25 mA, for the three voltage steps. This yielded
approximately a doubling in magnitude of the peak currents compared to the low voltage process,
however, none of the processes gave the normal 10-14 mA peaks. In spite of the low peak currents,
both processes gave good results. It is not clear whether the diﬀerence between the two wafers, i.e.
that one had a larger void compared to the other, was cause by the diﬀerence in the process or
simply that a larger particle might have stuck onto one of the wafers. A graph showing the current
during the three voltage steps for both recipes can be seen in Figure 3.18
After bonding, a visual inspection was made, as voids normally are easy to see by the naked eye. Two
voids were observed on each of the IHMSOI bonded wafers and one on the commercial SOI. An image
of the bonded wafers with the boroﬂoat wafer facing upwards can be seen in ﬁgures 3.19, 3.20 and
==PAGE:40==
32
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.19: Macroscopic image of the boroﬂoat and SOI wafer after they had been bonded. The bonding
was successful as only a single small void can be seen next to the top left element.
3.21. Notably, one of the advantages of the IHMSOI wafers compared to the commercial SOI wafers
can be observed in these images. The rapid shifts between the red and blue color seen in Figure 3.19,
corresponds to shifts in the device layer thickness. This means, that across a single chip consisting
of diﬀerent elements and even across a single element, small variations in top plate thickness can be
present. This can both aﬀect the pull-in voltage, center frequency and pressure output of a CMUT.
Looking at ﬁgures 3.20 and 3.21, the variation in the colors happens less frequently, thus yielding a
more uniform surface which always is preferable for CMUT fabrication.
To further verify that the bond indeed was as good as it looked, a Photoluminescence (PL) mapping
was made. As seen in ﬁgures 3.22 and 3.23, no voids were detected. The cavities and the gold inside
them reﬂect much of the incoming light, which is why they can appear as red on the map. This is
also why some of the chips with smaller gold electrodes and connections can be distinguished from
the others as they do not reﬂect the same amount of light. Silicon and boroﬂoat are both transparent
to the light and will therefore not give the same high signal in return. In conclusion, even though
the peak currents were lower than what normally was expected from an anodic bonding process, the
bond obtained was good and the wafer could be processed further.
==PAGE:41==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
33
Figure 3.20: Macroscopic image of the boroﬂoat and IHMSOI wafer after they had been bonded. This will
from now on be referred to as IHMSOI 02. In the bottom right, a void covering a part of one of the chips
can be seen, and to the left near the edge another. Since everything else looked to be bonded well, the bond
was overall successful
Figure 3.22: PL-map of wafer IHMSOI 02. As
seen, no voids were detected. The slight defor-
mation in the image near the center is caused by
the tool itself, and has no physical consequences.
Figure 3.23: PL-map of wafer IHMSOI 03. As
seen, no voids were detected for this bond either.
The slight deformation in the image near the cen-
ter is again caused by the tool itself, and has no
physical consequences.
==PAGE:42==
34
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.21: Macroscopic image of the boroﬂoat and IHM SOI wafer after they had been bonded. This will
from now on be referred to as IHMSOI 03. IHMSOI 03 had a two small voids; one close to the alignment
mark on the right hand side and one next to the rightmost chip in the second row from the top. Furthermore,
the black lines and spots were marks caused by the top electrode in the wafer bonder. As the voids were
this small and the rest looked to be bonded well, the bonding process was overall successful.
Etch process
Chemical
Time
Poly-Si etch
KOH @ 80◦C
6 min 30 sec
Oxide etch
BHF
3 min 30 sec
Handle etch (Si etch)
KOH @ 80◦C
5 h 47 min 38 sec
BOX etch (oxide etch)
BHF
5 min 30 sec
Table 3.3: Etch process for for thinning the IHMSOI down to leave only the device layer. Notably, the ﬁrst
oxide etch should have been longer to fully etch away the oxide layer. As a thin layer was left on the wafer,
the ﬁrst ≈10 minutes in subsequent KOH etch was etching that oxide layer away.
3.2.4
Thinning of IHMSOI wafer
The IHMSOI wafer made by Nicolai A. Michaelsen during his master thesis consisted of a double
sided polished silicon wafer with a thickness of 350 µm. On both sides, a 150 nm oxide was grown,
which serves as the BOX layer of the SOI wafer. Finally, a 2 µm poly-Si layer was deposited on both
sides. A sketch of this can be seen in Figure 3.24. To thin down to reach the device layer, a process
described in table 3.3 was used:
It was decided to see whether the poly-Si layer could be removed in KOH completely as the wet
bench with this bath should be used for the handle etch as well. After the etch no traces of poly-Si
was seen on the wafer and thus it was concluded that this was possible. The subsequent oxide etch
turned out to be too short. When the handle etch was initiated it was expected that a lot of bubbles
==PAGE:43==
3.2. FABRICATION PROCESS
35
Figure 3.24: Sketch of layer structure of the IHMSOI wafers
would be seen in the bath as the silicon was etched away, however, this did not happen. This was due
to a thin oxide layer still remaining on the wafer, and since the KOH does etch oxide, it was decided
to leave it in the KOH. After ≈10 minutes, bubbles started emerging from the wafer surface, which
meant that the oxide was etched away and the handle etch started. At the end of the handle layer
etch, it was observed that the plate came oﬀabove some of the cavities and electrode connection
pads. This was believed to be due to the bonding being too weak. On one of the wafers, almost all
elements were destroyed in this way, but on the other several elements survived the etch. An image
of the latter mentioned wafer can be seen in Figure 3.25.
After the handle etch, the BOX layer was etched away. This time, the etch time was increased by 2
minutes compared to the ﬁrst oxide etch, to ensure that all oxide was gone from the top. One could
easily see when the etch was done, as the blue/purple was completely removed and that the wafer
surface became hydrophobic. An image of this can be seen in Figure 3.26.
Commercial SOI wafer
The wafer stack where a commercial SOI wafer was used had an oxide on the backside which was
measured to a thickness of 607 nm using the Filmtek tool. This oxide was etched away using BHF
in an identical process as the two oxide etches for the IHMSOI process. When the handle layer had
to be etched away, a KOH etch at 80◦C was tried. After 3 hours and 20 minutes, only 3-4 µm had
been etched away.
Two possible reasons for this behavior were suggested: 1) The wafer could have a heavily boron
doped handle layer or 2) The crystal orientation of the handle layer could be < 111 >. If the boron
doping is ≥1019cm−3, the etch rate in KOH drastically drops [9]. It is commonly known that the
KOH etch itself has a high dependence on crystal orientation, eﬀectively creating etch stop at the
(111) planes [8].
The surface resistivity was therefore measured and from that, a concentration of boron was found
to ≈1018cm−3 and thus it was concluded, that the etch stop must have been caused by the crystal
orientation. It was therefore decided to stop processing this wafer and focus the fabrication on the
IHMSOI wafers.
==PAGE:44==
36
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.25: Macroscopic image of wafer IHMSOI 02 after handle layer etch. As seen the plate came oﬀ
above several elements and thus the gold contacts underneath were visible. It was also observed that this
happened where voids were detected after bonding, and thus it is seen that it is crucial to eliminate voids
when bonding.
3.2.5
Top electrode deﬁnition
The type of CMUTs made in this design test only needed to be separated either by bottom- or top
electrode. As the design was made such that the bottom electrodes of the diﬀerent elements were
separated, it was possible to make a shared top electrode by depositing a metal layer. To do this,
an e-beam evaporation process was used, where 400 nm of aluminum was deposited on top of the
device layer with a deposition rate of 10 ˚A/s. An image of the wafer after this step can be seen in
Figure 3.27.
3.2.6
Etching access to bottom electrode
To etch access to the bottom electrode contact pads, UV-lithography was used followed by a wet etch
of aluminum and a dry etch of the poly-Si plate. Spin coating of a 1.5 µm AZ MiR 701 photoresist
was carried out immediately after deposition of the aluminum. This was done as previous experiences
in the MEMS-applied sensors group have shown that if one waits, the adhesion of the photoresist
onto the metal layer becomes worse. The alignment and exposure step this time diﬀered a bit from
the previous two lithography processes as backside alignment had to be used. The alignment marks
could only be seen through the boroﬂoat wafer on the backside. For this process, the third and ﬁnal
mask was used, and the exposure was made as hard contact for 15.5 seconds. Development was done
using the TMAH UV-developer with a post exposure bake at 110◦C for 60 seconds followed by a
single puddle development for 60 seconds.
==PAGE:45==
3.3. MEASUREMENTS
37
Figure 3.26: Macroscopic image of wafer IHMSOI 02 after BOX layer etch. The blue/purple color of the
oxide was completely removed, and thus only the device layer of poly-Si remained on the wafer.
After development, the wafer was baked on a hotplate at 110 ◦C for 2 minutes to harden the resist.
Then a wet aluminum etch using a wet bench with a bath of H3PO4 mixed with H2O in the ratio
2:1. This solution was heated to 50 ◦C, and the wafer was dipped into the bath for 5 minutes and 10
seconds. The etch rate of the solution is ≈100 nm/min, and thus a signiﬁcant overetch was made
to ensure that all aluminum was removed from the bottom contact pad areas.
When the aluminum was removed, an etch of the device layer had to be made. This was done by a
reactive ion etch process in the Advanced Silicon Etcher (ASE). The recipe used included two cycles
of an etching step where SF6 and O2 were used as inlet gasses. These gasses is then ionized by the
high energy plasma, and hits the surface of silicon, where it reacts. The products of this reaction
are volatile, and will therefore evaporate oﬀof the surface, and thus etching is obtained.
3.3
Measurements
Two sets of electrical measurements were conducted on the IHMSOI wafer, one on the test elements
and one on the device elements. This was done so that the test elements could be used for destructive
testing such as a pull-in measurement, as this would short circuit the element. Furthermore, two
chips which had functioning CMUT elements on them were mounted on a PCB and wire bonded to
allow for acoustic measurements as well.
All electrical characterization was made using the probe station belonging to the MEMS-applied
sensors group. This tool allows for automatic and semi-automatic wafer level characterization, which
was necessary for this project. The characterization of the test elements were done manually, but the
==PAGE:46==
38
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.27: Macroscopic image of wafer IHMSOI 02 after Al deposition. As seen the entire topside is
covered by the metal and serves as a shared top electrode for all the elements on the wafer.
device elements were done automatically. The probe station consists of an analyzer, which receives,
processes and displays acquired data during measurements, a controller where both the movement
of the probes inside the probe station, the stage at which the chips are placed and the microscope
can be controlled, and ﬁnally the probe station itself in which a number of probes can be mounted
inside a chamber and used for characterization. An image showing the setup can be seen in Figure
3.28. For this project, only two probes were necessary as it was needed to contact a top electrode
and a bottom electrode. The two probes were denoted ”high” and ”low” to establish a convention
where the probe on which the highest potential was applied, always contacted the top electrode. An
image showing the two probes inside the chamber can be seen in Figure 3.29.
3.3.1
Test elements
Two types of measurements were conducted on the test elements; current/voltage (IV) character-
ization and capacitance/voltage (CV) characterization. The IV-characterization was made to see
whether the elements were short circuited from the beginning or not. If not, CV-characterization
was made to see whether the parabolic behavior of the capacitance was obtained as a function of
applied voltage. As it was not certain exactly where pull-in for these devices would be, a safe ap-
proach to these measurements were carried out, i.e. starting with low voltages and a small range.
The test protocol can be seen in Table 3.4
The results were split into four categories:
1. Working
==PAGE:47==
3.3. MEASUREMENTS
39
Figure 3.28: Overview of the probe station used for electrical characterization of the CMUTs.
Figure 3.29: Probes inside the chamber of the probe station.
==PAGE:48==
40
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Characterization type
Voltage range
IV-characterization
0 V to -5 V
IV-characterization
0 V to 5 V
CV-characterization
0 V to -5 V
CV-characterization
0 V to 5 V
Table 3.4: Test protocol for the test elements. If the element did not short circuit, the range was raised to
±15 V, and afterwards ±30 V.
40 µm cavity
10 µm connection
15 µm connection
Center connection
Standard design
Working
2
5
2
11
9
SC
7
5
7
3
6
SCM
0
5
2
2
1
Broken
11
7
11
4
4
Table 3.5: Results from measurements on test elements of IHMSOI 02. The number in each cell corresponds
to the amount of test elements which ﬁt in each category of IV and CV responses.
2. SC
3. SCM
4. Broken
”Working” corresponded to elements which showed expected CV and IV responses through all three
test ranges. ”SC” was when an element immediately reached compliance current of 100 µA during
the ﬁrst IV-measurement. ”SCM” was when the elements survived the ﬁrst voltage range and showed
the expected responses of a CMUT, but then went to compliance during the second and third voltage
range. ”Broken” referred to elements which was visibly damaged, and therefore would not make sense
to measure. The results can be seen in Table 3.5. As seen in this table, the standard design and the
center connection design had a higher amount of functioning test elements, and were thus considered
the most promising designs. Secondly, many of the elements from every design category were either
short circuited from the beginning or did it during measurements already at low voltages. These
short circuits could potentially come from a damaged top plate, as KOH might have entered the
cavities during handle etching when the plate fell oﬀabove the contact pads. As known from the
theory section, a thinner plate would result in a lower pull-in voltage, thus creating the short circuit
at lower voltage than expected. In a worst case scenario, the plate could be completely etched away
underneath the Al layer, and potentially create a short circuit between top and bottom even with
no applied voltage.
Overall the center connection and the standard design gave the best result for the test elements.
Furthermore, two measurements of the pull-in of center connection design were made to get a limit
to how high voltages one could apply to the CMUTs. It was seen, that pull-in happened at 80-90 V.
Since these type of CMUTs have no insulating layer between the top plate and the bottom electrode,
the element short circuits and can not be used after pull-in. Based on these measurements it was
therefore decided to keep a threshold of 30 V when measuring the device arrays.
3.3.2
Device arrays
The device arrays consisted of 12 elements and due to the placement and design of these, automatic
wafer level testing was possible to do. Using MATLAB scripts made by PhD student Martin L.
Ommen and prof. Erik V. Thomsen a complete wafer map was created which included 52 sites,
corresponding to the 52 arrays, each with 12 sub sites i.e. 12 elements to characterize. The char-
acterization protocol can be seen in Table 3.6 and an overview of the coordinates used for chip
placement and element numbering can be seen in Figure 3.30.
==PAGE:49==
3.3. MEASUREMENTS
41
Characterization type
Voltage range
IV-characterization
-5 V to 5 V
CV-characterization
0 V to -30 V
CV-characterization
0 V to 30 V
Table 3.6: Test protocol for the wafer level measurements of the device arrays.
Figure 3.30: Overview of wafer map with the coordinates used for each chip placement. Each chip has 12
device elements and two test elements, numbered as shown in the image.
Measuring these three test on each elements provides 52·12·3 = 1872 datasets. To be able to process
all these datasets, all IV-measurements which included a current with a magnitude higher than 100
nA were considered short circuited. This cut-oﬀwas decided as it was seen that elements above this
limit would short circuit during measurement.
The vast majority of the measured elements either were short circuited or had no plate left on them
and thus the CV-measurements from these were disregarded. For the working elements, currents
in on the order of pA were seen and capacitances between 50-85 pF. Representative plots from the
working CMUTs both for IV- and CV-measurements can be seen in ﬁgures 3.31 and 3.32. As seen,
the graph in Figure 3.31, shows a non-linear behavior in the beginning of the measurement. This
is most likely due to a capacitor from the electronics charging up when the experiment starts. In
Figure 3.32, the parabolic behavior of the CV-graph is seen. In this ﬁgure a ﬁt to the following
function was made:
C(V ) = C0(1 + k(V −Voff)2)
(3.3)
Where C0 is the minimum capacitance, k is the curvature parameter and Voff is the oﬀset in voltage
of where C0 is found. These parameters were extracted from 9 functioning CMUT elements from
three diﬀerent chips, and the results presented in Table 3.7. There was no signiﬁcant change in the
parameters when looking at elements with the same design, which was expected. Furthermore, since
the area of the CMUTs varies across the diﬀerent design variations, C0, varied signiﬁcantly when
looking at elements from diﬀerent designs. It was noted that the change in capacitance was small
for the voltage range, which suggested that spring softening did not play a signiﬁcant role yet, and
thus that the voltage was much lower than pull-in for the device. However, based on experiments
from the test elements, it was decided not to measure at higher voltages, since the CMUTs might
break.
==PAGE:50==
42
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Voltage [V]
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
Current [nA]
IHMSOI_02 - Center connection - Index 0,1 subsite 12
Voltage sweep: -5 V to 5 V
Figure 3.31: IV-measurement of a working element. Since the measurement starts at a voltage of -5 V, a
capacitor within the electric setup needs to get charged before the current stabilizes, this is what is seen as
the steep slope to the left in the plot.
Chip location and element no.
Design
C0[pF]
k[V−2]
Voff[V]
Loc: (0,1) Element 10
Center connection
75.16
1.679 × 10−5
-0.7022
Loc: (0,1) Element 11
Center connection
75.14
1.701 × 10−5
-0.4073
Loc: (0,1) Element 12
Center connection
75.05
1.695 × 10−5
-0.4917
Loc: (2,6) Element 4
Center connection
75.36
1.751 × 10−5
-0.3048
Loc: (0,0) Element 11
15 µm connection
82.3
1.689 × 10−5
-0.32467
Loc: (1,0) Element 2
40 µm cavity
52.39
4.282 × 10−6
-0.4043
Loc: (1,0) Element 4
40 µm cavity
52.13
4.316 × 10−6
-0.3605
Loc: (1,0) Element 5
40 µm cavity
52.12
4.349 × 10−6
-0.3694
Loc: (1,0) Element 12
40 µm cavity
52.06
4.188 × 10−6
-0.5498
Table 3.7: Parameters extracted from ﬁts from 9 diﬀerent functioning elements from three diﬀerent chips.
As seen, there is some variation from design to design, and the elements from the same chip have only a
small variation compared to each other. This is as expected, as the eﬀective area of the CMUT elements
varies across diﬀerent designs, but not within the same design.
3.3.3
Acoustical measurements
To see whether the CMUTs worked as intended and were able to send out pressure waves, acous-
tical measurements were made. These were used to ﬁnd the center frequency of the CMUTs, the
bandwidth, and to check whether the CMUTs were stable in time or not. These measurements were
conducted in immersion, the chips had to be mounted on a custom print, wire bonded to enable
electrical contact and then covered by a PDMS layer to protect the CMUT arrays. This was done by
post doc. Mathias Engholm. Two chips could be mounted on one print, thus enabling 24 arrays to
be tested. Tthere were, however, only 2-3 working elements on each of the chips which was mounted.
The measurements shown below was made on a single element from one of these chips. An image of
the chips mounted on the print can be seen in ﬁgures 3.33 and 3.34.
==PAGE:51==
3.3. MEASUREMENTS
43
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
Voltage [V]
75
75.2
75.4
75.6
75.8
76
76.2
76.4
Capacitance [pF]
IHMSOI_02 - Center connection - Index 0,1 subsite 12
Negative voltage sweep: 0 V to -30 V
Positive voltage sweep: 0 V to 30 V
Parabolic fit: 75.05 (1+1.70
10-5(V+0.49)2
Figure 3.32: CV-measurement of a working element. The shape of the graph is parabolic as expected, and
from the ﬁt, it is seen that C0 = 75.05pF, the curvature parameter, k, is k = 1.70 × 10−5V−2 and the oﬀset
voltage, Voff = −0.49V.
Figure 3.33: Chips mounted on a print before
wire bonding and PDMS encapsulation. These
exact chips were not processed further as they
broke when a protective tape was removed from
the top during preparation.
Figure 3.34:
Print after wire bonding and
PDMS encapsulation. The diﬀerent elements of
the CMUT chip can be accessed through the pins,
and the print can now be used for acoustic mea-
surements.
==PAGE:52==
44
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
Figure 3.35: Sketch of the experimental setup for acoustic measurements of the CMUTs.
A sketch of the experimental setup for acoustic measurements can be seen in Figure 3.35.
The
setup consists of an oscilloscope, a computer for data collection and processing, AC and DC voltage
sources, a water tank, a hydrophone and some electronics which takes the output from AC and DC
voltages and forms a speciﬁc pulse.
The ﬁrst measurement that was made was a stability test over 10 minutes. For this, a DC bias of -30
V was applied, and an AC bias with a frequency of 4 MHz was used. It was chosen to create pulses
of 5 periods. In Figure 3.36 and 3.37 the average response of the pulse emitted by the CMUT across
9 measurements, and the peak-to-peak pressure output over 10 minutes can be seen respectively. In
Figure 3.36 it is seen that the CMUT is able to send out pressure waves with a magnitude higher
than the noise ﬂoor.
The measurements were made so that a ﬁxed DC voltage was maintained, while sweeping through
AC voltages with the same magnitude but diﬀerent frequencies. The highest pressure output should
then be observed when the AC frequency hits the center frequency of the CMUT. Furthermore,
the same type of measurement were made for diﬀerent potentials, so that the correlation between
pressure and voltage could be observed as well. As mentioned in the theory section, when the applied
voltages goes towards VP I, spring softening can be observed. This phenomenon eﬀectively shifts the
center frequency down and causes the pressure dependency to no longer be linear.
The voltages that was used was in the range between -30 V and -50 V in steps of -5 V. When it
was tried to apply -55 V, the element short circuited, even though this still should be far from the
pull-in voltage. This was again most likely due to the issues met during thinning of the handle layer
as discussed previously. The data from the acoustical measurements can be seen in ﬁgures 3.38 and
3.39. The parameters were extracted by ﬁtting the data to a gaussian function:
y = p · exp
"
−1
2
(f −f0)
σ
2#
(3.4)
Where p is the maximum pressure, f is the frequency, f0 is the center frequency and σ is the standard
deviation from which the FWHM can be found as
FWHM = 2.355σ
(3.5)
The center frequency is roughly as expected. The design was initially made for 3µm top plate with
the 50µm × 50µm dimensions of the cells, giving a center frequency of 7 MHz in air. In this case
the thickness of the plate was approximately 2µm and since the center frequency scales linearly with
==PAGE:53==
3.3. MEASUREMENTS
45
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Time [µs]
-800
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
Pressure [Pa]
Average signal from 9 measurements
Figure 3.36: Pressure detected by hydrophone. The 5 period sine pulse emitted by the CMUT is easily
seen. This plot is an average of 9 measurements, which is made to reduce background noice.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time [min]
1150
1200
1250
1300
1350
1400
1450
1500
1550
1600
1650
Peak-to-Peak pressure [Pa]
Stability test (peak-to-peak pressure)
Figure 3.37:
Peak-to-peak pressure detected by the hydrophone over 10 minutes.
It is seen, that the
peak-to-peak pressure remains constant throughout the 10 minutes, and thus the CMUT is stable in time.
==PAGE:54==
46
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
1
2
3
4
5
6
Frequency [MHz]
0
2
4
6
8
10
Pressure [kPa]
DC bias
-50V
-45V
-40V
-35V
-30V
Figure 3.38: Frequency response of the CMUT. As expected, the higher DC bias, the higher pressure
output. Furthermore, by ﬁtting a gaussian function to the graphs in this plot, center frequency and bandwidth
(FWHM) can be estimated.
the thickness, the expected center frequency was 4.7 MHz in air. The measurements were conducted
in immersion, which, as a rule of thumb, reduces the center frequency by a factor of 2, yielding
an expected underwater center frequency of 2.35 MHz. Furthermore, it is seen that the applied
voltages must be far from pull-in since the center frequency, where the pressure output is highest,
stays the same throughout the sweep. It was, however, proved that the CMUT was able to generate
pressure waves, which means that it worked as intended. Thus, with some changes to the design, the
fabrication method used for this run with IHMSOI wafers as top plate can produce working CMUTs.
3.4
Chapter summary
In this chapter the initial design and fabrication method of linear anodic bonded CMUTs have been
presented. Both test- and device elements were characterized, and even though only few elements
were working, it was seen that these were both stable electrically and able to emit pressure waves
when operated in immersion. The low yield is expected to be caused by a combination of poor anodic
bonding and that the plate fell oﬀabove the electrode contact pads during handle etching.
==PAGE:55==
3.4. CHAPTER SUMMARY
47
6
8
10
Pressure [kPa]
2.70
2.72
2.74
Center frequency [MHz]
30.0
32.5
35.0
37.5
40.0
42.5
45.0
47.5
50.0
DC bias [V]
3.4
3.5
3.6
(FWHM) Bandwidth [MHz]
Figure 3.39: Max pressure dependency on DC bias, estimations of center frequency, and bandwidth. It is
seen that the bias still is far from pull-in, as both the pressure dependency of DC bias is linear, and that the
center frequency is constant.
==PAGE:56==
48
CHAPTER 3. DESIGN STUDY OF LINEAR ABCMUT ARRAYS
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Process optimization
This chapter will describe the main issues observed during fabrication and characterization of the
ﬁrst run of linear anodic bonded CMUTs, and aim to solve these. The optimized fabrication steps
will be described, and the CMUTs will be characterized on wafer level.
4.1
Identiﬁcation of key problem
From the ﬁrst run of IHMSOI CMUTs, it was shown that it was possible to get functioning CMUTs
out of the fabrication process, however, the yield was low. To optimize the process, two key problems
were found:
1. The dirty top electrode in the wafer bonded could not provide the normal current for such a
bonding process, and thus the bond between the wafer may have been weak.
2. The plate above the electrode pads fell oﬀduring KOH etching, and thus allowed KOH to
enter the array of cavities underneath, potentially damaging the devices.
To solve the ﬁrst problem, Rune K. D. Chrisiansen, a process specialist from DTU Nanolab, changed
the top electrode to a clean one in the wafer bonder. This meant that the recipe had to be changed
slightly, as the new electrode did not have a hole in the middle. Normally, there is an initial bonding
step, where a small pin-electrode goes down and creates a bond in the center of the wafer. This
is done to preserve alignment by preventing the two wafers from sliding oﬀof each other when the
big electrode is pushed down. This step might be critical for some processes, but in the case of
ABCMUTs, the precise alignment is not essential for this step. One does still have to watch the
process when the electrode pushes down to be able to abort processing if the two wafers slide apart.
If this happens, the boroﬂoat wafer might be bonded directly to the bottom chuck and will not come
oﬀeasily, thus ruining the chuck.
To solve the second problem, apart from increasing bond strength with the new electrode in the
bonder, a thicker top plate was used. Instead of 2 µm, a 3 µm poly-Si layer was used to prevent the
plate from breaking above the electrode pads.
4.2
Fabrication
The fabrication process were essentially identical to the one already described. Therefore, focus
in this section will be on the wafer bonding and the thinning of the IHMSOI. Three new polished
IHMSOI wafers, IHMSOI 04, IHMSOI 05 and IHMSOI 06, with a device layer of 3 µm were used.
49
==PAGE:58==
50
CHAPTER 4. PROCESS OPTIMIZATION
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
Time [min]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Current [mA]
Anodic bonding - Current vs Time
Recipe 1: -250 V, -350 V, -600 V
Figure 4.1: Current proﬁle during an anodic bonding process with a clean top electrode. When comparing
to the same recipe run with the old electrode (Figure 3.18), it is here seen that the current peaks are
signiﬁcantly higher, thus increasing the chance of successful bonding.
4.2.1
Wafer Bonding
The same process for wafer bonding as described in the the previous fabrication process was used,
with the exception of the center pin step. This time, the peaks of the current during bonding reached
compliance of 13.9 mA. This was achieved with the low-voltage recipe (max voltage of -600 V). The
current proﬁle during the bonding process with the new top electrode can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Visually, there were no signiﬁcant changes in the appearance of the bonded wafers compared to the
ﬁrst run. Only a few small voids were detected, none of which were interfering with the devices on
the wafers. An image of one of the bonded wafers, IHMSOI 06, can be seen in Figure 4.2.
4.2.2
Etching of handle and BOX layer
The etching process for this step was identical to the one described in Table 3.3, except that the
temperature for the KOH etch was raised to 90◦C. This was done to increase the etchrate and thus
reduce the time needed in the KOH bath. Furthermore, the ﬁrst oxide etch step this time was longer
to ensure that all of the oxide was removed to avoid the extra handle etch time.
The actual etching times for the process can be seen in Table 4.1. The handle etch time was reduced
by 2 hours and 24 minutes compared to the ﬁrst run.
An image of IHMSOI 06 after the etching process can be seen in Figure 4.3. The plate did come oﬀ
above some of the elements, but compared to the ﬁrst run, this problem was signiﬁcantly reduced
as intended.
==PAGE:59==
4.2. FABRICATION
51
Figure 4.2: IHMSOI 06 after bonding process with the clean electrode. The visual appearance resembles
that of the ﬁrst run, however, the current peaks during bonding were signiﬁcantly higher, which might yield
a better bond.
Etch process
Chemical
Time
Poly-Si etch
KOH @ 90 ◦C
5 min 30 sec
Oxide etch
BHF
6 min
Handle etch (silicon etch)
KOH @ 90 ◦C
3 hours 23 min
BOX etch (oxide etch)
BHF
6 min 30 sec
Table 4.1: Etch process used to thin down the IHMSOI wafers. As seen, the handle layer etch time was
reduced with 2 hours and 24 minutes by increasing the temperature of the KOH bath to 90 ◦C.
4.2.3
Plate bow above contact pads
After optical inspection of the wafers in a microscope, it was seen that the plate above the contact
pads bowed. Therefore, a topography measurement using the Sensofar tool was made, to see how
large the bow was. The result of this measurement can be seen in Figure 4.4.
A plate bow of 7.5 µm was observed, thus either suggesting a large compressive stress in the poly-Si
layer, a pressure inside the cavity underneath or some combined eﬀect of these. Continuing with the
fabrication process, a photo lithography step had to be done. It was in the spin coating step seen,
that these ”spikes” above the contact pads had an eﬀect on the distribution of the resist. However,
as most of the potentially working elements did get covered with resist, the processing was carried
out as usual. When all processing was done, a last check in the microscope did however reveal,
that the etch of the aluminum layer had been impacted by these ”spikes”, so that some poly-Si and
aluminum was left around the edges of the contact pads. This was critical as these places in worst
case could create a short circuit of the bottom and top electrode, and thereby ruin the element. An
==PAGE:60==
52
CHAPTER 4. PROCESS OPTIMIZATION
Figure 4.3: IHMSOI 06 after thinning. The amount of elements where the plate had come oﬀwere lowered
when compared to the ﬁrst run.
image of this can be seen in Figure 4.5.
4.3
Characterization
The issue described with the short circuiting at the edges of the contact pads combined with the
places where the plate came oﬀduring thinning of the IHMSOI wafer, meant that among the 624
elements distributed between diﬀerent designs on diﬀerent chips on IHMSOI 06, only 109 cleared
the cut of 100nA during the IV-measurement. In ﬁgures 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 bar plots of the maximum
current measured for each device element on IHMSOI 06 can be seen. The blue color represents
measurements below the cut-oﬀlimit and the red color measurements above. Of the blue ones,
some short circuited during the CV-measurement and many did not have the expected behavior of
a CMUT. A similar result was seen for IHMSOI 05. The working CMUTs did not seem to have
any correlation to a speciﬁc design. For this reason, it was concluded that the plate bending above
the contact pads and that the plate above some of the contact pads came oﬀduring wet etching,
allowing the etching chemicals to enter the grid of cavities were the critical issues.
4.4
Chapter summary
In this chapter, the optimized fabrication process of linear anodic bonded CMUTs have been pre-
sented. The critical have been documented with images and graphs. Wafer level characterization
have been performed and presented of the fabricated CMUTs. It was shown, that the process could
==PAGE:61==
4.4. CHAPTER SUMMARY
53
Figure 4.4: Topography measurement above a contact pad on one of the elements on IHMSOI 04. The
plate bends 7.5 µm upwards either due to stress in the poly-Si, pressure inside the cavity underneath or a
combined eﬀect of these.
produce functioning CMUTs, however further process optimization was needed as the yield still was
low. This run had 109 of 624 elements clearing the max current cut-oﬀof 100 nA, however 17 of
these did not have a proper connection and some short circuited later during the CV measurement
meaning that the actual yield was lower. The suspected cause of this low yield was too large electrode
pad areas, which will be investigated with the row-column design.
==PAGE:62==
54
CHAPTER 4. PROCESS OPTIMIZATION
Figure 4.5: Short circuited element caused by the photolithography being impacted by the 7.5 µm plate
bending above the contact pad. The grey color in this image is the top electrode made of aluminum, which
touches the bottom electrode pad of gold.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Element
10-14
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
Current [A]
IV measurements from IHMSOI_06
Figure 4.6:
IV-bar plot from IHMSOI 06.
The blue colored bars means that the max current in the
element during measurement was lower than the threshold of 100 nA, and thereby was not considered short
circuited. The red color denotes the elements which were above the threshold.
==PAGE:63==
4.4. CHAPTER SUMMARY
55
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
Element
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
Current [A]
IV measurements from IHMSOI_06
Figure 4.7:
IV-bar plot from IHMSOI 06.
The blue colored bars means that the max current in the
element during measurement was lower than the threshold of 100 nA, and thereby was not considered short
circuited. The red color denotes the elements which were above the threshold.
420
440
460
480
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
Element
10-14
10-12
10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
Current [A]
IV measurements from IHMSOI_06
Figure 4.8: IV-bar plot from IHMSOI 06. The blue colored bars means that the max current in the element
during measurement was lower than the threshold of 100 nA, and thereby was not considered short circuited.
The red color denotes the elements which were above the threshold.A third group of measurements can also
be seen in this ﬁgure, the one where no contact could be established. This is seen where the measured current
is ≈10−15 F. The same would be measured if the a measurement was taken while the probes were in the air.
==PAGE:64==
56
CHAPTER 4. PROCESS OPTIMIZATION
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5
Design and fabrication of
row-column addressed CMUT
arrays
In this chapter, the design of the row-column addressed CMUT arrays will be presented.
The
thoughts behind the diﬀerent design variations will be explained as well as the ideas behind the
diﬀerent test structures. Furthermore, the critical steps of anodic bonding and thinning and problems
encountered related these steps will be discussed.
5.1
The row-column design variations
For this project, diﬀerent row-column design variations were made:
1. 16+16
2. 16+16 Bottom electrode short circuited
3. 16+16 Top electrode short circuited
4. 190+190
The 16+16 design corresponds to 16 rows (top electrodes) and 16 columns (bottom electrodes in
cavities).
This design is essentially a small version of what could be implemented in a real life
ultrasound scanner.
However, as the electrical characterisation of each row and column is not
possible with this design alone, the two short circuit designs were made as well. Short circuiting
either the bottom or top electrode means, that one in eﬀect will obtain a normal linear array of
CMUT elements with either common top or bottom electrode. Thus, one can characterize rows and
columns individually and directly compare them to the characterisation of the linear arrays. The
design of the short circuit is based on a previous project in the MEMS-applied sensors group, made
by Sophie Kargo [15]. In her project, it was shown that it was possible to make a design with a short
circuit, which after characterization could be removed by dicing. The same principle have been used
for the design in this master project. This can be seen in Figure 5.1.
Finally, the 190+190 design was made so that in the case that everything worked as intended, this
array potentially could be used in the project, in which the MEMS-applied sensors group cooperates
with diﬀerent companies towards better ultrasound imaging. For this purpose, it was important that
the 190+190 design was made with λ
2 -pitch, i.e. that the spacing between two neighboring CMUT
57
==PAGE:66==
58CHAPTER 5. DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF ROW-COLUMN ADDRESSED CMUT ARRAYS
Figure 5.1: Zoom in on a part of the 16+16 design with short circuited bottom electrodes. As seen, a grid
of metal is placed like a frame around the array itself, and has extra bottom electrode pads (green) located
right next to the top electrode pads (grey). The distance between these are made so that an impedance
probe with a spacing of 250 µm ﬁts. The short circuits can after characterization be diced oﬀby cutting
oﬀthe ”frame” around the array. The individual CMUT cells in this exact design are 50µm × 50µm, and is
connected with center connections.
cells from two diﬀerent rows or columns should be separated so that the distance from center to
center was equal to half of the intended operating wavelength. To do this, it was chosen to make
the cavities 37µm × 37µm, thus allowing a 2x2 grid of CMUT cells within each intersection of a row
and a column. This design can be seen in Figure 5.2.
The great advantages of the IHMSOI wafers in this regard, is that the device layer thickness can
be tuned to obtain the intended operating frequency and pull-in, thus allowing more freedom in the
dimensions of the cavities. To obtain the same center frequency as for 50µm × 50µm with a 3µm
top plate, knowing that
ω0 ∝h
a2
(5.1)
One can ﬁnd:
h2 = a2
2
h1
a2
1
= (37 × 10−6m)2
3 × 10−6m
(50 × 10−6m)2 = 1.64µm
(5.2)
Where h1 is the thickness of the previous design, a1 is the side length of the CMUTs in the previous
design, h2 is the thickness of the new top plate and a2 is the side length of the CMUTs in the new
design.
Each of these designs were made with two types of connections for the bottom electrode grid:
Standard design (through the corners) and Center connection (through the center). These were
chosen based on the test element results from the ﬁrst run of linear CMUTs, since no conclusion
==PAGE:67==
5.1. THE ROW-COLUMN DESIGN VARIATIONS
59
Figure 5.2: Zoom in on the 190+190 design. As seen here, the intersection between rows and columns
includes 4 CMUT cells with dimensions of 37 × 37µm. This exact design also shows the standard connection
between the cells, which is through the corners of the CMUTs.
could be made regarding best design from the second run, mainly due to the resist issues caused by
the plate bending.
To prevent the plate from bending as much above the contact pads, the 16+16 designs each were
made with three types of contact pads for the bottom electrode, which can be seen in Figure 5.3,
5.4 and 5.5:
Figure 5.3: 100 µm electrode pad. This design consist of single 100µm × 100µm electrode pad
Figure 5.4: 100 µm electrode pad. This design consist of a single 150µm × 150µm electrode pad
Figure 5.5: Wall electrode pad. This design consist of four 100µm × 100µm squares, connected through
small holes in the wall between them.
Regardless of whether the bending was caused by stress or pressure, smaller cavities for the con-
==PAGE:68==
60CHAPTER 5. DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF ROW-COLUMN ADDRESSED CMUT ARRAYS
Figure 5.6: Alignment marks used for the fabrication process. The ﬁgures on the left are the new set of
alignment marks while the ﬁgures on the right are the old set. The transparent green color is made by the
ﬁrst lithography process, where cavities are deﬁned. The bright green color is used for the second lithography
process, where the bottom electrode metal is deﬁned and the grey is used for the third and ﬁnal lithography
process, where top electrode and separation of top elements are made.
tact pads would decrease the bending, which is why the 100 µm electrode and 150 µm electrode
designs were made. In comparison, the dimensions of the electrode pads from the ﬁrst design was
350µm × 400µm.
The wall design allows the contact pad to keep relatively large dimensions by
leaving some walls inside, which should hold the top plate down after bonding. It was made, so
that four 100 µm× 100 µm was contact pads were left, each connected to the others through small
connections through the walls. A secondary advantage with this type of electrode pad, is that one
can dedicate 2 squares for characterization and keep the other two for wire bonding. The probes will
during characterization scratch the surface, which potentially could aﬀect the wire bonding process.
Having a two clean squares could therefore help, if this became an issue.
Regarding alignment marks for the lithography processes, the ones from the linear array study was
directly reused. These have yet to be further optimized, and therefore, it was chosen to make an
additional set of alignment marks. When the cavities were etched in BHF, the alignment marks for
the second lithography process was also made. However, since the wet etching in BHF is a isotropic
etch, the alignment marks which were deﬁned in the same process became bigger than intended. It
can for this reason, combined with the the contrast issue when aligning to a cavity in a glass wafer,
be hard to do the alignment for the second lithography process. The new set of alignment marks was
therefore based on relative position of a shape inside another shape. It is quite easy for the eye to
see whether a small circle is placed directly in the center of a bigger circle, or if it is moved slightly
in some direction. This type of alignment works regardless if the large shape (the cavity) becomes
slightly larger during the etch. It was decided to include both alignment marks side by side. These
can be seen in Figure 5.6.
5.2
Fabrication of RCABCMUTs
The fabrication method for the RCABCMUTs were identical to that of the linear arrays, except
that the new mask set was used for the diﬀerent lithography processes. Therefore, the focus of this
section will be on the new alignment marks and the critical steps of the fabrication process: The
second lithography process, the anodic bonding and ﬁnally the thinning of the IHMSOI wafer.
5.2.1
New alignment marks
The alignment step of the second lithography process was optimized with the new set of alignment
marks. The concept of relative position between two shapes combined with the old alignment marks
==PAGE:69==
5.2. FABRICATION OF RCABCMUTS
61
Figure 5.7: Alignment marks after lift-oﬀprocess. As seen, the alignment was successful, and both the old
and new alignment marks worked as intended. The black lines outlines the cavities, while the bright yellow
is the remaining metal.
made it possible to get a good alignment faster than what was achieved during the linear array study.
The old alignment marks was used to control rotational alignment, while the new marks was used
for x- and y-direction. An image taken after lift-oﬀcan be seen in Figure 5.7.
5.2.2
Anodic bonding and thinning
Before the bonding process was done, the top electrode of the wafer bonder was changed to the
clean one, to optimize chances for successful bonding. Furthermore, the chuck was cleaned with a
cleanroom napkin with isopropanol before each bond, to ensure that it was as clean as possible. It
was decided to try out both the recipe with voltage steps of -300V, -600V and -800V as well as the
one with -250V, -450V and -600V. In total, 4 bonds were made. Two wafers were processed with
the ﬁrst mentioned recipe, one of which only had small defects from particles on chuck and electrode
in the bonder, but with no large voids. The current peaks during bonding reached compliance of
13.9 mA as intended, which indicated good electrical connection and thus a strong bond should have
been formed. The second bond had a void of approximately 1 cm in diameter. This did, however,
only cover one of the test structures, and since the rest of the bond looked to be good across the
wafer, it was categorized as successful. The third bond was made with the recipe with a maximum
voltage of -600V. This time, the wafer stuck to the top electrode as it moved up after the bonding
process was completed. It was not bonded to the top electrode, as this would be impossible without
changing the polarisation of the electric ﬁeld, and therefore it was believed to be caused by the wafer
stack sticking to some impurities on the electrode. This bond had many voids visible to the naked
eye, both across alignment mark, row-column elements and along the edge of the wafer. This can
==PAGE:70==
62CHAPTER 5. DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF ROW-COLUMN ADDRESSED CMUT ARRAYS
Figure 5.8: Image of an anodic bond with maximum voltage of -600 V. As seen this bond had many voids,
especially near the edges. It is crucial that voids do do not appear at the edges, since this will allow the
KOH to etch inwards during the handle thinning.
be seen in Figure 5.8 It was therefore decided not to process this wafer further, as the chances of it
surviving the thinning step was too low. To see whether this was caused by the lower voltage steps
compared to the ﬁrst two bond, the last bond was done with the recipe with maximum voltage of
-800V. The same issue with the wafer sticking to the top electrode was again observed. This time
the bond looked ﬁne on the majority of the wafer, however a void covering the left alignment mark
was present, which caused this wafer to be stopped from the processing as well. This can be seen in
Figure 5.9.
The thinning of the two wafers which had successful bonds, initially went well. The ﬁrst poly-Si layer
and the ﬁrst oxide layer were easily removed. After one hour of KOH etching of the handle layer at
90◦C, the process still looked to be going as planned. After 2 hours and 35 minutes, approximately
one hour before the etching should be completed, the KOH began to etch inwards from the edge of
the wafer, completely removing the IHMSOI wafer from this area. Furthermore, a hole had formed
directly above the corner of one of the 190+190 CMUT arrays on both wafers. The wafers were
therefore taken out of the KOH at this point even though the handle etch was not completed. An
image of both wafers at this stage can be seen in Figure 5.10.
Since both of the wafers had the hole at the same position, it looked to be a consistent error and
not a random one. Two possible reasons for this could be 1) some error in the mask design, thus
translating into a defect in the bond, or 2) there could be some particle on the chuck or top electrode
of the wafer bonder at this position. Phd student Andreas S. Havreland had used the same exact
setup of the wafer bonder immediately before these two bonds were made, and therefore his wafers
were investigated with a microscope. At the same position it was observed, that his wafer that had
faced towards the chuck had a small crack. This can be seen in Figure 5.11. Due to this observation,
it was concluded that the error could not have been caused by a defect in the mask set, but had
to be some particle at the chuck of the wafer bonder. The particle was found, but was not able to
be cleaned oﬀof the chuck. Therefore, it was decided to stop processing, as the same problem was
likely to keep occurring at this critical step.
==PAGE:71==
5.3. CHAPTER SUMMARY
63
Figure 5.9: Image of an anodic bond with maximum voltage of -800 V. This bond was signiﬁcantly better
than the one shown in Figure 5.8, however, the void covering the left alignment mark is expected to ruin the
alignment mark during thinning, and thus further processing would be diﬃcult.
5.3
Chapter summary
In this chapter, the design of the row-column addressed anodic bonded CMUTs was presented.
The idea behind each design variation was explained, and discussed. As the fabrication process
essentially was identical to that of the linear anodic bonded CMUTs, only the critical steps of
bonding and thinning were discussed here. Due to problems with the wafer bonder in the DTU
Nanolab cleanroom, the fabrication process unfortunately could not be completed. This problem
was caused by particles stuck on the chuck and top electrode inside the bonder, and would potentially
be resolved by changing those. This was, however, not possible within the time limit of this master
thesis, and thus it was decided to stop processing.
==PAGE:72==
64CHAPTER 5. DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF ROW-COLUMN ADDRESSED CMUT ARRAYS
Figure 5.10: The two wafers after 2 hours and 35 minutes in the KOH handle layer etch. The KOH have
attacked the edges of the top wafer in both cases. Furthermore, a hole has been etched above the same
position on both wafers, thus indicating some defect in this area.
==PAGE:73==
5.3. CHAPTER SUMMARY
65
Figure 5.11: Dark ﬁeld image of the a crack located at the same position as the holes were formed on the
RCABCMUT wafers during handle etch. This wafer was made by PhD. student Andreas S. Havreland, and
had a completely diﬀerent design. Thus it ruled out that the error had a relation to the mask design.
==PAGE:74==
66CHAPTER 5. DESIGN AND FABRICATION OF ROW-COLUMN ADDRESSED CMUT ARRAYS
==PAGE:75==
Chapter 6
Conclusion & Outlook
In this project, process development towards a functioning fabrication process for row-column ad-
dressed anodic bonded CMUTs was carried out. Two runs of linear CMUT arrays were successfully
fabricated and characterized as an initial study before designing the row-column version. The main
focus was kept on polished In-house made silicon on insulator (IHMSOI) wafers, which showed
promising potential to be used at top plates. The IHMSOI wafers consisted of a double side polished
silicon substrate on which an oxide of 400 nm was grown followed by a deposition of 3 µm boron
doped poly-silicon. The polished IHMSOI wafers had a surface roughness of 0.5 nm, an had a better
uniformity of the device layer thickness compared to the commercial SOI wafers. Furthermore, the
fact that the device layer can be fabricated in any thickness rather than being chosen from a stock
list of ﬁxed thicknesses, gives signiﬁcantly more freedom regarding the design of the CMUTs.
The characterization of the CMUTs showed the expected parabolic CV-graph for the functioning
CMUTs. From the ﬁrst run, it was seen that the plates fell oﬀabove the contact pads during thinning
in many cases. This problem was reduced in the second run, as a thicker top plate was used. This
did, however, introduce another problem which was a 7.5µm plate bending above the contact pads
for the bottom electrodes. Due to this bending, the last photo lithography process had ﬂaws, which
translated into short circuits at the bottom electrodes in many cases. This was the main contributor
to a low yield of 109 non short circuited elements of 624 on one wafer. Of the 109 non short circuited
elements, 17 elements had an max current of ≈10−14A during IV-measurements, and thus had no
contact. Furthermore, some of the CMUTs short circuited during the CV measurement after the
IV-measurements already at voltages between 20-30 V. In total, the actual yield was ≤14%. The
electrical characterization of the working CMUTs, showed the expected parabola CV graph, with
an oﬀ-set voltage less than 1 V. The deviation in minimum capacitance of elements with the same
design was on the order of 0.1 pF, which suggested good uniformity on chip level.
A design and a process for fabrication of row-column addressed anodic bonded CMUTs were also
developed in this project. A number of design variations were included in this, to be able to develop
the fabrication process and design even further after characterization. Normally, one can not electri-
cally characterize an entire row of CMUTs without short circuiting or all the columns overlapping
with this row. To address this problem, two of design variations included short circuiting of all
rows, or columns which subsequently could be removed by dicing so that a regular row-column array
remained. Another variation was diﬀerent electrode conﬁgurations, all with signiﬁcantly reduced
size compared to the linear arrays to reduce the plate bending above the pads. Finally, a new set of
alignment marks were tested as well, which proved to be useful for a faster alignment process during
the second photo lithography process of the fabrication. All together, a good fabrication process
for the bottom substrate was found, however, the anodic bonding and thinning steps caused some
problems. This was due to the chuck and top electrode in the wafer bonder, which both had particles
on them that eﬀectively ruined the bond. Therefore, the row-column addressed CMUTs could not
survive thinning of the handle layer, and the processing had to be stopped. The full fabrication of
67
==PAGE:76==
68
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION & OUTLOOK
Figure 6.1: To the left, a sketch of the the prope setup on two neighbouring top electrodes. To the right
the equivalent circuit for the system inside the red box. This system will repeat itself for the entire length of
the electrodes. C1 and C2 are identical, as these represent capacitances for the individual CMUT cells. As
seen, with this type of measurement setup, theoretically, one should see half of the capacitance of a single
column.
the row-column addressed anodic bonded CMUTs design is still yet to be completed.
In future projects, it would be interesting to ﬁrst and foremost complete the proposed fabrication
process with a clean chuck and top electrode in the wafer bonder. This would potentially create a
stronger bond, which could survive the thinning process. Secondly, the thinning process itself could
be optimized. A combination of dry etching and wet etching for thinning should be tested to see
whether this produces a higher yield. As a part of the characterization, it is proposed to compare
the capacitances obtained from CV-measurements of rows and columns of the short circuited designs
with that of two probes contacting two neighboring rows of columns. In a project carried out by
Kitty Steenberg with supervision from prof. Erik V. Thomsen, it was shown that with this type
of measurement, capacitances of approximately half of a single row or column was measured. This
can theoretically be explained by a current running through two capacitors in series, as illustrated
in Figure 6.1. The capacitances C1 and C2 are identical and consists of a sum of parallel coupled
capacitors (the individual CMUT cells). Thus one can write
Ccolumn = n · C1
(6.1)
Where Ccolumn is the capacitance of an entire column, n is the number of CMUT cells within each
column and C1 is the capacitance of each CMUT cell.
Whether the current running through this ideal system is dominating or other currents from other
paths between the two neighbouring elements is yet to be conﬁrmed. A comparison between these
could be interesting, as one potentially could avoid having to short circuit elements to be able to
characterize rows and columns.
Another interesting experiment could be to tune the stress inside the poly-Si device layer.
The
IHMSOI wafers used in this project were annealed to lower the stress inside the thin poly-Si layer.
Instead, one could create a tensile stress on purpose, which not only could help with the plate bending
above the electrode pads, but also could increase the pressure output. A tensile stress would stretch
==PAGE:77==
69
out the top plate similar to a drum skin on a drum, and therefore increase the center frequency. To
compensate for this, the dimensions of the CMUT cells could be increased, thus providing basis for
higher pressure output while maintaining the desired center frequency. To do this in a consistent
manner, one needs to control the environment inside the LPCVD furnace, where poly-Si is deposited,
and an initial test of stress in the thin ﬁlm versus processing temperature should also be made to
have reference points.
==PAGE:78==
70
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSION & OUTLOOK
==PAGE:79==
Appendices
71
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Row-column designs
Figure A.1: Linear test elements with same CMUT dimensions as the 190+190 design
73
==PAGE:82==
74
APPENDIX A. ROW-COLUMN DESIGNS
Figure A.2: Linear array of test elements with same length as a rows and columns
==PAGE:83==
75
Figure A.3: Test elements with the possibility to measure the resistance through the bottom electrode by
contacting the bottom electrode pad in each end of the element.
==PAGE:84==
76
APPENDIX A. ROW-COLUMN DESIGNS
Figure A.4: 16+16 design with short circuited top electrode.
==PAGE:85==
77
Figure A.5: 16+16 center connection design with 100µm × 100µm electrode pad
Figure A.6: 16+16 center connection design with 150µm × 150µm electrode pad
==PAGE:86==
78
APPENDIX A. ROW-COLUMN DESIGNS
Figure A.7: 16+16 center connection design with wall electrode pad
==PAGE:87==
79
Figure A.8: 16+16 standard design with 100µm × 100µm electrode pad
==PAGE:88==
80
APPENDIX A. ROW-COLUMN DESIGNS
Figure A.9: 16+16 standard design with 150µm × 150µm electrode pad
==PAGE:89==
81
Figure A.10: 16+16 standard design with wall electrode pad
==PAGE:90==
82
APPENDIX A. ROW-COLUMN DESIGNS
Figure A.11: 190+190 center connection design with 100µm × 100µm electrode pads. This was the only
electrode pad design used for the 190+190 arrays
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Process ﬂow
83
==PAGE:92==
Process flow title 
Revision 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
Contact email 
Contact person 
Contact phone 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
Magnus Galsgård 
Petersen 
+4540476237 
Labmanager group 
Batch name 
Date of creation 
Date of revision 
 
RCABCMUT 1 
 
 
 
Not confidential 
File name: Process_flow_RCABCMUT 
Page 1 of 7 
 
Objective 
Batch name: RCABCMUT 
The purpose of the project is to fabricate Capacitive Ultrasonic Transducers using an anodic bonding process via a 
homemade SOI wafer. 
 
 
 
Substrates 
Substrate 
Orient. 
Size 
Doping/type 
Polish 
thickness 
Box 
Purpose 
# 
Sample ID 
Silicon  
<100> 
4” 
n (Phos.) 
DSP 
350±15µm 
 
Top plate 
25 
ON538-1 
Boron 
glass  
 
4” 
p (Boron.) 
DSP 
500±10µm 
 
Bottom plate 
25 
IB548 
Comments: 
  
 
84
APPENDIX B. PROCESS FLOW
==PAGE:93==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
 
Not confidential 
File name: RCABCMUT 
Page 2 of 7 
 
Contents 
1 
Preparation for Bottom electrode fabrication .................................................................................................................... 4 
1.1 
Wafer selection ................................................................................................................................................................. 4 
1.2 
Dehydration ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
2 
Cr deposition as masking layer for cavity etch ................................................................................................................... 4 
2.1 
Cr deposition by E-beam evaporation ............................................................................................................................... 4 
3 
Lithography process  1 – Cavities pattern ........................................................................................................................... 4 
3.1 
Spin coating ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
3.2 
Exposure ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4 
3.3 
Develop ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4 
3.4 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
3.5 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
4 
Cr mask etch ...................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
4.1 
Cr etch ............................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
4.2 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
5 
Cavity etching .................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
5.1 
Cavity etch ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
5.2 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
5.3 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4 
6 
Removal of masking layers ................................................................................................................................................. 4 
6.1 
Resist strip        Resist strip wet bench             Time: 10 min with ultrasonic agitation ...................................................... 4 
6.2 
Inspection         Dektak XT                                  Measure depth of cavities ......................................................................... 4 
6.3 
Cr removal        Cr etch 18 in beaker                Time: 5 minutes ......................................................................................... 4 
6.4 
Inspection         Optical microscope ................................................................................................................................... 5 
6.5 
Inspection        Dektak XT ................................................................................................................................................... 5 
7 
Lithography process 2 – Bottom electrode ......................................................................................................................... 5 
7.1 
Dehydration    250C Oven           Time: 5 hours .................................................................................................................. 5 
7.2 
Spin coating       Gamma-UV       Thickness: 2µm ............................................................................................................... 5 
Resist: AZ nLOF 2020 ...................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
7.3 
Exposure            MA6-2 aligner   Mask: Bottom electrode................................................................................................. 5 
Time: 11 seconds ............................................................................................................................................................................ 5 
Intensity: 11 mJ/cm2 ....................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
7.4 
Development   TMAH-developer   Recipe: 60s PEB @110 + 60 s SP development ........................................................... 5 
7.5 
Inspection         Optical microscope ................................................................................................................................... 5 
8 
Bottom electrode metal ..................................................................................................................................................... 5 
8.1 
Deposit Cr/Au .................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
8.2 
Lift-off ................................................................................................................................................................................ 5 
8.3 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
8.4 
Inspection of cavities ......................................................................................................................................................... 5 
9 
Cleaning before wafer bonding .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
9.1 
Cleaning-RCA ..................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
9.2 
Cleaning-Piranha ............................................................................................................................................................... 5 
10 
Wafer bonding ................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
10.1 
Anodic bonding.................................................................................................................................................................. 5 
10.2 
Bond inspection ................................................................................................................................................................. 6 
10.3 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
11 
Handle and box layer etching ............................................................................................................................................. 6 
11.1 
Poly-Si layer ....................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
11.2 
Oxide etch ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
85
==PAGE:94==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
 
Not confidential 
File name: RCABCMUT 
Page 3 of 7 
 
11.3 
Si etch ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6 
11.4 
Oxide etch ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
11.5 
Cleaning-Piranha ............................................................................................................................................................... 6 
12 
Top electrode deposition ................................................................................................................................................... 6 
12.1 
Deposition Al ..................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
13 
Lithography – top electrode ............................................................................................................................................... 6 
13.1 
Coat wafer ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
13.2 
Exposure ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6 
13.3 
Develop ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6 
13.4 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 6 
13.5 
Bake resist ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
14 
Etch – Top electrode .......................................................................................................................................................... 7 
14.1 
Al etch ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7 
14.2 
Inspection .......................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
15 
Etch - Bottom electrode access .......................................................................................................................................... 7 
15.1 
Device layer etch ............................................................................................................................................................... 7 
15.2 
Resist strip ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7 
 
 
 
86
APPENDIX B. PROCESS FLOW
==PAGE:95==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
 
Not confidential 
File name: RCABCMUT 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
Fabrication process for bottom plate: 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
1 Preparation for Bottom electrode fabrication 
Bottom electrode wafers 
1.1 Wafer 
selection 
Wafer box 
Use the dedicated vacuum tweezer across the A-
furnace stack  
IB548 
1.2 Dehydration 
Oven 250C 
Place borofloat wafers in a metallic cassettes. 
Time: ≈24h 
All borofloat wafers used for 
Bottom.  
2 Cr deposition as masking layer for cavity etch 
All Bottom electrode wafers 
2.1 Cr deposition 
by E-beam 
evaporation 
Temescal 
Recipe: Cr 
Deposition rate: 10 Å/s 
Final thickness: 150nm  
All borofloat wafers. 
 
3 Lithography process  1 – Cavities pattern 
All Bottom electrode wafers 
3.1 Spin coating 
Gamma UV 
AZ 5214E positive resist 
2.2 µm with HMDS 
Recipe: 3421- DCH 100mm 5214E 2.2 um HMDS 
1 dummy wafer: 3421- DCH 100mm 5214E 2.2um 
Cleaning wafer: 0400 100mm Coater Clean 
Clean spinner nozzle and run 
the dummy wafers 
 
3.2 Exposure 
MA6-2 
aligner 
Mask:  Cavity 
Exposure dose: 110 mJ/cm2 
Exposure time: 10 s 
Intensity: 11 mW/cm2 
 
3.3 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
Recipe: 1004  
 
3.4 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern 
 
3.5 Inspection 
Dektak XT 
Check height, write it down 
 
4 Cr mask etch 
All Bottom electrode wafers 
4.1 Cr etch 
Cr etch 18 in 
beaker 
Cr etch 18  
Time: 1:30-2:00 min 
Easy to see when etch is 
finished as glass will be clear 
4.2 Inspection 
Dektak XT 
Check height, write it down 
 
5 Cavity etching 
All Bottom electrode wafers 
5.1 Cavity etch 
BHF plastic 
beaker 
Etch rate: ≈24nm/min 
Etch time: 24 min 
Target depth: 570 nm 
 
5.2 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check  for defects 
 
5.3 Inspection 
Dektak XT 
Measure depth of the cavities 
This measurement is not 
precise due to variation in 
thickness of resist. It does 
provide an indication. 
6 Removal of masking layers 
All Bottom electrode wafers 
6.1 Resist strip        Resist strip wet bench             Time: 10 min with ultrasonic agitation       
6.2 Inspection         Dektak XT                                  Measure depth of cavities 
 
6.3 Cr removal        Cr etch 18 in beaker                Time: 5 minutes                                              Wafers need to be 
completely transparent when 
done 
87
==PAGE:96==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
 
Not confidential 
File name: RCABCMUT 
Page 5 of 7 
 
6.4 Inspection         Optical microscope 
See if pattern is good, and 
see whether all Cr is gone 
6.5 Inspection        Dektak XT               
Final measurement of depth 
7 Lithography process 2 – Bottom electrode 
 
7.1 Dehydration    250C Oven           Time: 5 hours 
 
7.2 Spin coating       Gamma-UV       Thickness: 2µm  
                                                                 Resist: AZ nLOF 2020 
 
7.3 Exposure            MA6-2 aligner   Mask: Bottom electrode 
                                                         Time: 11 seconds 
                                                         Intensity: 11 mJ/cm2 
Contrast in this step is not 
very good. Good alignment is 
critical 
7.4 Development   TMAH-developer   Recipe: 60s PEB @110 + 60 s SP development 
 
7.5 Inspection         Optical microscope 
Check that pattern is well 
defined inside cavities. Use 
dark field to make edges 
more visible 
8 Bottom electrode metal 
 
8.1 Deposit 
Cr/Au 
Temescal 
Recipe: CrAu 
Final thickness Cr: 20 nm 
Cr deposition rate: 5 Å/s 
Final thickness Au: 150 nm. 
Au deposition rate: 10 Å/s 
In this step, the Au thickness 
can be adjusted to fit a 
specific gap height. 
8.2 Lift-off 
Lift-off wet 
bench 
Time: 1 hour 15 min 
Time for this step can vary a 
lot. It is important that all 
metal outside of the cavities 
gets removed 
8.3 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
 
See whether alignment is ok, 
or if metal have been 
deposited outside of cavities 
– this will result in short 
circuits 
8.4 Inspection of 
cavities 
Dektak XT 
Measure depth of cavities with gold 
 
 
Fabrication process for anodic bonding of top and bottom plate: 
Step Heading 
Equipment 
Procedure 
Comments 
9 Cleaning before wafer bonding 
All wafers 
9.1 Cleaning-
RCA 
RCA bench 
 
All top plates  
9.2 Cleaning-
Piranha 
Piranha in a 
beaker 
Sulfuric acid H2SO4 (98%) and peroxide H2O2 
(30%) in the ratio 4:1. 
Temp: 70-80C 
Time: 2 min 
All bottom plates 
First add H2SO4 into a glass 
beaker then add H2O2. 
10 Wafer bonding 
All wafers 
10.1 Anodic 
bonding 
Wafer bonder 2 
Recipe: Anodic bonding CMUT 800 V no center 
pin (Depending on top electrode, ask Rune) 
 
Voltage steps: -300V, -600V, -800V 
Bottom and top plate directly 
from the cleaning process. 
Have Rune change the top 
electrode to a clean one 
before this step  
88
APPENDIX B. PROCESS FLOW
==PAGE:97==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
 
Not confidential 
File name: RCABCMUT 
Page 6 of 7 
 
10.2 Bond 
inspection 
PL mapper 
Use reflectance mapping for mapping voids after 
bonding.  
(optional step if necessary) 
All bonded wafer – normally 
voids can be seen with the 
naked eye 
10.3 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
 
Look for defects, also near 
edges 
11 Handle and box layer etching 
All bonded wafers 
11.1 Poly-Si layer 
Si KOH etch 3 
Etch top not useable device layer away. 
Process 4: 90C 
Time: 5-10 min for a thickness of 3 µm 
Time depends on the 
thickness of the poly-Si on 
the IHMSOI wafer.  
 
11.2 Oxide etch 
BHF 
Etch of not useable box layer. 
Etch rate: 75 nm/min.  
Etch time: 6 minutes for a thickness of 400 nm 
Time depends on the 
thickness of the oxide on the 
IHMSOI wafer. Surface is 
hydrophobic when etch is 
done 
 
11.3 Si etch  
Si KOH etch 3 
Etch handle layer away 
Etch rate: 1.7µm/min 
Etch time: 3 hours 24 minutes for a thickness of 
350 µm 
This is a critical step of the 
process flow. It is 
recommended to check how 
the wafers look regularly 
during the step 
11.4 Oxide etch 
BHF 
Etch of not useable box layer. 
Etch rate: 75 nm/min.  
Etch time: 6 minutes for a thickness of 400 nm 
Time depends on the 
thickness of the oxide on the 
IHMSOI wafer. Surface is 
hydrophobic when etch is 
done 
 
11.5 Cleaning-
Piranha 
Piranha in a 
beaker 
Sulfuric acid H2SO4 (98%) and peroxide H2O2 
(30%) in the ratio 4:1. 
Temp: 70-80C 
First add H2SO4 into a glass 
beaker then add H2O2. 
12 Top electrode deposition 
All bonded wafers 
12.1 Deposition 
Al 
Temescal 
Recipe: Al 
Final thickness Al: 400nm 
Deposition rate Al: 10 Å/s  
The deposition rate looks to 
be fluctuating during 
deposition, however, the 
metal layer looks fine-. 
13 Lithography – top electrode 
All bonded wafers 
13.1 Coat wafer 
Gamma UV 
Resist: AZ MiR 701 positive resist 
Recipe: 1411- DCH 100mm MiR 701 1.5 um 
HMDS 
HMDS doesn’t work on Al 
Clean spinner nozzle and run 
the dummy wafers. 
Spin coat as soon as possible 
after metal deposition 
13.2 Exposure 
MA6-2 aligner 
Exposure mode: Hard contact. 
Exposure dose:  189.2mJ/cm2. 
Exposure time:  17.2s 
Intensity: 11 mW/cm2 
Mask: Top electrode. 
Align from backside. 
13.3 Develop 
TMAH UV 
developer 
Recipe: 3001 DCH 100mm PEB60s@110C+SP60s 
 
13.4 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope 
Check pattern and alignment marks. 
 
 
89
==PAGE:98==
Process flow title 
Rev. 
Date of revision 
Contact email 
Anodic bonded CMUT  
V1 
 
magnusgp@hotmail.com   
 
Not confidential 
File name: RCABCMUT 
Page 7 of 7 
 
13.5 Bake resist 
Hotplate 
110 degrees for 2 minutes 
 
14 Etch – Top electrode 
All bonded wafers 
14.1 Al etch 
Aluminum etch 
Etch of pure aluminum. 
Etch rate: ≈100nm/min. 
Etch time: 4min. 
 
14.2 Inspection 
Optical 
microscope  
Inspection of aluminum etch. 
Control in microscope if all 
metal is gone. 
15 Etch - Bottom electrode access  
All bonded wafers 
15.1 Device layer 
etch 
ASE 
Dry etching of access to bottom electrode. 
2+2 cycles, recipe: shallorc 
Use Al carrier – no backside cooling 
 
 
15.2 Resist strip 
Plasma asher 1 
Photoresist stripping 
Pressure: 0.8-1.0mbar. 
Gas: Mixture of O2 and N2. 
Power: 1000watts. 
Time: 30-45 min 
 
 
 
90
APPENDIX B. PROCESS FLOW
==PAGE:99==
Appendix C
Project Plan
91
==PAGE:100==
Project plan
w1
w2
w3
w4
w5
w6
w7
w8
w9
w10
Litterature reading
Initial ABCMUT fabrication
Measurements 
Mask design
Row-Column ABCMUT fabrication
Report writing
w11
w12
w13
w14
w15
w16
w17
w18
w19
w20
w21
w22
Main focus
w8
Finish section about initial ABCMUT fabrication study
Side work
w14
Finish Row-Column fabrication 
Deadline
w22
Hand-in deadline
Litterature reading:
Find at least two relevant articles each week
92
APPENDIX C. PROJECT PLAN
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1] Jan A. Dziuban. Bonding in Microsystem Technology, volume 24. Springer, 01 2006.
[2] M. Bellaredj, G. Bourbon, V. Walter, P. Le Moal, and M. Berthillier. Anodic bonding us-
ing soi wafer for fabrication of capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers. Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, 24(2):025009, 2014.
[3] Thomas Lehrmann Christiansen. Micromachined ultrasonic transducers for 3-d imaging. Ph.d.
thesis, 2015.
[4] C. S. Desilets, J. D. Fraser, and G. S. Kino. The design of eﬃcient broad-band piezoelectric
transducers. IEEE Transactions on Sonics and Ultrasonics, 25(3):115–125, May 1978.
[5] Masayoshi Esashi. Wafer level packaging of MEMS. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengi-
neering, 18(7):073001, may 2008.
[6] J A Gallego-Juarez. Piezoelectric ceramics and ultrasonic transducers. Journal of Physics E:
Scientiﬁc Instruments, 22(10):804–816, oct 1989.
[7] U. Gossner, T. Hoeftmann, R. Wieland, and W. Hansch. Wafer-level manufacturing technology
of glass microlenses. Applied Physics A, 116(2):415–425, Aug 2014.
[8] A. Heuberger H. Seidel, L. Csepregi and H. Baumg¨artel. Anisotropic etching of crystalline silicon
in alkaline solutions: I. orientation dependence and behavior of passivation layers. Journal of
the Electrochemical Society, 137(11):3626–3632, November 1990.
[9] A. Heuberger H. Seidel, L. Csepregi and H. Baumg¨artel.
Anisotropic etching of crystalline
silicon in alkaline solutions: Ii. inﬂuence of dopants. Journal of the Electrochemical Society,
137(11):3626–3632, November 1990.
[10] Ole Hansen. Course no.:33355, lecture 11: Energy methods. University Lecture, 2018.
[11] U. Hashim, A. H. Azman, R. M. Ayub, M. K. M. Arshad, S. Norhaﬁezah, M. F. M. Fathil, M. Z.
Kamarudin, R. Adzhri, and M. N. M. Nuzaihan. Comparison of deal grove model growth rate
with dry thermal oxidation process for ultra-thin silicon dioxide ﬁlm. 2015 2nd International
Conference on Biomedical Engineering (ICoBE), pages 1–4, March 2015.
[12] Jun He, Fang Yang, Wei Wang, Li Zhang, Xian Huang, and Dacheng Zhang.
Electric
current characteristic of anodic bonding.
Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering,
25(6):065002, may 2015.
[13] Lotte Agnete Hendriksen.
Anodic bonded capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducer.
Master thesis, 2018.
[14] H. Henmi, S. Shoji, Y. Shoji, K. Yoshimi, and M. Esashi. Vacuum packaging for microsensors
by glass-silicon anodic bonding. Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 43(1):243 – 248, 1994.
93
==PAGE:102==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15] Sophie Kargo. Fabrication and characterization of capacitative micromachined ultrasound trans-
ducers. Bachelor thesis, 2018.
[16] M. F. la Cour, T. L. Christiansen, J. A. Jensen, and E. V. Thomsen. Modelling of cmuts with
anisotropic plates. In 2012 IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium, pages 588–591, Oct
2012.
[17] M. F. la Cour, T. L. Christiansen, J. A. Jensen, and E. V. Thomsen. Electrostatic and small-
signal analysis of cmuts with circular and square anisotropic plates. IEEE Transactions on
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, 62(8):1563–1579, August 2015.
[18] Byeungleul Lee, Seonho Seok, and Kukjin Chun. A study on wafer level vacuum packaging for
MEMS devices. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 13(5):663–669, jun 2003.
[19] Nicolai Anker Michaelsen. Wafer bonded capacitative micromachined ultrasonic transducers.
Master thesis, 2018.
[20] S. Olcum, K. O˘guz, M. N. S¸enlik, F. Y. Yamaner, A. Bozkurt, A. Atalar, and H. K¨oymen.
Wafer bonded capacitive micromachined underwater transducers. In 2009 IEEE International
Ultrasonics Symposium, pages 976–979, Sep. 2009.
[21] Magnus G. Petersen. Fabrication of an anodic bonded cmut array. Special course, 2019.
[22] J. L. Sanders, X. Wu, O. J. Adelegan, M. M. Mahmud, F. Yalcin Yamaner, C. M. Gallippi, and
¨O. Oralkan. A row-column (rc) addressed 2d capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducer
(cmut) array on a glass substrate: Preliminary results.
In 2018 40th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pages 1–4, July
2018.
[23] A. S. Savoia, G. Caliano, and M. Pappalardo. A cmut probe for medical ultrasonography: from
microfabrication to system integration. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and
Frequency Control, 59(6):1127–1138, June 2012.
[24] Erik V. Thomsen, Kasper Reck, Gustav Skands, Christian Bertelsen, and Ole Hansen. Silicon as
an anisotropic mechanical material: Deﬂection of thin crystalline plates. Sensors and Actuators
A: Physical, 220:347 – 364, 2014.
[25] R.F. Wolﬀenbuttel and K.D. Wise. Low-temperature silicon wafer-to-wafer bonding using gold
at eutectic temperature. Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 43(1):223 – 229, 1994.
[26] F. Y. Yamaner, S. Olcum, H. K. Oguz, A. Bozkurt, H. Koymen, and A. Atalar. High-power
cmuts: design and experimental veriﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics,
and Frequency Control, 59(6):1276–1284, June 2012.
[27] F. Y. Yamaner, X. Zhang, and ¨O. Oralkan. A three-mask process for fabricating vacuum-sealed
capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers using anodic bonding. IEEE Transactions on
Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, 62(5):972–982, May 2015.
[28] Xiao Zhang, Feysel Yalcin Yamaner, and Omer Oralkan. Fabrication of vacuum-sealed capac-
itive micromachined ultrasonic transducers with through-glass-via interconnects using anodic
bonding. Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, 26(1):7790859, 226–234, 2017.
