==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author:  Nicolas MONGOIN (s182092) 
Supervisor: Philip HALDING (Assistant Professor) 
Co-supervisor: Kristian  HERTZ (Professor) 
 
Technical University of Denmark - Department of Civil Engineering 
21th June 2019 
Msc Thesis: 
Development of an arch roof structure based on the  
Pearl-Chain concept 
==PAGE:2==
i 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I wish to express my sincere gratitude to my two supervisors, Philip S. HALDING and Professor 
Kristian D. HERTZ, for the guidance, the help and the time they took for me throughout this Master 
Thesis. Thanks to them, I could discover the Pearl-Chain Technology and the Super-Light Structures 
topic but also have a good first approach of the research field.  
I would like to thank my classmates of the course “11050: Super-Light Structures” who brought me 
others perspectives and point of views about the use of such structures. 
Finally, a special thanks to my parents, friends and flatmates for their supports and encouragements 
during my years of study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
ii 
 
Abstract 
The Pearl-Chain Technology, invented by professor Kristian Hertz, is currently developed by ABEO 
to bring an innovative building method for arch bridges. It consists in the assembly of several 
straight segments, maintain together using post-tension. Arch structures proved themselves in lot of 
old buildings and we are now able to understand their benefits. In this way, this Master Thesis aims 
at enhancing their interests in contemporary projects by providing examples of applications and 
design according to the Eurocode. It consists only in a theoretical approach. 
Firstly, an analytical study over the behaviour of arches was conducted. It has been shown that, in a 
building project, circular shape presents advantages compared to other shapes. Then, a range of loads 
configurations and their impact on section forces and support reactions were studied. A comparison 
between these results and Finite Elements Models (FEM) was made. The deviations are negligible, 
which contributes to make arches suitable for contemporary projects. The main criteria influencing 
the behaviour of arch-shaped structure are the rise-to-span ratio 

  and the static system. It was 
noticed that the smaller 

 is, the less the others geometric choices have influence. A static system 
called 2-hinged arch was chosen. This static system presents the advantage of having some plastic 
strength without creating too much stiffness. Furthermore, it is easier to build than a 3 hinges system 
and does not transmit bending moments to others structure. However, arches main drawbacks are 
that two signs of bending moments are observed and also that they induce horizontal support 
reactions. 
Secondly, a hypothetic high-rise building project, with a complex of arches and prestressed slabs 
supporting a vaulted roof was created. In this building, concrete arches, which span 17m, support a 
glass roof offering a view on the city of Copenhagen. They are built using the Pearl-Chain 
Technology and each consists in 12 straight elements. A Finite Elements Model, on Robot Structural 
Analysis, was used to determine the section forces in a 2D arch. Each element is able to support both 
positive and negative moments. The arches and the slabs below are designed to work together in 
order to avoid the transmission of horizontal forces to the rest of the rest of the building. Indeed, the 
floor is made of prestressed Super-Light Decks, a technology developed by ABEO as well, which 
combines light and regular concrete. It is considered that the horizontal loads from the arch are 
withstand as unloading compression in the slabs. Another interesting aspect is that one slab is in fact 
three distinct elements; assemble in one, using the Pearl Chain Technology. In this way, the position 
of the joints is adjusted to match a level of stress decided by the designer. 
Finally, a second hypothetic project was created but not investigated as much as the first one. In this 
case, arches span 30m and support a flat roof used as a helicopter landings area. In this project, an 
alternative to sandwich arches is investigated. Indeed the structure consists in several “T” shaped 
sections of various heights assemble together using the Pearl-Chain Technology. The rise to span 
ratio is really small but it has been proven that the structure is theoritically behaving like an arch. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
iii 
 
Table of content 
 
 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 1 
A - 
Background ............................................................................................................................. 1 
B - 
Pearl-Chain principle............................................................................................................... 1 
C - 
Super-Light Structures concept ............................................................................................... 3 
D - 
Scope ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
CHAPTER I. 
Introduction to arches and parametric study ..................................................... 5 
A - 
Several categories of arch ....................................................................................................... 5 
B - 
Structural influence of the shape ............................................................................................. 7 
C - 
Structural influence of the static system ............................................................................... 10 
D - 
Utilization of FE models ....................................................................................................... 12 
E - 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 13 
CHAPTER II. 
Arch-Slab Complex Design ......................................................................... 14 
A - 
Project description ................................................................................................................. 14 
B - 
Arches Design ....................................................................................................................... 21 
C - 
SL- Decks Design.................................................................................................................. 27 
D - 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 33 
CHAPTER III. 
Approach to Long Span Arches ................................................................... 34 
A - 
Introduction to the project ..................................................................................................... 34 
B - 
FEM results and structural details ......................................................................................... 37 
C - 
Design of a 2D arch ............................................................................................................... 39 
D - 
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 40 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 41 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
1 
 
Introduction 
A - Background 
Nowadays, in a world where “green technologies” are expected to face the urgency of climate 
change, the building sector has to react.  The construction field is considered as responsible of 18 % 
of the CO2 emissions in the world [1]. Among these 18 %, for a high energy-efficiency building, 
around 30 % is due to the construction and the materials themselves [2]. A first approach to reduce 
buildings environmental footprint could basically consist in using as less materials as possible. To 
follow this purpose, it is necessary to understand the strong points and the weakness of the current 
construction materials. Arch shaped structure seems really relevant since they carry loads mainly 
through normal forces. Moreover, a large part of the ruins remaining from the Antiquity are fully or 
partially made of an arch shape which enhance their strength. 
However, in the recent construction industry, arches are less and less observed. Most of time, this is 
due to the high cost of such a structure. Building process has became more and more efficient to 
erect straight shape, prefabricated or cast on-site, while arches generally require complex 
scaffolding, time and lot of work forces. This automatically increases the cost of the structure and 
lead to a rectangular landscape in our cities. Though, architects tend to propose more and more 
curved shape in their building, which create the need of developing an efficient process to build it. 
So that, it could be assumed that if arch structures could be reintroduced in an economically 
competitive version, they are likely to be used in a lot of contemporary projects. In this way, ABEO, 
in collaboration with DTU, is developing a process called “Pearl-Chain Technology” which consists 
in the assembly of several prefabricated elements using post-tension. Now combining the Super-
Light concept and the Pearl-Chain technology, it is possible to create big structures such as arch 
bridges. This was described and experienced by Philip S. Halding [3], who conducted several full-
scale tests.  As well, the same concept could be applied for building and so reintroduce the use of 
arch shape. This could lead to cheaper and more eco-friendly construction. This Master thesis aims at 
describing and detailing the whole design process of arch structures on the top floor of a building. 
B - Pearl-Chain principle 
The Pearl-Chain Technology was invented by professor Kristian Hertz [4] and is patented [26]. It 
basically consists in assembling precast elements along a cable in a given shape. Post-tension wires 
are led through every segment and then pulled in order to maintain all these elements together. As a 
result, it is possible to build vaulted shapes, such as arches, just by using straight elements (see 
Figure 1). Thus, the Pearl-Chain Technology removes most of the hindrances to set curved shapes in 
buildings. Indeed, neither complex scaffoldings are required, nor one-use mould; the work force cost 
is reduced given that most of the work is made in factories. We could also consider precast curved 
elements, but they are more complicated to design, to fabricate and to transport, which contributes to 
make the simplicity of the Pearl-Chain principle one of its assets. 
==PAGE:6==
2 
 
 
Figure 1 : Principle of Pearl-Chain Technology 
The post-tension cables follow the theoretical curved shape and are perpendicular to the ends of the 
element. In this way, they only induce normal forces. The joints between elements are cast before the 
post-tensioning process and are non-reinforced. They allow an even transmission of the section 
forces from one element to another. That contributes to make a Pearl-Chain structure works as one 
single element. Regular concrete could be used to fill out the joint but Halding [3] consider a special 
mortar having characteristic compressive strength of 80Mpa. This is relevant as the joints needs to 
have a sufficient strength while the post-tension is applied and does not have so much time to harden 
due to building site limitations. The post-tension might be combined with pre-tensioning strands in 
the elements, resulting only in compression forces in the structure. Some tensile forces due to 
external loads could appear, but they are taken as unloaded compression. In this way, the structure is 
always compressed which ensure its stability and avoid the appearance of cracks. 
Generally, when the elements are delivered on site, they are laid on the side one next to the other 
(Figure 2-1). Then, the joints are cast and post-tension (2) is applied after a sufficient time of 
hardening. The final structure is lifted up thanks to a crane (3) and set on place (4).  
 
 
 
Figure 2 : Steps of assembly [3] 
 
==PAGE:7==
3 
 
In this way, Pearl-Chain technology opens new architectural and structural possibilities. Since arches 
or cupolas are often the optimal shape to support a load, the Pearl-Chain Technology can lead to the 
cheapest and the most resource saving solution. 
C - Super-Light Structures concept 
The Super-Light concept is born in 2010 and has been invented by professor Kristian Hertz. Contrary 
to most of the new technologies in the construction field, the Super-Light structures are made of 
materials we have been using for centuries and thus we know well: concrete and steel. It is only the 
design approach which is different as it consists in determining where high strength material is 
necessary and can be used according to its strong points. A normal concrete (ρ=2400 kg/m3 ; fck 
=55Mpa)  is generally  combined with a lightweight aggregate concrete (ρ=700 kg/m3 ; fck =3 Mpa). 
Basically, the light concrete fills out the shape, transmits the loads to the strong concrete and protects 
it from fire or instability as buckling. 
This concept, as described by Hertz [4], could be applied to a large scale of structural elements such 
as columns, with a high strength core surrounded by a light concrete layer. As the light concrete does 
not have a structural role, it can be shaped to fit architectural purposes. However, probably for 
practical reasons, mainly SL-Decks are now sold by ABEO. These SL-Decks, as shown Figure 3, are 
composed by light concrete blocks at the bottom which will be used as a permanent mould to cast the 
regular concrete. In horizontal elements, prestressing is generally used in order to work only in 
compression when the element is loaded. To reach this purpose, the number of pre-tensioning strands 
and post-tensioning cables is chosen.   
 
 
Figure 3 : 3D views of SL-Decks [27] 
==PAGE:8==
4 
 
Thus, the SL-Deck sections are alternatively a ribbed section where the stresses are concentrated and 
a full concrete section where the stresses are equally distributed. In the length direction, 20 cm of 
regular concrete is set at the beginning and the end of each element in order to assure uniformly 
distributed constraints and higher strength near the connections areas. In the transversal direction, 
reinforcements are necessary to withstand the transversal bending moments which is expected to be 
small considering the width of the elements. 
Finally, Super-Light structures are considered as a green technology. Indeed, as claimed by Hertz 
[6], the CO2 emissions are between 30% and 50% less than a traditional concrete structure. Also, 
this technology allows to design lighter buildings, which contribute to reduce the cost and the 
ecological footprint of the foundations as well.  
D - Scope 
Before this Master Thesis, the Pearl-Chain concept had already been applied to arch structures in the 
context of real project. However, it involved bridges structure in most of the cases. Therefore, the 
main criterion of success is to adapt this technology to buildings regulation and design an arch 
structure at the top-floor of a high-rise building. In this purpose, several questions needed to be 
investigated:  
• What are the different types of arch and how to distinguish them? 
• How does an arch structure theoretically behave? 
• Why is the Pearl-Chain Technology suitable for arches? 
• How does the Eurocode deal with arches to define the loads applied onto a structure? 
• What are the requirements to fulfil to design a structure according to the Eurocode? 
Based on these questions, the following objectives were identified:  
1) Developing an Excel tool to have access to a various range of arches behaviour 
2) Understanding how they behave, their strengths and weaknesses. 
3) Gathering information about the Pearl-Chain Technology and the Super-Light concept 
4) Applying the Eurocode and the National Danish Annexes to arch structures 
5) Creating and designing an arch structure suitable for a building 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
5 
 
CHAPTER I. Introduction to arches and parametric study 
The chapter 1 is an introduction to the arch static system. Arches have been used for centuries 
because their shape allows to support the loads mainly through normal forces in the whole structure. 
Despite this clear benefit, they are almost never used in contemporary projects and so engineers are 
less and less effective to design them. In this context, the first part of this Master Thesis consists in 
creating an Excel tool to determine the section forces in a various range of arch. This tool and the 
theoretical calculations are detailed in Appendix 1. During this study, lot of different cases were 
investigated and some of them are presented in this chapter. Also, the results from an analytical 
calculation will be used and then compare to a Finite Elements Model. The final purpose of this 
chapter is to determine the type of arch suitable in the projects of Chapter II and III. 
A - Several categories of arch 
This part aims at describing the different types of arches in terms of theoretical shape and static 
system.  stands for the maximal height under the arch and  represents the horizontal span. 
1) In terms of geometry 
In the course 11050 and in the literature [29], three main types of arches were enhanced. The purpose 
of this part is to describe the geometric differences between them and establish their main 
advantages. 
First, the catenary shape is the optimized shape for a structure supporting only its self-weight. The 
catenary shape is linked to the notion of funicular and is mathematically defined as a hyperbolic 
cosine function. A catenary arch resisting only its own weight has neither bending moment nor shear 
forces acting, but only normal forces. Its interest seems limited as a structure is almost never 
resisting this load case. 
Then, the parabola shape comes from a parabolic mathematical function. Only three points of the 
curved need to be known in order to determine the final shape of the structure. This type of shape is 
suitable to support only a vertical linear uniform load. 
Thirdly, the circular shape consists in a part of a circle and therefore has a constant radius. It seems 
to be the most convenient shape both on a practical and structural point of view. A circle segment is 
the optimized shape to resist an addition of self-weight and vertical uniform loads which fits more to 
the reality of a project.  
There are much more types of arches that are not described above and will not be investigated. Some 
of them are commented on the website “HomeStratosphere” [18] 
As shown on the Graph 1, these three geometries are close to each other when the rise to span ratio, 

, is small and become distinct when 

 increases. The differences can be noticed mainly in the 
middle of each symmetric part. 
==PAGE:10==
6 
 
 
Graph 1 : Shapes of arches depending on H/L 
It can be assumed that the geometry has an influence on the section forces considering a high rise to 
span ratio arch, which is generally the case in a building.  Furthermore, as explained by Halding [3], 
shape detailed optimization could so be useful only for an arch with a high rise to span ratio; 
otherwise the geometry are so close that it is not worth it. 
2) In terms of static system 
In the literature, three types of static system can be enhanced for arch structures as shown Table 1.  
Table 1: Types of arch 
 
The three hinges system is isostatic while the two others are hyperstatic. A fourth type of arch called 
“one hinge arch”, with fixed end and a hinge at the crown could also be studied but will not be 
investigated as it has seldom been built. 
About the 3 hinges arch, it is important to notice that, using Pearl-
Chain Technology, the hinge at the crown shall be in the middle of 
one element for practical reasons. Halding tested different concrete 
hinges, inspired by Mesnager’s hinge (see Figure 4).  You can see 
more about the test results, the dimensions and the reinforcements in 
such a hinge in Halding’s paper [21]. 
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
catenary
cercle
parabola
3 hinges arch 
2 hinges arch 
Hingeless arch 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Mesnager and Freyssinet 
hinge 
H/L =1/3 
H/L =1/4 
H/L =1/8 
==PAGE:11==
7 
 
 
Then, the hinge at the springing can be made on two 
different ways. It could be the same type as described 
above, located in the first element. But, it could also 
consist in a mortar bed on which the arch structure is set 
(see Figure 5). If this mortar is deformed by the loads, the 
arch would be able to rotate in a certain limit.  
 
Halding [3] used the same geometry without mortar in the test of a shallow arch and noticed that 
when the arch is far from its failure point, the hinge acted more like a fixed connection. However, 
when the loads increase and the abutments remain in their elastic field, the arch is able to rotate. In 
this way, the mortar bed might allow the abutments to rotate when the arch is slightly loaded. 
 Later, in the part C, the advantages and inconvenient of each static system will be investigated 
3) In terms of erection process  
Concrete arches were cast on-site until the 1960s and the development of precast concrete. Back 
then, arch structures required a complex formwork; which is time consuming and expensive. Then 
various solutions were developed (see more in Halding’s paper [19]). However, each solution has a 
weakness. Some of them cannot span more than 20m; others are really complicated to assemble, 
leading to high labour cost as well.   
Using the Pearl-Chain Technology, it seems now possible to create arch shape more easily than 
before. Indeed, as they are assembled on the ground and then lifted up to their final position, a crane 
is not fully dedicated to that. Moreover, they are assembled on the ground, which decreases 
considerably all the safety problems and allows worker to move around the structure fastly.  
B - Structural influence of the shape 
This part aims at describing the influence of the geometry on a structural arch. Only two hinges 
arches are considered in order to isolate the influence of the type of arch and the rise to span ratio  

 
on the bending moments and on the support reactions. 
1) On the bending moments 
Only the behaviour under a vertical point load of 10kN is studied in order to create bending moments 
whatever the theoretical shape. For a shallow arch, we can expect that section forces are close to 
each other since there are a few differences in the geometry. The results for a rise to span ratio equal 
to 1/8 are shown on the Graph 2 below: 
Figure 5 : Section view of one end
==PAGE:12==
8 
 
 
Graph 2 : Bending moment comparison - H/L = 1/8 
Moreover, on the Graph 3 below (

 =1/2) we can notice differences in bending moments between the 
geometries. These differences occur where the geometries are the farthest from each other. For 
example, the circular geometry is different from the two others at a distance L/4 of the end of the 
arch; that induces a difference of local slope in the moments diagram despite the values are close to 
each others. 
 
Graph 3: Bending moment comparison - H/L = 1/2 
 
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
16,00
Bending moment [kN.m]
Postion x [m]
Catenary
Parabola
Cercle
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
16,00
Bending moment [kN.m]
Postion x [m]
Catenary
Parabola
Cercle
==PAGE:13==
9 
 
Generally, the bending moments in the parabola and catenary shape are close whatever the rise to 
span ratio, which is explained by the similar geometry (see Graph 1). That enhances the importance 
of choosing the suitable shape when a deep arch is studied. Also, it could be noticed that there is a 
significant difference of moments between the two 

 ratio for the circular shape. 
2)  On the horizontal reactions 
Moreover, the 

 ratio also has an influence on the horizontal reactions, which must be taken into 
account in the design process. Indeed, in a building, the loads are aimed at being transmitted 
vertically. The Graph 4 was established with a vertical uniform load of 10kN/m. considering a fixed 
span, the higher the arch is, the smaller the horizontal reactions values are. 
 
Graph 4 : Horizontal reaction evolution 
This is explained by the geometry as well. Indeed, in an 
arch, there are mainly normal forces that are transmitted 
to the supports with an angle α towards the vertical (see 
Figure 6).The smaller 

 is, the higher α is and so the 
higher the horizontal reactions () are. 
It can also be noticed that the theoretical shape influence 
grows when 

 increases. For a ratio of 1/2, the circular 
shape induces 16% less than the two other shapes. The 
reason is a difference of local geometry. However the 
shape influence is not significant until a 

 ratio of 1/3. 
Generally, in a building, horizontal forces are not sought. To balance these horizontal reactions a 
steel cable or a tie, connecting the 2 ends of the arch, and acting only in tension could be set. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0    
1/8
1/4
3/8
1/2
5/8
Horizontal reaction [kN]
Rise-to-span ratio H / L 
Cercle
Parabola
Catenary
Figure 6: Static sketch of a support reaction
==PAGE:14==
10 
 
C - Structural influence of the static system 
In this study, a circular arch with a rise to span ratio of 1/3 (L = 15m; H = 5m) is considered. Only 
the three static systems presented in the Table 1 are analyzed through their section forces. For every 
load configuration, the normal and the shear forces are close to each other, so that only bending 
moments are commented 
 The Graph 5 below shows the bending moments of each static system with a uniform vertical load 
of 10kN/m applied:  
 
Graph 5 : Bending moments comparison –q=10 kN/ml 
Withstanding a vertical linear load, the 2 hinges system reduces the moments near the connections 
(compared to the 3 hinges) but induces 2 signs of bending moments in the structure. Close to the 
supports, the hingeless system presents a high bending moments inducing a high level of stress. That 
induces high section forces in the possible adjacent structure leading to complex connections which 
is not sought as connections are often the weak point of a structure. 
Then, a point load of 150kN was applied at 1/4 of the span, which is the most unfavourable situation 
according to Halding [3]. The bending moments obtained are shown below on the Graph 6: 
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
16,00
Bending moment [kN.m]
Position x [m]
3 hinges
2 hinges
Hingeless
==PAGE:15==
11 
 
 
Graph 6 : Bending moments comparison –F=150 kN 
In this load case, the bending moments values obtained are between three and five times more 
important than with a linear load; despite that the overall load is the same. A similar behaviour is 
observed in the three structures. This type of loading, non-symmetric, and concentred at L/4 is the 
one creating the highest bending moments in an arch structure. 
Then, the behaviour under a horizontal linear load is also investigated, as this type of loads has to be 
considered in a building, often due to the wind. The bending moments diagrams under a load of 10 
kN/m are shown on the Graph 7 below: 
 
Graph 7 : Bending moments comparison –q=10 kN/ml 
When arches have to withstand a horizontal linear load , the hingeless system induces almost only 
positive bending moments while the two others static system lead both to positive and negative 
bending moments. The maximal values of bending moments are almost the same. In this way, a 
hingeless system is more suitable as the arch section could be designed to withstand mainly this 
positive bending moments, using post-tensioned SL-Decks for example. 
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
16,00
Bending moment [kN.m]
Position x [m]
3 hinges
2 hinges
Hingeless
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
0,00
2,00
4,00
6,00
8,00
10,00
12,00
14,00
16,00
Bending moment [kN.m]
Position x [m]
3 hinges
2 hinges
Hingeless
==PAGE:16==
12 
 
To conclude, the three static systems present benefits and drawbacks. However, an isostatic system is 
not influenced by creep, shrinkage and temperature effects contrary to hingeless arches which are 
very stiff. Moreover, it has been experienced by Halding [3] that in the case of a concentrated load 
located at ¼ of the span, plastic hinges are formed in the loaded and non-loaded side of the arch, 
respectively due to negative and positive moment. Testing a pearl-chain shallow arch, the point load 
can still be increased of 6% after the appearance of the first plastic hinge. Jain claimed that the loads 
can be increased from 50% to 100% between the formation of the first plastic hinge and the collapse 
of the structure [5] in the case of a traditional reinforced concrete structure. Considering that, a 
hyperstatic system seems to be more suitable for an arch structure as it is still stable despite the 
formation of one plastic hinge; introducing safety in the structure.  
D - Utilization of FE models 
Finite Elements Models are always used by structural engineers because they are usually a simple 
and fast way to work on a project. So that, it could be interesting to estimate the possible differences 
between an analytical calculation and FEM results for an arch system. 
The analytical calculation is based on a perfect, mathematically defined, circular shape while the FE 
model is an approximation made of several straight segments, which fits to the reality of the 
construction. As shown before, the geometry has an impact so that variations in the section forces are 
expected. Approximations due to the discretization were investigated using a 6, 12 and 100 segments 
arch and compared to the analytical approach. In order to demonstrate and quantified the deviations 
of section forces between these two approaches, a simple load case was investigated. A hingeless 
arch of 5 meters high, that spans 15 m (H/L = 1/3) and supports a vertical point load of 10 kN was 
studied. The results obtained are available in Appendix 2. 
The results enhance the fact that the more Finite Elements are in the model, the closer to the 
analytical it is. Basically, this is due to the shape, getting closer to the perfect circular shape when the 
number of FE increases. That shows again the dominant aspect of the geometry in arches. Despite, 
the deviations for 100 FEM are still higher than expected, especially concerning shear forces. These 
deviations are due to the software itself. Indeed, on a very local scale, the circular shape is not 
perfectly followed as the geometry accuracy is limited to the centimetre on Robot. In this way, near 
the crown, some segments are horizontal instead of being a little bit inclined (see Figure 8 on 
Appendix 2) which lead to small mistakes in results displayed. 
Thus, it is now assumed that an optimal balance between number of elements and satisfying results 
exists. The Graph 8 below was established by modelling 6, 12, 18, 24, 48, 70 and 100 Finite 
Elements arches. The relative bending moments deviations were calculated for each model. 
==PAGE:17==
13 
 
 
Graph 8 : Bending moments deviation depending on the number of elements 
The optimal number of elements seems to be around 18. This might be due to the fact that, using 18 
elements, it is possible to remain close to a perfect circular shape in terms of geometry and to follow 
a continuous geometry with the same angle from one element to another. Once again, that enhances 
the benefits of a geometric optimization for deep arches. Using the Pearl-Chain Technology, a 
compromise between assembling a lot of segments and fitting the analytical shape has to be found. 
E - Conclusion 
To conclude, in this part, the different types of arches, in terms of shape and static system, were 
introduced. Several parameters were investigated in order to determine their influence and to 
understand the behaviour of an arch structure.  
It has been enhanced that the geometry is a key factor, and particularly the rise to span ratio. 
However, in this Master thesis, a deep arch is required in the Chapter II so that a theoretical shape 
needs to be chosen. It was noticed that a circular arch looks suitable for most of projects since it 
supports a linear load in addition to its self-weight with inducing only compression forces. Also, it 
leads to smaller horizontal reactions than the two other shapes, which is an important criterion. 
However, it was noticed that the circular arch might introduce a significant additional moments when 
the 

ratio is high 
Regarding the static system, a two hinges arch seems to be a good compromise. It provides plastic 
strength to the structure without inducing the negative consequences of a very stiff structure. Also, it 
is the easiest static system to build considering that no concrete hinge is necessary at the crown and 
no strongly reinforced connections have to be cast on-site. 
Finally, as stated by Halding [3], it was experienced that it is a point load at ¼ of the span that leads 
to maximal values of bending moments.  
 
 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
0
20
40
60
80
100
Realtive deviation / analytical
Number of elements in the FEM
==PAGE:18==
14 
 
CHAPTER II. Arch-Slab Complex Design 
In this part, the design of a structure that consists in a arch-slab complex at the top floor of a building 
is described. This chapter is the main part of this Master Thesis .The structure investigated is made 
of deep arches which work together with the flooring structural system. The author created his own 
project, in which the arches support a vaulted roof. The location is assumed to be in Copenhagen, 
Denmark. This structure combines the Pearl-Chain Technology and the Super-Light concept. The 
first step consists in determining how to apply the Eurocode to such a structure in order to design it. 
Moreover, no horizontal loads are sought to be transmitted to the storey underneath. As detailed 
later, the slabs support the horizontal forces coming from the arches as unloaded compression. In this 
chapter, the design process is followed, starting from an architectural view until connections details. 
A - Project description  
This part aims at giving an overall view of the final project. In this purpose, general informations are 
given at the beginning. Then, the process leading to the final design is described. Finally, the 
assumptions taken regarding the calculations and the loads determination are detailed. 
1) Introduction to the project 
a) Generalities 
Six similar arches are located at the top floor of a building and support a glass roof covering the 
entire floor as shown on the Figure 7.  The slabs supporting the arches are Super-Light Decks of 2,4 
m wide so that the distance between 2 arches is 4,8 m. The Super-Light Decks and the arch structures 
work together in order to transmit only vertical forces to the structure underneath. 
 
 
Figure 7: 3D views of the project 
==PAGE:19==
15 
 
The arches span 17,5 m and the clear space in the middle is 5,3 m, as shown on the Figure 8.The 
global volume of this floor creates a comfortable space, inspired by The Sky Garden in London 
(Figure 7), used as a public space like an inner park, a bar and a panoramic restaurant.  
 
Figure 8 :2D dimension of an arch 
In the lower floor, columns are located under each arch end to carry the loads throughout the 
building until the foundations. These columns are not designed in this study. Moreover, it is assumed 
that the slabs are simply supported by the columns. 
b) Structural choices  
The materials features are available in Appendix 3. 
- Arches: 
A circular shape is chosen, with a rise to span ratio close to 1/3. The arch is divided in 12 straight 
elements in order the post-tension wires to fit the curved centreline. Among them, the two elements 
at the end of the arch are called abutments. The numbering of the joints (in red) is shown Figure 9. It 
could be noticed that a circular shape allows the designer to divide the arch in several identical 
straight segments as the radius is constant. That makes the design process easier. Concerning the 
static system, a two hinges arch is chosen and the edges of the SL-Decks prevent arches from 
horizontal displacement.  
 
Figure 9 : Numbering of elements 
Several sections were investigated in order to reach a suitable solution. They are listed below on the 
Table 2. The ratio  
	

   is introduced with   , axial stiffness, and   bending stiffness. The 
higher , the more prestressing forces are necessary to reach a certain level of stress. The smaller 
 is, the more the post-tension eccentricity and the bending moments have a deep effect on the 
stress. Thus, it seems more convenient to use a section with a low 
	

 ratio as eccentricity cannot be 
==PAGE:20==
16 
 
adjusted since the post-tension duct is following the theoretical circular centreline. All the three 
solutions on the Table 2 below were fully designed during the design process and the solution 3 was 
chosen. 
Table 2 : Arch - Studied sections comparison 
 
Each segment is 1,95 m long, 30cm wide and 45cm high. The post tension duct goes up and down 
through the element respecting the covering requirements. The ends of elements are inclined of 6° in 
order to be perpendicular to the post-tension duct following a circular centreline. 
  
 
 
A mortar is cast between the abutments and the 
supports (see Figure 11). This mortar must resist the 
loads transmitted by the arch, in terms of 
compression strength. Also, its E-modulus shall be 
low to ensure that strains occur when the arch tends 
to rotate. The abutments are not designed in this 
study but an example for a bridge is detailed by 
Halding [3]. They are generally strongly reinforced. 
 
 
 
Figure 10 : Section view and view from the side of the section 3
Figure 11: Arch - Slab connection
==PAGE:21==
17 
 
- Super-Light Decks :  
The structural flooring system is composed by SL-Decks of 32cm high. This choice was made in 
order to cross longer span and to allow the use of post-tension. In this way, no columns or beams are 
required in the lower floor, except the ones under the arches. SL-Decks support horizontal forces, 
which come from the arches, as unloaded compression. Thus, the combination of an arch structure 
with a horizontal element creates a stable system transmitting only vertical forces to its support. 
Several configurations of SL-Decks were investigated in this study. They are described on the Table 
3 below: 
Table 3 : SL-Deck- technical solutions comparison 
 
The solution 3 seems to be the more suitable. Thus, Pearl Chain Technology is used as well to 
assemble 3 SL-Decks in one element. The main advantage is that the designer can decide the section 
forces acting on the joints by modifying the elements length. That enhances another interest of the 
Pearl-Chain Technology. 
In the final design, each element has 5 light blocks per section (see Figure 12) to reduce the weight 
of the structure and provide good acoustic and fire performance. At least 20 cm of normal concrete 
are cast at the end of each slab in order to ensure an even transmission of the section forces from one 
element to another. Two post tension cables are used. That avoids a high concentrated load in the 
middle of the section and therefore spread the loads in all the section. 
 
Figure 12: Section view of a SL-Deck 
==PAGE:22==
18 
 
2) Calculation assumptions and method 
Several assumptions were made along the design process:  
• Only one arch is investigated, leading to a 2D model and calculations. 
• The section forces are assumed to be perfectly transmitted from one element to an other 
• The sections has to be symmetric to avoid the negative transversal effects  
• The static system is defined with two perfect hinges at the ends of the arch 
• Only compression is allowed in the structure  
• A linear elastic calculation is performed 
• The effects of prestressing forces are added according to the superposition principle as long 
as the materials remain in their linear elastic field 
• Temperature loads are not considered  in a first approach 
• Creep and shrinkage due to the pre-tensioning have fully occurred when the post-tensioning 
is realized 
• The phenomenon of plastic hinge is not taken into account 
Basically, during the design, several parameters are modifiable to reach the intended behaviour of the 
structure:  
• The dimensions of the section 
• The prestressing forces by adjusting the numbers and the level of stress in each cable 
• The position of each prestressing cable in the respect of practical requirements such as 
minimal covering or minimal space between two strands. 
The joints are usually designed first in the process. Indeed, the level of constraints cannot be adjusted 
using pre-tensioning strands. Once the post-tension is designed in the joints, the verification of the 
elements through an iterative process starts. Pre-tensioning strands can be added at a certain level in 
the element to avoid tension when the structure is loaded. It is necessary to drawn section sketches of 
the whole element all along this process to ensure that the covering requirements and the minimal 
distance between prestressing wires is respected in all the element length. The Figure 13 below 
locates the sections to verify in a hypothetic Super-Light element: 
 
Figure 13 : Verified sections location 
The sections 2, 3, 5 and 6 are at the interfaces between the ribbed sections and the plain concrete 
sections. They are sometimes critical since the neutral axis is moving up from S2 to S3 and moving 
down from S5 to S6 while the post-tension is at the same height. If a element is made only with 
normal concrete, only the section 1, 4 and 7 needs to be verified 
==PAGE:23==
19 
 
The compression forces are carried by the normal concrete and the stress is calculated according to 
the formula below: 
 = 
 ∗ + 
 ∗ ∗ 
With AE defined as the axial stiffness, EI as the bending stiffness, z as the distance between the 
neutral axis and the height where the stress is calculated (z > 0 to the top) 
The verification of each section is based on the “Design Diagram Method”. A design diagram shows 
the extreme couples of normal forces and bending moments (N ; M) the section can resist. These 
“resisting points” are then connected together to create a “resisting border». Then, using Robot, 
couples of section forces acting on the structure while it is loaded are determined and positioned on 
the graph. A design diagram is established at each limit state for all the section in the element. If all 
these points are contained in the resisting border, the section is able to support the loads with only 
compression and considering the limited value of stress. 
3) Loads determination 
a) Loads on a 2D arch 
Four types of loads are taken into account and can be distinguished in the 2D arch study. These loads 
were inputted in Robot Structural Analysis. They are spread as much as possible on the left part of 
the arch in order to induce maximum values of bending moments. Also, the way that external loads 
are applied onto the structure depends on how the arch and the roof are connected. Thus, the loads 
are assumed to act linearly on the arch; each arch supporting a width of 4,8 m. All the details about 
loads calculation are available in Appendix 4. 
-  Permanent loads “G”: 
The permanent loads are basically the loads always acting on the structure since the erection is 
completed. In this case, they are the sum of the arch self-weight and the roof covering weight.  
-  Imposed loads “Q”: 
The imposed load value is found in the Eurocode 1 [8]. The arches support a not accessible roof 
except for maintenance and repair (Category H). According to the Danish National Annex [9], only a 
point load Qk of 1,5 kN has to be considered. This load was compared to the weight of a maintenance 
robot, which could be used to clean the roof, and is more than twice higher. This point load is set at 
1/4 of the span. 
-  Wind loads “W”:  
The wind load value was determined according to the part concerning the vaulted roof in the 
Eurocode 1 [10]. The most unfavourable situation is when the wind is blowing along the arch. Three 
pressure zones can be distinguished. This wind case creates a positive pressure on the part facing the 
wind while a negative pressure acts on the opposite side. More details about the assumptions and the 
calculation can be found in Appendix 4. 
==PAGE:24==
20 
 
-  Snow loads “S”:  
According to the Eurocode 1 [11 – 12], a drifted snow load arrangement is considered as it induces 
positive bending moments on the left part and negative moments on the right side. More details 
about the assumptions and the calculation are available in Appendix 4. 
b) Load s on a 2D slab 
Regarding the SL-Deck, only a permanent load and an imposed load are considered. More details 
about permanent and imposed loads are available in Appendix 5. 
- Permanent loads “G”: 
Once again, the permanent loads are calculated based on the geometry of the Super-Light slabs. A 
screed of 5 cm and floor tiles are taken into account. For the Super-Light part, the weight is around 
8,5 kN/m2 while it is around 15kN/m2 for the part made only of normal concrete (close to the 
connections with arch and column).  
-  Imposed loads “Q”: 
The imposed loads have been determined according to the Eurocode and the National Danish Annex. 
The room supported belongs to the Category C5 so that a surface load of 5kN/m² is considered. 
c) -  Loads combination and stress requirements: 
The load combination is made trough Robot, according to the Danish National Annex for a 
consequent class CC3. More details about the combination and the requirements at each Limit State 
are available in Appendix 6. 
For each Limit State, the software displays an envelope curve for N, T and M. An envelope curve 
shows the maximum and the minimum section forces values for a structure considering all the 
possible combinations. This lead to values called “N+”, ”N-“, “M+” and “M-“. Then every possible 
couple of value is set on the design graph to check if the section is strong enough to support them. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
21 
 
B - Arches Design 
In this part, the process relative to the design of a 2D arch according to the Eurocode is detailed. 
First, the choices made further to the analysis of the FEM results are explained. Secondly, section 
details and section views are given. Then, the design results such as design diagrams are shown and 
analysed. Finally, more investigations are made, notably about the thermal loads. 
1) FEM Results  
The section forces obtained through Robot are available in Appendix 7. The Figure 14 and 15 show 
the section forces at ULS : 
 
Figure 14 : ULS - Normal forces 
       
 
Figure 15 : ULS - Bending moments 
As expected, most of the loads applied induce positive normal forces (compression), according to an 
arch behaviour. The normal forces are symmetric contrary to the bending moments. That was aimed 
as the arch was loaded with non-symmetric loads. Furthermore, it can be noticed that the maximal 
positive moments is twice higher than the negative. Using that, the post-tension wires centreline is 
moved under the neutral axis in order to support positive moments with less prestressing forces. In 
this way, pre-tensioning strands are not necessary in the whole arch. 
2) Section features 
 The Table 5 and 6 show respectively the features of the joints and the elements. It is important to 
notice that all the elements are the same. 
==PAGE:26==
22 
 
Table 4 : Joints features 
Section view 
Concrete 
Post-tension cables 
Section : 0,3 x 0,45 m² 
Normal concrete only 
 
7 strands of φ15,7 mm 
68% of  fp01k 
set at 25,5 cm from the top 
 
 
Table 5 : Elements features 
Section view 
Concrete 
Post-tension cables 
Section : 0,3 x 0,45 m² 
Normal concrete only 
 
7 strands of φ15,7 mm 
68% of  fp01k 
set at 20,5  cm from the top at the middle
set at 25,5  cm from the top at the ends 
The abutments are not detailed here but they generally consist in a bigger and strongly reinforced 
section. 
3) Sections verifications 
In this part, design diagram are established for each section in the elements .The sections at the ends 
(S1 and S7 on the Figure 13 p18) are identical to the joints; so that there design diagrams are the 
same as no pre-tension is used. 
The abutments are not designed in this study. 
- SLS: Quasi-permanent  
 
Graph 9 : Design diagram - Quasi-permanent 
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
M [kN.m]
N [kN]
Middle
End / Joint
from Robot
==PAGE:27==
23 
 
At the quasi-permanent state, 11 couples (N;M) are extracted from ROBOT and listed in Appendix 
7.It can be noticed that the ends and the joints are much more able to support positive bending 
moments. This is explained by the fact that the post-tension induces negative bending moment 
balancing the one due to the loads.  
Then at the quasi-permanent state, the deflection of the structure has to be verified. In this purpose, 
the actual deflection is determined using an equivalent section of the same inertia on Robot 
Structural Analysis. According to the Eurocode 2[16], the deflection has to be less than 

 = 
.
 =
3,5  !.The post-tension effects are not taken into account as a first approach. The deflection 
obtained on Robot is 1,6 mm (see Figure 19 in Appendix 7). As expected, the maximal deflection is 
at the crown and way under the limit. The limit deflection in the Eurocode is made for beams, which 
are usually supporting mainly bending moments and no normal forces.  
-  SLS: Characteristic  
At the characteristic state, 44 couples (N;M) are extracted from ROBOT and listed in Appendix 7. 
We can expect that the most unfavourable combinations are the ones combining the minimal normal 
forces and the maximal bending moments, as compression is favourable to the arch stability. Below, 
the Graph 10 shows the design diagram  
 
Graph 10 : Design diagram - Characteristic 
All the points are contained in the design graph, so that the section is verified according to the SLS 
characteristic requirements. 
- Ultimate Limit State (ULS)  
At ULS, the following design graph (Graph 11) is established. The same method as above is used to 
compare all the possible couples of section forces to the resisting border. 
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
M [kN.m]
N [kN]
Middle
End
from Robot
==PAGE:28==
24 
 
 
Graph 11: Design diagram - ULS 
At the ULS, the collapse of the structure is, in most of the cases, due to the yield of the tendon. 
Finally the shear forces resistance has to be verified. We can expect that no reinforcements are 
needed as most of the loads are carried through normal forces. Using the Eurocode [22], the arch can 
resist shear forces until 50,1kN without any reinforcement in the area where there are the less normal 
forces (most unfavourable section. The maximum shear forces acting are 49,8kN in the most 
compressed area, so that the arch is able to support shear forces without any specific reinforcement. 
Moreover, it can be noticed that most of the shear forces are caused by the wind, acting 
perpendicularly to the neutral axis. ).More details about this calculation and the results obtained 
trough Robot are available in Appendix 7 
4) Further investigations 
a) Thermal loads 
In this part, the reaction of arches to variations of temperature is investigated. It was found [20] that 
when the temperature grows, the material tends to expand. As the span is considered as constant, 
temperature changes induce a modification of the rise. In this way, when the temperature grows, the 
rise tends to increase.  Moreover, an additional horizontal reaction in necessary at the support to keep 
the span fixed. According to FINLAY [23], this horizontal reaction can be calculated using the 
equation below: 
" = #" ∗$% ∗
& '()* ∗1



 
With α, coefficient of linear expansion, taken as equal to  10- °/-. The term #" ∗$% ∗ refers to 
the horizontal displacements if the arch was free to move. At the denominator, L is the span of the 
arch, y the height of the point and s the distance along the arch To calculate the reaction in the 
structure, the actual geometry is taken into account and twelve segments are considered instead of a 
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-500
0
500
1000
1500
Med[kN.m]
Ned [kN]
forces from robot
Middle
End / Joint
==PAGE:29==
25 
 
perfect circular shape. Then, the horizontal reaction was calculated for different values of $%, which 
enhanced the linear variations of " depending on $%, as shown on the Graph 12 below: 
 
Graph 12 : Horizontal reaction depending on 0T 
Then, the temperature changes in the arch structure have been calculated according to the Eurocode 
[13-14]. The maximal ΔT obtained is 37,5 °C leading to  " = 1,8 kN. This horizontal reaction 
induces normal forces and bending moments, growing along the arch, due to the lever arm, until the 
middle. The details of the calculation are available in Appendix 8. The section forces graphs are 
shown below on the Graph 13 : 
 
Graph 13 : Section forces for ∆T=37,5°C 
The values above correspond to a growth of temperature. The contrary occurs when the temperature 
decreases. The normal forces are really small and correspond to about 4% of the normal forces 
induced by the snow loads. However, for the bending moments, temperatures are the second leading 
action after the wind so that they cannot be neglected in an arch  
y = 0,049x
0,00
0,50
1,00
1,50
2,00
2,50
3,00
3,50
4,00
0
20
40
60
80
Horizontal 
reaction [kN]
Δ T [°C]
-10,5
-8,5
-6,5
-4,5
-2,5
-0,5
1,5
3,5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
N [kN] or 
M [kN.m]
Position x [m]
N= Ht * cosϴ ; M= -Ht * y 
Normal forces
Bending moments
==PAGE:30==
26 
 
On the other hand, in the building described before, the location of the arches has a great role about 
temperatures changes. The arches are located under a glass roof and so are not in contact with air 
from outside. Then, considering the surface of glass and the configuration of the last storey, it seems 
logical that the glass panel radiation features need to be improved. Indeed, to avoid a greenhouse 
effect in this storey, the main part of the radiation energy shall be blocked by the glass and thus does 
not reach the arches. Then, as any new building, the quality of air is automatically controlled days 
and night. Generally, the variation remains under 7°C between summer and winter. Finally, the case 
in which a part of the panels need to be replaced can be considered. However, this replacement will 
never happen neither during a snowing day nor during a wind storm.  
In this way, the temperature loads still need to be considered for such a structure but more elements 
needs to be known, as the features of glazing on the roof. That requires a deeper study of the building 
and knowledge about energy in buildings. 
b) Interest of a Super-Light Arch 
In this part, the interest of using the Super-Light concept for the arch described above is tested. In 
this way, the different benefits related to Super-Light elements are considered. 
First, acoustic reasons are not meaningful as a major part of the ceiling is made of glass, which needs 
an acoustic approach. Then, the case of a fire is not really relevant. As the arch does not support any 
accessible area, there is no need to resist a fire more than 30min [15]. The last reason could be 
environmental. In this way, the CO2 emitted to fabricate the designed section above (0,3 x 0,45 mht) 
was estimated in the Appendix 9 and compared to a hypothetical arch very favourable. The results 
obtained shows that around 1,5T of CO2 are rejected for a concrete arch compared to1,7T for a 
Super-Light arch.  
Therefore, using the Super-Light concept does not seem relevant in this case. Generally, Super-Light 
technology would be efficient if the arch had a covering function. 
c) Bracing system and instability 
A bracing system is necessary to carry the horizontal loads acting perpendicularly to the arches axis. 
These loads are most of the time due to the wind. Bracings have to be taken into account in the 
engineering process but will not be designed in this study. They are usually hollow cylinder made of 
steel and are set in order to create a triangular grid which ensures the stability of the whole structure. 
Sketches are available in Appendix 10. 
Also, the bracing system and the IPE that connect arches together prevent them from buckling. This 
has to be considered as buckling might appear in structural elements with a high level of normal 
forces. 
 
==PAGE:31==
27 
 
C - SL- Decks Design 
In this part, the process relative to the design of a 2D SL-Deck according to the Eurocode is detailed. 
First, the construction choices made further to the FEM results are explained, including how the arch 
is supported by the SL-Decks. Secondly, sections features and section views are provided. Then, 
some points of the design calculation are analysed. Finally, connection details, such as the edges of 
the SL-Decks, are investigated. Only a 2D slab, supporting 2,4 wide, is investigated 
1) Final Geometry and its consequences 
There are only shear forces and bending moments acting in the slab, which behaves as a beam. On 
the Figure 16 the elements on the side are assumed to be 5,1m (around 1/4 of the span). The position 
of the joints is decided to match a certain level of section forces.  
 
Figure 16: Side view of the slab and numbering of sections investigated 
Concerning the edges in contact with the arch, the vertical reactions are assumed to be transmitted 
directly to the columns. The horizontal reactions at ULS have to be taken into account to design the 
SL-Decks. The resultant of the horizontal forces is considered as acting at 2/3 of the blocking 
element height. 
 
Figure 17 : Mechanical sketch of the connection 
In this way, two distinct cases are distinguished. : 
• Normal forces (-200kN) + Bending moments (-58 kN.m): since the horizontal forces are not 
transmitted at the level of the neutral axis (see Figure17 above); a constant negative bending 
moment is induced. This moment is unfavourable around the support and added to the 
external forces according to the superposition principle. 
==PAGE:32==
28 
 
• Normal forces (-200kN) only: the negative moment is not considered in the middle of the 
span, as it balances the positive value due to the external loads. In this way, the horizontal 
reactions are only unloading compression in the slabs.  
It has to be noticed that the edges are only 0,7m wide while the slab width is 2,4m. They are only 
punctual elements, which are used to support the arch. 
2) Sections features 
This part gives an overview of the section features. The section 2 (Table 7) belongs to the element 1 
on the side, while the section 6 (Table 8) belongs to the element 2 in the middle. As the loading is 
symmetric, the elements 1 and 3 (the two on the sides) are the same. Drawings for each section 
indicate on the Figure 16 above are available in Appendix 11. 
Table 6 
SECTION 2 : Element on the side 
 
Concrete 
Post-tension cables 
Pre-tension strands 
Section : 2,4 x 0,32 m² 
5 light blocks +Normal 
concrete 
2 x 19 strands of φ15,7 mm 
80% of  fp01k 
set at 17,5  cm from the top 
 
4 strands of φ12,5 mm 
80% of  fp01k 
2 set at 6 cm from the top 
2 set at 22 cm from the top 
 
Table 7 
SECTION 6 : Element in the middle 
Concrete 
Post-tension cables 
Pre-tension strands 
Section : 2,4 x 0,32 m²
5 light blocks +Normal 
concrete 
2 x 19 strands of φ15,7 mm 
80% of  fp01k 
set at 21,5 cm from the top 
 
8 strands of φ12,5mm 
2 set at 6 cm from the top (60%) 
6 set at 22,5 from the top (80%) 
 
The post-tension cables are at 17,5 cm from the top on the section 2 and are going down until being 
at 21,5 cm from the top on the section 3. Then the cables are straight until they reach the section 3 in 
the element 3. That increases the strength to positive moments near the middle and allows negative 
bending moments near the columns. 
==PAGE:33==
29 
 
3) Sections verifications 
The section forces obtained through Robot are available in Appendix 12. Only SL-Decks that 
support an arch are investigated, but the same prestressing can also be applied to the ones which do 
not. 
-  In terms of stress   
Tables summarizing the design verification at SLS and ULS are available in Appendix 13. 
In these tables, the boxes “Pre-tension only” refers to the step when the post-tension has not been 
applied yet. It is necessary to ensure that the ULS and the SLS-Char requirements are verified at this 
state. 
The boxes “Final” refers to the level of stress just after that the post-tensioning process is complete. 
The same verifications need to be done. 
Finally, the design diagrams refer to the time when the structure is set on place and all the loads are 
applied. Only parts of the diagram are shown as the section support a huge range of normal forces 
values because of its high axial stiffness. As well, this explains the important number of post-tension 
wires required in the element in the middle. 
It can be noticed that for the joints, the point (N=0; M=0) is not contained in the design diagram at 
SLS-Char. This point corresponds to the time where the structure is lying on the ground after the 
post-tensioning, which is a temporary situation. That is due to tension, at the top of the section, 
before the structure is set in place. It is assumed that if the tension appears temporary and remain 
under 1 Mpa (tensile strength; fct=3 Mpa), the concrete will not be damaged. Then, when the 
structure is set in place, tension disappears totally in the structure. 
At ULS, only the positive resisting bending moment 12was calculated, for the most unfavourable 
normal forces, and compared to the soliciting moment 32 . The shear forces verification was 
performed and shows that no reinforcements are required. Calculation details are available in 
Appendix 12. 
-  In terms of deflection   
As for the arch, the deflection of the SL-Decks is limited to = 3,5  ! . This deflection could be 
decomposed in two parts: 
• Positive : due to the loads applied on the SL-Deck 
• Negative : due to the negative bending moments induced by prestressing 
To evaluate the actual deflection at SLS-QP an equivalent section is created on Robot. This section 
has the same inertia as the Super-light section. The position of the post-tension cables is calculated to 
induce the same section forces in the equivalent section. The vertical deflection obtained is right 
under the limit value (3,49 cm < 3,5 cm) as shown Figure 18.  
==PAGE:34==
30 
 
 
Figure 18 : SLS-QP: deflection 
Then, the deflection under permanent loads only is investigated and shown on the Figure 19. The 
designer has to ensure that the final deflection is not negative (to the top). The values obtained are 
small (8,9mm) and remain positive at half the span. 
 
Figure 19 : Deflection under permanent loads 
4) Connection details  
This part aims at giving more details about the reinforcements in the edges of the SL-Decks 
a) Regarding the forces coming from the arch to the edge of the SL-Deck 
The collapse of the structure could happen by crack openings in the edges of the SL-Decks because 
of the loads brought by the arch. Two cases can be distinguished by the location of the cracks, as 
shown on the Figure 20 
 
Figure 20 : The two cracking modes of the edge 
Regarding the case 2, on the left, it could occur only if there is tension in the SL-Deck, which means 
that the compression has been unloaded entirely. This case has been verified before when we ensured 
that there is only compression forces in the SL-Deck, even near the support. In this way, only the 
case 1 was investigated. 
==PAGE:35==
31 
 
The calculation process, leading to the reinforcements below on the Figure 21 and 22, is detailled on 
Appendix 14. The diameter of the horizontal reinforcements is 14 and it is 12 for the vertical 
rebars.The Figure 23 shows that there is no interference between the reinforcements and the 
prestressing wires. 
 
Figure 21: Top view of the edge 
 
Figure 22 : Side view of the edge 
 
Figure 23 : Front section view 
==PAGE:36==
 
b) Regarding the corner
 
c) Regarding the reinfor
Steel reinforcements have to be 
helical reinforcements [30] ensure
out in the whole section of concr
the Figure 24 and in the Table 9 
ΦA [mm]
B  [m
430
490
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 24 : Corner reinfo
r at the edge 
Cracks are likely to 
despite the reinforceme
not have a structural 
aesthetical aspect of t
reinforcements have to b
shown on the Figure 23.
been designed, so that 
have a diameter of 8mm
They are made of stainle
respect the minimal cove
 
rcements around the post-tension 
set around the anchorage point of the post
e that the forces are not too concentrated and
rete. The dimensions of these helical reinfor
Figure 25 : Helical reinforcements 
Table 8: Helical reinforcement features 
Helical reinforcements 
m]
ΦC  [mm]
D  [mm]
N [mm]
fy
0
16
50
9,5
orcements location
32 
appear at the corner 
ents. These cracks do 
impact but harm the 
the structure. Specific 
be set at this corner, as 
. These rebars have not 
they are assumed to 
m and set every 10 cm. 
ess steel as they do not 
erings requirement. 
t-tension cables. These 
d contribute to spread it 
rcements are shown on 
 
yk [Mpa]
500
==PAGE:37==
33 
 
d) Others connection details 
Fixed end connections, as shown on the Figure 25, are necessary (in the length direction) to carry 
shear forces and bending moments from one element to another. Then, considering a 3D system 
Hammerhead joints (Figure 26) are connecting the SL-Decks together in the width direction. These 
connection details are not designed in this study. 
 
 
 
 
 
D - Conclusion 
To conclude, this roof structure has been successfully designed. The interest of arches is illustrated 
by the fact that more prestressing forces are required in the slabs to cross the same span; even in 
those which does not support an arch. Also, dividing the slabs in pearl-chain elements seems to be a 
good way to withstand various level of bending moments. 
The method provided by the Eurocode and the Danish National Annex to estimate the loads was 
analyzed. Although arches are seldom used in buildings, they are described specifically in the 
Eurocode. It is mainly the actions of the wind and the snow which is different from what is 
recommended for flat roof. The FEM enabled to have access to the section forces on a fast and 
accurate way, which enhances its interest regarding arches studies. Also, considering deep arches, 
the thermal loads effects has to be investigated since the bending moments induced can be 
significant. 
The constructive solutions investigated for the arches, and also for the SL-Decks, show that the 
Pearl-Chain Technology opens new structural possibilities. An interesting further study could be to 
explore the relation between the ratios 
4
5  and 
	

 to bring an optimal section which minimizes the 
materials needed depending on the section forces.  
Moreover, the combination between an arch and a horizontal structural system is relevant in 
buildings. As explained before, this combine work results in a structure transmitting only vertical 
forces to the rest of the building, which is sought. 
On the other hand, attention needs to be paid to details in such a structure. The designer has to ensure 
that the steel reinforcements in the abutments do not interfere with the prestressing cables. Also, the 
covering requirements described in the Eurocode can be a hindrance to use small sections arches. 
Figure 25: Fixed end connection [17]
Figure 26: Hammerhead joints
==PAGE:38==
34 
 
CHAPTER III. 
Approach to Long-Span Arches  
 
This part aims at giving an overview of another structure slightly investigated during this Master 
Thesis. This chapter is more a feasibility study than a real design. A flat roof used as a helicopter 
landing area is supported by 10 arches. Each arch is divided in precast segments assemble using the 
Pearl-Chain Technology.  The roof dimensions are 30 x 30 m which offers enough space to enable a 
helicopter to take off and also create a pedestrian circulation around. The building is assumed to be a 
high-rise building of 50m high, located in Copenhagen. The purpose of this chapter is only to give 
another example of an arch, which could be built using the Pearl-Chain Technology. In this way, 
only topics related to the Pearl-Chain Technology, such as the geometry, the loads, and how to 
support them using prestressing forces, were investigated. 
A - Introduction to the project  
This part aims at giving an overview of the structure studied in the Chapter III. First, the approach 
leading to the section used is explained. Then, the geometry, the static system and the loads applied 
to such a structure are described. 
1) Integration of structural concepts 
This final structural concept is the result of several ideas coming from the previous study and the 
course 11050 “Super-Light Structures” at DTU. The first aim was to create an arch structure crossing 
a long span and able to support a high level of external loads. In this purpose, a sandwich arch, as 
described by Hertz [19] is a suitable structure. However, it still requires in-situ casting for the upper 
slab; and the light concrete in sandwich does not have any structural role except transmitting the 
loads. At the same time, the influence of the 
	

 ratio was approached (see Chapter II – part A) and a 
structure shaped like “C” with a extra inverted “T” was designed (see Figure27) in a group project 
for the course 11050. The basic idea behind the inverted “T” is to increase the post-tension lever arm 
so that it balances more external bending moments. The Figure 27 below shows the steps of thought 
leading to the actual section of the structure. The first section on the Figure 27 combines a sandwich 
arch and a “T”-shaped section to keep the benefits from the eccentricity and to avoid the need of 
filling materials. However, the lower slab no longer seems necessary, which leads to the final 
solution, which obviously requires less material. Finally, Super-Light blocks are added in order to 
reduce the self-weight of the structure, which has a large impact on the section forces considering the 
long span. 
==PAGE:39==
35 
 
 
Figure 27: Steps and combination leading to the section 
 
The optimal section could consist in placing the Super-Light 
blocks closer to neutral axis, as shown Figure 28, providing fire 
protection and reducing the self-weight. However, this section is 
not practically feasible using the current Super-Light casting 
machine. 
 
2) Description of the structure 
The roof consists in 10 arches of 3m wide. Each arch spans 30 m, with a “T” section of 2m near the 
support and 58cm in the middle of the span. That offers a huge clear space underneath without any 
column or wall (Figure 29). 
 
Figure 29: Side view of the structure 
Figure 28 : Optimal section
==PAGE:40==
36 
 
The structure is assimilated to a 2 hinges arch, supported by a beam at each end connected to 
columns. The beams spread the horizontal loads, brought by the arch support reactions, on the 
columns; which carry them as vertical forces to the structure underneath. These elements are not 
designed in this study. The Figure 30 and 31 respectively show a zoom on the Arch-Column 
connection and a view from the front (view A on Figure 29) 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
Considering the neutral axis along the span, the structure is assimilated to a symmetric circular arch 
spanning 30m with a rise of 0,5m. Each arch is divided in 11 straight segments. The elements in the 
middle are 2m long while the ten others are 2,8m long which fit with the light blocks dimensions. 
Another solution is to merge the elements 5 and 6 in order to avoid the joint between them.  A post-
tension cable is running from one element to another following a perfect circular centreline as shown 
on the Figure 32.  
 
Figure 32: Side view of the structural elements 
 
The materials features are the same as the previous structure and are described in Appendix 3. 
3) Loads definition and combination 
Only a 2D system of 3m wide is investigated in the design process. Four types of loads are taken in 
this study. More details are available about the permanent loads, the imposed loads, the wind and the 
snow arrangements in Appendix 15  
Figure 30: Zoom on the connection
Figure 31: “View A” – Front view
==PAGE:41==
37 
 
The arch is acting as a flat roof supporting a helicopter landing area. Concerning the permanent 
loads, the eventual equipments relative to landing areas safety are neglected so that only the arch 
self-weight is acting. Regarding the imposed loads, the roof belongs to the Category K (roof 
accessible for special services) defined in the Eurocode [8-9]. Thus, several imposed loads have to be 
included: 
• The helicopter weight is represented by a point load of 60kN (Category HC2). A dynamic 
factor equal to 1,4 has to applied at the SLS characteristic and the ULS . 
• A load of 1,5 kN due to people around the helicopter  
• A walkway surface load, which is assumed as not being on the same slab as the helicopter 
(going to the transverse direction) 
As a first approach, the helicopter and the people weights are added and taken as one point load, 
which is a little bit unfavourable compared to what is recommended in the Eurocode. Two positions , 
at ¼ and ½ of the span, were considered for this load and the expected effects are described in 
Appendix 15.  
Regarding the loads combination, roofs Category K are not available in Robot, so that the loads 
combination was done manually, following the Danish National Annex. More details are available in 
Appendix 16. 
B -  FEM results and structural details  
This part aims at describing the structural behaviour of a 2D arch. First, the section forces are 
analyzed. Then the design method and the related calculations are detailed. 
1) FEM Results 
The Figure 33 and 34 respectively show the normal forces and the bending moments under 
permanent loads in the structure. It can be noticed that the structure truly behaves as an arch. Indeed, 
a major part of the external forces are carried through normal forces while the bending moments 
remain small compared to a beam (around 2 MN.m for the same load configuration) 
 
Figure 33: Normal forces due to permanent loads [kN] 
 
Figure 34: Bending moments due to permanent loads [kN.m] 
==PAGE:42==
38 
 
2) Design method and assumptions 
The same assumptions as detailed in Chapter II are taken. Once again, the design diagram method is 
used and each element is investigated individually. However, due to the symmetry of the structure, 
each element has to be able to resist the section forces corresponding to its numbering but to its 
symmetric as well (see Figure 35).  
 
Figure 35 : Numbering of elements 
3) Section details 
The Tables 10 and 11 show some features of the structure. The Table 10 is related to a section in the 
element 3, at the right limit of the light blocks. It can be noticed that no pre-tensioning strands are 
required 
Table 9: Section view of the element 3 
 
The Table 11 is a section view in the middle of the element 6, corresponding to the symmetry axis. 
The element 6 is both pre-tensioned and post-tensioned as it is the most solicited part of the arch. 
Table 10 : Section view of the element 6 
 
==PAGE:43==
39 
 
C - Design of a 2D arch 
1) Design calculations 
The section forces obtained through Robot and after combination are available at the end of the 
Appendix 16. Only a 2D arch of 3m wide is investigated here. 
-  In terms of stress   
In Appendix 17, you can find tables summing up the design verifications for the joints and for each 
element. As before, the purpose of these verifications is to ensure that the stress in the structure 
remain between the limit at SLS-QP and SLS-Char. At ULS, the maximum resisting moment 12 is 
compared to the moments acting on the structure,  32. 
Also, it is necessary to determine the level of stress when the structure is post-tensioned and still 
lying on the ground in order to ensure that it would not be damaged at this step of the erection. The 
stress values have to be compared with the limitations at SLS-Char. However, it is assumed that a 
few tension forces are acceptable as long as they remain inferior to 1,5Mpa (concrete tensile strength 
is 3Mpa). The section forces during the lifting of the structure have not been considered, but the 
same rules can be applied. 
The shear forces verification at ULS was not conducted. 
-  In terms of deflection   
The verification of the deflection under permanent load and at SLS-QP was not performed. 
2) Further investigations 
To complete the design process of this structure, several investigations are still to complete.  
First, the shear forces and the deflection verifications have to be done. Then, it is possible to 
optimize this structure in terms of dimensions, although, it could be thought that that the extra “T” of 
2m high near the support is an architectural wish. Also, thermal loads effects need to be estimated as 
these arches are directly exposed to variations of temperature. 
The connections between the arches and the beams/columns system is assumed to act as hinges. This 
has to be taken into account to design the exact connections but also to design the beams and the 
columns. The strut and tie method can be applied to determine if the columns are able to carry out 
the horizontal forces. As the previous structure in the Chapter II, abutments are probably required at 
the end of the arch since it is a zone with lot of forces. High level of horizontal reactions can be 
expected, notably due to the geometry. Steel cables could be used to support to avoid horizontal 
deflections in columns. These cables could be located just under the roof, between the T-drops.  
Eventually, the lifting process induces different section forces than the ones considered above. It has 
to be verified in terms of stress, that the lifting is not a critical step of the erection process. Moreover, 
it is necessary to ensure that a  3m wide arch  is not too heavy to be lifted up by a regular crane. 
==PAGE:44==
40 
 
D - Conclusion  
To conclude, the Chapter III is a first approach to a certain type of long span arches. Only the stress 
at SLS and ULS were investigated and the structure was able to meet these requirements. Combining 
several principles coming from the Pearl-Chain concept led to a new type of section. The basic idea 
is to lower the 
	

 ratio in order to have a better control over the stress in such a structure. The 
structure designed in this Chapter seems efficient as it cross a span of 30m supporting a helicopter 
landing area. Moreover, only a few post-tension wires are necessary, considering the dimensions of 
the arch. It is still possible to add pre-tensioning strands to deal with the lifting phase.  
The needs of abutments for such structures have to be investigated. Also the dimensions of the 
columns supporting these arches need to be very large, especially in the arch span direction, in order 
to transfer the loads to the rest of the structure.  
Architecturally speaking, an inverted “T” shaped arch could be a good option since it offers the view 
of arches and provide an important clear space as the “T” is only a punctual drop. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
41 
 
                                  Conclusion 
 
To conclude, through this Master Thesis, applications of Pearl-Chain Technology to arches were 
investigated. Arches remain unusual structures in buildings but it has been shown that they could be 
suitable and an even efficient way to support the loads. 
Generally, the geometric and static features of an arch structure need to take the loads applied into 
account. Arches structural behaviour is deeply dependent of the geometry. Thus, the rise to span ratio 
is a key factor to consider in the conception stage. Indeed, it has a non-negligible impact on the 
section forces but influences deeply the support reactions. Then, it has been demonstrated that the 
choice of the static system is also a key feature of arches in a global approach of a building. The 
connections between Pearl-Chain arches and others structure is still a topic that needs to be explored. 
It could be aimed to design an arch to resist only a certain type of section forces but the interaction 
between such a structure and the rest of a building must be an important criterion as well. Finally, the 
fact that they carry the loads mainly through normal forces makes the structural materials work 
according to their strength. This is really relevant in an ecological approach. However, the main 
drawbacks of arches are the horizontal supports reactions, which are not sought in a building. 
Through the hypothetical projects developed in the Chapter II and III, the prescriptions of the 
Eurocode were analyzed. It results that the recommended loads are defined to induce a high level of 
normal forces but also to increase the bending moments. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that 
thermal loads shall be included in deep arches study as they might create significant moments.  
Generally, in a Pearl-Chain arch, a compromise has to be found between the axial stiffness and the 
bending stiffness of a section. Their design has to follow several technical requirements, such as 
having the post-tension cables perpendicular to the ends of the elements. That leads to a complex 
design process where several solutions are possible. Through the projects, it was found that the 
Pearl-Chain Technology, potentially combined with the Super-Light concept; allow to create 
structure that crosses a long span without bringing a lot of permanent loads on the structure 
underneath. This is really relevant as well. Indeed, if we manage to build lighter, we will build 
cheaper, which is the first step to a large scale development. 
The structure designed in the Chapter II enhances the fact that arches must be considered in a global 
approach when a building is designed. Withstanding the horizontal supports reactions of an arch as 
unloaded compression in a horizontal Pearl-Chain floor removes the main hindrance of arch structure 
in buildings. However, that seems feasible mainly considering deep arches. As detailed on the 
Chapter I, shallow arches induce high horizontal forces. 
The limits of the Pearl-Chain Technology need to be explored to determine the maximal dimensions 
applicable for arch structures. That might involve full-scale test. Also, it could be interesting to test 
very shallow arches, as described in the Chapter III, to determine if they really act as shown by the 
Finite Element Model. 
 
==PAGE:46==
42 
 
References 
[1]  
Viande.info,”www.viande.info/les-emissions-de-gaz-effet-de-serre-dans-le-monde”,2014 
[2] 
K.D. Hertz and A.Bagger,”CO2 emissions from Super-Light Structures” in Proceedings of 
the International Association for Shell and Spatial Structures(iabse-iass)Symposium2011 
”taller,longer,lighter”,2011 
[3] 
P.S. Haldind, PHD Thesis,”Construction and design of post-tensioned Pearl-Chain Bridges 
Using SL-Technology”, 2016 
[4] 
K.D.Hertz,”Super-Light concrete with pearl-chains” in Magazine of Concrete Research, 
61,no8, p655-663,2009 
[5] 
O.P.Jain, “Ultimate strength of reinforced concrete arches”, American Concrete Institute-
Journal, vol32,no6,pp.697-713,1960 
[6] 
K.D. Hertz and A.Bagger, ”Super-Light structures with pearl-chain reinforcement” in 
Proceedings of the International Association for Shell and Spatial Structures-iass)Symposium2010  
[7]  
J.Ruzicka and L.Vrablik,”Shape Optimization of Arch and Shells Centerline”, in 7th 
International Conference on Arch Bridges,2013,pp 211-216 
[8] 
”EN 1991-1 2007 – Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings” 
[9] 
”EN 1991-1 DK NA 2007 – Densities, self-weight, imposed loads for buildings” 
[10] 
”EN 1991-4 2007 – Wind actions”  
[11] 
”EN 1991-4 DK NA 2015 – Wind actions” 
[12] 
”EN 1991-3 DK NA 2015 – Snow  loads” 
[13] 
”EN 1991-5  2012 –Thermal actions” 
[14] 
 ”EN 1991-5 DK NA 2012 –Thermal actions” 
[15] 
 BATISS “Reglement sécurité incendie ERP”,2016 
[16]  ”EN 1992-1-1Design of concrete structures”, 2008 
[17]  ABEO, “www.abeo.dk/en/fixed-end-assembly” 
[18] 
 HomeStratosphere,” www.homestratosphere.com/types-of-arches/” 
[19] 
P.S.Haldin 
and 
K.D.Hertz 
and 
J.W.Schmidt,”Precast 
Pearl-Chain 
concrete 
arch 
bridges”,Engineering structures, 2015 
[20] 
S.Ivanovech”Temperature affected on two hinges steel arch bridge”, International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Innovative Technology (IJESIT) Volume 5, Issue 4, July 2016 
==PAGE:47==
43 
 
[21] 
P.S.Halding and K.D.Hertz,”Concrete hinges”, in Proceedings of the Iass-slte 2014 
Symposium, 2014 
[22]  S.Multon,”Beton armé – EUROCODE2”,2012 
[23] 
A.H.Finlay,” Deck participation in concrete arch bridges”,Civil Engineering(New York), 
vol2,no.11,pp.685-689,1932 
[26] 
 K.D.Hertz,”Light-weight load-bearing structures reinforced by core elements made of 
segments and a method of casting such structures”,08160304.5,2010 
[27] 
Course 11050 Material, “Super Light Structures”, Technical University of Denmark 
[28] 
P.S.Halding, K.D.Hertz, J.W.Schmidt and J.B.Kennedy,”Full-Scale Load Tests of Pearl-
Chain Arches”Engineering Structures,2016 
[29] 
 “Civil Engineering course materials from IIT Kharagpur” 
[30]  CCL, “Post-tensioning systems”, 2014 
 
