==PAGE:1==
Human motion classiﬁcation
using machine learning
Anders Christian Sperling
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to use machine learning methods, artiﬁcial neural net-
works in particular, to classify human motions based on accelerometer and heart
rate data gathered, from an ear mounted devices. Based on the current state
of the art the usage of a K-Nearest Neighbour, decision tree and random for-
est classifers, as well as feed forward, convolutional, reccurrent and Long Short
Term neuron networks were used. Training and testing of these models on the
priorly mentioned data yielded a maximum accurracy score on validation data
of around 82% using a random forest classiﬁer with 101 trees, and a maximimu
dept 2 and the test data. Using a completely new dataset yielded a maximum
accuracy of 24% using a feed forward network. These results depicts a huge bias
towards the training/test set.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with machine learning and the problem of classifying human
motions given data from an ear-mounted accelerometer and heart rate sensor
using classical machine learning methods for supervised learning, as well as
modern deep learning techniques.
This thesis consist of an introduction to the problem posed as well as the current
state of the art, followed by a description of the data used and how it was
manipulated. After the data has been described the underlying theory of the
models and techniques used in this thesis is presented followed by the results of
these models. Finally the results will be discussed an concluded upon.
Lyngby, 30-July-2019
Anders Christian Sperling
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Morten Mørup, for being endlessly vigilant
with me, guiding me through the thesis with a keen mind and a genuine interest
in the project.
I would also like to thank Jesper Glad, and GN - Store Nord, for providing
me with this project and the unique experience of collaborating with a large
Danish corporation as well as providing support and positivity throughout the
process.
I would also like to thank my best friend, Nikolaj Geertinger for putting up
with me and my bickering, and for providing support as well as input to diﬀer-
ent aspects of the thesis. Thank you brother mine.
Finally I’d like to thank my best female friend - in lack of a better word -
Ida Videcrantz, for helping me stay on track, and mercilessly telling me to get
back to work, if and when I got down in a gulley.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Project introduction and state-of-the-art
1
2
Data description and preparation
5
2.1
Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Original accelerometer data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Addition of heart rate RRI data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Data transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Minute-wise splitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Theoretical background and methods used
11
3.1
Cross validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
N-fold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Ensemble methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
K-Nearest Neighbours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Decision trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
Impurity measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4.2
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.1
Artiﬁcial Neuron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.2
Deep networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5.3
Feed forward ANNs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5.4
Convolutional ANNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5.5
Recurrent ANNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.5.6
Long Short Term Memory neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5.7
Training a network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5.8
Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.5.9
Optimizers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Regularization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4
Result data
35
4.1
KNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Decision tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.1
Single decision trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.2
Random forest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3.1
Feed forward network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.2
Convolutional network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3.3
Reccurent network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Discussion
57
5.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Accuracy measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.5
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Project introduction and
state-of-the-art
The objective of this thesis is to try and model human activities in such a man-
ner that it is possible to classify an activity using a small amount of data -
one minute of data. This is to be achieved through the use of machine learn-
ing models, and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. The thesis has been concieved and
conducted in conjunction with GN - Store Nord, using the Jabra Elite Sport
earphones to gather the data.
The current state-of-the-art in the ﬁeld is mainly built 4 diﬀerent types of
algorithms: K-nearest neighbours, Naive Bayes classiﬁers, decision trees, and
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. The following papers have used these state of the
art techniques, and have been the inspiration for the work done in this thesis as
well as the building block upon which the scientiﬁc questions that is the basis
for the thesis is formulated:
In Real Time Monitoring and Recognition of Eating and Physical Activity with
a Wearable Device connected to the Eyeglass by Muhammad Farooq, Edward
Sazonov [MF17] the data was gathered mounting an accelerometer on a pair of
glasses, and having their subjects perform certain tasks while the models were
trained to classify the data in real time. To classify the movements the decision
trees were trained using cross validation. In this paper the highest misclassifac-
tion was observed with eating while sitting, which was misclassiﬁed as simply
==PAGE:12==
2
Project introduction and state-of-the-art
being sedentary.
The second paper, Activity classiﬁcation using a single wrist-worn accelerometer
by Saisakul Chernbumroong, , Anthony S. Atkins, and Hongnian Yu [SCY11]
used a wrist-worn accelerometer to gather data. This paper used the notion of
features, trying to model the raw data to higher level features such as minimum
values, diﬀerences in a raw data feature (i.e. the x-axis for example). To classify
the data decision trees and an artiﬁcial neural network. The decision tree model
in this paper used entropy as the impurity measure and the ANN was feed for-
ward network which had accuracy scores of 94.13% and 90.57% respectively.
This paper has been the overall inspiration for the feature vector used in this
thesis, using many of the same features.
An older paper from 2010, Movement Recognition using the Accelerometer in
Smartphones by Sian Lun Lau and Klaus David [LD10] uses smartphones to
gather the accelerometer data. The methods used in the paper was decision
trees, Naive Bayes classiﬁers, K Neares Neighbours and support vector machines.
Given the position of the smartphone (usually in the pocket of the subject), the
movements classiﬁed didn’t involve eating or any other facial movements. This
allowed the models to achieve accuracies of up to 96.5% which further inspired
this thesis in the ways of using decision trees and the KNN classiﬁer.
Finally, in Exercise Motion Classiﬁcation from Large-Scale Wearable Sensor
Data Using Convolutional Neural Networks by Terry Taewoong Um, Vahid
Babakeshizadeh and Dana Kulic [TTUK17] a armband with an accelerometer
and a gyroscope is used to gather data. The paper utilizes convolutional neural
networks to classify the motions. The hyperparameters used in this paper, has
been the inspiration for the implementation in this thesis. Using the CNN ar-
chitecture a classiﬁcation accuracy of 92.14% is achieved on a 50-class exercise
dataset.
Some methods that seems notably absent from these papers is the random for-
est decision tree classiﬁer and the recurrent neural network architecture as well
as the LSTM extension of this. These concepts will be explored in this thesis,
partly due to the inspiration from these prior papers and their use of decision
trees in general, and partly due to the theoretical ﬁt of the recurrent neural
network architecture to the data used.
The scientiﬁc questions posed below where formed on the basis of the priorly
discussed papers and their ﬁndings:
• To what extent can human motions be classiﬁed from data collected using
an in-ear tri-axial accelerometer?
==PAGE:13==
3
• How precisely can minor facial motions i.e. chewing and talking, be clas-
siﬁed using machine learning, from the previously speciﬁed data?
• Will the us of deep learning methods be able to improve the accuracy
of classiﬁcation, compared to the current state of the art methods, i.e.
decision trees, clustering and ANN’s?
• Will the trained machine learning models be able, to classify two or more
simultaneous, priorly trained, motions?
The goal of the thesis is in part to be able to answer these questions in a
meaningful manner. This is done through the investigations and experiments
performed in this thesis.
The thesis consist of an introduction to the data and how the data is pre-
pared for use in the diﬀerent models, followed by a theoretical background for
the models used in the thesis, as well as the implementations of these. After
the models have been introduced, the resulting data from each of the models, as
well as the evaluation of these, is presented, followed by a discussion about the
results and the general evaluation of the thesis work and, ﬁnally, a conclusion.
==PAGE:14==
4
Project introduction and state-of-the-art
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Data description and
preparation
This chapter describes the data gathered and used in this thesis, including the
original accelerometer data of the movements of the subjects as well as the heart
rate data which was added later on when the data was available. Finally two
diﬀerent propositions for how the data is transformed, to ﬁt the diﬀerent models
used in the thesis are introduced.
2.1
Device
To gather the accelerometer and heart rate data used in this project, the Jabra
Elite Sport headset was used. The headset contains both a high refreshrate
tri-axial accelerometer as well as a heart rate monitor. The device itself can be
seen in Figure 2.1 below.
==PAGE:16==
6
Data description and preparation
Figure 2.1: The Jabra Elite Sport headset. On the right: The headset seen
from the top. Left: The headset seen from the bottm, with the
hear rate sensor exposed.
2.2
Original accelerometer data
The data consists of accelerometer data gathered from the sports headset Jabra
Elite Sport as such, the accelerometer data is ear-mounted and follows the sub-
jects head movement. As the accelerometer is tri-axial, a directional vector of
the x-, y- and z-axis movement is collected alongside a force-vector describing
how rapid the motion is. The data is sampled at 125 Hz as it is the maximum
resolution of the accelerometer.
Timestamp
Force
X
Y
Z
1552320292659
12042
1440
-3472
-320
Table 2.1: An example of the data layout, where the timestamp is in the format
of HH:MM:SS:MSMS:.. . The force is the relative acceleration of
the recorded movement and the X-, Y- and Z- features are the
relative movement in either direction in space.
To ensure the data is usable for the coming training and classiﬁcation using
the machine learning algorithms, which will be described later in the Theory
and Methodology chapter, it is annotated using a data-gathering app, such that
the user is obligated to input whatever action(s) they are about to perform.
This is absolutely necessary for supervised learning to determine the classes of
the observation. Given the option to record many diﬀerent activities, a large
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Addition of heart rate RRI data
7
amount of data was gathered, but only the classes with 5 or more observations
will be used by the models in order to ensure that the models have a suﬃcient
amount of data as well as allow for any kind of cross validation in which every
subset contains observations of each class.
2.3
Addition of heart rate RRI data
During the gathering of data, the ability to also retrieve heart rate data through
the gathering app arose. Given the more feature-packed data-points and seeming
correlation of the movement data and the hear rate of the subject, this was
incorporated in the observations and used for the models. The format changed
as follows:
Timestamp
heart rate
signal quality
force
x
y
z
1552320292659
69
99
12042
1440
-3472
-320
Table 2.2: Example of the data layout after the addition of RRI-data
As table 2.2 shows, not only is the heart rate of the subject added, but also a
measure of the signal quality. This is a measure of how hard the sensor has to
work to get the readings it provides - this is a percentage unit, without a real
metric unit - subsequently it is also a good measure of how precise the reading
is. If the sensor has to work extraordinarily hard to get the reading, the reading
might not be as precise, given the insecurity of the readings. A problem arises
with the data gathered before the heart rate data was recorded, as it does not
contain this feature. While the heart rate-data was added fairly early on, this
sets demands to the model being able to run using purely the accelerometer data
as well as with the combined accelerometer and heart rate data. After reviewing
the number of observations from before the heart rate data was added, this prior
data was scrapped.
As the data format was ﬁnialized it was possible to visualize it. One aspect
of visualizing the data is the knowledge of it actually being recorded correctly.
Another aspect is to have an intuitive understanding of what the data points
actually are. Figure 2.2 shows the diﬀerent features plotted, over the timespan
of 1 minute.
==PAGE:18==
8
Data description and preparation
Figure 2.2: The visualizations of the features gathered of a 1 minute walking
session. Note: all the plots have the timestamps as their x-axis.
The reason for the extremely high numbers, is due to the fact,
that the timestaps are seen as integers. From top-left to bottom
right, the plots are the x-values, the y-values, the z-values, the
force-values and the heart rate-values.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Data transformation
9
2.4
Data transformation
While some models are suited to run on time-series data, others require that
the data is formatted as a feature vector. To do so the raw data was fed to a
data-modulation script to create a feature vector with 14 features.
The 2.3 chart depicts the features selected in the vector, including the class of
the observation.
Feature
Class
Mean of the x-values
Mean of the y-values
Mean of the z-values
Mean of the force-values
Standard deviation of the x-values
Standard deviation of the y-values
Standard deviation of the z-values
Standard deviation of the force-values
Correlation between x- and y-values
Correlation between x- and z-values
Correlation between y- and z-values
Correlation between x- and force-values
Correlation between y- and force-values
Correlation between z- and force-values
Table 2.3: The features used in the data modulation
While this does not retain all the information contained in the raw data, it
does allow the models to train with equally sized inputs. This transformation
of the data, was inspired by the Activity classiﬁcation using a single wrist-worn
accelerometer paper [SCY11].
2.5
Minute-wise splitting
Another method to allow the data to be of a certain length, is to split the
data by a time-limit. By performing the splitting, the amount of observations
is increased greatly without having to artiﬁcially create data-points. The only
downside to splitting the data, is the excess data at the end of ﬁles which doesn’t
meet the split-size limit. This excess data is purged to ensure the length of the
==PAGE:20==
10
Data description and preparation
observations stays the same. This allows the models to have equally sized ob-
servations, while also retaining all the information in the original data. Another
eﬀect of splitting the data, rather than using the feature vector is that the data
needed for a classiﬁcation is reduced to only a minutes worth of data. The last
feature is quite relevant for GN - Store Nord, because if the classiﬁcation re-
quires a long data recording, one might not be able to classify an action before
it is over. This was the inspiration for the transformation, as it is not commonly
used in the papers which has provided inspiration for this thesis in general.
The data used in this thesis is transformed into either feature vectors or split
into 1-minute sub-sequences before being fed into the models used to classify the
motions. How the data is used by the models will be described in the following
chapter.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Theoretical background and
methods used
This section will describe the theory used in the thesis, and while a reasonable
understanding of the basics in machine learning is assumed, the chapter will
provide information on general techniques used in machine learning algorithms,
algorithms for model selection, pooling algorithms and the models used in this
thesis. Finally the theory behind the main models and algorithms, K-Nearest
Neighbours, decision trees, random forest classiﬁers, and the three neural net-
work architectures, feed forward, convolutional and recurrent networks, will be
introduced. The concepts of cross validation and ensemble methods, as well
as the K-Nearest Neighbours and decision tree models including the impurity
measures and the random forest models is based on the Introduction to Ma-
chine Learning and Data Mining Lecture notes, Spring 2019, version 2.0 by
Tue Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt and Morten Mørup [THM19].
3.1
Cross validation
An essential part of training any model is data, but most times data is not
available in large enough quantities to satisfy and saturate a model. This is
exactly the problem cross validation can help mitigate. The idea behind cross
==PAGE:22==
12
Theoretical background and methods used
validation is to split a dataset into smaller subsets, and then use these as both
training, test and validation sets for the model. The splits can be made in any
kind of way, but usually the largest subset is the training set, which increase
the possibility for the model to be able to perform optimally given the data.
There are several distinct methods of cross validation, but the most common is
the N-fold cross validation, which will be discussed in the next section. Apart
from the ability to utilize datasets properly, cross validation is a useful tool for
selecting the best model available which will be discuss later on.
3.1.1
N-fold
The N-fold cross validation creates folds - subsets of the entire dataset - of size
N, and the data is split into training, test and validation sets. Through the
following explanation, a 10-fold cross validation will be used:
As previously stated, the dataset is split into 3 diﬀerent categories of sub-sets.
For a true 10-fold cross validation, 11-splits is actually necessary, as the valida-
tion set should not be used for the following folds. For each of the non-validation
sets, a single split is selected as the test set, whereas the rest of the splits is used
for training. Thus the model is trained on the 9 training-splits and then tested
with the ﬁnal test set. This is done 10 times with a diﬀerent split selected as
the test set each time. This makes for 10 slightly diﬀerent models as well as 10
diﬀerent classiﬁcation errors. Using these 10 classiﬁcation errors one can ﬁnd
the mean error of the model on the selected dataset. The outcome of a true
10-fold cross validation can be seen in table 3.1.
set-1
set-2
set-3
set-4
set-5
set-6
set-7
set-8
set-9
set-10
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Test
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Train
Table 3.1: An example of 10-fold cross validation, omitting the validation-set.
As can be seen 10 training and test sets are created. For each of
the sets, a new split is used as the test set, this is done to mitigate
biasing the model towards a single training set, and thus to test
how well the trained model generalizes to diﬀerent test sets.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Ensemble methods
13
Model selection
As the previous section implies, a 10-fold cross validation would create 10 mod-
els. When testing these 10 models on the validation set, one of these would
emerge as the better model. However, this is not the only way cross validation
can be used to select the best model. Another approach is to perform cross
validation on the structure of the model itself. This can be done by altering for
example the amount of neurons in hidden layers, or the amount of hidden layers
itself, in neural network models, the amount of neighbours taken in account in a
KNN classiﬁer or how many clusters to use with a gaussian mixture model. For
each of these changed conditions, the model is trained and evaluated to select
the best model. To further improve the model selection process and to increase
the possibility of selecting the correct model, one can utilize multi-layer cross
validation by testing the model with diﬀerent hyperparameters on the cross
validated dataset.
3.2
Ensemble methods
Another key element in machine learning algorithms is ensemble methods. The
main feature of ensemble methods is the combination of sub-models. While a
single model can be trained to provide a reasonable classiﬁcation or regression,
allowing several models to cast their vote will result in greater accuracy as each
model may have a slight bias, but in unisome they greatly reduce the bias. This
method can be used in many diﬀerent cases, however the data used has to be
the same, or sub-sections of the same dataset. Table 3.2 shows an example of
using KNN:
==PAGE:24==
14
Theoretical background and methods used
Subset
Predicted class
Subset-1
1
Subset-2
2
Subset-3
1
Subset-4
3
Subset-5
2
Subset-6
3
Subset-7
1
Subset-8
1
Subset-9
2
Subset-10
1
Table 3.2: The same KNN classiﬁer used on a dataset with 10 subsets. In the
above example, the class selected is 1.
Once the models have predicted the outcome classes, a majority vote between
all of the diﬀerent models is held, and the class which scores the highest is se-
lected as the class with the highest probability.
In this thesis, ensemble methods have been used to calculating the accuracy
of the diﬀerent models, allowing for label-wise majority votes[Wik]. The ﬁnal
usage of the ensemble methodology, is the use of the sklearn python library im-
plementation of random forest decision tree classiﬁers, which will be discussed
later.
3.3
K-Nearest Neighbours
K-Nearest Neighbours, KNN, is a clustering algorithm that depends upon the
similarity of the other observations. To use the algorithm, a certain amount of
neighbours to use, K, need to be chosen. This can be done using cross validation.
For each new observation, the distance from every training datapoint to the
new observation is calculated. The distance measure is usually the Euclidian
distance as it is fast to calculate and accurate, however other distances such as
the Hamming distance or the Manhattan distance is equally eglible. Finally,
when the distances is calculated, a majority vote is cast and the class which
holds the most votes is selected.
Thus the algorithm goes as follows:
1. Initialize K to the amount of neighbours to be considered in the vote.
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Decision trees
15
2. For each element in the training data, calculate the distance to the new
observation.
3. Sort the list of distances.
4. The closest K training observations cast a vote, based on their own class.
5. The new observation is placed in the class which has the largest amount
of votes.
One can derive from the above algorithm, that K should be set to an uneven
number to ensure no deadlocks appear. Some advantages of the KNN algorithm
is, the length of the feature vectors does not matter, as long as the lengths are
identical. The only calculations to determine the class of a new observation, are
fairly simple i.e. the Euclidean distance as can be seen in equation 3.1 where the
x and y values are vectors to be compared. The simplicity of the calculations
allow the algorithm to be fast.
d(x, y) =
p
(x1 −y1)2 + (x2 −y2)2 + .. + (xnyn)2
(3.1)
As equation 3.1 depicts, adapting to new data is quite easy for the KNN clas-
siﬁer as it is only necessary to do the calculations for the new observation and
add the observation to the bucket of the class it belongs to. Thus no training is
really necessary given the nature of the algorithm and the fact that it bases the
classiﬁcations solely on the data-points available. This implies that the model
is almost set up the moment it is written in code.
The KNN classiﬁer used in the thesis is the sklearn implementation of the model,
in which cross validation has been employed in order to tune the model to per-
form at its best. Given the simplicity of the model, the amount of variables to
tune is rather small. A variable which is tunable, is the amount of neighbours
considered. In order to make sure that the model always return an answer, only
uneven numbers were used for this tuning thus making sure that there will al-
ways be a majority vote. Another limiting factor is the amount of observations
per class. If the model demands more neighbours than there are observations
of a certain class, that class would never be able to achieve a 100% accuracy.
3.4
Decision trees
Decision trees provide another model to classify an observation that unlike KNN
does need training.
However, once the model is trained, the calculations to
classify a new observation should be easier.
==PAGE:26==
16
Theoretical background and methods used
The model itself creates splits based on the training data. A split is deﬁned as
a binary option based on a measure of the feature vector of the observations,
i.e. "feature x has to have a value of minimum y for the observations to go to
class z". Whenever a split is to be made, the impurity gain or loss is calculated
to determine whether or not the split is good, or if it should be avoided. These
impurity measures will be discussed in the following section. The decision tree
model also incorporate a few ways of stopping the splitting - while this is not an
exact science - the simplest of which is going for a maximum depth. The depth
of a tree is the amount of nodes between a leaf (a terminal node) and the root of
the tree. Another way of stopping the tree from splitting into more branches is
by setting a minimum amount of improvement in the impurity measure. Should
the split not provide enough improvement to match or exceed the minimum
requirement of the purity gain, the split is simply refused. The last method is
pruning, which is done after the tree is "grown". Pruning "cuts" oﬀleaves if
they are uneccesary or even harmful to the precision of the tree, however there
is no exact algorithm for this.
The general algorithm for decision trees can be seen beneath:
1. Select split based on measure of the feature vector.
2. Calculate impurity of the split.
3. If the split provides suﬃcient purity or isn’t at the maximum depth, per-
form the split.
3.4.1
Impurity measures
After describing the decision trees and the algorithms they employ, a paramount
element is the impurity-measure. There are several diﬀerent measures, in the
following subsections three diﬀerent ones will be introduced, but generally the
Gini-index will be used in the models.
Entropy: The entropy is a measure of the un-orderness of the data or how
much information the data contains. If it is exactly one class, i.e. no other class
is represented in the split, no information is stored in the data. This means that
the entropy value ranges from 0.0 to 1.0, with 1.0 being the maximum entropy
occuring when the split between the classes is exactly equal.
The entropy of a dataset can be calculated using the following equation:
E(data) = −class1 ∗log2(class1) −class2 ∗log2(class2)
(3.2)
Where the result E is entropy or the unorderness of the dataset called ’data’.
==PAGE:27==
3.4 Decision trees
17
Information gain: The entropy calculation only calculates the information
retained in a single subset rather than the entire split, which is why, when try-
ing to determine the splits, the information gain is calculated. This measure
makes use of the entropy calculation by calculating the entropy of the set before
the split, and then calculating the weighted average of the subsets of the split,
to determine whether or not the split is worth making.
The equation for the information gain can be seen in equation 3.3:
IG(data, split) = E(data) −
X
i
|spliti|
|split| ∗E(spliti)
(3.3)
As per the equation, maximizing the information gain, IG, has the same eﬀect
as minimizing the average entropy, E, of the splits. Thus by maximizing the
information gain, the entropy of the data set is reduced the most.
Gini-index: The ﬁnal impurity measure discussed here is the Gini-index, which
relies on the class distribution of the dataset. Unlike the information gain, the
Gini-index calculates the probability of misclassifying a randomly chosen ele-
ment in the dataset. To calculate the Gini-index of a dataset, the probability
of misclassifying a new observation is the accumulated probability of false neg-
atives. The Gini-index will be 0 if the split is perfect and for each new split, the
same calculation is made for the two new subsets, as well as compared to the
pre-split set, just like the information gain calculation. The Gini-index equation
can be seen in equation 3.4:
Gini(data) =
C(data)
X
i
p(i) ∗(1 −p(i))
(3.4)
Where C is the diﬀerent classes in the dataset and p(i) is the probability of classi-
fying the observations as the i’th class. This equation only shows the probability
of misclassifying a randomly chosen element in the dataset for a single dataset,
but the calculation could be expanded as information gain did for the entropy
measure.
The implementation of the decision tree classiﬁer, used in this thesis is the
sklearn package implementation. In order to allow the model to perform its
best, cross validation was used to determine the optimal depth of the tree as
well as minimum amount of leafs in a split.
3.4.2
Random forest
A sub-division of the decision tree classiﬁers is the random forest classiﬁer. The
random forest utilizes the decision trees, however the method extends upon this
==PAGE:28==
18
Theoretical background and methods used
by using several smaller trees, rather than a single large tree. When the deci-
sion trees are trained, they are fed random subsamples of the training dataset
using bootstrapping. This ensures that while each tree might have high vari-
ance towards a particular subsets, the entire tree does not, without sacriﬁces in
regards to high bias. In practice this infers that only a subset of the features are
considered for splitting, in each of the diﬀerent decision trees. Naturally this
will lead to some features not being considered at all.
Figure 3.1: The general setup of a random forest classiﬁer, showing the input
data being fed to all the decision trees, and the processed predic-
tions being averaged over, to produce an output.
Once the trees are trained, the forest classiﬁes by averaging over the diﬀerent
trees.
3.5
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
A rather big subset of machine learning models can be found in the Artiﬁcial
Neural Network, ANN, plethora. These models tries to - rather crudely - model
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
19
the human brain and how learning is achieved. Given that the brain still out-
performs any artiﬁcial inference-engine, trying to use the workings of it as the
basis for a machine learning model, would seem to be the most informed choice
and the one with the highest probability of matching or even outperforming
our own CPU. The concepts of artiﬁcial neural networks in general as well as
the artiﬁcial neurons, the training of networks, the backpropagation algorithm,
the diﬀerent optimizers used when training a network, regularization techniques
and the feed forward and convolutional network architecture is based on Neural
Networks and Deep Learning by Michael A. Nielsen [Nie15]. The ﬁnal neural
architecture, the recurrent neural network, and it’s Long Short Term Memory
extension is both based on Deep Learning by Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio
and Aaron Courville [GBC16].
3.5.1
Artiﬁcial Neuron
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, ANNs, are built by using artiﬁcial neurons. These
try to mimic the neurons in the brain by using the basic structure of the neurons.
Figure 3.2: A human neuron, with an overlay showing the input and outputs of
the neuron. This is used as the blueprint for the artiﬁcial neurons.
The ﬁgure is found on wikipedia [VQ].
As ﬁgure 3.2 depicts, the neurons, and thus the artiﬁcial neurons as well, depend
on two diﬀerent parts: The dendrites and the axions. Each of these fulﬁlls a
distinct job, the dendrites recieve electrical signals from other neurons, whereas
the axion transmits electrical signals to other neurons. There is more to the
common neuron than a simple passing of electricity through the brain. The rea-
son why a neuron does not have a single dendrite and a single axion, is because
each neuron depend on the outcome of several other neurons before it. However,
==PAGE:30==
20
Theoretical background and methods used
as with all other parts of the human body, neurons are trying to optimize its
energy usage. Because of this optimization, while the neurons could keep ﬁring
to send a current through the brain, they do not. This is due to each neuron
having an activation function, which has a threshold that needs to be fulﬁlled,
before the neuron ﬁres a signal through its axion. These function make sure
that there is an actual signal before passing it along to the transformation made
by the neuron. As Figure 3.2 depicts, a neuron can have several dendrites, and
as such the signal retrieved by the activation functions, is the pooling of these.
Finally a neuron is not just a conveyor of current, it has a job to do and while
the functions performed by the neurons are usually quite simple, for example
detection of light vs. no light, these simple operations are done in all capac-
ities from a single neuron, to several thousands. Such that when the neurons
activation function is met, and the function of the neuron is performed on the
incoming data, the output will be usable by the next neuron connected to the
axions.
These general elements are all carried over to the artiﬁcial neuron. The den-
drites and axions are translated to the connections between the output of a
single neuron and the input of several other neurons. The activation functions
on the other hand are translated into diﬀerent functions, which take the received
output of other neurons, to determine whether or not the neuron is to ﬁre.
Figure 3.3: Two examples of commonly used activation functions, from left to
right: The sigmoid function, and the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit, ReLU,
function. The sigmoid ﬁgure is found on wikipedia [uQ] as is the
ReLU ﬁgure [uP].
Many diﬀerent activation functions can be used. The sigmoid function and the
ReLU fucntion 3.3 above are the most popular due to both their intrinsic success
as well as their simplicity, with the sigmoid function being the oldest, and the
==PAGE:31==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
21
ReLU being a more modern alternative. Finally, the transformations made by
the individual neurons are rather simple functions, such as a linear regression,
a moving mask on an image producing an output image or vector, or a simple
transformation. These functions are, as with the standard neurons, performed
many times over by many diﬀerent artiﬁcial neurons in a net.
3.5.2
Deep networks
The inner workings of a deep artiﬁcial neural network is the hidden layers. In
order for a ANN to be deep, it needs to have one or more hidden layers[Nie15].
In the hidden layers the function of the neurons is performed, whereas the two
required layers, the input and output layers, are performing little else than
receiving the input data, and transmitting the data as probabilities of classes or
another transformed form of the data to determine a regression or classiﬁcation
issue. Figure 3.4 depicts a very simple deep neural network.
Figure 3.4: A depiction of a very simple neural network, with a single hid-
den layer connected to the input- and output-layers. The hidden
layer is performing the actual calculations performed by the net-
work, whereas the input and output layers are merely receiving and
transmitting data, respectively. This ﬁgure is found on wikipedia
[Glo].
Depending on the architecture of the network, the network may have diﬀerent
setups for the hidden layers, however one element is general for all the diﬀerent
architectures: A ﬁnal, fully connected, layer with the same amount of neurons
==PAGE:32==
22
Theoretical background and methods used
as the available amount of classes. This layer is often paired with a SoftMax-
layer to make sure the output is usable. Whereas the input-layer is not as rigid
as the output layer, it does need to be of a ﬁxed size. The reason why the
input-layer is less rigid than the output-layer, is because while FFNs and CNNs
both have a input-layer which takes a ﬁxed amount of data and feeds it into
the hidden layers, RNNs are diﬀerent in this regard. RNNs have a certain input
size, as these networks work with timeseries-based data so the data is fed into
the network one time-step of features at a time.
3.5.3
Feed forward ANNs
The arguably most well-known architecture for an ANN, is the feed forward
ANN. As the name implies, a feed forward network feeds information unidirec-
tionally through the network. However, what the name doesn’t directly imply
is that a feed forward network is a fully connected network, meaning that every
neuron in a particular layer is connected to every neuron in the prior layer, as
well as the next layer. The reason for the popularity of the feed forward net-
work, is partly due to it is immense success, as well as the relative ease by which
it is trained. These factors make the FFN very powerful as a model, that can
present a deployable solution faster than a slow training model. However, one of
the shortcomings of a FFN is that it employs a ﬁxed amount of input neurons.
This mean that the data fed to the network, has to be of a ﬁxed size. While the
size of the input can be any number from 1 to MAX_INT, it can not vary as
time series data do for example.
As Figure 3.4 shows, the input data is fed to the hidden layer, the ﬁgure only
depicts one though there could be several more, which is in turn fully connected
to the output layer. Using the ﬁgure as an example, this could be a binary
classiﬁcation. In such a scenario the output would be the probability of either
of the classes, and whichever is highest would be selected as the class for the
input data.
In this thesis the feed forward networks has been designed to be a relatively
shallow ’deep network’. Two hidden layers are employed for the calculations
with the number of neurons in the hidden layers being cross validated to en-
sure the network performs optimally. The networks is built using the PyTorch
framework, using the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit, ReLU, as the activation function
of the neurons. Finally the output layer holds the same amount of neurons as
==PAGE:33==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
23
the amount classes available. While the network structure of the feed forward
network is very simple, two diﬀerent models had to be made; one network using
a feature vector with inspiration from (THIS PAPER), and an identical net-
work that is fed the raw minute-wise split data, which should hold far more
information.
3.5.4
Convolutional ANNs
Another very popular and successful neural network architecture is the convo-
lutional network. Where the feed foward network only feeds data unidirectional
and processes the data in that direction, a convolutional network is more ad-
vanced. The network structure keeps processing data, however it is not fully
connected as the FFN’s. The reason for this is, that each layer works using
convolutions, which is very similar to masks used in image recognition, these
convolutions is moved over the entirety of the dataset, and calculates the out-
come. The convolutions process a subset of the input stimuli with each ’step’,
however the same part of the input may be used many times by the convolution
as it may inﬂuence the rest of the input, i.e. there is a correlation between the
inputs.
Figure 3.5: A simple depictions of a convolutional neural network, showing
the convolutions stepping over the input and creating diﬀerent
feature maps. The convolutional neural network ﬁgure was found
on wikipedia [uA].
As Figure 3.5 depicts, the convolutions step over the input stimuli creating dif-
ferent features maps. Subsampling these feature maps to once again let diﬀerent
convolutions step over these, repeating this step an abritrary amount of times,
before terminating in a fully connected layer to output the results as a classiﬁ-
cation.
This setup leaves four new settings to cross validate for, to ﬁnd the most ef-
==PAGE:34==
24
Theoretical background and methods used
ﬁcient and performance-wise best network: The size of the convolutions, the
shape of the convolutions, the step size and the padding of the input. While
the shape and the size of the convolution might seem trivial to vary, the step
size and padding may require an explanation. Figure 3.6 show an example of
padding on a binary image. The step size is how far the convolution moves
with each step, meaning that with a 3 x 3 convolution and a step size of 1, a
single data point might inﬂuence as many as 9 diﬀerent parts of the produced
feature map. Whereas if the step size is 3, it will only be able to inﬂuence up
to 3 diﬀerent parts of the produced feature map. As the step size deﬁnes how
far the convolution moves with each step, the padding deﬁnes wheter or not the
input data should have padding around it, allowing for the corner-bound data
points to have as much inﬂuence on the produced feature maps, as the rest of
the data.
Figure 3.6: On the lefthand-side, the unpadded input of a 3 x 3 dataset, on the
righthand-side, the same input with 1 pixel zero-padding, allowing
the outer data-points to be applied equally with the inner points.
Convolutional networks are superb at classifying images, given that a convolu-
tion can be 2-dimensional and thus be sensitive to spatial features, rather than
just individual pixels on the image presented. Another distinction making the
convolutional architecture brillant for image recognition, is the fact that the
input of a convolutional network can have multiple channels. This allows the
network to take all 3 of the color channels into account if necessary. Rather
than having a full layer of connected neurons performing the same task, with
convolutions, a subset of the neurons in the layer is learning diﬀerent aspects
of the stimuli. Using the image classiﬁcation example, several convolutions in a
layer react to diﬀerent spatial features, one convolution may for instance detect
vertical in the upper half of the image, whereas another is far better at detecting
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
25
round shapes in the lower left corner. This allows a suﬃciently large layer to
produce an outcome tensor of the image, mapping features of the image rather
than pixels. While the use of convolutions is neat to detect features which span
more than a single datapoint, the convolutional network architecture makes
use of another technique: pooling. Pooling is a subsampling technique which
span several diﬀerent poolings, max-pooling, min-pooling, average-pooling, and
so on. These pools subsample the outcome of the convolutions using diﬀerent
functions: Max-pooling is taking a subset of data-points and selecting the max-
imum value in the set, min-pooling selects the minimum value, and the average
pooling takes the average of the subset. Figure 3.7 shows the diﬀerent pooling
techniques used on a subset of data, as well as their outcomes.
Figure 3.7: Each of the poolings have a step size of 2 and use a 2x2 ﬁlter.
From left to right: Max-pooling, min-pooling and average-pooling
as well as their resulting values on their righthand-sides.
These pooling methods create a condensed version of the feature map, main-
taining only the most interesting values, and removing noise.
In this project, as the data could concieveably contain some sort of spatial
features (the vectors represent movements in 3-dimensional space), both 1d-
and 2d-convolutions have been employed to try to classify the observations.
Using the setup from [TTUK17] two convolutional layers with max-pooling lay-
ers in between is employed. They are terminating in a fully connected layer
which uses a softmax function to output probabilities of the diﬀerent classes.
To produce the best possible conditions for the convolutional network, cross
validation is employed to vary the size of the convolutions, as well as whether
or not regularization is used.
3.5.5
Recurrent ANNs
Unlike the two prior network architectures, a recurrent neural network, RNN,
doesn’t share the same basic structure. Whereas both the FFN and CNN archi-
tectures employ individual weights and biases for the diﬀerent layes, the RNN
==PAGE:36==
26
Theoretical background and methods used
use shared weights. This results in the weights being passed forward to the next
layer alongside the data which is passed forward. One of the great advantages
of this architecture is the ability to work with timeseries-data, given that every
part of the prediction is dependent on the prior calculations. While the prior
architectures have been of the type one-to-one as Figure 3.8 depicts, given an
input stimuli - i.e. a tensor - the model outputs a single class.
Figure 3.8: The one-to-one input-output structure of the FFNs and CNNs.
This ﬁgure was inspired by the one found on Andrej Karpathys
blog [Kar].
The RNN architecture works on a one-to-many as the output of the model,
is fed back into the model as new input data. Thus the one-to-many RNNs
are capable of creating more timeseries data based upon earlier data and the
behaviour of the model.
Figure 3.9: The one-to-many input-output structure of the RNNs showing the
model taking a single input and using the ouput as the next input
value in order to create new data. The model isn’t just predicting
a class, it is predicting the way the data will behave over time.
This setup is very useful in weather predictions for example. This
ﬁgure was inspired by the one found on Andrej Karpathys blog
[Kar].
One of the main issues with RNNs is in regard to the training of the networks.
When training a deep RNN the occurrence of exploding or vanishing gradients,
i.e.
how much change a single weight changes the outcome, both gradients
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
27
stem from the issue of weights being shared throughout the network, which
makes propagating the error back through the network much harder than with
individual weights.
As the RNNs are geared towards timeseries data, the function describing the
output of the network reﬂects this by transmitting Yt, the output value to the
time, t, rather than simply Y.
Yt = tanh(wYt−1 + uxt)
(3.5)
Where the w and u are the weights, xt is the current input and yt−1 is the
previous output value, from the last input in the model.
One could use padding to make sure the input to the network is always of the
same size, however in the case of this thesis, the data length is controlled through
splitting the input data into minutes or 5-minute intervals.
3.5.6
Long Short Term Memory neurons
While the recurrent ANNs are very hard to train, compared to convolutional
networks and specially compared to feed forward networks, an extension to the
general formula of the RNNs helps mitigate the vanishing or exploding gra-
dients, which makes the RNNs hard to train. This is done by introducing the
Long Short Term Memory neurons, or LSTMs. These neurons have built-in safe-
guards to allow the gradients to be calculated throughout the network, without
the issue of exploding or vanishing gradients. These safeguards are called ’gates’
and there are 3 diﬀerent types of these: Input gates, output gates and forget
gates. In the following Figure 3.10 the set up of the gates is shown visually, and
the underlying functions are explained afterwards.
==PAGE:38==
28
Theoretical background and methods used
Figure 3.10: The setup of a LSTM equipped RNN network, showing the three
diﬀerent gates, the input, output and forget gates. Note: the
straight line running from Ct−1 horizontally to the Ct, is the cell-
state which is what is changed by the rest of the gates. When two
of the lines converge, without any function in between, they are
simple concatenated. This ﬁgure was inspired by the one found
on Cristopher Olahs blog [Ola].
An input gate described in equations:
it = σ(Wi.[ht−1, xt] + bi)
(3.6)
ˆCt = tanh(Wc.[ht−1, xt] + bc)
(3.7)
Ct = ft ∗Ct−1 + it + ˆCt
(3.8)
The input gate is generally described by Equation 3.6 and 3.7, as Equation 3.8
is simply the combination of these into the cell state, i.e. what data is stored.
Equation 3.6 describes which of the values to update in the cell state. The Wi
and bi variables in the equation are the weight and bias respectively, and the ht
and xt variables are the output of the prior layer and the input values, respec-
tively.
Equation 3.7 creates a vector of candidate values for the updates.
Finally Equation 3.8 updates the cell state by ﬁrst forgetting the elements which
were decided by the forget gate, and simply adding the new candidate values
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
29
in, from the input gate.
An output gate described in equations:
Ot = σ(Wo.[ht−1, xt] + bo)
(3.9)
ht = Ot ∗tanh(Ct)
(3.10)
The output equations 3.9 and 3.10 decide which parts of the cell state to ouput,
and then retrieves these data points respectively. Once again the ht−1 and xt
values are the output of the prior layer, and the input values. The reason for
using the tanh-function when selecting the output values, is to make sure they
recide between -1 and 1.
An forget gate described in equations:
ft = σ(Wf.[ht−1, xt] + bf)
(3.11)
In equation 3.11, what the function is deciding is on a per element basis, which
of the Ct cell state variables to maintain, and which to forget. The xt and ht−1
variables are as usual the input to the layer and the calculated output from the
prior layer. Finally the Wf and bf values are the weight and bias values.
In this thesis two identical RNN- and LSTM-networks have been created. The
reasoning behind the network structures being identical is to test the eﬀec-
tiveness of the LSTM neurons, as the two networks are built upon the RNN
architecture, regardless of the neurons in the LSTM model having the extended
output-, forget- and input-gates. Given the extreme simple usage of the PyTorch
RNN and LSTM implement, the models used in this thesis are cross validated
on both the number of neurons in the hidden layer, the number of layers and
the amount of epochs used to train the network.
3.5.7
Training a network
Once the problem has been determined, and the proper network has been se-
lected to solve it, the matter of training the network arises. In order to train a
network, the following steps has to be performed:
1. Initialize the network, with randomized weights.
2. Feed the training data to the input layer.
3. Forward pass the data trough the network.
==PAGE:40==
30
Theoretical background and methods used
4. Calculate the error, using the cost function.
5. Propagate the error backwards through the network.
6. Use the backpropagation algorithm to get the gradients of the cost func-
tion.
7. Use the gradients of the cost functions to update the weights, based on
the gradients as well as the learning rate η.
Once this is done, the weights in the network has been updated, this is done
several times, each is called an epoch. One problem with this training, is that
although the weights of the model is changed toward the "correct" values to
classify the training data, it will be biased towards the training data, hence the
need for big datasets. As mentioned in the steps, the learning rate or stepsize,
is another important measure that can be changed. This variable determines
how much the weights are changed, based on the gradients of the loss function.
3.5.8
Backpropagation
In order to calculate the gradients eﬃciently, the backpropagation algorithm is
employed, the following algorithm is based on the Neural Networks and Deep
Learning book [Nie15]:
1. Input x: set the activations, a, for the input layer
2. Feedforward: for each layer, l, in the network, calculate zl = wlal +bl and
al = σ(zl), where σ is the sigmoid function.
3. Calculate the output error δl = ∇aC ⊙σ′(zL)
4. Backpropagate the error through the layers by computing δl = ((wl+1)T δl+1)⊙
σ′(zl) , for each layer l
5. Finally get the output as the gradient of the cost function which is given
by the following two equations:
∂C
∂wl
jk = al−1
k
δl
j and
∂C
∂bl
jk = δl
j
The backpropagation algorithm as described above, is computationally simple,
and compared to calculating the gradient using steps in each direction, for every
weight on every neuron, the backpropagation only needs one forward pass, and
one backward pass through the network. Another reason why the backpropa-
gation algorithm is deemed simple, is due to the individual calculations being
computationally fast. Once the backpropagation algorithm has been used, the
gradients of the weights is to be optimized to minimize the error.
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
31
3.5.9
Optimizers
After performing backpropagation to determine the gradients of the weights,
an optimizer is needed.
An optimizer in this case is for example stochastic
gradient decent (SGD) which is used to optimize the steps made on the values
of the weights to minimize the error propagated through the network. The most
common, due to the simplicity, of the optimizers, is simple stochastic gradient
decent which takes steps to move down the "curve" and reach the lowest point,
preferrably not a saddle point. The equation for SGD is as follows:
w := w −η∇Q(w) = w −ηsumn
i=1∇Qi(w)/n
(3.12)
Where η is the learning rate, which is also called the step-size, and the function
Q, is described by the following equation:
Q(w) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Qi(w)
(3.13)
Another important optimizer is called the Adam optimizer, which is derived
from Adaptive moment estimation and is based on SGD. Unlike SGD, Adam
does not use a single learning rate, rather it utilizes a per-weight learning rate.
Unlike earlier algorithms such as RMSProp, which updates the weight-learning
rates only based on the ﬁrst moment (the mean), Adam also utilizes the second
moments of the gradients (the uncentered variance). Thus Adam calculates the
moving average of the gradients and the squared gradients. A moment in this
case is the expected value of the variable to the power of n (n being the count
of moments) as seen in Equation 3.14.
mn = E[Xn]
(3.14)
As for the moving averages they are described in Equation 3.15 and 3.16.
mt = β1mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
(3.15)
vt = β2vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
(3.16)
Where m and v are the moving averages, and g is the gradient of the current
batch of data.
Finally, the complete equation for the moving averages is shown in Equation
3.17.
mt = (1 −β1)
t
X
i=1
βt−i
1
gi
(3.17)
==PAGE:42==
32
Theoretical background and methods used
The expected value can be related to the true moment, once the formula is
derived as shown in Equation 3.18 and 3.19.
E[mt] = E[(1 −β1)
t
X
i=1
βt−i
1
gi]
(3.18)
= E[gi](1 −β1)
t
X
i=1
βt−i
1
ζ
(3.19)
As the relation in Equation 3.18 and 3.19 depicts, there is an error estimator ζ
which needs correction through bias correction. The correction of the diﬀerent
moment estimators is slightly diﬀerent from one another, which is shown in the
equations below:
ˆ
mt =
mt
1 −βt
1
(3.20)
ˆvt =
vt
1 −βt
2
(3.21)
Finally the estimators can be used to scale the learning rate per weight which
is done as follows:
wt = wt−1 −η
ˆ
mt
√ˆvt + ϵ
(3.22)
In the above equation w is the model weights, η is the step size or learning rate.
As can be seen, the Adam optimizer is an extension of the SGD, while remaining
fairly simple to implement and understand.
In the thesis the Adam optimizer has been used, unless otherwise stated, as
it will be superior to the standard stochastic gradient decent in almost any
case.
3.6
Regularization
When a model is capable of becoming increasingly complex and the model is
suﬃciently ﬂexible, it is prone to overﬁtting. To mitigate this overﬁtting regu-
larization can be used. Regularization is a technique that shrinks the coeﬃcient
estimates towards zero, eﬀectively discouraging learning a more complex model,
to avoid overﬁtting. This is done through regression, and there are several dif-
ferent regression types that can be used for regularization. In the following three
diﬀerent regularization types utilized in this thesis will be presented, each of the
regressions are added to the cost-function in order to shrink towards zero:
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Regularization
33
L1 - Lasso
The L1 "Lasso" regression is short for Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection
Operator, and the regression adds the absolute value of the coeﬃcients as a
penalty term:
λ
p
X
j=1
|βj|
(3.23)
In Equation 3.23 β is the coeﬃcient, and as the function shows, if λ is very small
or zero, the inﬂuence is very little, however if λ is very large, the inﬂuence of
the regression on the cost-function will be too large, making the model underﬁt.
L2 - Ridge
The L2 "Ridge" regression, unlike the prior regression function adds the squared
value of the coeﬃcients as a penalty to the cost-function:
λ
p
X
j=1
β2
j
(3.24)
As Equation 3.24 depicts, the L2-regularization has a diﬀerent inﬂuence on the
cost-function. However, it has the same vulnerability to having either a small or
large λ, resulting in either none to a very small inﬂuence or too much inﬂuence
and causing underﬁtting, respectively.
Dropout
The ﬁnal type of regularization is done through random dropouts. A dropout
in this case is temporarily ignoring nodes in the network randomly during the
training of the network. This technique forces the other nodes to learn more.
As the eﬀect of the dropout is temporary, when the net is tested and used after
the training, the nodes are again all working. The result of the dropout is the
simulation of sparse activation in the network. By doing so the model become
more robust, as it no longer can do correction based on all the nodes all the
time.
The general concepts of machine learning described as well as the theory behind
the models used in this thesis and ﬁnally the reasoning behind the choice of
==PAGE:44==
34
Theoretical background and methods used
these models and their setup, is necessary to understand the results of these
models in the following chapter.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Result data
The following results of the diﬀerent models, and their meaning is shown in
order to use as the basis for a discussion upon the diﬀerent scientiﬁc questions
this thesis is trying to answer. Every result in the following chapter has been
run with the same training-, test-, and validation data-sets. This was necessary
in order to compare the models on equal grounds. For both the KNN model and
the decision tree models, both the raw data and a feature vector representation
is used, as mentioned in the data chapter 2 of the thesis.
Note: Every calculation has been performed on a system with a hex-core Intel
Core I7 6800k, a nVidia GTX 1070 8Gb graphics card and 16Gb of RAM. All
data used for test and training can be found on https://www.dropbox.com/sh/
zpetxc5rykzfl7t/AACNQuI5tLFzz6v74cwxoxv9a?dl=0 as well as the ﬁnal vali-
dation set can be found on https://www.dropbox.com/sh/ra40edc1iwu4bo0/
AACt55B0LT8VSno2YlPKikwNa?dl=0.
4.1
KNN
As described in the theory/methodology chapter, the best model was found by
cross validating over the amount of neighbours evaluated when determining the
superior model. The amount of neighbours were cross validated going from 1 to
10 with a stepsize of 2.
==PAGE:46==
36
Result data
Figure 4.1: The accuracy of the KNN-model using the feature vector data,
with regards to the amount of neighbours taken in account.
As Figure 4.1 shows, the optimal model uses 2 neighbours to classify the data.
The KNN model produced an accuracy score of about 66% and as it can be
seen above, the optimal amount of neighbours is selected due to the diminishing
returns of using any more than 2.
The model was validated using a completely seperate dataset which yielded an
accuracy of 0% and a confusion matrix as seen in Figure 4.2
==PAGE:47==
4.1 KNN
37
Figure 4.2: The confusion matrix of the feature vector KNN model run on the
completely separate data.
This suggests a huge bias towards the training data.
The same testing was done for the KNN model using the 1 minute sequence
data:
==PAGE:48==
38
Result data
Figure 4.3: The accuracy of the KNN-model using the 1 minute sequenced
data, with regards to the amount of neighbours taken in account.
Left: the accuracy calculated directly using the class predictions.
Right: The accuracy calculated using majority vote within each
sequence.
As Figure 4.3 shows, the optimal model (using both accuracy measures) uses 2
neighbours to classify the data. The KNN model produced an accuracy score
of about 52.5% using the sequenced data.
Finally the KNN model trained on the 1 minute sequences was validated on the
completely separate dataset using both the direct accuracy and the ensemble
accuracy both yielding an accuracy of 0%. The confusion matrices of these can
be seen in Figure 4.4 and 4.5 for the direct accuracy and the ensemble accuracy
respectively.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 KNN
39
Figure 4.4: The confusion matrix of the feature vector KNN model run on the
completely separate data using the direct accuracy.
Figure 4.5: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence KNN model run
on the completely separate data using the ensemble accuracy.
==PAGE:50==
40
Result data
Once again depicting a huge bias towards the training set.
4.2
Decision tree
The models described in the theory/methodology chapter for decision trees and
their random forest versions, has been employed and the following results has
been found using cross validation to test diﬀerent setups.
The single decision tree models have been cross validated using the maximum
depth of the tree, from 1 to 20.
4.2.1
Single decision trees
The single-tree decision tree model, has been found to be performing optimally
with a maximum depth of 2 using the feature vector data, which can be seen in
the below graph:
Figure 4.6: The accuracy of the decision tree model using the feature vector
data, plotted against the maximum depth of the tree
As Figure 4.6 depicts the maximum accuracy of the decision tree model is about
71%. However, this result seems to be overﬁtting model with a depth of 16 while
an accuracy of 62% is reacable at a depth of 2.
As per the prior models the decsion tree model was also validated on the com-
pletely separate dataset with an accuracy of 0%:
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Decision tree
41
Figure 4.7: The confusion matrix of the feature vector decision tree model run
on the completely separate data.
Figure ?? further solidiﬁes the bias towards the training data.
The same training and test was made with the 1 minute data:
Figure 4.8: The accuracy of the decision tree model using the 1 minute se-
quence data, plotted against the maximum depth of the tree.
==PAGE:52==
42
Result data
As can be seen in Figure 4.8 using the 1 minute data sequences rather than the
feature vector data improves the accuracy of the model substantially.
A confusion matrix is employed to reveal which of the classes is the most cause
for trouble for the decision tree model:
Figure 4.9: The confusion matrix of the results of the decision tree model using
the data sequences of 1-minute splits
As Figure 4.9 shows, the class that was the most troublesome to classify, was
the sitting and eating class.
Finally the decision tree models trained on the 1-minute sequence data was
also validated on the completely separate dataset, yielding a 20% and 11.1%
accuracy for the direct accuracy calculation and the ensemble accuracy. The
confusion matrices of these can be seen in Figure 4.10 and Figure 4.11.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Decision tree
43
Figure 4.10: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence decision tree
model run on the completely separate data, using the direct ac-
curacy.
==PAGE:54==
44
Result data
Figure 4.11: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence decision tree
model run on the completely separate data, using the ensemble
accuracy.
4.2.2
Random forest
The second decision tree setup used, is the random forest variation.
In the
following both the number of trees as well as the maximum depth of the trees
has been cross validated, to ﬁnd the superior hyper parameters for the model.
The number of trees varied between 1 and 1000 with a stepsize of 100 and the
maximum depth of these, were between 1 and 10 with a stepsize of 1.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Decision tree
45
Figure 4.12: The accuracy of the model, with the optimal amount of trees,
plotted with varying depths. Both the direct accuracy calculated
on the class predictions on the right hand side, and the majority
vote classifcation on the left hand side is present.
As can be seen the accuracy of the optimal model is 82%. Finally the confusion
matrix is once again used to detect wether or not the model is biased towards
some class, or if all the classes are classiﬁed equally:
Figure 4.13: The confusion matrix of the results of the random forest, decision
tree model using the 1 minute sequence data.
==PAGE:56==
46
Result data
The random forest model was validated on the completely separate dataset with
the confusion matrices of both the direct accuracy and ensemble being seen in
Figure 4.17 and 4.18. The model returned validation accuracies of 20% direct
accuracy and 11.1% ensemble accuracy.
Figure 4.14: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence random forest
model run on the completely separate data, using the direct ac-
curacy.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Neural networks
47
Figure 4.15: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence random forest
model run on the completely separate data, using the ensemble
accuracy.
4.3
Neural networks
The following section of this chapter, will describe the diﬀerent neural network
models employed, as described in the theory/methodology chapter. For every
model a set of two accuracy scores is shown, the ﬁrst being the direct classifca-
tion accuracy, and the second being the majority vote accuracy, allowing each
subsequence of a datapoint (each 1 minute sequence of the full data sequnces of
arbitrary length), to cast a vote on which class it is predicted as.
Given the nature of the nerual networks being data-hungry and easier trained
with more data, the feature vector was not fed to the ANN models, thus only
the raw data of 1-minute sequences is used. The code used to create and train
the FFN and CNN models has been heavily inspired by the works of the deep
learning course at the DTU[Win].
==PAGE:58==
48
Result data
4.3.1
Feed forward network
The feed forward network trained and tested in this thesis, has been setup as per
the theory and methodology chapter, with 2 hidden layers, and cross validation
to determine the optimal amount of hidden neurons between 10 and 60 neurons
with a stepsize of 10, the amount of epochs to train with between 100 and 1000
with a stepsize of 100, as well as whether or not to use regularization.
Figure 4.16: The accuracy of the FFN model using 30 neurons, and regular-
ization. The accuracy is plotted with regards to the amount of
epochs used to train.
As Figure 4.16 depicts, the highest performance of the FFN model is around
57% using the direct accuracy score.
As the prior models the FFN model was validated on the completely separate
dataset with identical accuracies of 24%. While the models returned identical
accuracies their confusion matrices had quite diﬀerent outlooks as can be seen
in Figure ?? and Figure ??.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Neural networks
49
Figure 4.17: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence FFN model run
on the completely separate data, using the direct accuracy.
Figure 4.18: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence FFN model run
on the completely separate data, using the ensemble accuracy.
==PAGE:60==
50
Result data
4.3.2
Convolutional network
The second type of ANNs used in this thesis is the convolutional network, as
described earlier. Once again the amount of hidden neurons between 1 and 50
with a stepsize of 10 and whether or not to use regularization. However, this
time the amount of epochs used to train the network was set to a ﬁxed amount
of 60. Both of the models is heavily inspired by Exercise Motion Classiﬁcation
from Large-Scale Wearable Sensor Data Using Convolutional Neural Networks
[TTUK17] with the 2-dimensional convolution model taking the same dimen-
sions of the convolutions (64 x 64 and 32 x 32). The convlutional network using
1-dimensional convolutions taking the same inspiration but scaling down the
convolutions.
The ﬁrst set up is using a one dimensional convolutions:
Figure 4.19: The accuracy of the CNN model using a 1-dimensional convolu-
tion, 21 neurons and regularization. The accuracy of the model
has been plotted with regards to the amount of epochs used to
train the model.
As can be seen in Figure 4.19 the best results of the model is achieved by using
between 8 and 20 epochs and yields an accuracy of about 62%.
The CNN model using 1-dimensional convolutions was also tested on the com-
pletely separate dataset.
While the model using direct accuracy returned a
16% accuracy score, the ensemble model returned a score of 0%. The confusion
matrices of these can be found in Figure 4.20 and Figure 4.21.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Neural networks
51
Figure 4.20: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence CNN model with
1-dimensional convolutions model run on the completely separate
data, using the direct accuracy.
==PAGE:62==
52
Result data
Figure 4.21: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence CNN model with
1-dimensional convolutions run on the completely separate data,
using the ensemble accuracy.
The second model used 2-dimensional convolutions:
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Neural networks
53
Figure 4.22: The accuracy of the CNN model using a 2-dimensional convolu-
tion, 11 neurons and regularization. The accuracy of the model
has been plotted with regards to the amount of epochs used to
train the model.
Figure 4.22 shows about the same accuracy of 62% however at a far lower amount
of epochs.
Finally the CNN model using 2-dimensional convolutions was also tested on the
completely separate dataset. This test yielded an identical 16% accuracy score
using both direct accuracy and the ensemble accuracy. The confusion matrices
of the direct accuracy model and the ensemble accuracy model can be found in
Figure 4.23 and Figure 4.24 respectively.
==PAGE:64==
54
Result data
Figure 4.23: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence CNN model with
2-dimensional convolutions model run on the completely separate
data, using the direct accuracy.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Neural networks
55
Figure 4.24: The confusion matrix of the 1 minute sequence CNN model with
2-dimensional convolutions run on the completely separate data,
using the ensemble accuracy.
4.3.3
Reccurent network
In the following the results of the implemented RNN and LSTM models and
their cross validations should have been presented, unfortunately the resulting
data of these was lost and a substantial amount of work would have to be done
to recreate these.
==PAGE:66==
56
Result data
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5
Discussion
This chapter will evaluate the progress shown the thesis, discuss shortcomings of
models or the general setup, answer the questions posed by the thesis-description
based on the knowledge acquired, as well as touching upon directions in which
the project could be taken for further exploration.
5.1
Data
One of the key elements of the thesis - being a machine learning project - is
the data. Due to the mounting of the accelerometer, and the refresh-rate of
the device, the data is excellent compared to the data used in previous similar
attempts to classify human motion. However, due to the small amount of data,
the more complex models are harder to train to deliver a reasonable output.
While the initial dataset is seen as very small, the splitting of the sequences
into smaller 1-minute sequences was performed partly to increase the amount
of data to feed the diﬀerent models, and partly as a reaction to the fact that
being able to classify the movement of a person needs to be quick.
If it is
only possible to accurately determine what action a person is performing, after
observing the person for a longer while, say 15 to 30 minutes, the use cases of
this classiﬁer greatly diminish. Thus with the ability to quickly determine the
action through 1-minute observations. Another design choice regarding the data
==PAGE:68==
58
Discussion
was the feature vector transformation, which was done to allow the models to
have inputs of identical length before the splitting of the data was considered.
Using a feature vector yields an improvement over the raw-sequences apart from
being of uniform length, they describe hyperparameters such as the the mean,
the variance, the highest and lowest values of the sequences. This allows for a
higher level understanding of the data, rather than just the spatial movements
of the instrument, as well as allowing the models to try and understand these
high-level features, compared to analysing the raw data directly.
5.2
Model selection
In this thesis selecting the best model both in general terms where the selection
of the most suitable models for the task at hand, as well as selecting the best
hyperparameters for the models, has been instrumental. Due to the massive
amount of data gathered for a single sequence of data, the obvious choice of
model would be an Artiﬁcial Neural Network, speciﬁcally a recurrent version,
as well as the LSTM adaptation of this.
As can be seen in ﬁgure 3.9 and
the subsequent description, the RNN-architechture is brilliant at working with
exactly the kind of data which has been gathered in this project: time-series
data. As such, the obvious choice of model is the RNN, however this has its
own implications. A RNN model requires massive amounts of data, compared
to what was gathered for this project, and even with a suﬃcient amount of data
the models are some of the hardest to train, given the problem with vanishing
or exploding gradients. The latter is somewhat mitigated by using the long
short term memory neuron-setup, but even with these troubles minimized, the
complex model architecture still makes for a hard training process. Thus with
the obvious model found, why did the rest of the models even get a mention in
the thesis? Two reasons, ﬁrstly simply put: they all have promising features,
which would make them prime-candidates to be a great model for classifying
the motion-data. The second reason is the priorly discussed amount of available
data, which is far too little to warrant the use of a supremely complex model,
thus making less complicated - though also less ﬂexible - models more feasable.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Model selection
59
Figure 5.1: A sketch of the model accuracy of both simple non-ﬂexible models
(red) and complex ﬂexible models (blue), based on the amount of
available data. These are relative accuracies as the simple mod-
els doesn’t get worse with more data available. This ﬁgure was
inspired by Introduction to Ma-chine Learning and Data Mining
Lecture notes, Spring 2019, version 2.0 by Tue Herlau, Mikkel N.
Schmidt and Morten Mørup[THM19].
In this regard the K-Nearest Neighbours models are some of the most simple
models in the rooster, and as the results show, these aren’t exactly terrible but
they deﬁnitely aren’t the top performers either. Due to the simplicity of the
model architecture the KNN-models would serve as an excellent benchmark for
the more complex models. Apart from the simplicity and thus in-ﬂexibility of
KNN, the model has another potential problem: the amount of space needed
as the model needs to store some representation of the entire training data-set,
to be able to classify new observations based on the similarity of the previous
observations. This doesn’t make much of a problem when the model resides in
traditional computers, where storage isn’t a problem, however if the model was
to be integrated in an embedded system it would be quite a challenge when be-
ing fed the raw data (the models having ﬁle-sizes of almost 800 megabytes each).
The second model architecture used was the decision trees, unlike the KNN
models these are capable of becoming very complex in their structure. This
complexity ensures that the tree models can classify far more diverse data. The
trouble with the model being able ﬁt to complex data appears in the form of
overﬁtting. Allowing a decision tree to grow uncontrolled, would make for a
model that could classify the training data to perfection, but wouldn’t neces-
sarily generalize very well. Several measures to mitigate this problem can be
taken, such as using bagging, pruning or as employed in this thesis the use of
a cross-validated maximum depth. The hardest of these methods is pruning, as
==PAGE:70==
60
Discussion
a general rule, or even a rule-of-thumb for that matter, of how many leaf-nodes
to prune, doesn’t exist. On the other hand, the approach taken in this thesis
- setting a maximum depth of the trees - is working the other way around, in-
stead of growing a tree of a certain size, and the cutting back, this method only
allows for a certain depth. Using cross validation, this has the ability to ﬁnd
the approximate best-depth of the tree, to create the best possible predictions.
A sub-model based on the decision tree setup - the random forest - is another
example of a method to ensure that the model has a low bias towards the train-
ing set. As described in the theory and methodology chapter this model creates
an arbitrary amount, n, trees and each of these are trained on subsets of the
training data. Each observations is a 1 minute sequence of 125Hz motion data,
therefore each subset contains 7500 x-, y-, z-, force- and heart rate-features. The
use of a large amount of trees would be prudent way of allowing the trees to
observe diﬀerent parts of the data. Due to the mentioned cross validation of the
depth, this model is also far less prone to overﬁtting, compared to the standard
decision trees.
The ﬁnal two models that was selected in the thesis was neural network ar-
chitectures: Feed Forward neural networks, and Convolutions neural networks.
Feed forward networks being the absolutely most used and by far the simplest
architecture to understand of the neural network-family, this was the ﬁrst neural
network implemented. First of all, the model was used to check if the simplest
of the neural networks, could outperform the priorly described models (except
of course the RNN/LSTMs). However due to the way the data is structured
and the amount of available data, this model wasn’t expected to perform much
better - if at all better - than the more simple models. Even if it didn’t, it would
be able to serve as a benchmark for the coming neural networks. Thus as it is
commonly known that a FFN using a single layer and suﬃciently many neurons
is capable of ﬁtting any problem, the use of a an input, hidden and output
layer, and varying the amount of hidden neurons seemed like a good starting
point. While the model is quite simple, one of the problems with the model
is that data is only evaluated once. The data is only passed one way through
the network unlike the convolutional models, the RNN and the LSTM models
which will be discussed later on. Thus each feature doesn’t have the ability to
inﬂuence each other, something that could be crucial to classifying movement
data in free-space.
The last model architecture employed is the convolutional network. This model
is a natural progression of the FFN models as it solves some of the problems the
prior model faced: The convolutions of the convolutional models can in many
ways be seen as the masks of image recognition algorithms. Due to this, the
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Model selection
61
network is quite brilliant at exactly that, image detection. However as the data
presented is actual movements in 3D-space, the prior and coming movements on
the same axis or even the prior and coming movements on the diﬀerent axises,
as well as the force and heart rate data may have a correlation with the ob-
served feature-point. This made the selection of the model architecture easy,
and as the convolutions can have any dimensions trying to use one- as well as 2-
dimensional convolutions was a design choice to allow both the one-dimensional
convolution to take the prior and future points of the same axis into account as
well as testing if taking several feature points in account would yield a better
result. To select the best possible models the amount of neurons as well as the
number of epochs was cross validated.
Returning to the aforementioned RNN and LSTM models, these seem to be the
best of both worlds, allowing data to pass through bidirectionally, and having
prior inputs inﬂuence the current input. Both the RNN and LSTM models have
been cross validated to select the hyperparameters yielding the best models,
including the amount of recurrent layers, neurons in the recurrent layers and
the amount of epochs to train the model on.
Given the diﬀerent models’ pros and cons, they each had a diﬀerent justiﬁcation
for being used to try and solve the problem at hand. And while some of the
models presented holds more opportunities for cross validating diﬀerent hyper-
parameters, these design choices was based upon which hyperparameters seemed
to control the accuracy of the models more. With enough time, the diﬀerent
models, especially the ANNs, could have each and every one of their hyperpa-
rameters cross validated in order to create even more precise models. However,
the process of cross validating diﬀerent hyperparameters is a quite slow one, as
it requires the model to be trained over and over again, while this isn’t a huge
problem with small and relatively simple models such as KNN and the deci-
sion trees, when the matter at hand is neural networks - namely the RNN- and
LSTM-versions - training a model 1000 times is a very time-consuming process,
and this isn’t necessarily an extreme amount of models. One would only need
to train the model on 10 diﬀerent numbers of neurons, 10 diﬀerent numbers of
layers, and 10 diﬀerent amounts of epochs. That would result in 1000 models
being trained, and this is only testing 3 diﬀerent hyperparameters.
==PAGE:72==
62
Discussion
5.3
Accuracy measures
In order to train the models and verify their progress, an accuracy measure was
needed. Due to the data structure, several diﬀerent measures of accuracy were
employed: A simple comparison of the predicted classes to the target classes
was used, as this is the absolute simplest method to determine the precision of
a model. However, as the data is split into 1-minute sub-sequences they can be
evaluated in another way, rather than simply checking which classes each of the
sub-sequences is predicted to be, and comparing these to the target values. If
a full sequence of data can be split into smaller 1 minute sub-sequences, these
can make a majority vote on which of the classes the full sequence belongs to.
An even more fair way of using the ensemble majority vote, is to pool the prob-
abilities of the output and then using the LogSumExp-trick discussed earlier in
the theory and methodology chapter in section 3.2 to calculate the combined
probability of the full sequence belonging to a certain class. The ﬁnal method
of calculating the accuracy of the models should provide the best result, as it
allows smaller probabilities to have a lower inpact on the selection. Given a
sub-sequence which has been classiﬁed to belong to class X, with a probability
of 36% which is still higher than the competing probabilities, this wouldn’t ex-
actly be counted as a certainty, however if another sub-sequence is classiﬁed to
class Y, with a 87% probability, this would impact the ﬁnal decision more, thus
driving the classiﬁcation towards class Y.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Accuracy measures
63
Prediction
Target
Sequence number
Ensemble sequence number
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
3
4
3
3
3
4
3
1
3
4
3
Table 5.1: The ﬁgure presents the problem with the current ensemble accuracy
calculation. As can be seen the above data-set consist of 4 diﬀerent
observations/sequences, however because the last two, has the same
target, the ensemble accuracy calculations view these two as the
same.
There is one major hurdle when using the ensemble methods to calculating the
accuracy; when the full sequences are split in to the sub-sequences, an equal
amount of targets are created. That is if a 10 minute sequence of running is
split the result will be 10 sub-sequence data-points of 1 minute each, as well
as 10 target values all being "running". This knowledge is also used when the
ensemble accuracy is calculated. However, if two sequences belonging to the
same class follows one another ensemble accuracy will not see a diﬀerence in the
target values, and thus take the two sequences, as being one.
As ﬁgure 5.1 depicts, the ensemble accuracy calculation, would make both the
sub-sequences of sequence 3 and 4 belong to sequence 3 and ignore the existence
of sequence 4. While this error may be minimal, there is a chance of corruption
between a well distinguished observation, and a very noisy observation.
As
shown in the results chapter, whenever applicable all three accuracy measures
are present, although the very simple version where the predicted classes are
compared to the target classes directly, are used in the models.
==PAGE:74==
64
Discussion
5.4
Performance
As each model needs to perform better than just guessing for the largest class,
the measure which will be used as the baseline for the accuracy testing, thus if
a model has an accuracy of less than 48% it isn’t better than simply guessing
for the largest class, and therefor not useable for classifying the movements.
The absolute simplest model of the thesis is the K-Nearest Neighbours, KNN,
which for all intends and purposes was thought of as a benchmark for the rest
of the models to be compared to, and hopefully outperform. However as the
results chapter of this thesis describes, the KNN models doesn’t perform badly.
While they’re by no means the best models of the bunch, both the feature vector
and the sequence versions are performing in the 52.5% to 66% accuracy range.
Under the assumption of having a large amount of data, this would not be the
expected outcome of the model, as the model is as simple and relatively inﬂexi-
ble as it is but due to the smaller amount of available data, the model can easier
generalize to the small test set.
The performance of the decision tree is better than that of the KNN model
both when being fed the the feature vector, and when being fed the raw sensor
data. Given the models ability to grow more complex the increase in accuracy
is expected. As such the decision tree delivers with an accuracy of 62% and 75%
being fed the feature vector and the raw data respectively.
The random forest sub-type of the decision tree models, performs extraordi-
narily well compared to what one would expect. The model having an accuracies
in the range of 82% to 91% is far higher than what seems reasonable, speciﬁ-
cally as the model is fed the raw data as a single one dimensional vector. At a
relatively small 101 trees, and a quite shallow depth of 2.
Due to the incredible performance of the random forest classiﬁer when being
fed the raw data as a one dimensional vector, this method had to be tested as
for whether it was actually working properly. This was done through permuta-
tion testing the algorithm, where the target values was shuﬄed randomly. This
permutation testing was done 100 times, and however unlikely the result is, the
model is performing correctly with an accuracy below the baseline of 48%.
As the ﬁrst neural network, and by far the simplest architecture among these,
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Performance
65
the feed forward network (FFN) was expected to perform relatively bad, as
it doesn’t utilize any of the more advanced techniques suitable for the kind of
data it is fed. Feed forward networks are usually better at working with data
that is structured as feature vectors or at least not multi-dimensional data like
the time-series data of this thesis. As the model performs in the 50% to 59%
accuracy range, it delivers on the prior assumptions, of not being particularly
good at classifying the activities using the data as neither a feature vector nor
raw data. Although it has to be noted that the feature vector representation
works quite a lot better than the raw data version. Although the model doesn’t
perform that well, it was necessary to investigate how the model performed with
the smaller amount of data and to use it as a benchmark for the following net-
work architectures.
Unlike the FFNs the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) both the 1-
dimensional and the 2-dimensional versions are actually geared to deal with the
data format it is fed. This is due to the convolutions being able to create higher-
level features from the combination of larger parts of the input data, rather than
evaluating every single feature at the same time. Compared to the FFNs, the
CNNs perform mildly better, having an accuracy around 62%. This is not a
huge improvement but this may be due to the relatively small amount of data
available.
The last two networks, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Long
Short Tern Memory neuron networks (LSTMs) should both theoretically
be a strong ﬁt for the timeseries-like data used in this thesis, but due to priorly
mentioned reasones in the resluts chapter4 these will not be discussed.
The models have generally performed as expected and in accordance with the
theory, except for the random forest classiﬁer which completely outperformed
any reasonable expectation. The model was tested to check for errors in the
code using a permutation test, which it passed. Finally as shown in the results
chapther4 none of the models generalized well to new data. The reason for this
inability to generalize may be found in the training dataset, as some subjects
are hugely over represented. This over representation of certain subjects makes
the model biased towards these individuals and thus not being able to classify
new data. Two solutions to this problem exist: the ﬁrst being purging some
of these over represented individuals data from the dataset, and the second
being gathering vastly more data than what is available at the moment. As
==PAGE:76==
66
Discussion
neither options were in any way favourable by the time the ﬁnal validation of
the models had happened, the above presentation of the models test-accuracy
seemed necessary in order to present the diﬀerent models promises.
5.5
Further work
Evaluating the outcome of this thesis gives rise to diﬀerent aspects that can be
taken on in future projects. The ﬁrst of these would be trying to implement
reinforcement learning, and through this allowing the model to train by itself.
This could be done through an app which would allow the user of the headsets
to rate the classiﬁed movements, for example after a run or after talking on the
phone while using the headset. If this was implemented, the hurdle of gathering
observations would be somewhat mitigated, as the users would provide the data,
in exchange for the model becoming more robust and capable.
One of the scientiﬁc questions posed by this thesis was not answered, namely
the question "Will the trained machine learning models be able, to classify two
or more simultaneous, priorly trained, motions?". The reason for this not to be
explored in this thesis was due to the time constraint and the lack of data. As
this question has not been explored it would be natural to try and investigate
this matter.
Another aspect of the project, that would be interesting to look at, would be to
gather far more data than what is available at the moment and use this to feed
deeper networks. With more data, more complex models may be a plausible
solution to getting higher accuracy than what the models are capable of today.
Apart from simply gathering more data with the same sensors as what has been
used in this thesis, adding more sensory data may help the current models and
allow for more powerful models with a larger scope than simply detecting the
motions of a human being. One such sensor to add to the rooster would be the
microphone. By allowing the models to get access to microphone data, these
would have more information on the environment in which the subject is resid-
ing. This information does of course present a whole new problem in the form
of privacy. The microphone data would have to be scrambled in some way, or
==PAGE:77==
5.5 Further work
67
simply not accessible for anyone but the model. The last solution could prove to
be extraordinarily problematic, due to the inaccessibility of the data for other
data scientists to evaluate the models. Another solution would be to anonymize
the data and use diﬀerential privacy as discussed in The Algorithmic Founda-
tions of Diﬀerential Privacy by Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth[DR14] when
training the models to further improve the privacy of such models.
Finally, the two sensors in use at the moment, the tri-axial accelerometer and
the heart rate sensor, could be combined once a more robust model is built.
This could be utillized to check if a person is having an extremly high heart
rate while doing something which doesn’t warrant this. An example would be
a person sitting down and suddenly the heart rate jumps to running levels. In
such a case, the model would be able to warn the subject that something doesn’t
seem right and inform the medical assistance about what situation he or she is
facing with the user.
==PAGE:78==
68
Discussion
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The models trained in this thesis has to a lessor or greater degree been able
to classify the human motions represented by the data. The most powerful of
the models, given the available data, is the random forest classiﬁer which could
classify the motions with a 82% accuracy using data from the same subjects
that is represented in the training set. While theoretically the recurrent neural
network structure is far more suitable for a problem such as this, the amount of
data available isn’t enough to allow the networks to train properly. The mod-
els were validated on a small set of data which consisted of data-points from a
person who did not exist in the training or test dataset. This was done to test
the generalization of the model, to completely new subjects.
Apart from the above ﬁndings, this thesis was based on four scientiﬁc ques-
tions that was sought to be answered, which can be found in the introduction
1. Answering these question has been paramount to the investigations and ex-
periments made in this thesis.
As the results show the human motions can be classiﬁed with a 82% accuracy
using the combinations of a data gathered from a tri-axial accelerometer and a
heart rate sensor. This ﬁnal sensor was not available for data gathering when
the scientiﬁc questions was formed, otherwise it would have been reﬂected in
the question as well. However, as the seen in the results chapter 4 the models
does not generalize very well to new data with an accuracy score of only 24%.
As seen in the results chapter 4 the minor facial motions recorded when a sub-
==PAGE:80==
70
Conclusion
ject is chewing can be modelled quite satisfyingly.
This thesis only handles
chewing data which of course presents a problem.
Without any other facial
movement-motions the diﬀerence between chewing and other such facial move-
ments (talking etc.) is not tested. However, the confusion matrices in the results
chapter shows the classiﬁcation of chewing data is not mistaken for simply sit-
ting down.
In this thesis the deep learning methods employed did not improve upon the
classical KNN, decision tree and random forest classiﬁers. The deep learning
methods such as deep recurrent neural networks is theoretically great at working
with the kind of timeseries data used in this thesis, but these didn’t yield better
results with the set up and data used.
The ﬁnal scientiﬁc question regarding the classiﬁcation of multiple simultaneous
motions was not answered, as discussed in the discussion chapter 5. This was
mainly due to time constraints and the lack of data.
In conclusion, several diﬀerent classiﬁers were trained to classify human mo-
tions. The best model was the random forest classiﬁer which could classify the
motions with a 82% accuracy. These models were tested on a completely new
dataset consisting of recordings of a person whos recordings hasn’t been in the
training or test sets. The trained models didn’t generalize well to this new data,
as it had a maximum accuracy of 24% which is worse than the baseline. This
could be mitigated by gathering more data from a more diverse group of people,
this would be pursued if more time was available.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[DR14]
Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth. The algorithmic foundations of
diﬀerential privacy. Foundations and Trends R⃝in Theoretical Com-
puter Science, 9(3-4):211–407, 2014.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learn-
ing. MIT Press, 2016.
[Glo]
Glosser.ca.
Artiﬁcial
neural
network
with
layer
coloring.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coloredneuralnetwork.svg.
[Kar]
Andrej Karpathy. The unreasonable eﬀectiveness of recurrent neural networks.
http://karpathy.github.io/2015/05/21/rnn-eﬀectiveness/.
[LD10]
Sian Lun LAU and Klaus David. Movement recognition using the accelerometer
in smartphones. 2010.
[MF17]
Edward Sazonov Muhammad Farooq. Real time monitoring and recognition of
eating and physical activity with a wearable device connected to the eyeglass.
2017.
[Nie15]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press,
2015.
[Ola]
Christopher
Olah.
Artiﬁcial
neural
network
with
layer
coloring.
http://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
[SCY11]
Anthony S. Atkins Saisakul Chernbumroong and Hongnian Yu. Activity classi-
ﬁcation using a single wrist-worn accelerometer. 2011.
==PAGE:82==
72
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[THM19]
Mikkel N. Schmidt Tue Herlau and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine
Learning and Data Mining, Lecture notes version 2, Spring 2019 for the course
02450 Introduction to Machine Learning and Data Mining at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark. Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, 2019.
[TTUK17] Vahid Babakeshizadeh Terry Taewoong Um and Dana Kulic. Exercise motion
classiﬁcation from large-scale wearable sensor data using convolutional neural
networks. 2017.
[uA]
Wikicommons
user
Aphex34.
typical
cnn
architecture.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Typicalcnn.png.
[uP]
Wikicommons user Pccoronado. Relu (ﬁle:rectiﬁer and softplus functions.svg).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Rectiﬁerandsoftplusfunctions.svg.
[uQ]
Wikicommons
user
Qef.
The
logistic
sigmoid
function.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Logistic-curve.svg.
[VQ]
Prof.
Loc
Vu-Quoc.
Artiﬁcial
neuron
(ﬁle:neuron3.png).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Neuron3.png.
[Wik]
Wikipedia. Majority. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Majority.
[Win]
Ole Winther.
Exercises and supplementary material for the deep learning
course 02456 using pytorch.
https://github.com/DeepLearningDTU/02456-
deep-learning-with-PyTorch.
