==PAGE:1==
Acoustic Fingerprinting: Spectral Identiﬁcation
of Trains in Urban Areas
Brandon Van Haeren
s162620
A thesis submitted for the
Masters of Science
Technical University of Denmark
June 12, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Background
6
2.1
Noise Contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Rail Traﬃc Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
11
4
Analysis
13
4.1
Construction Noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Results
21
6
Conclusion
26
7
Recommendations
27
1
==PAGE:3==
List of Figures
1
Time-history plot for passenger train pass-by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Time-history plot for freight train pass-by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Normalised sound pressure levels of all sampled passenger train pass-bys
15
4
Normalised sound pressure levels of all sampled freight train pass-bys . .
16
5
Passenger train spectral signature with upper and lower standard devia-
tion limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Freight train spectral signature with upper and lower standard deviation
limits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
7
Spectral signatures of passenger trains and heavy equipment machines .
21
8
Spectral signatures of freight trains and heavy equipment machines . . .
22
2
==PAGE:4==
List of Tables
1
Exclusion Limit Values of One-Hour Equivalent Noise Level (Leq, dBA)
Outdoor Points of Reception [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Exclusion Limit Values of One-Hour Equivalent Noise Level (Leq, dBA)
Plane of Window of Noise Sensitive Spaces [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Heavy equipment machines present on construction sites . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Passenger and freight train numerical ratings for all sampled heavy equip-
ment machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
The post-processing analysis for identifying noise sources during unattended sound level
recordings can often be a time-consuming and repetitive process. This identiﬁcation
process is generally completed by an individual aurally analysing all recorded audio
data and associating the audio with its respective source. Eliminating the necessity
of having someone manually process this data would signiﬁcantly reduce analysis time
and would potentially open up opportunities for providing a "real-time" identiﬁcation
of noise sources, further reducing the amount of time that would be required to analyse
all measured noise levels.
Currently, a situation where this increased eﬃciency in the post-processing step of unat-
tended long-term measurements is possible would be at construction sites situated in
close proximity to railroad tracks. The Ministry of the Environment of the Province of
Ontario (MOE) often implement target noise level limits that can be emitted from these
sites in order to ensure that any potential local dwellings or commercial areas are not
impacted. Acoustic consulting ﬁrms are often hired to perform audits that guarantee
these construction sites are meeting the noise level targets speciﬁed by the MOE.
The scope of this thesis is to analyse current issues with conducting acoustic audits
on construction sites neighbouring sets of railroad tracks where the possibility of noise
created by a passing train would interfere with the sound level measurements taking
place on-site. These measurements can be long-term and would record data for more
that 12 consecutive hours unattended by an engineer. When this occurs, the engineer
performing the measurements must analyse all the recorded data to determine how many
times the target noise level limit was exceeded and if the exceedance occurred as a result
of a piece of machinery operating on the construction site or from a train passing by on
an adjacent set of railroad tracks.
The objective of this thesis is to develop a method of reducing analysis times by creating
a spectral signature for two common types of trains: passenger and freight.
These
signatures will be applied to large sets of collected data from construction sites to ﬁlter
out the sounds of trains and identify other heavy equipment machines present on a
4
==PAGE:6==
construction site, which may be exceeding the implemented target noise level limit.
5
==PAGE:7==
2
Background
RWDI is an Engineering Consulting Firm based primarily out of Guelph, Canada. Their
Environmental Noise Group specialises in road, rail, and industrial noise assessments for
land use planning, noise management and mitigation design, and environmental compli-
ance applications. The Environmental Noise Group conducts on-site measurements of
noise levels emitted from corresponding sites and facilities to ensure that the levels do not
exceed any noise limitations in that respective area. These sites must adhere to speciﬁed
noise level limits in order to minimise the potential for adverse eﬀects on neighbouring
areas from noise. The limits are based on the MOE’s Environmental Noise Guidelines
for the Approval and Planning of Stationary and Transportation Sources (NPC-300)
and will vary based on the location of the tested site.
The locations are separated into three main classes: Class 1 areas, Class 2 areas, and
Class 3 areas. A Class 1 area is considered a location with the acoustical characteris-
tics of a major populated area, where the background noise level is dominated by the
activities of people, most often occurring from the noise of road traﬃc. Class 3 ar-
eas are rural locations where the environment’s acoustical characteristics are deﬁned by
natural sounds have little or no road traﬃc. The acoustical characteristics within an
environment of a Class 2 area are representative of both Class 1 and Class 3 areas.
For noise emitted from a stationary source, the noise level limit at a point of recep-
tion, expressed in terms of a One-Hour Equivalent Sound Level (Leq), is the higher of
the applicable exclusion of the limit value given in Table 1 or Table 2 below, or the
background sound level for that point of reception. The outdoor noise level limits for
stationary sources apply only to daytime and evening hours (07:00 - 23:00). Noise level
limits apply during the night-time period (23:00 - 07:00) for the plane of the window
of a noise sensitive space. In general, the outdoor points of reception will be protected
during the night-time as a consequence of meeting the noise level limits at the adjacent
plane of window of noise sensitive spaces. [1]
6
==PAGE:8==
Table 1: Exclusion Limit Values of One-Hour Equivalent Noise Level (Leq, dBA) Outdoor Points
of Reception [1]
Time of Day
Class 1 Area
Class 1 Area
Class 3 Area
07:00-19:00
50
50
45
19:00-23:00
50
45
45
Table 2: Exclusion Limit Values of One-Hour Equivalent Noise Level (Leq, dBA) Plane of
Window of Noise Sensitive Spaces [1]
Time of Day
Class 1 Area
Class 2 Area
Class 3 Area
07:00 - 19:00
50
50
45
19:00 - 23:00
50
50
40
23:00 - 07:00
45
45
40
An Outdoor Living Area (OLA) is an outdoor point of reception that is considered
to be an area located 3 metres from a building façade, 1,5 metres above ground, and
aligned with the midpoint of the subject façade where noise could be assessed. A plane of
window point of reception is representative of the centre of a window on a noise sensitive
space of a second storey building located a minimum of 4,5 metres above ground.
Noise levels at these locations are able to be determined by measuring the eﬀective sound
pressure of a sound relative to a reference value. These measured values are referred to
as Sound Pressure Levels (SPLs) and can be calculated as
SPL = 10 log10
A
p2
rms
p2
ref
B
(1)
where
prms is the root mean square sound pressure being measured; and
pref is the reference sound pressure. [2]
The SPL value is measured in Decibels (dB) and can often be obtained through the
use of a sound level meter, which is typically a hand-held instrument that measures
sound pressure levels with an A-weighting frequency ﬁlter. An A-weighting is applied to
sound levels measured by instruments in an eﬀort to synthasise how a human ear would
perceive the sound since humans are not as sensitive to low frequencies. [2] The meter
7
==PAGE:9==
measures sound levels using a time-averaged value and can take measurements in either
octave or third-octave frequency bands. The SPL can then be converted to a Sound
Power Level (PWL) in order to obtain the sound level at the source. The PWL can be
calculated from the measured SPL value, such that
PWL = SPL + |10 log10
Q
4ﬁr2 |
(2)
where
Q is the directivity factor; and
r is the distance to the sound source. [2]
The directivity factor is dependent upon the directions in which the source radiates
sound into free space. The resulting PWL is representative of the sound level at the
sound source.
2.1
Noise Contamination
Sound level measurements can be diﬃcult to obtain in locations considered to be Class
1 or Class 2 areas as there is often the chance of noise contamination from additional
sources of sound within the area that is being analysed.
Some of the most diﬃcult
locations for which sound level measurements must be obtained are construction sites.
Since these sites can be present in all Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 areas, there is
always the presence of the possibility of having multiple sources in neighbouring vicinities
that are emitting noise, which may contaminate the sounds being measured at the
construction facility. These contaminating noises can occur from nearby road traﬃc,
pedestrian traﬃc, or industrial facilities. This thesis will focus on construction sites
adjacent to railroad tracks.
8
==PAGE:10==
2.2
Rail Traﬃc Noise
Rail traﬃc sound levels are measured as a 16-Hour Equivalent Sound Level, Leq(16),
during the daytime and an 8-Hour Equivalent Sound Level, Leq(8), during the night-
time. [1] An equivalent sound level is the value of the constant sound level which would
result in exposure to the same total A-weighted energy as would the speciﬁed time-
varying sound, if the constant sound level persisted over an equal time interval. [3]
The need for noise control measures are assessed based on the estimated sound level at
speciﬁc points of reception. The sound level limits present for OLAs are 55 dBA or less
during the daytime and 50 dBA or less in the plane of bedroom windows during daytime
or night-time. These limits are applicable for assessments of noise impact on proposed
noise sensitive land uses to determine the sound levels on a site of proposed land use due
to transportation sources. As a result, the sound power levels of trains are not regulated
and it is not the responsibility of the proponent that is planning the development of
any land within proximity of transportation corridors to ensure compliance with these
sound level limits. [1]
The sound level limits for construction sites must adhere to the One-Hour Equivalent
Sound Levels displayed in Tables 1 and 2. It is the responsibility of those working within
the area of construction to ensure their work does not exceed these limits. Therefore,
when an audit is performed on a construction site that is adjacent to a transportation
corridor containing at set of railway tracks, it is essential that the noise created from a
train pass-by be emitted in order to conﬁrm the site’s compliance with these sound level
limits. Audits to ensure compliance with the MOE’s Environmental Noise Guidelines
often consist of a sound level meter being placed oﬀ-site and taking long-term measure-
ments of the noise created over the duration of a period of several days. This allows
for multiple one-hour measurements to be obtained in order to achieve a more accurate
prediction of the total noise levels on the site. These long-term measurements are often
left unattended, which would allow for the engineer performing the audit to conduct
additional tests at diﬀerent locations within the site. These unattended long-term mea-
surements create an opportunity for numerous tests to be conducted simultaneously
whilst on site, but require post-processing by an employee of the company measuring
9
==PAGE:11==
the sound levels. This process results in extensive analysis times, which increase the
cost of the projects that would require these measurements to be conducted.
This thesis focuses on the development of a spectral signal that would possess the ability
to analyse large sets of data, examine instances where a set sound level was exceeded,
and ﬁlter out sounds of trains from other heavy equipment machinery operation nearby.
10
==PAGE:12==
3
Methodology
The Environmental Noise Group at RWDI has conducted extensive research and mea-
surements of sound data for moving trains. These measurements were performed by
placing sound level meters with uni-directional microphones a set distance away from
a set of railroad tracks along which the trains would pass.
The sound level meters
were set to log all sound data into one-second intervals. In instances where the me-
ter detected the logged sound levels exceeding 85 dBA, the recording of an audio ﬁle
would begin and continue over the duration of the exceedance until ﬁve seconds after
the last instance when the sound level dropped below the set 85 dBA. These audio
recordings would provide an auditory conﬁrmation of whether the exceedance was the
result of a passing train or another piece of construction equipment in order to assist in
determining a spectral signature in the post-processing step. The maximum sound level
during this measurement period represented the instance at which the loudest part of
the passing train was located at the point of closest approach to the sound level meter.
The locomotive was always determined to be the loudest part of a train and frequencies
obtained at this maximum sound level would provide characteristic information about
the operating engine. One year of spectral sound data collected at a site in Toronto,
Canada was analysed. The spectral sound data consisted of a frequency range divided
into groups of adjoining frequencies called octave bands. Octave bands are able to yield
speciﬁc frequency information based on a sound source’s characteristics.
In addition to frequency, the intensity of energy contained within the collected sound
waves were an area of concern when comparing the collected sound levels. The locations
that were observed in the collection of this sound data often had multiple sets of railway
tracks running parallel to each other. As a result, the distance from the passing train
and the sound level meter may have varied depending on which set of tracks the train
was operating. Since the distances could not be conﬁrmed in these unattended mea-
surements, it was determined that the most accurate method of comparing the spectral
characteristics of each sampled train pass-by would be to transpose the measured pres-
sure levels to an equivalent sound level. The obtained levels were corrected to 100 dBA
as normalised ﬁeld-measured values to take into account possible ﬂuctuations in pres-
11
==PAGE:13==
sure levels as a result of measurements of the passing trains being collected at various
setback distances.
12
==PAGE:14==
4
Analysis
After analysing the collected spectral sound data and utilising known train schedules,
spectral signatures were developed for two types of trains: passenger and freight. Based
on the locations where the data was collected, it was determined that the passenger
trains were all operated by the same transit company. Through post-processing analysis
of the logged sound data, the passenger trains and freight trains could be identiﬁed.
Figures 1 and 2 below represent a time-history plot of typical passenger and freight
train pass-bys, respectively.
Figure 1: Time-history plot for passenger train pass-by
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2: Time-history plot for freight train pass-by
The passenger train time-history plot demonstrates a maximum value that represents a
locomotive followed by a section with elevated sound levels, which represents the coach
cars being pulled. For instances where the locomotive is pushing the coach cars, the time
history displays a section with elevated sound levels followed by a louder maximum value
at the end of the pass-by. Freight trains typically carry larger and heavier loads than
passenger trains and will result in higher sound levels produced by the locomotive and
freight cars. Locomotive noise is dependent on the engine throttle setting and somewhat
on the grade, but is relatively independent of velocity. However, rail car noise is produced
by the interaction between the car wheels and the rail and is a strong function of velocity.
[4] Another identifying characteristic of the time history plots is the duration of the train
pass-by. The passenger trains being analysed on average pull from 10 to 12 coaches.
Therefore, the duration of elevated sounds at a single measurement location could be
almost identical if the trains were travelling at similar speeds. Although the velocity is
not represented in these plots, the collected data yielded an average pass-by time for
passenger trains to be approximately 20 seconds while the duration of the freight train
pass-bys typically exceeded 2 minutes.
14
==PAGE:16==
The frequency spectra of the maximum sound levels collected from the train pass-bys
over the span of one year were analysed and a spectral signature for each individual
train was produced. These individual signatures were then grouped together based on
train type. Figures 3 and 4 illustrate the normalised maximum sound level spectral
frequencies of the observed passenger and freight trains, respectively.
Figure 3: Normalised sound pressure levels of all sampled passenger train pass-bys
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 4: Normalised sound pressure levels of all sampled freight train pass-bys
The logarithmic averaging of all the spectral sound data of similar train types was
applied using Equation 3
SPL = 10 log
A
1
n
n
ÿ
i=1
100.1xi
B
(3)
where
SPL is the mean value of all the observed data points in a single octave band;
n is the number of sampled data points in a single octave band; and
{x1, x2, ..., xn} are the equivalent sound levels for each sample in a single octave
band.
This averaging resulted in a spectral signature for both passenger and freight trains.
In order to determine how accurately an evaluated train pass-by resembled the calculated
spectral signature, an upper and lower boundary limit was developed. These limits were
based around a standard deviation, which analysed the amount of variation in each
16
==PAGE:18==
octave band from the average that existed for the total number of observed train pass-
bys. The standard deviation for each octave band was calculated as
SD =
ˆ
ı
ı
Ù 1
n
n
ÿ
i=1
(xi ≠x)2
(4)
where
n is th number of sampled data points in each octave band;
{x1, x2, ..., xn} are the equivalent sound levels for each sample in a single octave
band; and
x is the mean value of all the observed data points. [5]
This created an enclosed region within the upper and lower standard deviation limits,
which represented a range of noise levels that would be representative of the type of
train being evaluated. These limits were created using Equations 5 and 6, respectively.
SDHigh = SPL + (SD)(1, 5)
(5)
SDLow = SPL ≠(SD)(1, 5)
(6)
where
SD is the standard deviation for each octave band.
A value of 1,5 was used as a multiplier in order to create a larger region of variance
between the limits. Increasing the size of this region would later improve the ability
to accurately identify a train pass-by based on the variability that may exist between
a single train’s sound level and the signature created from the average of all sampled
trains. The spectral signature with the upper and lower standard deviation limits for
the maximum sound levels of passenger and freight trains are shown in Figures 5 and 6,
respectively.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 5: Passenger train spectral signature with upper and lower standard deviation limits
Figure 6: Freight train spectral signature with upper and lower standard deviation limits
A scoring system was developed to create a numerical value that indicated how accu-
rately the data points of the sampled frequency spectrum would compare to each train’s
18
==PAGE:20==
spectral signature. It can be seen from the above plots that at frequencies greater than
1000 Hz the standard deviation limits began to spread out over a larger range of pressure
levels. This divergence in the upper and lower standard deviation limits indicated that
the higher frequency bands do not contain characteristic information regarding the type
of train that is being analysed. This increased level of deviation from the average sound
pressure level in the higher frequencies was predicted to have occurred as a result of
the sampled sound data being collected at a location with a curved set of tracks. Short
radius curves have the ability to produce random occurrences of wheel squeal, which
may increase the perceived noise level by 15 to 25 dBA. [2] Therefore, the numerical
values presented by this scoring system were representative of a sample’s similarity to a
train’s spectral signature within the frequency range of 31,5 Hz to 1000 Hz.
4.1
Construction Noise
The vehicles and mechanical equipment present on a construction site is dependent
upon the type of work that is being fulﬁlled. Based on previous work completed by
RWDI’s Environmental Noise Group, it was determined that the heavy equipment ma-
chines listed in Table 3 were the most frequently present machines operating within the
observed areas of construction.
Table 3: Heavy equipment machines present on construction sites
Equipment
Expected Uses
Haul Truck
Transporting large quantities of heavy material
Grader
Creating ﬂat surfaces during the process of grad-
ing
Scraper
Moving or processing quantities of soil
Bulldozer
Clearing large quantities of soil or rubble
Excavator
Digging of holes and foundations
Loader
Moving and loading quantities of materials into
another type of machinery
The sound data for these machines was obtained from RWDI’s database of equipment
measurements and manufacturing data from previous projects. These sound levels would
have been measured with the use of a sound level meter logging the sound pressure levels
19
==PAGE:21==
of each machine as it was working or as a pass-by. Since these sound levels would have
been measured at various setback distances, their resulting sound pressure levels would
not have been able to be compared accurately. Therefore, it was necessary to duplicate
the process of normalising the measured maximum sound levels to 100 dBA, which was
used to obtain the spectral signatures for the observed passenger and freight trains for
the heavy equipment machines.
A numerical value for each type of analysed heavy equipment machines was developed
using Equation 4. The process consisted of taking the square root of the average of the
squared diﬀerences of the normalised machine and train sound pressure levels within
the 31,5 Hz to 1000 Hz octave band range. The resulting numerical value represented
how closely the maximum sound level of a speciﬁc piece of equipment operating on
a construction site related to the spectral signature of a train.
The scoring system
presented lower numerical values for maximum sound levels that closely represented the
spectral signature of a train, whereas larger numerical values indicated more variability
in the evaluated data points from the signature. This scoring system would allow the
amount of time required to post-process the logged data to be signiﬁcantly reduced as
the source of the audio that was recorded when the overall sound pressure level exceeded
the 85 dBA threshold would have already been identiﬁed as a train or a heavy equipment
machine.
20
==PAGE:22==
5
Results
After completing an octave band frequency analysis of the maximum sound levels for the
heavy equipment machines listed in Table 3, individual spectral signatures were created
and plotted against the signatures and the upper and lower limits of the trains. Figures 7
and 8 present the comparisons between diﬀerent types of trains and the heavy equipment
machines that contain the most similar spectral characteristics to the signatures, as well
as the machines with the most variance from the signatures.
Figure 7: Spectral signatures of passenger trains and heavy equipment machines
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 8: Spectral signatures of freight trains and heavy equipment machines
The standard deviation for each machine was calculated based on the squared diﬀerence
between the normalised pressure levels of the machine and the train for each octave
band. The amount of deviation from the spectral signatures of the trains was presented
as a numerical value, which is displayed in Table 4 below.
Table 4: Passenger and freight train numerical ratings for all sampled heavy equipment machines
Sound Source
Passenger Train Rating
Freight Train Rating
Haul Truck Pass-by
5,2
6,1
Grader
4,4
2,8
Scraper
4,6
7,4
Bulldozer
4,0
6,7
Excavator Pass-by
9,8
8,8
Excavator Working
3.7
3,4
Loader Pass-by
2,9
5,7
Passenger Train*
1,6
5,9
Passenger Train**
3,3
7,7
Freight Train*
5,4
1,3
Freight Train**
7,1
3,0
* represents a sampled train pass-by that contained the least variance from its respective
22
==PAGE:24==
train type’s spectral signature
** represents a sampled train pass-by that contained the most variance from its respec-
tive train type’s spectral signature
As seen from this table, the maximum sound level frequencies of the Loader Pass-by
and the Grader closely resemble a passenger train and a freight train, respectively. The
scoring system was applied to each sampled train pass-by utilised during the process of
obtaining the trains’ spectral signatures and it was determined that the largest numerical
values were 3.3 for passenger trains and 3.0 for freight trains. These numbers represent
the sample for each train type that contained data points which varied the greatest from
the average range of values.
With the implementation of the scoring system, it was necessary to create a limiting
range of numerical values that would indicate if a logged sample would require further
processing or if its numerical rating should provide a high enough level of conﬁdence
to be ﬁltered out as being a train or a machine operating within a construction area.
The issue with creating a limiting numerical range of values was that if the upper limit
was too low then there would be an increased possibility of categorising an exceedance
that occurred as a result of a train pass-by as a heavy equipment construction machine
with similar spectral frequency characteristics. If the lower limit was too high then an
exceedance created from the construction equipment operating close to the positioned
microphone may be categorised as a train.
Additionally, a larger range of limiting
values would not ﬁlter our enough signiﬁcant sound data and this information would
then require further post-processing, which would not achieve the necessary reduction
in analysis times. Alternatively, the implementation of a narrow range of values may
incorrectly identify a sound source as a train when the sound was actually produced by
a heavy equipment machine with similar spectral frequencies.
Ideally, the range of numerical values would minimise the number of samples that would
require post-processing, but would maintain a certain factor of safety in order to prevent
sources from being incorrectly identiﬁed. Based on the data used in determining all the
spectral signatures and numerical ratings, the upper limit was set to a value of 3,5
and the lower limit to 2,6. These limits ensured that all observed data was correctly
23
==PAGE:25==
categorised into its respective source of sound and provided a marginal factor of safety
for samples that may have yielded numerical values indicating similarities to the spectral
signature of a train.
These limits provided conﬁrmation that all the samples yielding a numerical rating below
2,6 were trains and a rating greater than 3,5 were various heavy equipment machines.
Based on all the samples analysed during the process of developing this scoring sys-
tem, approximately 21% of all heavy equipment machines, 27% of all passenger trains,
and 13% of all freight trains fell within these limits.
Therefore, almost 80% of all
sampled data would have been accurately identiﬁed, resulting in an 80% decrease in
post-processing times for the individual conducting the sound level measurements. The
remaining data yielded numerical ratings within the range of the upper and lower limits
would require an individual to manually categorise the sample through means of aural
identiﬁcation.
Although this scoring system provided a simple and eﬃcient approach to identifying and
classifying train sounds against the heavy equipment machines present within areas of
construction, there are several factors that may prevent an accurate noise measurement
from being obtained. If a train passes between a sound level meter and a wall that
runs parallel to the railway tracks, the wall has the ability to reﬂect and absorb some
of the sound emitted from the train. This occurrence may increase the sound pressure
levels received by the microphone for some octave bands more than others depending on
the reﬂective and absorptive properties of the wall. As a result, the obtained frequency
spectrum of the train’s maximum sound level may not accurately resemble the spec-
tral signature of similar train types and increases the possibility of not being correctly
identiﬁed. The combination of these two signals (direct and reﬂected) is known an con-
volution, which results in a development of a third signal which is a modiﬁed version of
the direct signal. The eﬀects of convolution on the recorded sound data can be reversed
through the process of deterministic convolution.
Deterministic convolution requires the form of the convoluted signal to be known. This is
possible since the form of the reﬂected signal could be calculated by analysing the eﬀect
that the wall would have on the form of the original signal. Deterministic deconvolution
24
==PAGE:26==
involves the design and application of an inverse ﬁlter that cancels out the eﬀects of the
reverberation in order to determine the true shape of the original signal. [5]
In addition to a train operating adjacent to a reﬂective wall, convolution could still
occur from a train sounding its whistle, two trains crossing paths on parallel tracks, or
a train and a heavy equipment machine passing by the sound level meter simultane-
ously. If multiple samples of train whistles had been previously measured and a spectral
signature was developed, then an inverse ﬁlter could be applied to the convoluted sig-
nal to remove the whistle noise and obtain the original train signal. Otherwise, a new
signature could be developed that is capable of recognising whistle noise, as this would
assist in the process of identifying trains. In the cases where another train or machine
is operating simultaneously, an inverse ﬁlter cannot be applied since the sound level
meter recording the sound levels is left unattended over the duration of the long-term
measurements and the source of interfering noise would not be known. Deconvolution
could still be performed, but the interfering signal would need to be estimated through
various methods of statistical estimation, which is outside the scope for this thesis.
25
==PAGE:27==
6
Conclusion
The development of a spectral signature to identify a train pass-by adjacent to a con-
struction site could possess the ability to reduce post-processing times by approximately
80%. The implementation of a system that is able to provide a score or a rating for each
logged sound level measurement exceeding 85 dBA would result in a numerical value
being allocated to each observed sample. These values could accurately identify 80% of
sound sources as originating from a train or heavy equipment machine on a construction
site based on whether they fell above or below the speciﬁed lower and upper standard
deviation limits of 2,6 and 3,5, respectively. When a source was identiﬁed as a train, the
sound pressure levels in the frequency domain occurring at the time of the maximum
sound level of the measurement were able to determine if the sample originated from
a passenger or freight train based on similarities to the developed spectral signature of
each train type.
This system for identifying train sounds could be further developed by creating spectral
signatures for each type of equipment that is expected to be present on a construction
site. This would present the opportunity to create a system that analyses real-time
events and would possess the ability to send alerts and notiﬁcations to clients indicating
the time that a recorded sound level exceeded a speciﬁed limit.
These notiﬁcations
would indicate if a nearby train was predicted to have caused the exceedance or if it was
a result of a machine operating within the area of construction. The source would be
identiﬁed by comparing the recorded sample’s maximum sound level frequency spectrum
to the spectral signature of all possible machines and ﬁnding the signature that most
accurately represented the recording. The alerts would contain a level of conﬁdence that
would indicate how closely the sample matched the spectral signature of the predicted
source of sound.
26
==PAGE:28==
7
Recommendations
The sampled passenger trains produced the largest quantity of numerical values present
within the 2,6 and 3,5 standard deviation limits. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the
passenger train time-history plots contain two characteristic features: a maximum sound
level and an extended section with elevated sound levels. The location of the maximum
peak level with respect to the elevated sound levels would be dependent on whether
the locomotive was pushing or pulling the passenger cars. In the instances where a
passenger train pass-by was recorded, the time history plots were nearly identical when
the locomotive was pulling the cars, as was the situation when the locomotive was
pushing the cars. If these time-history plots could be implemented into the numerical
scoring system then ideally the 27% of all passenger train samples that fell within the
standard deviation limits would be correctly identiﬁed. This would result in less that
10% of all sampled data that would still require post-processing. Consequentially, post-
processing times would decrease by more than 90% compared to the analysis times
currently being achieved without the implementation of any source identiﬁcation system.
The ability to analyse the time-history plots of these train pass-bys creates the possibility
to determine how quickly a train is travelling and how many cars the locomotive is pulling
or pushing. When a sound source is moving, the measurement distance changes with
time. The increasing distance between a train and an observer causes a decrease in the
sound pressure level by 10 log of the square of the overall source-to-receiver distance [4].
If it is assumed that the train is travelling at a constant speed along a straight path
at a distance away from the observer, the sound level can be written as a function of
time. When the train reaches the point of closest approach to the observer, (t = 0),
the sound level is dependent only on the ratio of the square of the reference distance
to the minimum distance. [4] The equivalent sound level for a transient vehicle could
be calculated by logarithmically adding the contributions from each measured location
along the pathway on which the source is travelling for a speciﬁed period of time. This
equivalent sound level could be calculated as
27
==PAGE:29==
Leq = Lr + 10 log ﬁdr
vT + 10 log dr
d
(7)
where
Leq is the equivalent sound level (dB);
Lr is the sound level at a distance dr (dB);
dr is the reference distance at another point along the train’s path (m);
d is the distance of closest approach (m);
v is the source speed (m/s); and
T is the duration of the sound level measurement (s). [4]
If all distances had been predetermined, a sound level meter would be able to provide
values for the overall sound level, the sound level at an earlier distance, and the time
period over which the source was travelling past the stationary receptor. Rearranging
the terms in Equation 7 allows the velocity of the locomotive to be determined. The
product of the velocity of the locomotive and the duration of the pass-by from the front
of the locomotive to the end of the last car passed the observer yields the length of
the entire train. By dividing this length by the average length of a train car, the total
number of cars comprising the train, including the locomotive, could be determined.
This type of information could be useful in future studies of determining if locomotives
are moving at safe velocities based on the total number of cars being pulled.
28
==PAGE:30==
References
[1] Ontario Ministry of the Environment (MOE), NPC-300:
Environmental Noise
Guideline Stationary and Transportation Sources - Approval and Planning. August
2013.
[2] W. Cavanaugh, G. Tocci, and J. Wilke, Architectural Acoustics - Principles and
Practice. New Jersey: John Wiley Sons, 2 ed., 2010.
[3] Ontario Ministry of the Environment (MOE), NPC-101: Technical Deﬁnitions. Jan-
uary 1996.
[4] M. Long, Architectural Acoustics. London, UK: Elsevier Academic Press, 2006.
[5] B. Buttkus, Spectral Analysis and Filter Theory in Applied Geophysics. New York:
Springer, 2010.
29
