==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Learning in Project Management
a case on
IT Projects in the Danish Tax Administration
Author:
Simone M. Jæpelt
Supervisor:
Josef Oehmen
Co-superviser:
Morten Wied
28th June 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 3006 0946
www.man.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is is written as my ﬁnal step to complete a masters program
in Industrial Engineering and Management at the Technical University of
Denmark.
When I took on this project, it was the result of a last minute change of
heart. I have always appreciated the exactness of mathematics. So initially,
I had set my mind on designing a new clever algorithm. However, through
the course of my masters program, management theory had caught my at-
tention, and I decided to take the leap.
What caught my attention was the combination of complexities, contra-
dictions and paradoxes found in management science. I am deﬁnitely not
disappointed. We all know the type, who favoured literature subjects in
school, based on the fact, that no one correct answer existed. If I am ever
met with this argument again, I will suggest they study project management
instead.
My thesis is based on a case study, investigating a large IT project, which
eventually failed.
As it so often happens with case studies, it ended up
somewhat diﬀerent what where it started out. The initial plan was to an-
swer the question of why the project failed. I would investigate evidence
from multiple sources, put the pieces together and hopefully discover the
cause. Much like solving a crime. However, the initial attempts to conduct
detective work, with heaps of ﬁles piling up, was unsustainable. Luckily I
was pointed in a diﬀerent direction.
I ﬁrst spoke to someone, who had himself been a key actor in this case. He
readily advised me not to take this approach, as the case was simply too
comprehensive. So I changed my path. I now wanted to validate diﬀerent
i
==PAGE:4==
explanations of why the project failed, by comparing them to literature.
Soon after, I met with Joanna Geraldi, who provided me with some much
appreciated ideas. Ideas that would end up deﬁning my work. She argued
that I could ﬁnd management literature that would both support and de-
bunk any argument made. Instead, she prompted the question of why so
many projects still fail, even though we eagerly try to learn from the out-
comes. This became the basis for my thesis.
In the process of writing this thesis, I have received invaluable support. First
and foremost from Morten Wied, who has kept me on track. As I do not
always possess the longest span of attention, this has been highly appreci-
ated. He has provided me with advise, ideas, inputs to literature and put
me in contact with several people.
Furthermore, Joseph Oehman, who has been my supervisor on this project,
has been a skilful sounding board. Although, minutes of his time are not
always easy to come by, they have certainly manifested a great impact. He
appears to have an ability to understand and conceptualise almost anything
into tangible ideas.
Lastly, I have received some much cherished inputs from Verena Stingl re-
garding literature. She has provided me with sources, which would wound
up constituting much of the theoretical framing of my thesis.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Project management is a extensively covered topic in literature. One aspect
is learning from outcomes of past projects. Many attempts have been made
to uncover the events that led a project to fail or succeed. Yet, success rates
have not been signiﬁcantly aﬀected.
The aim of this study that to provide suggestions for explaining, why we are
not able no learn in project management. This is done by analysing a case
of a failed IT project in the Danish Tax Ministry. The study is based on the
idea, that organisational learning occurs, when individuals have convergent
mental models. And that learning results in cumulative knowledge of the
discipline. Meaning that existing knowledge is reﬁned or extended, within
a shared understanding of a system.
The case is analysed by comparing diﬀerent narratives, which each provide
an explanation for the outcome. Narratives are analysed by identifying their
motivation, theoretical and empirical foundation, observations of the out-
come, attributed causes and normative suggestions.
The ﬁndings were, that some narratives presented conﬂicting perceptions
of reality. It was also found that they viewed the case from diﬀerent per-
spectives. Their explanations for why the project failed were not necessarily
conﬂicting. However they were derived from diﬀerent contexts. Finally, it
was found that learning outcomes did not result in cumulative knowledge.
Mainly, they were based on existing knowledge, and merely pointed out,
when actions were not in accordance with existing knowledge on the discip-
line.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Approach
6
2.1
Research Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
The Case
14
3.1
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
The Task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Expectations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Aftermath . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Narratives
20
4.1
Auditors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Consultants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
The Tax Ministry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
IT Professor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
4.5
The Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Comparison
43
5.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Foundation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Observations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Causes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.5
Normative Suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
The Learning Curve
51
6.1
Cumulative Knowledge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Convergent Narratives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
A Repetitive Task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Discussion
55
8
Conclusion
57
References
59
A Appendix
62
A.1 Auditors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 The Tax Ministry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 Consultants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.4 IT Professor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.5 Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
v
==PAGE:8==
1
|
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Today, we consider aeroplanes to be the safest mean of transportation. This
was not always the case. In the 1920’s, aviation was a dangerous activity.
There were a huge gab between the number of successful take-oﬀs and the
number of successful landings.
After World War 2 the industry of air transportation commercialised, but
accident rates were still much higher than they are today.
In 1945, an
average of ﬁve people lost their lives, for every 100 million passenger miles
travelled. Since 1997 that number has been less than 0.05.
In took only 20 years to achieve a ten-fold improvement.
From 1948 to
1968 the number dropped from 5 to 0.5. This was due to a tremendous
focus on aviation safety. Every crash were analysed, to identify the cause.
Afterwards, this information was used to improve technology [1].
Aviation is a good example of how an industry have managed to learn and
improve by systematically analysing outcomes.
Project management has not been as successful. Especially when look-
ing at IT projects. A report published in 2013, shows that while 69% of IT
projects are completed, 53% were challenged. Meaning they did not live up
to expectations. A total of 31% of projects fail completely [2].
Failure rates stand in clear contrast to eﬀorts made to learn. In 1969, the
ﬁrst article was published, on what to learn from failed projects. Since then,
the number of publications per year have increased signiﬁcantly [3]. The ap-
proach taken, is in many ways comparable with that of aviation, and many
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.1.
MOTIVATION
other engineering disciplines.
Still, the discipline of project management
continues to struggle..
The public sector in Denmark is no exception. Throughout the 90’s and
00’s, it has been subject to many digitisation projects. Some projects were
successful. However, many did not meet expectations and a signiﬁcant num-
ber failed.
After having experiences a number of failures in the 90’s, the public sec-
tor started to focus on what could be learned from these projects. They
approached the problem in the same manner, as had been done to project
management theory in general. They searched for problem causes, and re-
vised their project management procedures accordingly.
Despite their eﬀorts to learn, they faced another failed project the following
decade. Actually, several projects failed. Success rates were still low. How-
ever one project in particular illustrated a lesson not learned. It is often
attributed the with the notion, of being the largest IT failure in the danish
public sector.
The project was initiated in 2005 by the danish government. They named
it EFI - short for ’Et Fælles Inddrivelsessystem’. This translates into ’One
Uniﬁed Recovery System.’ The intention was to automatise all collection of
public debt. It turned out to be very a diﬃcult task. Ten years later, in
2015, the Tax Minister declared the project a failure, and it was decided to
put the system out of function.
There appears to be to a paradox in project management. Regardless
of both the importance of projects in today’s organisations and intense ef-
forts to learn, many projects still fail. This serves as the motivation for this
thesis.
The aim of the study is to identify possible obstacles to learning in project
management. This is done by analysing the EFI project from the Danish
Tax Ministry.
2
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.2.
RESEARCH QUESTION
1.2
Research Question
To approach a better understanding of why so many projects still fail, the
following research questions are phrased.
• What were the major events in the case project?
• How do various narratives explain the outcome?
• Why are we not been able to learn in project management?
The ﬁrst research question serves solely to provide the identity of the
case. The identity is based on the main characteristics described in one or
more of the narratives. This is the topic of Chapter 3.
The second research question is phrased, based on the idea, that narratives
constitute learning in an organisation [4]. I develop an answer to this, by
ﬁrst deﬁning the concepts and identiﬁers for learning in Chapter 2. In is
argued, that for learning to occur, through repetitively analysing project
outcomes, the following should be observed: (1) Knowledge is cumulative
and (2) conform to a shared or convergent model of the system.
Then, I establish a framework, which support the concepts of learning. This
is also found in Chapter 2. This framework guides the analysis of the nar-
ratives.
Learning outcomes obtained from the narratives, are presented in Chapter
4. Furthermore, a comparison of the narratives is found in Chapter 5. This
presents the key ﬁndings of this study.
First, I found that narratives had conﬂicting perceptions of reality. Second,
I found that the perspectives diﬀered, e.g. whether the causes that lead to
failure, should be found in the political scene of management approaches.
Third, I found that learning outcomes were not necessarily conﬂicting. They
were while they were diﬀerent in context, they could still be complementary
to each other.
These ﬁndings aspire suggestions for the third research question, which are
presented in Chapter 6. It is found that models and perspectives on the
case diﬀers among some of narratives.
However, they do not necessarily
contradict. Narratives just weren’t concerned with the same aspects of the
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.3.
LIMITATIONS
case. This is adjacent to observations, which did actually contradict each
other.
Finally, I found that knowledge was not cumulative. Meaning, that it did
not reﬁne or contribute to existing knowledge.
Mostly, narrative points
the attention to mistakes, which could have been avoided, by applying ap-
proaches, which were also know at the time.
In the the discussion I consider the limitations of this study, and make sug-
gestions for further research.
1.3
Limitations
The results of this thesis are subject to limitations in terms of both it’s the-
oretical and empirical scope. This especially applies to the third research
question - Why are we not able to learn in project management.
The thesis aims to answer this question in a limited context. It considers
only one single case in the Danish Tax Ministry. Additionally, the approach
taken does not ensure an exhaustive list of explanations - even within the
context of given case.
It provides qualitative suggestions for why they struggle to learn in the
Danish Tax Ministry. These suggestions may be extended to project man-
agement in general. However, the study does not make any claims for the
statistical inference of the suggestions. This study has mainly been explor-
atory.
Furthermore, is the assumptions of what deﬁnes success or failure. This
relates both to the nature of a project, but also to project management as a
discipline. The deﬁnition of project success is often discussed and disagreed
upon. This is not within the scope of this study. Instead, it is assumed that
the case project failed.
The deﬁnition of project management success derives from two aspects. First
is the empirical evidence of eﬀorts made to learn. It builds on the assump-
4
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1.
INTRODUCTION
1.3.
LIMITATIONS
tion, that performance can be improved, if we avoid repeating our mistakes.
Yet, success rates are not greatly aﬀected. Thus, success would be deﬁned
as improved performance, measured in project success rates.
5
==PAGE:13==
2
|
Approach
2.1
Research Philosophy
The objective of this thesis have emerged from an observation of incoher-
ence between the environment and the literature. A great fraction of large
projects either fail or are signiﬁcantly challenged. This stands in contrast
to the amount of attention the topic has received in literature.
As the study is mainly exploratory, the contributions are qualitative. They
are given as suggestions for why we do not learn in project management and
provide suggestions for further research.
The environment is observed and analysed based on some underlying
principles. First is the ontological foundation for the nature of reality. In
this regard, I accept the reality as objective. It means that reality exists
externally and independent of social actors.
Second is the epistemology of the thesis. This is the relation between an ob-
server and the reality. For this I accept knowledge of the world as subjective
to the observer. This places the research of this thesis in the post-positivism
paradigm.
For the sake of this study, it means that the reality of how the case unfolded
is the same, unrelated to anyone observing it. Yet, narratives make subject-
ive observations, which is not a complete or accurate reﬂection of reality.
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.2.
CONTEXT
2.2
Context
There are several examples of major projects throughout human history.
The pyramids in Egypt, Coliseum in Rome and the Great Wall of China.
However, it was not until the 1950’s, that project management were prop-
erly deﬁned as a discipline.
Following this time was a period of very ambitious and arguably successful
projects. The Manhattan project in the 1950’s. Space projects in the 60’s
and computer technology projects in the 70’s.
However, despite the seemingly success of large and complex projects, the
discipline suﬀered. Many projects failed and success rates were discouraging.
This made way for several attempts to encompass a learning curve, by ana-
lysing successes and failures.
In the early stages of project management, projects were understood as very
deterministic. Systems Theory is generally quoted as the foundation of the
discipline (Morris, 1994) cited in [5]. This was especially evident since the
discipline was characterised by highly standardised approaches.
In 1969, the ﬁrst article was published, on what to learn from failed pro-
jects. Since then, the number of publications per year have increased signi-
ﬁcantly [3]. The approach taken, is in many ways comparable with that of
aviation, and many other engineering disciplines.
This approach to learning is still common, even though studies show a dis-
parity between project performance and robust body of knowledge on pro-
ject management (Williams, 1999; Atkinson, 1999; Morris et al., 2000) cited
in [5].
In this study, project management is deﬁned as the application of knowledge,
skills, tools and techniques to project activities to meet requirements [6]. In
this sense, project management is understood as a discipline.
Project management as a discipline originated in a time of megaprojects.
However modern project management approaches are derived from ideas of
standardisation, large-scale operations and bureaucracy [5]. In this study,
a project is understood as a temporary endeavour undertaken to create a
unique product, or result [6, p. 1].
Furthermore, project span from being unique to repetitive tasks. The case
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.3.
THEORY
studied in this thesis, was indeed unique. Although it was an IT project,
it the industry, had not previously automatised this system. Thus, in the
scope of this, projects are considered to be unique tasks.
According to Lundin & Söderholm projects had mainly been seen as repetit-
ive tasks, where planning was both possible and desirable. In this perspect-
ive, projects would have the opportunity of cumulative knowledge.
In this thesis I will adopt the understanding of projects, as it was deﬁned by
Lundin & Söderholm in 1995 [7]. They argue that projects should be seen
as temporary organisations.
Their publication led to a trend in project theory publications, which would
consider characteristics, such as complexity, uncertainty and ambiguity, more
frequently (e.g. Geraldi et al., 2011; Pich et al., 2002) cited from [8].
2.3
Theory
Learning is a topic widely covered in many ﬁelds of study. Including learn-
ing psychology, cognitive science, sociology, pedagogy, biology and modern
brain research [9]. As such, learning theory reaches much farther than what
is needed for the scope of this thesis. Thus, for the sake of this study, I will
introduce only the required concepts.
For the scope of this thesis, I am concerned with four aspects of learning.
First is individual learning and the implication of mental models. Second
is the extension of learning from individuals to an organisation. Third is
the concept of how learning can be facilitated through systems and system
thinking. Finally, is the concept of a learning curve.
For individual learning, I accept the premise that mental models exists. And
that they impact the learning process. For the sake of this thesis a mental
model is deﬁned as a concentrated, personally constructed, internal concep-
tion, of external phenomena (historical, existing or projected), or experience,
that aﬀects how a person acts [10].
In relation to organisational learning, I adopt the premise that organisational
learning occurs through the individual members (Starkey et al., 2004) cited
in [10]. This means that mental models held by individuals are important
construct for organisations and management to enhance learning (Miller,
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.3.
THEORY
2003; Senge, 2006; Starkey et al., 2004) cited in [10].
Additionally, the knowledge which emerges from disciplines of organisational
learning has been deﬁned as cumulative, but within conﬁnes of a speciﬁc
overall paradigm (Constant 1980, Knorr-Cetine 1981, Kuhn 1970) cited
in [4]. In addition, it is suggested that when individual share converging
narratives, it enable organisational learning [4].
Now, system thinking is a concept coined by Mario Bunge in 1970 [11]
among others. The idea was to model a framework, in which many diﬀerent
disciplines could be studied. The framework is deﬁned through the use of
logical arguments, as often seen in mathematics and other natural sciences.
The assumption behind system thinking, is that learning takes place in a
feedback loop, where feedback will be interpreted through a shared and well
deﬁned mental model. System thinking then aims to improve mental mod-
els, as this will allow for better decision making in a dynamic environment.
A ﬁnal terminology for learning is the learning curve. It was introduced
by Theodore Paul Wright in 1936. He identiﬁed the mathematical relation-
ship between the number of times a worker had carried out a task, and that
worker’s performance (Wright, 1936). From this correlation he developed
the hypothesis, that repetition leads to improvement. He furthermore dis-
covered, that improvements happens at a constant rate.
The deﬁnition of the learning curve, as Wright suggested it, has later been
subject to reﬁnements. However, the premise remains that repetition leads
to increased performance, whereby cost decreases.
In the aviation industry, costs were the rate of lost lives. In project man-
agement, costs are the rate of failed projects.
The theories that have now been introduced, serves as the theoretical
foundation of this thesis. By combining the concepts I deﬁne a framework
for learning.
This framework is build from the basic assumptions evident in project man-
agement literature. Namely, that we can learn within a well deﬁned discip-
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.3.
THEORY
line, through repetition and revision of attempts.
From this framework I set up conditions for learning in project management.
First, learning starts with the individual, where it is impacted by men-
tal models tied to the individual. From there learning can extend to the
organisation. This process takes place, when individuals have converging
narratives. Such that they move towards a shared understanding of a con-
text.
Second, learning can be facilitated by means of system thinking. For learn-
ing to take place, it is required that we have a shared model of how a system
works. This model guides how information is interpreted.
Third, through repetition we can improve performance. This was what con-
stituted the learning curve. A property of the learning curve is that tasks
are repetitive.
This results in the following conditions for learning in project management:
• The context in which we learn is well deﬁned, such that knowledge can
be extended and reﬁned (property of system thinking)
• Narratives held by individuals in an organisation are converging (prop-
erty organisational learning)
• The events from which we learn is repetitive.
Implying they share
characteristics. (property of a learning curve)
As it has been stated, success rates show that learning does not occur
in project management.
Thus, the hypothesis of this thesis is, that the
conditions listed above, are compromised in the process of learning in project
management. This is studied by analysing a single case. The chosen method
is elaborated and discussed in the next section.
10
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.4.
METHOD
2.4
Method
The approach taken in this project is an embedded single-case study. Em-
bedded, because the approach includes analysing several diﬀerent narratives.
There are two main reasons for choosing this approach. The ﬁrst relates to
the ﬁeld of topic. The second relates to the research question.
The ﬁeld of topic is still highly undiscovered. Many publication have
been made, to uncover why a project succeeded or failed, and what to learn
from it. Furthermore, publications are made on how to deﬁne project suc-
cess and failure. Another extensively covered topic is tracking success and
failure rates of projects. Yet, trying to understand why projects fail, despite
tremendous eﬀorts to learn and improve, is an undiscovered ﬁeld. Choosing
a case study makes it possible to preserve the complexities in the topic.
The second reason for choosing a case-study approach is the type of
research question. The question is both descriptive and explanatory. Ac-
cording to [12], this encourages the chosen approach.
It is descriptive because it asks what the perceived learning outcomes from
the failed IT-project are. Thus, the question is open and does not limit the
answer to a speciﬁed framework. It is explanatory because it asks why we
struggle to learn.
Various types of data sources can be used in a case study. This report
relies mainly on documents. It considers several documents from diﬀerent
sources, all concerned with the same IT-project.
A common concern when using documents in case studies, is that they may
be subject to shortcomings and biases. A way to compensate for such biases
is to compare evidence from multiple sources. When independent sources
make identical claims, it is more likely to be true.
However, the concern regarding biases is not an issue. Since the aim is to
understand the subjective views on the case, it is actually an asset. Addi-
tionally, it is not the goal to uncover what happened, during the execution of
the IT-project. Thus, steering towards one truth, by comparing narratives,
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.4.
METHOD
Motivation
The purpose of the publication
Foundation
Empirical and theoretical foundation
Observations
Observations made about the process and
the outcome of the project
Causes
Causes to explain the outcome of the pro-
ject
Normative Suggestions
Suggestions for corrective actions to take
in the future
Table 2.1: Meta Framework for Narrative Analysis
is not an asset.
Ultimately, the aim of the report is not to conclude who is right, or has the
most accurate understanding of what happened. A claim could be made,
that the project failed, due to alien possession, and it would be treated as
equally likely and important. The goal is to compare learning outcomes from
multiple sources, and use this knowledge to understand, why we struggle to
learn in project management.
Diﬀerent documents concerning the case, are sorted into narratives. Each
narrative gives a take on the IT-project. A narrative can stem from one
person, from a group or from an entire institution. The narratives may be
completely independent, but are most likely not. This is irrelevant to the
study.
The Analysis of the narratives considers ﬁve dimensions, as shown in
Table 2.1. The ﬁrst is the motivation. The reason behind analysing the
case, as it is stated by the authors. The second is the foundation. This
is the empirical evidence, which they have based their analysis on. Fur-
thermore it is the theoretical foundation, if such is stated or evident in the
narrative. Third is the observations. This is their understanding of what
happened. Fourth is their explanations for why it happened - the causes for
why the project failed. This diﬀers from the observations, in the sense that
observations are meant as facts. Causes, on the other hand, represent their
subjective interpretation how the outcome can be explained. The ﬁfth and
12
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2.
APPROACH
2.4.
METHOD
ﬁnal dimension is normative suggestions. This is the suggestions made for
how failure could have been avoided. More importantly, it is suggestions
made for how similar events can be prevented in the future.
13
==PAGE:21==
3
|
The Case
In the introduction I brieﬂy introduced the
EFI project.
It was initiated in 2005 the
by danish government. More precisely the
Tax Ministry. Ten years later, in 2015, the
Tax Minister declared the project a failure.
He decided to put the system out of func-
tion.
Oftentimes, EFI is referred to as the largest
IT failure in the danish public sector. It had many serious consequences.
Cost overruns, signiﬁcant delays and perhaps a run-in with the law. Just to
name a few. This chapter outlines what happened.
Figure 3.1: Timeline of the EFI Project
14
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3.
THE CASE
3.1.
CONTEXT
3.1
Context
EFI was born in a time of change. Signiﬁcant changes were made to the
structures of the public sector. Three relevant changes will be explained -
The Structure Reform, The Fusion and The System Modernisation. All of
which were preconditions of the EFI project.
The public sector consists of governmental institutions and local authorit-
ies. In 2004 Denmark decided to change the structure of its public sector.
We called this The Structure Reform. Beforehand, Denmark was composed
of 271 local authorities. This number then changed to 98. Meanwhile, the
reform made way for a transformation of the Tax Administration.
Danish Tax Administration is a 400 year old system. It has only been
subject to few major changes in its lifespan [13]. In 2005 the system was
faced with a new change - The Fusion. At the time, several units formed
the Tax Administration. Taxes were collected by local authorities, police,
Økonomistyrelsen and ToldSkat [14]. With The Fusion, Tax Administra-
tion were centralised into one organisation. This organisation was named
’SKAT’, which conveniently translates to ’TAX’. The idea was to harvest the
beneﬁts of a scaled economy. To decrease complexity and increase eﬃciency.
Furthermore, a higher level of legal certainty could be ensured. In the fu-
ture, all rules and procedures would be deﬁned by one top management [15].
In the age of digitisation, the Fusion laid the foundation of the System Mod-
ernisation. Tax Administration became subject to digital transformation. A
comprehensive project. It consisted of developing six IT solutions. Each of
the systems, would support a new and better Tax Administration.
The System Modernisation were carried out in two phases. In each phase,
three solutions were developed. However, they were all interconnected. The
projects in phase one, were a requirement for the projects in phase two.
They were to enable communication between the systems. EFI was a part
of phase two. The two other projects in phase two, were to supply EFI with
the data it required [14].
15
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3.
THE CASE
3.2.
THE TASK
Thus, EFI was part of a bigger picture. It was the largest of the six projects,
but still highly depended on the rest. Besides, EFI were developed at a time,
where massive structural changes took place.
3.2
The Task
When taxes are left unpaid, they turn into debt. EFI’s job would be to
collect this debt. Recovering money, which people have avoided to pay, is
imaginable not a pleasant task. Evidently, I have never seen a bailiﬀpic-
tured with a smile on his face. However, this was the purpose of EFI. When
you add to the equation, how complex the danish tax system is, the task ap-
pears even more challenging. This section will shine some light on the debt
recovery system. What it looked like before EFI, and why automatising it,
looks like an ungrateful task.
There are many types of debt to be recovered. Just how many, where un-
known in the years before EFI. In 2003, the National Audit Oﬃce published
a report [16]. The report looked into debt recovery in the public sector. It
stated, that ﬁve diﬀerent authorities were handling debt collections. It also
stated, that there were 37 types of debt in total. As it turns out, this was
an underestimation.
Legally, the debt collection was also complex. First, diﬀerent methods are
used for recovery. One method is withholding salary. However, this method
could only be used for some types of debt. Second, in Denmark debt can
only be recovered, if the debtor has the ability to pay. Procedures for es-
timating this ability diﬀered across authorities.
IT systems were used for debt collection already before EFI. According to
the report published in 2003 [16], the situation was the following.
Each
authority had its own systems. Most had 1-2 systems. ToldSkat had 11
diﬀerent systems. To complicate this even more, the systems communicated
with other IT systems outside of this portfolio.
In 2004, the National Audit Oﬃce published a new report [17]. This presen-
16
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3.
THE CASE
3.3.
EXPECTATIONS
Figure 3.2: Internal and External IT Systems in ToldSkat [17]
ted a diﬀerent situation. According to this report, ToldSkat had 71 systems.
Many were interconnected. Furthermore, the systems were connected to 97
external systems. This is shown in Figure 3.2.
As it turned out, there were far more types of debts than anticipated.
In 2003, the estimated number was 37. In 2015, a report showed, that the
number was in fact 400+ [18]. Despite not realising the number of debt
types. They did realise that debt collection was complex. This was the
reason for EFI. One uniﬁed system, that would handle all debt collection.
3.3
Expectations
It often leads to discussion, When a claim is made, that a project has failed.
This is because success criteria are debatable. Does a project have to deliver
on all account in order to succeed? If scope and expectations changed along
the way, is the project then still successful. An interesting discussion. How-
ever, in the case of EFI, I assume that the project failed. In this section, it
is explained why.
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3.
THE CASE
3.4.
AFTERMATH
Automatising all debt collection was the purpose of EFI. There were also
expectations to input requirements and outcome beneﬁts. Expectations re-
lated to cost, time, legal equality and beneﬁts.
The project started in 2005 and was meant to ﬁnish in 2007. It was estim-
ated, that approximately one month was needed to implement the system.
However, the project missed the ﬁrst deadline. In 2009, the project missed
the second deadline.
It was not until 2013, that the system was partly
deployed. Only partly, since it was not completely ﬁnished. In 2015, the
project was shut down. The system was still unﬁnished. [19]
The expected cost of EFI was approximately 100 million Dkk. The actual
cost was 1.2 billion Dkk. This includes the cost of putting EFI out of func-
tion, but not the cost of lost revenue. Even so, it is safe to say, that costs
were much higher than expected.
One of the reasons for EFI, was to ensure legal certainty. There were many
procedures for debt recovery. It depended on the authority what was allowed
and not allowed. Some rules were even conﬂicting. This meant, that debtors
were treated diﬀerently. Despite the intention, EFI was actually shut down,
because of legal issues. It was suspected, that debt were not being collected
in accordance with the law.
Another beneﬁt, apart from legal certainty, was a reduction in staﬀ. EFI
were meant to save 200 full-time equivalents (FTEs). Employees were actu-
ally laid of. However, it became clear, that EFI would not ﬁnish on time.
Many were rehired as consultants. Additionally, more staﬀwere hired to
clean up, after the system was shut down.
3.4
Aftermath
Tax Administration suﬀered several consequences from the failed system.
Unpaid debts grew rapidly.
Since data from before the centralisation is
limited, it is diﬃcult to compare the amount of debt before 2005 with the
amount of debts today. However, the amount of debt has only been growing
since 2005. Especially in the years 2013 to 2015, when EFI was handling
debt collection. [19].
18
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3.
THE CASE
3.4.
AFTERMATH
Tax Administration also noticed, that their reputation took a hit.
This
became evident in two ways. First, they have struggled to ﬁnd and keep
qualiﬁed workers. many skilled and resourceful employees chose to leave.
Second, the population have less trust in the Tax Administration. [14].
Another consequence stems from the legal issues.
As mentioned, it was
suspected that some debts were collected illegally.
This of course added
to the trust issues. Additionally, it let to a thorough investigation of the
Tax Ministry and EFI project. An investigation that is expected to last ten
years. The aim of this investigation, is to ﬁnd out, if any individuals can be
held legally responsible1.
Since EFI was a project in the public sector, it was paid for by taxpayers. It
receives attention when a huge amount of taxpayers money are spend, but
nothing comes from it. This project caught the attention of both politicians,
media and the population. Many wanted to hold someone accountable. The
Tax Ministry raised a case against the solution providers.
Some people were actually held responsible. At least in a symbolic way. The
chief executive and many other in management positions were let go.
1https://www.regeringen.dk/nyheder/skattekommission/
19
==PAGE:27==
4
|
Narratives
Figure 4.1: The Five Stakeholders
Throughout the years EFI has received much attention. Countless news-
paper articles. A court case demanding hundreds of millions Dkk in com-
pensation for the failed system. A commission, which is spending ten years
on investigating the project. It was even cause for a book. Not many IT
projects become the topic of a book. Especially not failed IT projects. How-
ever, this was the case with EFI.
In this chapter I will present ﬁve narratives. Each narrative gives an inter-
pretation of the EFI case. In chapter 2 I introduced a meta framework for
analysis. The framework considered ﬁve dimensions - motivation, founda-
20
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.1.
AUDITORS
Figure 4.2: Timeline of Narratives
tion, observations, causes and normative suggestions. The same framework
is also used when presenting the narratives in this chapter.
Some of the narratives stems from publications made while the project
was still ongoing. Others from publications made afterwards. The narratives
will be presented in chronological order, according to the timeline in Figure
4.2.
As it becomes evident in this chapter, aspects of a narrative sometimes
erupts from publications made prior. Other times, it challenges it.
4.1
Auditors
State Auditors and Auditors General work closely together. State Auditors
monitor how tax money is spend. They receive information from the min-
istry and Auditors General. Civil servants in the ministry clarify in a report,
how they have spend the money. Auditor Generals crunch the numbers, and
pass forward the accounts. State Auditors then evaluate if the money was
spend, as agreed upon by politicians in the parliament.
In January 2015 a report was published on the System Modernisation. Aud-
itor Generals had carried out an investigation and forwarded the report to
State Auditors. State Auditors commented on this and published the report.
This is the source of the ﬁrst narrative.
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.1.
AUDITORS
The EFI project had not yet ﬁnished at the time of this report, therefore
the main focus is not on the results, but rather on the process. In particular,
they focus on the organisational implementation of EFI. However, other
phases in the process are commented on as well.
Motivation
Auditor’s role is to be critics of the government. This means that the purpose
of their investigation was to ensure, that the Tax Ministry were spending
tax money eﬀectively. They also oversee that promises are kept. In example,
that cost savings are achieved according to the plan. This is standard pro-
cedure. However, this report was an addition to their actual obligations.
Auditors General took initiative to conduct this investigation, even though
no requests had been made.
Foundation
The report is based on written information from the Tax Ministry and Tax
Administration. Much documentation is required in any part of the public
sector in Denmark.
Procedures for decision making as well as ﬁnancial
transactions. However, Auditors General noticed, that documentation was
very limited. The Tax Ministry and Department had far less, than would
have been expected.
The report also dives in to the quality of management procedures. They
base their evaluation regarding IT-project management on a report from
2001 [20], written by the Technology Counsel 1.
Box 4.1.1 gives a brief
overview of the main points in the report from 2001, which Auditors have
referred to in their investigation of EFI.
1Teknologirådet
22
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.1.
AUDITORS
Box 4.1.1: Good Practises in IT Project Management
The following are good practise approaches in IT project man-
agement, as they are listed in Auditors report. All references
are made to the report published in 2001 by the Technology
Counsel [20].
The report recommends that top management is highly in-
volved in IT projects, and that clear descriptions of roles and
responsibilities are made for everyone involved [14, p. 6].
In the initiation phase a clear scope for the project should be
deﬁned.
This should include measurable success criteria.
It
should furthermore be made clear, what potential for cost sav-
ings, the project has [14, p. 19].
When managing an IT project, not only project management
procedures should be deﬁned, but also procedures for facilitat-
ing changes in the organisation. This includes plans for com-
munication, user education and plans for handling a crisis in
relation to staﬀand resource requirements [14, p. 23].
Observations
At the time of the report, EFI had been deployed for almost a year and a
half. Despite this, the system was still not fully functioning. The report
clearly states that the project is far from successful. This is based on con-
secutive missed deadlines and cost overruns.
One observation made by the Auditors relates to the initiation phase. They
pay attention to the fact, that very abstract goals were deﬁned for EFI [14,
p. 20]. Additionally, it is pointed out, that SKAT displays high risk will-
ingness in the initiation phase. This is evident as they decided to initiate
the project, even though the projects in phase one were struggling. Projects
which EFI depended on [14, p. 11].
The Auditors main focus is on the implementation of EFI. They observed
that although clear deﬁnitions for roles and responsibilities were deﬁned for
most parts of the project, this did not hold true for all parts. In the im-
plementation phase. In 2013 SKAT puts together a team, consisting of the
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.1.
AUDITORS
managing director in SKAT, the program manager and project manager,
along other high ranging civil servant. The team is assigned with the task
managing challenges related to implementation. This also includes problems
with conﬂicts of interests and supplier management. [14, p. 8,24].
SKAT has made clearly deﬁned plans for communication and user educa-
tion p.23. Furthermore SKAT created risk assessments for events that might
occur in the implementation phase. These focused mostly on extremely un-
likely events, which would have very serious consequences.
An example
would be that SKAT was not able to collect debts for a long period of time.
SKAT did not formulate contingency plans in case of such events. [14, p. 24].
Lastly, in is noticed that budget control and documentation on ﬁnances are
insuﬃcient.
Causes
The causes detected by Auditors fall into four categories. Risk, preparation,
formalisation and resources. The ﬁrst two can be placed at top management
level within SKAT. The third can be found at all three levels of SKAT, and
the fourth is placed at project level.
Additionally, Auditors also mention the role of the solution providers, but
do not elaborate further on this.
First cause is high willingness to accept high risks and inadequate risk
assessments. According to this narrative, high risks were identiﬁed, accepted
and not adressed.
It it stated, that while risk assessments were done poorly in the ﬁrst phase
of the System Modernisation, they were actually thorough in the second
phase. However, risk willingness were too high. In example, SKAT initiated
the development of EFI, even though two IT solutions, which EFI would
depend on, struggled to get ﬁnished. Also, they did not outline contingency
plans, in case of unwanted events.
This cause is found at top management level in SKAT.
24
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.1.
AUDITORS
The second cause relates to the concept phase. Goals and descriptions
of EFI were too abstract. This made it diﬃcult to measure progress and
success. This cause is also placed in top management.
The third cause is lack of formalisation. Auditors suggest that unclear
roles and responsibilities were one reason why the project is unsuccessful.
This is evident on all three levels. [14, p. 8]. At top management level, de-
scriptions of both tasks and responsibilities were very superﬁcial. Further-
more, procedures for decision making were also not formally described [14,
p. 8].
At program- and project-level, roles and responsibilities were not
formally deﬁned until 2009 [14, p. 9].
Furthermore it is stated that documentation were insuﬃcient. Especially
regarding budgets. This in itself is not listed as a cause. It relates to the
responsibilities of Tax Administration. They are required to document how
money is spend. It does however lead to the last cause - communication.
Due to missing documentation, top management did not receive all the in-
formation they needed.
Finally, a fourth cause relates to lack of resources. At project manage-
ment level they had frequent replacements of project managers and diﬃculty
acquiring people with the needed skills [14, p. 9].
Normative Suggestions
The Auditors make only a few recommendations. All are in accordance with
best practises as outlined by the Technology Counsel in 2001.
First, they recommend that clear goals and speciﬁcations are established in
the initiation phase. This is in contrast to the very abstract goals recorded
in EFI.
Second, they recommend that risk assessment focus more on events that are
more likely to occur - in contrasts to unlikely but high impacts events. They
also suggest that contigency plans for how to respond are essential.
25
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.2.
CONSULTANTS
Last, more attention should be paid to budget documentation, as well as
written documentation for decision making procedures and basis for de-
cisions.
4.2
Consultants
The use of consultants is very common in the public sector. Especially when
important decisions need to be made. In Marts 2015, SKAT requested the
consultancy ﬁrm Accenture to conduct an analysis of EFI. This resulted in
a report, which was published in September 2015 [21]. A report that most
likely determined EFI’s fate.
Actually, Accenture wrote not just one report, but ﬁve. Three very tech-
nical reports. One investigating data ﬂows in EFI. The second investigating
functions, which is how EFI performs tasks, and a third report investigating
quality of the source code. They also wrote a fourth report, with the aim to
analyse management practises. Finally they wrote an overlay report. The
overlay report sums up all ﬁndings of the previous mentioned. This report
is used as the primary source to this narrative.
Accenture worked in close collaboration with a law ﬁrm - Kammerad-
vokaten. It is an independent ﬁrm and thereby not a part of the state. They
have an agreement with the state through the Ministry of Finance. They
provide legal services and counselling to ministries and state-owned institu-
tions.
in September 2015, Kammeradvokaten published a report [22]. The Tax
ministry had requested them to evaluate two systems - EFI and DMR. They
were asked if the systems acted in accordance with the law. In case they
did not, the Tax Ministry also wanted to know, how and when to put them
out of function. The main point from this report is listed in box 4.2.1.
The results presented in Accenture’s reports are highly dependent on those
of Kammeradvokaten and vice versa.
26
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.2.
CONSULTANTS
Box 4.2.1: Kammeradvokaten [22]
The analysis discovered a number of serious and less serious
mistakes.
These mistakes lead to a signiﬁcant risk of illegal
debt collection.
Some mistakes might cause currently illegal debt collection,
while others involving faulty registration of data, may lead to
issues with legality in the future.
Some, but not all, mistakes have been handled by suspending
the functionalities, that may cause illegal debt collection. How-
ever, there are still mistakes in the system, which has not yet
been dealt with.
Lastly, the report concludes that it has not been possible to
conduct a comprehensive investigation of all system mistakes.
In particular, it has not been possible to look into mistakes,
which are already known, in the scope of this analysis.
Motivation
SKAT requested Accenture to investigate EFI. The aim of this, was to un-
cover the current state of EFI, and make a proposition for where to go from
there. Accenture clearly states, that it is not their goal to conclude, whether
or not the contract agreements were obliged to. This would not be possible,
as contract obligations were weakly formulated.
The goal was purely to
determine the quality of the system, and make suggestions for actions to
take.
Foundation
Accenture gathered a large amount of empirical data prior to the analysis.
They conducted interviews with many people, who had been part of the
project.
This included the top management, program management and
members of the project team in SKAT and IT developers.
Apart from this, they have had access to much documentation. Both from
SKAT and the solution providers. This includes documentation on project
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.2.
CONSULTANTS
management and speciﬁcations, contracts, solution speciﬁcations and the
source code.
Furthermore, they state, that their conclusion is based on a comparison with
general industry standards within system development, similar collection
systems in other countries and Accenture Delivery Methods [21, p. 2].
Observations
The observations of EFI’s current state led to the ﬁnal conclusion, that EFI
should be discontinued [21, p. 2]. This is based mainly on two things - EFI
does not function as it should and it will be extremely diﬃcult to ﬁx the
system.
Accenture has observed, that EFI had signiﬁcant deﬁciencies and errors.
They state that this had been the case since EFI was partly deployed in
2013. Some improvements had been made regarding the amount of errors.
However, it was not possible to reduce the number signiﬁcantly.
They furthermore state that the poor performance of EFI, has negatively
aﬀected SKAT’s ability to collect debts.
Regarding the state of EFI they make the following remarks [21, p. 3-4]:
• The scope of EFI is large, which makes the system extremely complex.
• The documentation of the systems current state is insuﬃcient. The
same applies to documentation of design, requirements and expecta-
tions.
• The system has severe functional limitations, that inhibits eﬃcient
debt collection.
• The current state of data governance, data validation and data quality
makes the system likely to perform actions based on incorrect data.
• The quality of the source code is considered to be average.
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.2.
CONSULTANTS
Causes
Concept
In relation to the concept phase, Accenture targets the complexity of the
system. They state that the system was far more complex, than comparable
systems in other countries. This is attributed to the high number of diﬀerent
claim types, and legal procedures for each of them.
Planning & Design
In relation to the design, they say that the underlying architecture, integra-
tion with and dependence on external systems make EFI vulnerable. If one
of the external systems sets out, it will have a great impact on EFI.
Also, another main focus in this narrative is on issues with data validation.
They state that incorrect data can enter the system, and no procedures are
in place to validate data properly. This is a big problem, as it increases
risks of illegal actions. Furthermore, the system does not allow for SKAT
to track down were these mistakes might have occurred.
Finally, EFI Lacks speciﬁcations about requirements. This problem is present
both in the planning and design phase, but also in the execution phase. Ac-
centure states that as of July 2015, there is still no clear deﬁnition of the
system. Additionally, in the execution phase, documentation on the already
developed parts of the system are also missing.
Execution & Launch
Regarding the execution phase, the main causes related to leadership and
formalisation of procedures.
Accenture stated that the organisation lacks clear leadership, which makes
it diﬃcult to consider business goals when making decisions. They also em-
phasise that the lack of procedures led to lack of control, which accordingly
increase risk and uncertainty.
Another reason EFI is not performing well has to do with testing. According
to Accenture, the amount of tests and quality of the tests are disappointing.
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.2.
CONSULTANTS
There are three reasons for this. First is that the preparation and deﬁni-
tion of tests is inadequate. Second is the poor quality of documentation.
It is diﬃcult to design suitable tests, when documentation of the software
is missing. Third is a focus on "the simple path". According to Accenture,
only very simple cases were tested. Thus, the system was not very robust
once the complexity increased.
Normative Suggestions
The ﬁnal conclusion by Accenture was to discontinue EFI and replace it
with a new system. They provide some suggestions for reﬁnements, which
can be made in the next project.
When considering the concept phase, they ﬁrst suggest limit the scope
of such projects to decrease complexity. The high complexity was attributed
to both the high level of integration with other systems, but also complex-
ities in debt collection rules and procedures. There were a large amount of
diﬀerent debt types. A new system should focus on a smaller number of
debt types.
Regarding the planning and design phase, they recommend much more
detailed descriptions of the system’s design, requirements and expectations.
They also advise clearer deﬁnitions of roles and responsibilities and formal-
isation of procedures.
In the execution and launch phase, they recommend several changes.
However, all have the mutual characteristics, that they relate to formalisa-
tion of procedures and increasing the amount of documentation. The same
applies to the testing phase.
30
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.3.
THE TAX MINISTRY
4.3
The Tax Ministry
The next narrative stems from the Tax Ministry. As mentioned previously,
Kammeradvokaten were requested to investigate if EFI had any legal issues,
and Accenture were requested to investigate the current state of EFI. Both
were asked for actions to take in the future. Shortly after Kammeradvokaten
and Accenture presented the results of their work, the Tax Ministry pub-
lished a report [19]. This is the source of the next narrative.
The report has three main purposes - to outline the execution of project up
until the given time, to clarify the current state and to decide on what needs
to happen with the project next.
This narrative is included, because it stems from a key actor in the EFI case
- namely the institution that initiated the project. However, the report is
not based on an analysis. It serves to provide on overview of all available
information on EFI.
Motivation
SKAT and the Tax Ministry had acknowledged that the system was still not
fully functioning, and decided to review the entire project.
The motivation for writing this report, were the same as for the requests
made towards Kammeradvokaten and Accenture. The motivation was to
determine the fate of EFI.
Foundation
The majority of the report is a description of events throughout the lifespan
of the project. They describe debt collection before the fusion in 2005, and
how it has evolved since. This is based on documentation available from
previous reports, meetings etc. They also state that the report builds on
undocumented knowledge, that lies in the organisation.
Furthermore they based the report on the results presented by Kammerad-
vokaten and Accenture. This is summed up and provides the basis for their
conclusion.
31
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.3.
THE TAX MINISTRY
Observations
All observations regarding the current state of EFI and the process all ob-
servations stems directly from Accenture’s and Kammeradvokaten’s reports.
Thus, it is the Tax Ministries take, that EFI does not work, is acting illegally
and can not be saved. The conclusion is, that EFI must be shut down and
the system put out of function.
Causes
The explanation for why the project has failed is also based on the results
of the consultants. With a main focus on project management procedures.
The Tax Ministry makes a few additional comments, which highlights some
issues with the process.
They point out issues with supplier management, and argue a need for fur-
ther investigation of how contracts are formulated. Additionally, they high-
light the problems with communication, and the lack suﬃcient information
to top management.
Based an the report written by Accenture, the Tax Ministry states, that
there have been signiﬁcant challenges with the solution providers.
Furthermore, they are concerned with the missing information.
This is
also based on the work of Accenture.
It is stated that top management
did not receive the information they required regarding risks and problems
in testing. It is also stated that warnings and general concerns, were not
communication by the solution providers to the IT department in SKAT.
Normative Suggestions
The Tax Ministry is not concerned with normative suggestions, as this is
not within the scope of the report.
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.4.
IT PROFESSOR
4.4
IT Professor
This narrative is based on a report written by Søren Lauesen [18]. A pro-
fessor at the IT University of Copenhagen.
The report identiﬁes the damages and damage causes of ﬁve major IT pro-
jects in the danish public sector. IT takes a structured approach. In total,
36 damage causes are listed, and each are linked to one or several projects.
Equivalently, 36 cures are also given. One for each of the causes.
Motivation
“The purpose of this report is not to blame somebody. The
purpose of this report is to learn from past damages in order
to avoid them in the future.”
- Søren Lauesen [18, p. 3]
As stated in the quote. The aim of this report is the clarify what led the
project to fail, and provide suggestions for how to prevent this from hap-
pening in future projects. It is to learn from the outcomes of a failed project.
Foundation
The narrative builds on reports, that are publicly available. Reports writ-
ten by the Tax Ministry, consultants and Auditor. Apart from this, it is
also based on information given by whistleblowers and the authors own ex-
periences with IT projects. The narrative does not refer to any theoretical
foundation.
Observations
This narrative states that the EFI project experienced four major damages.
The damages are linked to time, cost, business performance and feasibility
doubts. Time, because EFI missed the ﬁrst deadline by eight years. Cost,
33
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.4.
IT PROFESSOR
because the costs were much higher than anticipated. Business performance,
because they were not able to save money on salaries, as they set out to do.
Feasibility doubts, because the systems feasibility was questioned, which let
to the system being put out of function.
Later on, Søren Lauesen has claimed, that the system may have been put out
of function without good reason. He says, that it could have been completely
legal. According to Søren Lauesen, the system might actually have worked2.
At least the majority of the system.
Causes
This narrative identiﬁes causes belonging to ﬁve categories. Project scope,
risk management, preparation, resources and management involvement.
While some of the causes may be found at project level, they all link to top
management level.
The ﬁrst cause in this narrative relates to the scope of the project. It ar-
gues, that they did not realise the complexity of the task [18]. A part of this,
was not realising the unorthodox tricks used by bailiﬀs. To this extend, the
narrative presents an example for illustration, that deserves to be mentioned.
“A good approach with an arrogant debtor is to locate him
at his favourite bar where he has drinks with his fellows.
While they all listen, announce his debt and ask whether he
cannot pay or whether they should set up a payment scheme.
Suddenly, he is willing to pay.”
- Søren Lauesen [18, p. 27]
Additional to this, he targets the scope of the project. Due to the complex-
ity of debt collection, the ambition to automatise all was too big.
2https://m.itwatch.dk/article/9617212
34
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.4.
IT PROFESSOR
Next, this narrative also identiﬁes risk management as a cause. It targets
top management’s disregard for risks. They downplayed it. This happened
both when software developers or project managers tried to communicate
it, but also when the system was deployed. According to this narrative, the
system had not been suﬃciently tested, and performed poorly in the limited
amount of tests. Top management decided to deploy the system anyway.
Even though it was risky. They were set on getting return on investments,
with no further delays.
Third, several causes listed in this narrative, relates to lack of upfront
planning. The author has identiﬁed problems with both description of re-
quirements and solution design.
Additionally, the cost estimates were wrong. This is not stated as a stand-
alone cause.
Basically, when upfront planning is insuﬃcient, it is more
diﬃcult to estimate costs correctly.
Additionally, descriptions of the business case was too simple. It is stated
in the report, that the single line "Eﬃcient debt collection" was the only
business goal. There were no means for measurement.
Second, The requirement did not target customer needs. They considered
both rules and laws. However, they failed to consider usability and what
the end-user needed.
Fourth, this narrative identiﬁes several causes, which can be attributed
to lack of resources and insuﬃcient involvement from top management. Re-
sources relates primarily to lack of knowledge.
One cause was that too much was expected from technology. As a precon-
dition for EFI, along with other future systems, SOA was developed. SOA
was an integration platform. New systems could be connected to exiting
through SOA. It was however not as easy, as they had anticipated. Thus,
they did not realise the limitations of technology.
Another cause relates to lack of knowledge at project level. They made re-
quests for more funding, as they needed help from lawyers and experts in
debt collection. Yet, top management did not take action. Thus, the project
team did not have the knowledge they required.
35
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.4.
IT PROFESSOR
A ﬁnal cause relates to wrong beliefs about the law and it’s limitations.
Management believed the law to be a roadblock. When EFI was eventually
shut down, it was due to legal issues. The report states that no attempts
were made to ﬁnd other solutions. Nobody tried to clarify if the system
actually acted illegally. Also, no requests for law changes were made. Thus,
the decision the shut down EFI, was based on uncertainty. They did not
actually know if it was illegal.
Normative Suggestions
Standardised Approaches
Many of the normative suggestions in this narrative relates to two things.
Better preparation upfront and implementing more standardised approaches.
He suggests to formulate a more comprehensive business goals. Additionally
these goals should be reviewed ongoing.
Problems related to poor formulation of requirement, can be avoided. New
systems should be formulated in problem-oriented requirements.
To avoid the problems, that relates to high complexity, they should study
processes more carefully, before formulating a new system.
This simply
were not aware of how complex the system was. This issue could have been
avoided, if they had put more eﬀort into understanding the existing system.
Management needs to do correct risk management. Use checklists and draw
on experiences from similar projects. Evaluate the consequences, even if
events are unlikely, and make a plan for how to navigate from there. Man-
agement should not downplay risk.
The problem with underestimating cost. This would partly be solved, when
the four previous cures have been implemented. Better formulation of re-
quirements, will provide a better foundation for correct cost estimation.
Additionally, it is suggested to use a checklist. Either a standard business
case checklist or an adjusted template.
The testing was insuﬃcient, when the system was deployed. The cure is to
do one of two tests. Either a deployment test or a pilot test. In a deploy-
ment test, the system is run on the actual cases, but results are not. The
36
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.5.
THE BOOK
work is still done in the old ways. In a pilot test, the system is used on a
small number of cases only, but actual work is done, and results are used.
More Knowledge
Many problems could have been avoided with more knowledge. They would
have realised the complexity of the debt collection system. Other problems
could have been avoided as well.
The problem of expecting too much from technology. First, they should seek
a second opinion. Second, they should study organisations, which use the
same type of technology.
Developers were not able to build a feasible solution, simply due to lack
of knowledge. Tax had the experts, but they were unwilling to cooperate.
The cure for obtaining feasible solutions, are expert involvement.
Both
IT experts and domain experts are needed.
Preferably IT experts with
experience from similar projects. Management should have interfered, and
ensured cooperation.
Another problem was uncertainty about the law. The cure for this is to ﬁnd
constructive lawyers. It is stated, that most lawyers choose the safe answer.
If it is unclear whether something is legal or not, they will say its not.
More constructive lawyers are more likely to discover, if it can be done in
accordance with the law. Also, more eﬀort should be put into clariﬁcation.
Was the system actually illegal.
4.5
The Book
The next narrative is based on a the book written by two danish profess-
ors [23]. The name of the book is ’Overconﬁdence and Powerlessness - The
Story of The New Tax Administration’ 3.
Authors of the book, Jørgen
Grønnegård Christensen & Peter Bjerre Mortensen, are both professors in
political science at Aarhus University.
Their book does not only cover EFI. They discuss the entire centralisation
3Translated from ’Overmod og Afmagt - Historien om Det Nye Skat
37
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.5.
THE BOOK
of the Tax Ministry - The Fusion. In relation to this, they discuss the sys-
tem modernisation, which EFI was a part of. They also discuss other major
projects and events in the Tax Ministry. Most importantly, they investigate
the political environment before, during and after the Fusion. Nevertheless,
EFI is given a considerable amount of attention in the book.
Figure 4.3: Book Cover
Motivation
In the very beginning of the book, they declare the motivation behind their
work. They state that the purpose of their work is to make suggestions on
what went wrong and what can be learned from the process.
They argue, that often the investigation of cases, such as EFI, is concerned
with assigning blame. In constrast, they wanted to view the case in a more
holistic perspective.
However, they are do believe, that signiﬁcant mistakes were made. They also
believe that the project could have been successful, if actors had been more
aware of the problems and in many aspects, acted diﬀerently [23, p. 233].
38
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.5.
THE BOOK
Foundation
It is stated, that the book is not a theoretical contribution. It does however
have a theoretical foundation.
They build their claims on theories from
cognitive psychology, political science and Economics.
Four main concept are core in their narrative. First is the concept of limited
rationality. Individuals are not able to perceive all aspects of the reality,
citing (Simon 1945). They rely on simpliﬁed models of the world, citing
(Jones 2001). Second is overconﬁdence, that we have to much trust in our
own abilities, citing (Kahneman 2011: 199-221).Third is our tendency to
not realise problems as they unfold, citing (Jones & Baumgartner). Fourth
is the principle agent theory, that we will act according to our own best
interest, citing (Weber 1918; Bertelli 2012).
They also refer to aspects of management theory.
However, they do
not view management theory as a proper framework for understanding the
causes, or support suggestions for corrective means [23, p. 252-253].
Empirical evidence stems from reports, which are made public. Reports
from both the parliament, the Tax Ministry, Tax Administration, Auditor
Generals, Attorney Generals and consultants.
Observations
The authors of this book share the same view on EFI, as most of the others.
Namely, that the project was a massive failure. It suﬀered major delays,
cost overruns and ﬁnally, is did not deliver a solution.
However, some observations diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the other narratives.
Most most argue that upfront preparation was sparse. This narrative states
that upfront preparation was extensive [23, p. 146]. However, it was the
foundation of the preparation, that was not solid.
Furthermore, they also observe a contradiction regarding management
approaches. They notice, that what is presented as modern management
approaches, is actually grounded in old ideas of the administrative formation
of an organisation [23, p. 252]
39
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.5.
THE BOOK
Causes
The causes identiﬁed in this narrative are placed into four categories - pro-
ject scope, preparation, external environment and a lack of common sense.
Causes related to the ﬁrst two categories and lack of common sense, all fall
under the responsibilities of top management in SKAT and the Tax Min-
istry. Causes related to the external environment are attributed to other
parts within the public sector.
The ﬁrst cause identiﬁed in this narrative relates to the complexity and
scope of the project. As mentioned many times before, the debt collection
system was complex. This narrative argues, that maybe the system was too
complex to comprehend.
This is based on a theory formulated by Elinor Ostrom, cited (Ostrom et al.
1999:280). The idea is, that when systems evolves over long periods of time,
rules and dynamics arise. These are rarely visible to someone observing the
system. However, they are the reason a system works. In the case of debt
collection, complexity and invisible dynamics, may be a reason why the sys-
tem was to diﬃcult to automatise.
Additionally, the scope was also the result of overconﬁdent civil servants,
who trusted to much in their own abilities.
The second cause relates to preparation. This narrative states that pre-
paration was actually thorough.
Top management worked very hard to
prepare for the project. However, the basis for their preparation was incom-
plete.
The reason for this was two-fold. It was the combination of our cognitive
limitations combined with power incentives in the political scene.
First is the myth of the rational organisation. They argue that decisions
only appear to be based on rationality. In reality the rational organisation
is only a theoretical phenomena, that is not supported by empirical data,
citing (Christensen & Mortensen 2016: 155-161).
The use of consultants also constituted to an incomplete basis for decision
making. According to this narrative, consultant were bias. They did not
provide a critical review of pros and cons. Instead, they only served the
40
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.5.
THE BOOK
purpose of supporting a decision, which was already made.
To this extend, they served both civil servants and themselves. They in-
creased their chance of being chosen for similar jobs in the future. Mean-
while, they provided civil servants with the basis they needed to get through
with decisions.
A third cause is placed in the external environment of SKAT. However,
still within the public sector of Denmark. It argues that Auditors and the
Ministry of Finance stepped out of their roles.
The Ministry of Finance is responsible for accounting and managing the
ﬁnance in the state of Denmark. This narrative argues, that they may have
interfered more than they should. They had too much to say regarding the
organisational structures and how the EFI project were managed. This was
especially a problem, since they were not qualiﬁed for the task. They had
an overly strict idea, of what an organisation looks like. An outdated idea,
that were not supported by more recent management theory [23, p. 257].
Similar to the Ministry of Finance, Auditors Generals also stepped out of
their role. They are supposed to be critics. According to this narrative,
they too were busy making suggestions for how changes to the organisa-
tional structures should be made, and suggestions for EFI. They also had a
strict and outdated view on how organisations are run [23, p. 257].
Another problem was with the politicians. They may not have stepped out
of their role. Instead, they did not exploit it enough. The politicians who
belong to the opposition, are critics of the government. They oversee every
action. According to this narrative, they were often on the right track. How-
ever, they gave up too quickly [23, p. 259].
Finally, a fourth cause was the lack of common sense. They celebrated
too soon. A beneﬁt of EFI was that less FTE’s were needed. However,
employees were let go, before the system could take over their jobs. This
resulted in a severe shortage in knowledge within the organisation. Accord-
ing to this narrative, this was also a reason, why the project kept struggling
to meet deadlines [23, p. 253].
41
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4.
NARRATIVES
4.5.
THE BOOK
Normative Suggestions
Time & Strategy
The problems with overconﬁdence resulted in an underestimation of time
requirements and the extend of the task. As stated, deadlines were to short,
and goals were too ambitious. This narrative suggests, to allow more time
for such projects. They also suggest a part by part approach. Avoid big-
bang launches and comprehensive solutions. Ministries and departments in
the public sector should break down goals. This way, problems with over-
conﬁdence can be dealt with. Ambitions will be lowered, and time frames
extended [23, p. 256].
Avoid Repetition
Another suggestion is to not make the same mistakes. Change the systems
and approaches. For instance, change the use of consultants. As they are
both bias and unqualiﬁed, it does not make sense, to use them for decision
making.
Also, they argue not to let people go, until they are able to replace them [23,
p. 256 & 258].
Stay in Character
Both the Ministry of Finance and Auditors general should avoid stepping out
of their roles. This way, actions taken in the departments, are not inﬂuenced
by wrong organisational beliefs [23, p. 257].
Politicians should make better use of their resources. When they come across
an issue, they should stay with it for longer. This way, they will be able to
exploit their roles even more [23, p 259].
42
==PAGE:50==
5
|
Comparison
Figure 5.1: The Blind Men and The Elephant
The Blind Men and The Elephant is an old parable. The story is about
a group of blind men, who encounters an elephant for the ﬁrst time. The
concept of an elephant is unknown to them. They each touch a diﬀerent
part of the elephant. One touches the tail and believes it is a rope. Another
touches a leg and believes it’s a tree and so on. The moral is that humans
often claim to know the truth, based on a limited subjective experience.
At the same time we disregard others limited subjective experiences as the
truth. Even though they are equally likely.
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.1.
MOTIVATION
The parable serves as a ﬁne metaphor for what happened after EFI. Diﬀerent
people looked at the same event, and came up with diﬀerent explanations
for what happened.
In this chapter I compare the narratives. This is done through the same
framework, in which they were outlined - motivation, foundation, observa-
tion, causes and normative suggestions.
5.1
Motivation
Motivation displays some fundamental assumptions in the narratives. The
motivation behind several narratives, is to learn from the EFI project. This
means that there is a shared assumption across the narratives, that this
is possible.
That learning outcomes from past projects can be projec-
ted onto future projects. Especially narrative 4.4 based on the report by
Søren Lauesen [18] and narrative 4.5 based on the book by Mortensen and
Christensen [23] takes this approach.
The foremost purpose of narrative 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 were to understand the
situation of the project at the current time. However, it is still a shared goal
in all narratives, to provide explanations for why the project failed, and more
or less implicit, to make normative suggestions. Only narrative 4.3 abstain
from providing normative suggestions for how to manage IT-projects in the
future.
5.2
Foundation
Each narrative is build around one or more of three elements - Theory,
empirical data and common sense. Theories provides us with generalised
explanations - a way to interpret our observations. In these narratives it
includes aspects of organisational management, project management and
management of change.
It also includes cognitive psychology, economics
and political science.
Empirical data consists of both public available documents, qualitative data
44
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.2.
FOUNDATION
gathered through interviews and own experiences. Finally, the narratives
build on what is stated as common sense. In this section I will compare the
foundations, as they are either described in the narratives, or shown through
statements.
References made to project management theory is sparse. However, al-
most all narratives display beliefs about the fundamentals of project man-
agement. The only narrative less concerned with project management, is
the one based on the book 4.5.
One general theme can be found in four of the narratives. This relates to
standardised approaches in project management.
These include detailed
descriptions and upfront documentation of requirements, expectations and
goals. It also includes more detailed designs of the IT solution and docu-
mentation thereof.
Other common themes in most narratives are the need for clearly deﬁned
roles and responsibilities. It is the need for procedures to structure how pro-
gress is measured, a testing framework, communication procedures, budget
documentation and better risk assessment.
Some narratives are also concerned with managing changes in the organisa-
tion. This includes narrative 4.1, narrative 4.2 and narrative 4.4. In this
regard it is still mutual to all, that focus is placed on formalisation of pro-
cedures.
Only narrative 4.5 draws on theory from other disciplines, such as cog-
nitive and political science. This makes way for an interpretation of the case,
where human limitations and incentives becomes the centre of attention.
When considering the empirical data, all narratives are based partly or
entirely on publicly available documents. The analysis also showed, that the
narratives draw on each other’s publications. Apart from documents, inter-
views are mentioned in narrative 4.4 and 4.2. Narrative 4.4 also mention
access to whistleblowers.
45
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.3.
OBSERVATIONS
Lastly, the narratives are based on own experiences. This is explicitly
stated in narrative 4.3, 4.2, 4.4 and 4.5.
With the existence of mental
models in mind, it is not surprising that interpretations would draw on
own experiences. While common sense is not listed as a foundation for the
narratives, it is evident in most narratives. This is displayed in suggestions
such as not to let employees go, until they can be replaced. Narratives are
not concerned with supporting such suggestions with theoretical or empirical
evidence. They rely entirely on common sense.
It is apparent, that perspectives depend on the person or group behind
the narratives. For instance, the IT professor is very concerned with the
details in IT development, while the professors in political science are more
concerned with the political scene. Non of narrative, apart from the book,
identify political power incentives as a cause.
5.3
Observations
Narratives observe the reality diﬀerently, but they also observe very diﬀer-
ent aspects of it.
The observations listed in the narratives, are concerned with both the
quality of the ﬁnal product and characteristics in the process. A comparison
of the observations reveals some contradicting observations.
One highly discussed topic in project management is how success can be
measured.
There are often several ideas of what makes up a successful
project. This debate has not been evident in the EFI case. However, the
observations does display a contradiction regarding the success of the pro-
ject.
Across the narratives there is an agreement regarding success criteria. This
is evident in their reasons for deeming it a failure. All narratives focus on
time, cost and scope, but while they agree what the scope was, they appear
to have conﬂicting views on whether it was accomplished. The consultancy
ﬁrm Accenture argued that the solution had very limited functionalities, and
that it was unlikely, that this could be corrected. In contrast, the narrative
given by Søren Lauesen from ITU argues diﬀerently. He claims that the sys-
46
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.4.
CAUSES
tem actually worked, and that mistakes were corrected eﬀectively as they
were discovered.
Another disagreement is on whether the system acted illegally. Recall, this
was the main argument for abandoning the project. It is arguably an im-
portant observation. Still, while Kammeradvokaten and Accenture deemed
the system illegal, Søren Lauesen and high ranging civil servants1 begs to
diﬀer.
Another conﬂicting observation relates to the missing information. Søren
Lauesen states that information were communicated to top management,
but not reacted on. He based this on information collected through inter-
views. At the same time, Accenture and the Tax Ministry claims that this
was not the case. Instead, the Tax Ministry highlights this as an important
cause, that led the project to fail.
Finally, Søren Lauesen made the observation, that management believed the
law to be a roadblock, and did not try to convey this problem. It has been
stated by members of the top management, that this does not hold true. In
reality, requests were made to change the law, and those requests were also
met.
Based on the contradictions listed above, it is clear that even though
much of the data stems from the same sources, namely publicly available
documents, interpretations of the situation are not identical. Many of them
are in fact contradicting.
5.4
Causes
The project was too complex and the scope too ambitious. Details in plan-
ning and design were inadequate. Risk willingness was too high. Not enough
control was exercised. The project lacked proper documentation. Overcon-
ﬁdence let to unrealistic goals. Top management were not involved enough.
Communication procedures were missing, and the list goes on.
The narratives lists a large number of causes. Most of these can be placed
into management theories.
Even if this connection was not made in the
1Information acquired from anonymous interview
47
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.4.
CAUSES
narratives. Some even make it to the top ten list of most frequent causes
for why IT projects fail.
In the previous section, it was clear, that several observations were contra-
dicting. This applies only to a very limited extend, when comparing the
causes. Most causes are actually mutual agreed upon. Still, they can not be
said to qualify as new discoveries.
If we start by looking at the concept of the project. The goal was to
automatise all debt collection with one IT system. Three narratives mention
the scope and complexity of the project as a cause of faliure - 4.2, 4.4 and
4.5. The task was simply too complex.
Considering the planning and design phase of the project, three nar-
ratives agree on the missing formalisation - Auditors, consultants and Søren
Lauesen. The Tax Ministry mention this in a summary, but does not provide
an independent opinion, and the book does not focus on this aspect of the
project.
Causes related to missing formalisation includes, but are not limited to,
lack of details in requirements, design speciﬁcations and expectations. It
also includes lack of clearly deﬁned roles and responsibilities along with
documentation of this. Søren Lauesen also mention the problem with cost
estimation, and connects this cause to lack of details in requirements.
However, the book does target issues with planning. It claims that dead-
lines were too short and ambitious. This problem is not attributed to lack
of formalisation, but rather to overconﬁdent civil servants.
Ultimately, there is common agreement that upfront preparation was in-
adequate.
Most narratives agree, that this is can be blamed on lack of
formalisation.
Some causes listed in the execution and launch phase resemble the ones
above. They are also concerned with an insuﬃcient focus on formalisation.
Auditors mention budget control and documentation. Accenture mention
documentation of progress, changes in scope and time. They also mention
decision making procedures, test execution and several other aspects that
were too informal.
48
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.5.
NORMATIVE SUGGESTIONS
Another theme in the execution phase is risk. Auditors argue, that while
risk assessments were done, they were improper. SKAT focused on unlikely
events, when they should have been concerned with the more likely events.
Additionally, SKAT did not formalise contingency plans, and they accepted
very high risks. This was not given as cause for failure, as the project had
not yet failed. It was a part of why the project struggled.
Søren Lauesen claims that top management accepted high levels of risks
when the solution was deployed. They new about the poor test results, but
released it anyway.
To sum up, while many of the causes are diﬀerent, a signiﬁcant number
overlap. In some instances, the same cause is identiﬁed in more than one
narrative, but the explanations for the cause varies. In example, this was
the case with poor planning. Some blamed it on missing procedures, while
the book blamed it on overconﬁdence.
Nevertheless, very little contradiction was found, and most causes would be
able to coexist. However, as also stated in the beginning of this section, the
causes do not qualify as new discoveries.
5.5
Normative Suggestions
The majority of the normative suggestions can ﬁt into one of four categories;
Deﬁne a more appropriate scope, implement and stick to known approaches
from management, ensure that required resources are available and apply
common sense.
If we start by looking at the concept of the project.
The suggestion
to deﬁne a more appropriate scope comes into place. There were mutual
agreement that complexity was a cause.
However, their normative sug-
gestions regarding this issue diﬀers. Accenture suggest that scope of such
projects should be more limited. This implies the assumption that they were
aware of the complexity at the time. In narrative 4.4 by Søren Lauesen it
is acknowledged, that complexity were not entirely realised. However, he
suggests to put more eﬀort into realising such characteristics, by analysis
49
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5.
COMPARISON
5.5.
NORMATIVE SUGGESTIONS
the system. Again the suggestion is to adjust the scope accordingly. In nar-
rative 4.5 it is argued that complexities could not have been realised. Yet
the normative suggestion relating to this is to avoid comprehensive solutions
and allow more time for such projects.
When considering both the planning and design phase and the execu-
tion and launch phase, most normative suggestions argue to implement more
formalised procedures. Namely, to implement and stick to know approaches
from project management. This is found in both the narrative by Auditors,
consultants and Søren Lauesen.
The pattern found in normative suggestions relates to resources. It must
be ensured that they are in place. In particular, the narrative from Søren
Lauesen is concerned with this issue. He argues the need for managers to
acquire more technical knowledge, and to allocate people with the required
expertise to the project.
Lastly, I will highlight some normative suggestions, which appears to build
on common sense. First, the consultants mention the need to stay clear of
’the simple path’. The tests performed on EFI mainly included very simple
cases. In reality EFI would be faced with much more diﬃcult cases. Thus,
the test instances should reﬂect this.
Common sense is also visible in the suggestion advising not to let employees
go, until they can be replaced. This is found in both the narrative from
Søren Lauesen and the book.
While the normative suggestions might not be identical, many of them
overlap, just as the causes did. Furthermore, most of them would be able to
coexist. However, just as the causes did not include many new discoveries,
neither do the normative suggestions.
50
==PAGE:58==
6
|
The Learning Curve
In this chapter I outline the main reasons, which has been identiﬁed in this
analysis, for why we struggle to learn. This is initially limited to the ques-
tion of why the pubic sector in Denmark struggles to learn.
6.1
Cumulative Knowledge
The ﬁrst reason I identiﬁed, is that the assumption of cumulative knowledge
does not hold true. Recall the idea behind system thinking. It suggested
that through repetition, we could reﬁne responses and thereby move down
the learning curve. If this is projected onto this case, it would imply that
learning outcomes should be reﬁnements to an already established system.
This is not the case, even if we allow for repetitive mistakes. By repetitive
mistakes I mean actions that does not ﬁt into the established system.
For instance, a cause given by both Auditors and IT professor is poor risk
assessment. Although it is evident, that risk assessments were part of the
project management philosophy. The normative suggestions are, to conduct
more thorough risk assessments, and better contingency plans. This is an
example of pointing attention to a task that could have been performed bet-
ter. However, it does not reﬁne or extend the existing body of knowledge.
A main theme in all narratives is not that actors lacked the required know-
ledge, it is that they did not act according to this. Thus, most causes are
based on knowledge of best practise approaches, which were also available
51
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6.
THE LEARNING CURVE
6.2.
CONVERGENT NARRATIVES
when the mistakes were made. The normative suggestion mainly just advise
entities to act according to this knowledge.
6.2
Convergent Narratives
A second reason relates to the idea of converging narratives. Approaching
a shared mental model of a system. First, a comparison of the narratives
showed, that in some instances, they has conﬂicting ideas of what happened.
Consultants and the Tax Ministry itself, claimed that the system was illegal.
In contrast, the IT professor said that it was not.
Second, the comparison showed very diﬀerent perspectives. The book fo-
cused mainly on the political scene and human cognition. While consultants
and the IT professor focused on the IT development process.
It also occurred that they identiﬁed the same cause, but supported it with
diﬀerent explanations. The scope was big and the task complex. According
to the IT professor, this was due to not investigating the task thoroughly.
At the same time, the book narrative claims, that complexity could not
have been realised, and that scope was because of overconﬁdence. Although
the narratives mostly indicate causes and normative suggestions, that could
coexist. They do not show a shared model of the system.
6.3
A Repetitive Task
A third reason is that project management approaches are based on an un-
derstanding of projects as repetitive. In chapter 2 I adopted the deﬁnition
of projects as temporary organisations. This means that issues related to
complexity, uncertainty and ambiguity are generally expected.
This fur-
thermore means, that the ability to notice and respond to unusual events is
crucial. Not a single one of the narratives are concerned with the possibil-
ity of unusual events occurring, and consequently, the ability to respond to
them. Across all narratives, it is assumed that all types of events can be
predicted, and through proper risk assessment, they can be accounted for.
52
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6.
THE LEARNING CURVE
6.3.
A REPETITIVE TASK
A Success Paradox
The study has inspired a thought, that let me to question one of the initial
assumptions in the thesis. It is the question of whether project management
is actually as unsuccessful, as it has been claimed. The infamous quote by
Thomas Edison, is a good illustration for this idea.
“I have not failed. I’ve just found 10,000 ways that won’t
work.”
- Thomas A. Edison
In the introduction of the thesis, it was stated, that high failure rates
indicate an unsuccessful discipline. This was based on two things. First,
is the deﬁnitions of a project and project management. Recall, a project
was understood as a temporary endeavour undertaken to create a unique
product, or result [6, p. 1]. And project management was deﬁned as the
application of knowledge, skills, tools and techniques to project activities to
meet requirements [6]. In this regard, a ﬁnal result and meeting require-
ments, must be the indicators of success.
Second, the eﬀorts made to learn in project management, was based on
ideas of system thinking and learning through repetition. As success rates
did not improve, when compared to other disciples taking the same ap-
proach, it deemed the discipline unsuccessful.
This makes way for an interesting thought. In the beginning of the thesis,
the aviation industry served as an example of a successful industry. This was
based on, that learning has occurred by means of systems and repetition.
One task commonly undertaken in aviation is projects, and thereby project
management. However, even in the aviation industry, many projects fail.
Either they do not meed expectations, or they are never completed.
Some interesting questions present; would the aviation industry have been
equally successful, measured in accident rates, if projects never failed? Or
does projects serve as a mean for learning? This question can be extended
53
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6.
THE LEARNING CURVE
6.3.
A REPETITIVE TASK
to other engineering disciplines as well. It suggests, that perhaps a high
success rate in projects, would just be an implication of setting the bar too
low.
54
==PAGE:62==
7
|
Discussion
Throughout this thesis, I have been concerned with the learning outcomes of
diﬀerent narratives. The approach taken to uncover what was learned, rely
on a very important assumption. That we share a purpose. In section 2,
I introduced the concept of mental models and limited rationality. Thus, I
went into the analysis with the expectation, that narratives were a reﬂection
of the entity it emerged from, rather than the truth. However, I assumed
that all narratives were concerned with uncovering the truth.
In reality, this may not be the case. Power relations and incentives may also
be reﬂected in a narrative. To give an example. One narrative suggested to
abstain from using consultants, on the basis that they were unqualiﬁed for
the task. While my knowledge about power relations and incentives is not
strong, I would argue, that at least one other narrative would disagree with
this claim.
Since the analysis conducted and presented here is limited in this regard,
a suggestion for further research is to uncover, how power relations and in-
centives aﬀect learning outcomes.
Another topic that has not been dealt with in this thesis is stakeholders
interpretation of success. Based on the initial assumption, that this project
was an obvious case of failure, it was not within the scope. An hypothesis
would be, that diﬀerent interpretations of success and failure also contribute
to inhibit learning. This is also suggested as a topic for further research.
55
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7.
DISCUSSION
The analysis presented in this thesis, is concerned with a single case.
Yet, some ﬁndings have made way for explanations, which could potentially
apply to project management in general.
First, the problem with system thinking. It was evident that the assumption
behind system thinking did not hold true for this case. The same might also
be the case with projects in general. Recall that the preconditions for system
thinking to work, is that tasks are repetitive and that we have are shared
understanding of the system. When trying to deﬁne project management
approaches, we focus on what projects have in common. however, this may
only be the tip of the iceberg. If in fact projects are more diverse than they
are similar, this would make learning through a systematic approach very
diﬃcult.
IT serves as a ﬁne example, since IT is a discipline applied to a variety of
industries. In this case it was debt collection. It could also be healthcare,
transport or many other ﬁelds.
We would probably never categorise an organisation based on the language
spoken by the people in it. A construction company in Spain and one in
Denmark belongs to the same category - construction. If we were looking
for people to hire for a construction project in Spain, the main attributes we
would be looking for is knowledge on construction and not Spanish. This is
not the case with projects, or project management. EFI was considered an
IT project - not a debt collection project. The main concerns are on project
management and IT development tools and not on debt collection.
Thus, a recommendation for further research would be to study in which
ways projects diﬀers, and if the project category - especially IT project -
serves as proper classiﬁcation.
56
==PAGE:64==
8
|
Conclusion
In the introduction I identiﬁed a paradox. Despite tremendous eﬀorts to
learn in project management, the discipline struggles. The success and fail-
ure rates clearly support this claim. The aim of the thesis was to uncover
the reason for this, which was done through a case study.
I accepted the deﬁnition of projects as temporary organisations, in which
uncertainty plays a key role.
The case study was conducted through analysis of multiple narratives. Each
served to display an example of a learning process. Three interesting dis-
coveries were made. First, all narratives build on a shared assumption, that
learning was possible through a process of system thinking. Second, while
the theoretical understanding of a project diﬀered from the one adopted in
this thesis, it was mutual agreed upon in the narratives. Third, identiﬁca-
tion of causes and the normative suggestions given do not involve any new
discoveries. Instead, they argue that members of the project did not act
optimally, and that the solution for future projects lies in not making the
same mistakes.
With the deﬁnition of projects as characterised by uncertainty in mind, I
found that two of the reasons we struggle to learn, is the assumption that
projects are repetitive tasks, and that all types of events can be predicted.
If project were repetitive and system thinking could lead to learning, then we
would have seen a reﬁnement of existing frameworks and knowledge. This
has not been the case. In fact, the narratives are actually self contradicting,
as they assume a possibility of cumulative knowledge, but only to a very
limited extend reﬁne this knowledge.
Furthermore, if the deﬁnition of projects holds true, and uncertainty is a sig-
57
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 8.
CONCLUSION
niﬁcant part of projects, this provides the second reason for why we struggle
to learn. The narratives are based on a shared assumption, that any event
that might occur can be predicted.
Another ﬁnding in this thesis, was the eﬀect the hindsight bias has, on how
we analyse outcomes of past events. If we are prone to believe that an out-
come could have been predicted, we may also believe that this will apply in
future cases.
To sum up, the disregard for uncertainty in projects, the understanding of
projects as repetitive tasks and the hindsight bias negatively aﬀect our abil-
ity to learn in project management.
The project has led to the following suggestions for further research: how
does power relations and incentives aﬀect the way we judge the outcome of
a project, and also how do diﬀerent interpretations of success aﬀects this.
Furthermore, the issues with projects not conforming to the characteristics
of being a repetitive task, it not only due to uncertainty. I suggest that it
may be attributed to the fact, that the project category holds such distinct
entities, and may not be an appropriate deﬁnition. In project management
and IT project management we generalise across many industries, but the
number of similarities found in these projects might be outdone by the num-
ber of diﬀerences.
58
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
[1] European aviation safety agency.
Annual safety review 2010.
easa.europa.eu, 2010.
[2] Incorporated The Standish Group International. Chaos manifesto 2013.
2013.
[3] Jiju & Gupta Shivan & Bag Surajit & Roubaud David Gupta Sandeep
& Gunasekaran, Angappa & Antony. Systematic literature review of
project failures: Current trands and scope for future research. Com-
puters & Industrial Engineering, 2018.
[4] Raghu Garud, Roger L. M. Dunbar, and Caroline A. Bartel. Dealing
with unusual experiences: A narrative perspective on organizational
learning. Organization Science, 22(3):587 – 601, 2011.
[5] Damian & Lindgren Monica & PackendorﬀJohann Cicmil, Svetlana
& Hodgson. Project management behind the facade. Ephemera, 2009.
[6] PMI, editor. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge
(PMBOK Guide).
Project Management Institute, Newtown Square,
PA, 5 edition, 2013.
[7] Rolf A. Lundin and Anders Söderholm.
A theory of the temporary
organization. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 11(4):437 – 455,
1995. Project Management and Temporary Organozations.
[8] Verena Stingl. Uncertain choices: Adaptive cognition in project de-
cision making. DTU Management Engineering Technical University of
Denmark, February 2019.
59
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] Knud Illeris. An overview of the history of learning theory. European
Journal of Education, 53(1):86–101, 2018.
[10] Laura Rook. Mental models: A robust deﬁnition. The Learning Or-
ganization: An International Journal, 20, 01 2013.
[11] M. Bunge. A World of Systems. Number vb. 2 in A World of Systems.
Reidel, 1979.
[12] Robert K. Yin. Applications of case study research. SAGE, Thousand
Oaks, Calif, 2012.
[13] Søren Bo Lyllof. Skattens historie i danmark. 2009.
[14] Statsrevisorerne.
Beretning om skats fusion af inddrivelsesområdet.
København, 2010. Statsrevisorerne.
[15] Skatteministeriet. Det nye skatteministerium. København, 2004. Skat-
teministeriet.
[16] Rigsrevisionen. Beretning til statsrevisorerne om statens restanceind-
drivelse. Rigsrevisionen, 2003.
[17] Rigsrevisionen. Notat til rigsrevisionen om toldskats it-systemer. Rig-
srevisionen, 2004.
[18] Søren Lauesen.
Damage and damage causes in large government it
projects. IT University of Denmark (ITU), 2018.
[19] Redegørelse om et fælles inddrivelsessystem. Skatteministeriet, 2015.
[20] Erik Bonnerup. Erfaringer fra statslige it-projekter - hvordan gør man
det bedre? Teknologirådet, 2001.
[21] Accenture. Overlay report - assistance for analysis of "et fælles inddriv-
elsessystem. 2015.
[22] Kammeradvokaten.
Rapport
om
legalitetsanalysi
af
eﬁ-
delsystemfunktionaliteter,
lønindeholdelse,
tvungne
betalingsord-
ninger, og betalingsevneberegning budget. 2015.
60
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[23] Jørgen Grønnegård Christensen and Peter Bjerre Mortensen. Overmod
og afmagt: Historien om Det nye SKAT. DJØF Forlag, København,
2018.
61
==PAGE:69==
A
|
Appendix
A.1
Auditors
Auditors
Motivation
• "Har SKATs styring af systemmoderniseringen været tilfredsstil-
lende?"
• "Har SKATs opgørelse af målopfyldelsen for systemmoderniserin-
gen været tilfredsstillende, og har den organisatoriske implemen-
tering af EFI været tilfredsstillende?"
• "Rigsrevisionen har selv taget initiativ til undersøgelsen i novem-
ber 2013." [14, p. 1]
62
==PAGE:70==
Foundation
For theoretical foundation Auditors have listed four reports [14, p. 30].
• "Bonnerup-rapporten (2001) [20]: Rapporten giver en række an-
befalinger om god praksis for it-projekter i den oﬀentlige sektor."
• Risikovurdering (2001): Finansministeriet har udarbejdet Vejled-
ning om risikovurdering af IT-projekter (2001). Ifølge vejlednin-
gen bør et it-projekt først iværksættes, efter at der er gennemført
en risikovurdering, som omfatter væsentlige elementer, der kan
have indﬂydelse på projektet.
Det fremgår af vejledningen, at
omfanget af risikoanalysen bør afhænge af projektets størrelse." -
This report is was not available.
• Projektmodel (2007): Den Digitale Taskforce har i samarbejde
med Ministeriet for Videnskab, Teknologi og Udvikling, Danske
Regioner, KL og Finansministeriet udviklet en projektmodel til
god styring af digitaliseringsprojekter og indfrielse af fastsatte mål
(december 2007). Modellen er udviklet for at skabe bedre plan-
lægning, dokumentation og styring af digitaliseringsprojekter."
• "Eﬀektvurdering (2007): IT- og Telestyrelsen færdiggjorde i 2007
et værktøj til måling af eﬀekten af implementeringen af digital-
iseringsprojekter Eﬀektmåling af oﬀentlige it-projekter (septem-
ber 2007)."
For the empirical data the report states:
• "Da undersøgelsen blev påbegyndt, gjorde Skatteministeriet op-
mærksom på, at det på grund af den lange undersøgelsesperiode
højst sandsynligt ikke ville være muligt for SKAT at tilvejebringe
alt relevant materiale og al dokumentation. Rigsrevisionen har
derfor baseret dele af undersøgelsen på SKATs efterfølgende be-
skrivelser og redegørelser. Dette forhold gør sig særligt gældende
i forhold til SKATs økonomiske styring af systemmoderniserin-
gen." [14, p. 4]
==PAGE:71==
Observations
• Analysen
dannede
grundlag
for
detaljerede
kommunikation-
splaner både før og efter den trinvise idriftsættelse af EFI.
SKAT har desuden løbende orienteret medarbejderne via inform-
ationsmøder, nyhedsmails og en særlig EFI-portal på intranettet.
- [14, p. 23]
• SKAT har gennemført brugeruddannelse af alle ca.
1.200 in-
ddrivelsesmedarbejdere, som afhængigt af målgruppen varierede
fra intensive ﬂerdagesforløb til en gennemgang af nogle få timers
varighed.
SKAT har desuden udarbejdet en lang række vejled-
ninger, som fortsat bliver opdateret, til at understøtte de nye
arbejdsgange. SKAT har desuden oprettet en hotline for eksterne
fordringshavere - [14, p. 23]
Causes
• Rigsrevisionens undersøgelse omhandler SKAT. Rigsrevisionen
skal dog bemærke, at udfaldet af systemmoderniseringen også har
været et resultat af leverandørernes indsats - [14, p. 2]
• SKAT undervejs i systemmoderniseringen har haft en høj
risikovillighed, set i lyset af at grundlæggende styringselementer
ikke har været på plads. - [14, p. 2]
• Hertil kommer, at Rigsrevisionens undersøgelse viser, at direk-
tionen ikke i hele perioden blev tilstrækkeligt orienteret om udvik-
lingen i systemmoderniseringens økonomi fordelt på projekt og år
og derfor ikke har haft et overblik over, hvordan systemmodern-
iseringens økonomi udviklede sig - [14]
• mens der for særligt 2 projekter (DMR og EFI) også er opstillet
mere abstrakte mål. Et eksempel på et abstrakt mål er for EFI
Eﬀektiv administration af inddrivelsen - [14, p. 20]
==PAGE:72==
Normative Sug-
gestions
• Rigsrevisionen ﬁnder, at et skriftligt dokumenteret beredskab er
en del af god praksis for organisatorisk implementering, som kan
bidrage til at håndtere kritiske hændelser og mindske risikoen for,
at der opstår tvivl om, hvem der gør hvad, når der opstår ud-
fordringer. - [14, p. 20]
Table A.1: Analysis of Auditors Report
==PAGE:73==
A.2
The Tax Ministry
The Tax Ministry
Motivation
• "Baggrunden var, at der blev konstateret betydelige udfordringer
med at få EFI i ordentlig drift med store konsekvenser for ind-
drivelsesarbejdet." - [19, p. 1]
• "Skatteministeriet og SKAT foretog i december 2014 en gen-
nemgang af EFI med henblik på at skabe grundlag for en umid-
delbar vurdering af systemets funtionelle problemer samt tidsplan
for en fuld idriftsættelse." - [19, p. 36]
Foundation
• They received help from two consultancy ﬁrms (Valcon and Ac-
centure) and Kammeradvokaten - [19, p. 1]
Observations
• The EFI system contains many faults, especially in the way data
in handled [19, p. 5].
• The EFI system has missing functionalities [19, p. 5].
• Based on the report by Kammeradvokaten it is stated that EFI
acted illegally [19, p. 5].
==PAGE:74==
Causes
The causes listed by the Tax Ministry are based on the results in the
reports written by Accenture [21] and Kammeradvokaten [22].
The
following is what the Tax Ministry highlighted in their report:
• Information past on to top management were inadequate and
misleading [19, p. 49]
• The inadequate information was due to project management is-
sues such as solution providers not communicating their concern
and not following up on external recommendations.
• Governance structures in the project has not been managed to a
suﬃcient extend [19, p. 50]
• Project management were not informed of incomplete testing [19,
p. 50].
Normative Sug-
gestions
• Since the complexity of the task were one of the key problems, it
is argued that the debt collection system should be simpliﬁed [19,
p. 57].
Table A.2: Analysis of Tax Ministry Report [19]
==PAGE:75==
A.3
Consultants
Consultants - Accenture
Motivation
The report was conducted on a request from SKAT and the Taxmin-
istry, with the aim to uncover the current state of EFI and DMR [21,
p. 2].
Foundation
• Accenture’s conclusion has been made based on a comparison
with the general industry standards within system development,
similar collection systems in other countries and Accenture De-
livery Methods [21, p. 2].
• "The guidelines for project managers are documented in EFI Gov-
ernance. This document describes project governance (within the
EFI Programme and towards the steering committee), and the
three mandatory documents Project Initiation Document (PID),
weekly status report and closure report." - [21, p. 15]
==PAGE:76==
Observations
• "The high level of error has been constant since the system
went live in September 2013. There have been improvements in
some areas, but signiﬁcant parts of EFI and DMI are still non-
functional, and new production errors are identiﬁed on a regular
basis. EFI had approximately 1000 errors after go-live, and in the
subsequent two-year period of operation, it has not been possible
to reduce this number of errors signiﬁcantly." - [21, p. 2]
• " EFI and DMI have never functioned as intended, which has res-
ulted in a signiﬁcant reduction of SKAT’s ability to collect debts
and avoid expiry of debts." - [21, p. 2]
• "We have not been able to identify a formal structure for test
execution. There is a Testing Strategy, which has not been up-
dated since 2012. This still has some relevance according to the
EFI Programme Test team, however this has not been conﬁrmed
throughout the analysis phase." - [21, p. 17]
• "Our observation, based on interviews with the PMO and project
managers, is also that project timelines are continuously revised
and postponed, which also supports this conclusion." - [21, p. 16]
• "Our overall conclusion is that many activities are informal and
reactive in nature rather than proactive, standardized and con-
trolled in advance." - [21, p. 16]
• "It is impractical to resolve the issues with the EFI+DMI System
without a rebuild, as it is necessary to deﬁne requirements in
detail, before revisiting design, build and test. This is therefore a
lengthy and costly exercise." - [21, p. 20]
==PAGE:77==
Causes
• "Accenture’s analysis has shown that a signiﬁcant lack of adequate
documentation, combined with a lack of detailed requirements and
an inadequate approach to testing of EFI and DMI have resulted
in a consistently high level of error." - [21, p. 2]
• "One of the main consequences of this high number of errors is
that only very simple cases can be processed using EFI and DMI."
- [21, p. 2]
• "The impact of not having well deﬁned and documented IT pro-
cesses with clear roles and responsibilities have resulted in overly
complex processes and procedures with multiple teams involved at
diﬀerent levels, as described throughout our interviews with the
EFI Programme." - [21, p. 2]
• "The EFI and DMI systems are based on an ambitious vision
of creating a fully-automated collections system with minimal
manual processing. The scope for EFI and DMI is far greater
and considerably more complex than comparable systems in rev-
enue collection authorities in other countries." - [21, p. 3]
• "Proper testing of whether the systems are operating correctly is
also diﬃcult due to the very limited documentation available" -
[21, p. 3]
• "Accenture’s analysis has identiﬁed challenges with data quality
and data integrity in EFI and DMI, which has contributed to
EFI and DMI not being able to fulﬁl the vision of fully automated
collection." - [21, p. 3]
• "Accenture’s analysis of the underlying architecture, integrations
and services from external systems has identiﬁed a number of
areas that make EFI and DMI vulnerable." - [21, p. 3]
==PAGE:78==
• "Accenture’s analysis has identiﬁed a lack of comprehensive sys-
tem documentation. As of July 2015, there is no detailed, doc-
umented and complete deﬁnition of what the System is required
to do.
Without this deﬁnition, it is our opinion that the sub-
sequent phases of activity including design, build and test, which
depend on these detailed documented requirements were seriously
compromised." - [21, p. 3]
• "The collection system is divided into two tightly integrated applic-
ations, EFI and DMI. Given the lack of end-to-end requirements
and design, and the lack of documentation of functionality in the
two applications, it is very diﬃcult to debug and test how EFI
and DMI will function as a total solution." - [21, p. 3]
• "Throughout requirements speciﬁcation, use cases, designs, codes
and tests, EFI and DMI are lacking the necessary mechanisms
that enable the system to handle the diverse and complex situ-
ations that arise in connection with operations outside ’the simple
path’ " - [21, p. 4]
• "Lack of clear leadership and direction of the organisation aﬀects
the overall ability to deliver the EFI Programme to completion.
The informal team structure and the lack of clear governance
model leads to uncertainty regarding responsibilities and account-
ability." - [21, p. 15]
• "Based on interviews with project managers in the EFI Pro-
gramme, our understanding is that, there is a lack of transparency
how and if these (red: concerns about EFI) are escalated to the
steering committee and mitigating actions agreed and executed."
- [21, p. 16]
==PAGE:79==
Normative Sug-
gestions
• "Given the complexity of the solution, in our experience, we would
expect signiﬁcantly longer release cycles with clearly deﬁned test
cases and acceptance criteria deﬁned prior to the testing by the
EFI Programme begins." - [21, p. 16]
Table A.3: Analysis of Accenture’s Consultancy Report [21]
==PAGE:80==
A.4
IT Professor
IT Professor
Motivation
• "The purpose of this report is not to blame somebody. It is all too
easy to look back and say why didn’t they notice? - they should
have . . . But in the real situation people did their best, yet it
ended with small or large damages. The purpose of this report is
to learn from past damages in order to avoid them in the future."
- [18, p. 3]
Foundation
• "Bad project management in itself doesn’t kill a project.
It is
killed for technical or organizational reasons such as trusting new
technologies too much, developing the user screens too late, or
not noticing that the business results are about to disappear. Bad
project management is when the project manager isn’t aware of
these factors and doesn’t deal with them when they arise." - [18,
p. 2]
• "The author has knowledge of the projects from many sources:
published reports; his own experience in industry; work as a con-
sultant for the National Auditors; reading piles of project docu-
ments; discussions with project participants; a broad professional
network; supervision of students who come from a troubled organ-
ization and write a thesis about it; whistle blowers who tell facts
that the National Auditors missed." - [18, p. 3]
==PAGE:81==
Observations
• "After the ﬁrst release of the report, I got several new facts and
included them in the next version. One great surprise was that
one of the projects (EFI) had been claimed closed by the press,
but actually operated, although in a restricted form." - [18, p. 3]
• "Time: The development time was estimated to 2.5 years. Ac-
tually, the ﬁrst part of the system was deployed after 8.5 years
(2013)."- [18, p. 26]
• "Cost: The estimated project cost was 144 M DKK. The actual
cost was around 600 M DKK when the ﬁrst part of the system
was deployed."- [18, p. 26]
• "Business performance: The plan was that the system should save
salaries of 300 bailiﬀs and speed up debt collection. The bailiﬀs
were actually dismissed, saving around 150 M DKK per year.
However, it turned out that most debts could not be collected auto-
matically, either because data were wrong or missing, or because
human judgement was needed (ref. 1, page 48). Automatic debt
collection was soon stopped, becoming partly manual. Around 300
case managers were employed to do this, eliminating the gain of
saving the 300 bailiﬀs. Collection of 70,000 M DKK debt was
delayed by years."- [18, p. 26]
• "Feasibility doubts: In September 2015 the feasibility of the IT
architecture was questioned. Accenture wrote a report that clearly
said that the programs involved couldn’t be rescued (see A6, multi-
vendor strategy). Further the State Lawyer declared that the sys-
tem in many ways violated the law. Actually the system did only
what human debt collectors had done before." - [18, p. 26]
• "The system was deployed September 2013.
There were many
errors in EFI and related systems, but they were gradually re-
moved. The system automatically collected debts, e.g. by holding
back part of the debtor’s salary. However, when the architecture
and legality were questioned in September 2015, Tax stopped the
automatic debt collection." [18, p. 27]
==PAGE:82==
Causes
• "Management had a very simpliﬁed picture of how debt collection
worked." - [18, p. 27]
• "Requirements were written as use cases and service deﬁnitions.
There was nothing about how to deal with the many business rules
and laws. Further, the requirements failed to address the basic
questions: who is going to use this system? when? and for what?"
- [18, p. 28]
• Oversells technology by believing a system (SOA) can do more,
than is actually can [18, p. 28-29]
• The system was not feasible: "During analysis, developers had
looked only at simple ﬂows for debt collection." [18, p. 30]
• Surprising rule complexity. Even though spreadsheets were made
for a large amount of rules, they did not include all. One rule was
the one that led the Tax Ministry to shut down EFI [18, p. 30]
• "The cost estimates were a factor 4 too optimistic. This is re-
lated to lack of true requirements (A2), optimistic expectations
about SOA (A5), multi-vendor strategy (A6) and surprising rule
complexity (A10)." - [18, p. 30]
• "Deploys the system with insuﬃcient testing" - [18, p. 31]
• "The business goal for EFI was weak: Eﬃcient debt collection."
- [18, p. 32]
• "Doesn’t face the danger.
The risk assessment downplays the
danger" - [18, p. 32]
• "Bailiﬀs were dismissed before it was sure that the project was
feasible." - [18, p. 32]
• "Lack of management involvement: There was little communica-
tion between IT staﬀand management." - [18, p. 32]
• "Believes law blocks sound approaches: The customer closed down
automatic debt collection in 2015 and announced the whole sys-
tem dead. The primary cause was that the State Lawyer found
some of the collection procedures dubious or against the law." +
"Nobody tried to ﬁnd other solutions, e.g. asking for clariﬁcation
or law changes. " - [18, p. 32]
==PAGE:83==
Normative Sug-
gestions
• Study carefully how systems work today and rewrite into
problem-oriented requirements.
• Seek second opinion (not from consultants) and look to companies
already using the technology.
• Deploy system one by one.
• Involve experts early on and early proof of concept as a condition
for contract to continue. Honest suppliers welcome this approach,
it eliminates liars.
• From problem-oriented requirements, estimate cost in function
points.
• Use templates for writing business cases.
• Use deployment and pilot testing.
• Monitor and review business case.
• Give managers IT insight.
• Find constructive lawyers (not afraid to ﬁnd solutions) and in-
clude them in the team.
Table A.4: Analysis of IT Professor Report [18]
==PAGE:84==
A.5
Book
The Book
Motivation
• Resultatet er denne bog, hvor vi giver vores bud på, hvad der gik
galt og hvad man kan lære af forløbet." - [23, p. 10]
Foundation
The following list are the theoretical foundation of the book:
• Limited rationality (Simon 1945) - [23, p. 13]
• Simpliﬁed models of the world (Jones 2001) - [23, p. 13]
• Tendency to ignore when unexpected problems unfolds (Jones &
Baunmgartner 2005) - [23, p. 13]
• Principal-agent theory (Weber 1918; Bertilli 2012) - [23, p. 13]
• Overconﬁdence (Kahneman 2011: 199-221) - [23, p. 14]
For empirical data they based the book on publicly available reports
[23, p. 15-16].
==PAGE:85==
Observations
•
EFI var ikke blot det mest fejlslagne af de seks projekter i sys-
temmoderniseringen.
Det var også det økonomisk væsentligste
projekt.. - [23, p. 146]
• Det viste sig hurtigt at EFI var fejlbehæftet. Der var problemer
med lovmæssigheden - [23, p. 151]
• They argue that the scope of EFI was very ambitious [23, p 135-
137].
• EFI experiences signiﬁcant delays and cost overruns [23, 146-150].
• EFI experiences major problems and did not live up to initial
expectations. [23, p. 150-152].
• SKAT og Skatteministeriets eksterne rapportering forholder sig i
det hele taget meget lidt til de problemer, der knytter sig til udvik-
lingen af EFI Som tiden går, er det dog åbenlyst, at problemerne
er betydelige. - [23, 153-154]
• Man må samlet set konkludere, at det var et grundigt og langvarigt
forarbejde, der lå bag iværksættelsen af systemmoderniseringen
af 6 it-systemer. Man lagde ikke skjul på, at opgaven var kom-
pliceret. - [23, p. 146]
• Derimod var den generelle forberedelse af systemmoderniseringen
langvarig og efter vores vurdering grundig. - [23, p. 157]
• Problems were evident in two ways. First, not eﬀectively handling
problems when they occurred, but instead alternately reducing
and increasing the workforce. Second, the organisation were sub-
ject to structural changes several times in this period [23, p. 155-
156].
==PAGE:86==
• Skeptikerne ville have forudsagt, at det lader sig svært gøre, men
skeptikerne kom ikke til orde, alternativt blev de undertrykt. -
[23, p. 157]
• Argues that the fusion and system modernisation was based on
management theories, that favored centralisation. SKAT and the
Tax Ministry have later adopted a model that focus on decent-
ralisation. However, both management philosophies are based on
the same arguments. (referece made to De Vries 200) [23, p. 227].
• Med dette videre sigte drister vi os til i slutningen af kapitlet at
stille spørgsmålet: Kunne man have gjort det bedre? Vi mener,
at det kunne man." - [23, p. 233]
• "Vi mener også, at var man, bevares i bagklogskabens lys, admin-
istrativt og politisk gået anderledes til værks, så havde man i dag
stået med en enestående administrativ succes. - [23, p. 233]
==PAGE:87==
Causes
• Argues that consultants are very optimistic, and do not consider
apparent issues with EFI. [23, p. 154-155]
• Grundlaget for McKinseys vurdering er tredobbelt. Det består for
det første i en ukritisk accept af de oprindelige antagelser.. For
det andet består det i ret overordnede sammenligninger med ef-
fektiviteten i en række andre, ikke speciﬁcerede landes inddrivelse.
For det tredje er McKinseys inddrivelsesanalyse stærkt præget af
ﬁrmaets generelle organisations- og ledelsesmodel. - [23, p. 155]
• Decisions was often based on arguments for acting, rather then
critical analysis of the challenges that they were faced with [23,
p. 158].
• They argue, that consultants made a mistake when they presen-
ted a plan, for how the project could catch up, instead of invest-
igating, why so much had gone wrong [23, p. 158].
• Enten var advarselslamperne alt for uformidlede, eller også blev
de ignoreret. - [23, p. 158]
• There was a tendency throughout the EFI project. To hide prob-
lems and continue to do more of the same. Although the situation
called for careful though, rather than overconﬁdence [23, p. 158].
• Problems may have their origin in the political scene. Civil ser-
vants and politicians hide the problems, because it was the most
optimal political strategy [23, p. 159].
• Det store implementeringsproblem, som bragte SKAT ud på
afgrundens rand,
er knyttet til en på fagligt-administrative
standarter dårlig forberedelse, en forhastet gennemførelse og en
forhippet realisering af rationaliseringsfrugter, som ikke var høst-
modne. - [23, p. 159]
==PAGE:88==
• They argue, that on paper, decision were founded on well re-
searched, rational arguments. They were also supported by the
work of several consultancy ﬁrms.
This was not the reality.
Rather, it was an example of the end justiﬁes the means [23,
p. 226-227].
• Decisions build on the idea of a rational organization. Yet, the
rational organisation is a myth. A complex system, like the Dan-
ish tax administration, is constituted of many hidden dynamics.
The rational organization is a theoretical phenomena, but is not
supported by empirical data. (reference made to: Christensen &
Mortensen 2016: 155-161) [23, 234-237].
• It is argued that consultants served mostly to warrant decisions
- they were bias. Yet, nothing want according to the consultant
analysis. [23, p. 242-244]
• They describe the Ministry of Finance as an actor with power,
but no responsibilities. They drew much of the pressure for cost
savings, partly since they were link between SKAT and the con-
sultants [23, p. 244-245].
• The parliament and minsters were guided by high ranging civil
servants, who suﬀered from technocratic overconﬁdence.
Civil
servant relied on even more conﬁdent consultants [23, p. 251].
• Management philosophies build on two ideas - top driven and
performance driven. Two ideas, that do not coincide very well
with each other. Instead, it led to bureaucracy and system think-
ing [23, p. 252-253].
==PAGE:89==
Normative Sug-
gestions
• Give new changes time to settle in [23, p. 255].
• Dont cash in the beneﬁts too soon. (dont let employees go, before
they can be replaced.) [23, p. 256]
• One step at a time. Avoid comprehensive goals and solutions [23,
p. 256].
• The Ministry of ﬁnance should abstain from interfering with how
the organisation should be managed [23, p. 257].
• Auditor Generals should also abstain from providing suggestions
on organisational management [23, p. 257].
• Be critical of expensive consultants. They will not necessarily
improve decision making [23, p. 258].
• The political parties have resources that are not exploited. Better
use of their time, would lead to better decision making [23, p. 259].
Table A.5: Analysis of the Book - ’Overmod og Afmagt’
