==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Application of Global Wind Atlas microscale data in large-
scale wind generation time series simulation 
 
 
Ernesto Rodrigo Hurtado Ellmann 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0274 
June 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Ernesto Rodrigo Hurtado Ellmann 
Title: Application of Global Wind Atlas microscale in large-scale wind 
generation time series simulation 
DTU Wind Energy-M-02744 
June 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
January 2019 – June 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Poul E. Sørensen, DTU Wind Energy 
Matti Juhani Koivisto, DTU Wind Energy
Neil Davis, DTU Wind Energy 
Petr Maule, DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Telephone  46 77 50 85 
 
info@vindenergi.dtu.dk 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Abstract
Wind power has become the fastest growing renewable energy source in the world.
The
increasing share of wind generation into power systems has presented challenges to transmission
system operators, due to the intermittent characteristic of wind which leads to a limited
predictability of the generated power.
In an eﬀort to simulate wind power generation on an aggregated level, this project proposes two
statistical models to generate downscaled wind speed time series for every wind farm location
in Europe. This is achieved through a combination between mesoscale wind speed time series
from the Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF), and high resolution microscale data
from the Global Wind Atlas (GWA).
Spatiotemporal dependencies are modeled by WRF, while the GWA provides a description of
the local wind speeds in a more detailed extent. Long-term wind speed time series from the best
performing statistical model, named in this project as Scaling Factor, were obtained for each
wind farm location, assuming a constant hub height of 100 meters due to limited availability
of detailed wind farm data.
The resulting downscaled wind speed time series were employed to execute aggregated power
generation simulations at a country level. A comparison of the obtained generation simulations
was performed against historical data through both, yearly capacity factor estimations, and
hourly time series.
The obtained generation results employing the Scaling Factor model showed a clear improvement
for almost all the analyzed countries, compared to employing coarser resolution wind speed
time series, as is done in most of the consulted previous studies. Particularly close results
were gathered for countries with predominant low-complexity terrain, whereas an inferior
performance was found for countries having high-complexity terrain.
Lastly, several improvements to the Scaling Factor model were proposed, since it was found
that diverse parameters aﬀected the estimation of the resulting downscaled wind speeds, which
determine in a large extent the aggregated power generation simulations.
i
==PAGE:6==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Acknowledgments
The realization of this project would not have been possible without the support of all the
associated supervisors, who guided me throughout this process.
Firstly I would like to thank Professor Poul Enjar Sørenson for giving me the opportunity to
participate in this interesting research project. I am specially grateful to Postdoc Matti Juhani
Koivisto for his valuable guidance, and for being always available to clarify the questions that
came up during the elaboration of this project. I would like to thank Niel Davis for his relevant
advises regarding the utilization of the microscale data; his deep knowledge in this topic played
a very important role in the project. I would also like to thank Petr Maule for his help regarding
the technical issues that arose through the elaboration of this project.
Additionally, I would like to thank all my friends in Mexico and Denmark for their support.
Finally, I would like express my deep gratitude to my father Ernesto, my mother El˙zbieta and
my brother Martin, for all their support and unconditional love through every stage of my life.
Thank you sincerely,
Rodrigo
ii
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Meteorological Masts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Issues Using Measured Data for Variability Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Reanalysis Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Application of Reanalysis Based Data in Wind Resource Variability Studies
7
2.2.2
Previous Research Studies Using Reanalysis Data . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Conclusions From Previous Research Studies Using Reanalysis Data . . .
8
3
Dynamical Downscaling Method
10
3.1
Mesoscale Model: WRF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
WRF data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Microscale Model: GWA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
GWA data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Methodology
16
4.1
Wind Farm Data Base . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Wind Farm Spatial Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
GWA Microscale Data Obtention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.1
Weibull Distribution Merging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
WRF Mesoscale Time Series Obtention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Calculations
26
5.1
Scaling Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Probability Integral Transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Comparison Between the Two Statistical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Final Method Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4.1
Cabauw Mast Data Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Large-scale Wind Speed Results
37
6.1
Inﬂuence of Terrain in Scaling Factor Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Area Inﬂuence in High-complexity Terrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Weighted Scaling Factor per Country . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Wind Speed to Power Generation Conversion
48
7.1
Introduction to CorRES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Large-scale Power Generation Results
51
8.1
Yearly Capacity Factor Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Capacity Factor Time-Series Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
iii
==PAGE:8==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
9
Results Discussion
60
9.1
Scaling Factor Results for Smaller Hub Heights
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.1.1
Terrain Inﬂuence for Scaling Factor Results at Diﬀerent Heights . . . . .
66
9.2
Weighted Scaling Factor for Diﬀerent Hub Heights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
10 Conclusions
69
11 Future Work
71
11.1 Data Quality Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
11.1.1 Obtaining a Data Base with More Complete Information . . . . . . . . .
71
11.1.2 Microscale Data from Global Wind Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
11.2 Model Performance Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
11.2.1 Scaling Factor Obtention at Precise Hub Heights
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
11.2.2 Model Testing Against Wind Speed Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . .
74
11.2.3 Adjustments in Power Conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A Appendix
85
A.1 Mean Wind Speeds at WRF Grid Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.2 Scaling Factor Results at Complex Terrain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
iv
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1.1
Cumulative Installed Capacity of Energy Sources in Europe
. . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
Anemometer Installed in an Automatic Meteorological Station . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1
Downscaling Method to Microscale Domain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
10 meter surface wind speeds from a reanalysis model having a spatial resolution
of 6 km, compared to a reanalysis model with a spatial resolution of 125 km (right) 11
3.3
WRF Domains Used to Cover the European Continent . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
Average Wind Speeds at 100 Meter Height According to Global Wind Atlas
. .
14
4.1
Process followed to Obtain the Large-scale Time Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Visualization of the Wind Farm Locations in Europe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Wind Farm Area Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Modeled Wind Farms in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Detail of Modeled Wind Farms at the Northwest Coast of Denmark . . . . . . .
20
4.6
GWA Grid Points Inside Two Modeled Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.7
Weibull probability density function and cumulative distribution function . . . .
22
5.1
Wind speed distribution comparison after applying the scaling factor method . .
27
5.2
Probability Integral Transformation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in United-Kingdom 29
5.4
Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in Spain
. . . . .
29
5.5
Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in Finland
. . . .
30
5.6
Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in Romania . . . .
30
5.7
Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in UK
. . . .
31
5.8
Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in Spain . . .
31
5.9
Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in Finland . .
32
5.10 Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in Romania
.
32
5.11 Cabauw Distribution Comparison of the Two Methods Against Measured Data .
36
6.1
Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Germany . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in France . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.5
Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Portugal and Spain . . . . .
39
6.6
Scaling Factor Results per Country 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.7
Scaling Factor Results per Country 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.8
Scaling Factor Results at Complex Terrain Assuming Diﬀerent Installed Capacities 44
6.9
Scaling Factor Results at Simple Terrain Assuming Diﬀerent Installed Capacities
44
6.10 Weighted Scaling Factor Results per Country
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
v
==PAGE:10==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
7.1
Power curve of the Vestas V90 3MW Wind Turbine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.1
Capacity Factor Distribution For Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.2
Capacity Factor Distribution For Estonia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.3
Capacity Factor Distribution For Latvia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.4
Capacity Factor Distribution For Finland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9.1
Vertical Wind Proﬁle on a Flat Surface and on Top of a Hill . . . . . . . . . . .
62
9.2
Scaling Factor Results for Germany at 50 and 100 meters height . . . . . . . . .
63
9.3
Scaling Factor Results for Denmark at 50 and 100 meters height . . . . . . . . .
63
9.4
Scaling Factor Results for U.K. and Ireland at 50 and 100 meters height . . . . .
64
9.5
Scaling Factor Results for France at 50 and 100 meters height
. . . . . . . . . .
65
9.6
Scaling Factor Results for Spain and Portugal at 50 and 100 meters height . . .
65
9.7
Scaling Factor Results for Portugal Considering Two Diﬀerent Hub Heights . . .
68
11.1 Wind Farms from the Data Base Containing Erroneous Information . . . . . . .
72
11.2 Wind Farm Locations with Missing Parameters from Global Wind Atlas
. . . .
73
A.1 Mean wind speeds for North Europe according to WRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.2 Mean wind speeds for North Europe according to GWA . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.3 Ruggedness Index Layer from the Global Wind Atlas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.4 Locations with a scaling factor values between 1.2 to 1.6
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.5 Locations with a scaling factor values between 0.3 to 0.6
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
vi
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
1
Comparison Results Against Cabauw Measured Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2
Weighted Scaling Factor Results at Country Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3
Yearly Capacity Factor Results for 2014
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4
Yearly Capacity Factor Results for 2015
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5
Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Sweden
. . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Estonia
. . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Latvia . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8
Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Finland
. . . . . . . . . .
58
9
Weighted Scaling Factor Results for Two Diﬀerent Hub Heights
. . . . . . . . .
67
vii
==PAGE:12==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
List of abbreviations
CF:
Capacity Factor
CorRES:
Correlations in Renewable Energy Sources
ENTSO-E:
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity
ESEM:
European Single Electricity Market
EU:
European Union
EWEA:
European Wind Energy Association
GWA:
Global Wind Atlas
IPCC:
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
NEWA:
New European Wind Atlas
NWP:
Numerical Weather Prediction
PIT:
Probability Integral Transformation
RES:
Renewable Energy Sources
RES-E:
Renewable Energy Sources for Electricity
RIX:
Ruggedness Index
RMS:
Root Mean Square
RMSE:
Root Mean Square Error
SF:
Scaling Factor
TYNDP:
Ten Year Network Development Plan
WRF:
Weather Research and Forecasting Model
viii
==PAGE:13==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
1
Introduction
Climate change mitigation has become one of the main objectives at international government
agendas at the present time. Climate change itself, has been at the core of the European Union’s
environmental policy since 1988; and in 2007, it was highlighted as a major security issue by
both, the European Union and the International Community [1].
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reported a range of global
warming over the next century to be from 1.4oC to 5.8oC, as a part of its long-term green
house emissions scenarios [2]. Other authors like Reily et al. estimate a temperature increase
between 1.1oC to 4.5oC, while Wigley et al. estimate it to be from 1.7oC to 4.9oC at the end
of the current century [3, 4]. One of the eﬀective approaches to help mitigate climate change
and ensure economical growth in a sustainable way is sustainable energy development [5].
Climate change mitigation has been the main driver behind the growth of renewable energy
generation sources like wind and solar energy.
At the end of 2017, the global wind power
installed capacity reached 539 GW [6]. During the last ﬁve years, wind power had experienced
an average rate of 25% annual growth of cumulative capacity. This makes wind power the
fastest growing renewable energy source in the world, with a trend that is projected to continue
in the future [7].
In Europe, the total wind power installed capacity at the end of 2018 was 189 GW. This makes
wind energy to account for 18.8% of the European Union total power generation capacity, and
its expected to overcome natural gas during the present year [8].
Figure 1.1: Cumulative Installed Capacity of Energy Sources in Europe [8]
The fast growth of wind power in Europe observed in ﬁgure 1.1, is enhanced by the goal of the
European Union for Renewable Energy Sources for Electricity (RES-E), which aims to supply
at least 27% of the total energy consumption with renewable sources by 2030 [9].
1
==PAGE:14==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
However, the increasing share of renewable generation sources in power systems present additio-
nal challenges regarding power system management. From a power system perspective, the
most signiﬁcant diﬀerence between renewable energy sources (RES) and dispatchable generation
units, is that RES have a limited predictability on the generated power. [10].
Wind farms, in contrast to conventional power plants, are exposed to the inclement and
variability of weather, which depend on meteorological conditions [11].
Wind speed is the
main factor determining the amount of wind power available to a wind turbine. Given that
the power in wind is a cubic function of the wind speed, changes in the wind speed produce a
remarkable eﬀect on the generated power [12].
The intermittent aspect of wind power imply that the output power is variable, and to some
extent unpredictable [13]. As wind power has a zero marginal cost, it will always be scheduled
in electricity markets, replacing other conventional generation units in the dispatching order
when generating [14]. This presents a major challenge to the power system operator when
integrating a large amount of wind power into the existing electrical grid, in terms of optimum
power ﬂow, transmission congestion, system stability, etc. [15, 16].
The growing share of generation from wind resources, constantly increases the stochastic nature
of the power system, potentially compromising the security of supply [17]. Having in mind the
increasing share of RES in electricity grids, policy makers, system operators and planners
have already raised awareness about the need to assess intermittent generation in network
development plans, reliability and market studies [10].
An approach that can be followed to reduce the impacts of wind power variability, is to enhance
interconnection between countries or regions [18]. Electricity interconnection in Europe has
increased signiﬁcantly during the last decades. Back in 2002, the European council deﬁned an
interconnection target for each member state to be at least the 10% of their installed production
capacity for 2005 [19]. Nowadays, a creation of a single electricity market in Europe has been
presented as long run aim of the European Union. The European Single Electricity Market
(ESEM) has the intention to promote eﬃcient trading of electricity, and has been foreseen in
the 10 year network development plan (TYNDP) made by ENTSO-E [20, 21].
The long-term planning of the transcontinental European power system requires detailed data
about the expected hourly energy production from renewable energy sources. In this regard,
there is a growing interest to study the attributes of RES over large areas, and develop models
able to replicate these properties [10].
Given the explained nature of wind, capability to analyze wind speed behavior for a long period
of time, can help to capture the climate variability in a certain area. Having long-term wind
speed time series is attractive to electrical grid operators, since it makes it possible to estimate
the probability of rare event occurrences, such as extreme low winds that need dispatchable
generation as back up, as well as very high wind speeds and ramps in generation. As extreme
events are not frequent, they are less likely to appear in short-term data observations [22].
Additionally, long-term wind speed data is also attractive to grid planners since it can be
utilized to evaluate future energy generation scenarios, and to developers and ﬁnancers since it
can help to reduce uncertainty about the expected revenues of a proposed wind farm [22].
2
==PAGE:15==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Addressing these need, the aim of this project is to generate downscaled wind speed time series
at each wind farm location over Europe, through the combination of the spatiotemporal features
from the Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF), with site-speciﬁc microscale data
from the Global Wind Atlas (GWA). The long-term wind speed time series could therefore be
used to study wind resource variability, and to estimate wind power generation spanning from
a single wind farm to a pan-European level.
3
==PAGE:16==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
2
Background
2.1
Meteorological Masts
The traditional way to obtain wind speed time series is through an anemometer installed in a
meteorological mast or in a weather station. Normally, a meteorological mast is equipped with
several sensing devices to gather accurate information from the low atmosphere under speciﬁc
conditions of surface roughness [23]. Measurement of wind speed, wind direction, air pressure
and temperature are common in these monitoring systems.
Figure 2.1: Anemometer Installed in an Automatic Meteorological Station [24]
As any mechanical measurement device, anemometers need constant calibration to provide
accurate data recordings.
Additionally, the location of the anemometer in the mast tower
should be designed carefully to avoid introducing additional uncertainties in measurements
[25]. For example, in the measurement station presented in ﬁgure 2.1, wind speed recordings
coming from east will contain an error due to ﬂow distortion, since the wind will face ﬁrstly the
vain before reaching the anemometer, generating with this, lower wind speed recordings than
they are in reality.
To ensure a better quality on the recorded data, recommendations on anemometer mounting
are given in the IEC 61400-12-1 standard [26].
However this standard is relatively new,
and mounting errors like the one displayed in ﬁgure 2.1 can be commonly encountered in
measurement masts, especially if they were installed during the previous century.
The use of anemometer based data in wind variability studies present several diﬃculties which
are described in section 2.1.1.
4
==PAGE:17==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
2.1.1
Issues Using Measured Data for Variability Studies
Besides the study of the atmosphere and its interaction with the land surface, meteorological
mast are used to gather wind speed measurements at relevant wind turbine heights in a speciﬁc
location, which are later employed to assess wind power development. Nevertheless, generally
the measured wind data by these masts is relatively short in duration.
As mentioned on section 1, in order to capture wind speed variability, the resulting wind speed
time series per location need to cover a large period of time, which normally accounts for more
than 30 years. Wind measurement systems that have collected data for a period of time long
enough to capture wind variability, are usually located in meteorological monitoring stations.
These stations have collected data for many decades, however the generated data present several
aspects that makes it problematic to use in wind generation analysis studies [27].
The most noticeable drawback is that the meteorological monitoring stations usually measure
wind speeds at 8 to 10 meters height, which is far below the 60 to 100 meters hub heights of
commercial wind turbines [22]. The wind speed at those hub heights is signiﬁcantly higher than
the one measured just at several meters above the ground. One could argue that it would be
possible to extrapolate the wind speeds to the required hub height, using for example, the wind
proﬁle power law shown in equation 1; in which the desired wind speed u at a height z, can be
obtained from the measured wind speed uo at a height ho, introducing an empirical coeﬃcient
α that varies depending on the atmosphere stability and the surface roughness length [28].
u = uo ·
ho
h
α
(1)
However performing a wind speed extrapolation to the desired hub height would drive an
additional uncertainty, since meteorological stations generally do not measure variables such as
atmospheric stability and surface roughness, which are required to calculate the vertical wind
proﬁle [22]. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that the wind shear coeﬃcient α varies in
a diurnal manner, adding complexity to the calculation [29].
The second problem regarding the use of measured data for wind variability studies, is that
meteorological stations are often located in areas that are not suited for wind power development,
i.e. metropolitan areas and airports [22]. If the measured data is intended to be spatially
extrapolated to a certain location of interest, the resulting wind speed time series will contain
a major uncertainty on itself that will be transferred to the further calculations.
The uncertainty of performing spatial extrapolations is ampliﬁed by the fact that each monitoring
station is aﬀected by its unique site topography, which might be subjected to changes, such as
building construction or tree growth during the long period of time required to capture wind
variability [30].
Lastly, historical wind speed data covering such a large period of time will deﬁnitely contain gaps
due to limitations on availability, which requires a demanding cleaning eﬀort [31]. Moreover,
changes in the measurement equipment, location, recording procedure and sensor calibration
5
==PAGE:18==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
at the monitoring stations can result in inconsistencies of the gathered data, which also need
to be taken into consideration [32].
Given all the factors mentioned above, historical data from meteorological masts hamper the
study of wind variability, making it inappropriate for estimating the long-term mean wind
output and its variability [30, 32, 33, 34]. Furthermore, employing data from meteorological
monitoring stations to perform such studies covering large areas like countries or the whole
continent of Europe, would be a very complex task that even if its fulﬁlled, will contain a large
number of biases that could potentially override the study.
As an alternative, many researchers have opted to use reanalysis data instead, a tool that
performs large-scale atmospheric simulations, which is rapidly gaining popularity for renewable
energy resources simulations [35].
2.2
Reanalysis Data
Meteorological reanalysis is a scientiﬁc method used to develop a comprehensive record of
weather and climate changes over time [36]. It consist of a numerical model used to produce
complete time series over an area, applying data assimilation techniques. In order to reproduce
the historical conditions of the atmosphere, both previous forecasts models and observations
from land, sea, radiosonde and satellite are considered as an input in a complex series of
physically consistent calculations, performed to obtain a complete, gridded data set outputs.
[31, 37, 38].
Reanalysis models usually span for several decades, generating continuous time series at regular
intervals of meteorological parameters such as air pressure, air temperature, wind speed, radiative
ﬂux and precipitation. The models have regional or global coverage and are able to calculate
the mentioned variables at several heights. [39].
Reanalysis models are attractive because they provide continuous atmospheric conditions esti-
mates over long periods of time, this represent a very convenient format that has drive reanalysis
data to become one of the most used data sets in weather and climate studies [40]. However,
their output should not be taken directly as ”real” observations, but with foresight and keeping
in mind their structural uncertainties. [38, 41]
The advantage of incorporating numerous sorts of observations as input components in reanalysis,
is the inﬂuence reduction of a single observation having biases or discontinuities, which in
contrast, have a signiﬁcant impact in a single measurement device as a meteorological mast.
However, as reanalysis results come from observations, inferred calculations and forecasts; errors
and uncertainties associated with reanalysis data are generally less well understood than the
ones related to real observations. Often reanalysis data is just taken as the best estimate at
each grid point as no further information is provided to identify the expected accuracy of the
reanalysis results [40].
The ﬁrst large atmospheric reanalysis project (The NCEP/NCAR 40-year reanalysis project),
was released in 1996 [42]. Since then, a large number of reanalysis projects have been undertaken.
6
==PAGE:19==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Currently, there are many reanalysis models being constantly updated which are used for
diﬀerent studies. Some examples of commonly used reanalysis products in research are:
• NCEP: National Centers for Environmental Prediction
• CFSR: Climate Forecast System Reanalysis
• 20CR: Twentieth-Century Reanalysis
• MERRA: Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and Applications
• ERA-Interim, by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
• NARR: North American Regional Reanalysis
• JRA-25: Japanese 25-year Reanalysis Project
These reanalysis models present diﬀerences on the spatial and temporal resolution attributes of
their output parameters. However, the most signiﬁcant diﬀerence is that each of these models
consider their own set of forecasts, observations and assimilation methods which therefore
provide diﬀerent output results [43, 44]. This means that the results obtained in a study using
reanalysis will vary depending on the used reanalysis method. Results diﬀering signiﬁcantly
over diﬀerent reanalysis models should be treated carefully [38].
Given that reanalysis is a relatively young ﬁeld of research, it makes it diﬃcult to know for
what reanalysis data sets can, and cannot be properly used for [45]. Moreover, the fact that
generally they don’t include any uncertainty, makes it unclear how accurate the reanalysis
results are expected to be [40]. However, better data quality and assimilation methods have been
introduced in reanalysis models, improving the generated products, spanning longer periods of
time, at ﬁner spatial and temporal resolutions [31, 46].
2.2.1
Application of Reanalysis Based Data in Wind Resource Variability Studies
Reanalysis products are used for several applications in the science community due to the lack of
complete observations, having both, spatial and temporal coverage [47]. For variability studies,
reanalysis data seems very attractive given its ability to produce a complete long-term wind
speed time series for any given location on the globe.
The spatial coverage of reanalysis makes it possible to obtain observations for locations and
times without recordings in historic data [27], avoiding the challenge of analyzing masts sitting
at unrealistic locations for wind power. The temporal coverage models at least 3 decades of
observations with no missing recordings, something that, as mentioned in section 1, is crucial
to study wind power variability.
An additional advantage is that, in reanalysis, the wind speed time series can be obtained at
several heights, reducing the uncertainty of extrapolating the wind speed from the meteorological
station to the desired hub height as explained in section 2.1.1. Nevertheless, wind speeds in
a precise location are inﬂuenced by the terrain topography and roughness. The low spatial
resolution of reanalysis models makes them unable to account on the local topography, smoothing
the terrain features which therefore enhance the output wind speeds [22]. This is something
that needs to be kept in mind while working with reanalysis data.
7
==PAGE:20==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
An analysis of diverse wind resource and generation studies using reanalysis data sets is
performed in section 2.2.2.
2.2.2
Previous Research Studies Using Reanalysis Data
Literature is limited regarding the accuracy of reanalysis based models to represent local wind
characteristics, and how reanalysis can be used to simulate wind generation over a region [31].
In [35], a validation study on the wind power output for 23 European countries is performed
using reanalysis data. The results showed that reanalysis overestimate wind output by 50%
in northwest Europe and underestimating it by 30% in the Mediterrian. Therefore, national
correction factors were obtained, to be used as simple multiplication factors applied to raw
reanalysis data, in order to yield historical average capacity factors.
At [31], a 10 year wind speed comparison between reanalysis and meteorological mast data
is performed for eight locations in Northern Ireland.
Results showed that reanalysis data
consistently overestimated the mast readings for all the eight locations at each year of the whole
period, which was also attributed to the missing modeled site-speciﬁc topography in reanalysis
due to its large spatial resolution. When power generation was simulated by the introduction
of wind shear coeﬃcients to make the time series meet the measured system capacity factor,
reanalysis based time series showed a higher correlation and lower RMS error than the mast
based time series, indicating a higher accuracy to reproduce the pattern of actual generation.
In [48], a reanalysis model was used to simulate hourly generation estimates for Great Britain,
which proved to have a high correlation with the national grid data, reproducing well the
temporal variability including frequency and severity of extreme events. However,the estimated
long-term mean capacity factor was higher than the previous long-term estimates, perhaps, due
to an overestimation of the calculated wind speeds in the reanalysis model.
Finally, in [49], the statistical properties from 210 meteorological stations measuring wind speed
at 10 meter height, were compared with data from three diﬀerent reanalyses in a 4 year period.
The three reanalyses time series showed a high correlation for most of the stations, being
the ﬁnest-grid reanalysis (COSMO-REA6), the one that showed the best correlation results.
Nonetheless, wider wind speed distributions were observed in the three reanalysis models,
showing an overestimation of the wind speeds compared to meteorological measurements;
signiﬁcant deviations were found especially at stations located in complex topography.
2.2.3
Conclusions From Previous Research Studies Using Reanalysis Data
By reviewing the studies presented on section 2.2.2, it is to be noted that, for wind resource
studies evaluating large regions, the assessment of the reanalysis model is performed with
capacity factor comparison, after converting wind speeds to generated power through the
application of power curves.
Generally, wind speed and generation time series coming from reanalysis models show good
correlation values with respect to measured data, but overall, they present important overestimates
8
==PAGE:21==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
due to the unresolved site topography. The presented studies have opted for applying correction
factors to the reanalysis data instead of performing an analysis of the topography for the
evaluated locations, maybe due to the complexity that this calculation would represent.
In a summary of 11 studies evaluating the accuracy of reanalysis data showed in [50], the
author found that: ”Notably, none of the studies examining onshore areas have considered the
importance of topography and land use”.
An exception to this can be found, in [51], where the mesoscale numerical model WRF, which
is also employed in this project and described section 3.1, was used to model wind climate at 5
meteorological stations in Norway. When compared to real observations, the model was found to
overestimate wind speed in areas with large topographical variations. A suggestion of including
a microscale model like WAsP, to adjust for these local parameters was made, with the aim
to reduce the observed deviations. This combination between WRF and WAsP was actually
studied in [52] for wind resource evaluation at three sites in Norway. The procedure followed in
[52] is highly computationally intensive, and is deﬁnitely not suitable for a continental analysis
like the one performed in this project.
In an eﬀort to include the local features observed in a microscale analysis, this project considers,
at each wind farm site, the site-speciﬁc wind speed distribution according to the Global Wind
Atlas, which subsequently is employed to model long-term wind speed time series at each
location.
9
==PAGE:22==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
3
Dynamical Downscaling Method
The wind speed distribution at a site is partially determined by its topography. The coarse
resolution of reanalysis models make them unable to capture the local eﬀects of speciﬁc site
topography. If a higher level of detail is required, dynamical downscaling approaches are crucial
to obtain results with signiﬁcantly higher accuracy.
However this accuracy comes with an
extreme computational eﬀort, which usually shorter the duration of downscaled reanalyses
[30, 35].
Dynamical downscaling is a process used to obtain high resolution climate information from
relatively coarse resolution models like reanalysis. The principle of this process is to integrate
atmospheric models in order to increase the spatial resolution at the area of interest [10, 53].
Data from reanalysis models is taken as boundary conditions by mesoscale models, to reﬁne the
weather estate to a resolution of a few kilometers. If further downscaling is needed, a dynamical
coupling between mesoscale and microscale solvers can be performed, in which the idealized
conditions of the microscale model are replaced with realistic conditions of the mesoscale model
[53].
A overview of the dynamical downscaling process commonly used within the wind research
community is shown on ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Downscaling Method to Microscale Domain
Mesoscale models cover a limited geographic region. They reﬁne reanalysis data until a grid
spacing, which is still large enough to incorporate large-scale circulation patterns. Yet, the
resolution of mesoscale models only represent the grid-cell average, which most likely will
contain diverse terrain features. The higher resolution of a microscale model makes it able to
incorporate the local topographic features that are not solved by the mesoscale model, leading
to results with higher accuracy [54].
The grid spacing of mesoscale models allows them to solve important large-scale features, that
later on, are transmitted to a microscale model if a higher level of detail is required. It is
important to make sure that the mesoscale model do not resolve the local physics of ﬂow
dynamics caused by the topography, which should be simulated by the microscale model. In
the same way, the microscale model should not consider processes that were already accounted
by the mesoscale model; this to avoid double counting processes which would lead to erroneous
results [55].
Figure 3.2 shows wind speed averages in Germany from a mesoscale model (left), compared to
wind speed averages of a reanalysis model having a coarser resolution (right).
10
==PAGE:23==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 3.2: 10 meter surface wind speeds from a reanalysis model having a spatial resolution
of 6 km (left), compared to a reanalysis model with a spatial resolution of 125 km (right) [49]
As wind speeds are inﬂuenced by the local terrain features, downscaled methods can also help to
identify the areas of higher wind energy potential, which are attractive for wind farm planning.
In this project, the mesoscale model used to obtain the raw wind speed time series is the
Weather Research and Forecasting Model (WRF). The tendencies shown by WRF are useful for
understanding the climate in a region [55], but in order to obtain results with higher accuracy, a
microscale forcing of the local wind speed distributions according to Global Wind Atlas (GWA),
was performed within two statistical methods explained in sections 5.1 and 5.2.
A further description of the mesoscale and microscale models used as input data in this project
is provided in sections 3.1 and 3.2 respectively.
3.1
Mesoscale Model: WRF
The Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF) is a mesoscale numerical weather prediction
model (NWP) used in atmospheric research and operational forecasting applications [56].
A numerical weather prediction model is a tool which is able generate meteorological data for
future times inside a limited geographic region. This is achieved by introducing observations and
analysis of current atmospheric conditions, into mathematical models to produce short-term
weather predictions, spanning from few hours to few days [57, 58].
Historical weather forecasts can be generated with numerical weather prediction models emplo-
ying lateral boundaries from past reanalysis observations, This procedure is called retrospective
forecast, and can be performed over the broad temporal coverage of the reanalysis model.
Additionally, the output from NWP models can be used to update global reanalysis models
[53, 59].
11
==PAGE:24==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
WRF is particularly popular in research due to its set-up ﬂexibility, and the fact that is
completely open-source [54].
In fact, WRF is the most widely used open-source mesoscale
model, and has been extensively employed in research and forecasting purposes. The WRF
model is constantly updated, introducing improvements in physics, numerical analysis and
data assimilation, in an eﬀort to improve the reliability of the calculations. [56, 60]
3.1.1
WRF data description
The mesoscale wind speed time series used in this project were generated with WRF version
3.7.1, in which the initial boundary conditions were provided by ERA-Interim reanalysis data.
To cover the European continent, three diﬀerent domains were created.
These WRF grid
domains are shown on ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: WRF Domains Used to Cover the European Continent
Each of the WRF domains contain grid points having a spatial resolution of 10 kilometers, in
which the average hourly wind speed is provided. The resolution provided by WRF is able
to solve important large-scale features which cannot be fully appreciated in the original 80
kilometer resolution from the ERA-Interim reanalysis data [61].
In the other hand, the temporal coverage of the ERA-Interim reanalysis data makes the WRF
mesoscale model being able to span for 34 years, providing continuous wind speed observations
at every grid point from 1982 to 2015.
12
==PAGE:25==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
In [62], it was shown that in complex terrain, WRF models presents large surface wind speed
bias as a consequence of unresolved topographic eﬀects. Mesoscale models cannot represent
local topography, however this also represents an advantage. Since the local features are not
resolved by mesoscale models, they are able to reproduce in a more faithful way large scale
wind variability [48].
In this project, the local wind speed distribution at each wind farm location is modeled with
site- speciﬁc data from the Global Wind Atlas, which has a much lower spatial resolution than
the WRF mesoscale model.
3.2
Microscale Model: GWA
The Global Wind Atlas (GWA) is an open data set providing statistical information regarding
local wind resource with high resolution. The model was developed to help identify potential
high-wind locations at preliminary wind resource assessment phases, and it was produced by
a partnership between the Wind Energy department of the Technical University of Denmark,
and the World Bank group [63].
The microscale data used in this project is taken from GWA 2.1. The data on this version
is obtained through a downscaling process based on ERA-Interim reanalysis data.
Several
WRF 3.0 mesoscale simulations with 9km grid resolution were forced using the reanalysis data.
Subsequently, an additional downscaling process was executed, which consisted in two parts.
Firstly, wind climate generalizations as explained in [64] were performed at each grid node.
Secondly, the generalized wind climates were applied on higher resolution grids to account
for microscale eﬀects. This process ensures that the modeled ﬂows include the eﬀects of high
resolution topography, since elevation and roughness length maps are introduced [65].
The high resolution data from Global Wind Atlas has global onshore coverage, along with 30
kilometer of oﬀshore data measured from the coastline. The wind resource descriptions are
provided at three diﬀerent heights above the surface level (50, 100 and 200 meters), at a spatial
resolution of 250 meters. [65]
A wind resource map from the Global Wind Atlas, indicating the average wind speeds in Europe
at 100 meters height is shown on ﬁgure 3.4.
13
==PAGE:26==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 3.4: Average Wind Speeds at 100 Meter Height According to Global Wind Atlas [66]
3.2.1
GWA data description
This version of the Global Wind Atlas provides not only the mean wind speed at a given grid
point, but also a description of the site’s wind speed distribution, modeled by the scale and
shape parameters of a Weibull distribution for the three mentioned heights.
Usually, wind speed distributions can be well described by the Weibull distribution function,
which has been commonly used for these purposes [67].
With these two parameters (scale
and shape), it is possible to determine the probability of occurrence of a certain wind speed,
providing a much deeper understanding on the wind resource conditions at a speciﬁc location,
compared to just knowing the mean wind speed value.
14
==PAGE:27==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
For this project, the GWA wind speed distribution at each grid point of interest was taken, and
therefore, a calculation to obtain the overall wind speed distribution at a larger area simulating
a wind farm was performed, as described in section 4.3.1.
This large-scale study was accomplished gathering data from WRF and GWA at constant 100
meters height, assuming it to be the closest value for the average wind turbine hub height in
Europe. However, an analysis on how the calculations are aﬀected by obtaining mesoscale and
microscale data for a diﬀerent height (i.e. 50 meters) is presented and discussed in section 9.1.
Lastly, it is important to remember that the GWA results are retrieved through a downscaling
process derived from a coarser mesoscale grid, therefore the equivalent uncertainties of the WRF
mesoscale model are transmitted within the microscale level. Special caution should be taken
when analyzing rough terrain. In areas with large ruggedness index values, the results might
contain large errors in the ﬂow modeling, leading to an overestimation of mean wind speeds at
ridges and hilltops [63].
15
==PAGE:28==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
4
Methodology
The methodology followed in this project to derive the downscaled wind speed time series in a
large-scale level is shown on ﬁgure 4.1.
Mesoscale wind speed time series are obtained through WRF, for wind farm locations in Europe.
Therefore, they are adjusted to the microscale level by employing data from GWA through two
statistical procedures described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. These calculations allow to achieve the
aim of this project which consist on the obtention of long-term wind speed time series at each
wind farm location in Europe.
As it is hard to compare the estimated wind resource against measured observations in a large-
scale level, the wind speed time series are converted to power generation time series through
the application of wind turbine power curves. The equivalent power curve at each wind farm
location was taken from the calculations made in a concurrent master thesis project named:
”Large-scale Bottom-up Wind Generation Time Series Simulation with Missing Data”, which
was also performed at the Technical University of Denmark.
Figure 4.1: Process followed to Obtain the Large-scale Time Series
The followed methodology to obtain the equivalent mesoscale and microscale wind speeds for
each wind farm location in Europe is explained in this section.
Later, the two statistical
approaches followed to determine the downscaled wind speed time series at each wind farm
location are described in section 5. Lastly, the results from the large-scale calculations are
presented for wind speeds in section 6 and for power generation in section 8.
16
==PAGE:29==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
4.1
Wind Farm Data Base
To calculate the long-term wind speed time series at actual wind farm locations, a data
base containing information of wind farms around the globe was consulted. This data base
was provided by the Technical University of Denmark for research purposes, and contains
information gathered from ”The Wind Power” [68].
Besides including the wind farm locations, which are crucial for the development of this
project, the database also contains other relevant information for each wind farm entry, such
as: country, wind farm name, installed capacity, number of turbines, turbine model, hub
height, commissioning date, and wind farm status, meaning if the wind farm is operating,
under construction or it was already dismantled.
For the analysis in this project, initially all the onshore wind farms in Europe and Turkey
were considered, which accounts for a total of 17,867 wind farms. However, as it is expected
in large data bases, some of the wind farms presented missing information, this is also due
to the fact that some times, speciﬁc information such as the installed capacity, turbine type
and commissioning date is kept as conﬁdential by the wind farm owners, or it cannot be easily
accessed.
Information about the wind farms location in Cartesian coordinates is crucial for the realization
of this project since it allows to obtain the correct microscale parameters. Therefore the wind
farms with missing location had to be removed from the calculation, lowering the number of
wind farms to study to 16,655. A large scale visualization of the 16,655 wind farm locations
was obtained through the Data Station web application, and is shown in ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Visualization of the Wind Farm Locations in Europe
17
==PAGE:30==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
4.2
Wind Farm Spatial Modeling
The spatial features of a wind farm are not only given by the Cartesian location itself, but also
by the area that the wind farm occupies. Modeling the wind farm area is important since this
parameter will determine the amount of GWA grid points to be considered, in order to obtain a
description of the overall wind speed distribution at the wind farm according to the microscale
data of the Global Wind Atlas.
Information about the wind farm area is not speciﬁed in the database.
However a good
parameter to determine the spatial size of a wind farm is the installed capacity. A proportional
relation can be found between the installed capacity and the dimension of a wind farm, since
ordinarily, the higher the wind farm capacity, the larger the amount of turbines, and therefore,
the bigger the area of the wind farm.
The layout of onshore wind farms can have many shapes, which are carefully designed by the
developers to reduce wake eﬀects.
In a large scale study like this, it results impossible to
determine the actual shape of every wind farm. Therefore a generalization to determine the
wind farm area is needed.
In an eﬀort to model the actual area of a wind farm, the installed capacity was employed to
calculate a circular area, in which the radius is given by equation 2, assuming that a 200 MW
wind farm occupies an area of 25 km2
Ro =
r
25 · WFcap
200 · π
[km]
(2)
Where Ro is the radius of the wind farm in kilometers assuming a circular layout, and WFcap
corresponds to the installed capacity of the wind farm in MW.
However, it is unlikely to ﬁnd circular layouts in wind farms. A squared shape instead, represents
better a general wind farm layout, and therefore it was chosen to be the way to model all the
wind farms in this study. The modeled wind farm area was converted from a circular layout to
a squared layout, in which each side of the square is a function of the circle’s radius previously
calculated. Equation 3 states the ﬁnal length of a squared wind farm layout area as a function
of the installed capacity.
lsq = √π · Ro
lsq = √π ·
r
25 · WFcap
200 · π
[km]
lsq =
r
25 · WFcap
200
[km]
(3)
A visual representation of the area maintenance when modeling a squared wind farm using
equation 3 is provided in ﬁgure 4.3. The point in the center of the square represent the exact
wind farm location given by Cartesian coordinates.
18
==PAGE:31==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 4.3: Wind Farm Area Modeling
In order to be able to spatially model a wind farm using this procedure, it is necessary to have
information about the installed capacity of every wind farm. Unfortunately, there were 20 farm
entries with missing information about their installed capacity. These wind farms had to be
withdrawn from the further calculations.
Additionally, the wind farms with a dismantled status were removed from the calculations,
since they do not longer exist and their installed capacity was indicated with a zero value in
the data base. This accounted for 669 wind farms, reducing the ﬁnal number of wind farms to
be analyzed to 15,966.
The remaining wind farms were modeled with squared layouts in MATLAB. The modeled wind
farms are shown in a continental scale, and in detail at ﬁgures 4.4 and 4.5 respectively.
19
==PAGE:32==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 4.4: Modeled Wind Farms in Europe
Figure 4.5: Detail of Modeled Wind Farms at the Northwest Coast of Denmark
20
==PAGE:33==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
4.3
GWA Microscale Data Obtention
The following task was to obtain the Global Wind Atlas grid points which ﬁt inside each modeled
wind farm area, in order to subsequently, be able to estimate the wind farm’s representative
overall wind speed distribution. This is why the correct spatial modeling of the wind farm
described in section 4.2 was so important.
A MATLAB script was generated to obtain the equivalent GWA grid points for each wind farm.
For cases where the wind farm area was so small that none of the GWA points ﬁtted inside
the modeled area, the closest points were taken into consideration to model the wind speed
distribution according to the GWA data.
Figure 4.6 shows an example of the GWA grid points which ﬁt inside two adjacent wind farms
in the south of Poland.
Figure 4.6: GWA Grid Points Inside Two Modeled Wind Farms
Each GWA grid point contains the scale and shape Weibull parameters describing the 100
meter-height wind speed distribution at the grid point. A discussion on the obtained results by
considering GWA grid points at a diﬀerent height (50 meters) is performed in section 9.1.
All the GWA grid points inside each wind farm area will most likely contain slightly diﬀerent
Weibull parameters accounting for the site topography. In principle each GWA grid point will
contain a ”unique” wind speed distribution, therefore, a calculation to obtain the overall wind
speed distribution of the wind farm is needed. This calculation is presented in section 4.3.1.
4.3.1
Weibull Distribution Merging
The Weibull distribution has become one of the most commonly used and accepted distributions
to describe the wind speed at a site [69]. The distribution of wind speed is determined by two
parameters named scale and shape (”A” and ”k” respectively). The scale parameter describes
the scatter of the distribution indicating how windy a location is, while the shape parameter
describes the shape of the distribution, indicating how peaked the distribution is [70, 71].
21
==PAGE:34==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
The Weibull probability density function describes the probability of observing a certain wind
speed ”v”. It is given as a function of the scale and shape Weibull parameters as shown in
equation 4.
p(v) =
 k
A
 v
A
k−1
exp
h
−
 v
A
ki
(4)
The cumulative distribution function describes the probability of encountering a wind speed
value of less than, or equal to a given wind speed ”v”. It is described by equation 5.
c(v) = 1 −exp
h
−
 v
A
ki
(5)
The Weibull probability density function and the cumulative distribution function presented in
equations 4 and 5 are shown graphically for a random scale and shape parameters at ﬁgure 4.7.
(a) Probability Density Function
(b) Cumulative Distribution Function
Figure 4.7: Weibull probability density function and cumulative distribution function
Each GWA grid point, as the ones presented in ﬁgure 4.6, has its own wind speed distribution
as the one shown in ﬁgure 4.7 (a), which is described by Weibull parameters. To obtain the
overall Weibull distribution parameters for a given wind farm, a version of the moment method
was followed.
The moments of a Weibull distribution can be analytically calculated, and they provide a
statistical description of the distribution. The main four Weibull moments are presented in
equations (6 - 9) as a function of the scale parameter ”A”, the shape parameter ”k” and the
gamma function ”Γ” [72].
The ﬁrst moment of the Weibull distribution, M1, describe the mean value of the distribution,
which is given by equation 6.
22
==PAGE:35==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
M1 = A · Γ

1 + 1
k

(6)
The second moment of the Weibull distribution, M2 correspond to the standard deviation of
the distribution, and is described in equation 7.
M2 = A ·
h
Γ

1 + 2
k

−Γ2
1 + 1
k
i1/2
(7)
The third moment of the Weibull distribution, M3 deﬁne the distribution skewness, which
determines whether the distribution stretches in one tail or the other. The distribution skewness
can be calculated using equation 8.
M3 =
Γ

1 + 3
k

−3Γ

1 + 1
k

Γ

1 + 2
k

+ 2Γ3
1 + 1
k

h
Γ

1 + 2
k

−Γ2

1 + 1
k
i3/2
(8)
The fourth moment of the Weibull distribution, M4 specify the distribution kurtosis, which
states if the distribution has heavy tails or is more concentrated in the center. The distribution
kurtosis can be estimated through equation 9.
M4 =
Γ

1 + 4
k

−4Γ

1 + 1
k

Γ

1 + 3
k

h
Γ

1 + 2
k

−Γ2

1 + 1
k
i2
+
6Γ2
1 + 1
k

Γ

1 + 2
k

−3Γ4
1 + 1
k

h
Γ

1 + 2
k

−Γ2

1 + 1
k
i2
−3
(9)
The procedure to calculate the equivalent scale and shape parameters for each wind farm
containing numerous wind speed distribution grid points was the following:
1. For a given wind farm, the ﬁrst and the third Weibull moments were calculated for each
one of the GWA grid points inside the wind farm, through equations 6 and 8.
2. The moments of each grid point were weighted equally since theoretically, a wind turbine
can be located anywhere inside the modelled area. Afterwards, they were added to obtain
the wind farm overall ﬁrst and third moments, M1 and M3.
3. The obtained moments were introduced again in equations 6 and 8, which therefore, were
solved for the shape and scale parameters through the ”fsolve” nonlinear equation solver
in MATLAB. Initial guess values for A and k were provided to speed up the calculations,
which subsequently lead to the obtention of the overall wind farm Weibull parameters.
Usually, in the moments method, the ﬁrst and the second moment functions are used to obtain
the Weibull parameters by solving two simultaneous equations. The reason for this is that the
mean and the standard deviation are easy to calculate from observations, and they statistical
values are wished to be preserved in the calculated Weibull distribution.
23
==PAGE:36==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
However, in this project, it was decided to utilize the skewness instead of the standard deviation;
this in order to replicate wind speeds at the tail of the distribution, which is considered of great
relevance since the highest wind speeds are related to the highest generation values, which also
might be potentially shut down due to the cut-out wind speed limitation in a wind turbine.
Hence the importance of the appropriate modeling of the distribution tails.
The calculation presented in this section was done for all the GWA grid points which ﬁtted
inside each of the 15,966 wind farms to be analyzed. This lead to the obtention of the equivalent
wind farm’s scale and shape parameters at 100 meters height. Unfortunately, it was not possible
to obtain the equivalent Weibull parameters for 121 wind farms due to missing information in
the Global Wind Atlas ﬁle. This has to due to some systematic error which is explained more
in detail in section 11.2.
Additionally, a total of 82 wind farms (135 MW) from the Canary Islands, Madeira and Azores
Islands which did not ﬁt in the three WRF domains were removed. Finally, a table of 15,763
wind farms containing the original wind farm information, plus the equivalent wind farm scale
and shape parameters describing the local wind speed distribution was constructed.
4.4
WRF Mesoscale Time Series Obtention
Once the microscale wind speed distribution of each wind farm was modeled, the following
step was to obtain the mesoscale wind speed time series at each wind farm location.
The
equivalent WRF wind speed time series were obtained through CorWind, a tool which is also
implemented on the Data Station portal from the Technical University of Denmark. This tool
allows to obtain an equivalent mesoscale wind speed time series for any location in Europe,
using the three WRF domains showed in ﬁgure 3.3 as an input.
As explained before, the ﬁnest grid from the WRF numerical model presents a resolution of 10
kilometers spacing. Therefore, to obtain the equivalent wind speed time series at any desired
location, CorWind applies an inverse distance weighted interpolation using the closest WRF
grid points. This ensures that the closest WRF grid point has the highest inﬂuence on the
resulting time series for the given location, and so on.
For each wind farm location, a continuous hourly average wind speed time series was obtained
for a duration of 34 years, ranging from January 1st 1982, to December 31st 2015 in order
to account for wind speed variability.
The calculations were performed at a country level,
assuming a constant hub height of 100 meters for all the wind farms to match with the data
obtained from the Global Wind Atlas. The constant 100 meters height was also selected since
hub height information was missing for almost two thirds of the total amount of wind farms in
the data base.
The resulting wind speed time series per country were saved in csv ﬁles. This procedure was
done for all the European countries except for Germany, in which the large amount of wind
farms in the country (7,030) needed to be split in 3 diﬀerent ﬁles to make the data more
manageable.
24
==PAGE:37==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
As concluded in section 2.2.3, the WRF wind speed time series cannot be taken as the “observed”
ones, since they come from a mesoscale model, which does not consider speciﬁc site parameters
like roughness or topography as a microscale model would do. This means that generally, wind
speeds calculated from WRF will be higher than the observed ones, requiring an adjustment
which in this project, is performed with the microscale data from the Global Wind Atlas.
At this point, every wind farm location in Europe had an equivalent mesoscale long-term wind
speed time series, in addition to the scale and shape parameters from the Weibull distribution
describing wind speeds at the microscale level.
The two proposed statistical procedures to
include the microscale parameters into the mesoscale wind speed time series are explained in
sections 5.1 and 5.2.
25
==PAGE:38==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
5
Calculations
In this section, two statistical procedures to obtain downscaled wind speed time series are
described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. The general concept is to downscale the original WRF time
series with the introduction of GWA microscale parameters, in order to obtain realistic wind
speed time series at each wind farm site, which later on, can be used for variability studies and
power generation simulations.
5.1
Scaling Factor
The scaling factor method consists on applying a multiplication factor to the 34-year WRF
wind speed time series, in order to yield the same average value as the average of the wind
speed distribution calculated with microscale GWA data.
At each wind farm, the multiplication factor, referred in this project as ”Scaling Factor” (SF)
is then, the relation between the mean value of the wind speed distribution calculated from
GWA microscale data, and the average wind speed of the long-term WRF time series. This
relation is shown in equation 10.
SF = GWAmean
WRFmean
(10)
The resulting downscaled wind speed time series ”Xt
∗” at each wind farm location, will therefore
be obtained by multiplying every hourly wind speed value of the WRF time series ”Y ”, with
the scaling factor result obtained in equation 10.
Xt
∗= SF · Yt
(11)
In this sense, this method guarantees that the resulting downscaled long-term wind speed time
series has the same average value as the one calculated from the GWA microscale data, but
still maintaining the shape of the original WRF distribution.
Four visual examples comparing the original WRF time series distribution against the resulting
time series distribution after applying the scaling factor method, are given in ﬁgure 5.1 for wind
farms covering diverse geographic regions.
The same locations are later on tested in section 5.2 with the second proposed procedure called
probability integral transformation.
Therefore, both methods are statistically compared in
section 5.3 in order to provide an overall understanding on the results produced by the scaling
factor and the probability integral transformation methods.
26
==PAGE:39==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
(a) Wind Speed Distribution Example in UK
(b) Wind Speed Distribution Example in Spain
(c) Wind Speed Distribution Example in Finland
(d) Wind Speed Distribution Example in Romania
Figure 5.1: Wind speed distribution comparison after applying the scaling factor method
27
==PAGE:40==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
5.2
Probability Integral Transformation
The second method presented in this project, consists on obtaining the downsacaled wind speed
time series at each wind farm location, by forcing the estimated wind farm Weibull distribution
into the WRF time series. This is performed by a procedure known as probability integral
transformation.
The probability integral transformation (PIT) is a statistical method which allows to convert
the values described as random variables of any continuous distribution, into random variables
having a uniform distribution [73]. Later on, the inverse procedure can be applied to transform
the random variables with a uniform distribution, into variables having any desired distribution;
this is known as inverse transform sampling [74].
The procedure followed to obtain the downscaled wind speed time series through the probability
transformation method, is summarized in equation 12
X∗
t = FGWA
−1(FWRF(Yt))
(12)
Firstly the WRF time series distribution is modeled as an empirical distribution function.
Subsequently, a cumulative distribution function is applied to it, in order to obtain a uniform
distribution, which is indicated in equation 12 as FWRF(Yt).
Once the resulting wind farm’s Weibull distribution is modeled from the GWA data, an inverse
cumulative distribution function is applied to it, having as a sample, the data from the uniform
distribution. This provides as a result the time series X∗
t as indicated in equation 12.
The output of this method provides a long-term wind speed time series that retains the
temporary dependencies, but presents a distribution shape equal to the Weibull distribution
estimated from the GWA microscale data.
A diagram showing graphically the procedure to force the original wind speed time series
distribution into the calculated Weibull distribution, is shown in ﬁgure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Probability Integral Transformation Procedure
28
==PAGE:41==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
It is possible to compare the resulting wind speed time series X∗
t against the original WRF wind
speed time series Yt, to observe the growing non-linear relation between the two distributions.
This relation along with the original WRF distribution (bottom) and the resulting forced
Weibull distribution (left) are shown in ﬁgures 5.3 - 5.6 for the same locations evaluated with
the scaling factor method in section 5.1.
Figure 5.3: Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in United-Kingdom
Figure 5.4: Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in Spain
29
==PAGE:42==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 5.5: Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in Finland
Figure 5.6: Probability Integral Transformation Results for a Wind Farm in Romania
30
==PAGE:43==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
5.3
Comparison Between the Two Statistical Methods
In this section, a comparison of the wind speed distribution and the statistical results between
the original WRF wind speed time series, and the resulting wind speed time series after applying
both, the scaling factor (SF) and the probability integral transformation (PIT) methods is
provided.
Figure 5.7: Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in UK
Figure 5.8: Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in Spain
31
==PAGE:44==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 5.9: Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in Finland
Figure 5.10: Distribution Comparison and Statistical Results for a Wind Farm in Romania
The four wind farms presented in this section were specially selected to show diﬀerent distribution
shapes and scaling factor results. In general, it can be seen that the scaling factor and the
probability integral transformation methods provide wind speed distributions that have notably
diﬀerent shapes, but still are able to provide the same mean value due to the way they were
calculated. This diﬀerence in the distribution shape will produce diﬀerent generation results
32
==PAGE:45==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
after a power curve is applied at the speciﬁc wind farm location. Hence the importance of
modeling correctly the wind speed distribution at a location.
The scaling factor results determine how much the resulting wind speed distribution will narrow
or expand compared to the original distribution of the WRF wind speed time series. Scaling
factors with values lower than one will narrow the resulting wind speed distribution, while
scaling factors with values higher than one will expand the resulting wind speed distribution
as it can be appreciated in ﬁgure 5.9 for the Lammasoaivi wind farm in Finland.
Looking at the statistical results, it can be seen that for all the four cases, the standard deviation
of the probability integral transformation method is higher than the standard deviation obtained
in the scaling factor method. This happens even at the Finnish wind farm in which the high
scaling factor value yields a larger standard deviation compared to the original WRF time
series. This characteristic of the probability integral transformation method having a higher
standard deviation than the scaling factor method was observed for almost all the analyzed
wind farm locations using both methods.
For the scaling factor method, the skewness and the kurtosis remain with the same value as in
the WRF wind speed time series, since the distribution is just scaled by a multiplier. For the
four shown examples, the skewness in the probability integral transformation is always higher
than for the scaling factor method, indicating that for the probability integral transformation
method, the mass of the distribution is more concentrated towards low wind speeds [75].
It can be observed that for the scaling factor method, there is a direct relation between the
scaling factor results and the growth or decrease in the percentile results. If the scaling factor
is lower than one, the percentiles will be lower than the ones presented by the WRF time series
since the distribution will become narrower. On the contrary, for a scaling factor with values
higher than one, the percentile results will increase compared to the original WRF time series
since the distribution is expanded towards higher wind speeds.
The same eﬀect in the percentiles can be observed for the probability integral transformation
method for location in which the wind resource need to be ”scaled down”.
However, for
the wind farm in Finland, in which the mean value for the proposed methods is higher than
the one calculated by the WRF mesoscale model, the distribution of the probability integral
transformation method is expanded at both sides, leading to a lower 5th percentile value and
a higher 95th percentile value compared to the original WRF wind speed time series.
Lastly, it is important to mention that the correlation between the scaling factor and the
probability integral transformation wind speed time series is higher than 0.995 for all the cases,
except for the wind farm in Spain, where the correlation goes down to 0.978. However, the
Spanish wind farm is presented as an extreme example, in which the small capacity of the wind
farm and the rough topography of the location, yields to an extreme low scaling factor value.
Each wind farm to be analyzed in this project, would present a unique scaling factor and
probability integral transformation results, since the mesoscale and microscale wind speed
distributions are particular for every given wind farm location. However, the analysis presented
in this section provides an overall coverage of diﬀerent cases that can be encountered in the
large scale analysis to be performed in this project.
33
==PAGE:46==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
5.4
Final Method Selection
In this section, an assessment between the two methods presented in sections 5.1 and 5.2 is
carried out to determine the ﬁnal method to be used in the large-scale study.
The ﬁrst proposed method, referred in this project as scaling factor, represent an easy and
convenient calculation for estimating the long-term wind speed time series at a certain location.
Given the global onshore coverage from both, the mesoscale WRF model and the Global Wind
Atlas microscale data, it is possible to obtain a scaling factor value for any desired onshore
location in the world, and employ it to estimate downscaled wind speed time series through a
simple multiplication.
In the scaling factor method, the shape of the original WRF time series is maintained. However,
an important aspect to have in mind, is that the application of the multiplier has a bigger impact
at high wind speeds than in low wind speeds. Given that generally it is expected to obtain a
scaling factors with values lower than 1, the resulting time series will present a lower variance
compared to the original WRF time series distribution. This variance decrease is especially
observed at high wind speeds and can be appreciated in the ﬁgures shown in section 5.3.
On the other hand, the probability integral transformation method suppose a more complex
calculation which requires a greater computational eﬀort to be performed.
The resulting
output of this method provides a relation between the original WRF, and the forced Weibull
distributions as presented in ﬁgures 5.3 - 5.6. Given its non-linear behaviour, this relation needs
to be saved in form of a function after applying an appropriate curve ﬁtting, instead of being
saved as a simple multiplier.
Results saved in form of a function, imply a more complex calculation to obtain the downscaled
wind speed time series at a location. Additionally, it is not straightforward to obtain large-scale
geographical visualizations with this approach, unlike the scaling factor method in which the
multiplier values can be plotted in a map.
Lastly, in the probability integral transformation method, the resulting wind speed time series
present the Weibull distribution determined by the microscale data from the Global Wind
Atlas.
In reality, the wind speed distribution at a location might diﬀer from the modeled
Weibull distribution. Previous studies have shown that the Weibull distribution is not always
suitable to represent the wind resource at every geographical location in the world [76, 77].
The initial comparison between the scaling factor and the probability integral transformation
methods performed in this section, position the scaling factor as the more convenient method to
be followed for the large scale study intended in this project. To make the ﬁnal decision on the
method to be utilized, the performance of both methods were tested against real wind speed
observations measured at the Cabauw mast in the Netherlands. The statistical comparison of
the two methods against the wind speed measurements from the Cabauw mast can be found
in section 5.4.1
34
==PAGE:47==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
5.4.1
Cabauw Mast Data Comparison
In this section, the performance of the scaling factor, and the probability integral transformation
methods are tested against wind speed measurements from the Cabauw meteorological mast in
the Netherlands.
Located at 51.971◦N, 4.927◦E, the meteorological mast contains a large set of instruments to
study the atmosphere and its interaction with the land surface. The recorded data is publicly
available and it is possible to obtain wind speed measurements at seven diﬀerent heights above
the surface level (2, 10, 20, 40, 80, 140 and 200 meters) [78].
10-minute average wind speed measurements at 80 meters height were obtained from 2008 to
2016. The wind speed measurements were converted to hourly wind speed averages in order to
have the same time step as the time series of the proposed methods. The hourly wind speed
measurements at 80 meters height above the ground level were extrapolated to a 100 meters
height using the wind proﬁle power law described in equation 1. Through assuming neutral
stability conditions, a value of α = 1
7 was introduced into the equation.
Thereafter, the WRF wind speed time series was obtained for the Cabauw mast location at
100 meters height for the mentioned years. The equivalent wind farm Weibull parameters were
obtained from the Global Wind Atlas data at 100 meters height, assuming an installed capacity
of 10 MW for the spatial modeling of the area.
The scaling factor (S.F.) and the probability integral transformation (P.I.T.) methods were
applied, and their equivalent wind speed time series were statistically compared against the
extrapolated data from the Cabauw Mast. The results of this comparison are shown in table 1.
Parameter
Mast (100 m)
WRF (100 m)
S.F. (100 m)
P.I.T. (100 m)
Mean
7.038
7.530
7.025
7.025
Standard deviation
3.110
3.111
2.903
3.302
5th percentile
2.336
2.589
2.416
2.120
95th percentile
12.518
12.737
11.890
12.913
Table 1: Comparison Results Against Cabauw Measured Data
The obtained scaling factor at the Cabauw mast for the 9 years evaluated was: SF = 0.933
From results presented on table 1, interesting observations can be made. Firstly it can be
seen that both methods provide the same mean value which is noticeably close to the mast
extrapolated average value. Secondly, the standard deviation seems to be underestimated by
the scaling factor method and overestimated by the probability integral transformation method.
However, it seems that the variability is well represented by the WRF mesoscale model. This
is something than could be considered in the future to enhance the scaling factor method.
Looking at the percentiles, it can be noticed that the scaling factor method tends to concentrate
the data towards the center of the distribution, while the probability integral transformation
35
==PAGE:48==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
tends to spread the data throughout the distribution. This can be graphically observed by
analyzing the equivalent distribution histograms shown on ﬁgure 5.11.
Figure 5.11: Cabauw Distribution Comparison of the Two Methods Against Measured Data
Overall, both methods presented good statistical results. The statistical comparison of both
methods against the measured wind speed data, did not provide any strong evidence of one
method performing noticeably better than the other. However the wind speed distributions
presented in ﬁgure 5.11, show that the scaling factor method represents better the wind resource
at the mast location, reproducing more faithfully the wind speed distribution. Given this, in
addition to its relative simplicity, the scaling factor method was choosed to be the method to
be used in the large scale study presented in this project.
36
==PAGE:49==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
6
Large-scale Wind Speed Results
The scaling factor method described in section 5.1 was applied to the 15,763 wind farms in
Europe, leading to the obtention of a unique scaling factor value for each wind farm location.
The scaling factor is the number for which the site’s WRF mesoscale wind speed time series
should be multiplied, in order to obtain the downscaled wind speed time series at the location.
The scaling factor results are visually presented for the European continent in ﬁgure 6.1, while
detailed results for several countries are shown in ﬁgures 6.2 to 6.5.
The visualization of the scaling factor results allows to observe how much the wind resource
according to the WRF mesoscale model should be reduced (or in some cases increased) at
determined regions. The scaling factor range at each one of the following ﬁgures was set taking
the minimum and the maximum scaling factor values encountered at each region or country.
Figure 6.1: Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Europe
37
==PAGE:50==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 6.2: Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Denmark
Figure 6.3: Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Germany
38
==PAGE:51==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 6.4: Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in France
Figure 6.5: Scaling Factor Results for Wind Farm Locations in Portugal and Spain
39
==PAGE:52==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
It’s important to remark that the scaling factor results does not indicate directly the quality
of the wind resource, in the sense that the higher the scaling factor value, the greater the wind
resource is. A scaling factor just represents the relation between the mean wind speed obtained
from a microscale model and the mean wind speed from the mesoscale time series. It provides
information on the extent the mesoscale wind speed time series should be modiﬁed to represent
the downscaled wind speed time series at a location.
To asses directly the wind resource in a location, a closer look to the equivalent WRF wind speed
time series should be given. This can be better explained using ﬁgure A.1 in the Appendix as
an example. This ﬁgure shows the mean wind speeds according to the WRF mesoscale model
for grid points at the North-European domain. It can be seen that, according to the WRF
mesoscale model, a greater wind resource exist in North-West Europe and in locations near the
coast, while lower mean wind speeds can be found at continental locations.
Using as an example ﬁgure A.1, it can be deduced that in general, a scaling factor of 0.8 at
a location in Ireland will most likely lead to higher wind speed values than a scaling factor of
0.9 in a location in Slovakia. This proves that the scaling factor by its own, is not a suﬃcient
parameter to determine the wind resource at a location. The speciﬁc site topography modeled
by microscale parameters lead in a large extent to the estimation of the wind speed adjustment
determined by the scaling factor.
Figures 6.2 to 6.5 show an interesting distribution of the scaling factor results.
For Germany, ﬁgure 6.3 shows that high scaling factor values are grouped in the north part of
the country, while low scaling factor values are gathered towards the south. On the other hand,
by analyzing ﬁgure A.1 in the Appendix, it can be observed that according to WRF, higher
mesoscale wind speeds are distributed in the north of the country while lower mesoscale wind
speeds can be encountered in the south of the country. By combining both observations, high
mesoscale wind speeds are multiplied by high scaling factors values, leading to an important
wind resource in the northern part of Germany. While in turn, low mesoscale wind speeds
encountered at the south of the country are multiplied by low scaling factors, reducing still
more the downscaled wind speeds at the south of the country.
France also shows interesting results. It can be observed that the lowest scaling factor values are
encountered in the west of the country, near to the coast. At this region, a relatively high wind
resource would be expected due to wind blowing from the Atlantic ocean. However, having a
closer view to the mesoscale wind speed values from WRF shown at ﬁgure A.1 in the Appendix,
it can be observed that the highest mesoscale wind speeds in France are encountered in this
region. Thus, what happens in this case, is that there is an overestimation of the wind resource
at this region by the WRF mesoscale model, which therefore, is compensated with relatively low
scaling factor values calculated from the microscale model. This yields to realistic downscaled
wind speed values at this region of France
A distribution of the scaling factor results for the twelve European countries with the highest
wind power installed capacity are provided in ﬁgures 6.6 and 6.7.
40
==PAGE:53==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 6.6: Scaling Factor Results per Country 1
41
==PAGE:54==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 6.7: Scaling Factor Results per Country 2
42
==PAGE:55==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
6.1
Inﬂuence of Terrain in Scaling Factor Results
It can be observed that the scaling factor results for Spain, Italy and Portugal present a
considerable variation, spanning relatively low and high scaling factor values. This is mainly
due to the complex terrain present in these countries. At complex terrain, the microscale model
tends to provide erroneous estimates on the wind resource, leading to inaccurate scaling factor
results.
Locations where the wind resource described by the microscale model might be uncertain, can
be identiﬁed with the ruggedness index layer (RIX) on the Global Wind Atlas Map. The RIX
layer measures the steepness or ruggedness of the terrain. Locations having high RIX values
will most likely present large errors in the ﬂow modeling, leading to erroneous estimations of
the local wind speed [65].
The ruggedness index layer (RIX) of the Global Wind Atlas is presented on ﬁgure A.3 in the
section A.2 of the Appendix. Additionally, the location of extremely low and high scaling factor
values is also presented at the same section. It can be noticed that these extreme scaling factor
values correspond to areas with high ruggedness index. Therefore, the scaling factor results at
high-complexity terrain should be treated with caution.
On the other hand, for relatively ﬂat countries with low ruggedness index values like Denmark,
Netherlands or Belgium; the scaling factor results are more stable and concentrated towards
the mean value as it can be observed in ﬁgure 6.7. The microscale ﬂow modeling is easier to
determine on relatively ﬂat terrain, and therefore, the scaling factor results for countries with
prevailing ﬂat terrain are more reliable than the ones for countries presenting regions with very
complex topography.
6.1.1
Area Inﬂuence in High-complexity Terrain
GWA microscale data at locations with high complexity terrain, will present a considerable
variation regarding the wind resource description between contiguous grid points, mainly due
to the complex ﬂow modeling at these regions. Given the employed method described in section
4.2 to spatially model the wind farms in this project, the scaling factor results at locations with
a high ruggedness index, are inﬂuenced by the installed capacity of the wind farms.
Wind farms with very small installed capacity will occupy a small modelled area, consequently,
the amount of GWA microscale grid points that will ﬁt inside the modeled area will be small
too. If a small wind farm is located in a high-complexity terrain like in a ridge or a hill top,
a lower averaging eﬀect would be present for the uncertain GWA grid points ﬁtting inside the
wind farm, which increase the probability of obtaining erroneous scaling factor results.
In order to demonstrate this, hypothetical wind farms were modeled at WRF grid points in
the North-European domain. Three diﬀerent wind farm capacities were used, accounting for
modeled areas of 0.1, 1 and 10 km2 respectively. Figure 6.8 shows the scaling factor results at
a high-complexity region for modeled wind farms using the three diﬀerent installed capacities.
The same calculation is shown in ﬁgure 6.9 for a low-complexity terrain region.
43
==PAGE:56==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
(a) 0.8 MW Wind Farms
(b) 8 MW Wind Farms
(c) 80 MW Wind Farms
Figure 6.8: Scaling Factor Results at Complex Terrain Assuming Diﬀerent Installed Capacities
(a) 0.8 MW Wind Farms
(b) 8 MW Wind Farms
(c) 80 MW Wind Farms
Figure 6.9: Scaling Factor Results at Simple Terrain Assuming Diﬀerent Installed Capacities
44
==PAGE:57==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
For the results in complex terrain (Norwegian fjords) showed at ﬁgure 6.8, it can be seen that
the scaling factor values present a large variability, covering a large range of values in a relatively
small area. For the scaling factors with the smallest modeled area presented in ﬁgure 6.8 (a),
it can be seen that there are adjacent red and blue colored scaling factors. This indicates an
enormous diﬀerence in the wind resource for just a 10 kilometer spacing, which is the spatial
resolution of the utilized WRF mesoscale model. These diﬀerence on wind resource at the
microscale level is something really diﬃcult to encounter in real life, specially considering that
the scaling factor calculations are performed for wind resource at 100 meters height above the
surface level.
Figure 6.8 shows that as the wind farm installed capacity increases, the scaling factor results
show a relatively more balanced distribution, with results closer to the mean value. This is due
to the increasing averaging eﬀect generated by accounting numerous GWA grid points inside
a bigger wind farm area. However, at a modeled wind farm area of 10 km2 for ﬁgure 6.8 (c),
a considerable variability is still present in the scaling factor results at the high-complexity
region.
On the other hand, for the relatively ﬂat surface region (West Denmark) showed in ﬁgure 6.9,
the diﬀerence on the scaling factor results for the three modeled areas is minor, and it is almost
imperceptible with a simple visual comparison. Therefore, it can be concluded that the scaling
factor results for regions with low terrain complexity, posses a lower uncertainty and should be
able to reproduce local wind speeds in a more faithful extent than in high-complexity regions.
6.2
Weighted Scaling Factor per Country
As seen on section 6.1.1, the calculated scaling factor results for wind farms with small installed
capacity have a higher uncertainty, as a lower number of GWA grid points are considered for the
estimation of the local wind resource. However, due to the same small installed capacity, these
small wind farms have a low contribution on the overall aggregated wind power generation for
a given country, therefore, the correct estimation of the wind resource at these locations is not
so crucial as in large wind farm locations.
For each country in Europe, the scaling factor results were weighted, and the average scaling
factor value was obtained. The results of this calculations are shown on table 2. The weighted
scaling factor provides an overview on the average reduction (or increase) of the mesoscale WRF
wind speed time series, in order to obtain the local downscaled wind speeds in a country level.
45
==PAGE:58==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Country
Power [MW]
S.F.
Norway
923
1.023
Macedonia
37
0.990
Finland
998
0.961
Ireland
2,064
0.950
Slovenia
5.5
0.942
Sweden
3,961
0.942
Iceland
4.2
0.917
France
11,036
0.915
Montenegro
72
0.914
Netherlands
2,852
0.901
Estonia
291
0.898
U.K.
9,248
0.890
Austria
2,186
0.887
Ukraine
425
0.884
Germany
35,590
0.883
Belgium
1,247
0.881
Lithuania
255
0.879
Portugal
4,756
0.877
Country
Power [MW]
S.F.
Croatia
296
0.877
Poland
3,633
0.876
Denmark
3,387
0.864
Luxembourg
62
0.857
Italy
8,873
0.856
Albania
500
0.856
Spain
22,082
0.849
Slovakia
3.1
0.845
Belarus
2
0.844
Greece
1,396
0.837
Latvia
52.5
0.836
Bulgaria
577
0.829
Hungary
472
0.829
Turkey
4,270
0.824
Romania
2,732
0.818
Czech Republic
305
0.799
Switzerland
60
0.796
Cyprus
92
0.748
Table 2: Weighted Scaling Factor Results at Country Level
The weighted scaling factor results for countries with a small wind power installed capacity (i.e.
Macedonia or Slovenia) should be analyzed carefully. It is very likely that the small amount of
wind farms in these countries are placed in locations with the highest wind resource inside the
country. Therefore the weighted scaling factor for these countries is not representative on the
overall ”adjustment” needed to obtain the downscaled wind speeds from WRF mesoscale data.
The weighted scaling factors per country presented in table 2 are graphically shown in ﬁgure
6.10. Combining the weighted scaling factor results with the mean wind speeds according to
the WRF mesoscale model shown on ﬁgure A.1, it can be observed that in general, countries
with higher mesoscale wind speeds also present high scaling factor values, which means that
the wind resource at the microscale level for these countries is high.
46
==PAGE:59==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 6.10: Weighted Scaling Factor Results per Country
Norway is the only country which shows a weighted scaling factor with a value higher than
one, meaning that the downscaled wind speeds are even higher than the mesoscale wind speeds
modeled by the WRF model. Looking at ﬁgure A.3 in the Appendix, it can be seen that the
whole country presents a terrain with a high ruggedness index. Therefore, the high scaling
factor values for the wind farms in Norway, might be derived from wind speed overestimates at
ridges and hilltops inside the GWA microscale model.
It is diﬃcult to evaluate the accuracy of the scaling factor method through a direct comparison
against real wind speed measurements in a large-scale. As explained in section 2.1.1, real wind
speed observations at wind farm locations are diﬃcult to be obtained, and certainly it would
be impossible to assess the presented model in a continental scale through a purely wind speed
comparison.
However, by knowing the installed capacity of each wind farm analyzed in this study, it is
possible to convert the calculated wind speed time series to power generation time series through
the application of wind turbine power curves. Large-scale wind power generation is an easier
parameter to be validated against historical data.
47
==PAGE:60==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
7
Wind Speed to Power Generation Conversion
At this point in the project, each one of the 15,763 wind farms had it’s corresponding downscaled
34-year wind speed time series determined by the scaling factor results. This calculation was
done assuming a 100 meters hub height. The eﬀect of performing the scaling factor calculation
for a diﬀerent hub height is discussed at section 9.1, but as explained previously, 100 meters was
considered the average hub height and therefore it was the height used to carry the large-scale
study intended in this project.
To be able to compare the accuracy of the proposed scaling factor model, the wind speed time
series were converted to generated power by means of wind turbine power curves. A wind
turbine power curve express the power generated by the wind turbine, as a function of the wind
speed faced by the turbine rotor. An example of a wind turbine power curve is given at ﬁgure
7.1 for the Vestas V90 wind turbine.
Figure 7.1: Power curve of the Vestas V90 3MW Wind Turbine [79]
A pitch-regulated wind turbine starts to generate power at the cut-in wind speed, which for
the Vestas V90 wind turbine is around 3 m/s. From this point onwards, the generated power
increases non-linearly with the wind speed, until reaching a wind speed where the rated power
generation is reached, which for this turbine model is around 15 m/s. From this point, the
generated power remains constant as the wind speed increases, until reaching the cut-out wind
speed, where the wind speed is so high, that the wind turbine needs to be shut down to prevent
large mechanical stresses that could damage the wind turbine.
Each wind turbine model has its own characteristic power curve, which present unique cut-in,
rated, and cut-out wind speeds. Additionally the rated power diﬀers between diﬀerent wind
turbine models.
48
==PAGE:61==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
In a previous study [10], it was found that the choice of power curves largely aﬀected the
estimated power output from wind speed time series. Additionally in [48], it was found that
the power generation results from wind speed time series had a large sensitivity on the choice
of the power curves to be applied. It was concluded that this sensitivity could be reduced
by employing more accurate, farm-speciﬁc power curves. This is why accurate information
regarding the wind turbine model at each of the wind farm locations in this study, plays a very
important role on the power generation simulations to be carried out.
Unfortunately, in the consulted data base, missing information about the wind turbine model
was found for 6,768 of the 15,763 wind farms in this study. Additionally 10,708 of the total
number of wind farms presented missing information on the hub height, which, due to the wind
proﬁle, also plays a very important role in power generation simulations.
To ﬁll the missing information on the data base, the results of a concurrent master thesis project
performed at the Technical University of Denmark were taken. In the project named ”Large-
scale Bottom-up Wind Generation Time Series Simulation with Missing Data”, the missing
information on hub heights and turbine types was estimated through data analysis techniques.
Once all the missing information was completed and the scaling factor results for each wind
farm location were obtained, power generation simulations were performed for the two most
recent years having WRF data through CorRES; a simulation tool developed by the Technical
University of Denmark. A brief introduction to CorRES is given at section 7.1, while the results
of the power generation simulations at a country level are presented in section 8.
7.1
Introduction to CorRES
Correlations in Renewable Energy Sources (CorRES) is a simulation tool that was employed
in this project to simulate the large scale generation time series from wind speeds and test
the accuracy of the scaling factor model.
Both, wind and solar generation outputs can be
simulated through CorRES, which employ a combination of meteorological time series and
stochastic simulations to provide consistent generation time series [80].
The rough WRF mesoscale wind speed time series at each wind farm location were provided
as the meteorological time series input in the CorRES tool.
The resulting output for this
simulation will correspond to a base-line case where no microscale adjustment is applied to
the mesoscale wind speeds. Later on, in a second simulation, the scaling factor value at each
wind farm location was introduced to the model, in order to downscale the mesoscale wind
speed time series. The resulting output for this simulation will correspond to the scaling factor
generation results for the proposed model in this project.
The stochastic simulations to be introduced in the CorRES tool corresponds to simulated wind
speed ﬂuctuations [81]. As seen in [82], mesoscale models like WRF, generally underestimate
the short-term variability in wind speeds due to spatial and temporal averaging eﬀects. To
compensate this, stochastic simulations in form of time series are introduced to CorRES in
order to produce a more realistic simulation of power generation. The added ﬂuctuations does
not modify the long-term mean wind speeds, as they have an expected value of zero [80].
49
==PAGE:62==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
For the generation simulations using CorRES, a generation output of 95% was set at each wind
farm location, in order to account for losses due to wake eﬀects and availability. Besides the
rough and the adjusted WRF time series, information of the hub height and the power curve
corresponding to the turbine type, are taken by CorRES for each wind farm to be evaluated.
Generation simulations were performed for each wind farm in a country level, and the results
were gathered as aggregated hourly capacity factor time series for the two evaluated years.
50
==PAGE:63==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
8
Large-scale Power Generation Results
The aggregated capacity factor results from both simulations, using rough and scaled WRF
wind speed time series, are compared against historical capacity factors in this section.
The capacity factor (CF) is deﬁned as the percentage of the actual energy produced, with
respect to the maximum energy that could be produced by the wind farm; this last parameter
is deﬁned by the installed capacity. The capacity factor can be estimated through equation 13.
CF =
Energy Generated [MWh]
Installed Capacity [MW] · Time [h]
(13)
As concluded in section 2.2.3, studies estimating capacity factors through raw reanalysis data,
usually show an overestimation in the presented results due to coarse resolution and unresolved
topography. In this project, simulating the capacity factor time series through both, rough
WRF data and WRF data after applying the scaling factor method, would serve to test the
improvement in the power generation time series by the application of the proposed scaling
factor model.
The results of both power generation simulations are compared against yearly historical data
for the 10 countries with the highest wind power installed capacity in section 8.1; and against
hourly time series generation for Nord Pool countries in section 8.2.
8.1
Yearly Capacity Factor Evaluation
To perform the yearly comparison of the obtained capacity factor time series, the historical
capacity factors for the 10 European countries with the highest installed capacity was determined.
The wind power installed capacity is reported for each European country in a yearly basis. Due
to the growth in wind energy, the installed capacity in a country at the beginning of the year
would must likely be lower than the installed capacity at the end of the year.
To account for this growth, the yearly capacity factor was calculated for each country considering
the mean value between the installed capacity at the beginning of the year, and the installed
capacity at the end of the year.
This calculation assumes a linear growth of the installed
capacity throughout the year as no further information is provided.
In this sense, the historical capacity factor for a year ”y” was estimated considering the installed
capacity at the beginning of the year ”Py−1”, and the installed capacity at the end of the year
”Py”, as indicated in equation 14, where ”Ey” is the total energy produced in the year ”y” and
8760 corresponds to the number of hours in a year.
CFy =
Ey
(Py−1 + Py)/2 · 8760
(14)
51
==PAGE:64==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
To obtain the installed capacities and energy generation values needed for this calculation,
historical energy statistics were consulted.
The wind power installed capacity for the 10 countries in this comparison were obtained
from the annual reports of the European Wind Energy Association (EWEA), through [83,
84, 85] for 2013, 2014 and 2015 respectively. Similarly, the yearly wind energy generation for
these countries was obtained from the yearly statistics published by the European Network of
Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) through [86, 87, 88] for the same
years.
For countries with important contribution of oﬀshore wind energy generation like Germany,
United-Kingdom and Denmark, more speciﬁc information was consulted to consider exclusively
onshore wind generation for the historical capacity factor estimations. Usually, oﬀshore power
plants tend to have higher capacity factor values due to the smooth terrain at the sea. Therefore,
speciﬁc data regarding onshore generation and installed capacity was gathered for Germany [89],
United-Kingdom [90] and Denmark [91].
Having all the needed data, the historical capacity factors for the 10 countries with the highest
wind installed capacity were calculated through equation 14. The yearly capacity factors from
the CorRES simulations were obtained by simply taking the average value of the resulting
capacity factor time series for each year.
The historical capacity factor estimations along with the rough WRF capacity factor and the
capacity factor results after applying the scaling factor model are shown in table 3 for 2014,
and in table 4 for 2015. The diﬀerence (diﬀ) between each one of the simulation results and
the historical data is also stated. The simulation results showing a clear better performance
compared to historical data are highlighted in green color.
CF (historical)
CF (WRF)
diﬀ. WRF
CF (S. F.)
diﬀ. S.F.
Germany
0.184
0.314
0.130
0.234
0.050
Spain
0.253
0.301
0.048
0.209
-0.044
United-Kingdom
0.286
0.364
0.079
0.290
0.004
France
0.223
0.327
0.105
0.267
0.044
Italy
0.200
0.303
0.103
0.219
0.019
Sweden
0.265
0.263
-0.002
0.222
-0.043
Poland
0.230
0.371
0.141
0.272
0.042
Denmark
0.252
0.353
0.101
0.254
0.002
Portugal
0.279
0.301
0.022
0.222
-0.057
Netherlands
0.242
0.311
0.069
0.243
0.001
Table 3: Yearly Capacity Factor Results for 2014. The closest results are highlighted in green
52
==PAGE:65==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
CF (historical)
CF (WRF)
diﬀ. WRF
CF (S. F.)
diﬀ. S.F.
Germany
0.209
0.343
0.134
0.262
0.052
Spain
0.239
0.281
0.043
0.195
-0.044
United-Kingdom
0.349
0.407
0.058
0.329
-0.019
France
0.245
0.344
0.098
0.282
0.036
Italy
0.191
0.277
0.087
0.201
0.010
Sweden
0.331
0.323
-0.009
0.277
-0.055
Poland
0.274
0.398
0.124
0.300
0.026
Denmark
0.286
0.385
0.099
0.285
-0.001
Portugal
0.258
0.291
0.033
0.215
-0.043
Netherlands
0.261
0.347
0.086
0.275
0.014
Table 4: Yearly Capacity Factor Results for 2015. The closest results are highlighted in green
Looking at the results shown at tables 3 and 4, it can be seen that the simulations employing
the scaling factor results perform better than simulations using the rough WRF mesoscale wind
speed time series for most of the evaluated countries.
For countries with relatively ﬂat terrain like Denmark or Netherlands, the scaling factor model
performs exceptionally good, leading to estimation errors lower than 5%. On the other hand,
for countries like Spain or Portugal, the scaling factor model presents errors up to 20%.
This relatively large error in Spain and Portugal is presumably due to the complex terrain
present in these countries, which challenges the estimation of the microscale ﬂow modeling as
discussed in section 6.1. Additionally, the underestimation of the yearly capacity factor by the
scaling factor model for these two countries, might be partially due to the exclusion of the wind
farms in the Canary Islands, Madeira and the Azores Islands. Located in the Atlantic ocean,
the wind farms at these islands should present a higher capacity factor than wind farms located
in continental lands.
Either way, the generation simulations using rough WRF data also shows considerable deviations,
overestimating the power generation for Spain and Portugal.
This indicates that utilizing
rough WRF wind speed time series is not a good alternative to perform the power generation
simulations for these two countries.
Results for Sweden are very particular. Generation simulations using rough WRF data perform
surprisingly better than simulations using the scaling factor model. In fact, for both of the years
tested, the generation simulations using rough WRF wind speed data produce errors lower than
3%. This means that for Sweden, it is convenient to use the rough mesoscale wind speed time
series to obtain generation results with higher accuracy.
Looking at the scaling factor results distributions for Sweden in ﬁgure 6.6, it can be observed
that the results do not present a large variance as in countries with high-complexity terrain like
Spain, Italy or Portugal. This means that in general, the terrain in Sweden is smoother than
in these countries, and the results should contain a lower uncertainty.
53
==PAGE:66==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
The weighted scaling factor for Sweden is 0.942, which is a high value compared to other
European countries as can be observed in table 2. Excluding countries with small installed
capacity, it can be noted that the countries with the highest weighted scaling factors in Europe
are Norway and Finland, which are the two neighbouring countries of Sweden.
Both Norway and Finland present higher weighted scaling factors than Sweden, pointing out
the possibility that perhaps, the relatively low capacity factors obtained through the scaling
factor model for Sweden, are due to an overestimation of the ruggedness classes inside the
Global Wind Atlas, which lower the microscale wind speed values for Sweden.
A more detailed study on the Swedish case should be carried out in order to understand the
reasons of the low performance of the scaling factor model for this country. Using rough WRF
wind speed data suppose a good approach to estimate the overall power generation in Sweden.
Nevertheless, if generation is intended to be evaluated in a regional scale, using the rough WRF
data might lead to errors due to the topography variations inside the country, since a coarser
resolution model is utilized.
8.2
Capacity Factor Time-Series Evaluation
In the previous section, it was shown that the simulated generation time series using the scaling
factor model, are able to replicate in a better extent the yearly capacity factors for most of the
tested countries than using rough WRF data.
Furthermore, in a direct time series comparison against historical generation, it would be
possible to evaluate the capability of the model to replicate actual generation behaviour. If
the proposed model is good enough to reproduce historical generation, it could be used to
perform long-term variability studies in a region, and assess the probability of encountering
extreme events that could compromise the security of supply in a power system. Additionally,
the model could be used to test future generation scenarios in a region or to test correlation
between neighbouring countries; both of them are very attractive for power system planners.
Historical generation data in an hourly time series format can be easily accessed for the
Nordic and the Baltic countries members of the Nord Pool electricity market. Historical wind
energy generation time series are available for Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania. However not all these countries can be directly assessed against the capacity factor
simulation results performed in CorRES as explained below.
Denmark was excluded from the time series comparison since the reported generation time
series from Nord Pool includes generation from oﬀshore wind farms. With higher capacity
factor values, oﬀshore wind energy plays a large role at energy generation in Denmark [92].
Therefore, the simulated onshore capacity factor time series cannot be directly compared to
the historical generation time series for validation studies.
Lithuania was also excluded for the time series comparison. The reason behind this, is that
the consulted data base presented missing information regarding the location of 37 of the 65
wind farms present in the country, which corresponds to more than the half of the total wind
farms.
For the remaining 28 wind farms, information on the hub height was only present
54
==PAGE:67==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
for 4 wind farms. Although the missing hub heights and turbine types were estimated in the
concurrent master thesis project mentioned previously, the generation simulations for Lithuania
will contain large uncertainties that jeopardize the validity of the comparison study.
Lastly, data for Sweden and Finland was not available for the year of 2014. However the available
data of 2015 was employed for the time series comparison. This leaves Sweden, Finland, Estonia
and Latvia for the time series comparison.
The historical generation time series were gathered from [93] for Finland, and from [94] for the
rest of the countries. The hourly historical generation time series in MWh, were converted to
hourly capacity factor time series by applying equation 13. Installed capacities were taken from
[83, 84, 85]. A linear growth in the installed capacity from the beginning of the evaluated year
until its end was considered for each of the historical generation time series.
Once the historical capacity factor time series were obtained, the data was cleaned to remove
hours with missing generation values. The hours with missing generation were also removed
from the simulated capacity factor time series in order to compare identical time periods.
For 2014 and 2015, the historical capacity factor time series were compared against generation
simulation from CorRES using again, rough WRF wind speeds and adjusted wind speeds after
applying the scaling factor method. The statistical results of this comparison, along with the
equivalent capacity factor histograms are shown below.
Figure 8.1: Capacity Factor Distribution For Sweden
2015
Mean
Stdv.
5th per.
95th per.
Correlation
RMSE [%]
Hist. generation
0.325
0.182
0.068
0.658
-
-
S. F. generation
0.269
0.170
0.044
0.588
0.92
8.98
WRF generation
0.315
0.186
0.059
0.661
0.92
7.12
Table 5: Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Sweden
55
==PAGE:68==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 8.2: Capacity Factor Distribution For Estonia
2014
Mean
Stdv.
5th per.
95th per.
Correlation
RMSE [%]
Hist. generation
0.202
0.193
0.003
0.606
-
-
S. F. generation
0.229
0.216
0.005
0.694
0.88
10.57
WRF generation
0.298
0.254
0.010
0.809
0.88
15.75
2015
Mean
Stdv.
5th per.
95th per.
Correlation
RMSE [%]
Hist. generation
0.245
0.206
0.013
0.658
-
-
S. F. generation
0.279
0.244
0.011
0.777
0.88
11.76
WRF generation
0.353
0.274
0.020
0.863
0.88
17.14
Table 6: Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Estonia
56
==PAGE:69==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 8.3: Capacity Factor Distribution For Latvia
2014
Mean
Stdv.
5th per.
95th per.
Correlation
RMSE [%]
Hist. generation
0.162
0.163
0
0.518
-
-
S. F. generation
0.174
0.180
0.003
0.591
0.80
11.01
WRF generation
0.282
0.248
0.010
0.825
0.80
19.29
2015
Mean
Stdv.
5th per.
95th per.
Correlation
RMSE [%]
Hist. generation
0.166
0.159
0
0.509
-
-
S. F. generation
0.212
0.225
0.002
0.712
0.85
13.19
WRF generation
0.323
0.282
0.007
0.893
0.85
23.02
Table 7: Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Latvia
57
==PAGE:70==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 8.4: Capacity Factor Distribution For Finland
2015
Mean
Stdv.
5th per.
95th per.
Correlation
RMSE [%]
Hist. generation
0.288
0.192
0.044
0.649
-
-
S. F. generation
0.307
0.229
0.034
0.768
0.85
12.10
WRF generation
0.339
0.241
0.040
0.804
0.85
13.52
Table 8: Statistical Results of Capacity Factor Time Series for Finland
From the time series comparison, several interesting observations can be pointed out.
In
general, it can be observed that generation simulations have high correlation coeﬃcients against
historical generation time series, which talks about the ability of the mesoscale model to
replicate historical wind speed tendencies.
In the case of Sweden, it can be observed that the capacity factor time series using rough WRF
data, follows in a closer extent the historical capacity factor distribution. This conﬁrm the
results obtained in section 8.1 for the yearly capacity factor comparison. For Sweden, using
rough WRF wind speed data provides closer results in generation simulations than employing
downscaled wind speeds. Figure 8.1 shows that the scaling factor method overestimates low
capacity factor values and underestimate high capacity factor values. As commented before,
this might be a consequence of obtaining overall low scaling factor results as a consequence of
too high ruggedness classes inside the Global Wind Atlas.
For Sweden, the simulated capacity factor time series modeled with rough WRF data, have
close statistical results to the historical generation time series, as can be observed in table 5.
However, the historical mean capacity factor estimated with the time series analysis (0.325) is
lower than the historical yearly capacity factor shown in table 4 (0.331). This can be due to
the fact that historical data was missing for the month of January, which tends to be one of
the windiest months in the year [95].
58
==PAGE:71==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Additionally, the consulted data sources for the yearly capacity factor estimations (EWEA and
ENTSO-E) are diﬀerent from the data sources consulted for the capacity factor time series
estimation (EWEA and Nord Pool). This might have contributed in the observed deviation.
In Estonia, the scaling factor model showed a good approximation against historical data.
Figure 8.2 shows that the scaling factor results represent faithfully the historical capacity factor
distribution for the two evaluated years. The scaling factor model provides consistently lower
RMSE values than the rough WRF generation simulation, and the statistical results presented
in table 6 shows that the scaling factor model follows closer the historical data than the rough
WRF capacity factor time series.
For Latvia, the scaling factor model also present close results to the historical generation time
series as can be observed in ﬁgure 8.3. On the contrary, the rough WRF simulations perform in
a poor extent, reaching a root mean square error close to 20%. For this country, it is important
to point out that the total wind energy generation corresponds to just 10 wind farms. This
makes Latvia a hard country to model, since lack of availability in a single wind farm will have
a relatively large impact in the overall wind generation. Therefore, in a country with a small
installed capacity, it is possible to obtain generation results with poor quality, even if the model
performs accurate simulations.
Lastly, for Finland, the scaling factor distribution is very similar to the rough WRF distribution
as can be observed in ﬁgure 8.4. This is due to the high weighted scaling factor (0.961) present
in the country.
However, the scaling factor model provides closer results to the historical
generation than the simple WRF model. The simulation results shown in ﬁgure 8.4 shows
that the model is able to follow in a close extent the historical generation distribution, until
reaching a capacity factor of 0.65. For higher capacity factors, the scaling factor model show
an overestimation on the reported probability.
With correlation values over 0.80, the results presented in this section show that the scaling
factor model is able to represent historical generation in an hourly time series domain. Besides
Sweden, the scaling factor model shows closer results to historical generation than simulations
using rough mesoscale wind speeds. The capacity factor distribution is also well replicated by
the scaling factor model, however a poorer relation can be observed at high capacity factors.
It can be observed that for Estonia, Latvia and Finland, the histograms presented in ﬁgures 8.2,
8.3, and 8.4 show that the scaling factor method overestimates high capacity factor occurrences.
This can also be observed in the percentile results shown at the corresponding table results.
Moreover, for these three countries, the mean capacity factor calculated with the scaling factor
model is slightly higher than the historical mean capacity factor.
The generation simulations using the scaling factor model were done considering a maximum
capacity factor of 0.95, in order to account for wake losses and turbine availability. However, the
overestimation of high capacity factors found for these countries, might indicate that a better
modeling on the losses should be introduced in order to yield closer results against historical
data. Nonetheless, to come to this conclusion, diﬀerent countries and larger time periods need
to be studied.
59
==PAGE:72==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
9
Results Discussion
The results obtained in sections 8.1 and 8.2 show that for most of the analyzed countries,
the generation simulations employing downscaled wind speeds from the scaling factor model
present a higher accuracy than performing the same calculations using rough WRF mesoscale
wind speeds. Satisfactory results were obtained for both, yearly capacity factor estimation and
hourly capacity factor time series comparison. Nonetheless, the scaling factor model proved to
have a better performance in some countries than in others, and overall, a room for improvement
in the generation results can be noticed.
In general, countries with relatively simple topography presented very close approximations,
with errors lower than 5% in the yearly capacity factors estimations and correlation factors
higher than 0.8 in the time series comparison.
However countries presenting large regions
with complex terrain showed important deviations in the yearly capacity factor estimations
performed with the scaling factor model. Sweden was the only country in which employing
directly the mesoscale wind speeds at the time series generation proved to give very close
results to historical generation.
As mentioned previously, it is very challenging to compare the simulated wind speeds against
real wind speed measurements in a large-scale level, therefore, generation time series must be
estimated in order to perform a large-scale assessment. The conversion from wind speed to
generated power adds several uncertainties that can alter the performance of the model when
compared against historical generation data.
If the resulting generation simulations of the
proposed model show a poor performance, it would not be possible to know precisely if the
error is made on the wind speed estimation, or in the generated power conversion.
Validation of generation time series at a single location requires historic generation data from
wind farms, which generally is diﬃcult to acquire due to commercial sensitivities [35]. Therefore,
an evaluation at a country level is performed. Unfortunately, the large-scale nature of this
comparison only allows to test the model performance in an extensive region, which does not
guarantee that the model is performing correctly at a site-speciﬁc location.
In this project, the performance of the scaling factor model to replicate historical generation
faced an additional challenge, since information regarding hub height and turbine type was
missing for plentiful of the evaluated locations.
The estimation of the missing parameters
added by itself a signiﬁcant uncertainty that was transmitted to the model.
In essence, there are three major sources of uncertainty that aﬀect the performance of the
proposed model for historical generation validation, which are:
1. Mesoscale and microscale wind speed estimation at a precise location, especially in complex
terrain locations.
2. Estimation of the missing wind farm parameters, like hub height or power curve employed
for the conversion to generated power.
3. Losses in historical generation due to wake eﬀects, curtailment, turbine performance and
electrical transmission.
60
==PAGE:73==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
The ultimate purpose of estimating long-term wind speed time series is to assess generation
variability, which is a major topic in power systems. This implies that the conversion from
wind speed to generated power will be performed, despite the related uncertainty that this
conversion could involve. It is important to remember that this project corresponds to a large
scale study and therefore some general assumptions needed to be made. If a single wind farm
was intended to be evaluated, a more precise approach should be followed to obtain results with
higher accuracy.
At this project, all the GWA microscale parameters ﬁtting inside each modeled wind farm area
were weighted equally, since it was assumed that a wind turbine could be located anywhere
inside the modeled area.
However, during the planning phase of a wind farm, wind speed
measurements are gathered to select the optimal turbine siting which will lead to the highest
energy generation. Therefore, introducing an optimal turbine siting estimation by removing
a certain percentage of the lowest GWA grid points, could help to represent in more faithful
extent the overall wind speed distribution at a wind farm location.
In the previous sections 6.1 and 6.1.1, it was explained the inﬂuence that the terrain ruggedness
and the modeled area of the wind farm have in the obtention of the scaling factor results.
However, due to the logarithmic wind proﬁle, one of the main parameters that determine the
scaling factor results at a certain location is the hub height. On this project a constant hub
height of 100 meters was considered for all the wind farm locations, since it is only possible to
obtain the GWA Weibull parameters for three diﬀerent heights (50, 100 and 200 meters).
The 100 meters GWA parameters were contemplated to be the closest to the average onshore
wind turbine hub height, and consequently, this height was assumed for all the analyzed wind
farm locations. Nevertheless, small-capacity or older wind farms might present substantially
lower hub heights. For these wind farms, estimating the GWA parameters at 50 meters height
would provide a better description of the local microscale wind speeds.
The scaling factor calculation at 50 meters height was not performed for the small hub-height
wind farms in the large-scale study, because when this project was performed, 2/3 of the
total wind farm entries in the data base presented missing information regarding hub height.
Including two diﬀerent hub height calculations in the large-scale study having incomplete hub
height data, would not provide a fair comparison in the obtained results between countries.
However, a discussion on the inﬂuence of lower hub heights in the scaling factor results is
presented in section 9.1, and a procedure to estimate the precise scaling factor for any desired
hub height is described as a future work in section 11.2.1.
61
==PAGE:74==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
9.1
Scaling Factor Results for Smaller Hub Heights
The wind resource at a location increase logarithmically as a function of the height above the
surface, this increase is described by the wind proﬁle power law already deﬁned in equation 1.
The wind speed magnitude as a function of height can be observed in the left of ﬁgure 9.1.
This ﬁgure also shows the change of the wind ﬂow caused by a hill; the magnitude of the speed-
up and the resulting wind proﬁle shape are determined by the geometry of the hill [65]. The
change on the wind speeds due to orography is only modeled by the microscale model given its
ﬁner spatial resolution.
Figure 9.1: Vertical Wind Proﬁle on a Flat Surface and on Top of a Hill [65]
At a certain location, the wind proﬁle shape is determined by the speciﬁc-site topography,
namely orography and surface roughness. The wind speed outputs from the WRF mesoscale
model are available at diﬀerent heights, which allows to obtain a description of the wind proﬁle.
However due to its coarser spatial resolution and the unresolved topographic eﬀects, this wind
proﬁle description is less precise than in a microscale model.
To observe the variation of the scaling factor results for a diﬀerent height, the procedure to
obtain the scaling factor results described in sections 4 and 5.1 was performed for several
countries, assuming a 50 meters hub height for both, the GWA microscale parameters and the
WRF mesoscale time series.
A comparison on the obtained scaling factor results for 50 meters hub height and the equivalent
results assuming a 100 meters hub height, is shown graphically for several countries in ﬁgures
9.2 to 9.6.
62
==PAGE:75==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 9.2: Scaling Factor Results for Germany at 50 and 100 meters height
Figure 9.3: Scaling Factor Results for Denmark at 50 and 100 meters height
63
==PAGE:76==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 9.4: Scaling Factor Results for U.K. and Ireland at 50 and 100 meters height
For Germany, it can be observed that the scaling factor results for a hub height of 50 meters
present lower values in all the country, which can be especially appreciated in the south of
Germany. At this region, the terrain is characterized by presenting higher levels of roughness
compared to northern Germany [96], and it is the region where the larger variation on the
scaling factor results for lower heights is encountered.
The scaling factor results comparison for Denmark presented in ﬁgure 9.3, show that in general,
scaling factors at a 50 meters height, are consistently lower than their corresponding values at
100 meters height for most of the locations. Denmark is a relatively ﬂat country, and therefore,
the scaling factor results present a relatively low variability for adjacent locations.
Similarly to Denmark, at ﬁgure 9.4, showing the scaling factor results for United-Kingdom and
Ireland, it can be observed that the results at 50 meters height present an overall lower value for
the south-eastern region of United-Kingdom, which as seen on the same ﬁgure, have in general
a simple orography. On the other hand, for more complex-topography regions, both lower and
higher scaling factor values can be encountered. For these regions, the resulting scaling factor
values depend exclusively on the topography of the modeled wind farm area, which determine
the magnitude of the microscale wind speeds.
64
==PAGE:77==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
For the 50 meters height results in United-Kingdom, notably high scaling factor values can
be found at the islands located in the north and north-east part of the country. Typically,
high wind speeds would be expected at these islands due to wind blowing from the Atlantic
ocean. With scaling factor values higher than 1, the microscale wind speeds at 50 meters height
for these locations are higher than the ones described by the WRF mesoscale model. This is
possibly due to speed-up eﬀects in the wind speed as a result of the site topography.
Figure 9.5: Scaling Factor Results for France at 50 and 100 meters height
Figure 9.6: Scaling Factor Results for Spain and Portugal at 50 and 100 meters height
65
==PAGE:78==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
The scaling factor results for France follow the same tendency described for the previous
countries. The low complexity terrains on the west and north of France present lower scaling
factor values at 50 meters height than in the results at 100 meters height. On the other hand,
inland locations near the south coast of France present high scaling factor values for both, 50
and 100 meters height.
These high scaling factor values in France for both heights are located in a high-complexity
topography region, which corresponds to a mountainous system denominated Massif Central;
this system is located between the Pyrenees mountains (border with Spain), and the Alps
(border with Italy) [97].
Lastly, ﬁgure 9.6 shows very interesting results.
For regions with relatively low-complexity
topography in Spain, the scaling factor values at 50 meters height are lower compared to the
scaling factor values at 100 meters height. However, for Portugal, it seems that the scaling
factor results at 50 meters height remain with a close magnitude as the results at 100 meters
height, especially in the north of the country where most of the wind farms are located.
According to the Global Wind Atlas (see ﬁgure A.3), this region of Portugal is characterized
by having high ruggedness index values, accounting for very complex terrains. The ruggedness
index provides a coarse measure of the extent of ﬂow separation [98]; and as mentioned in
section 6.1, locations with high RIX values are likely to present large errors in the ﬂow modeling
performed in microscale models.
9.1.1
Terrain Inﬂuence for Scaling Factor Results at Diﬀerent Heights
Keeping in mind that the scaling factor represent the relation between microscale and mesoscale
wind speeds, the graphical scaling factor comparison performed in the previous section allows
to infer the following conclusions for low and high complexity terrains:
At lower heights above the ground level, low-complexity terrains experience signiﬁcantly lower
scaling factor values compared to the equivalent results at larger heights. This mean that for
low heights, the wind resource described by the WRF model shows a larger overestimation, since
the relatively simple topography inﬂuencing the wind resource is coarsely described. Thus, this
overestimation needs to be compensated with lower scaling factor values.
On the other hand, for lower heights in locations presenting high-complexity terrains, the
relation between the microscale and mesoscale wind speeds gets determined exclusively by the
site-speciﬁc topography. The scaling factor values at these locations do not present a consistent
reduction as in low-complexity regions.
Larger scaling values were commonly encountered
mainly due to accentuated speed-up eﬀects caused by the high-complexity terrain.
In general, the scaling factor results at 50 meters height showed a higher variance compared
to the results obtained for 100 meters height. The scaling factor results at 50 meters height
for each of the countries analyzed in section 9.1 presented both, a lower minimum value, and
a higher maximum value than the results obtained for 100 meters height. This indicates that
the topography inﬂuence on wind speeds is larger at a height of 50 meters.
66
==PAGE:79==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
9.2
Weighted Scaling Factor for Diﬀerent Hub Heights
Similarly to the the procedure followed in section 6.2, the weighed scaling factor at 50 meters
height was obtained for the countries analyzed in this section. The obtained results, along with
a comparison against the original weighted scaling factor values at 100 meters height are shown
in table 9.
Country
Power [MW]
S.F. (100 m)
S.F. (50 m)
diﬀerence
Ireland
2,064
0.950
0.925
-0.025
Sweden
3,961
0.942
0.883
-0.059
France
11,036
0.915
0.893
-0.022
Netherlands
2,852
0.901
0.877
-0.024
U.K.
9,248
0.890
0.861
-0.029
Germany
35,590
0.883
0.849
-0.034
Portugal
4,756
0.877
0.875
-0.002
Denmark
3,387
0.864
0.831
-0.033
Spain
22,082
0.849
0.819
-0.030
Table 9: Weighted Scaling Factor Results for Two Diﬀerent Hub Heights
From the results shown in table 9, it can be concluded that overall, the scaling factor results are
expected to decrease as the hub height gets lower. At lower heights above the ground level, the
site-topography presents a higher inﬂuence on the wind speeds and therefore a larger diﬀerence
is encountered between the microscale and the mesoscale models. As the height increases, the
site topography have less inﬂuence on the resulting wind speeds, thus the scaling factor results
tend to have a value closer to 1, given that the microscale and mesoscale wind speeds present
a closer relation.
In this project, the scaling factor value at each of the 15,763 wind farms was calculated assuming
a constant hub height of 100 meters. As concluded from table 9, old installations and small-
capacity wind farms having low hub heights, would most likely present an overestimated scaling
factor result due to the constant 100 meters hub height assumption. Therefore the estimated
wind speed time series at these locations would be higher than it is in reality, producing an
overestimation in the generated power from the CorRES simulations.
As stated previously in [12], the generated power in a wind farm is a cubic function of the
wind speed. Consequently, small deviations on the calculated wind speed will be translated
in considerable deviations on the generated power.
This is why the correct modeling of
the local wind speeds plays such an important role for the power generation simulations.
The overestimation done by the scaling factor model for the yearly capacity factor results
in Germany, presented in section 8.1, might be partially due to an overestimation of the scaling
factor results at low hub-height wind farms, given that Germany present numerous wind farms
with old installations [89].
67
==PAGE:80==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
In table 9, the weighted scaling factor results at 50 meters height are consistently lower than for
100 meters height for all the countries with the exception of Portugal, in which both weighted
scaling factors present very close values.
This eﬀect is due to the high-complexity terrain
present in the country, as in Portugal, the wind farm development is mainly concentrated in
mountainous regions [99]. Therefore, the scaling factor results at lower heights are expected
to have a high variance, with several locations presenting higher scaling factor values due to
speed-up eﬀects produced in the complex terrain. The inﬂuence of the high-complexity terrain
for the scaling factor results in Portugal can be observed in ﬁgure 9.7.
Figure 9.7: Scaling Factor Results for Portugal Considering Two Diﬀerent Hub Heights
In this project, Portugal was the country which presented the worst yearly capacity factor results
for the generation simulations performed in CorRES. The generation results after applying the
scaling factor method, presented an underestimation on the yearly capacity factor of 20% for
2014 and 16% for 2015. On the contrary, Denmark was the country which presented the best
results for this study, yielding yearly capacity factor errors of 0.8% and 0.35% for 2014 and
2015 respectively.
In [100], the performance of microscale data obtained through the application of the wind
atlas method was tested. Comparison studies were performed against observed wind speed
measurements from meteorological masts at 50 meters height. The uncertainty of the models
was determined with the RMS error between the modeled and the annual mean wind speeds of
the sites. For Denmark, a RMS error of 5% was obtained after testing 21 sites, while for north
Portugal and northwest Spain, the RMS error reached 10% for a 13 site comparison.
From these results, it can be concluded that the accuracy of microscale wind speed estimations
play a very important role in generation simulations.
Large uncertainties in wind speed
estimations at locations presenting high ruggedness index values are translated to the generation
simulations compromising their accuracy.
68
==PAGE:81==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
10
Conclusions
The scaling factor model proposed in this project proved to be a quick and eﬃcient method
to obtain downscaled wind speed time series at wind farm locations. To assess the accuracy
of the model, the resulting downscaled wind speeds were employed to simulate time series
of aggregated power generation at a country level. Results from these simulations showed a
closer relation to historical data than the same calculations using raw wind speed time series
from direct WRF outputs, indicating a clear improvement in the generation estimations by the
introduction of microscale parameters.
The scaling factor at each wind farm determines the reduction (or increase) of the equivalent
WRF time series needed to obtain the downscaled wind speeds. Accurate modeling of local
wind speeds is important since errors in wind estimation are magniﬁed in the power conversion.
In this project, it was found that several parameters presented a considerable inﬂuence on the
magnitude of the obtained scaling factor results. These parameters are described below.
The terrain topography was found to be one of the main features inﬂuencing the scaling factor
results. At high-complexity locations, the scaling factor value for a given wind farm is more
susceptible to present extreme values due to a larger uncertainty associated to the microscale
parameters. This is enhanced if the wind farm present a small installed capacity, which implies
a small modeled area. For larger modeled areas with complex terrain, an averaging eﬀect is
present in the estimation of the equivalent microscale parameters, leading to the obtention of
scaling factor results with lower deviation.
Due to the limited information regarding hub height for most of the wind farms in the data base,
the large-scale study was performed assuming a constant hub height of 100 meters for all the
locations. However, it was found that the magnitude of the scaling factor value was dependent
in a reasonable extent on the height at which the mesoscale and microscale wind speeds were
estimated, due to the logarithmic wind proﬁle. This raises a considerable error in the scaling
factor estimations for wind farms with considerable diﬀerent hub heights. By following the
mentioned constant hub-height assumption, wind farms presenting low hub heights tend to
present overestimated wind speeds, which is translated to overestimated generation at these
locations.
The scaling factor method was chosen over the probability integral transformation method,
due to a better representation of the wind resource measured at the Cabauw mast in the
Netherlands. The improved performance of the scaling factor method can be clearly observed
in the wind speed distribution in ﬁgure 5.11. Given the non-liner relation between wind speed
and generated power, the correct modeling of the site-speciﬁc wind speed distribution plays an
important role in the accuracy of the generated power estimations.
Nevertheless, the application of the scaling factor values to the mesoscale wind speeds, provide
a reduced variability on the downscaled wind speeds. This variability reduction is not produced
with the probability integral transformation method, which represents variability in a better
extent. However, the resulting Weibull distribution from the probability integral transformation
method might not be adequate to represent the wind speed distribution in every location.
69
==PAGE:82==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Mesoscale models like WRF generally underestimate the short-term variability in wind speed
[80, 82]. This eﬀect is emphasized after the application of the scaling factor results for the
obtention of the downscaled wind speeds. In the generation simulations performed with CorRES,
stochastic simulations were added to compensate the reduced variability in the WRF wind
speed time series. This lead to a greater variability than the one observed in historical power
generation time series.
The aggregated generation simulations were calculated through CorRES, employing the obtained
scaling factor results at 100 meters height. Moreover, the missing hub heights and power curves
in the data base were estimated though data assimilation techniques. The scaling factor method
presented closer yearly capacity factors estimations, compared to the use of raw mesoscale data.
This occurred for almost all the tested countries, despite the constant hub height assumption
and the large uncertainty caused by the estimation of the missing hub heights and power curves.
Regarding the time series comparison between simulated and historical generation, high correla-
tion factors and low error values were obtained for all the simulations employing the scaling
factor model. The capacity factor distributions conﬁrmed the ability of the scaling factor model
to replicate wind generation in an hourly time series format for all the tested countries besides
Sweden. Nonetheless, considerable deviations were encountered on the estimation of very low
and very high power generation occurrences. The correct modeling of these extreme generation
occurrences, along with step changes on the aggregated power output are of great relevance in
variability studies. Higher quality wind farm data might lead to a closer representation of these
extreme generation occurrences.
In summary, generation results with high accuracy were obtained for countries with low-
complexity terrain like Denmark or Netherlands, which presented errors lower than 5% on
the estimated yearly capacity factor. On the other hand, generation results for countries with
high-complexity terrain like Spain or Portugal presented important deviations on the estimated
generation, reaching errors up to 20%. This is due to the larger uncertainties involved in the
estimation of the microscale parameters at complex-terrain locations, which are magniﬁed in
the generation simulations.
The good performance of the scaling factor model in low-complexity terrains makes it attractive
to perform generation simulations on oﬀshore wind farms. Given the low ruggedness index and
the smooth surface of the sea, the application of the scaling factor model could lead to accurate
generation estimations. Nevertheless, oﬀshore wind farms experience larger losses due to the
wakes, which would need to be properly modeled if the scaling factor approach is employed.
Compared to the standard use raw reanalysis or mesoscale wind speed data, the scaling factor
model proposed in this project demonstrated an improved performance in the estimation of
power generation time series. Results with remarkable accuracy were obtained for countries with
low-complex terrain, which provide a promising application for further generation modeling.
70
==PAGE:83==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
11
Future Work
During the realization of this project, improvements that could enhance the performance of the
scaling factor model were observed. This improvements stated as future work are separated
in two sections, and could potentially lead to the obtention of generation results with higher
accuracy.
11.1
Data Quality Improvement
Improvements in the quality of the data which is introduced as an input to the scaling factor
model, would help to reduce the uncertainty of the performed calculations. This represent an
important step to increase the accuracy of the proposed model against historical generation
measurements.
11.1.1
Obtaining a Data Base with More Complete Information
aThe ﬁrst and more signiﬁcant improvement that could enhance the calculations obtained
through the application of the scaling factor model, is to have a better quality of the information
contained in the wind farm data base. The quality of the wind farm data is a fundamental
factor for successful modeling [101].
As mentioned previously, it was very common to ﬁnd wind farm entries with missing information
in the consulted data base. In this project, over 1,000 wind farms needed to be excluded from
the study due to missing information on their location. This accounted for almost 7% of the
total amount of wind farms in Europe.
For the remaining wind farms, more than 1/3 of the entries presented missing information
regarding the turbine model, while more than 2/3 presented missing information on the hub
height. As explained before, this two parameters play a crucial role in the generation simulations
performed with CorRES. Although the missing turbine models and hub heights were estimated
through data assimilation techniques, an unavoidable uncertainty was introduced in the calcula-
tions, which compromises in a certain extent the accuracy of the results.
In addition to the missing information, it was found that the data base presented erroneous
information regarding the location for some wind farm entries. Few examples of this are shown
in ﬁgure 11.1, where it can be observed that there are wind farms in Denmark and Germany
which are mistakenly located inside dense urban areas. Also, it was noticed that for Spain, 35
wind farms were lumped at the same location in the south of the country, which corresponds
to a mistaken observation.
71
==PAGE:84==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 11.1: Wind Farms from the Data Base Containing Erroneous Information
The reduction of uncertainties through better quality information regarding wind farms entries,
would lead to more precise wind speed estimations and therefore, generation simulations with
an improved accuracy. However, due to the large amount of wind farms in Europe and to
commercial sensitivities, is very unlikely to obtain precise information for all the locations.
Therefore, data assimilation techniques would be eventually needed to estimate the missing
parameters.
11.1.2
Microscale Data from Global Wind Atlas
When the large scale study described in this project was performed, it was observed that there
were some wind farm locations, for which the microscale Weibull parameters from the Global
Wind Atlas were not available. Without the microscale parameters these wind farm locations
needed to be excluded from the study.
The locations that presented missing parameter information from the Global Wind Atlas were
visualized on a map, and it was found that they exhibit a spatial pattern. The wind farm
locations which presented missing microscale parameters are shown on ﬁgure 11.2
72
==PAGE:85==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure 11.2: Wind Farm Locations with Missing Parameters from Global Wind Atlas
The missing microscale parameters from GWA were spot at longitude intervals of 6◦. This is
most likely due to a systematic error in the way the data was obtained. However, obtaining
the microscale parameters for all the wind farm locations would help to asses more objectively
the performance of the scaling factor model.
In this project, microscale data from the Global Wind Atlas (GWA 2.1) was employed to obtain
a description on the wind speed distribution at a given wind farm location. The used microscale
data comes from a downscaling process employing ERA-Interim reanalysis data, which has a
spatial resolution of 80 km. ERA-Interim data is utilized to model WRF mesoscale simulations
at 9 km resolution, employed to perform the subsequent wind climate generalizations [65, 102].
The future New European Wind Atlas (NEWA) will be based on ERA-5 reanalysis data, which is
a next generation reanalysis model that has a spatial resolution of 30 km. The subsequent WRF
mesoscale simulations will be performed on an increased resolution of 3 km, to be later used to
perform the wind climate generalizations and the subsequent downscaling process [65, 103].
The use of ﬁner resolution data from both, reanalysis and mesoscale simulations might lead to
more precise estimations. Therefore, employing the microscale data from NEWA could improve
the performance of the scaling factor model, especially in complex terrain locations.
73
==PAGE:86==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
11.2
Model Performance Improvement
The two processes further described in sections 11.2.1 and 11.2.2 would help to enhance the
wind speed estimations at a precise wind farm location; while the process proposed in section
11.2.3 could help to obtain improved generation simulations.
11.2.1
Scaling Factor Obtention at Precise Hub Heights
As reviewed on section 9.1, the scaling factor results depend on the hub height at which the
mesoscale and microscale parameters are acquired. Obtaining scaling factor values at the exact
hub height of the wind farms, would greatly enhance the wind speed estimation performed by
the scaling factor model, leading to more accurate generation simulations.
The Global Wind Atlas provides microscale parameters at 50, 100 and 200 meters height above
the ground. For the microscale model, the mean wind speed at the exact hub height could be
calculated by obtaining the mean wind speeds at 50 and 100 meters height. Those two wind
speed values could be introduced in the wind proﬁle power law described in equation 1 to obtain
the empirical coeﬃcient α.
For each location, the mean microscale wind speed at 50 meters height and the calculated
empirical coeﬃcient α, could be used to obtain the microscale mean wind speed at any desired
height employing again equation 1. Regarding the mesoscale wind speeds, it is possible to
obtain the equivalent WRF wind speed time series at any desired height through CorWind,
which applies an interpolation to accomplish this task.
Ultimately, the scaling factor value at each location would be obtained by the relation of the
mean microscale and mesoscale wind speeds at the desired hub height.
11.2.2
Model Testing Against Wind Speed Measurements
Similarly to the wind speed comparison against measurements from a meteorological mast
presented in section 5.4.1; downscaled wind speed time series employing the scaling factor
model could be estimated for other meteorological mast locations in order to perform wind
speed comparison studies.
It is important that several terrain types are tested with the scaling factor model, in order
to verify the extent to which the modeled wind speed time series represent the observed
wind speeds at the site.
If meaningful deviations are noticed, additional corrections could
be incorporated in the scaling factor model with the aim to provide more faithful wind resource
estimations.
Comparison against historical wind speed observations at diﬀerent sites represent an important
task to be done, since it would serve to assess the accuracy of the scaling factor model
to reproduce local wind speeds, and therefore, the accuracy that could be expected in the
subsequent power generation simulations.
74
==PAGE:87==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
11.2.3
Adjustments in Power Conversion
The yearly capacity factor estimations using the scaling factor model obtained in section 8.1,
showed that the overestimation or underestimations on the historical capacity factors at each
country presented similar error magnitudes for the two evaluated years.
As described in section 9, there are several sources of losses in the conversion from wind
speed to measured power generation which are diﬃcult to model in the generation simulations.
Parameters like grid curtailment might be speciﬁcally dependent on the analyzed country,
therefore estimating parameters like this for each county could lead to more precise estimations.
If after performing the tasks mentioned in the sections 11.2.1 and 11.2.2, a constant error per
country is still encountered, the output time series from the generation simulations could be
adjusted per country, in order to provide results which are closer to historical data.
75
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
References
[1] Angela Liberatore. Climate change, security and peace: the role of the european union.
Review of European Studies, 5(3 special issue):83, 2013.
[2] Bert Metz, Ogunlade Davidson, Peter Bosch, Rutu Dave, and Leo Meyer. Climate change
2007: Mitigation of climate change. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.
[3] John Reilly, Peter H Stone, Chris E Forest, Mort D Webster, Henry D Jacoby, and
Ronald G Prinn. Uncertainty and climate change assessments, 2001.
[4] Tom ML Wigley and Sarah CB Raper. Interpretation of high projections for global-mean
warming. Science, 293(5529):451–454, 2001.
[5] Chih-Chun Kung and Bruce McCarl.
Sustainable energy development under climate
change, 2018.
[6] Global Wind Energy Council.
Global wind statistics 2017.
https://gwec.net/
wp-content/uploads/vip/GWEC_PRstats2017_EN-003_FINAL.pdf, 2018.
[7] Power Technology.
The world’s most used renewable power sources.
https://
www.power-technology.com/features/featurethe-worlds-most-used-renewable_
power-sources-4160168/, 2014.
[8] Wind Europe. Wind energy in europe in 2018. https://windeurope.org/wp-content/
uploads/files/about-wind/statistics/WindEurope-Annual-Statistics-2018.
pdf, 2019.
[9] European Comission.
Energy union package - a framework strategy for a resilient
energy union with a forward-looking climate change policy. https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:1bd46c90-bdd4-11e4-bbe1-01aa75ed71a1.0001.03/
DOC_1\&format=PDF, 2015.
[10] Edgar Nu˜no, Petr Maule, Andrea Hahmann, Nicolaos Cutululis, Poul Sørensen, and
Ioanna Karagali. Simulation of transcontinental wind and solar pv generation time series.
Renewable energy, 118:425–436, 2018.
[11] Carlos Quiterio G´omez Mu˜noz and Fausto Pedro Garc´ıa M´arquez. Wind energy power
prospective. In Renewable Energies, pages 83–95. Springer, 2018.
[12] Guanjun Ding, Bangkui Fan, Teng Long, Haibin Lan, Yan Liu, and Jing Wang. Analysis of
technical properties of wind and solar photovoltaic power. Journal of Applied Mathematics
and Physics, 1(04):39, 2013.
[13] Patrick Luickx.
The backup of wind power: Analysis of the parameters inﬂuencing
the
wind
power
integration
in
electricity
generation
systems
(de
backup
van
windenergie: analyse van de invloedsparameters voor de integratie van windenergie in
elektriciteitsopwekkingsystemen). 2009.
77
==PAGE:90==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[14] Nico Keyaerts, Erik Delarue, Yannick Rombauts, and William D’haeseleer. Impact of
unpredictable renewables on gas-balancing design in europe. Applied energy, 119:266–
277, 2014.
[15] Ming-Shun Lu, Chung-Liang Chang, and Wei-Jen Lee. Impact of wind generation on a
transmission system. In 2007 39th North American Power Symposium, pages 348–352.
IEEE, 2007.
[16] Chai Chompoo-Inwai, Wei-Jen Lee, Pradit Fuangfoo, Mitch Williams, and James Liao.
System impact study for the interconnection of wind generation and utility system. In
Conference, 2004 IEEE Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Technical, pages 27–
32. IEEE, 2004.
[17] I Gonz´alez-Aparicio, F Monforti, Patrick Volker, A Zucker, F Careri, T Huld, and Jake
Badger. Simulating european wind power generation applying statistical downscaling to
reanalysis data. Applied energy, 199:155–168, 2017.
[18] Matthias Huber, Desislava Dimkova, and Thomas Hamacher. Integration of wind and
solar power in europe: Assessment of ﬂexibility requirements. Energy, 69:236–246, 2014.
[19] Presidency Conclusions. European council. Maastricht, 9:2, 1994.
[20] Valeria Di Cosmo, Valentin Bertsch, and Paul Deane. Impact of new interconnection
lines on the eu electricity market. In 2016 13th International Conference on the European
Energy Market (EEM), pages 1–5. IEEE, 2016.
[21] ENTSO-E. Ten-year network development plan-2018 edition, executive summary. https:
//tyndp.entsoe.eu/Documents/TYNDP\%20documents/TYNDP2018/consultation/
Main\%20Report/TYNDP2018_Executive\%20Report.pdf, 2018.
[22] Stephen Rose and Jay Apt.
What can reanalysis data tell us about wind power?
Renewable energy, 83:963–969, 2015.
[23] Isidro A P´erez, M Luisa S´anchez, MA Garc´ıa, and Beatriz de Torre. Comparison between
measurements obtained with a meteorological mast and a rass sodar. In Proc. Third Int.
Conf. on Experiences with Automatic Weather Stations. Citeseer, 2003.
[24] Grupo
de
Observadores
Astron´omicos
de
Traslasierra.
Datos
meteorol´ogicos
de
villa
de
las
rosas.
http://goatraslasierra.blogspot.com/2014/03/
datos-meteorologicos-de-villa-de-las.html#axzz5n3g5Wveu.
[25] Suk-Whan Ko, Moon-Seok Jang, and Yoon-Sub Lee. The error analysis of measuring
wind speed on met mast shading eﬀect. Journal of the Korean Solar Energy Society,
31(3):1–7, 2011.
[26] International Electrotechnical Commission. Wind power generation systems – Part 12-1:
Power performance measurement of electricity producing wind turbines. 2017.
78
==PAGE:91==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[27] Michael Brower. Wind resource assessment: a practical guide to developing a wind project.
John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[28] JO Counihan. Adiabatic atmospheric boundary layers: a review and analysis of data
from the period 1880–1972. Atmospheric Environment (1967), 9(10):871–905, 1975.
[29] ML Kubik, Phil J Coker, Janet F Barlow, and C Hunt. A study into the accuracy of
using meteorological wind data to estimate turbine generation output. Renewable Energy,
51:153–158, 2013.
[30] ML Kubik, David J Brayshaw, Phil J Coker, and Janet F Barlow. Exploring the role of
reanalysis data in simulating regional wind generation variability over northern ireland.
Renewable energy, 57:558–561, 2013.
[31] Marek Kubik, David Brayshaw, and Phil Coker. Reanalysis: an improved data set for
simulating wind generation. WREF 2012, 2012.
[32] Peter Thomas, Simon Cox, and Andrew Tindal.
Long-term wind speed trends in
northwestern europe.
In Proceedings of the European Wind Energy Conference and
Exhibition (EWEC), pages 16–19, 2009.
[33] David James Brayshaw, Alberto Troccoli, Rachael Fordham, and John Methven. The
impact of large scale atmospheric circulation patterns on wind power generation and its
potential predictability: A case study over the uk. Renewable Energy, 36(8):2087–2096,
2011.
[34] SC Pryor, RJ Barthelmie, and Justin T Schoof. The impact of non-stationarities in the
climate system on the deﬁnition of ‘a normal wind year’: a case study from the baltic.
International journal of climatology, 25(6):735–752, 2005.
[35] Iain Staﬀell and Stefan Pfenninger. Using bias-corrected reanalysis to simulate current
and future wind power output. Energy, 114:1224–1239, 2016.
[36] Reanalyses.org Advancing Reanalysis. Reanalyses.org home page. https://reanalyses.
org/reanalysesorg-home-page, 2010.
[37] Richard Hewston and Stephen R Dorling. An analysis of observed daily maximum wind
gusts in the uk. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 99(8):845–
856, 2011.
[38] Schmidt G. Reanalyses ’r’ us. http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/
2011/07/reanalyses-r-us/, 2015.
[39] Ron Lindsay, Mark Wensnahan, A Schweiger, and J Zhang. Evaluation of seven diﬀerent
atmospheric reanalysis products in the arctic. Journal of Climate, 27(7):2588–2606, 2014.
[40] Wendy S Parker. Reanalyses and observations: What’s the diﬀerence?
Bulletin of the
American Meteorological Society, 97(9):1565–1572, 2016.
79
==PAGE:92==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[41] Michael G Bosilovich, John Kennedy, Dick Dee, Rob Allan, and Alan O’Neill. On the
reprocessing and reanalysis of observations for climate. In Climate science for serving
society, pages 51–71. Springer, 2013.
[42] Eugenia Kalnay, Masao Kanamitsu, Robert Kistler, William Collins, Dennis Deaven, Lev
Gandin, Mark Iredell, Suranjana Saha, Glenn White, John Woollen, et al. The ncep/ncar
40-year reanalysis project. Bulletin of the American meteorological Society, 77(3):437–472,
1996.
[43] Eugenia Kalnay. Atmospheric modeling, data assimilation and predictability. Cambridge
university press, 2003.
[44] Florence Rabier. Overview of global data assimilation developments in numerical weather-
prediction centres. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 131(613):3215–
3233, 2005.
[45] H Gregow, P Poli, HM M¨akel¨a, K Jylh¨a, AK Kaiser-Weiss, A Obregon, DGH Tan,
S Kekki, and F Kaspar. User awareness concerning feedback data and input observations
used in reanalysis systems. Advances in Science and Research, 12(1):63–67, 2015.
[46] Dennis L Hartmann, Albert MG Klein Tank, Matilde Rusticucci, Lisa V Alexander, Stefan
Br¨onnimann, Yassine Abdul Rahman Charabi, Frank J Dentener, Edward J Dlugokencky,
David R Easterling, Alexey Kaplan, et al. Observations: atmosphere and surface. In
Climate change 2013 the physical science basis: Working group I contribution to the
ﬁfth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge
University Press, 2013.
[47] Taotao Qian, Aiguo Dai, Kevin E Trenberth, and Keith W Oleson. Simulation of global
land surface conditions from 1948 to 2004. part i: Forcing data and evaluations. Journal
of Hydrometeorology, 7(5):953–975, 2006.
[48] Dirk J Cannon, David J Brayshaw, John Methven, Phil J Coker, and D Lenaghan. Using
reanalysis data to quantify extreme wind power generation statistics: A 33 year case
study in great britain. Renewable Energy, 75:767–778, 2015.
[49] AK Kaiser-Weiss, F Kaspar, V Heene, M Borsche, DGH Tan, P Poli, A Obregon, and
H Gregow. Comparison of regional and global reanalysis near-surface winds with station
observations over germany. Advances in Science and Research, 12(1):187–198, 2015.
[50] Ed Sharp, Paul Dodds, Mark Barrett, and Catalina Spataru. Evaluating the accuracy
of cfsr reanalysis hourly wind speed forecasts for the uk, using in situ measurements and
geographical information. Renewable Energy, 77:527–538, 2015.
[51] O Byrkjedal and Erik Berge.
The use of wrf for wind resource mapping in norway.
In The 9th WRF Users’ Workshop, NCAR Green Campus. http://www. mmm. ucar.
edu/wrf/users/workshops/WS2008/WorkshopProgram. pdf, 2008.
80
==PAGE:93==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[52] Rolv E.; Mollestad. Knut Berge, Erik; Bredesen. Combining wasp with the wrf meso-
scale model. evaluation of wind resource asessment for three norwegian wind farm areas.
European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition 2007, 2:736–741, 2007.
[53] Javier Sanz Rodrigo, Roberto Aurelio Chavez Arroyo, Patrick Moriarty, Matthew
Churchﬁeld, Branko Kosovi´c, Pierre-Elouan R´ethor´e, Kurt Schaldemose Hansen, Andrea
Hahmann, Jeﬀrey D Mirocha, and Daran Rife. Mesoscale to microscale wind farm ﬂow
modeling and evaluation.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and Environment,
6(2):e214, 2017.
[54] Peter Kalverla, Gert-Jan Steeneveld, Reinder Ronda, and Albert AM Holtslag. Evaluation
of three mainstream numerical weather prediction models with observations from
meteorological mast ijmuiden at the north sea. Wind Energy, 22(1):34–48, 2019.
[55] R Ch´avez Arroyo, A Irigoyen Indave, J Sanz Rodrigo, and P Fernandes Correia.
Analysis and validation of weather research and forecasting model tendencies for meso-
to-microscale modelling of the atmospheric boundary layer.
In Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, volume 1037, page 072012. IOP Publishing, 2018.
[56] William C Skamarock, Joseph B Klemp, Jimy Dudhia, David O Gill, Dale M Barker,
Michale G Duda, Xiang-Yu Huang, Wei Wang, and Jordan G Powers. A description of
the advanced research wrf version 3. Technical report, National Center For Atmospheric
Research Boulder Co Mesoscale and Microscale . . . , 2008.
[57] Davor Davidovi´c, Karolj Skala, Danijel Beluˇsi´c, and Maja Teliˇsman Prtenjak.
Grid
implementation of the weather research and forecasting model. Earth Science Informatics,
3(4):199–208, 2010.
[58] Gregor Giebel, Richard Brownsword, George Kariniotakis, Michael Denhard, and
Caroline Draxl. The state-of-the-art in short-term prediction of wind power: A literature
overview. ANEMOS. plus, 2011.
[59] Thomas M Hamill, Jeﬀrey S Whitaker, and Steven L Mullen. Reforecasts: An important
dataset for improving weather predictions.
Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society, 87(1):33–46, 2006.
[60] National Center for Atmospheric Research.
Weather research and forecasting model.
https://www.mmm.ucar.edu/weather-research-and-forecasting-model.
[61] Dick P Dee, SM Uppala, AJ Simmons, Paul Berrisford, P Poli, S Kobayashi, U Andrae,
MA Balmaseda, G Balsamo, d P Bauer, et al. The era-interim reanalysis: Conﬁguration
and performance of the data assimilation system.
Quarterly Journal of the royal
meteorological society, 137(656):553–597, 2011.
[62] Pedro A Jim´enez and Jimy Dudhia.
Improving the representation of resolved and
unresolved topographic eﬀects on surface wind in the wrf model.
Journal of Applied
Meteorology and Climatology, 51(2):300–316, 2012.
81
==PAGE:94==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[63] Jake Badger, Andrea Hahmann, Xiaoli Guo Larsen, Merete Badger, Mark Kelly, Neil
Davis, Bjarke T. Olsen, and Niels G. Mortensen. Global wind atlas. an eudp project
carried out by dtu wind energy. ﬁnal report, 2016.
[64] Ib Troen and Erik Lundtang Petersen. European wind atlas. Risø National Laboratory,
1989.
[65] Global Wind Atlas introduction, key features, purpose and methodology.
https:
//globalwindatlas.info/about/introduction. Accessed: 2019-06-01.
[66] Map obtained from the Global Wind Atlas 2.0, a free, web-based application developed,
owned and operated by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in partnership with
the World Bank Group, utilizing data provided by Vortex, with funding provided by the
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP). For additional information:
https://globalwindatlas.info.
[67] Stanton E Tuller and Arthur C Brett. The characteristics of wind velocity that favor the
ﬁtting of a weibull distribution in wind speed analysis. Journal of Climate and Applied
Meteorology, 23(1):124–134, 1984.
[68] The Wind Power.
Wind farms databases.
https://www.thewindpower.net/store_
windfarms_view_all_en.php.
[69] Seyit A Akda˘g and Ali Dinler. A new method to estimate weibull parameters for wind
energy applications. Energy conversion and management, 50(7):1761–1766, 2009.
[70] Juan Carlos Serrano Rico. Comparaci´on de m´etodos para determinar los par´ametros de
weibull para la generaci´on de energ´ıa e´olica. Scientia et technica, 18(2), 2013.
[71] M Bassyouni, Saud A Gutub, Umair Javaid, Muhammad Awais, Shaﬁqur Rehman, SM-
S Abdel Hamid, MH Abdel-Aziz, A Abouel-Kasem, and Hani Shafeek.
Assessment
and analysis of wind power resource using weibull parameters. Energy Exploration &
Exploitation, 33(1):105–122, 2015.
[72] Peter C Chu. Weibull distribution for the global surface current speeds obtained from
satellite altimetry. In IGARSS 2008-2008 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium, volume 3, pages III–59. IEEE, 2008.
[73] Yadolah Dodge. The Oxford dictionary of statistical terms. Oxford University Press on
Demand, 2006.
[74] Sheehan Olver and Alex Townsend.
Fast inverse transform sampling in one and two
dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1307.1223, 2013.
[75] Susan Dean and Barbara Illowsky. Descriptive statistics: skewness and the mean, median,
and mode. Connexions website, 2018.
82
==PAGE:95==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[76] Pen´elope Ram´ırez and Jos´e Antonio Carta. The use of wind probability distributions
derived from the maximum entropy principle in the analysis of wind energy. a case study.
Energy Conversion and Management, 47(15-16):2564–2577, 2006.
[77] OA Jaramillo and MA Borja. Wind speed analysis in la ventosa, mexico: a bimodal
probability distribution case. Renewable Energy, 29(10):1613–1630, 2004.
[78] Cabauw Experimental Site for Atmospheric Research cesar observatory. http://www.
cesar-observatory.nl/. Accessed: 2019-06-06.
[79] Gareth P Harrison, Lucy C Cradden, and John P Chick.
Preliminary assessment of
climate change impacts on the uk onshore wind energy resource. Energy Sources, Part
A, 30(14-15):1286–1299, 2008.
[80] Matti Koivisto, Kaushik Das, Feng Guo, Poul Sørensen, Edgar Nu˜no, Nicolaos Cutululis,
and Petr Maule. Using time series simulation tool for assessing the eﬀects of variable
renewable energy generation on power and energy systems.
Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Energy and Environment, page e329, 2019.
[81] Matti Juhani Koivisto and Juan Gea Bermudez. Nson-dk energy system scenarios–edition
2. 2018.
[82] Xiaoli Guo Lars´en, Søren Ott, Jake Badger, Andrea N Hahmann, and Jakob Mann.
Recipes for correcting the impact of eﬀective mesoscale resolution on the estimation of
extreme winds. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 51(3):521–533, 2012.
[83] EWEA. Annual report 2013. https://windeurope.org/fileadmin/files/library/
publications/reports/EWEA_Annual_Report_2013.pdf.
[84] EWEA. 2014 european statistics. http://www.ewea.org/fileadmin/files/library/
publications/statistics/EWEA-Annual-Statistics-2014.pdf.
[85] EWEA. 2015 european statistics. https://www.ewea.org/fileadmin/files/library/
publications/statistics/EWEA-Annual-Statistics-2015.pdf.
[86] ENTSO-E. Yearly statistics & adequacy retrospect 2013. https://docstore.entsoe.
eu/Documents/Publications/Statistics/YSAR/141515_YSAR_2013_report.pdf.
[87] ENTSO-E. Yearly statistics & adequacy retrospect 2014. https://docstore.entsoe.
eu/Documents/Publications/Statistics/YSAR/entsoe_ys_ar_2014_web.pdf.
[88] ENTSO-E. Yearly statistics & adequacy retrospect 2015. https://docstore.entsoe.
eu/Documents/Publications/Statistics/YSAR/entso-e_YS_AR2015_1701_web.pdf.
[89] Bundesministerium
f¨ur
Wirtschaft
und
Energie.
Zeitreihen
zur
entwicklung
der
erneuerbaren
energien
in
deutschland.
https:
//www.erneuerbare-energien.de/EE/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/
zeitreihen-zur-entwicklung-der-erneuerbaren-energien-in-deutschland-1990-2018.
pdf;jsessionid=283BC78F31EB1CBD7679294A20AE4557?__blob=publicationFile&v=
20.
83
==PAGE:96==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
[90] GOV-UK. Digest of uk energy statistics (dukes): renewable sources of energy, load factors
for renewable electricity generation.
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/
renewable-sources-of-energy-chapter-6-digest-of-united-kingdom-energy-statistics-d
[91] Danish
Energy
Agency.
Overview
of
the
energy
sector,
master
data
register
of
wind
turbines.
https://ens.dk/en/our-services/
statistics-data-key-figures-and-energy-maps/overview-energy-sector.
[92] Danish
Energy
Agency.
Danish
experiences
from
oﬀshore
wind
development.
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Globalcooperation/offshore_wind_
development_0.pdf.
[93] Fingrid.
Download datasets.
https://data.fingrid.fi/open-data-forms/search/
en/?selected_datasets=245.
[94] Nord
Pool.
Historical
market
data.
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/
historical-market-data/.
[95] Niamh Conroy, JP Deane, and Brian P ´O Gallach´oir. Wind turbine availability: Should
it be time or energy based?–a case study in ireland. Renewable Energy, 36(11):2967–2971,
2011.
[96] World Facts. Geography of germany. http://worldfacts.us/Germany-geography.htm.
[97] NASA Earth Observatory.
The topography of france.
https://earthobservatory.
nasa.gov/images/3655/the-topography-of-france.
[98] Niels G Mortensen, Anthony J Bowen, and Ioannis Antoniou. Improving wasp predictions
in (too) complex terrain. In 2006 European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition.
European Wind Energy Association (EWEA), 2006.
[99] Paulo Pinto, Ricardo Guedes, Miguel Ferreira, and A Rodrigues.
Wind prediction
deviations in complex terrain.
In Proceedings of the 2004 European Wind Energy
Conference, Dublin, Ireland, October, pages 6–9, 2004.
[100] Jake Badger, Helmut Frank, Andrea N Hahmann, and Gregor Giebel.
Wind-
climate estimation based on mesoscale and microscale modeling: statistical–dynamical
downscaling for wind energy applications.
Journal of Applied Meteorology and
Climatology, 53(8):1901–1919, 2014.
[101] Jon Olauson and Mikael Bergkvist. Modelling the swedish wind power production using
merra reanalysis data. Renewable Energy, 76:717–725, 2015.
[102] ECMWF.
Era-interim.
https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/datasets/
reanalysis-datasets/era-interim.
[103] ECMWF.
Era-5.
https://www.ecmwf.int/en/forecasts/datasets/
reanalysis-datasets/era5.
84
==PAGE:97==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
A
Appendix
A.1
Mean Wind Speeds at WRF Grid Points
In this section, a large-scale comparison on the mean wind speed according to WRF mesoscale
model and GWA microscale model is provided.
The WRF grid points for the North-Europe domain were taken, and their equivalent wind speed
average are shown according to the WRF time series in ﬁgure A.1, and according to the GWA
microscale parameters in ﬁgure A.2.
Figure A.1: Mean wind speeds for North Europe according to WRF
The results presented for the Global Wind Atlas model in ﬁgure A.2 were obtaining inferring a
square area of 100 km2 to calculate the equivalent Weibull parameters. This was done to match
the spatial resolution presented by the WRF mesoscale model.
It can be observed that the WRF mesoscale model presents higher wind speeds for all the grid
points in Europe, showing the expected wind resource reduction as the spatial resolution is
increased and the surface topography is taken into consideration.
85
==PAGE:98==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure A.2: Mean wind speeds for North Europe according to GWA
86
==PAGE:99==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
A.2
Scaling Factor Results at Complex Terrain
Locations with complex terrain can be observed with the ruggedness index layer from the Global
Wind Atlas. A large-scale visualization on the RIX layer is provided at ﬁgure A.3.
Figure A.3: Ruggedness Index Layer from the Global Wind Atlas [66]
For Europe, the average scaling factor value is 0.883. Locations with extremely high and low
scaling factor values are presented in ﬁgures A.4 and A.5 respectively.
It can be appreciated that the extremely low and high scaling factor values presented in ﬁgures
A.4 and A.5 correspond to locations with a high ruggedness index. Therefore these results
should be treated with caution as probably they contain errors in the ﬂow modelling.
87
==PAGE:100==
Application of Global Wind Atlas Microscale Data in Large-scale Wind Generation Time
Series Simulation
Figure A.4: Locations with a scaling factor values between 1.2 to 1.6
Figure A.5: Locations with a scaling factor values between 0.3 to 0.6
88
==PAGE:101==
