==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis in Electrical Engineering, July 2019
Investigation of Interaction Eﬀects
in Binaural Auditory Steady-State
Response Measurements
Samuel David Watson
s.d.watson@outlook.com
Supervisors
Senior Researcher Søren Laugesen
slau@iru.interacoustics.com
Associate Professor Bastian Epp
bepp@dtu.dk
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Investigation of interaction eﬀects in binaural auditory steady-state
response measurements
Author:
Samuel David Watson
Supervisors:
Søren Laugesen (Interacoustics Research Unit, Interacoustics)
Bastian Epp (DTU Department of Health Technology, Hearing Systems Group)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Hearing Systems (HEA)
Ørsteds Plads
Building 354
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 39 50
Email: elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
July 2nd 2019
Category:
1 (public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve the MSc of Engineering Acous-
tics at the Technical University of Denmark. This report represents 35 ECTS
points.
Rights:
©Samuel David Watson, 2019
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
Beginning with an avid interest in physics, it is somewhat surprising that two short years
at the Acoustics Department of DTU have culminated in this thesis on physiological
responses to sound.
My ﬁrst real interest in the area began with a three week intensive taught course
involving a short research project into the eﬀects of modiﬁcations to complex Auditory
Steady-State Response (ASSR) stimuli, which lead into a thirteen week special project
focused on the post-processing of ’cortical auditory evoked potentials’. Whilst purposely
casting my net wide during my masters studies, acoustic physiology, and more speciﬁcally
Auditory Evoked Potentials (AEPs), has not only captured my curiosity and interest, but
also provides a real opportunity to contribute research that will have a direct positive
impact to those in need.
While this may be my ﬁrst publication of substance, the challenge has brought forth
signiﬁcant development in myself, which I am eager to continue. As most who read this
will know, this study has brought forth as many new questions as answers, which I hope
to continue to pursue.
A great many people have contributed professionally and personally to this study.
First and foremost, I cannot thank enough Søren Laugesen, whose guidance and patience
has been invaluable, and whom I credit with developing my interest in AEPs. I am also
grateful for the combined wisdom of the rest of the Interacoustics Research Unit (IRU), and
in particular the advice of Sinnet Greve Bjerge Kristensen, which they gave so willingly.
I must also thank my academic supervisor Bastian Epp for his periodic injections of
enthusiasm and insight, and Jonatan Marcher-Rørsted who answered the call several times
to the beneﬁt of the study.
My deepest thanks go to Jonathan and Oli, whose near daily comic relief and friendship
throughout this thesis and beyond, I could not have been without.
To Mum and Dad, for without your tireless love, concern, and help, none of this would
be possible. I am forever grateful to you for letting me take my own path, and your eternal
encouragement.
And lastly my thanks go to Zoë, whose endless pride and faith in me has seen me
through even when my own failed.
I hope, reader, you ﬁnd this thesis interesting and satisfactory, and I would be pleased
to hear from you should it prove useful, provide inspiration, or otherwise to hear your
comments.
________________
Samuel David Watson
Copenhagen, July 2nd 2019
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
ASSR can be used as a clinical tool to validate hearing aid ﬁttings.
While separate
monaural testing of each ear is preferred, binaural testing can be used as a more holistic
assessment and to save time. During a sound-ﬁeld binaural measurement, unintentional
dichotic stimulation may occur, for instance, due to interaural time diﬀerences (ITD’s)
imposed by spatial eﬀects or processing by a single aided ear. Such a situation may reduce
the ASSR detectability compared to monoaural measurements, potentially extending test-
ing time or causing false referrals. This study tests multiple clinically conceivable dichotic
conditions; these were simulated using adapted three-band versions of the CE-ChirpTM
stimulus, each consisting of a two-octave wide chirp centred at 707 Hz presented at a 40
Hz repetition rate, and two one-octave wide chirps centred at 2 and 4 kHz both presented
at similar 90 Hz repetition rates. ASSRs were recorded with a clinical two channel EEG
system for 15 subjects.
It was found that the ASSR noise corrected power of a response harmonic can be
reduced by up to 10 dB, and detection time increased by up to ﬁve times, by introducing
large ITDs equal to half the time period of that harmonic. This reduction in response
detectability increases the likelihood of false-negatives during a clinical ASSR hearing aid
validation, but the risk may be minimised by using detectors which consider multiple
harmonics.
No eﬀect on an ASSR response was detected for simulated lateralisations of the stim-
ulus, which is advantageous for proposed sound-ﬁeld ASSR.
Additional 64 channel full-scalp ASSR recordings show distinct SNR reduction and
topographical changes in response to the large ITDs, supporting a wave cancellation model
from multiple generators.
Overall, the ﬁndings suggest that common clinical situations do not increase the risk
of false referrals. In addition, the results imply that risks associated with less common
clinical situations could be eﬀectively managed.
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
ABR
Auditory Brainstem Response
AEP
Auditory Evoked Potential
AIC
Akaike Information Criterion
ASSR Auditory Steady-State Response
BIC
Binaural Interaction Component
BMLD Binaural Masking Level Diﬀerence
EEG
Electroencephalogram
EP
Evoked Potential
ERP
Event Related Potential
HRIR Head Related Impulse Response
ILD
Interaural Level Diﬀerence
IPD
Interaural Phase Diﬀerence
IRU
Interacoustics Research Unit
ISTS
International Speech Test Signal
ITD
Interaural Time Diﬀerence
MEG Magnetoencephalogram
NC
Noise Corrected
SAM
Sinusoidally Amplitude Modulated
SNR
Signal to Noise Ratio
TTD
Time to Detect
vi
==PAGE:9==
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Preface
iii
Abstract
v
Abbreviations
vi
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Use of ASSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The ASSR, Project Origins and Aims
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The Fundamentals of ASSR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
6
2.1
Review of Related Works and Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Magnetoencephalogram Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Summary of Findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Experimental Design and Methods
12
3.1
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Stimulus Presentation and Electroencephalogram (EEG) Recording . . . . .
15
3.3
Signal Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Monotic vs. Diotic Stimulation (Reference Study)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Dichotic Stimulation (Main Study) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.6
ASSR Scalp Topography (Follow-Up Study)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.7
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Results and Discussion
21
4.1
Reference Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Main Study: Diotic Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Follow Up Study: ASSR Topography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Additional Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Synthesis
39
6
Conclusions
42
Bibliography
44
ix
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
This thesis documents a six month investigation regarding potential interference eﬀects
that may conceivably occur during a clinical binaural Auditory Steady-State Response
(ASSR) measurement with nominally diotic stimuli.
It includes original work by the
author, supported by the work of S. Laugesen of Interacoustics Research Unit (IRU),
and the work of R. Arnoult and S. Bilert (Arnoult and Bilert, 2018) which was in part
supervised by the author. The following section brieﬂy outlines the speciﬁc research topic
and the wider ﬁeld, before providing context into how clinical ASSR is used, and explains
the importance of the research question and the investigation as a whole.
Readers who are entirely new to the topic of ASSR are encouraged to read this chapter
in it’s entirety, along with the further reading recommended in section 1.3. More advanced
readers already familiar with the ASSR or the wider ﬁeld of Auditory Evoked Potentials
(AEPs) can simply read section 1.2 ’The ASSR, Project Origins and Aims’ and then
proceed to the sections of interest. It is advised that even expert readers consider reviewing
section 3.1, as the stimuli used in this study are of unusual design compared those used
in the majority of other literature.
It is possible for conﬁdent readers only simply seeking to grasp the key outcomes to
progress from section 1.2 to chapter 5 ’Synthesis’ and chapter 6 ’Conclusions’.
1.1
Background and Use of ASSR
When performing tests on young children, or disabled or uncooperative adults, assessors
are faced with the challenge that their subject cannot or will not consciously participate
in the test or may even actively work against it. As such, it is necessary to devise tests
that measure involuntary responses to a stimulus. One such kind of response is an Evoked
Potential (EP). EPs are electrical potentials produced by the nervous system in response
to a stimulus. EPs which form in response to a particular sensory event are termed Event
Related Potential (ERP); generally referring to electrical potentials measured at the scalp
of the subject as a result of the coordinated ﬁring of groups of neurons in the brain and
brain stem. Importantly, an ERP is also synchronised to the stimulus, occurring reliably
every time the stimulus is presented. These processes are unconscious, automatic, and,
crucially, closely related to the perception of the stimulus event. While the presence of
an ERP is not synonymous with the subject being able to perceive the generating stim-
ulus, the two are intimately linked. Hence, if one can design and present to a subject an
auditory stimulus which elicits a reliable and measurable potential synchronised to that
stimulus, then one can infer that the subject can likely perceive the sound, all without the
active participation or even awareness of the subject. This is the basis of why Auditory
Steady-State Response (ASSR), a type of AEP, measurements are undertaken.
A child who cannot easily perceive sound will show a weak or no ASSR. Once hearing
aids are ﬁtted, follow-up ASSR measurements can be taken to conﬁrm that the aids do
restore hearing, allowing the acoustic information into the brain, and producing an ASSR.
This can be done using either using monaural or binaural stimulation. While monaural
testing is widely studied and is regarded as the preferred approach, it is suspected that
practitioners commonly use binaural testing to save time. Given this diﬀerence, this thesis
1
==PAGE:14==
speciﬁcally examines whether results from binaural testing can ever be worse than those
which would expected from monaural testing.
1.2
The ASSR, Project Origins and Aims
As mentioned earlier, the ASSR is a speciﬁc type of AEP that is increasingly used to test
the hearing of subjects who cannot participate in more traditional behavioural examina-
tions; mainly infants. While many diﬀerent AEPs have been identiﬁed, ASSR diﬀers from
the others primarily in the following ways:
• The ASSR is elicited only by a continuous stimulus which must include some periodic
repeating component, such as repeated clicks or chirps or a modulated envelope.
• The process of detecting and analysing an ASSR is mainly performed in the fre-
quency domain, as opposed to the time domain, and is purely based on objective
measures rather than expert opinion.
These key features mean that the ASSR is particularly well suited to a clinical setting
where the main focus is objectively assessing whether someone can hear speech; an am-
plitude modulated continuous sound. Further details on the nature of the ASSR itself is
given in section 1.3.
The ASSR has received growing attention from researchers in the last 20 years, as
shown in the literature review. There is now a signiﬁcant volume of work mainly focused
on improving the speed and reliability of an ASSR measurement or using it as a tool
to probe the auditory pathway. However, relatively little work has been produced in-
vestigating ASSR under alternative experimental conditions. It came to the attention of
researchers at IRU that ASSR hearing-aid validation measurements were possibly being
performed binaurally in clinics rather than sequentially, one ear at a time (monaurally).
Furthermore, there was very little research into what the potential consequences might
be of using binaural testing for validation. The advantages of binaural testing are that it
takes less time than testing both ears individually, and binaural testing is a closer to ’real
life’ performance test of the aids. However, growing concerns of possible yet unknown
negative consequences have lead to the overarching research question of thesis:
Are there (clinically relevant) conditions under which binaural aided ASSR measure-
ments will show poorer results than the best of the two monaural measurements, in terms
of response rate, response magnitude, and response time?
The research question focuses speciﬁcally on the possibility of poorer results as a con-
sequence of a binaural measurement. If a realistic testing condition exists that artiﬁcially
reduces the ASSR response, it will lead to incorrect hearing aid ﬁttings for children at a
vital stage of development and additional time, eﬀort, and anxiety on the part of parents
and health care professionals. The aim of this thesis is to identify possible conditions in
which a poorer ASSR measurement may artiﬁcially be caused and to provide practical
advice on how to avoid or mitigate these situations.
In chapter 2, a comprehensive review of relevant research is presented which allowed
the formulation of this study’s experimental conditions. Chapter 3 provides details of all
2
==PAGE:15==
experimental designs and procedures, as well as the technicalities of the signal processing
and statistical analysis performed.
1.3
The Fundamentals of ASSR
This section provides more technical detail about the origins of the ASSR and technicali-
ties of its measurement. It is mainly aimed at readers who are unfamiliar with the topic
to provide a baseline of knowledge going into the rest of this thesis. For a complete intro-
ductory treatment of ASSR both in theory and practice, the author recommends Rance
(2008), which was found to be approachable, instructive and well referenced.
Auditory Evoked Potentials (AEPs) can be used as an objective test of hearing because
if a person cannot hear a stimulus, then their neurons will not respond to it and no phys-
iological response will be produced. The amplitude of the response, usually detected by
an Electroencephalogram (EEG), is also related to the perceived loudness of the stimulus,
allowing audiograms to be objectively estimated too. The ASSR potential is generated
in the brainstem and auditory cortex, with the relative contribution of each depending
on the repetition rate of the stimulus (Giraud et al., 2000; Herdman et al., 2002a). If
these generating zones do not respond to an ASSR stimulus, one may infer that the test
person could not perceive the stimulus, since the auditory information seems to have been
prevented from travelling up the auditory pathway, assuming a reliable test. However, a
positive test where a response is detected strongly infers that the stimulus is perceivable
by the subject1.
The Auditory Steady-State Response (ASSR) is a type of AEP. When a continuous
stimulus, which has rapid, periodic, repeating structures is presented to a subject, groups
of neurons in the brain stem (and possibly brain cortex) begin to synchronously ﬁre in time
with the stimulus. The neurons ’phase-lock’ to the repeating element(s) of the stimulus,
which is often a repeating click, frequency sweep/chirp, or a tone which is amplitude
modulated. The underlying repeated signal, such as a chirp, is referred to as the ’carrier’.
The frequency content of the carrier determines crucially which areas are excited along the
basilar membrane in the cochlea, and therefore what precise frequency speciﬁc auditory
pathway is under test. By using multiple diﬀerent carriers with diﬀerent frequency content,
ASSR audiometry can be performed, and the subject’s ability to perceive a range of
frequencies can be estimated.
The phase locking of many neurons to the stimulus repetition rate is important to
the detection of the ASSR, since the detecting electrodes are placed on the scalp of the
subject, relatively far from the neurons themselves. The synchronised activity of these
neurons produces a larger scale (nano-volt scale) electromagnetic potential across the
dimensions of the head which can then be read and interpreted as a combined response.
The ASSR forms and reaches full amplitude after the stable stimulus has been present for
around 250 ms (Ross and Pantev, 2004) and is sensitive to changes in the repetition rate
of the stimulus or other interfering sounds. More detail on these eﬀects can be found in
chapter 2. This separates the ASSR from other AEPs as it cannot be elicited by a single
1There are some exceptions to this. One must bear in mind that while neural activity related to a
response is required for it to be perceived, the presence of neural activity does not guarantee that a person
may produce an internal representation of the stimulus and ’perceive’ it. Similarly, a person may perceive
a stimulus but the neural activity related to it may be undetected.
3
==PAGE:16==
period of the stimulus; unlike for example the Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR).
Detection of the ASSR is done in the frequency domain. The response’s aforementioned
phase locking is very strict and locks to the repeating elements of the stimulus, making it
relatively simple to separate out the response from ongoing environmental and biological
noise by careful design of the stimulus repetition rates. A diagrammatic representation
of the signal chain, from presentation to reception and detection of the ASSR is shown in
Figure 1. Why a loudspeaker and hearing aid has been included in Figure 1 is made clear
in subsection 1.3.1.
Figure 1: Diagrammatic representation of a sound-ﬁeld ASSR measurement signal chain, with an op-
tional hearing aid included highlighted in the red box. The main three types of stimulus are shown: a.
click/impulse train, b. SAM tone, and c. chirp train. The common ’mastoid reference’ ASSR electrode
montage is also shown as the red ellipses on the head. The second peak in the spectrum represents the
second harmonic of the main fundamental response.
When detecting AEPs many repeat measurements are normally taken in one long suc-
cessive chain and averaged together in either the time or frequency domain. The advantage
of this is that it allows for signiﬁcant noise suppression. Since unrelated environmental
and biological activity (termed ’noise’ from here on) is not synchronised with the stimulus,
by taking the average of set time windows (epochs), signals that are uncorrelated an in-
consistent from epoch to epoch are suppressed as
√
N, with N number of averaged epochs.
As such, even small amplitude responses can be detected given enough measurement time.
Combining the above, it makes it possible to design an automated objective detector
based on an F-test of the signal-to-noise power ratio in the frequency domain. This test
works by comparing the amount of signal power in the expected response frequency bin
to the estimated noise ﬂoor from surrounding frequency bins and assesses whether the
response is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to the noise ﬂoor. Removing the need for a human in-
terpretation of response waveforms (as is required for other AEPs), reduces workload and
eliminates decision making bias, which is especially important when attempting to detect
ASSRs near the subjects hearing level thresholds.
4
==PAGE:17==
Selection of the appropriate repetition or modulation rates in an ASSR stimulus has
several consequences, but it is usually a choice between two key regions: around 40 Hz,
and around 80 - 90 Hz. These two regions are most commonly considered as they provide
the best Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR). Particularly interested readers are directed towards
Rance (2008) and Giraud et al. (2000) for precise details, as well as the literature review
of this thesis, but the fundamental diﬀerences are summarised below.
• 40 Hz ASSR: Contains contributions from the brain stem and cortex, with the
cortical activity dominating. Due to the involvement of the higher brain, responses
in this frequency range are strongly suppressed by unconsciousness, and in literature
show more evidence of binaural eﬀects and a Binaural Interaction Component (BIC).
When a subject is awake and alert, 40 Hz ASSR has substantially the greatest SNR.
• 80-90 Hz ASSR: Contains mostly only contributions from the brainstem and is re-
ported as being unaﬀected by a subject’s state of arousal. This rate range produces
the second greatest SNRs and is reportedly more robust to interaction eﬀects when
simultaneously presenting multiple stimuli, monaurally or binaurally.
Therefore, in summary, it is possible to design a stimulus with an underlying carrier
frequency content, repeated or modulated at speciﬁc chosen rate that will elicit an ASSR
response. Through sequential or simultaneous presentation of these stimuli, it is possible to
assess whether the auditory system is capable of detecting a full range of carrier frequencies
by whether the distinct respective rate ASSRs are produced.
1.3.1
Aided ASSR
An important case to consider, and the main target of this study, is that of ’aided
ASSR’ whereby a ’sound-ﬁeld’ ASSR measurement is performed by presenting the stim-
ulus through a loudspeaker to a subject wearing hearing aids. This is done to validate
the ﬁtting of a hearing aid as part of a clinical audiological pathway, normally to non-
responsive subjects such as infants. With the hearing aids ﬁtted, the aids become part
of the transmission line from the environment to the subject and their perception, just
like in the real use case, so this kind of test is considered an important aﬃrmation of the
quality of ﬁt and beneﬁt it provides, both to the medical professionals and care givers of
the subject (Mehta et al., 2019).
Placing the aids in the signal chain, shown in Figure 1, is also the reason why al-
ternate versions of ASSR stimuli were designed with ’speech like’ stimuli. Addition of
these features, derived from the International Speech Test Signal (ISTS), prevents aids
from identifying the otherwise ’unnatural’ stimulus as noise, and instead applies normal
speech processing to the signal. More details on this process are covered in this study in
section 3.1, and in Laugesen et al. (2018), the origin of this practice.
5
==PAGE:18==
2
Literature Review
Foreword
This section presents an overview of research works that are pertinent to the design of this
study and its discussion. To attempt to provide a complete overview of works regarding
Auditory Evoked Potentials (AEPs) or even Auditory Steady-State Responses (ASSRs)
would be unwieldy, although it would be inadequate to focus only on works relating di-
rectly to binaural processing eﬀects in clinical ASSRs, since there are few.
As such,
this section comprises a selection of papers chosen by the author that provide both a
background overview of studies related to this thesis as well as works which directly
contributed to the design and whose results can be considered somewhat comparable.
This includes studies of monaural ASSR or binaural studies measuring other AEP eﬀects
that have provided inspiration and plausibility for the formation of the testable hypothe-
ses of this study.
Similarly, a substantial body of ASSR studies conducted using the
Magnetoencephalogram (MEG) provided a great deal of insight into what binaural inter-
action eﬀects may be measured in humans using similar experimental designs to those
used in this study. It is acknowledged, however, that results from MEG studies should
only be compared to Electroencephalogram (EEG) studies with deliberate caution.
It should also be noted that even works that appear in parts to be similar to this
study, none share precisely the same choice of stimulus. The stimuli used by Narayanan
(2018) and Laugesen et al. (2018) is similar however. Despite the stimulus being of unique
design, and therefore unique in comparative literature, it was chosen because of the sub-
stantial expertise available from Interacoustics Research Unit (IRU) on this stimulus type,
as well as its relevance to real use cases in IRU research and products. Furthermore, this
stimulus has the advantage of containing multiple carrier and repetition rate frequencies
with previously studied responses, allowing simultaneous testing of many possible interac-
tion eﬀects. A discussion of the precise details of the stimulus used is included in chapter 3.
The work of Laugesen et al. (2018) is addressed here separately since it is a key
reference and is repeatedly referred to in the discussion. Laugesen et al. (2018) concerns
the consequences of adding International Speech Test Signal (ISTS) envelope modulations
to the CE-ChirpTM stimulus, which is also done in this investigation (see section 3.1).
Laugesen et al. (2018) ﬁnds that the addition of the speech-like modulations reduces the
fundamental response level by 3.7 dB (increasing for higher harmonics) and increases
detection time by a factor of 1.5. This is deemed an acceptable cost by the Laugesen et al.
since this ISTS stimulus is accepted by tested hearing aids as speech and appropriate
signal processing is applied; an important element for the validity of the test.
2.1
Review of Related Works and Literature
Research into Event Related Potentials (ERPs), speciﬁcally brain potentials to acoustic
events, dates as far back at the 1930’s when the research was focused on identifying
changes in ongoing brain electrical responses to certain stimuli and diﬀerent subject states.
An instructive example by Davis (1939) and the contained references show preliminary
6
==PAGE:19==
detection of onset and oﬀset responses in humans, as well as potentials related to the
expectation of stimuli. Moving ahead to the 1960’s, much more reﬁned studies of subject
state were performed, with seminal works such as Sutton et al. (1965) identifying changes
in key individual features of responses, which would become identiﬁed as signature wave
forms of particular responses, named, and the focus of further study.
This began a process of identifying the physiological origins and meaning of potentials
detected at the scalp leading to, for example, the common attributions we have today
of waves one through ﬁve in the Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR) originating from
progressively deeper neuron groups along the auditory pathway. This introduces us to
the beginning of the papers of direct relevance: Ainslie and Boston (1980) report that
for ABR (referred to as "BAEP’s" in the paper) recordings to click stimuli, the sum of
an ABR response to a left and right presented monaural stimulus is equal to that of the
stimuli presented diotically. Furthermore, there is no evidence of binaural interaction,
once acoustic cross-talk between ears is eliminated. This is done through the analysis of
the Binaural Interaction Component (BIC), a common trend in ABR papers investigating
binaural interactions at that time and still at the time of writing2. Lins et al. (1995)
presents a wide investigation into the eﬀects of diﬀerent stimuli choices for eliciting ASSR,
part of which includes measurements of ASSR to 80 Hz Sinusoidally Amplitude Modulated
(SAM) tones with a carrier frequency of 1 kHz; concluding simply that there is no evidence
of binaural interaction, since the sum of the left and right monaural stimuli responses is
equal to that of the binaural response.
From these ﬁndings alone, one could assume that binaural processing is unrelated to
AEPs, or at least has no detectable eﬀect on them.
More recent works have in part
challenged these ﬁndings, however, with Poelmans et al. (2012) and Gransier et al. (2017)
indicating that detection of binaural interaction may depend on other factors. Poelmans
et al. (2012) reported that the diotic ASSRs to speech-weighted SAM noise are on average
≥4.6 dB greater than a monotic ASSR when presented at a modulation frequency of 80 Hz,
but are then equal to and then less than the monotic case when presented at a 20 Hz and 4
Hz modulation rate respectively. Gransier et al. (2017) presents a somewhat similar study
with SAM octave band noise centred at 1 kHz and at a ﬁxed 40 Hz modulation frequency
and ﬁnds a ≈3 dB increase in response amplitude from monotic to diotic stimulation.
However, the sum of the monaural left and right responses was greater still than the diotic
condition by ≈3 dB. Gransier et al. (2017) also includes a dichotic condition whereby the
repetition rates for the stimuli diﬀered between ears leading to a signiﬁcant reduction in
ASSR amplitude.
From these more recent papers, a more complex trend emerges whereby diotic 80
Hz ASSR appears to be simply the summation of a left and right monotic response,
but lower repetition rates show decreasing gain advantage becoming eventually weaker in
response than a monotic measurement. This could be evidence that lower repetition rates
stimulate progressively higher order areas of the auditory pathway, and stimulating areas
which respond to equally to the left and right oﬀers no advantage when stimulated by
both diotically.
Dichotic stimulation mainly appears in the literature in reference to dichoticism through
diﬀerent repetition rates/modulation frequencies of the stimulus between the two ears. Re-
search including these conditions is almost exclusively focused on the more recent use of
2The BIC is calculated as the diﬀerence between the diotic response and the sum of the responses to
monotic left and right stimulation.
7
==PAGE:20==
ASSR as a clinical tool in audiology, particularly with infants in mind as patients, and the
large potential time saving of testing multiple carrier frequencies simultaneously, possibly
dichotically. Studies driven by attempting to make ASSR practicable in this way have
continued to be relevant over the last 20 years with some particularly pertinent examples
including John et al. (1998), Armstrong and Stapells (2007), Hatton and Stapells (2010),
Hatton and Stapells (2013) and Mühler et al. (2018).
Across these studies the common ﬁnding is that at high stimulation levels, an ASSR re-
sponse to a single carrier is reduced if it is simultaneously presented with other carriers at
other repetition/modulation frequencies. This holds true for infants and adults, although
no studies tested both with the exact same design. Furthermore, while a reduction in in-
dividual band responses is found, these studies (ex. Armstrong and Stapells (2007)) still
claim that multi-band stimulation is relatively more time eﬃcient than single band. In
these studies band interactions are reported to be dependent on carrier frequency, stimula-
tion level, number and distribution of carrier frequency bands, and repetition/modulation
frequency. This is supported by Guerit et al. (2017) and Herdman et al. (2002b) for ex-
ample, who ﬁnd that no interaction exists as long as the stimulus carrier bands are well
separated (at least 1 octave) and are presented at mid-range levels (≈60 dB SPL).
This presents a complex picture of options for further study. Interaction is not only
limited to being destructive, as constructive interference can also occur, reported by John
et al. (2002) and Elberling et al. (2007).
Following from the above, and of particular relevance to this thesis, if ’binaural in-
teractions’ are possible from dichotic repetition rates, it seems crucial to consider what
other forms of dichotacism may also produce interactions. The following eight studies, to
the author’s knowledge, comprise the most signiﬁcant research into the eﬀects of dichotic
ASSR beyond dichotic repetition/modulation frequencies as previously discussed. While
seemingly disparate in their approaches, the broad combined scope is highly instructive
in the formation and understanding of this thesis’ design.
The work of Zhang and Boettcher (2008) investigates the consequences of using click
stimuli with Interaural Level Diﬀerences (ILDs) and Interaural Time Diﬀerences (ITDs)
presented at 80 Hz using analysis of the BIC. The ﬁndings show unexpectedly complex
behaviour with increasing ILDs resulting in an increasingly negative BIC, and increasing
ITDs resulting in an increasingly positive BIC. Experiments were not conducted with
ILD and ITD simultaneously. Readers should note however that Zhang and Boettcher
(2008) appear to discard half the ITD data to achieve statistical signiﬁcance without ade-
quate explanation (although not surreptitiously). Related to spatial eﬀects on the ASSR,
Narayanan (2018) (while a monotic study), ﬁnds that for real lateralised presentation of
the stimulus, the head shadow has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ASSR for a 4 kHz centred
octave band chirp stimulus repeated at around 90 Hz when the head is turned away from
the source.
These studies together comprise good reason to investigate the consequences of spa-
tialised binaural ASSR stimuli on the response, as it may have signiﬁcant consequence for
sound-ﬁeld measurements as mentioned in subsection 1.3.1.
Maki et al. (2009) presents a diﬀerent approach through the presentation of contralat-
eral band limited white noise during a monotic ASSR measurement. The ASSR detection
thresholds and amplitude to the click and tone-pip stimuli were recorded at 40 Hz and
80 Hz, as well as a psychophysical threshold measurement. No eﬀect on the detection
threshold was seen as a consequence of the contralateral noise at 40 dB SL for the 80
8
==PAGE:21==
Hz ASSR or psychophysical measurement. The 40 Hz ASSR threshold was elevated by
10 to 15 dB relative to the psychophysical threshold. Galambos and Makeig (1992a) and
Galambos and Makeig (1992b) show similar ﬁndings with a 50% 40 Hz ASSR monoaural
amplitude reduction in the presence of contralateral white noise.
These ﬁndings may have signiﬁcance if some clinical conditions could corrupt the
stimulation of one ear to the degree that it behaves more like an uncorrelated interfering
noise. This is most likely by distortion of the phase, desynchronising the nominally diotic
stimuli repetitions/modulations.
Picton et al. (2009) is focused again on multi-band stimulation with diﬀerent modula-
tion frequencies, monaural and dichotic, for SAM tone ASSR but with additional factors
considered such as subject gender, ear of stimulation, and handedness. None of these
additional factors had a consistent signiﬁcant eﬀect.
Regarding Interaural Phase Diﬀerences (IPDs); Wong and Stapells (2004) identiﬁed
the presence of Binaural Masking Level Diﬀerences (BMLDs) for low frequency 7 Hz and 13
Hz ASSR but not at 80 Hz when the IPD of the signal was 180◦. Finally Vercammen et al.
(2017) shows that the onset and oﬀset of IPDs can induce a temporary desynchronisation
of the ASSR to the stimulus. Desynchronisation and recovery occurs much faster for 80
Hz ASSR than for 40 Hz and 20 Hz. Both of these IPD related studies used SAM tones.
This again infers that the relative phase of the binaural stimulation may inhibit ASSR
detection.
2.2
Magnetoencephalogram Studies
Studies that use MEG recordings to measure the ASSR provide an alternative view of
auditory related events in the brain. While the same physiological response can be mea-
sured using EEG or MEG, choosing to measure the orthogonal electrical or magnetic
components of the electromagnetic waves critically opposes the two methods despite their
clear intrinsic link. As such, when regarding the following studies, it is thought prudent
to only consider the eﬀects that are found in the response to environmental changes such
as the stimuli, and even then with some reserve. The direct measures of magnetic ﬁeld
strength are not easily comparable to that of electrical wave voltage, and the diﬀerent
spatial sensitivities of the two methods relative to the propagation of the electromagnetic
waves complicates the matter signiﬁcantly. Despite this, the following MEG studies are
included as their ﬁndings are possibly transferable to that of an EEG study. The included
studies are all works involving Bernhard Ross whose research is near solely in this niche.
Ross and Pantev (2004) showed that during a monaural 40 Hz SAM tone ASSR mea-
surement, small gaps injected into the stimuli as short as 3 ms had relative long-term
eﬀects on the response amplitude and phase. This was interpreted and attributed to the
’ASSR Reset Mechanism’ whereby disturbances in the stimulus may cause a collapse of
the ASSR and the formation of a new one after. This may have consequences for the use of
ISTS modulations in the stimulus to make it speech like, as mentioned in subsection 1.3.1.
Part of Ross et al. (2003) ﬁnds that for a 40 Hz SAM tone monoaural measurement,
the presence of an additional non-modulated pure tone can reduce the response amplitude
by up two-thirds of what it is without the non-modulated pure tone. This maximum
reduction occurred when the interfering tone was slightly higher in frequency than the
SAM tone carrier frequency.
9
==PAGE:22==
Evidence of another stimulus interference eﬀect is presented in Ross et al. (2006)
where bursts of 2 kHz - 3 kHz band limited noise were presented contralaterally to an ear
stimulated with a 500 Hz carrier 40 Hz modulated SAM tone. A signiﬁcant reduction in
the ASSR amplitude was observed in response to the noise burst followed by a complete
recovery of the response approximately 250 ms later.
This time course of the ASSR
amplitude and phase during recovery were similar to what was observed during the initial
stimulus onset, leading again to the theory that the interfering noise burst elicited the
’ASSR Reset Mechanism’.
Lastly Ross (2008) showed a novel 40 Hz ASSR behaviour in response to 180◦IPD
changes. In response to an interaural phase shift of the SAM tone bursts, an ASSR phase
lag was induced, which was maximally 90◦which corresponds to a 6 ms delay in the time
domain, which would recover after approximately 500 ms after the IPD shift occurred.
Furthermore, an ASSR amplitude reduction was induced 100 ms after the IPD shift. This
amplitude reduction was clearly visible for stimulus carrier frequencies of 500 Hz, barely
detectable at 1000 Hz, and absent entirely for carriers higher.
These studies together agree with many of the EEG study ﬁndings; sudden changes to
the stimulation, such as gaps of silence, noise bursts, or IPD changes can induce a collapse
or wavering of the ASSR response, while continuous interference from simultaneously
presented ’maskers’ simply reduce the response level.
2.3
Summary of Findings
Drawing on the combined ﬁndings of the presented studies it seems reasonable to state
that binaural interaction exists in ASSR, but also there exists several diﬀerent paradigms
for presenting a binaural ASSR stimulus each with diﬀerent results.
Presenting stimuli which contain components at diﬀerent modulation/repetition rates
to either one or both ears causes a reduction in response amplitude, unless the stimuli are
presented at mid to low levels and the carrier frequencies are well separated. The addition
of more components to the stimulus causes more reduction. However, the combined time
to detect all interfering simultaneous responses is still less than the time required to test
all components singularly.
The choice of ASSR stimulus modulation/repetition rate has consequences for the
response amplitude and Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), but also for which neuron groups
contribute most to the response.
Subsequently it seems that lower rates, which have
greater contributions from higher processing stages, display the presence of a stronger BIC
and BMLD. The perturbations in the ASSR caused by short gaps of silence in the stimulus,
sudden or continuous contralateral unmodulated noise, or abrupt IPD changes suggest
that the ASSR is sensitive to even small changes in stimulation of the ipsilateral and
contralateral ear. This is supported with ITDs and ILDs also showing to-date unexplained
BIC eﬀects on the 80 Hz ASSR
.
It must be considered however, whether any of these described eﬀects have relevance
to the clinical practice of ASSR measurements. Speciﬁcally, if conditions described here
in the literature could plausibly occur in a clinical setting, and if they did, what conse-
quences could they have on the detection of a response. Furthermore, are there clinically
likely conditions not covered by the literature, the eﬀects of which may also adversely
aﬀect measurements in practice? By assessing the current ﬁeld of research, an experimen-
10
==PAGE:23==
tal design was constructed that addressed these essential questions, and is presented in
detail in chapter 3. By seeking conditions that simultaneously are thought probable and
detrimental to an ASSR measurement in the ’real world’, this thesis aims to re-frame and
advance ASSR research to produce useful advice for practitioners.
It is concluded that three diotic stimuli types will be considered in the main investi-
gation of this thesis which fulﬁl these criteria:
1. Simulated spatialised stimuli which mimic the incidence of the stimuli on a subject
not directly facing the presenting loudspeaker.
2. Stimuli with a large ITD which sets the envelopes of the left and right channel into
antiphase. This may cause some physiological or physical destructive interference in
the production and transmission of the ASSR. A large ITD of ≈10 ms may occur
with a unilateral digital hearing aid user.
3. Stimuli with an interaural inverse polarity (carrier IPD of 180◦), which may have
some consequences for binaural processing and may also possibly occur with uni-
lateral or mixed type hearing aid users, or even identical bilateral hearing aids but
with inverted wiring. This condition also de-confounds carrier and envelope inter-
aural phase eﬀects, as stimuli category 2 also contains some carrier interaural phase
diﬀerence as a result of setting the envelopes into antiphase.
It will be assessed whether any of these altered stimuli produce and ASSRs which is
worse in response rate, response power, or response time than an unaltered equivalent
diotic or monotic stimulus.
The design methodology of the experiments to test these
conditions and the precise methods used to implement them are presented in the next
section, Experimental Design and Methods.
11
==PAGE:24==
3
Experimental Design and Methods
This section of the thesis details the investigation design methodology and how experi-
ments were carried out. This includes speciﬁcally the structure of the overall investigation,
the general features of the participating subjects and selection criteria, the stimuli used,
equipment used to make the recordings, signal processing applied to the collected data,
and the statistical analysis performed. Details of the stimuli, playback/recording and sig-
nal processing are given ﬁrst, followed by details of each experimental phase, and ending
with the statistical methods.
Written and informed consent was given by all subjects who participated in this in-
vestigation.
Overall, this investigation was divided into three main experimental sections, termed
’phases’, each an advancement on the last:
1. An opening study determining a baseline response level using the same reference
stimuli and two channel Electroencephalogram (EEG) recording equipment to be
used in the main study. Mean response levels were found for both monotic and
diotic stimulation, for two types of reference stimuli.
2. The main study comprising of the diotic reference condition and nine experimental
conditions, each with a stimulus modiﬁed in some capacity from the diotic reference.
Each of these main experimental conditions was designed to simulate and test the
eﬀects of a clinically plausible dichotic presentation of the original diotic stimulus.
3. A follow-up study repeating the most signiﬁcant main test conditions and reference
condition on a subset of the main experiment subjects; but with an alternative
64-channel full scalp EEG recording technique.
Each of the three phases has its own section in the following chapter dealing with the
unique design and methods used. Details that are common across more than one phase,
such as the reference stimuli or recording equipment, are presented in their own sections
and referred to when necessary. Table 1 provides a quick ’at a glance’ summary of the
key recording and data processing diﬀerences between the three phases that may not be
immediately obvious.
Recording
Equipment
Recording
Criterion
Post Processing
and Analysis
Eclipse
Biosemi
SNR
Target
Fixed
Time
Noise Weighted
Averaging
Mixed Linear
Model
Phase 1
(Reference Study)
X
X
X
Phase 2
(Main Study)
X
X
X
X
Phase 3
(Topography)
X
X
Table 1: Quick reference guide to the recording and post processing diﬀerences between phases.
12
==PAGE:25==
3.1
Stimuli
The original stimulus, the NB CE-ChirpTM, was created by Elberling and Don (2010)
and is a complex stimulus consisting of four repeating sweeps or ’chirps’, each an octave
wide, with centre frequencies of 500 Hz and 1, 2, and 4 kHz, each with a diﬀerent 90 Hz
range repetition rate. Since the creation of this stimulus, an adapted version has been
developed by Interacoustics Research Unit (IRU) by merging the two lowest bands into a
single double octave wide chirp repeated at a single repetition rate. This adapted three
band stimulus is the one used in this study (hence referred to as simply the ’CE-Chirp’
stimulus) and has the following features. The lowest chirp is two octaves wide, centred
around 707 Hz, and has a repetition rate close to 40 Hz (referred to as being 40 Hz onwards
for simplicity). There is then a mid-range chirp one octave wide centred at 2 kHz and
and high frequency chirp also one octave wide, centred at 4 kHz. The mid-range and high
frequency chirps both have repetition rates very close to 90 Hz (referred to as 90 Hz), but
diﬀerent to each other. The chirp frequency content is the ’carrier’ and the repetition rate
determines the frequency of the corresponding Auditory Steady-State Response (ASSR).
The stimulus also contains energy at harmonics of the stimulus repetition rates (Laugesen
et al., 2018), meaning additional harmonic ASSR responses are directly stimulated.
This stimulus is the reference stimulus used in all three phases of this thesis’ ex-
perimental work, presented monotonically or diotically as appropriate. Versions of this
stimulus were created with envelope modulations designed to mimic the envelope of speech
(identiﬁed as the International Speech Test Signal (ISTS) versions of the stimulus), but
at the cost of lower response levels and longer testing times (Laugesen et al., 2018). Both
the ISTS and non-ISTS versions of the stimuli were used as starting points for creating
the dichotic experimental condition stimuli for phases 2 and 3, the main experiment and
follow-up experiments. For both the ISTS and non-ISTS versions, the root-mean-square,
levels of each of the chirp bands were scaled to match the levels of the same bands of the
ISTS, which itself was scaled to have a broadband level of 65 dB SPL, as described by
Laugesen et al. (2018). In this way, both versions of the stimulus had banded spectral
weighting equivalent to the ISTS, but only the ’ISTS’ version had the speech-like envelope
imposed on it.
In total, nine experimental condition stimuli were created, using the ISTS and regular
versions of the CE-Chirp, in three distinct type categories, displayed in Figure 2 and
explained below:
1. Inverse modulation (Inv.
Mod.): These stimuli have a large artiﬁcial Interaural
Time Diﬀerence (ITD) imposed equal to that of half the repetition period of either
the 707 Hz low band or the 2 kHz and 4 kHz bands. Doing this sets the repetition
of the targeted chirp(s) into interaural anti-phase. For example, one version of this
stimulus took the diotic non-ISTS CE-Chirp stimulus, and circularly shifted the left
left channel ahead by a half repetition period (1
2 ∗1
40 = 0.0125 seconds). The same
procedure was repeated on the same starting reference stimulus but shifting ahead
by half the repetition rate of the 2 kHz and 4 kHz chirps (1
2 ∗1
90 = 0.0056 seconds).
The true repetition rates of the 2 kHz and 4 kHz chirps are so similar and close to
exactly 90 Hz, that a single inverse modulation condition was decided suﬃcient to set
both chirps into eﬀective interaural anti-phase. Two more experimental stimuli were
created the same way, but using the ISTS version of the reference diotic stimulus,
resulting in a total of four experimental inverse modulation conditions.
13
==PAGE:26==
(a) 1. Diagram of the two ’Inv.
Mod’ stimuli time signals with the
channel time delay oﬀsets, corre-
sponding to half the time period
of the 40 Hz and 80 Hz repetition
rates for the (low 707 Hz) and high
(2 kHz and 4 kHz) bands.
(b) 2. Diagram of the ’Inv. Pol’
stimulus time signal with inverted
polarity between the left and right
channels.
(c) 3.
Diagram of the angles
of incidence simulated in the spa-
tialised conditions, in addition to
the eﬀective 0◦angle of incidence
of the diotic condition.
Figure 2
2. Inverse polarity (Inv. Pol.): There was a single inverse polarity condition, which
was simply created by inverting the signs of the samples in the left channel of the
diotic non-ISTS CE-Chirp stimulus.
3. Spatialised: The spatialised signals were designed to simulate the Interaural Level
Diﬀerence (ILD) and Interaural Time Diﬀerence (ITD), which would occur if the
non-ISTS CE-Chirp signal was presented through a single loudspeaker to a listener
with a ±45◦or ±90◦azimuthal head angle, relative to the loudspeaker in anechoic
conditions. Head Related Impulse Responses (HRIRs) for a B&K HATS Type 4128C
ﬁtted with hearing aids were procured from the data base of ’Hearing Device Head-
related Transfer Functions’ provided by the Department of Medical Physics and
Acoustics of Oldenburg University (Denk et al., 2018). The speciﬁc HRIRs used
were those for a ’behind the ear’ style hearing aid for an azimuthal source angle of
−45◦and −90◦, with no elevation angle. From these impulse responses, the ITD
was calculated by cross correlating the left and right channel impulse responses and
taking the sample lag at which the correlation was maximum. The level diﬀerence as
a result of head angle for each chirp band was calculated by taking the HRIR into the
frequency domain and then taking the mean diﬀerence of the frequency responses
across each chirp’s frequency range, an example of which is shown in
3a, along
with a phase response plot showing linear phase, and as such a ﬁxed ITD across
all frequencies between the right and left channels. These values for each frequency
range are then used as design criteria for an automatically generated FIR ﬁlter, one
for each of the left and right channel, shown in 3b, which is then convolved with the
original CE-Chirp stimulus to apply the appropriate band speciﬁc level diﬀerences.
The ITD is then applied by circularly shifting the appropriate channel to eﬀectively
’delay’ it. The resulting spatialised signals in the −45◦and −90◦azimuthal directions
were then inverted by swapping the channels to create the +45◦and +90◦stimuli.
This method for creating the simulated spatialised stimuli was used (compared to a
simple convolution with the appropriate HRIR) to maintain precise control over the
stimulus and not to introduce any unintended HRIR ﬁne structure eﬀects.
14
==PAGE:27==
250
500
1
2
4
8
-10
0
10
Magnitude (dB)
L
R
1
2
4
8
Frequency (kHz)
-10
-5
0
Phase (rad/2pi)
(a) B&K HATS Frequency and Phase Response at
−90◦azimuthal angle. Dotted lines show the HRIR
band averages which span the stimulus chirp fre-
quency bands. The black line in the phase response
represents the total frequency range across all chirps
in the stimulus.
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
Frequency [Hz]
-10
-5
0
5
Magnitude Gain [dB]
L
R
L target
R target
(b) Designed stepped ’Staircase’ ﬁlter response sim-
ulating the head shadow and baﬄe eﬀects of a −90◦
incidence, overlaid with the target response values
derived from the input HRIR.
Figure 3: HRIR frequency and phase responses shown alongside the generated ’band averaged’ ﬁlters to
apply the simulated head shadow and baﬄe eﬀects of incident sound −90◦(from the left), zero degrees
azimuth.
3.2
Stimulus Presentation and EEG Recording
For phase 1 and 2 of the investigation, playback and recording were performed using
an adapted research edition of the Interacoustics Eclipse, in conjunction with a Fireface
UC soundcard, all coordinated by an instance of Matlab running a specialised suite of
data collection scripts created by IRU. Stimulus playback and EEG recording was done
at a sample rate of 48 kHz.
The system was calibrated to deliver the stimulus at a
nominal free-ﬁeld level of 65 dB SPL. In reality the delivered level would be marginally
less, due to the stimulus not containing any very low or very high frequency content and
the eﬀects of the ’open ear gain’ applied by the insert earphones used, which will be
described later. Subjects were ﬁtted with electrodes in a standard montage, one on each
mastoid, one on the vertex below the hairline, and a ground electrode on their right cheek.
Etymotic Research ER-1 insert earphones were used to deliver the stimulus as they have a
frequency response designed to simulate the gain of an ’open ear’ with sound incident from
the outside environment, which matches the eventual use case of aided ASSR presented
through a loudspeaker. The subjects were asked to lie down and quietly rest or sleep in
an electrically and acoustically shielded booth for the duration of the experiment. The
experiment progressed as required, moving on to each new condition when the Bonferoni
corrected response F-test threshold (corresponding to a p-value of 0.01) was reached for
all three ASSR bands for both the left and right channel, or until 15 minutes had passed,
similar to the procedure used in Laugesen et al. (2018). From pilot runs, it seemed that
a total testing time of one hour per subject would be required to complete all conditions.
For phase 3 of the investigation, the recording equipment was swapped to the ’Biosemi
Active Two’, a system capable of recording 64 simultaneous EEG channels, but at a
reduced sampling frequency of 8192 Hz.
The playback was performed using diﬀerent
15
==PAGE:28==
equipment, namely a RME Fireface UCX soundcard, but with a subset of the same stimuli,
same playback level, and insert earphones as the main experiment. Playback and recording
was not as precisely synchronised as with the system used in phases 1 and 2, since the
playback and recording sampling frequencies are not the same. This causes some ’jitter’,
as the precise starting and ending time of each playback epoch cannot be exactly resolved
in the recording samples. This may cause some spreading of ASSR response energy into
undesired FFT bins during analysis.
However, during post-processing the amount of
’spectral leakage’ seemed insuﬃcient to perturb measurements and analysis still produced
precise spectra of the EEG responses.
3.3
Signal Processing
Post processing of the raw EEG recordings and calculation of the response metrics, was
performed in Matlab using a suite of scripts and functions developed by Søren Laugesen
of IRU.
For phases 1 and 2, the two channels of time domain EEG recordings were read into
Matlab and split into individual ’epochs’ of 98304 samples, representing ASSR recording
from a single playback ’loop’ of the stimulus. Epochs which contained any single sample of
greater magnitude than a 40 µV artefact rejection threshold were entirely discarded. For
data from phase 2, the remaining epochs were Fourier transformed and then given weights
based on the amount of noise power contained in 20 bins surrounding each ASSR response
bin, as suggested by IRU and John et al. (2001), protocol three. The complex weighted
mean of all epochs was then taken, for each of the weight sets for each response. For data
from phase 1, no weighted mean was calculated, only a simple mean after epoch artefact
rejection. The noise corrected ASSR level was then calculated by subtracting the mean
power in the surrounding 20 bins of the response bin, from the power in the response bin,
and then converting to a 10log10 dB scale (ref. 10−18 W). The response Signal to Noise
Ratio (SNR) was calculated as the ratio of the response bin power to the mean power of
the 20 surrounding bins, similarly converted to a log scale. A separate measure calculated
in phase 1 and 2 was Time to Detect (TTD). TTD is the number of epochs from the start
of the EEG recording required before an ASSR response SNR reaches a critical F-test
value. The calculation initially only considers the ﬁrst epoch, but if signiﬁcance was not
reached, the next sequential epoch was included, and so forth. Weighted averaging was
included in each calculation loop of the included epochs. The critical value required for
the response bin to be considered signiﬁcantly larger than the mean of the noise bins was
again based on an F-test criterion but with a p-value of 0.05. Noise Corrected ASSR level
values which resulted from trials which did not have an SNR level above the detection
threshold (10log10(5.18)= 7.14)3 were discarded.
Signal processing of data from phase 3 of the investigation was very similar to that
of the main experiment, but front ended by a signiﬁcant amount of Matlab preprocessing
using the ’FieldTrip’ Matlab toolbox (Oostenveld et al., 2011). In summary, this processing
consisted of:
• Splitting the EEG time signal data into sections corresponding to teach trial and
then epochs of 2.048 seconds.
3Based on an F-test ratio derived from α = 0.99, df1 = 2, df2 = 40
16
==PAGE:29==
• Applying a 400 Hz cutoﬀlowpass and 20 Hz cutoﬀhighpass zero-phase ﬁlters, both
of type Butterworth, order 2, in addition to notch ﬁlters (using ’zeroing’) to remove
line noise at 50 Hz, 100 Hz, and 150 Hz.
• Manual removal of channels which were consistently very noisy and replacing them
with data interpolated from the channel neighbours.
• Re-referencing all channels to the grand mean of all the EEG channels.
• Automatic detection of ’noisy’ epochs contaminated with muscle artefacts and re-
moval of these epochs from the data set.
• Manual inspection of the data and further judgement-based ’noisy’ epoch artefact
rejection.
• Final complex-averaging and extraction of the ASSR in the frequency domain, as
performed for the main experiment data processing.4.
3.4
Monotic vs. Diotic Stimulation (Reference Study)
This initial phase was designed to determine expected baseline levels for monotic and
diotic stimulation using CE-Chirp stimuli both with and without ISTS modulations. Ad-
ditionally, it was desirable to check that the relationship of monotic response level to
diotic response level was the same for the CE-Chirp stimuli with and without ISTS mod-
ulations. See section 3.1 for exact details of the stimuli, and section 3.3 for details of the
main response measure, noise corrected (NC) level.
This phase was carried out in practice by two masters students of the DTU Engineering
Acoustics program participating in course ’31212 - Technical audiology and experimental
hearing science’, R. Arnoult and S. Bilert, supervised by the author, in addition to S.
Laugersen, and S.G.B. Kristensen of IRU.
This phase was planned to take place ﬁrst for two reasons. Firstly, if it was shown that
the relationship between a monotic and diotic ASSR levels were consistent, the monotic
condition could be removed from the main experiment, and the monotic to diotic rela-
tionship determined from phase 1 used to compare phase two results. This would satisfy
the key research question’s precondition of comparing monotic ASSR to dichotic ASSR,
while saving time in the main experiment later in the investigation timeline. Secondly, if
it was shown that the monotic to diotic relationship was the same for the stimuli with and
without ISTS modulations, the non-ISTS version of the stimuli could be used in the main
experiment, also saving signiﬁcant time (again see section 3.1 for details). 14 subjects (5
female) participated in this ﬁrst phase, all of whom were young (mean age = 24.9, std =
3.03) normal hearing (< 20 dB HL at all audiometric frequencies from 250 Hz to 4 kHz).
In this initial phase, normality of hearing was checked by tone audiogram, or by otoscopy
and a questionnaire when time did not allow. Each subject was exposed to six separate
tests: monotic left, monotic right, and diotic presentation; of both the ISTS and non-ISTS
modulated CE-Chirp stimulus. Details of the playback and recording system used can be
found in section 3.2. Details of the signal processing and subsequent statistical analysis
of results can be found in section 3.3 and section 3.7 respectively.
4A simple complex frequency domain average was implemented here, as opposed to the noise-weighted
averaging implemented in the main study.
17
==PAGE:30==
3.5
Dichotic Stimulation (Main Study)
The main experiment, phase 2, of this thesis project was devised to test whether the
ASSR elicited from dichotic stimuli of various types has poorer detectability than that
elicited from a diotic stimulus. The measures of the response detectability were Noise
Corrected (NC) power level, Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR), and Time to Detect (TTD),
the details of which can be found in section 3.3. 15 subjects5 (7 female) participated in
this second phase, all of whom were conﬁrmed to be of normal hearing by air condition
tone audiogram (thresholds < 20 dB HL from 250 Hz to 4 kHz), otoscopy, and ques-
tionnaire6 and young (mean age = 23.2, std = 2.20). An additional three subjects were
recruited to participate in this phase but were rejected for either having too high hearing
thresholds or too much cerumen in the ear canal to safely use the insert earphones. Each
subject was exposed to eight experimental test stimuli (10 if time allowed), plus the diotic
non-ISTS reference stimuli, unaltered from phase 1. Figure 4 is a diagram illustrating the
experimental condition order and blocking.
Figure 4: Presentation order block diagram.* Ran-
domised permutations with no repeats
The four inverse modulation conditions
were placed ﬁrst in the experimental or-
der.
Within this block, the presentation
order was randomised (with no repeats of
orders), since there are too many order per-
mutations to balance a design with only
15 subjects. This largest block was placed
ﬁrst in the experimental order in an at-
tempt to mix the eﬀect of arousal (Rance,
2008) between as many conditions as pos-
sible, since it is likely the subjects will be
at their most restless at the beginning of
the experiment7. The inverse polarity and
diotic reference conditions were placed in
the middle of the proceedings, as it was
thought that subjects are most likely to be
at their most restful in the middle of the
experiment. This minimises the amount of
eﬀect of arousal in these singular conditions. Subjects were randomly divided into two
groups, with each group being exposed to the negative or positive angle spatialised sig-
nals. Within each of the groups, the presentation order was balanced. This was done to
save time and keep the experiment time close to an hour. Furthermore, it was decided
it was of more interest to detect a possible diﬀerence between a diotic and a ±45◦and
±90◦spatialised signal than a diﬀerence in response to signals spatialised from the posi-
tive (right) or negative (left) direction. As such, with the presented design, data for both
angles would always be collected for each subject. However, if time allowed, the alternate
direction spatialised signals were collected if a subject progressed through the previous
conditions faster than expected. The spatial conditions were placed last in the experi-
515 subjects were recruited based on a predictive power analysis detailed in section 3.7
6taken from ISO389-9 (2009)
7Separate to the eﬀects of arousal on the ASSR, restless subjects also have a higher EEG noise ﬂoor
and generate more muscle artefacts from movement
18
==PAGE:31==
mental order so that the extra trials could be appended on demand to the ﬁnal block.
Monotic conditions were excluded from the study for time saving and to keep testing time
under one hour per subject. This was deemed acceptable since the relationship between
monotic to diotic stimulation was to be established separately in phase 1. While indi-
vidual experiences of undergoing the experiment varied widely, the expected time course
for subject state was: Initial restlessness and fully conscious at the experiment beginning,
followed by steady relaxation leading to fully relaxed state (possibly sleep), intermittent
activity during resting state in response to stimuli changes or natural rest cycles, and ﬁ-
nally eventual increasing alertness or even agitation after an hour of daytime rest. Details
of the stimuli conditions themselves can be found in section 3.1.
3.6
ASSR Scalp Topography (Follow-Up Study)
This third phase of the investigation was designed to investigate the ASSR power SNR
topography across the scalp in response to the diotic reference condition and other con-
ditions of particular interest (to be decided after performing phase 2, the main study).
It was decided that the ’Inv. Mod. 40 Hz’ condition would be compared against the
diotic. The stimuli were precisely the same as those used in the main study, calibrated to
the same playback level of 65 dB SPL. Again, a monotic condition was excluded to keep
testing time at comfortable levels. However, an oversight was that inclusion of monau-
ral conditions would have allowed calculation and visualisation of a Binaural Interaction
Component (BIC). The ’Biosemi Active Two’ system , integrated with a custom playback-
trigger-recording system was used to record 64 channel EEG from four returning subjects
from the main study. Two repeats of the diotic and ’Inv.Mod. 40 Hz’ would be performed,
interleaved, with a ﬁxed time of 10 minutes per condition (total time 40 minutes). All
64 channels were recorded at the maximum sample rate the available transmission band-
width allowed of 8192 Hz. Electrodes were applied to the subjects scalp and held in place
using a Biosemi cap of the correct head size, which had been centred on the head prior.
Electrode ﬁts were adjusted until they had a stable DC oﬀset less than ±20 µV . Some
exceptions were made when electrodes proved problematic with DC oﬀsets up to ±30 µV
being accepted. The four returning subjects were speciﬁcally chosen due to their contrast-
ing results from the main study. Two of the returning subjects had showed the largest
consistent reduction in the 40 Hz ASSR NC power level from the Diotic to the Inv. Mod.
40 Hz condition, and the other two had shown some of the smallest. For details on the
signal processing and statistical analysis of this data, refer to section 3.3 and section 3.7
respectively.
3.7
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis of the reference study and main study results was carried out in R
using R-studio 3.5.2. The predictive main study power analysis was performed in R us-
ing the ’pwr’ package, based on the planned pairwise comparisons to be done comparing
each condition to the relevant reference diotic condition. Data standard deviation was
predicted from Laugesen et al. (2018), with a projected desire to be able to detect a
diﬀerence of 3 dB between two noise-corrected ASSR level population means at with a
power of 0.90.
The same ’pwr’ package was used to perform the retrospective power
analysis. Mixed linear models were ﬁtted to data from phases 1 and 2 using the pack-
19
==PAGE:32==
age lme4 (Bates et al., 2015), with main eﬀect and interaction p-values provided by the R
’anova’ function supplemented with the ’lmerTest’ package (Kuznetsova et al., 2017). The
full model was reduced, retaining only factors or interactions which showed signiﬁcance
(α = 0.05), but model hierarchy was maintained with non-signiﬁcant factors and inter-
actions being retained when their higher order interactions were found to be signiﬁcant.
Separate models were ﬁt to each of the appropriate experiment metrics in phases 1 and
2, with all measured data transformed to a log scale. Results were checked for inﬂuential
data points by computation of cook’s distance for the data from each subject. Checks
for homoskedasticity and normality of residuals were also performed. Subsequent planned
comparison tests were then performed comparing each condition to the diotic condition,
for each stimulus band and response harmonic separately, as well as each response to
an ISTS modulated stimulus to its non-ISTS counterpart. Planned pairwise comparisons
were performed using the ’glht’ function of the ’multicomp’ package (Hothorn et al., 2008).
20
==PAGE:33==
4
Results and Discussion
This section presents the combined results and discussion for the three phases of this
investigation: 1) the reference study, 2) the main study, and 3) the follow-up study us-
ing ASSR topography. This is followed by a comprehensive discussion that synthesises
the ﬁndings from the study as a whole. Finally, a supplementary section (4.4) presents
additional valuable observations and ﬁndings that emerged from various aspects of the
study.
Where signiﬁcance tests are performed of all kinds, a signiﬁcance level threshold of
α = 0.05 was used. Some statistical comparisons were pre-planned (as opposed to being
post-hoc), as it was known before carrying out the experiment that it would be most
appropriate to compare each condition only to the equivalent reference condition, rather
than to every other condition. When planned comparison data is reported, for conciseness,
the diﬀerence in means is reported in measurement units, as well as a signiﬁcance indicator:
p<0.001 ***, p<0.01 **, p<0.05 *.
Due to the unexplained variance in the data being larger than what was predicted
from previous work, the power of this study is reduced to β = 0.60 from the target 0.90
(calculated from NC level data with a desired detectable diﬀerence in means of 3 dB).
This may explain why some eﬀects in the following section appear to occur inconsistently.
This may also result in eﬀect sizes to be over estimated.
Due to the reduced power,
smaller examples of eﬀects under certain conditions are undetected, meaning only the
larger examples are considered, averaging to a larger overall eﬀect size.
Lastly, the reader should be aware that during measurements taken during phase 2,
an intermittent EEG noise source was detected almost exclusively in the left recording
channel. Despite signiﬁcant eﬀorts, the source of the noise was never found. On a single
occasion, a measurement was aborted and rescheduled due to the left channel noise causing
repeated false rejection of recording epochs. The noise was present to a lesser degree in
many of the admitted recordings, the consequences of which are discussed.
4.1
Reference Study
Graphs and tables in this section are suitably adapted from the work of R. Arnoult and
S. Bilert (Arnoult and Bilert, 2018), under the partial supervision of the author, as part
fulﬁlment for the course 31232 at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Results
Table 2 shows the F-test statistics derived from the mixed linear model ﬁt to the NC
power level data. The ’unexplained’ error remaining in the model, or the residual standard
deviation is 3.5 dB.
Based on the results of Table 2, Figure 6 shows the Auditory Steady-State Response
(ASSR) Noise Corrected (NC) power level plotted against the stimulus orientation split by
stimulus type (standard or ISTS modiﬁed CE-Chirp) and stimulus band centre frequency.
’Stimulus Orientation’ refers to the side(s) that stimulus was presented from.
In the
monotic conditions (left and right), the ipsilateral channel is used to calculate the response
power level. In the diotic condition, the left channel was used (however, no diﬀerence was
21
==PAGE:34==
Factors
F Statistics
p-Value
Subject (random)
<0.0001***
Stimulus
F(1,221) = 108.35
<0.0001***
Orientation
F(2,221) = 36.30
<0.0001***
Stim. Freq.
F(1,221) = 112.14
<0.0001***
Stimulus:Orientation
F(1,221) = 0.01
0.989
Stimulus:Stim. Freq.
F(1,221) = 5.54
0.004*
Orientation: Stim. Freq.
F(1,221) = 2.25
0.064
Stim.:Orientation:Stim. Freq.
F(1,221) = 0.52
0.724
Table 2: Main eﬀect and interaction eﬀects F-test results from the mixed linear model. Type III Analysis
of Variance Table with Satterthwaite’s method. Signiﬁcance codes: 0 - ***, 0.001 - **, 0.01 - *, 0.05 - .
found in the level between the left and right channel during diotic stimulation (p=0.32)).
Plot lines are included to better visualise the relationship of stimulus centre frequency and
stimulus type on the increase in response power level from monotic to diotic simulation
(left/right to diotic orientation).
Left
Right
Diotic
Stimulus Orientation
30
35
40
45
50
ASSR Power Level [dB re. 10-18V2]
Standard NB CE-Chirps
ISTS mod. NB CE-Chirps
Figure 5:
Mean NC power level across stimulus
frequencies plotted against stimulus orientation, for
both the ISTS and ’standard’ non-ISTS stimulus.
Post-hoc comparisons using the Tukey
HSD test indicated that the mean power
level for the 707 Hz centre frequency re-
sponse was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than 2
kHz centre frequency response
(∆M2k−707 = −9.08, p***) and the 4 kHz
centre frequency response (∆M4k−707 =
−7.69, p***). However, the 2 kHz and 4
kHz centre frequency responses did not sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀer from each other.
The testing time required for all re-
sponse bands to reach the ’online’ SNR de-
tection threshold was typically ﬁve to ten
minutes, with a maximum of 15 minutes.
There was only one occurrence of a record-
ing ﬁnishing with a single response band
not reaching threshold.
Similar mean patterns between the
monotic (left-right) orientation responses and diotic orientation responses were observed
between the non-ISTS and ISTS version of the stimuli when averaged across centre fre-
quency, shown in Figure 5.
Lastly, from ﬁtting a similar mixed linear model to the Time to Detect (TTD) data
from this phase, no eﬀect of Orientation was found.
Discussion
The most signiﬁcant ﬁnding from this reference study is that the addition of the ISTS
envelope modulations to the CE-Chirp stimulus reduces the overall level of the response
pattern by an oﬀset, without distorting the response across orientation or centre frequency.
This is evident by the parallel results of the two stimuli in Figure 5, and conﬁrmed by
the lack of any second order interaction of Stimulus:Orientation shown in Table 2. The
22
==PAGE:35==
Left
Right
Diotic
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
ASSR Power Level [dB re. 10-18V2]
707 Hz
Left
Right
Diotic
Stimulus Orientation
2 kHz
Left
Right
Diotic
4 kHz
Standard NB CE-Chirps
ISTS mod. NB CE-Chirps
Figure 6:
ASSR Power level plotted against Stimulus Orientation, split across stimulus band centre
frequency and stimulus type. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the data.
signiﬁcant interaction of ’Stimulus:Stim. Freq.’ in Table 2 means that the eﬀect of stimulus
does vary across the diﬀerent centre frequency responses. However, referring to Figure 6
it appears that this may be simply due to the ISTS condition reducing the response level
more for the 707 Hz centre frequency than for the 2 kHz and 4 kHz centre frequency.
Nevertheless, this does not change the overall monotic-to-diotic pattern.
The mean response power level oﬀset when using the ISTS stimulus was -4.5 dB,
somewhat similar to the -3.7 dB reported by Laugesen et al. (2018). The author of this
thesis suggests that the mechanism by which the ISTS stimulus reduces the ASSR NC
magnitude may be through repeated ASSR reset. Ross and Pantev (2004) found that
even very brief gaps of silence injected into an ASSR stimulus may cause relatively long
term suppression or ’reset’ of the ASSR. The author believes that the envelope minima of
the ISTS signal, may be acting similarly to the injection of gaps in the stimulus, causing
very frequent collapse and reset of the ASSR. Since the ASSR build up time to reach
full magnitude is reportedly 250 ms (Ross et al., 2006), and the peak frequency in the
modulation spectra of the ISTS (and approximately human European speech) is 4 Hz
(Holube et al., 2010), it seems plausible that the ASSR elicited by an ISTS modulated
signal would infrequently reach it’s maximum level and as such, as a long term average,
be reduced in level.
The 707 Hz centre frequency response produces a larger ASSR power level than the
2 kHz or 4 kHz centre frequency responses, with the 707 Hz diotic response being on
average 7.3 dB greater than the diotic 2 kHz and 4 kHz responses. This is attributed
to the diﬀerence in repetition rates of the 707 Hz band compared to the 2 kHz and 4
kHz bands, with the lower 40 Hz repetition eliciting a response from more neurons at the
cortical level (Rance, 2008).
Averaged across frequency band, moving to a diotic stimulation from a monotic stim-
ulation using the standard non-ISTS stimulus increased the response power level by an
oﬀset of +4.3 dB. This ﬁnding that the response power of the diotic condition is more than
equal to the sum of the individual monaural responses is in disagreement with Ainslie and
Boston (1980) and Lins et al. (1995), who ﬁnd that the sum of monotic responses should
be equal to that of the diotic. In both of these comparisons, however, dramatic diﬀerences
23
==PAGE:36==
exist in stimulus and experimental design.
As can be seen in Figure 6, the increase in response NC power from monotic to diotic
condition is less for the 707 Hz response band (+2.9 dB) than the 2 kHz (+4.2 dB)
and 4 kHz (+4.8 dB) bands, but the Orientation:Stimulus-Frequency interaction is just
insigniﬁcant in Table 2. If it had been signiﬁcant, this result would be more in agreement
with Poelmans et al. (2012) and Gransier et al. (2017), whereby diotic >80 Hz repetition
rate ASSR responses are larger than the sum of the monotic responses, but <40 Hz
repetition rate diotic responses are equal to or less than the sum of the monotic. Despite
these diﬀerences in NC power in response to changes in Orientation, the lack of any eﬀect
on the TTD infers that diotic stimulation does not signiﬁcantly change testing time.
In summary, these results indicate that the ISTS stimulus behaves similarly during
both monotic and diotic presentation to the standard non-ISTS stimulus. As such, eﬀects
observed when using one stimulus are likely to occur when using the other, and equally as
strongly, with a simple measurement level oﬀset. On this basis, it was decided that the non-
ISTS ’standard’ CE-Chirp stimulus would be used for the remainder of this investigation
due to it’s improved time eﬃciency over the ISTS version, with the assurance that any
conclusions drawn from using the non-ISTS stimulus would be the same if using the ISTS
stimulus, but with a lower overall Noise Corrected (NC) power level. An exception was
made in regards to the two ’Inverse Modulation’ conditions, whereby ISTS versions will
also be included to inspect and conﬁrm the compound eﬀects of the inter-channel time
delay and speech-like envelope ﬂuctuations.
4.2
Main Study: Diotic Conditions
This section considers the main experimental results, where NC power level, Signal to
Noise Ratio (SNR), and TTD are compared across the 10 stimuli conditions, stimulus
bands, and the ﬁrst and second response harmonics8.
Data was also taken simultaneously from two electrode channels, so a comparison
across this dimension is also performed, with diﬀerent outcomes for NC power level, SNR
and TTD.
A grand table of the F-test analysis done for NC power level, SNR, and TTD is
presented on the following page in a compact form; Table 3. Relevant parts are referred
to individually in the following subsections, but presentation as a single table allows easy
comparison across measures. Furthermore, in the following sections, since many planned
pairwise and post-hoc comparisons are performed, for brevity, any comparisons omitted
can be assumed to be found insigniﬁcant.
It is mentioned here that the random factor of subject is found highly signiﬁcant for
all measures. This reﬂects the high degree of between-subject variation, but is accounted
for by the mixed linear model.
8’Harmonic 1’ in this instance refers to the ’fundamental’ where the the response is found at the same
frequency as the band repetition rate.
24
==PAGE:37==
ASSR NC Power Level
ASSR SNR
log10(TTD)
Factor
F statistics
p
F statistics
p
F statistics
p
Subject (random)
<0.0001***
<0.0001***
<0.0001***
Condition
F(9,1467.4) = 45.6
<0.0001***
F(9,826.06) = 10.7
<0.0001***
F(9,775.88) = 19.2
<0.0001***
Stimulus Freq.
F(2,1467.1) = 123
<0.0001***
F(2,825.04) = 30.6
<0.0001***
F(2,775.19) = 8.80
<0.0001***
Harmonic
F(1,1467.1) = 496
<0.0001***
F(1,825.04) = 61.6
<0.0001***
F(1,775.15) = 34.6
<0.0001***
Channel
F(1,1467.4) = 1.83
0.176
Condition: Stim. Freq.
F(18,1467.0) = 0.565
0.925
F(18,825.04) = 1.23
0.231
F(18,775.06) = 1.03
0.417
Condition: Harmonic
F(9,1467.0) = 1.47
0.154
F(9,825.04) = 1.80
0.0651
F(9,775.09) = 0.734
0.678
Stim. Freq.:Harmonic
F(2,1467.1) = 3.95
0.0195*
F(2,825.04) = 11.5
<0.0001***
F(2,775.21) = 13.9
<0.0001***
Stim. Freq.:Channel
F(2,1467.0) = 4.21
0.0151*
Cond.:Stim. Freq.: Harm
F(18,1467.1) = 8.73
<0.0001***
F(18,825.04) = 8.19
<0.0001***
F(18,775.06) = 3.35
<0.0001***
Table 3: F test statistics derived from a mixed linear models ﬁt to the processed data from the main ’phase 2’ experiment. The test results from three separate
models are shown, each ﬁt to either the NC Power Level, SNR, or TTD. Greyed out areas indicate ﬁelds which are not applicable. Type III Analysis of Variance
Table with Satterthwaite’s method. Signiﬁcance codes: 0 - ***, 0.001 - **, 0.01 - *, 0.05 - .
25
==PAGE:38==
4.2.1
Noise Corrected Power Level
Results
Reviewing the results of the mixed linear modelling for the NC power level (Columns 2
and 3 of Table 3), the ﬁrst issue to address is the unexpected signiﬁcant interaction of
Stimulus-Frequency:Channel. While there is no eﬀect of Channel alone, an interaction
eﬀect involving Channel warrants further investigation.
The NC Power Level data is
plotted against Condition in Figure 7, split across response band, Harmonic, and Channel9.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
30
40
50
Left - Harmonic 1
Right - Harmonic 1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Left - Harmonic 2
Right - Harmonic 2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
30
40
50
Noise Corrected Level [dB] ref. 1nV2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
20
30
40
50
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
Figure 7: The mean noise corrected level of the ASSR plotted against condition, split across the stimulus
frequency response bands, harmonics, and channel. Error bars represent the 95% conﬁdence intervals.
As the results from the statistical analysis indicate, there is no general oﬀset in
NC Level introduced by Channel.
However, diﬀerences can be seen between the left
and right when compared within frequency bands. Determining from Figure 7 the ex-
act nature of this interaction does not seem possible, but it is possible to conclude
that the interaction appears to be weak. Performing further statistical analysis on the
Stimulus-Frequency:Channel interaction showed that only the pairwise comparison of the
707 Hz:Right mean with the 2 kHz:Right mean are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from each other
9The reader may notice some data points with signiﬁcantly larger error bars, for example the 707 Hz
band, harmonic 2, ’Inv 90 ISTS’ conditions for both the left and right channel. This is mostly attributed to
the sensitivity of conﬁdence intervals to the number of observations made at low numbers. Since Figure 7 is
split across so many factors, the reduced number of observations per data point makes error bars sensitive
to missing data, which more commonly occurs for ISTS conditions which systematically produce worse
SNRs and lower response powers.
26
==PAGE:39==
(∆M2kHZ:R−707Hz:R = −1.84, p*). Since only one pairwise interaction comparison proved
weakly signiﬁcant, and visual inspection of Figure 7 conﬁrms that this interaction appears
inappreciable. The data is hence folded across Channel. This produces Figure 8.
Figure 8 shows that across all conditions, it appears only ’Inv 40’, ’Inv 40 ISTS’,
and ’Inv 90 ISTS’ seems to produce systematically lower response NC levels than the
corresponding diotic condition.
These aﬀects are strongest in the 707 Hz band, ﬁrst
harmonic, but also appear in the 2 kHz and 4 kHz bands second harmonics, and somewhat
in the ﬁrst.
The ﬁrst harmonic response is greater across all bands than the corresponding second
harmonic response. Also, across stimulus bands, the 707 Hz response is greater in level
than the 2 kHz and 4 kHz, which are similar.
20
30
40
50
Harmonic 1
Harmonic 2
20
30
40
50
Noise Corrected Level [dB] ref. 1nV2
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
20
30
40
50
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
Figure 8: The mean noise corrected level of the ASSR plotted against condition, split across the stimulus
frequency response bands, and harmonics, folded across channel. Error bars represent the 95% conﬁdence
intervals. The red horizontal line corresponds to the mean level of the relevant reference diotic condition
for easy comparison to other conditions.
Planned comparisons of the dichotic non-ISTS conditions to the diotic reference were
performed for each band and harmonic, using the Bonferroni-Holm correction for multi-
ple comparisons to control the family wise error rate of type I errors. ISTS conditions
were excluded from this initial planned pairwise comparison, as it is already established
from phase 1 that adding ISTS modulation reduces response power, and inclusion would
therefore adversely eﬀect the detection of other eﬀects due to the applied Bonferroni-Holm
correction.
27
==PAGE:40==
Pairwise comparisons to corresponding diotic conditions revealed that the Inv.
40
condition produced a signiﬁcantly lower response power in the 707 Hz response band
ﬁrst harmonic (∆MInv.40−Diotic = −9.9, p***), the 2 kHz response band second har-
monic (∆MInv.40−Diotic = −6.8, p***), and the 4 kHz response band second harmonic
(∆MInv.40−Diotic = −5.7, p***).
Additional planned comparisons were performed comparing each ISTS condition to
the equivalent non-ISTS condition within each response band and harmonic. The follow-
ing ISTS conditions produced lower NC power levels than the corresponding non-ISTS
conditions within each response band and harmonic:
Within the 707 Hz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv. 40 ISTS (∆MInv.40ISTS−Inv.40 = −5.2,
p***), Inv. 90 ISTS (∆MInv.90ISTS−Inv.90 = −7.2, p***) and the 707 Hz band second
harmonic, only the Inv. 40 ISTS (∆MInv.40ISTS−Inv.40 = −7.5, p***).
Within the 2 kHz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv. 40 ISTS (∆MInv.40ISTS−Inv.40 = −4.6,
p***) and the 2 kHz band second harmonic: the Inv. 90 ISTS (∆MInv.90ISTS−Inv.90 =
−6.9, p***).
Within the 4 kHz band ﬁrst harmonic: the Inv. 40 ISTS (∆MInv.40ISTS−Inv.40 = −5.1,
p***) and the 4 kHz band second harmonic: Inv. 40 ISTS (∆MInv.40ISTS−Inv.40 = −4.9,
p**), Inv. 90 ISTS (∆MInv.90ISTS−Inv.90 = −5.0, p***).
Discussion
Of priority to note are the eﬀects of condition across Figure 8, particularly that of the
Inv. 40 condition. The Inv. 40 condition not only signiﬁcantly reduced the level of the
targeted 707 Hz band ﬁrst harmonic response (-9.9 dB), but also both the second harmonic
responses of the 2 kHz (-6.8 dB) and 4 kHz (-5.7 dB) responses. It is worth noting that
the second harmonic of the 707 Hz band response (≈77.1 Hz) does not coincide with the
fundamental of either the 2 kHz (≈95.2 Hz)or 4 kHz (≈96.2 Hz) responses.
As expected, the ISTS conditions did lower the response NC level compared to the
non-ISTS equivalents (-5.8 dB), somewhat similar to what was found in phase 1, but still
more than reported by Laugesen et al. (2018). The eﬀect of the ISTS was larger for the
707 Hz band than for the other two; when detected.
No eﬀects of the spatialised conditions were found, which is in opposition to Zhang
and Boettcher (2008). However it is acknowledged that the eﬀects detected by Zhang and
Boettcher (2008) were weak, and the experimental design quite diﬀerent to the present
investigation. Furthermore, since Zhang and Boettcher (2008) found that Interaural Time
Diﬀerence (ITD) and Interaural Level Diﬀerence (ILD) aﬀected the response level oppo-
sitely, it is possible the simultaneous testing of these two factors are cancelling out. Lastly,
it is not clear from the paper Zhang and Boettcher (2008) if it is raw or NC levels which
are reported, making justiﬁable comparison diﬃcult.
The lack of any signiﬁcant eﬀect of Channel in Table 3, despite the presence of known
channel dependant noise (possibly explicitly detected in the following SNR and TTD
analysis) is evidence that the Noise Corrected (NC) protocol used (described as part of
section 3.3) is successful at isolating from a signal only the power originating from the
ASSR response of interest.
Lastly, it is not known why the Inv.
40 condition is observed to successfully and
consistently reduce the 707 Hz band response, but there is a lack of any signiﬁcant eﬀect
of the Inv. 90 condition on the 2 kHz and 4 kHz band responses.
28
==PAGE:41==
4.2.2
Signal to Noise Ratio
Results
When ﬁtting a full model with all factors and interactions to the SNR data, a signiﬁcant
eﬀect of Channel was found (F(1,1665.0)=14.4540 p=0.00015). When split by Channel,
the statistical analysis of separately ﬁtted mixed linear models shows the same overall
conclusions, but with some variation in the strength of the signiﬁcance. The right channel
model was found to have a slightly greater conditional r2 (r2
conditional = 0.420) than the
left channel (r2
conditional = 0.401), and a better Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) (5232)
compared to the left channel model (5337).
It was observed during measurements that an unknown intermittent noise source would
occasionally pollute the left recording channel. The unexpected signiﬁcance of the factor
Channel in the full model combined with the observation of an unknown channel speciﬁc
noise source during recording is taken as reasonable cause to remove left channel SNR
data from analysis and plotting from this point onwards. This of course removes Channel
as a factor from Table 3 for SNR analysis, but shows the same pattern of signiﬁcance in
the remaining factors as the NC power level analysis.
Plotting the remaining right channel data SNR against condition, split across response
band and harmonic produces Figure 9.
0
10
20
30
Harmonic 1
Harmonic 2
0
10
20
30
Signal to Noise Ratio [dB]
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
0
10
20
30
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
Figure 9: The mean signal to noise ratio of the ASSR right channel, plotted against condition, split
across the stimulus frequency response bands, and harmonics. Error bars represent the 95% conﬁdence
intervals. The red horizontal line corresponds to the mean level of the relevant reference diotic condition
for easy comparison to other conditions.
29
==PAGE:42==
Similar to the NC Level results, Figure 9 shows that the 707 Hz response band gives
the greatest mean SNR, and that the ﬁrst harmonic SNRs are greater than the second
inside each band.
Planned pairwise comparisons within each frequency band and harmonic between each
non-ISTS condition and the reference diotic condition found the following conditions SNR
to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent:
Within the 707 Hz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv.
40 (∆MInv.40−Diotic = −10, p***).
Within the 2 kHz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv. 90 (∆MInv.90−Diotic = −4.9, p*). Within the
2 kHz band second harmonic: Inv. 40 (∆MInv.40−Diotic = −6.0, p**). Within the 4 kHz
band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv. 90 (∆MInv.90−Diotic = −6.2, p**). And lastly, within the 4 kHz
band second harmonic: Inv. 40 (∆MInv.90−Diotic = −5.4, p*).
Further planned pairwise comparisons between each ISTS condition and the equivalent
non-ISTS condition were performed within each response frequency band and harmonic.
Of all of these 12 comparisons, only within the 707 Hz band second harmonic: Inv. 90
ISTS (∆MInv.90ISTS−Inv.90 = −4.1, p*) was found to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to the
equivalent non-ISTS condition; Inv. 90.
Discussion
Of importance to note when reviewing SNR data in phase 2, it is possible that the SNR
measures shown in Figure 9 are not truly independent measures of ’recording quality/-
success’. Since a target SNR threshold was used to decide when to end the recording, the
recording time was always as long as it needed to be (within the 15 minute limit) for all
bands to reach signiﬁcance at at least some point. While it is possible, and it did occa-
sionally occur, that bands might achieve ’signiﬁcance’ and then the SNR reduce again,
it occurred more often that bands would stay above threshold once reached. Therefore,
by deﬁnition, testing time is biased towards being as long as required to achieve an SNR
above 7.14 dB (plus a Bonferroni correction), particularly for conditions which produce
low SNRs. This may have the secondary eﬀect of reducing the contrast between conditions,
and suppressing diﬀerences in SNR10.
Both Table 3 and Figure 9 show similar overall patterns between SNR and NC level
results. However, in comparing Figure 9 and Figure 8 by their pairwise analyses, one key
diﬀerence is the signiﬁcant eﬀect of the Inv. 90 condition in the SNR data, but not in
the NC power level data. As hypothesised at the beginning of the project, the SNR data
shows that the Inv. 40 condition reduces the response in the 707 Hz response band ﬁrst
harmonic (40 Hz repetition rate) and the Inv. 90 condition reduces the response of the
2 kHz and 4 kHz response bands ﬁrst harmonic (90 Hz repetition rate). It’s not known
why these eﬀects would be detected in the SNR analysis only, especially given the reduced
number of SNR observations from the removal of the left channel. Similarly to the NC
power level results 2 kHz and 4 kHz second harmonic responses are also reduced in the
Inv. 40 condition.
Only a single signiﬁcant eﬀect of ISTS was detected in the SNR data, the Inv. 90
condition in the 707 Hz band response, second harmonic. This comparison involves a
data point with an unusually large conﬁdence interval. However, due to a relatively low
10Such a bias in not expected for NC Level and TTD, as they are not strongly dependant on recording
length (NC Level changes slightly for very short recordings as the noise level estimate becomes more
accurate rapidly over the ﬁrst few epochs).
30
==PAGE:43==
number of observations of that condition being available, some care should be taken in
interpretation.
Lastly, it is worth noting the increasing size of the conﬁdence intervals from the 707
Hz band to the 2 kHz band, to the 4 kHz band, which seems mostly evident in the SNR
data, but perhaps also in NC level and TTD data. The smaller CI’s for the 707 Hz band
response is likely due to the greater response level and SNR at
40 Hz repetition rates
compared to 80 Hz (Rance, 2008). However, the systematic diﬀerence between the 2 kHz
and 4 kHz band responses is unexplained.
4.2.3
Time to Detect
Results
Similarly to the SNR measurements, when ﬁtting a full model with all interactions to the
Time to Detect (TTD) results, a signiﬁcant eﬀect of channel was found (F(1,1537.1)=8.9014,
p=0.002894). Splitting the analysis into the ﬁtting of two separate models to data from
each channel, overall ﬁndings were similar, with slightly varying strengths.
The right
channel data was found to have a slightly greater conditional r2 (r2
conditional = 0.419) than
the left channel (r2
conditional = 0.376). These observations combined again with the noted
presence of an intermittent electrical noise source in the left recording channel during
measurement is taken as reasonable cause to exclude the left channel from further analy-
sis or plotting. Table 3 subsequently shows factors and interaction signiﬁcances excluding
the Channel factor.
All remaining single factors are found signiﬁcant, as well as the
Stimulus-Frequency:Channel interaction and the Stimulus-Frequency:Channel:Harmonic
interaction. Subsequently this produces a similar pattern of signiﬁcance’s as SNR and NC
Power level.
Plotting the right channel TTD against condition, split by response frequency band
and harmonic produces Figure 10, which shows many of the same trends as Figure 8
and Figure 9, but ’inverted’ due to these being converse types of measures. The 707 Hz
response band produces the lowest TTDs, followed by the 2 kHz and 4 kHz bands, which
are marginally diﬀerent. The second harmonic produces a higher TTD than the ﬁrst for
the 707 Hz response band, but the harmonics seem very similar for the other two.
Planned pairwise comparisons between each non-ISTS condition and the reference
diotic condition within each response band and harmonic were performed and found the
following conditions signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. Within the 707 Hz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv.
40 (∆MInv.40−Diotic = 0.71, p***).
Within the 2 kHz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv.
90
(∆MInv.90−Diotic = 0.52, p*), and 2 kHz second harmonic: Inv. 40 (∆MInv.40−Diotic =
0.65, p**).
Additional pairwise comparisons within each response band and harmonic between
ISTS and the equivalent non-ISTS condition found only three diﬀerences. Within the 707
Hz band ﬁrst harmonic: Inv. 40 ISTS (∆MInv.40ISTS−Inv.40 = 0.53, p*). Within the
2 kHz band second harmonic: Inv. 90 ISTS (∆MInv.90ISTS−Inv.90 = 0.66, p***). And
within the 4 kHz band second harmonic: Inv. 90 ISTS (∆MInv.90ISTS−Inv.90 = 0.48, p**).
Discussion
When discussing Time to Detect (TTD) results, it is ﬁrstly useful to acknowledge the
diﬀerent nature of the TTD measure compared to NC power level and SNR. While NC
power level and SNR are both computed from relative energies of signal and noise averaged
31
==PAGE:44==
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Harmonic 1
Harmonic 2
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time To Detect [log10(Seconds)]
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Diotic
Inv 40
Inv 40 ISTS
Inv 90
Inv 90 ISTS
Inv Pol
+45°
+90°
-45°
-90°
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
707Hz
2kHz
4kHz
Figure 10: The log transformed mean time-to-detect of the ASSR right channel, plotted against condition,
split across the stimulus frequency response bands, and harmonics. Error bars represent the 95% conﬁdence
intervals. The red horizontal line corresponds to the mean level of the relevant reference diotic condition
for easy comparison to other conditions.
from the complete length of the recording, TTD is computed ’epoch-by-epoch’ and only
includes the number epochs from a trial, in time order, for the target response to reach
the F-test signiﬁcance threshold (α = 0.05, with no repeated comparisons correction).
As such, it is certainly possible that a response could have a low TTD (indicating a
strong response SNR, as it quickly became detected), but a low ’SNR’ measure in the
previous section since the entire recording is considered. The possible consequences of
the interaction of SNR as a metric for determining recording length and as a measurable
dependant variable are addressed in chapter 5.
Since the TTD results show the same signiﬁcance patterns as NC power level and SNR,
predictably Figure 10 shows the same trends across condition, harmonic and stimulus band
response, but inverted as a consequence of the inverse nature of the TTD measure to NC
level and SNR. To provide a sense of ’real world scale’ to Figure 10, the diotic, Inv. 40,
and Inv. 40 ISTS data points of the 707 Hz band, harmonic 1 subplot represent times
of 4.7 seconds, 24 seconds, and 71 seconds respectively. While 71 seconds does not seem
excessively long to achieve a measurement in the worst condition, it must be remembered
that these recordings were made under controlled lab conditions, with resting, cooperative,
adult subjects, and that additional epochs are already rejected from the 71 second mean
by the artefact rejection done at the point of recording. As such, if ASSR recordings were
done under less ideal conditions, and nominally took 1 minute to achieve a signiﬁcant
32
==PAGE:45==
response to the diotic stimulus, switching to the Inv. 40 ISTS stimulus would increase
testing time to a conservative estimate of ≈15 minutes. Such an increase would be harmful
to the practicality of the test, clinical viability, and subject discomfort, when using this
test and detection paradigm.
The pairwise comparisons again highlights the clear strongly negative eﬀect of the
Inv. 40 condition on the 707 Hz stimulus response ﬁrst harmonic. This condition also
signiﬁcantly reduces the second harmonic of the 2 kHz stimulus response. The pattern
looks similar in the 4 kHz second harmonic response, which would match the ﬁndings
in the NC level and SNR measures, but is not found signiﬁcantly diﬀerent to the diotic
condition. The eﬀect of the ISTS stimuli compared to the non-ISTS equivalents is more
visible in Figure 10 and in the pairwise comparisons than in the analysis of SNR, but
not particularly consistent, being detected only three times out of a possible 12 expected
occurrences.
The mean ratio increase in TTD from non-ISTS to ISTS stimulus when
found signiﬁcant is 3.6, much larger than the 1.5 reported by Laugesen et al. (2018) for
the ﬁrst harmonic. Again this diﬀerence is addressed in chapter 5.
4.3
Follow Up Study: ASSR Topography
The key results of the follow up study topography are three plots, Figure 12, 13a, and
13b which show the topographic SNR11 of the ASSR response to the 707 Hz stimulus
band, 2 kHz stimulus band, and 4 kHz stimulus band respectively. The left column of
these ﬁgures displays the diotic reference condition and the right the Inv. 40 condition.
While not shown, the two repeat measures for all plots were compared and were deemed
very similar and as such were combined into single plots for each subject per condition.
Fp1
AF7 AF3
F1
F3
F5
F7
FT7 FC5 FC3 FC1
C1
C3
C5
T7
TP7 CP5 CP3 CP1
P1
P3
P5
P7
P9
PO7 PO3
O1
Iz
Oz
POz
Pz
CPz
Fpz
Fp2
AF8
AF4
AFz
Fz F2
F4 F6 F8
FT8
FC6
FC4
FC2
FCz
Cz
C2
C4
C6
T8
TP8
CP6
CP4
CP2
P2 P4 P6 P8
P10
PO8
PO4
O2
Figure 11: 64 channel Biosemi EEG montage pro-
jection with channel names.
Subjects 2 and 8, grouped by the red box,
were were re-recruited as they showed some
of the largest NC power reductions in re-
sponse to the Inv. 40 condition during the
main experiment. In contrast, subjects 13
and 17, grouped by the blue box, were were
re-recruited from the main study to take
part in the follow up study as they showed
some of the smallest NC power reductions
in response to the Inv. 40 condition during
the main experiment. There appeared to
be no systematic similarities (eg. age, gen-
der...) between subjects considered for the
two groups.
Due to movement, noise, or coupling is-
sues with some of the electrodes, some elec-
trode data was entirely removed from these
plots and replaced with interpolated data
from the electrode neighbours. The exact channels removed varied between subjects, but
was then kept as consistent as possible for all measurements from each individual subject.
For subject 2, channel P2 was removed. For subject 13, channels C2, FCz, FC4, and
11As mentioned in section 3.6, a ﬁxed recording time was used for phase 3 data collection, so no bias
in the SNR data is expected from variable recording length.
33
==PAGE:46==
AF3 were removed. For subject 17, channels CP3, CP1, CP5, and P9 were removed. No
channels were removed for subject 8.
The reader should be aware of the slightly diﬀerent z-axis colour scales between Fig-
ure 12 and Figure 13, which was necessary to accommodate the generally higher response
SNR’s produced by the 707 Hz response band and accurately display the topology.
Results
Figure 12 shows the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) topology of the 707 Hz band (40 Hz
repetition rate) ASSR response for the four returning subjects in both the diotic and Inv.
40 condition.
Figures 13a and 13b show the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) topology of the 2 kHz band
and 4 kHz band (90 Hz repetition rate) ASSR response for the four returning subjects in
both the diotic and Inv. 40 condition.
34
==PAGE:47==
Figure 12: Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) topology of the 707 Hz band response (40 Hz repetition rate),
for the diotic and Inv.
40 conditions, interpolated and plotted over a ﬂattened representation of the
64 channel EEG montage. Each topology colour map represents the mean of two 10 minute recording
segments performed 10 minutes apart. EEG channels are referenced to the grand mean of all channels.
35
==PAGE:48==
(a) 2 kHz band response
(b) 4 kHz band response
Figure 13: Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) topology of the two 90 Hz repetition rate band responses, for the diotic and Inv. 40 conditions, interpolated and plotted
over a ﬂattened representation of the 64 channel EEG montage. Each topology colour map represents the mean of two 10 minute recording segments performed
10 minutes apart. EEG channels are referenced to the grand mean of all channels.
36
==PAGE:49==
Discussion
What stands out the most and demands discussion is the clear and substantial diﬀerence
between the diotic and Inv. 40 condition shown in Figure 12. The Inv. 40 condition
not only elicits a much lower overall SNR response, but the topology and distribution of
the SNR is also radically altered. This eﬀect is clearly band speciﬁc, as this does not
appear in Figure 13, as predicted by the phase 2 results. In the diotic case, a typical
pattern appears with the greatest SNRs appearing at the top (vertex) and back (occipital
lobe) of the head, extending round to the mastoids (temporal lobe). This matches typical
mastoid-vertex and nape-vertex EEG recording montages commonly used for ASSR and
ASSR topology shown in Picton (2011). This ’typical’ topology appears again in both
plots of Figure 13, but with an even sharper distribution across the anticipated zones. It
also conﬁrms that the electrode montage used with the Eclipse in the main experiment is
suitable when using a diotic stimulus, but could be much improved if the vertex electrode
could be moved to the true vertex at the top of the head.
The Inv.
40 condition across all subjects in Figure 12 shows a smaller and more
disparate overall area emitting the maximum SNR, which is reduced down by ≈10 dB
from the diotic condition. As opposed to the diotic condition topology, the Inv. 40 is more
lateral, with the highest SNRs appearing to be split more left-right, rather than front-
back. This is perhaps evidence of destructive interference of two anti-phase ASSR signals
originating from possibly diﬀerent generation zones, causing a topographical interference
pattern.
It is worth noting that anything below
7 dB SNR on the topography plots would
be considered a non-detection, as it would not meet the SNR detection threshold even
without any multi-comparison correction. This would present a much bigger issue were
the recordings were of a more ’normal’ shorter length than the shown combined 20 minute
recording data, as the reduced noise suppression would reduce the SNR globally across
the topography. It is of particular concern, as shown in Figure 12, that standard electrode
montage areas which show strong SNR’s in the diotic condition can become low SNR
areas in the Inv. 40 condition. In these cases, if using a standard montage, it would not
be possible to distinguish between 1) an ASSR not being present, and 2) the topographic
pattern moving to a less favourable conﬁguration.
4.4
Additional Observations
This section includes comments on other valuable observations that are beyond the scope
of the main analyses discussed previously.
Firstly, it is useful to note the frequency and distribution of failed measurements,
as this is a source of information which by its own nature does not survive into the
recorded data sets.
For the reference phase one study, there were no outright failed
measurements. However, one band within one measurement did fail to reach the on-line
statistical threshold. Nevertheless, this is considered a very high success rate. For the
main study, 19 subjects were originally recruited, but 4 were rejected; two for having
too high cerumen buildup to safely use the insert headphones, and one other for having
hearing thresholds above 20 dB HL. The fourth rejected subject’s data were discarded
after having an adverse reaction to the experiment and becoming very uncomfortable; as
such the experiment was stopped early.
37
==PAGE:50==
Of the data that was admitted, NC level data was discarded if the SNR did not reach
a set threshold (see section 3.3 for details). Of a possible 1800 observations (15 subjects, 3
response bands, 2 harmonics, 2 channels, 10 conditions), 1680 were recorded. The missing
120 observations are due to 5 subjects not having measurements for both spatial stimuli
’directions (+ and -)’ (5 subjects, 3 response bands, 2 harmonics, 2 channels, 2 conditions).
Of the observations made, 197 did not meet the SNR detection threshold when the whole
recording was considered.
137 of the rejected observations (70.3%) were from second
harmonic responses. 110 of the rejected observations (55.8%) were from the left channel.
34 and 43 of the rejected observations occurred during exposure to the Inv. 40 condition
and Inv. 40 ISTS condition stimulus respectively. 29 and 40 of the rejected observations
occurred during exposure to the Inv. 90 condition and Inv. 90 ISTS condition stimulus
respectively. As such, the remaining diotic, Inv. Pol., and four spatialised conditions
combined accounted for only 51 (25.9%) of the rejected observations.
In terms of clinical performance, out of the 140 measurements attempted, in 100%
of them a response was detected, for all three stimulus band responses, in at least one
channel or harmonic.
Three subjects of all those tested claimed to have found the experiment unpleasant,
all quoting some complaint about the repetitive and ’irritating’ nature of the stimulus12.
This is in contrast to the other 12 subjects whom had no complaints beyond being unable
to sleep or fully relax while exposed to the stimulus.
No recordings were discarded during the phase 3 topology segment of the investiga-
tion, but as detailed in section 3.3 and section 4.3, some channels were removed due to
containing too much noise from poor electrode contact or movement. It is the author’s
observation that these poor electrode contacts commonly occurred in small groups at the
’top’ or vertex of the head, and that this is caused by insuﬃcient tension in the cap pulling
the electrodes into contact with the scalp. While an adjustable chin strap is provided on
the caps to provide such tension, the position of the strap against the chin and throat
when the cap is properly worn makes suﬃciently tightening the strap too uncomfortable
to be endured for long periods. Researchers planning to use the Biosemi caps in the future
should carefully consider this issue, as a solution would signiﬁcantly reduce the number
of failed channels.
A retrospective power analysis based on the unexplained variance in the actual data
gathered shows that the main phase 2 investigation is under powered compared to the
desired target calculated in section 3.7. Since the unexplained variance in the data after
modelling is greater than that of Laugesen et al. (2018), the actual detectable eﬀect size
is 0.901 at a power of 0.90, translating to a required diﬀerence of means of ∆µ = 4.45
dB in the NC power level. To achieve the target ∆µ = 3 dB with the actual amount of
unexplained variance in the data would require 31 subjects.
12All subjects were aware that they may and had the means to stop the experiment at any time, with
or without cause. However, in these three cases, the subjects chose not to, despite their discomfort.
38
==PAGE:51==
5
Synthesis
Of perhaps the most importance to discuss, is the lack of signiﬁcance in any measurement
of the spatial ±45◦or ±90◦or Inv. Pol conditions. The lack of any signiﬁcance to the Inv.
Pol condition makes it clear that the interference eﬀects seen in the Inv. Mod. conditions
are caused by interaural phase diﬀerences of the envelope, not the carrier.
Regarding the spatial conditions, it is clear from Figures 8, 9, and 10 that the spa-
tialised stimuli have no eﬀect on the detectability of any of the stimulus band responses.
This is a useful and convenient ﬁnding, since sound ﬁeld Auditory Steady-State Re-
sponse (ASSR) recordings are a much needed clinical technology (Laugesen et al., 2018),
and especially when dealing with young children one can assume they will rarely face the
presenting loudspeaker directly.
This ﬁnding contrasts with the conclusions of Zhang and Boettcher (2008) and Narayanan
(2018), but are not incompatible.
In the case of comparison to Zhang and Boettcher
(2008), ﬁrstly the reader is reminded that some concerns regarding the data handling that
were raised when this paper was introduced in chapter 2. However, direct comparison is
still diﬃcult since Zhang and Boettcher (2008) base their investigation on calculation and
comparison of the Binaural Interaction Component (BIC) in response to separate trials
with imposed ILD’s and ITD’s. This investigation’s spatialised ±90◦condition had a mean
ILD of 7.7 dB and an 688 µS ITD is within the experimental range included by Zhang
and Boettcher (2008)’s use of 80 Hz click stimuli. According to this study by Zhang and
Boettcher (2008), however, the combined BIC eﬀect of the ILD and ITD would be close
to zero, as the ILD would reduce the BIC amplitude by ≈10 nV and the ITD increase
the BIC amplitude by ≈10 nV. While this would explain the lack of any eﬀect of the re-
sponse in this study, a linear change of even 20 nV is only around a 1 dB change in power
level, too small to be detected with this investigation’s power. Regarding comparison to
Narayanan (2018), the reason there is no eﬀect of head shadow on the 4 kHz stimulus
band response in this study is simply that this study is binaural. While it is true that the
side of the head simulated to be turned away from the stimulus source receives a lower
SPL, particularly of the 4 kHz stimulus band, the other ear receives a marginal boost in
SPL. Subsequently, the total ASSR response to the dichotic is not signiﬁcantly perturbed
from the diotic stimulation.
Secondly, we address the eﬀect of the International Speech Test Signal (ISTS) stimuli.
The larger diﬀerence between the equivalent ISTS and non-ISTS stimuli was seen in this
study’s main phases 1 and 2 NC level and TTD compared to Laugesen et al. (2018), is
likely explained by the diﬀerence in stimuli repetition rates. As discussed in section 4.1
and section 4.2.1, the 707 Hz (40 Hz repetition rate) band response showed a larger reduc-
tion in response to the ISTS stimulus than the two other band responses (90 Hz repetition
rates). As such the replacement of the two 90 Hz repetition rate stimulus bands used
by Laugesen et al. with a single 40 Hz wider band increases the overall mean response
reduction eﬀect of the ISTS envelope modulations. The larger reduction in the 707 Hz
band is compensated by its overall higher level. In parallel, the eﬀect of ISTS was more
consistently signiﬁcant in the NC level data than, SNR, and TTD. This could perhaps be
explained by the exclusion of the left channel data reducing the power of the SNR and
TTD analysis enough to make the ISTS eﬀect unlikely to be detected.
39
==PAGE:52==
Thirdly, we consider the Inverse Modulation conditions, which had a consistent im-
pact on reducing the detectability of the ASSR. The eﬀect of the Inv. 40 condition on
the 707Hz band ﬁrst harmonic is strong and compelling evidence that stimulus envelope
Interaural Phase Diﬀerences (IPDs) induce destructive interference in the ASSR. The
harmonic dependency of this destructive interference (as it does not occur in the 707 Hz
band second harmonic) supports a model where harmonics are processed independently.
Harmonics present in the stimulus, or created by non-linear processing of the auditory
system, are assumably processed as separate stimulus bands, like the original three stim-
ulus bands. Their presence does likely have an impact on other responses, however, as
multi-stimulus band interaction has repeatedly been shown (two examples of this being
Hatton and Stapells (2013) and Mühler et al. (2018). Please refer to chapter 2). It was not
expected that the Inv. 40 condition would reduce the 2 kHz and 4 kHz band responses
in the second harmonic. However, in retrospect, it was found that the near
1
80 second
delay applied to the right channel to create the Inv. 40 stimuli is very close to ﬁve times
larger than the delay that would be required to set the second harmonic of the 2 kHz
and 4 kHz also into anti-phase. Since phase is cyclic, this is equivalent to setting these
bands into anti-phase, hence the destructive interference and reduction in NC power level
during this condition. It is not currently understood why the second harmonics of the 2
kHz and 4 kHz bands are capable of being eﬀected by the Inv. 40 condition, but the Inv.
90 condition showed no reliable eﬀect on the ﬁrst harmonic.
And lastly, the ﬁnding with the greatest implications for the practice and development
of ASSR in a clinical setting is the large increase in TTD caused by the Inv. 40 condition,
both with and without ISTS modulations. A base increase of ﬁve times the diotic case
would likely result in false test referrals in a clinical test due to the test ’timing out’
before a response was detected. An increase of 15 times the diotic case, as seen caused
by the Inv.
40 ISTS condition would make testing near practically impossible.
One
possible solution would be to either predict or detect the artiﬁcial suppression of response
harmonics in a geometric pattern, and then under these circumstances base detection
only on the unaﬀected response harmonics. For example, the current ’q-sample’ detector
(Stürzebecher et al., 1999) used in the Interacoutics Eclipse system for performing ASSR
bases detection on multiple harmonics, and as such may still perform response detection
even in the case that some harmonics are suppressed.
A repeat study of the work of
Laugesen et al. (2018) should be performed with the newer 3-band CE-Chirp stimulus
if it is planned to be used for clinical ASSR. The inclusion of the 40 Hz repetition rate
band may exacerbate the eﬀects of the ISTS modulation and this possible decrease in
performance should be assessed for cost-beneﬁt.
In an eﬀort to gain further understanding into the cause of this inverse modulation
interference we review ﬁgures 12 and 13. It is proposed that they support a multi-source
model, since distinct topography changes are seen, rather than a spatially independent
SNR reduction. The reduction in the maximum SNR between the diotic and Inv. 40
conditions also evidences a likely complex lateralised arrangement of sources, with their
conﬂicting emission phases and amplitudes creating a compound 3D interference pattern
where at least some destructive interference is present at all points. Alternative electrode
montages, or additional electrodes placed at the temporal and frontal scalp areas during
clinical ASSR may help prevent false negatives when these interference eﬀects occur, but
large inter-subject variability from this small sample size makes prediction of the best
40
==PAGE:53==
back-up electrode locations diﬃcult. These interference pattern may, however, present
possibilities for more fundamental research in auditory processing, since interference pat-
terns can reveal information about the spacing and distribution of source locations. An-
other interesting progression would be the visualisation of topographical BICs to perhaps
gain insight into whether diotic and dichotic stimulation activate similar neural generators,
or just in diﬀerent ways and synchronisations.
41
==PAGE:54==
6
Conclusions
The aim of this study was to attempt to discover whether there are clinically conceivable
conditions that may cause a binaural Auditory Steady-State Response (ASSR) measure-
ment to produce a poorer test result than the best of the two monaural measurements,
with respect to detection rate, magnitude, and time.
The baseline relationship between monotic and diotic stimulation was found, and sev-
eral plausible, suspected problematic, conditions were tested. Furthermore, the origins
of detected interference eﬀects were investigated using full-scalp Electroencephalogram
(EEG).
Phase 1 of the investigation found that there was no discernible diﬀerence between left
and right mastoid referenced ASSR during monotic stimulation. Compared to monotic
stimulation, diotic stimulation increased the response NC power by 4.3 dB. Despite this,
diotic stimulation did not eﬀect the Time to Detect (TTD) compared to monotic stimu-
lation.
Phase 2 found that the overall response rate was 100%, and was not aﬀected by any
condition, as long as a response from either harmonic 1 or 2, in either channel was accepted
as a valid response. This was due to the fact that any condition which did reduce the
response was found to do so in only one of the two measured harmonics.
Simulated lateralised (spatialised) stimuli had no eﬀect on the response power or or
detection time compared to diotic stimulation. Head shadow and baﬄe Interaural Level
Diﬀerence (ILD) eﬀects across the two ears are thought to have largely cancelled out in
the summed response. It is also possible that and the eﬀects of the imposed ILDs and
Interaural Time Diﬀerences (ITDs) are opposed and negate each other.
The Inv. 40 condition was found to have a harmonic speciﬁc interference eﬀect com-
pared to the diotic case, reducing the 707 Hz response ﬁrst harmonic by 9.9 dB, and the
second harmonics of the 2 kHz and 4 kHz response by 6.8 dB and 5.7 dB. This reduces
the responses NC power levels to -5.6 dB, -2.5 dB, and -1.4 dB respectively, lower than
the predicted monotic responses. Considering the TTD, the Inv. 40 condition was found
to increase the detection time of the ﬁrst harmonic 707 Hz band response by a factor of
ﬁve, which increased to a factor of 15 when using the Inv. 40 ISTS condition, compared
to diotic stimulation (which was found equivalent to monotic stimulation). However, it is
not currently clear why the Inv. 90 condition had a less consistent eﬀect, despite being of
a similar design.
In phase 3, building on the above ﬁnding that a binaural inverse modulation condi-
tion could produce worse results than a monotic test, it was found that reductions in
detectability are thought to be caused by wave interference eﬀects. Destructive wave in-
terference from multiple contributing generation zones seems evident from the changing
topographic EEG patterns.
In summary, speciﬁc and niche conditions, involving large ITDs, do exist where a
nominally diotic ASSR measurement can give a worse test result than a monaural mea-
surement, when assessed using NC power level and TTD. However, detectors based on
42
==PAGE:55==
using multiple response harmonics, and simple awareness of the conditions which precip-
itate such interference, can prevent these conditions from causing spurious results and
false clinical referrals. Results from the simulated spatialised conditions imply that there
should be no adverse consequences where subjects do not directly face the stimulus source
during a binaural sound-ﬁeld ASSR measurement.
Further research could address whether diotic or the signiﬁcant dichotic conditions
elicit a Binaural Interaction Component (BIC) compared to monotic stimulation. Such
research could provide a fundamental insight into the binaural processing along the au-
ditory pathway. Furthermore, it could be beneﬁcial to investigate the eﬀect of a wide
range of inverse modulation conditions, ranging from small to large ITDs, as it may reveal
more information on the exact nature of the binaural interaction based on the interference
patterns.
43
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
P. Ainslie and J. Boston.
Comparison of brain stem auditory evoked potentials
for monaural and binaural stimuli.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neuro-
physiology, 49(3):291 – 302, 1980.
ISSN 0013-4694.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.
1016/0013-4694(80)90223-0.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/0013469480902230.
M. Armstrong and D. R. Stapells. Multiple-stimulus interactions in the brainstem (80
hz) and cortical (14 & 40 hz) auditory steady-state responses, 07 2007. URL http:
//www.ierasg.ifps.org.pl/files/book_of_abstracts_2007.pdf.
R. Arnoult and S. Bilert. A comparison of assr level patterns yielded by speech-like stimuli,
2018. A project undertaken at the Technical University of Denmark(DTU) as partial
fulﬁlment of the course 31232 ’Technical Audiology and Experimental Hearing Science’.
D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, and S. Walker. Fitting linear mixed-eﬀects models using
lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1):1–48, 2015. doi: 10.18637/jss.v067.i01.
P. A. Davis.
Eﬀects of acoustic stimuli on the waking human brain.
Journal of
Neurophysiology, 2(6):494–499, 1939.
doi:
10.1152/jn.1939.2.6.494.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1152/jn.1939.2.6.494.
F. Denk, S. M. A. Ernst, S. D. Ewert, and B. Kollmeier. Adapting hearing devices to the
individual ear acoustics: Database and target response correction functions for various
device styles. Trends in Hearing, 22:1–19, 2018. doi: 10.1177/2331216518779313. URL
https://doi.org/10.1177/2331216518779313.
C. Elberling and M. Don. A direct approach for the design of chirp stimuli used for the
recording of auditory brainstem responses. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 128(5):2955–2964, 2010. doi: 10.1121/1.3489111. URL https://doi.org/
10.1121/1.3489111.
C. Elberling, M. Cebulla, and E. Stürzebecher.
Simultaneous multiple stimulation of
the auditory steady-state response (assr).
Proceedings of the International Sympo-
sium on Auditory and Audiological Research, 1:201–210, Dec. 2007. URL https://
proceedings.isaar.eu/index.php/isaarproc/article/view/2007-19.
R. Galambos and S. Makeig. Physiological studies of central masking in man. i: The eﬀects
of noise on the 40-hz steady-state response. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 92:2683–90, 12 1992a. doi: 10.1121/1.404383.
R. Galambos and S. Makeig. Physiological studies of central masking in man. ii: Tonepip
ssrs and the masking level diﬀerence. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
92:2691–7, 12 1992b. doi: 10.1121/1.404384.
A.-L.
Giraud,
C.
Lorenzi,
J.
Ashburner,
J.
Wable,
I.
Johnsrude,
R.
Frack-
owiak,
and
A.
Kleinschmidt.
Representation
of
the
temporal
envelope
of
sounds
in
the
human
brain.
Journal
of
Neurophysiology,
84(3):1588–1598,
2000.
URL
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.
0-0033812385&partnerID=40&md5=02f48dad34a37222e8ad22968b1fc65c.
44
==PAGE:57==
R. Gransier, A. van Wieringen, and J. Wouters. Binaural interaction eﬀects of 30-50 hz
auditory steady state responses. Ear and hearing, 38, 03 2017. doi: 10.1097/AUD.
0000000000000429.
F. Guerit, J. Marozeau, and B. Epp. Linear combination of auditory steady-state re-
sponses evoked by co-modulated tones.
JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SO-
CIETY OF AMERICA, 142(4):EL395–EL400, OCT 2017.
ISSN 0001-4966.
doi:
{10.1121/1.5007757}.
J. Hatton and D. Stapells. The eﬃciency of the single- versus multiple-stimulus auditory
steady state responses in infants. Ear and hearing, 32:349–57, 12 2010. doi: 10.1097/
AUD.0b013e3181ﬀ352c.
J. Hatton and D. Stapells.
Monotic versus dichotic multiple-stimulus auditory steady
state responses in young children. Ear and hearing, 34:680–2, 09 2013. doi: 10.1097/
AUD.0b013e31828d2c1d.
A. Herdman, O. Lins, P. Van Roon, D. Stapells, M. Scherg, and T. Picton. Intracerebral
sources of human auditory steady-state responses.
BRAIN TOPOGRAPHY, 15(2):
69–86, WIN 2002a. doi: {10.1023/A:1021470822922}. International Evoked Response
Audiometry Study Group Meeting, VANCOUVER, CANADA, JUL, 2001.
A. Herdman, T. Picton, and D. Stapells. Place speciﬁcity of multiple auditory steady-
state responses. JOURNAL OF THE ACOUSTICAL SOCIETY OF AMERICA, 112
(4):1569–1582, OCT 2002b. ISSN 0001-4966. doi: {10.1121/1.1506367}.
I. Holube, S. Fredelake, M. Vlaming, and B. Kollmeier. Development and analysis of an
international speech test signal (ists). International Journal of Audiology, 49(12):891–
903, 2010. doi: 10.3109/14992027.2010.506889. URL https://doi.org/10.3109/
14992027.2010.506889. PMID: 21070124.
T. Hothorn, F. Bretz, and P. Westfall.
Simultaneous inference in general parametric
models. Biometrical Journal, 50(3):346–363, 2008.
ISO389-9. Acoustics - reference zero for the calibration of audiometric equipment - part
9: Preferred test conditions for the determination of reference hearing threshold levels.
page 7, 2009. URL https://www.iso.org/standard/35251.html.
M. John, O. Lins, B. L. Boucher, and T. Picton. Multiple auditory steady-state responses
(master): Stimulus and recording parameters. Audiology : oﬃcial organ of the Inter-
national Society of Audiology, 37:59–82, 03 1998. doi: 10.3109/00206099809072962.
M. John, A. Dimitrijevic, and T. Picton. Weighted averaging of steady-state responses.
Clinical neurophysiology : oﬃcial journal of the International Federation of Clinical
Neurophysiology, 112:555–62, 04 2001. doi: 10.1016/S1388-2457(01)00456-4.
M. John, D. W Purcell, A. Dimitrijevic, and T. Picton. Advantages and caveats when
recording steady-state responses to multiple simultaneous stimuli. Journal of the Amer-
ican Academy of Audiology, 13:246–59, 06 2002.
A. Kuznetsova, P. B. Brockhoﬀ, and R. H. B. Christensen. lmerTest package: Tests in
linear mixed eﬀects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82(13):1–26, 2017. doi:
10.18637/jss.v082.i13.
45
==PAGE:58==
S. Laugesen, J. E. Rieck, C. Elberling, T. Dau, and J. M. Harte. On the cost of introducing
speech-like properties to a stimulus for auditory steady-state response measurements.
Trends in Hearing, 22:2331216518789302, 2018. doi: 10.1177/2331216518789302. URL
https://doi.org/10.1177/2331216518789302.
O. G. Lins, P. E. Picton, T. W. Picton, S. C. Champagne, and A. Durieux-Smith. Auditory
steady-state responses to tones amplitude-modulated at 80–110 hz. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 97(5):3051–3063, 1995. doi: 10.1121/1.411869. URL
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.411869.
A. Maki, T. Kawase, and T. Kobayashi. Eﬀects of contralateral noise on 40-hz and 80-hz
auditory steady-state responses. Ear and hearing, 30:584–9, 07 2009. doi: 10.1097/
AUD.0b013e3181acfb57.
K. Mehta, M. Mahon, P. Watkin, J. Marriage, and D. Vickers. A qualitative review of
parents’ perspectives on the value of CAEP recording in inﬂuencing their acceptance
of hearing devices for their child. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF AUDIOLOGY,
2019. doi: {10.1080/14992027.2019.1592250}.
R. Mühler, A. Petzke, and J. Verhey. Simultaneous acquisition of 40- and 80-hz auditory
steady-state responses for a direct comparison of response amplitude, residual noise and
signal-to-noise ratio. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, 275, 08 2018. doi:
10.1007/s00405-018-5097-y.
S. K. Narayanan. Eﬀect of head movement on sound-ﬁeld assr measurements, 2018. [MSc
Thesis], Technical University of Denmark: Department of Electrical Engineering.
R. Oostenveld, P. Fries, E. Maris, and J.-M. Schoﬀelen. Fieldtrip: Open source software
for advanced analysis of meg, eeg, and invasive electrophysiological data. Computational
intelligence and neuroscience, 2011:156869, 01 2011. doi: 10.1155/2011/156869.
T. Picton. Human Auditory Evoked Potentials. Plural Pub., 2011. ISBN 9781597563628.
URL https://books.google.dk/books?id=z05QAQAAIAAJ.
T. Picton, P. Van Roon, and M. John. Multiple auditory steady state responses (80-101
hz): Eﬀects of ear, gender, handedness, intensity and modulation rate. Ear and hearing,
30:100–9, 02 2009. doi: 10.1097/AUD.0b013e31819003ef.
H. Poelmans, H. Luts, M. Vandermosten, P. Ghesquière, and J. Wouters. Hemispheric
asymmetry of auditory steady-state responses to monaural and diotic stimulation. Jour-
nal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology, 13(6):867–876, Dec 2012.
G. Rance. The auditory steady-state response : generation, recording, and clinical appli-
cation. San Diego : Plural Pub, 2008. ISBN 9781597561617 (hbk. : alk. paper).
B. Ross. A novel type of auditory responses: Temporal dynamics of 40-hz steady-state
responses induced by changes in sound localization. Journal of neurophysiology, 100:
1265–77, 09 2008. doi: 10.1152/jn.00048.2008.
B. Ross and C. Pantev. Auditory steady-state responses reveal amplitude modulation
gap detection thresholds. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 115(5):
2193–2206, 2004. doi: 10.1121/1.1694996. URL https://doi.org/10.1121/1.
1694996.
46
==PAGE:59==
B. Ross, R. Draganova, T. W. Picton, and C. Pantev.
Frequency speciﬁcity of 40-
hz auditory steady-state responses.
Hearing Research, 186(1):57 – 68, 2003.
ISSN
0378-5955. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-5955(03)00299-5. URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378595503002995.
B. Ross, A. Herdman, and C. Pantev.
Stimulus induced desynchronization of human
auditory 40-hz steady-state responses. Journal of neurophysiology, 94:4082–93, 01 2006.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00469.2005.
E. Stürzebecher, M. Cebulla, and K.-D. Wernecke. Objective response detection in the
frequency domain: Comparison of several q-sample tests. Audiology & neuro-otology, 4:
2–11, 01 1999. doi: 10.1159/000013815.
S. Sutton, M. Braren, J. Zubin, and E. John. Evoked-potential correlates of stimulus
uncertainty. Science (New York, N.Y.), 150:1187–8, 12 1965. doi: 10.1126/science.150.
3700.1187.
C. Vercammen, A. van Wieringen, J. Wouters, and T. Francart. Desynchronisation of
auditory steady-state responses related to changes in interaural phase diﬀerences: an
objective measure of binaural hearing. International Journal of Audiology, 56:464–471,
02 2017. doi: 10.1080/14992027.2017.1288304.
W. Wong and D. Stapells. Brain stem and cortical mechanisms underlying the binaural
masking level diﬀerence in humans: An auditory steady-state response study. Ear and
hearing, 25:57–67, 03 2004. doi: 10.1097/01.AUD.0000111257.11898.64.
F. Zhang and F. Boettcher. Eﬀects of interaural time and level diﬀerences on the binaural
interaction component of the 80 hz auditory steady-state response.
Journal of the
American Academy of Audiology, 19:82–94, 01 2008. doi: 10.3766/jaaa.19.1.7.
47
==PAGE:60==
www.hea.elektro.dtu.dk
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Hearing Systems (HEA)
Ørsteds Plads
Building 354
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 39 50
Email: elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
