==PAGE:1==
Sustainable waste management 
through holistic and behavioural design
Suggestions for a homogeneous household 
waste management system in Denmark
Design & Innovation 
The Technical University of Denmark
Supervisors: Tim C. McAloone & Philip Cash
Master’s thesis by 
Emma Stenholt Østergaard & Rasmus Lundgård
spring 2019
==PAGE:2==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
I 
Title page 
 
Master’s Thesis 
The Technical University of Denmark, Institute for Mechanical Technology 
 
Design & Innovation 
Spring 2019 
 
English title: Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design 
 
Danish title: Helhedsdesign af cirkulært affaldshåndteringssystem med fokus på 
brugeradfærd 
 
Submission date: July 3rd 2019 
 
Supervisors: Tim C. McAloone & Philip Cash 
 
Number of pages (report): 100 
Number of pages (appendix): 62 
Number of pages (total): 162 
 
Submitted by: 
Rasmus Lundgaard Christensen (S133674) 
Emma Katrine Stenholt Østergaard (S112909) 
 
 
 
 
 
Division of labour 
The workload for this project has been equally distributed so that both students have 
written and participated an equal amount: 
 
 
_____________________________                   _____________________________             
   Rasmus Lundgaard Christensen                        Emma Katrine Stenholt Østergaard  
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 II
Abstract  
 
To support the transition towards a circular economy in Denmark, it has 
been argued that a homogeneous waste management system is needed. 
This project is a contribution to the debate of an alignment of the Danish 
waste management system. It studied the waste management sector with a 
focus on circular economy and human behaviour. Based on the findings, 
the report establishes suggested requirements for a homogeneous 
household waste management system. 
 
The report investigates different indicators from literature that has been 
found to correlate with waste behaviour. These was however determine 
irrelevant for the purpose of planning a homogeneous waste management 
system. The analysis points towards a system that establishes requirements 
for what fractions to collect, and how they can be mixed. Here two overall 
systems are suggested. (1) A system that only allows separation at the 
source and collects organic waste, paper, cardboard, glass, metal and 
plastic. (2) A system that collects the same fractions, but allows a) paper 
and cardboard, and b) glass and metal to be mixed during collection. Soft 
plastic is suggested to be collected with rigid plastic, as indications points 
towards an increase in the collection rates of rigid plastic when both 
fractions are collected together. The report suggests five behavioural 
design principles to support the new homogeneous waste management 
system. These are expected to be able to increase the recycling rates and 
improve the implementation of a new waste management system. The 
results of this project have received positive feedback from field experts, 
but further work is needed to verify the main conclusions in the report. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 III 
Learning objectives 
 
When the students have completed, they can: 
 
Analysis 
 
● Analyse the structure of the Danish household waste management system and 
identify areas of importance when designing for increased recycling rates 
within the system 
 
● Clarify the concept behavioural design and investigate and select the relevant 
scientific knowledge and design methods within the area 
 
● Identify relevant scientific literature through a literature review and be able to 
use it for the further empirical work 
 
Design & Evaluation 
 
● Understand the demands for the technical system and translate these into 
design suggestions and requirements 
 
● Manage an iterative design process with the use of systematic and creative 
methods to explore the solution space and navigate towards a solution through 
selection based on criteria 
 
● Understand a complex system with many stakeholders and opinions and apply 
this knowledge into the creation of a solution 
 
● Critically reflect on the solution and reflect on its performance 
 
● Communicate the project work and the solution through visual and physical 
artefacts if needed together with written language 
 
Overall project 
 
● Demonstrate project management skills by following and adapting a project 
plan as well as applying methodology to structure the project 
 
● Reflect and evaluate the quality of the project and the learnings from the 
process 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 IV 
Acknowledgement  
 
Throughout this project a number of people have shown great willingness 
to help and provide relevant information. The outcomes and results from 
this project are brought forward by the resourceful help and information 
we have received from these people. 
 
We would like to thank both of our supervisors Tim McAloone and Philip 
Cash from the Technical University of Denmark for their time, guidance 
and constructive feedback throughout the project. 
 
We would also like to thank Civil Engineer Bjarne Kallesø, who has 
contributed with valuable information during the project and been able to 
give feedback on important aspects of our research. 
 
Lastly we would like to thank the many people who have taken the time to 
give us their opinions and experiences during our interviews. Your 
contribution has been helpful during the investigation of the Danish waste 
management system. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 V
Reading Guide 
 
This reading guide will explain the structure of the report and how it 
should be read. 
 
In this report, sources and quotes are referred to using the style APA 6th 
edition. The conducted interviews are listed in a table in appendix 1A, 
which is the first appendix in the appendix folder. Here information from a 
specific interviewee will be referred to during the report with the reference 
code that is listed in this table. The questions that have been central for the 
interviews can also be found in appendix 1A. The appendix folder contains 
important information from the analysis and provides insights in the 
development process as well. The appendix should be read simultaneously 
with the report and will be referenced to when necessary. The appendix 
will follow the chronological order of the report where the chapter number 
is identical to the first digit of the appendix reference number. 
 
During the report several terms related to waste management will be used. 
These are explained in the glossary found on the next page. This glossary 
is to help the reader to establish an overview of these terms. 
 
 
Abbreviation 
 
 
MRF: 
Material recovery facility  
MPG 
Off-site segregation of; metal, plastic and glass 
DST: 
Statistics Denmark 
MST: 
Danish Environmental Protection Agency. (Danish: Miljøstyrelsen) 
CE: 
Circular Economy 
BD: 
Behavioural Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 VI 
Glossary 
 
 
Collection services 
The specific solutions and services that are used for collection 
of household waste. E.g. 240 litter 2-chamber plastic bin. 
Five dry fractions 
Definition of the fractions; paper, cardboard, metal, glass and 
plastic 
Household pick-up 
services 
Fractions are collected at the household (Danish: 
Henteordninger) 
Material Recovery 
Facilities 
 
 
Facilities that can separate waste material from one another for 
further processing. Material recovery facilities can be designed 
to separate main fractions from one another allowing the 
citizen to mix or partly mix different fractions. 
On-site segregation 
The citizen separates the main material into separate fractions 
during disposal. This means that the main fractions; paper, 
cardboard, glass, metal, plastic and organic waste are not 
mixed with each other. (Danish: Kildesortering) 
Off-site segregation 
The citizen disposes certain fractions together in one 
container, e.g. a mix of cardboard and paper is sorted together 
in one container. (Danish: Kildeopdeling) 
Pick-up frequency:  
Determining how often the dustman empties the containers.  
Recycling rate 
The amount of the collected waste that are sent to recycling 
facilities. (Danish: Genanvendelsesprocent). 
Residual waste:  
The waste that is sent to incineration. Please note that there 
can be differences in the definition of this term. (Danish: 
Restaffald) 
Separation at the 
source:  
See on-site segregation 
Station pick-up 
service:  
 
Services where fractions are collected in cubes in the city or 
similar. (Danish: Bringeordninger) 
Seven main 
fractions 
Definition of the fractions; organic waste, paper, cardboard, 
metal, glass, plastic and hazardous waste 
 
The technical 
system:  
We have divided this project into two main elements. The 
technological system here refers to the design of the HWM 
system without behavioural interventions. 
Virgin material 
Previously unused raw material 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 VII
Table of Contents 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 THE PROJECT RELEVANCE 
1 
1.2 THE PROBLEM STATEMENT 
2 
1.3 THE CONTRIBUTION OF THIS PROJECT 
2 
1.4 THE DELIMITATION 
3 
1.5 THE STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT 
3 
2. METHODS 
3 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
4 
2.2 DESIGN RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
4 
2.3 DOUBLE DIAMOND 
5 
2.4 ROUND-OFF 
5 
3. LITERATURE REVIEW 
6 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
6 
3.2 CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
6 
3.2.1 WASTE MANAGEMENT THROUGH A CE LENS 
9 
3.3 BEHAVIOURAL DESIGN 
11 
3.3.1 BEHAVIOURAL DESIGN THEORY 
11 
3.3.2 HUMAN HABITS 
14 
3.4 BEHAVIOURAL STUDY FOR RECYCLING IN WASTE MANAGEMENT 
16 
3.5 CONCLUSION 
19 
4. ANALYSIS 
20 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
20 
4.2 APPROACH AND METHODS FOR THE ANALYSIS 
20 
4.3 TRADITION AND NEW REGULATION IN WASTE MANAGEMENT 
22 
4.4 INDICATORS FOR WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANNING 
24 
4.4.1 INVESTIGATION OF INDICATORS FOR PREDICTION OF WASTE BEHAVIOUR IN DENMARK 
24 
4.4.2 PARAMETERS FOR PLANNING WASTE MANAGEMENT 
29 
4.5 THE CURRENT WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN DENMARK 
29 
4.5.1 OVERVIEW OF THE HWM SYSTEM IN DENMARK 
30 
4.5.2 STAKEHOLDER MAPPING 
31 
4.5.3 OVERVIEW OF THE CURRENT HWM SYSTEM IN THE 98 MUNICIPALITIES 
32 
4.5.4 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE DANISH HWM SYSTEMS 
37 
4.5.5 OVERVIEW OF WASTE CONTENT IN DENMARK 
42 
4.5.6 ROUND-OFF 
47 
4.6 WASTE SORTING IN OTHER COUNTRIES 
47 
4.6.1 WASTE SORTING IN OTHER COUNTRIES 
47 
4.7 RECYCLING BENEFITS FOR THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
49 
4.7.1 RECYCLING THROUGH A LIFE CYCLE PERSPECTIVE 
50 
4.7.2 IDENTIFIED HUMAN BEHAVIOUR IN HWM 
53 
4.7.3 OFF-SITE SEGREGATION AND CROSS-CONTAMINATION 
54 
==PAGE:9==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 VIII
4.8 IMPORTANT FINDINGS FROM THE ANALYSIS 
58 
5. DEVELOPMENT OF THE TECHNICAL SYSTEM 
60 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
60 
5.2 PROCESS AND METHODS 
60 
5.2.1 IDEA AND CONCEPT GENERATION 
61 
5.2.2 SELECTION THROUGH CRITERIA 
61 
5.3 SUGGESTIONS FOR THE NEW TECHNICAL SYSTEM 
62 
5.4 ROUND-OFF 
64 
6. DEVELOPMENT OF BEHAVIOURAL PRINCIPLES 
66 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
66 
6.2 METHODS AND OUR PROCESS 
66 
6.3 BEHAVIOURAL ANALYSIS 
67 
6.3.1 SURVEY 
67 
6.3.2 DESK RESEARCH 
69 
6.3.3 BEHAVIOURAL CHANGE WHEEL 
70 
6.3.4 PHOTOVOICE METHOD 
72 
6.3.5 CUSTOMER JOURNEY MAP 
74 
6.4 SUGGESTED PRINCIPLES FOR BEHAVIOURAL DESIGN 
75 
6.4.1 PRINCIPLE 1: A HOMOGENEOUS WASTE JOURNEY 
75 
6.4.2 PRINCIPLE 2: PROVIDE INFORMATION IN THE MOMENT OF SORTING 
78 
6.4.3 PRINCIPLE 3: FEEDBACK ON SORTING BEHAVIOUR 
79 
6.4.4 PRINCIPLE 4: ENSURE TRANSPARENCY IN HWM 
81 
6.4.5 PRINCIPLE 5: AFFECT THE PHYSICAL WASTE SORTING ENVIRONMENT 
84 
6.5 ROUND-OFF 
86 
7. DISCUSSION 
87 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
87 
7.2 DISCUSSION ON RESULTS 
87 
7.3 THE PROCESS AND METHODS 
89 
7.4 THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL CONTRIBUTIONS 
92 
8. LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
94 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
94 
8.2 PROCESS AND LIMITATIONS 
94 
8.3 FURTHER WORK 
95 
9. CONCLUSION 
97 
9.1 OBJECTIVE ONE: THE TECHNICAL SYSTEM 
97 
9.2 OBJECTIVE TWO: BEHAVIOURAL INTERVENTIONS 
99 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
1.
==PAGE:11==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 1 / 100
1. Introduction 
1.1 The project relevance  
During the last couple of decades there has been a shift in how we treat waste. In Denmark 
incineration of waste has traditionally been a central part of the waste management strategy. 
However, this has changed during the last couple of years. One reason for this shift is that 
incineration as a consequence means that valuable resources vanish. The global population 
and the living standards are rising, which have consequences for the environment. The 
environment is affected by the way products are designed, manufactured and how they are 
disposed.  
 
In 2013 the Danish government released a resource strategy with the headline: Denmark 
without waste. Recycle more - incinerate less (Miljøministeriet, 2013). The strategy set a goal 
to recycle 50 % of the household waste in 2022. Today the topic of recycling waste has 
increased with the new governmental strategy for circular economy released in September 
2018 (MFM & EM, 2018). Here a central part of the new strategy concerns the Danish 
household waste management system (HWM), which builds on top of the former HWM 
strategy from 2016 (EFK, 2016). One goal with this strategy is to recycle more waste and 
secure a high quality of this. The government describes the importance of economies of scale 
when recycling waste. The collection of one large, uniform, and stable quantity of each 
fraction is a more efficient solution, which can result in a better waste treatment (MFM & 
EM, 2018). Today each municipality individually decides how to sort their waste and what 
services they want to provide to the citizens. The strategy suggests designing a more 
homogeneous collection of household waste to make use of economies of scale. The 
government argues such a standardised waste management system will secure a better 
environmental treatment of waste and be able to more efficiently provide resources for 
Danish businesses. Today the Danish Environmental Protection Agency (Miljøstyrelsen) 
works on how to create a homogeneous waste management system. This debate is influenced 
by many stakeholders, which all take part of a complex system. This complicates the 
determination of an optimal standardisation of a new waste management system. The 
project’s main focus is to find the optimal requirements for a homogeneous HWM system in 
Denmark, when considering circular economy and human behaviour. As such the main 
objectives of this project are of high relevance for the further development of a more 
homogenous waste management system.  
 
Why focus on household waste? 
In 2016 households were the second largest source of waste in Denmark accounting for 30 % 
of the entire waste mass (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). Household waste was only overtaken by 
construction waste accounting for 37 %. At the same time households have low recycling 
rates, where only 48% is recycled. By comparison, 87% of the construction waste, 71% of the 
industrial waste and 50% of agricultural, hunt and forest waste were recycled in 2016. In 
other words, household waste accounts for a significant part of the Danish waste production, 
and has low recycling rates. 
 
==PAGE:12==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
2 / 100 
1.2 The problem statement  
The overall scope of this master thesis has been formulated into the following problem 
statement and two objectives:  
 
How should a homogeneous Danish HWM system be designed, to ensure a higher 
environmental performance for the circular economy from a behavioural and 
holistic perspective? 
 
1. How should the requirements for a homogeneous HWM system be designed, to 
improve the conditions for circular economy through recycling and adaption to 
current behaviour? 
 
2. How can behavioural design be used to support the homogeneous HWM 
system, to potentially increase the sorting quality and recycling rates? 
 
The main focus has been to answer the first objective, as this requires a deep knowledge of 
the Danish HWM system and the different structures and stakeholders. Moreover the first 
objective can support the Danish Environmental Protection Agency in their development of 
requirements for HWM. This project seeks to contribute with new knowledge that can lead to 
new perspectives for this process. It is estimated that objective 1 consumed approximately 70 
% of the workload in this project.  
 
The second objective is interrelated with the first objective, which means that this could only 
be answered when the first objective was answered. The purpose of this objective was to find 
ways to support the behaviour in the new technical system, to increase the recycling rates and 
the sorting quality. This objective was answered by drawing on behavioural analyses and 
research. Here developing principles that could achieve such results in HWM was the 
primary objective.  
 
1.3 The contribution of this project  
This thesis contributes with an investigation of important aspects of waste management in 
Denmark. The findings can support the development of a homogeneous waste management 
system. Moreover, this thesis highlights areas where future research might be important to 
conduct, to verify the many claims and opinions that are within the HWM system. One main 
contribution is the suggested requirements for a homogeneous HWM system in Denmark. 
Here behavioural principles, that are important to apply to this new HWM system, have been 
developed to potentially increase the recycling rate further. These suggestions have been 
translated into a presentation folder, which together with the report are to support 
stakeholders within waste management. The suggestions have received positive feedback 
from field experts. The project also shed light on behavioural research of waste behaviour. 
Here an investigation of the differences between waste behaviour in Denmark, can contribute 
to a better understanding of waste behaviour in this specific context. As such the project 
mostly involves practical contributions to the further development of HWM in Denmark. 
==PAGE:13==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
3 / 100 
1.4 The delimitation 
It has been important for us to combine circular economy and behavioural design during the 
development of the HWM system. Human behaviour is an essential part of HWM as the 
system relies on waste sorting. This means that a clear delimitation of the project has been 
required in order to be able to answer the problem statement. We have chosen to focus on the 
collection and the implication of not collecting or mixing different fractions. The Danish 
HWM system consists of many other aspects that were black boxed, such as the implications 
of the different standards for allowed material in each fraction. Furthermore, due to the 
timeframe, we have not tested any of the behavioural design principles, but found literature 
that can verify effect in similar contexts. As such there are elements that needs to be 
considered in the further work and development of a homogeneous HWM system. These will 
be highlighted in the report. 
 
 1.5 The structure of the report  
The following section presents the structure of the report. The report contains nine chapters, 
which are briefly presented below. Here chapter 4 and 5 answer the first objective in the 
problem statement. This development process will be referred to as the development of the 
new technical system. Chapter 6 answers the second objective in the development of 
behavioural strategies to apply on top of the new technical system.  
 
Chapter 1 
Presents an introduction to the overall project and the primary 
focus. 
Chapter 2 
Presents the methods used for the overall planning of the 
project. 
Chapter 3 
Presents the process and main findings from the literature 
review. 
Chapter 4 
Presents the main analysis for determining the requirement for 
the technical waste management system when focussing on 
circular economy and human behaviour. 
Chapter 5 
Presents the development and determination of the suggested 
requirements for the technical waste management system. 
Chapter 6 
Presents the behavioural design analysis, main findings and 
overall suggestions for behavioural interventions. 
Chapter 7 
Presents the main discussion of the overall process and results. 
Chapter 8 
Presents the development process and the further work ahead. 
Chapter 9 
Presents the main conclusions and findings in the project. 
2. Methods 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Methods
2.
==PAGE:15==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
4 / 100 
2.1 Introduction  
This chapter presents the methodology that has been used to structure the project. The Design 
Research Methodology (Blessing & Chakrabarti, 2009) was chosen as a guideline and it 
especially helped us to make decisions in the Research Clarification stage. Furthermore the 
Double Diamond Model1 was chosen to support the process to see if we missed important 
parts in the design process. Moreover it illustrated the need for both divergent and convergent 
thinking. These methods helped structure the project plan, which can be found in appendix 
2A. The next two sections will briefly present the Design Research Methodology and the 
Double Diamond Model.  
 
2.2 Design Research Methodology   
To be able to answer the problem statement, a structured approach was found important. Here 
Blessing and Chakrabarti’s (2009) Design Research Methodology (DRM) was used. This 
methodology consists of four stages that are to ensure a structured research and design 
process. Each of the four stages will briefly be explained in the following four paragraphs and 
an illustration of the process can be found in appendix 2B. 
 
Stage 1: Research Clarification 
The first stage of the methodology is the Research Clarification. According to Blessing and 
Chakrabarti (2009) the aim of this stage is to identify and refine the research problem. To do 
this, one needs to gather and understand different information about the research problem. 
 
In this stage we started creating the most suitable project plan, which, together with the 
problem understanding, evolved during the project.   
 
Stage 2: Descriptive Study I 
With a clear goal and focus identified from the Research Clarification, the Descriptive Study 
can be carried out.  
 
In this project we conducted a literature review to elaborate the initial descriptions from the 
Research Clarification stage. Furthermore empirical studies were conducted to fully under-
stand the area. The outcome from this stage was a thorough understanding of the initial 
description, including measurable criteria of success for the design.   
 
Stage 3: Prescriptive Study 
The third stage of the methodology is the Prescriptive Study. Here the solutions based on the 
descriptive study are developed. 
 
                                                
1 https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-process-what-double-diamond  [Accessed 23/1/19] 
==PAGE:16==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
5 / 100 
In this stage knowledge was gathered from both theoretical and empirical studies and used to 
develop the new technical system. For this project the stage was followed by a new analysis 
and development process (Descriptive Study I), as the behavioural interventions was created 
for the new technical system. The investigations of behaviour and the development of the 
technical system ran in parallel. However, parts of the behavioural analysis could only be 
created after the solution for the technical system was designed. In that way stage 2 and 3 in 
the DRM were repeated for the behavioural analysis and development of principles.     
 
Stage 4: Descriptive Study II  
The purpose of this stage is to evaluate the solution and its applicability and to ensure that it 
fulfils the measurable success criteria.  
 
This stage was limited for this project due to the timeframe. Therefore we created a section in 
the report presenting the further work, which involves verification of the suggested solutions. 
We have presented the results to a few experts in the field and received their feedback. 
However this stage is required in the further work, to fully understand the effect and 
implication of the suggestions in the project. 
 
2.3 Double Diamond 
Double Diamond is a design process model developed by the British Design Council in 
20052. It consists of the four distinct phases; Discover, Define, Develop and Deliver, and 
these stages were together with the stages from the DRM, used for the planning and 
development in the project. The Double Diamond maps the divergent and convergent stages 
of a design process, and the model can be found in appendix 2C.  
 
2.4 Round-off 
It was beneficial to have the DRM and the Double Diamond Model to support the process 
and to help the development of the project plan. This overall project and the HWM sector are 
complex and therefore these methods were especially important during the beginning of this 
project to be able to stay on the right track. 
                                                
2 https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-process-what-double-diamond [Accessed 23/1/19] 
==PAGE:17==
Literature 
review
3.
==PAGE:18==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
6 / 100 
3. Literature review 
3.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents the findings from the literature review carried out in the project. The 
two topics, circular economy and behavioural design, was examined and linked together, with 
the overall topic of household waste management (HWM). The scope of the literature review 
was to cover existing literature, to create the foundation for the project, and in that way be 
able to come closer to an answer for the two objectives in the problem statement. The 
literature review found important research and methods to use, when designing the overall 
waste management system. Moreover it found and examined examples and approaches, for 
developing a waste management system fit for the transition to a circular economy. Here the 
focus human behaviour was an area of importance to establish an overview of the existing 
research of waste and human behaviour. This resulted in a study on the different processes 
and behavioural aspects that can influence the amount of waste produced and sorted.  
 
The literature review found inspiration from the Systematic Literature Review Protocol 
(Biolchini, Gomes Mian, Candida Cruz Natali, & Horta Travassos, 2005), where the key 
questions and elements from this procedure were used for the literature review. However, this 
literature review was not a systematic literature review, as we aimed to find context-based 
literature that could help the further development of a waste management system. The 
literature searches were mainly conducted through the databases Scopus and DTU FindIt. 
Here keywords were used to find relevant literature, such as: “waste management”, 
“household waste”, “circular economy”, CE, recycl*, “behavi*ral design”, “behavi*r*”. 
These searches resulted in a number of articles, which were sorted by first screening the titles 
and removing duplicates. Afterwards the abstracts were read, and the remaining articles were 
briefly examined and saved when relevant. These articles were then read and included in the 
literature review. A flowchart with the most used search terms can be found in appendix 3A. 
Chained search were used to broaden the findings on specific areas that were found important 
for the topic. 
 
The literature review is divided into three sections. Here section 3.2 presents the main 
findings from the literature review on circular economy and waste management. Section 3.3 
presents the main findings on behavioural design and human psychology and waste 
behaviour. Section 3.4 presents the areas of importance in the interconnections between waste 
management in a circular economy when focussing on waste behaviour. The following 
section describes the findings from the literature research of circular economy. 
 
3.2 Circular Economy 
Circular economy is a topic of increasing interest politically in Europe (EC, 2014, 2019) and 
Denmark (MFM & EM, 2018).  An estimation predicts that eco-design, waste prevention and 
reusing products all together can bring net savings for EU businesses of up to €600 billion, 
while reducing emissions of greenhouse gasses with 2-4% (EC, 2014). An optimal use of 
existing technologies for resources could save Danish businesses DKK 21 billion (€2,8 
==PAGE:19==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
7 / 100 
billion) on material costs (MFM & EM, 2018). There has also been rising attention to 
business model innovation in circular economy, which increased significantly over the past 
couple of years (Pieroni, McAloone, & Pigosso, 2019). This influences many sectors and 
corporations throughout society. Circular economy provides frameworks for the shift from 
the linear production chain (take-make-use-dispose), towards a circular cascading system 
enabling resource preservation, efficiency, and increased productivity (Blomsma, 2018). One 
of the better known frameworks are created by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation cycles’ 
(EMF, 2016). Here circular economy is defined as: ‘An economy that is restorative and 
regenerative by design and which aims to keep products, components and materials at their 
highest utility and value at all times, distinguishing between technical and biological cycles’ 
(EMF, 2016). However, this definition only includes material regeneration, and does not 
include e.g. avoidance of harmful emissions. As the operation of waste management requires 
energy, the need for a broader definition, which accounts for emissions and other 
environmental harmful substances, is seen necessary. Geissdoerfer, Savaget, Bocken, & 
Hultink (2017) defines circular economy based on key literature as: ‘A regenerative system in 
which resource input and waste, emission, and energy leakage are minimized by slowing, 
closing, and narrowing material and energy loops’. Materials and energy needs to be 
managed in a loop, to slow down the extraction of resources. The two will be used to describe 
the overall definitions of circular economy in this project.   
 
To understand circular economy it is not enough to define it, one should know what 
frameworks could be used. Circular economy is described as an umbrella concept, that e.g. 
encompasses and accounts for a wide range of waste and resource management frameworks 
(Blomsma & Brennan, 2017). It is also used for areas such as waste prevention (Dumlao-Tan 
& Halog, 2017) or decoupling the link between value creation and resource consumption in 
business model innovation (Pieroni et al., 2019). This framework created by the Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation is well captured by its butterfly diagram (EMF, 2013), see figure 3-A, 
and the Re-SOLVE framework; Regenerate, Share, Optimise, Loop, Virtualise and Exchange 
(EMF, 2015). This framework is a synthesis on other 
earlier frameworks (Blomsma, 2018) including Cradle-
to-Cradle 
(McDonough 
& 
Braungart, 
2002), 
Performance Economy (Stahel, 2010), Blue Economy 
(Pauli, 2010) and several similar thinkers. The 
framework of Ellen MacArthur Foundation divides 
circular economy into the four building blocks; (1) 
Circular economy design, (2) New business models, (3) 
Reverse cycles and (4) Enablers and favourable system 
conditions (EMF, 2017). This project is mainly 
focussing on resource preservation in the waste 
management system, mostly associated with building 
block three, reversing cycles. 
  
 
Figure 3-A: Illustration of the circular 
economy in the two separate cycles in the 
biological and technical system (Ellen 
MacArthur Foundation, 2013). Large 
illustration can be found in appendix 3B. 
==PAGE:20==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
8 / 100 
 
The butterfly diagram illustrates the life cycle of a product (the middle) and the different 
ways to keep products in the loop throughout their lifetime. Circular economy should be 
integrated in the HWM system in a way that ensures the materials to be handled in a proper 
way, so that they stay in the loop for as long as possible. Here incineration should be limited 
and landfill avoided. The following section presents a process of evaluating a product’s 
potential environmental impact over its entire lifetime.  
 
Life Cycle Assessment - LCA 
To be able to understand the potential environmental impact of a product, one can use a life 
cycle assessment (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, & Olsen, 2018). The LCA is a common way to 
assess the environmental impacts of a product throughout its lifetime. The goal is to be able 
to compare the environmental performance of products or methods, to be able to choose the 
least burdensome (Hauschild et al., 2018)3. There are two internal standards, linked to LCA; 
ISO 14040 that describes the principles and structure, and ISO 14044 that specify demands 
and guidance (Hauschild et al., 2018). The LCA assess each stage on a products lifecycle, 
from the extraction of raw materials to end of life (see figure 3-B).  
 
 
Figure 3-B: Life cycle assessment 
 
A life cycle assessment includes four stages: 1) Definition of goal and scope, 2) Inventory 
analysis, 3) Impact Assessment, and 4) Interpretation (Hauschild, 2005). It is an iterative 
process, that is often ran several times. It is important to consider the system and its 
surroundings, because a product’s LCA can be negative, but the product might improve the 
system that the product is functioning in. It is essential to identify and manage uncertainties 
and clarify assumptions taken during an LCA (Hauschild et al., 2018). Using LCA as part of 
HWM is therefore an important tool to understand the potential impacts of different 
approaches to waste management. The following subsection investigated HWM from a 
circular economy perspective.  
 
                                                
3 https://www.iso.org/news/2006/07/Ref1019.html [Accessed 1/3/19] 
==PAGE:21==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
9 / 100 
3.2.1 Waste Management through a CE lens 
Looking at the previous definition of circular economy, waste management plays a central 
part of the transition towards a circular society. This is because waste management plays a 
vital part in regenerating materials for new products. The regeneration of materials ‘can be 
achieved through long-lasting design, maintenance, repair, reuse, remanufacturing, 
refurbishing, and recycling’ (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). There are case examples of initiatives 
done to promote reuse and repairs on top of the waste management strategies (Kalmykova, 
Sadagopan, & Rosado, 2018). However, due to the timeframe of this project we will focus on 
recycling in the HWM system. Therefore we will not focus on other initiatives outside the 
HWM system even though they might be beneficial, such as e.g. promotion of reuse or 
repairs. 
 
The operation of the waste management system requires a large operation of transportation 
and redistribution. Here the impacts of waste collection on a circular economy are essential to 
understand. The current literature on circular economy involves many cases of recovery and 
recycling (Kalmykova et al., 2018). Recycling involves the use of materials from waste 
products to the production of new products (Watson, 2012), and here benefits for the 
environment will occur resulting in positive impacts in a life cycle perspective compared to 
production from virgin material. The environmental benefits are dependant on the type of 
material that is recycled, as the energy consumption and resource scarcity varies (Dahlén, 
2005). This project therefore needs to identify the impacts of recycling the different 
materials, to understand what fractions to collect. One of the priorities in this project must 
therefore be, to establish an overview of the most important fractions to collect in relation to 
the environmental benefits. This includes an overview of the content of the Danish household 
waste, as this will determine amount of the materials that are produced and can be recycled. 
Solid waste is often different from other waste streams, as they contain a large amount of 
heterogeneous waste with small quantities of diverse materials mixed together (Watson, 
2012). Here characterization of the solid waste content is done through test samples, as the 
heterogeneous waste stream means the characterisation becomes costly (Christensen, 2011). 
Such samples are often complex and created for specific purposes (Christensen, 2011). 
Therefore a goal in this project must be to review such tests in order to establish a content 
overview of the household waste in Denmark. The characterisation of the waste can be 
included in the life cycle perspective, to ensure that the different materials and their further 
treatment are included in the analysis. 
 
Establishing an overview of the environmental impacts in a lifecycle perspective is an 
important step of identifying areas of importance for HWM and the circular economy. 
However, studies in this regard often do not say anything about the quality and the market 
demand for the regenerated materials. Here as much non-biological material as possible 
theoretically should be recycled infinitely to the same level of quality in a circular economy 
(Dumlao-Tan & Halog, 2017). This will ensure that the products can be turned into raw 
materials and then reused as new products with the same quality. Therefore, in an ideal 
circular economy, materials of different qualities need to be recycled into the same level of 
==PAGE:22==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
10 / 100
quality (Eriksen, 2019). However, due to large amounts of heterogeneous waste in HWM, it 
is hard to recover the same value from the materials. This is because the different materials 
are produced for different purposes with different processing and market streams. As seen in 
the previous model of circular economy, there is a clear distinction between biological and 
technological matter. This is an important aspect to investigate further in the analysis, as 
much household waste often completely or partly mixes biological and non-biological matter 
(Christensen, 2011). As such investigations of solutions that can keep the value of the 
products, by ensuring that the materials within them can be recycled to similar products are 
important. Currently the recycled material from household waste ‘is often of lower quality as 
a consequence of a more limited application range, when compared to virgin material’ 
(Eriksen, 2019). Minimizing the cross-contamination, to ensure the highest possible quality 
of recycled material should therefore be a focus in this project. This should be done without 
increasing other environmental harmful emissions. 
  
To ensure a higher quality of the materials they must be clean and uncontaminated (Eriksen, 
2019). As part of the waste management system, material recovery facilities (MRFs) are used 
to handle the recyclable fractions to improve the output quality (Christensen, 2011). These 
facilities play an important part in the separation of materials for new processing, as e.g. a 
metal fraction will be required to be sorted into e.g. steel, aluminium, copper and other types 
of metals. We here define the use of separation at the source, e.g. keeping metal separately 
from other fractions in the household, as on-site segregation. On-site segregated household 
waste will often be required to be further processed in a MRF. Here a MRF can remove 
unwanted waste from the fraction and divide the fraction into the more specific material 
categories (Christensen, 2011). As many materials can be separated in a facility, one of the 
key criteria for handling waste in a circular economy are to minimize the cross-contamination 
and deterioration of the materials in the storing and processing (Dumlao-Tan & Halog, 2017). 
  
There are also a number of technical solutions, which continuously are improving and can 
separate several fractions in a central facility, e.g. a mix of plastic, fibre, glass and metal. This 
allows the citizen to mix or partly mix different fractions in one container. This will later 
require off-site segregation of these fractions, where a specialised MRF can separate them 
(Christensen, 2011). We will refer to this separation method as off-site segregation due to the 
requirement of separation of the fractions handled off-site. An overview and investigation of 
the consequences for the use of on-site and off-site segregation should be investigated further 
in this project.  
 
A transition towards circular economy involves many different stakeholders in the society. 
Here the Ellen MacArthur foundation highlights the fact, that there is a need for research on 
consumer behaviour in regards to circular economy (EMF, 2013). The technical aspect of the 
HWM system is obviously important for developing circular recycling loops. However, 
humans are also deeply involved in the process of waste sorting. Therefore the next section 
reviews literature on behavioural design and human behaviour.  
==PAGE:23==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
11 / 100 
3.3 Behavioural Design 
The HWM system is affected by the behaviour and habits of the people producing and 
disposing their waste. This section investigates what literature and established methods that 
can be used when designing HWM for behavioural change. As such this section will identify 
theories and methods for behavioural change, which is essential for findings answers to 
second objective in the problem statement. Moreover an investigation is needed to clarify the 
behaviour and habits around household waste sorting. These two issues will frame the next 
two subsections. 
3.3.1 Behavioural design theory 
Designing for behavioural change is a growing field of interest, where the acceptance that 
social issues are greatly affected by behaviour, plays an important role (Tromp, Hekkert, & 
Verbeek, 2011). Behavioural design refers to strategies that can “enable design to influence 
behaviour and habits” (Bhamra, Lilley, & Tang, 2011). This is closely related to Planned 
Behaviour, which defined as “a theory designed to predict and explain human behavior in 
specific contexts” (Ajzen, 1991). Design strategies for sustainable behaviour emerged in the 
field of behavioural design, which takes environmental, economic and social impacts into 
consideration to minimize harmful impacts (Lilley, 2009; Tromp et al., 2011). Design 
strategies for sustainable consumption originated from the optimizing product development, 
from a technical perspective by e.g. choosing recyclable materials. The idea has grown that 
“to really effect change, sustainable design must be capable of changing user behavior" 
(Tromp et al., 2011), or that technical solutions alone are insufficient for sustaining behaviour 
change (P. J. Cash, Hartlev, & Durazo, 2017). The strategies for sustainable consumption 
mostly focuses on purchasing behaviours, but it also includes use, maintenance, repair, 
disposal and recycling products or services (Bhamra et al., 2011). The habits of disposal and 
recycling are therefore highly relevant to the field and topic of behavioural design. To be able 
to change behaviour around recycling, one must understand the human psychology (Fogg, 
2009). This area will be elaborated in the following. 
Human psychology 
To create an understanding of human psychology and how to influence behaviour, three 
different perspectives are taken. The three perspectives are: The Dual Process Theory 
(Kahneman, 2011), the ABC model (Miltenberger, 2008), and the FBM model for persuasive 
design (Fogg, 2009). These perspectives cover different areas and will be valuable to 
combine. The three following paragraphs cover each of these perspectives. 
 
The Dual Process Theory (Kahneman, 2011) describes how the human mind works, by 
distinguish between two systems: System 1, the fast thinking and automatic operation system, 
and system 2, the slow thinking and controlled operation system. System 1 operates 
automatically, requires little or no effort, and is especially used in familiar situations. A 
couple of examples that uses system 1 are: Finish the sentence: “An apple a day…”, or when 
we turn towards the source of a sudden sound (Kahneman, 2011). The use of system 2 
requires attention, and will be disrupted when the attention is drawn away. This system is 
==PAGE:24==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
12 / 100
deliberate, effortful, and orderly. Examples on where system 2 is in use are: Look for a man 
with brown shoes, or maintain a faster speed than normally when walking. System 2 requires 
something that does not come naturally to the mind and is only used little, because humans 
have limited capacity of attention. System 2 is in charge of self-control and should overcome 
the impulses of System 1. This sharing of work between the two systems is highly efficient 
by minimizing effort and optimizing performance (Kahneman, 2011). This theory of the two 
cognitive systems is accepted today, and used in theory for designing behavioural 
interventions (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008; Wendel, 2014).    
 
Another model that helps establish an understanding of human behaviour is the ABC model 
(Miltenberger, 2008). The ABC model explains how human decision-making can be 
described with the three steps: Antecedent (trigger) → Behaviour (action) → Consequence 
(result). The antecedent is the trigger that starts the behavioural process and does often build 
on earlier experiences that has been reinforced (Miltenberger, 2008). The behaviour is the 
user’s action and the consequence is the result and output from this action. Depending on the 
output (reward, fee, feedback etc.) the situation might occur again. The ABC model can both 
be used as an analysis tool as well as a design tool, which will be needed for this project. 
 
The same is valid for Fogg’s Behavior 
Model (FBM) (2009), that can be used to 
analyse behaviour and to develop inter-
ventions that change behaviour. The mo-
del describes behaviour as a product of 
three factors: Motivation, ability, and 
trigger, each having subcomponents. For 
certain behaviour to happen the FBM 
model asserts that a person must have (1) 
sufficient motivation, (2) sufficient ability, 
and (3) an effective trigger. For behaviour 
to happen, all three factors must occur at 
the same instant and be above the 
activation threshold curve. Please see 
figure 3-C. One can influence an undesirable behaviour by removing one of these three 
factors, which were also valid for the ABC model, and the dual process theory. All three 
models can be used to understand behaviour, but also to design for behavioural change.  
 
Bringing these three perspectives together increases the possibility that the specific human 
psychology in a given situation is understood correctly. There are however still two important 
perspectives that need to be addressed, to be able to design for behavioural change. This is 
needed, because the perspectives do not provide any concrete structure on how the process of 
changing behaviour should be. The following section therefore highlights two frameworks 
that can be used when wanting to change behaviour. 
Figure 3-C: The FEM models three factors  
==PAGE:25==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
13 / 100
Two frameworks for changing behaviour 
The framework Behaviour Change Wheel (BCW) 
(Michie, Atkins, & West, 2014) is developed from 
19 frameworks of behaviour change. It is 
highlighted in this literature review, because it 
accounts for the entire process, of designing for 
behavioural change. In other words, the BCW 
provides a holistic view of possible interventions. 
Here sources of behaviour, intervention functions, 
and policy categories are considered. These can be 
seen in figure 3-D, where the hub of the wheel 
shows the sources of behaviour (marked with 
green), which are to identify the sources of the 
behaviour that can be changed. The intervention 
functions (marked with red) consist of nine 
intervention functions, which are used to change 
the behaviour. They choice of intervention 
functions are based on the sources of behaviour. The policy categories (marked with grey) 
contain seven types of policies that are to deliver the intervention functions. The BCW can be 
difficult to use for designers, who do not possess a behavioural design mind-set yet (P. J. 
Cash et al., 2017). Therefore it can be helpful to use behavioural design tools as e.g. Design 
with Intent4 or Fogg’s behavioral grid5 to support the BCW process. 
 
The different perspectives that were highlighted until now can be used as tools to support the 
behavioural design process. We found two last areas of importance in this literature review. 
These are:  
 
1. Collective versus individual concern 
Human concern and thus behaviour, can be divided into collective concerns (e.g. social 
concerns, concerns of society or family concerns) and individual concerns (Tromp et al., 
2011). These concerns can be in conflict because a collective concern is not always 
experienced as best for the individual.  
 
2. The context 
The frameworks described are general guidelines, and it is important to remember the 
behaviour are influenced by the context (Ajzen, 1991). This means, that the effect of an 
introduced artefact with a desired behavioural change can be difficult to predict (Fogg, 2009), 
given the ‘highly contextual nature of behaviour’ (Cash et al., 2017). 
 
                                                
4 http://designwithintent.co.uk/ [Accessed 5/3/19] 
5 https://www.behaviorgrid.org/ [Accessed 5/3/19] 
Figure 3-D: The Behaviour Change Wheel with 
its three layers (Michie et al., 2008)  
==PAGE:26==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
14 / 100
Bringing these perspectives and frameworks together creates an understanding of human 
psychology and methods to change behaviour. This will be used in the development of the 
HWM system, where both the technical design of the system and human behaviour can affect 
the recycling rates and the quality of the sorted household waste. Furthermore throwing out 
waste is a habit, an automatic behaviour (Tucker & Speirs, 2003). It happens through system 
1, where it can be done without any thoughts. Therefore it is necessary in this project, to go in 
depth with human habits to understand what a habit is, and how it can be changed. The 
following subsection will explore this. 
3.3.2 Human habits  
To create optimal condition for the recycling of the household waste, as mentioned in the first 
section the avoidance of cross-contamination is essential. This means that the citizen have to 
dispose waste correctly not once or twice, but in a continuous manner. Responsible waste 
behaviour “is a repeat behaviour, characterized by initiation and persistence’ (Tucker & 
Speirs, 2003). The next chapter presents literature on the formation of habits and how to 
change them. To do so we build on the established theories and perspectives found previously 
and highlighted in earlier sections.  
 
The understanding of habits is also important (Tucker & Speirs, 2003). A habit is an 
automatic and repeating behaviour that often is a response to a cue in a certain context, e.g. 
the environment or preceding actions (Neal, Wood, & Quinn, 2006). It requires little energy 
for the brain to perform a habit, because the habit is performed through system 1. Wood and 
Neal describe a formation of a habit with the following three components: 1) behavioural 
repetition, 2) associated context cues, and 3) rewards (Neal et al., 2006). 1) Behavioural 
repetition occurs in the beginning of habit formation, where system 2 is activated, because 
the citizen has to learn or think of how to perform certain behaviour. When this behaviour is 
repeated many times, the behaviour becomes automatic and the citizen does no longer have to 
think of how to perform the behaviour. Habit formation does not only depend on the 
repetition of the behaviour but also of stable 2) context cues. These can be e.g. be times of 
day, location, prior actions in sequence or the presence of other people. 3) rewards make 
sure that we will perform the behaviour again, which means that we need to get something 
positive out of doing the behaviour to do it again. This can e.g. be praise, feedback, or 
money. It does not necessarily have to be a positive consequence; it can also be negative.  
 
Wood and Neal’s three components in habit formation are similar to Miltenberger’s ABC 
model (2008) of operant behaviour. Miltenberger describes how behaviour gets reinforced if 
the consequence of the behaviour is positive. An example of this is e.g. when a boy is asking 
his mother for money and she says yes (Miltenberger, 2008). The mother is an antecedent 
stimulus that is present, when behaviour is reinforced, which is referred to as the 
discriminative stimulus. The discriminative stimulus is a cue that can increase the likelihood 
of behaviour to happen (Miltenberger, 2008). The consequence of the behaviour is similar to 
Wood and Neal’s third component, the reward. A new element is included in Fogg’s 
Behavior Model (2009), where he describes that for behaviour to occur, a person must have 
==PAGE:27==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
15 / 100
(1) sufficient motivation, (2) sufficient ability, and (3) an effective trigger. Again there is a 
trigger (cue), and the motivation can be seen as a consequence or result of the behaviour. But 
Fogg adds the third element being ability. This means that the person performing the 
behaviour needs to be able to do so (Fogg, 2009). Fogg describes, that to be able to stop 
behaviour from taking place, one should think of how to reduce either the motivation, take 
away the ability, or remove 
triggers. This is similar to Mil-
tenberger and the BCW. The 
BCW uses the model COM-B 
(capability, opportunity, and 
motivation).  
 
Figure 3-E illustrates how the 
capability, opportunity, and 
motivation change over time 
when a habit is formed.  
 
As seen in figure 3-E the size of capability and opportunity grows during this habit formation 
process and the motivation is moved from reflective to automatic over time (Michie et al., 
2014). 
 
To interrupt a habit Wood and Neal present three strategies: 1) Cue disruption, 2) 
Environmental reengineering, and 3) Vigilant monitoring or inhibition (Wood & Neal, 2016). 
Cue disruption means that a person is no longer exposed to cues that trigger an unwanted 
habit. Environmental reengineering often involves cue disruption, but this is often used by 
adding friction to unwanted habits and removing friction for wanted habits. By adding 
friction it becomes harder for the citizen to perform the unwanted behaviour (Wood & Neal, 
2016). Vigilant monitoring or inhibition is a combination of conscious thoughts of control 
and automatic processes. This stands in contrast to cue disruption and environmental 
reengineering that only focussing on automatic processes. If citizens are aware of what 
situation or time a day an unwanted habit might occur, they can control their automatic 
responses before it will happen. This means, that the citizen must be aware of their unwanted 
habits to change them.  
 
A common misunderstanding when trying to change behaviour is the belief that if people 
understand e.g. why a habit is bad for them, they will change it (Wood & Neal, 2016). This 
means that information addressed for system 2, would change behaviour, and over time 
become a natural habit in system 1. However, while many public health campaigns are able 
to educate and motivate the citizens in the short run, the long-term health habits are rarely 
formed. It seems that it is relatively easy to perform certain behaviour for a period, while it is 
still new and interesting. After a while old habits overtakes the new ones due to the loss of 
willpower (e.g. new year’s resolutions) (Wood & Neal, 2016). Therefore other strategies than 
education are needed when wanting to change habits. 
Figure 3-E: The development of COM-B components during habit 
formation, where C = capability, O = opportunity, R = reflective 
motivation, A = automatic motivation (Michie et al., 2014). 
==PAGE:28==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
16 / 100
Due to the objectives of this project, behavioural insights for developing behavioural 
interventions are not the only objective. It is also to develop a suggestion for the technical 
HWM system, and here behaviour is also central. The next section will investigate the current 
effects on behaviour that can be found based on different HWM system. As the overall 
objective for the project is to develop a suggestion for a standardized waste management 
system, it can be of interest to establish an overview of the indicators that are found in 
society, that can predict or effect waste behaviour. The next section will present the findings 
from the literature review in this regard. 
 
3.4 Behavioural study for recycling in waste management 
To be able to determine important aspects of behaviour in HWM, and hereby answer the first 
objective, we need to understand what influences behaviour in the waste system today. In this 
subsection the coupling of behaviour and waste management systems can be found, where 
different indicators that seems or has been found to predict behaviour are identified. The 
indicators are found in literature and listed in the table presented on the next page. 
 
Indicators that might predict behaviour in the HWM system has been studied by Miliute-
Plepiene and Plepys (2015). Here different indicators that were found to predict or affect 
waste behaviour in the literature have been listed. The aim of this study was “to contribute to 
better understanding of waste sorting behaviour among households and provide inputs 
valuable in municipal planning”(Miliute-Plepiene & Plepys, 2015, p. 183). Miliute-Plepiene 
and Plepys’ literature review summarised findings on variables affecting household waste 
generation and recycling rates. These indicators are presented in table 3-F. 
 
 
Table 3-F: Summary of indicators for household waste prevention and increased recycling. Table from Miliute-
Plepiene et al. (2015). 
 
We have see found other indicators that are not represented in the table 3-F in this literature 
review. Here it was found that indicators like; mean age, pick-up frequency, and curbside 
collection, also have been found to influence behaviour. Therefore we highlight that these 
eleven listed indicators in table 3-F are not illustrating all the indicators that can be found in 
the literature. Here e.g. Pelău & Chinie (2018), Starr & Nicolson (2015), and Andersson & 
Stage (2018) highlight other indicators that seem to predict household waste behaviour. As 
such we have build upon this table and added all the indicators we have found to be able to 
predict behaviour in relation to HWM management. These indicators are not a complete list, 
but an addition to table 3-F. The table can be seen below. 
==PAGE:29==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
17 / 100 
Summary of indicators for household waste prevention and increased recycling 
Variables 
Indicators 
Effect on waste 
 
Country/Area of experiment: Source 
Household 
type 
Households income 
 
 
Households income 
Education level of households1 
Lifelong Learning Activities 
Size of household 
Prop. of children in household 
Density of population  
Mean age 
Generation (+) 
 
 
Composition3 
Recycling rate (+) 
Recycling rate (-) 
Generation (-) 
Generation (-) 
Generation (-) 
Recycling rate (+) 
 
Iran: (Monavari, Omrani, Karbassi, & Raof, 2011) & OECD: 
(Johnstone & Labonne, 2007) & Mexico: (Benítez, Lozano-Olvera, 
Morelos, & Vega, 2008) 
Iran: (Monavari et al., 2011) 
Eurostat: (Pelău & Chinie, 2018) & USA: (Starr & Nicolson, 2015) 
Eurostat: (Pelău & Chinie, 2018) 
OECD: (Johnstone & Labonne, 2007) 
OECD: (Johnstone & Labonne, 2007) 
OECD: (Johnstone & Labonne, 2007) 
USA: (Starr & Nicolson, 2015) & (Pelău & Chinie, 2018) 
Commerce 
level 
Tourist overnight stays 
Tourist overnight stays 
Scale of employment 
Generation (+) 
Composition4 
Generation (+) 
Austria: (Bach, Mild, Natter, & Weber, 2004) 
Austria: (Bach et al., 2004) 
Austria: (Bach et al., 2004) 
 
Values and 
Beliefs 
Pro-recycling attitudes 
 
Environmental concern 
Recycling rate (+) 
 
Recycling rate (x) 
UK: (Tonglet, Phillips, & Read, 2004) & USA: (Werner & Makela, 
1998) 
(Tucker & Speirs, 2003) 
Infrastructure 
Density of collection site 
Curbside collection 
 
Introd. of organic waste sorting 
Introd. of organic waste sorting 
Introd. of organic waste sorting 
 
Pick-up frequency  
 
Price of containers 
 
Required resources  
(effort, space) 
Recycling rate (+) 
Recycling rate (+) 
 
Recycling rate2(+) 
Generation (-) 
Sorting quality(+) 
 
Recycling rate (-) 
 
Recycling rate (-) 
 
Recycling rate (-) 
Austria: (Bach et al., 2004) (Dahlen et al. 2009) 
Sweden: (Dahlén, Vukicevic, Meijer, & Lagerkvist, 2006; Dahlén, 
Åberg, Lagerkvist, & Berg, 2009), Minnisota: (Pelău & Chinie, 2018) 
Sweden: (Miliute-Plepiene & Plepys, 2015) & (Dahlén et al., 2006) 
Sweden: (Miliute-Plepiene & Plepys, 2015) 
Sweden: (Andersson & Stage, 2018; Miliute-Plepiene & Plepys, 
2015)  
UK: (Abbott, Nandeibam, & O’Shea, 2011) & (Gellynck, Jacobsen, & 
Verhelst, 2011) 
New Zealand: (Bryce, Day, & Olney, 1997) & North America: 
(Noehammer & Byer, 1997) 
Australia: (Boldero, 1995) & USA:  (McCarty & Shrum, 1994) 
 
Economic 
instruments 
Unit based billing 
 
Unit based billing 
Recycling rate (+) 
 
Generation (-) 
Sweden: (Andersson & Stage, 2018) & Germany: (Morlok, 
Schoenberger, Styles, Galvez-Martos, & Zeschmar-Lahl, 2017) 
Sweden: (Dahlén et al., 2006, 2009) 
 
Codes: Adaptive variables are underlined, Instrument variables are italic 
 
1 Education level is correlating with recycling rate positively with a university degree or a similar tertiary education 
2 Recycling rate increasing for mostly packaging waste 
3 Increase in paper, cardboard and plastic packaging waste when increase in income 
4 Increase in packaging waste when increase in overnight stays 
Table 3-G: A summation of important findings from our literature review. This table is inspired by the table created by Miliute-Plepiene 
and Plepys (2015), which can be seen in table 3-F. 
 
Explanation to table 3-G: The red and green colours indicate wanted and unwanted effects respectively. The symbols (+) and 
(–) indicate whether the correlation with the indicator is positive or negative. (x) means that the indicator is a poor predictor 
for the behaviour. The highlighted indicators and effects with orange indicate areas of special importance to this project. 
Sorting quality is a measure for the amount of correctly distributed waste for the designated fractions. Generation is the 
amount of total waste produced per person. Recycling rate is the amount of recyclable waste collected. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
18 / 100
Table 3-G. includes variables such as household type, commerce level, and values and 
beliefs. Most are found to affect household waste behaviour, and can be used to determine 
differences, in order to adapt the waste management system to the identified behaviour. 
These indicators are classified as adaptive variables. The variables infrastructure and 
economic instruments are factors that can be used or adjusted in the waste management 
system, and have effects on household waste behaviour. These indicators are classified as 
instrument variables. In this project the rate of success will be measured by the ability to 
increase the sorting quality and the recycling rate. Here the sorting quality refers to correctly 
distributed waste for the designated fractions, e.g. a clean fraction instead of a fraction with 
multiple other materials mixed wrongly together. The recycling rate refers to the amount of 
recycled material that is sorted and collected in the recyclable fractions instead of e.g. being 
disposed with the residual waste.  
 
In the next two paragraphs the indicators in table 3-G. are elaborated, in terms of how they 
influence the waste generation and recycling. The adaptive indicators that correlate with 
household waste behaviour are important for the prediction of certain behaviour. Household 
income level correlates with the generation of household waste, where an increase in income 
results in a larger household waste generation (Benítez et al., 2008; Johnstone & Labonne, 
2007; Monavari et al., 2011). The household income is also a predictor for the composition of 
the waste, where a increase in income lead to an increase of packaging waste, mostly 
cardboard, paper and plastics (Monavari et al., 2011). Other household indicators correlate 
negatively on the generation of waste per person, as illustrated by Johnstone & Labonne 
(2007), where the size of the household, the proportion of children in the household, and the 
density of the population in the area, all lead to reduction in the generated waste. There is a 
correlation between education level of the households and the recycling rate, where a higher 
amount of people holding a university degree or a similar tertiary education increases the 
recycle rate (Pelău & Chinie, 2018; Starr & Nicolson, 2015). Pelău & Chinie also found a 
negative correlation between recycling rate and lifelong learning activities, which is defined 
as the participation in learning activities throughout their entire adulthood (Pelău & Chinie, 
2018). The mean age of the population correlates with the recycling rate positively (Pelău & 
Chinie, 2018), and Starr & Nicolson (2015) found a 16% different in the recycling rate from 
the a low age to a high age in USA, leading to an 0.43 % increase in recycling for each 1-year 
increase in median age (Starr & Nicolson, 2015). Values are also reflected in the recycling 
rate, where a general positive attitude towards the waste management system and recycling in 
general, leads to an increase in the recycling rate (Tonglet et al., 2004; Werner & Makela, 
1998). These attitudes are defined as pro-recycling attitudes. General environmental concern 
on the other hand, is a poor predictor for recycling behaviour (Tucker & Speirs, 2003). 
The instrument indicators can be important for the further planning of the waste management 
system, when trying to change behaviour. Here e.g. unit based billing is an economic 
instrument, where the citizen is charged for amount of generated waste either in volume or 
mass. Unit based billing leads to a reduction in the total generated waste (Dahlén et al., 2006, 
2009) and an increased recycling rate (Andersson & Stage, 2018; Morlok et al., 2017). The 
design of a billing system is essential, where unit based billing is feared to add rebound 
==PAGE:31==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
19 / 100 
effects of illegal dumping or waste in unwanted distribution channels as well as reducing the 
sorting quality (Andersson & Stage, 2018). A surprising correlation is the introduction of 
organic waste sorting, which leads to a reduction in the total generated waste (Dahlén et al., 
2006, 2009) and Anderson & Stage concluded that the introduction of organic waste sorting, 
seemed to be a more efficient tool for increasing the recycling rate than unit based billing 
(Andersson & Stage, 2018). The pickup frequency also affects the recycling rate, where a low 
pick-up frequency can lead to an increased recycling rate (Abbott et al., 2011; Gellynck et al., 
2011). The amount of effort, time, and resources required also affects the recycling rate. Here 
free garbage containers increase the recycling rate (Bryce et al., 1997; Noehammer & Byer, 
1997). The amount of space required for the garbage containers and required effort decrease 
the recycling rate (Boldero, 1995; McCarty & Shrum, 1994).  
 
The indicators found in this literature review should be verified further in a Danish context, to 
see if they can be used to predict waste behaviour in Denmark. Some of the indicators are 
only based on one study, and many of these are conducted in countries far from Denmark. As 
we know from this literature review the context influence human behaviour. 
 
3.5 Conclusion 
This chapter presented the literature and methods selected for the two topics; circular 
economy and behavioural design. They were linked together under the overall topic of 
household waste management.  
 
First; it can be summarised, that waste management plays a central part of the transition 
towards a circular society. Life Cycle Assessment can be used to assess a product’s potential 
environmental impact throughout its lifespan, and hereby one is able to understand what 
materials are the most important to recycle, from an environmental point of view. LCA 
studies should be used in the further investigation, as well as focussing on the output quality 
of the HWM system. Here an overview of the MRFs in Denmark, and their effect on the 
output quality are important to investigate further. No empirical study of MRFs in Denmark 
was found in this literature review. Furthermore a determination of the most valuable 
materials in the household waste and the content of it will be important to investigate further.  
 
Second; the HWM system is affected by human behaviour and the perspectives on human 
psychology will be used to be able to understand this. The Behavioural Change Wheel can be 
used to ensure that the entire system is taken into consideration, when designing for 
behavioural change. Moreover different ways to interrupt and create habits are important, 
since waste sorting is a habit. Here e.g. rewards and cues can be used to either add friction or 
make things easier.  
 
Third; the indicators identified in this literature review should be studied further in the 
analysis. Here it can be investigated, whether a standardised national waste management 
system in Denmark, should use these indicators for the overall planning of the HWM system. 
 
==PAGE:32==
Analysis
4.
==PAGE:33==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 20 / 100 
4. Analysis 
4.1 Introduction 
The literature review in the previous chapter established areas that were important to 
investigate further for the purpose of this project. These areas were important, because the 
findings in the literature review do not cover all aspects of the waste management system in 
Denmark. This chapter presents the analysis of the important aspects of the Danish waste 
management system for households. This analysis was conducted to find answers for the first 
objective in the problem statement.  
 
The methods used in the analysis are presented in section 4.2. Section 4.3 presents the 
regulations in HWM in Denmark. In section 4.4 the indicators found in the literature review 
are investigated in a Danish context, to understand if they can be predictive for the planning 
of the waste management system. Section 4.5 contains the overall analysis of the waste 
management system in regards to the main stakeholders and the current waste management 
practices in the 98 municipalities in Denmark. In section 4.6 an investigation of waste 
management practices in other countries is presented. Section 4.7 presents an investigation 
the different fractions and their environmental impact when recycled. Section 4.8 highlights 
the important findings from the entire analysis in this chapter. 
 
4.2 Approach and methods for the analysis 
The waste management sector in Denmark consists of many different stakeholders including 
e.g. policy makers, public institutions, private and public utility companies and citizens. As 
the stakeholder network is complex, the navigation within it equally becomes a complex task. 
To ensure a well-established overview of the waste management sector, we used different 
qualitative and quantitative methods. During the introduction chapter it was highlighted, that 
a more uniform waste management system is high on the political agenda. Therefore several 
large projects on the subject recently been published by the Environmental Protection Agency 
in Denmark. These reports have been examined and combined with the knowledge from our 
own fieldwork and research.  
 
During the project we conducted interviews with stakeholders from ten municipalities and 
utility companies and one incineration plant. We moreover had continues contacts with 
experts within the field. Please see appendix 1A. This qualitative information was combined 
with the published information from Statistics Denmark (DST) and the Danish 
Environmental Protection Agency (MST). Through Herning municipality we received a 
confidential dataset, from a cooperation project between 72 municipalities that share their 
data on waste performance with the consultancy company JHN processor. The dataset was 
anonymised to ensure that no individual municipal performance can be seen in the presented 
results in this project. We will refer to this dataset as the municipal dataset during the project. 
The dataset was used in the analysis in section 4.4 and 4.5. All statistical analyses were done 
according to standard guidelines with a 95 %-confidence interval.  
 
==PAGE:34==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
21 / 100
The municipalities interviewed for this study were selected based on four criteria, where three 
of the criteria were found to be important indicators for waste behaviour in the literature 
review. These were population density, mean income and tourism. It was decided to ensure 
that at least one municipality was represented in each category with low, medium and high 
population density and mean income. Furthermore it was ensured that municipalities with a 
high amount of tourists were included in the study. Lastly the fourth criterion was used to 
include municipalities that offered household pick-up of a low, medium and high amount of 
fractions. The criteria can be seen in table 4-A, where the number of municipalities that 
belongs to each category has been listed. 
 
Population Density 
[people per km2] 
Mean Income 
[DKK] 
Household pick-up 
services [number of 
fractions] 
Tourists per citizen 
[tourist overnight stays 
per citizen] 
Low 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 2 
Low (<250.000) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 1 
Low (1-2 fractions) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 2 
Low 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 4 
Medium 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 3 
Medium (250.000-
325.000) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 4 
Medium (3-5 fractions) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 1 
 
High 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 2 
High (>325.000) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 2 
High (6-7 fractions) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 4 
High (>30) 
represented no. of 
municipalities: 3 
Table 4-A: Criteria and representation of municipalities in the qualitative study 
 
The interviews were semi-structured and the questions were asked neutral and open, to 
minimise the risk of leading the interviewee in a particular direction. The approach in the 
beginning was, that the interviewee was the expert and we were the apprentices, being open-
minded and curious. In that way we learned about the waste management system including 
their thoughts and persuasions of it. 
 
The interviews with the municipalities were an on-going process, and some municipalities 
were contacted several times. Therefore the questions were adapted to the current state of the 
project and purpose of the study given the time. The questions can be found in appendix 1A 
page 2. The municipalities were contacted early in the project, and the inputs from the 
interviews were used to frame the project early on. During the qualitative study it was clear 
that regulations from the EU drives a change in the waste management system in Denmark. 
To understand the current direction, the regulation is therefore important to understand. This 
is presented in the following section.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 22 / 100
4.3 Tradition and new regulation in waste management 
Incineration of waste has for many years been the preferred treatment in Denmark, as a way 
to recover energy from waste (MFM & EM, 2018). This energy is used as heat and electricity 
for households across the country. Large joint investment programs for incineration plants 
have been made, involving several municipalities across the country. Here e.g. the 
incineration plant Vestforbrændingen on Zealand is funded and owned by 19 municipalities. 
These municipalities deliver daily residual waste for incineration and recyclable fractions for 
further transportation. The usage of incineration is slowly decreasing, which can be seen in 
the following:  
 
In 2014 55 % of the Danish household waste were to incineration plants 
In 2015 54 % of the Danish household waste were to incineration plants 
In 2016 51 % of the Danish household waste were to incineration plants 
(Miljøstyrelsen, 2018)  
 
This decline is caused by regulation on 
waste management practices, primarily 
coming from the European Union 
(appendix 1A, reference HK, KK, LT). 
In 2018 the European Union enacted a 
number of changes to the EU waste 
directives, which were introduced as a 
part of the circular economy package6. 
This had an intensified focus on the 
utilisation of by-products, End-of-Waste 
and direct reuse of products. The 
changes included new and more exact 
definitions, higher demands on recyc-
ling, standardisation of measurements, and calculation methods for 
recycling. It contained regulations for the separation of recyclable 
materials, and also a deadline for the implementation, including the 
following three fractions in the pick-up service offers: 
 
● Hazardous household waste by the end of 2022 
● Organic waste by the end of 2023 
● Textiles by the end of 2025 
 
The directive set a deadline for each member state, to implement the 
directive before the 5th of July 2020. Moreover, the member states 
                                                
6 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/index_en.htm & https://dakofa.dk/vidensbank/eu-love-
rammebetingelser/ [Both accessed 19/2/19] 
 
Figure 4-B: The EU waste hierarchy 
(http://ec.europa.eu/environment/green-growth/waste-
prevention-and-management/index_en.htm) 
Figure 4-C: The overall 
targets for recycling of 
municipal waste for EU 
member states 
==PAGE:36==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 23 / 100 
have to collect paper, metal, plastic, and glass before 2025 (EU, 2018a). Furthermore, 
member states have to prioritise the recovery of waste according to the hierarchy seen in 
figure 4-B. This figure highlights the fact that the EU directives and regulation is driven from 
the perspective of a circular economy. 
 
The overall directive is the Waste Framework Directive, which by 2018 included a new 
amendment (EU, 2018a). These directives include basic definitions and concepts for waste 
management practices and regulation of operation and infrastructure. It also ensures all 
member states to implement waste prevention plans. The amendment from 2018 includes 
directives of producer liability, which means that the manufacturer must take responsibility 
for the product at the end of its life. EU has three overall goals for the recycling rates for 
municipal waste in all member states, which can be seen in figure 4-C. 
 
According to statistics, Denmark sent approximately 48 % of the municipal waste to 
recycling facilities in 2016 (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). The amount of waste transported to 
recycling facilities is however not a measurement for actual recycling. In the processing, 
cleaning, and sorting a large amount of the material is lost. Therefore the current 
measurement of recycling rate does not determine the actual amount of waste that is recycled. 
 
The large focus on recycling rates alone has in the qualitative study led to criticism, as it does 
not necessarily drive the most eco-friendly waste management system forward (appendix 1A, 
reference LK, HK, KK). The optimal solution for recycling varies, when considering multiple 
factors, where materials as e.g. recycling of metal and fibre are very different when 
considering environmental benefits. Some municipalities have expressed concerns that the 
focus on recycling rates alone, can remove the focus from important aspects. This can also 
lead to a one-sided focus on large fractions that can increase the overall recycling rates, 
without environmental concerns in mind (appendix 1A, reference LK, RS). It is therefore 
important to establish environmental criteria for the individual fractions, which is one of the 
reasons why EU also regulates recycling rates for different fractions. 
 
An example of the regulation of the minimum 
recycling rates for specific fractions can be found 
in the EU in the Packaging and Packaging Waste 
Directive, with the amendment from 2018 (EU, 
2018b). These changes include goals and 
demands on prevention, recycling rates, and 
collection of packaging waste. Here the collection 
and handling of packaging waste should reduce 
the weight and volume of the packaging. In 2030 
a minimum of 70 % by weight of all packaging 
waste must be recycled (EU, 2018b). The specific 
goals for increased recycling rates can be seen in 
figure 4-D.  
Figure 4-D: The specific goals for recycling of 
packaging waste from households 
==PAGE:37==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 24 / 100 
 
The regulation and focus on circular economy can explain the changes in the waste 
management in Denmark. However, the future waste management is not only dictated from 
EU level, but is still planned and managed by the municipalities in Denmark. As EU provides 
minimum rates for recycling and waste treatments, the member states and municipalities can 
still increase the environmental performance even further. Before an investigation of current 
waste management in Denmark, the indicators found in the literature review were 
investigated, in order to figure out if these could be used in the further planning of waste 
management. This will be presented in the next section. 
 
4.4 Indicators for waste management planning 
As the previous section highlighted, regulation highly affects the planning of waste 
management in Denmark. Other factors also drive the planning, such as adaptation to the 
infrastructure in the city and local behaviour related to waste. One purpose of this project was 
to challenge the established methods for planning diverse waste management systems, which 
is currently, focussed on household type e.g. apartments and houses (Kromann, Jakobsen, 
Pedersen, Damgaard, & Henriksen, 2019; Mønsted, Larsen, Bøgelund, Johnsen, & Jørgensen, 
2019). As highlighted in the literature review, indicators were found to be able to predict 
behaviour related to waste. These was used in subsection 4.4.1, to investigate whether they 
can predict differences of waste behaviour in Denmark of such character, that it should be 
included in the overall planning of waste management. In subsection 4.4.2, the indicators 
chosen for the planning of waste management in this project will be determined and 
elaborated. 
4.4.1 Investigation of indicators for prediction of waste behaviour in 
Denmark 
The indicators highlighted in the literature review, were identified from research in different 
continents and their applicability to a Danish context is uncertain. Therefore we investigated 
the indicators’ effect on waste behaviour in the municipalities in Denmark. The municipal 
dataset from the 72 municipalities presented in section 4.2 was used for the analysis of the 
indicators. Here information about the municipalities was anonymised, to ensure that no 
individual data could be determined from the presented data. The indicators tested for each 
municipality were; 1) population density, 2) mean income, 3) percentage with a higher 
education (education), 4) percentage of households with more than two residents (size of 
household), 5) mean age and tourists per citizen. Large differences in the recycling rates or 
production rates can be used in the further planning to find if some municipalities have large 
differences, and therefore should have diverse HWM systems. The data used for these 
indicators are presented in appendix 4A. Each dataset has been extracted from Statistics 
Denmark7. A source of each parameter can be found in appendix 4A.  
 
                                                
7 dst.dk [Accessed 3/4/19] 
==PAGE:38==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 25 / 100 
One overall question has been formulated for the goal of this statistical analysis: 
 
● Analysis of indicators  
Can indicators found in the literature review predict waste production or recycling rates in 
municipalities in Denmark, and are the differences large enough to justify diverse planning of 
waste management based on these indicators? 
 
To answer the question and be able to investigate whether different indicators could predict 
waste behaviour in Denmark, a one-way analysis of variance (One-way ANOVA) was 
performed on the dataset. It was run three times on three different datasets with an output set 
as; (1) the total waste production for each municipality, (2) the total waste production in each 
municipality without the categories garden waste and other waste, and (3) the recycling 
performance for each municipality. These three output categories are assumed randomly and 
normally distributed, which corresponds well with the distribution of samples in a histogram. 
The recycling performance is here determined as the total collected amount of the five dry 
fractions; paper, cardboard, metal, glass and plastic in relation to the total amount of waste. 
These fractions will be referred to as the ‘five dry fractions’ in this analysis. Organic waste 
was not included, as most municipalities do not offer household pick-up of this fraction yet, 
and many that do, recently added this service. Furthermore, organic waste is not collected 
through pick-up stations or recycling centres. This means that organic waste is hard to 
compare in terms of total production and recycling rates. The indicators that were tested for 
variance, either individually or combined were determined from the literature review.  
 
The one-way ANOVA analysis has been chosen as an efficient way to determine variance in 
the different categories. Please see the R script in appendix 4C marked as ‘First analysis: 
Indicators’. The output of the One-way ANOVA analysis showed that several indicators 
seemed to have an effect on the tested output. Please also see the multiplot of all indicators 
and the three different outputs in appendix 4B. The multiplot shows that there are no strong 
correlation between the indicators and the outputs. The indicators with significance in the 
one-way ANOVA are illustrated in table 4-E below. 
 
ANOVA Output: 
Indicators with correlation: 
(1) Total waste production for 
each municipality in kg 
Population density: Very strong evidence (P < 0.001) 
Mean age: Very strong evidence (P < 0.001) 
Education: Some evidence (P < 0.05) 
Pop. density and Education combined: Some evidence (P < 0.05) 
Mean age and Education combined: Some evidence (P < 0.05) 
(2) Total waste production for 
each municipality without garden 
and other waste in kg 
Population density: Very strong evidence (P < 0.001) 
Mean age: Very strong evidence (P < 0.001) 
 
(3) Percentage of collection of the 
5 main recyclable fractions of total 
waste in each municipality 
Population density: Strong evidence (P < 0.01) 
Table 4-E: One-way ANOVA output and indicators with correlation 
==PAGE:39==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 26 / 100 
Table 4-E illustrates the indicators with significance when predicting waste behaviour. Please 
note that several of the indicators tested were found not to be statistically significant (P < 
0.05) for predicting waste behaviour on the three tested areas. The indicators that seem to 
have a correlation with the three areas were investigated further. For each of these indicators 
three groups were created with a high, medium and low category. Municipalities were then 
distributed according to their position in relation to the indicators. Each group holds 
approximately one third of the municipalities. Then a mean value for each category was 
calculated. Figures 4-F, 4-G, 4-H and 4-I show the calculated mean for each category on the 
three indicators that have significant correlation, when describing waste behaviour from the 
dataset from 2017. Note that for all four figures the category other mainly is associated with 
wood and constructional waste.  
 
Population density 
 
Figure 4-F: Calculated mean mass of total waste per person for municipalities with low (< 116 per/km2), 
medium (116-1000 per/km2) and high (>1000 per/km2) population density.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As illustrated in table 4-E and in figure 4-F and 4-G, the population density was the only 
parameter that was found statistically significant with all three tested outputs. Population 
density is therefore assumed to have a correlation with both waste production and the 
Figure 4-G: Calculated recycling mean rates for each municipality with low 
(< 116 per/km2), medium (116-1000 per/km2) and high (>1000 per/km2) 
population density. The recycling rates for the five dry fractions are in relation to 
the total waste production without the category garden waste and other waste.  
==PAGE:40==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 27 / 100 
recycling rate. However, the difference between the three groups does not seem large on most 
indicators as illustrated in figure 4-F and 4-G. In this project the main focus is on the five dry 
fractions and the residual waste. Here the major difference between the groups can be found 
in the amount of garden waste and other waste. The recycling rate is also statistically 
significant, but the mean recycling rate of the different groups are close to each other. On the 
basis of this dataset it seems that population density could be used to predict the recycling 
rate, but the effect does not seem large enough to be taken into account, in the planning of the 
HWM system. Here it is important to bear in mind, that the recycling rate can be a result of 
very good sorting, or a larger production of the recyclable fractions. E.g. a large amount of 
collected glass could be a result of large quantities of glass in a municipality, or a result of a 
large attendance in the sorting of glass for recycling. Furthermore the proximity of e.g. the 
German border might also affect these results. 
 
The prediction of waste behaviour in Denmark with population density could be further 
investigated, but for the purpose of using it for planning waste management, it is considered 
unimportant at this scale. 
 
Mean age 
 
Figure 4-H: Calculated mean mass of waste per person for municipalities with low (< 41 years), medium (41-
44 years) and high (>44 years) mean age. 
 
Mean age was found statistically significant for predicting the total production of waste, and 
also for the total production of waste without the categories garden waste and other waste. As 
seen in figure 4-H the difference between the groups for total waste production are relatively 
large, but is mostly affected by the production of garden and other waste. The difference was 
found smaller for residual waste and even less for the recyclable fractions. The prediction of 
the production of waste in Denmark with mean age could be further investigated, but for the 
purpose of using it for planning waste management this indicator was also considered 
unimportant at this scale. 
 
==PAGE:41==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 28 / 100 
Education 
 
Figure 4-I: Calculated mean mass of waste per person for municipalities with low (< 30%), medium (30-40%) 
and high (>40%) percentage of citizens with higher education. 
 
Percentage of citizens with a higher education in a municipality was found statistically 
significant for predicting the total production of waste. As seen in figure 4-I the difference 
between the groups are mainly affected by the categories garden waste and other waste. The 
prediction of waste production with this indicator could be further investigated, but for the 
purpose of using it for planning waste management, it was also considered unimportant at 
this scale. 
Round-off 
Population density, education and mean age seemed to be able to predict differences in the 
collected waste. However, the differences were primarily found in the collected garden waste 
and other waste, which mainly consist of wood and construction waste. The indicators could 
be further investigated, but for the purpose of using them to identify municipalities or areas 
for diverse planning of waste management, they are considered unimportant at this scale. It 
should be noted that this analysis only investigated the presented indicators and only had 
available data from one year. Therefore it is hard to reach any final conclusion on what 
indicators that can and cannot predict waste behaviour in Denmark based on this analysis. 
There are many elements that could have affected the results, e.g. proximity of the foreign 
border, new awareness campaigns on household waste or newly implemented changes in the 
HWM system.  
 
This analysis also investigated other predictors for the planning of waste management. It 
resulted in the conclusion that all the investigated indicators are considered unimportant at 
this scale. The indicators will therefore not be included in further planning of the HWM 
system. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 29 / 100 
4.4.2 Parameters for planning waste management 
During our qualitative study it was identified that household types are often included as a 
parameter in the planning process, where both the infrastructure and behaviour can differ. 
Here the three household types: Houses, apartments and vacation houses were identified to 
involve different waste management approaches. These three household types are also used 
by the Environmental Protection Agency (Kromann et al., 2019). This subsection will 
highlight the differences of the three different household types, to examine if they can be 
used in the design of the homogeneous HWM system. 
 
Throughout our qualitative studies, it was identified that household type reflects differences 
in waste management. Living in a house, an apartment or a vacation house seemed to 
influence the waste behaviour, and hereby how the technical system should be designed. Our 
qualitative study showed that houses generally produce more waste, but has a better sorting 
quality and recycling rate (appendix 1A, reference KK, LT, HK, SF). This was ascribed to an 
increased level of responsibility, as houses are individually responsible for their own 
container. Citizens sharing containers in apartment buildings are not held responsible, if the 
waste is not sorted correctly, because it cannot be tracked directly back to the responsible 
individual (appendix 1A, reference KK, LT, SF, HK). 
 
The infrastructure, the size of the containers and the pick-up frequency are often different 
from apartments to houses (appendix 1A, reference KK, LT, SF, HK). The infrastructure is 
different because containers can be placed inside a backyard for apartment buildings. These 
containers have wheels to enable the dustman to transport them to the dustcart. Another 
difference is that the container in an apartment building can be expensive, due to the fact that 
more people share and pay for the solution. This means that for areas with many apartments, 
a more expensive solution for handling waste can be implemented. This was seen in the 
qualitative study, where some municipalities have established large buried containers for 
apartment areas.  
It was identified that there are differences in the infrastructure and in the behaviour for 
different types of households. These will be used in the analysis and in the further design of 
the holistic HWM system. Before being able to design this system, the following section will 
investigate the current HWM system in Denmark.  
 
4.5 The current waste management system in Denmark 
The waste management sector, as highlighted in the section 4.3, is greatly affected by EU 
regulations. However, the Danish waste management system is still a service that is planned, 
managed, and operationalised by the municipalities. As there exist 98 municipalities in 
Denmark, waste management can differ within small geographical distances. This entails a 
variety of different systems, which result in a different number of pick-up fractions and other 
services. During the analysis it was found that few datasets contained information about the 
amount of textiles that is disposed from Danish households. Therefore it was decided to 
==PAGE:43==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 30 / 100 
narrow the focus to the seven main fraction in the analysis, which here are; organic waste, 
paper, cardboard, metal, glass, plastic and hazardous waste. 
 
This section presents an overview of the HWM system in Denmark today. Here general 
methods and treatments of the waste are presented in subsection 4.5.1. The stakeholder 
network within the industry in Denmark is presented in subsection 4.5.2. Subsection 4.5.3 
presents the differences across the municipalities, focussing on the main solutions for 
collection and services offered for waste management. In subsection 4.5.4 the differences 
within the municipalities is investigated, to see if some implemented systems today performs 
better than others in terms of recycling rates. Lastly the waste content is presented in 
subsection 4.5.5.  
4.5.1 Overview of the HWM system in Denmark  
In Denmark there are generally four different treatments of household waste, which is 
operationalised today. These are: Incineration, gasification through composting or 
composting, recycling and landfill. Here different plants are needed in the process. The 
recycling of waste, as previously mentioned, involves material recovery facilities that are 
customised for the specific fractions it receives. Incineration plants burn waste from the 
households and produces energy from this process. Biogas plants only handle organic 
material. Landfill is used for materials that cannot be incinerated or recycled. An overview of 
the waste management in Denmark has been mapped, please see figure 4-J. The figure can 
also be found in a larger size in appendix 4D. 
 
Figure 4-J: General overview of the HWM in Denmark. Please see appendix 4D for a larger illustration. 
The data is based on the Danish national waste statistics from 2016 (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). 
 
Figure 4-J illustrates the overview of the Danish HWM system, from the production to the 
end-of-life and treatment of the waste. The average Danish household waste production is 
estimated to be 610 kg per citizen every year, which leads to an average of 1309 kg per 
household every year (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). This puts Denmark in the top in the statistics, 
==PAGE:44==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
31 / 100
when considering production of household waste per citizen compared to any other European 
country8. This will be discussed in chapter 8. 
  
As mentioned in section 4.3 the recycling rate in Denmark in 2016 was 48 %, which has been 
gradually increasing each year for several years (Miljøstyrelsen, 2016, 2018). The recycling 
rate accounts for the total waste, sent to either recycling facilities, biogas plants or similar 
composting facilities. The increase in the amount of waste that is sent to recycling is not 
found in the organic waste, but primarily in the five dry fractions for recycling 
(Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). The amount of organic waste collected for biogas plants or similar 
composting facilities account for 1.2 % increase in the overall recycling rates, where other 
fractions account for 3.8 %. Approximately 51 % of all household waste was in 2016 
incinerated (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018). This waste contains valuable material, including metals. 
As seen in figure 4-J a decrease in residual waste, will lead to a reduction in the energy 
produced from the incineration plants, and this energy will need to be replaced. This could 
happen through gasification of organic waste, or other energy sources. The comparison of 
gasification and incineration of organic waste is interesting, as the current system often 
delivers the same type of output: Energy as electricity and heat. Gasification allows the 
energy to be stored, which is convenient for e.g. transportation vehicles, driven by biogas. 
The energy production of heat and electricity from biogas and incineration has been studied 
in research (Andreasi Bassi, Christensen, & Damgaard, 2017; Kromann et al., 2019; 
Thomsen et al., 2016). The environmental impacts are very similar and dependant on the 
energy sources that is used in the society (Kromann et al., 2019) & (appendix 1A, reference 
DTU). Generally the environmental benefits in terms of CO2 emissions are slightly better 
than gasification in a Danish context (Kromann et al., 2019) & (appendix 1A, reference 
DTU). This also depends on the technology used. There are on the other hand several benefits 
for gasification of organic waste in a bio plant, as processes can gain valuable chemicals from 
the organic material, before it is run through the gasification process (Topi & Bilinska, 2017). 
This is also highlighted as being of importance in a future perspective in circular economy 
theories (EMF, 2016). Furthermore, the separation of organic waste from the residual waste, 
will decrease the cross contamination between materials in the residual waste. This will allow 
better and more optimal treatments of the residual waste, for regaining valuable materials 
before incineration. During our interviews it has been highlighted that such a facility is 
currently being planned in the capital region, which can regain some of the unsorted material 
in the residual waste (appendix 1A, reference VF, KK, DAKOFA). Appendix 4E gives a brief 
explanation of the history of bio plants in Denmark and how these plants are driven. 
4.5.2 Stakeholder mapping 
As this project focuses on a standardisation of the HWM system, the stakeholders surround-
ding the processing are important to investigate. This subsection presents the main stake-
holders in the waste management system in Denmark. 
 
                                                
8 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Municipal_waste_statistics [Accesed 2/3/19] 
 
==PAGE:45==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 32 / 100 
There are many different stakeholders involved in the waste management system, and these 
were mapped to improve our understanding of the system. To identify the stakeholders, a 
socio-technical approach was taken, by mapping the arena of development that influences the 
context. This arena included both human and non-human actors, which were grouped into 
different actor worlds (Jørgensen, 2009). The process of mapping the stakeholders was used 
to reduce the risk of overlooking something in the 
system. The importance of the arena is the process of 
creating it, and what this provides (Jørgensen, 2009). 
For this project it has helped to get an overview of 
the system with its many actors, and a way to 
understand our role and hereby get a better 
understanding of our work, the context and the 
surroundings which the project are part of. The arena 
of development can be seen in figure 4-K and a 
larger figure and a more detailed description can be 
found in appendix 4F. It will be used as a way to 
minimise that any stakeholders in the system are 
forgotten. 
 
4.5.3 Overview of the current HWM system in the 98 municipalities 
To be able to accomplish the overall aim of this project, we must understand how the waste 
management system in each municipality is designed and currently working. We focus on the 
different services offered to the citizens within the municipalities. The Environmental 
Protection Agency published a datasheet with an overview of the type of services each 
municipality offered, at the end of 2017. The dataset contained information on the seven 
fractions; organic waste, paper, cardboard, glass, metal, plastic and hazardous waste9. This 
dataset has been compared with another dataset of the current service offers from the 
company JHN processor, which was updated in 2018 and is not publicly available. These two 
datasets was crosschecked to ensure that the data from 2017 is still up to date. During the 
interviews with the municipalities, we have also controlled, that the information for the 
corresponding municipality in the datasheet, has been correct. In a few instances it was found 
that the municipality recently changed their service offers. Some of the municipalities have 
during the interviews, also announced their future plans for the waste management systems, 
and by our judgement the data in this section will therefore be out-dated in a few years. This 
data provides a current overview of the waste management system in Denmark and will be 
the foundation of the overall mapping in this section. We will refer to this dataset as the 
service offer dataset. 
 
                                                
9 https://genanvend.mst.dk/projekter/projektbibliotek/2015/kortlaegning-af-kommunale-affaldsordninger-for-
husholdningsaffald/ [Accesed 21/2/19] 
Figure 4-K: Mapping of the stakeholders 
(appendix 4F) 
==PAGE:46==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 33 / 100 
HWM services in Denmark today 
The number of household pick-up services for the seven fractions was found for each 
municipality, and the data was mapped in figure 4-L. The data is from the service offer 
dataset. Household pick-up service is defined as waste that is picked up at the citizen’s 
house. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The map illustrated in figure 4-L shows that few municipalities offer no or only one 
household pick-up service (dark red). It reveals that the municipalities are often affected by 
the surrounding municipalities. In the southern Jutland almost all municipalities offer house-
hold pick-up for 6 out of 7 fractions. Other regions varies more, but e.g. the northern Zealand 
most of the municipalities offer fewer fractions than national average and much less than e.g. 
in the capital region. The map also reveals that low populated municipalities, are capable of 
offering household pick-up services for as many fractions as high populated municipalities. 
 
About 30 % of the municipalities offer household pick-up for organic waste, which means 
that approximately 70 % of the municipalities incinerate organic food today. About 45 % of 
the municipalities offer household pick-up for hazardous waste for houses and 36% for 
Figure 4-L: The number of fractions that are offered as a household pick-up 
service in each municipality. Note that hazardous waste is counted for both 
containers and bags when pick-up of both electronics and batteries is offered. The 
fractions investigated are; organic waste, paper, cardboard, metal, glass, plastic and 
hazardous waste, therefore residual waste is not included. The overview presents 
the household pick-up number for houses. Please see appendix 4G page 1 for a 
more detailed overview and for pick-up numbers for each fraction. 
==PAGE:47==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 34 / 100 
apartments. Pick-up service for the fractions paper and cardboard is most commonly offered 
through household pick-up, where more than 75 % offer this option. Pick-up for the fractions 
paper and glass are either offered as a station pick-up service or household pick-up service. 
10 - 45 % of the last fractions, not including paper and glass, are only collected through re-
cycling centres.  
 
The type of pick-up services in figure 4-L above covers the number and type of fractions 
collected. The solutions implemented in the municipalities for waste collection will now be 
examined. The data is from the same dataset, the service offer dataset. An overview of the 
services used for collection, and the number of municipalities that offer these solutions, can 
be found in appendix 4H. Please note that organic waste is not included do to missing data. 
Through our qualitative research we determine organic waste, to be most commonly collected 
in a 1-chamber or 2-chamber container. Currently 28 of the municipalities collect hazardous 
waste in a small container, and the rest offer pick-up for hazardous waste through collection 
in small bags on the lid of the residual waste container. 
 
The solutions for collection determine many of the requirements for the infrastructure, in the 
waste management system. The collection is by far the largest expense for the household 
waste management system, accounting for approximately 60% of the entire cost (Mønsted et 
al., 2019). Here the specific container and solutions for pick-up will determine the type of 
dustcart, where e.g. the 4-chamber bin requires a special dustcart, only suited for emptying a 
4-chamber container. When only one chamber is full, the container has to be emptied, which 
decreases the efficiency of the collections. One municipality, that has implemented this 
solution, states that the implementation was driven from a political perspective, to minimise 
the number of containers at the households, and therefore not the recommended solution from 
a waste management perspective (appendix 1A, reference LT). However, it was also 
highlighted that the support from the vast majority in the municipal council, was a large 
influencer on the citizens’ participation in the sorting program (appendix 1A, reference LT). 
 
The plastic container with 1- or 2-chambers are more flexible than the 4-chamber container, 
as dustcarts can be fitted to empty both solutions. The 1-chamber container is most common 
in apartments, which can be subscribed to the necessary capacity for this type of household. 
2-chamber and 4-chamber containers are therefore almost only found at houses. A buried 
container requires a special vehicle, but on the other hand it has many benefits, that has been 
highlighted during the interviews. Here the capacity of a buried container is much higher. The 
waste can also be transported in a larger vehicle, which removes the need for compression of 
materials such as glass, which enables the direct reuse of e.g. glass bottles. Scout services and 
bulky waste services, can enable the local community to take part of the waste management 
system. Furthermore it was highlighted in the interviews, that the possibility to have local 
adaptation can ensure that the municipalities can be innovative and come of with new ideas 
for waste management. The different solutions found in the municipalities, illustrate very 
different approaches to waste management. The cost and environmental impacts for each 
solution are hard to estimate, as e.g. the participation in the sorting program is dependant on 
==PAGE:48==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 35 / 100 
this as well. Here a potentially costly and an environmentally worse solution could prove to 
be better during operation, because it increases the amount of waste sorted. It has been found 
that plastic containers have equal cost for operation (Mønsted et al., 2019). The market for 
collection of household waste is characterised by strong competition, which has lead to fewer 
players in the market. Today competition mostly focuses on price (Mønsted et al., 2019). 
Aligning the solutions used for collection would provide some economic benefits, as it could 
ensure more efficient use of dustcarts (Mønsted et al., 2019). As such, aligning these services 
should be a discussion between having local adaptation, and potential savings in the overall 
infrastructure. However, it is estimated that the potential to lower the cost further is limited 
due to the competition within the field (Mønsted et al., 2019). Removing the option of 
adapting household waste services to local needs, can result in lower participation rates and 
bad adaptation to local needs. We furthermore experienced a sceptical attitude towards 
forcing a specific collection service upon all municipalities (appendix 1A, reference KK, LT, 
HK, RS, REFA, DIN, JHN). Therefore it is not advised to establish fixed requirements for the 
solutions and services used for collection. 
 
Off-site and on-site segregation of household waste in Denmark 
The number of municipalities that uses off-site segregation and on-site segregation was 
investigated based on the same dataset, the service offer dataset. Please see figure 4-M. A 
more detailed overview can be found in appendix 4G page 2. The figure illustrates 
municipalities that use on-site segregation of waste marked with a light blue colour, and 
municipalities that use off-site segregation of waste marked with a dark blue colour. On the 
illustrations the municipalities that currently use off-site segregation can be seen. 
 
Figure 4-M: On the left: Number of municipalities using off-site segregation or complete on-site segregation 
for different fractions. On the right the map illustrates municipalities that uses complete on-site segregation 
(light blue) or some off-site segregation (dark blue). Please also see appendix 4G page 2 for a more detailed 
overview of the number of fractions that are used for off-site segregation in the municipalities 
==PAGE:49==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 36 / 100 
The number of municipalities that uses off-site segregation to some extent, is substantial as 
seen in figure 4-M and in appendix 4G. When focussing on each fraction individually, less 
than one third of the fractions are collected as off-site segregated. The geographical location 
of the municipalities seems to affect whether off-site segregation is used. This aligns with the 
expected outcome, as the qualitative study highlighted the fact that the municipalities are 
affected by the facilities for waste treatment in their proximity. Here almost all municipalities 
on Zealand use on-site segregation for all collected fractions. Off-site segregation is mostly 
used in Jutland, and the majority of the municipalities in this area use some off-site 
segregation of household waste. No direct link was found between the number of fractions 
collected from the households and whether off-site or on-site segregation is used.  Low 
densely populated areas on the other hand, generally offer fewer fractions for pick-up unless 
they use off-site segregation. A further investigation of the different off-site segregation 
system that is operating today, could establish an overview of the different strategies that 
exist. Therefore a map has been created that illustrates the different types of existing 
segregation systems. There exist ten different off-site segregation systems in Denmark. These 
are presented below and can also be seen on a map of Denmark in appendix 4G page 3.  
 
1. Metal / glass / rigid plastic (MPG) 
2. Cardboard / paper 
3. Metal / plastic 
4. Metal / rigid plastic 
5. Glass / metal 
6. Glass / rigid plastic 
7. Soft plastic / cardboard 
8. Soft plastic / cardboard / paper together with metal / glass / rigid plastic 
9. Cardboard / paper together with metal / glass / rigid plastic 
10. Cardboard / paper together with metal / plastic 
 
As illustrated the different off-site segregation systems requires 
different MRFs, resulting in smaller fragmented waste streams. 
These streams can vary in quality, and the MRFs cannot be 
specialised, as the waste streams from few municipalities does 
not justify a large investment in a specialised MRF (appendix 
1A, reference HK, RS, KK, LT).  
 
The current practices for handling plastic was also investigated 
and the three different practices can be seen figure 4-N. Here 
the percentage of the municipalities that uses each system can 
also be seen. 
 
 
 
Figure 4-N: Current practice for 
collecting plastic in Denmark for 
houses. Percentage of the 98 
municipalities 
==PAGE:50==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 37 / 100 
The environmental impact of the different mixes will be further examined in section 4.7. Here 
we investigated if one of these off-site segregation systems, including municipalities that only 
using on-site segregation, were able to collect more waste for recycling in 2017. This investi-
gation is elaborated in the next subsection. 
4.5.4 Statistical analysis on the performance of the Danish HWM systems 
We have been unable to find research that investigate recycling rates across the different 
waste management approaches. Therefore this subsection analyses the recycling rates for 
different waste management systems illustrated in subsection 4.5.3.  
The Environmental Protection Agency releases a yearly report, containing an overview of 
waste performance and statistics on regions and their general recycling rates. The last report 
was released in June 2018 and contained data from 2016 (Miljøstyrelsen, 2018), which 
during this project was the newest publicly available information. As the publicly available 
data do not contain information on individual municipal performance, the data cannot be 
used. Therefore the municipal dataset, which was elaborated in the method section 4.2, was 
used. The municipalities was categorized in groups to be able to compare the implemented 
waste management systems, e.g. the number of fractions that is offered as a household pick-
up service or type of segregation system.  
 
The analysis investigated the total production of waste, and the recycling rate of the five dry 
fractions: Paper, cardboard, metal, glass, and plastic (the same fractions as in subsection 
4.4.1). It was investigated whether differences in the waste management system result in 
significant differences in either the production of waste or recycling rates.  
 
Second this subsection presents an analysis of the two fractions: Metal and glass. A first look 
at the data established the idea that large quantities of metal, could lead to lower amounts of 
glass and vice versa. This means that there can be a relation between these two fractions.  
 
All data has been treated in the computer programs R Studio and Microsoft Excel and the R 
script can be found in appendix 4C.  
 
Two overall questions have been formulated for the goal of this statistical analysis. 
 
1. Analysis of different HWM systems 
Is the recycling rate influenced by (1) the type of segregations system, (2) the number 
of available fractions that are offered as a household pick-up service, and/or (3) the 
option of household pick-up for the individual fraction? 
 
2. Analysis of glass and metal 
Does the amount of collected metal and glass vary significantly when separated or 
when mixed together, according to different indicators that are assumed to predict a 
difference in waste behaviour? 
 
==PAGE:51==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 38 / 100 
1. Analysis of waste management systems 
To answer the first question, the effect on the recycling rate in municipalities was tested on 
the basis of the current waste management systems. A one-way ANOVA analysis was chosen 
as an efficient way to determine variance in the different groups. Please see the R script in 
appendix 4C marked as ‘Second analysis: Performance on different parameters’. The tested 
parameters are: a) The number of fractions offered as a household pick-up service, b) the type 
of segregation system (see the systems in figure appendix 4G page 3), and c) whether the 
individual fraction is picked up at the household or not. A one-way ANOVA analysis was 
performed on each parameter and the recycling rates of the five dry fractions have been set as 
output. The recycling rate for each fraction is assumed randomly and normally distributed, 
which corresponds well with the distribution of samples in a histogram. The analysis shows 
that the parameter c) pick-up, is statically significant. Pick-up seems to have a significant 
effect on the recycling rate of any fraction in the ANOVA analysis. This corresponds well 
with the expected outcome. The other parameters a) and b) are not significant in this regard, 
but need to be investigated further for each individual fraction on its own. Therefore each 
individual fraction has been tested in relation to the three parameters a), b), and c). 
Individually there is a statistically significant correlation between several parameters. These 
are listed in table 4-O below. 
 
ANOVA Output  
Recycling rates of fraction 
Parameters a), b), and c) with correlation to: 
Paper  
Pick-up: Some evidence (P < 0.05) 
(Pick-up is YES or NO representing household pick-up) 
Cardboard  
None, although Number of fractions collected from the household 
have weak evidence (P < 0.10) 
Metal  
Number of fractions collected from the household: some evidence 
(P < 0.05) 
Glass  
Number of fractions collected from the household: some evidence 
(P < 0.05) 
Plastic 
Number of fractions collected from the household: some evidence 
(P < 0.05) 
Table 4-O: One-way ANOVA output and the parameters with significant correlation 
 
The results indicate that the effect of offering household pick-up (c), might not be as strong 
as expected. Paper seems to be the only fraction that is significantly better to collect directly 
from the households. Other collected fractions cannot be proven different in terms of 
recycling rates, when they are not collected directly from the household. The data used in this 
analysis is from a single year, and many factors determine the collection of the individual 
fractions, which means no final conclusion can be determined on the basis of this result. The 
research and interviews with key stakeholders still show that household pick-up does increase 
the amount of collected waste for each fraction. Please see figure 4-P, which shows the 
calculated mean for each fraction, when it is picked up at the household or through any other 
channel. 
 
==PAGE:52==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 39 / 100 
 
Figure 4-P: Mean recycling rates for each fraction, when household pick-up service is available or not available 
for each fraction. Percentage recycled is in relation to the total waste production without the categories garden 
waste and other waste.  
 
The parameter a) that determines the number of fractions collected as a household pick-up 
service in the municipality, is the parameter that seems to be the best indicator for prediction 
of the recycling rates. The recycling rates for metal, glass, plastic and perhaps cardboard 
(evidence is weak, P < 0.10), have a correlation between the numbers of fractions that is 
collected from the households. This is interesting, as household collection of e.g. metal 
cannot be proven to increase the recycling rates for metal with the dataset. However, a 
generally large number of fractions collected from the household seem to have a significant 
effect. Please see figure 4-Q, which shows the calculated mean for three groups that represent 
municipalities with high (6-7), medium (3-5) or low (1-2) number of fractions collected at the 
households. Please note that the residual waste fraction is not included in this number. 
 
Figure 4-Q: Recycling mean rates 2017 for each fraction for municipalities with high, medium or low amount 
of fractions collected from the households. Percentage recycled is in relation to the total waste production 
without garden or other waste.  
==PAGE:53==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 40 / 100 
For all fractions except metal, the ANOVA analysis shows, that no difference in the recycling 
rate across the different types of segregation systems can be proven. A Tukey Honest 
Significant Differences (Tukey HSD) reveals, that none of the tested segregation systems 
performs better than the other for metal, when tested individually against each other. 
Therefore we can conclude, that no type of segregation system seems to perform better than 
the other systems, for any fractions in terms of the recycling rates for 2017.  
 
The analysis shows that only paper has a significant difference, when it is picked up at the 
household. No variation between the groups was found for the other fractions, which could 
indicate that household pick-up services might not be as effective for all fractions as 
expected. Figure 4-P shows the calculated mean for each fraction, for municipalities that 
offer or do not offer household pick-up of the corresponding fraction. Here especially 
cardboard, metal and glass seems to have the same recycling rate across the groups. Again 
remember that the recycling rates can be a result of good sorting or a larger production of the 
recyclable fractions, and therefore these results can only be used as indications. For instance 
municipalities that do not offer household pick-up for cardboard, might produce more 
cardboard.  
 
On the basis of this analysis, it is concluded that the number of fractions collected from the 
household, seems to improve the recycling rates. No difference in recycling rates across the 
different types of segregation systems could be found, and therefore they are assumed to be 
the same. This means that we do not see any type of segregation system, performing better 
than the other in terms of the sorted amount. 
Analysis of glass and metal 
To answer the second question, and investigate the relation between collection of metal and 
glass, the recycling rates of glass and metal are compared. These are compared in groups, 
when treated separately and when summed together. Indicators that are expected to predict a 
difference in the collected amount are used for the comparison. These indicators are 
population density, mean income, mean age and percentage with a higher education. A one-
way ANOVA analysis has been performed on each parameter, and the outcome showed that 
population density, mean income and mean age have statistically significant correlation with 
the recycling rates. The evidence was very strong (P < 0.001) for population density and 
strong (P < 0.01) for mean age and mean income. Therefore it is assumed that the recycling 
rates are different in the groups, according to the three above-mentioned indicators. Please 
see table 4.R. 
 
ANOVA Output 
Indicators with correlation: 
Metal and glass recycling rates treated separately 
Population density: very strong evidence (P < 
0.001) 
Mean income: strong evidence (P < 0.01) 
Mean age: strong evidence (P < 0.01) 
Total recycling rate of both Metal and glass treated 
together  
None 
Table 4-R: One-way ANOVA output and the indicators with significant correlation 
==PAGE:54==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
41 / 100
The same test was performed on the total recycling rate of metal and glass together. When the 
ANOVA test is performed on total recycling rate of these two fractions, the recycling rate 
does not vary on any of the previous indicators. The recycling rates can no longer be proven 
to be significantly different, and therefore it is assumed to be the same across the groups. 
Please see table 4-R. It is concluded that metal and glass are significantly different in the 
collected amount for the indicators; population density, mean age and mean income, but the 
total collected amount of metal and glass are the same across the same indicators. For each of 
these indicators three groups was created with a high, medium and low category. 
Municipalities were distributed according to their position, in relation to the indicators. Each 
group holds approximately one third of the municipalities. Then a mean value for each 
category was calculated. Please see figures 4-S, 4-T and 4-U, which illustrate a calculated 
mean of the recycling rates for the three different indicators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4-S: Recycling mean rates 2017 for metal and glass separately and the total recycling mean 
rate of both fractions together for municipalities with high, medium and low mean income. 
Percentage recycled is in relation to the total waste production without garden and other waste.  
Figure 4-T: Recycling mean rates 2017 for metal and glass separately and the total 
recycling mean rate of both fractions together for municipalities with high, medium and low 
population density. Percentage recycled is in relation to the total waste production without 
garden and other waste.  
==PAGE:55==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 42 / 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As seen in figure 4-S, 4-T and 4-U the mean value, for the collected glass and metal is 
different across the groups; low, medium and high, but at the same level when together. This 
phenomenon was found across multiple of the tested indicators in the analysis; amount of 
collected metal is low when amount of collected glass is high. The amount of glass and metal 
vary and might substitute each other based on lifestyle, as e.g. large consumption of 
aluminium cans might lower the amount of other beverages, such as glass bottles. We 
investigated this further, with data from a report presenting a residual waste analysis from 
2017 (Lerche, Petersen, & Tønning, 2018). Here we assumed that the disposed amount of 
glass and metal in the residual waste, were the same across the locations. Due to the variation 
of the household size it has not been able to establish any relationship between these two 
fractions for houses, which must be further investigated. For apartments, it seems to be the 
case that these two fractions are more stable when collected together. Note that this is only an 
indication, as this analysis only involves residual waste. Please see appendix 4J, which 
illustrates the collected amount of metal and glass in the seven different locations. If the 
amount of metal and glass are more stable when collected together, it might ensure a more 
optimal collection of these two fractions, if they are mixed in the households.  
4.5.5 Overview of waste content in Denmark 
The previous subsection investigated the differences between the current HWM systems in 
Denmark. With this overview in mind, the further analysis of the important aspects of HWM 
can be investigated. As described in the literature review, different materials have different 
life cycles, and therefore the environmental impact varies accordingly. To be able to prioritise 
what fractions to collect, it is important to know the amount of available material there exists 
in the household waste. As much recyclable material, which is currently disposed into the 
residual waste, it is important to investigate this fraction. Furthermore it is important to 
combine this data with an investigation of the recyclable material, that is collected through 
other channels. This can establish a complete overview of the materials that can be collected 
in the HWM system. Such overviews are, as mentioned in the literature review, often based 
on samples. A recent report published by the environmental protection agency (Kromann et 
al., 2019) presents a complete content overview of the Danish household waste. However, 
Figure 4-U: Recycling mean rates 2017 for metal and glass separately and the total recycling 
mean rate of both fractions together for municipalities with high, medium and low mean age. 
Percentage recycled is in relation to the total waste production without garden and other waste.  
==PAGE:56==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 43 / 100 
these overviews date back to 2012 (Kromann et al., 2019). Therefore we decided to 
investigate the waste content, based on the available data we have had available in this 
project from 2017. This section presents the findings from this analysis. First the content of 
the residual waste was investigated. Second an overall estimation of the complete waste 
content was created. This will now be presented. 
Overview of the residual waste content 
To create an entire overview of the household waste, the residual waste was investigated. 
This was done to identify the materials that could potentially have been recycled. For this 
overview an investigation of two different projects that analysed residual waste in 2017 and 
2018 was used. The first dataset is based on a project funded by the environmental protection 
agency in 2017, that analysed the content of the residual waste in 1600 households in 8 
different municipalities (Lerche et al., 2018). Here 800 households were houses in the 4 
municipalities: Aabenraa, Osherred, Rødovre and Viborg. The other 800 households were 
apartments in Gladsaxe, Guldborgssund, Horsens and Kerteminde. These 8 municipalities 
were in the project determined to be representable for the entire country. The municipalities 
were equally distributed east and west in Denmark. This dataset has in their report been 
estimated to be accurate for determining an average for the country (Lerche et al., 2018). This 
project investigated the residual waste and included the fractions plastic and organic waste. 
The other dataset is from a project from 2018 from Ringkøbing-Skjern and Varde 
municipality (Møller & Nyborg, 2018), which investigated the residual waste for 
approximately 400 vacation houses in the 4 areas Houstrup, Blåvand, Hafavej and Nordsø 
Ferievej. These areas all have a high intensity of tourism and are situated on the west coast of 
Denmark. We have not been able to confirm the accuracy of the data for the prediction of 
other areas with many vacation houses, but as it is the best available dataset it will be 
presented in this section. These two datasets are the foundation of the overview of the 
residual waste. The data has been adapted to the categories; Organic waste (including food 
waste), Paper, Cardboard, combustible material (including e.g. tetra pack), rigid plastic, 
other plastic (including soft plastic), metal, not burnable material, glass, textiles, electronics 
and hazardous waste. Please see the original analysis and published paper to see a more 
detailed description of the content (Lerche et al., 2018; Møller & Nyborg, 2018). The 
distribution of the content of residual waste can be seen in figure 4-V. 
 
==PAGE:57==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 44 / 100 
 
Figure 4-V Overview of the distribution of residual waste for Danish houses and apartments 2017 and vacation 
houses 2018 situated on the west coast. Please note that the differences between the categories cardboard and 
other fibre and combustible are caused by differences in the categorisation of the fractions 
 
As seen in figure 4-V organic waste accounts for about half of the entire mass of the residual 
waste for all households. All the recyclable fractions account for maximum 32% of the all the 
residual waste if organic waste is incinerated. This is an important aspect to keep in mind, as 
many municipalities can increase their general recycling rates significantly by offering 
household pick-up for organic waste. An investigation of the environmental benefits and how 
organic waste should be treated in the future waste management system, therefore plays a 
vital part in this project. As seen the vacation houses produce significantly more glass 
compared to houses and apartments. This was also one of the conclusions in this residual 
analysis of vacation houses (Møller & Nyborg, 2018). However, there are generally few 
differences in waste content for the three household types.  
 
Overview of the entire household waste content 
The overview of the residual waste does not give an overview of all household waste, as 
much waste travels through other channels, e.g. the recyclable fractions from household pick-
up or station pick-up services. As much household waste travels through other channels, 
these channels need to be included to get an overview of the entire waste content. The project 
presented an overview of the content of the residual, organic and plastic waste fractions in the 
previous subsection. Therefore the outcome of the residual waste analysis alone, do not 
present the entire content of the waste that is produced in the households.  
 
There are estimations of the entire waste content in Denmark, which are based on data that 
dates back to 2012 and might be out-dated (Kromann et al., 2019). The entire waste content 
has therefore been calculated. The municipal dataset has been used for this purpose as this 
contains data from six out of the eight municipalities that was included in the residual waste 
analysis. The recycling rates of these six municipalities have been added for the fractions 
paper, cardboard, metal and glass. The recycling rates from the two municipalities, that we 
==PAGE:58==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 45 / 100 
have not been able to access, have been calculated using an average of the three 
municipalities with similar types of households.  
 
The waste content analysis has been conducted to get a precise overview of the household 
waste that can be included in the household pick-up program. Therefore large pieces of metal, 
glass or plastic have not been included in this content overview. Note that the data for the 
individual municipalities has been removed to ensure that no individual performance can be 
determined. The collected packaging waste for all fractions together with newspaper has been 
added to the residual waste analysis for the corresponding municipalities. This gives an 
overview of the entire waste content that can be handled through the household pick-up 
system. Please see the two figures 4-W and 4-X, which illustrate the entire waste content in 
mass and in percentage. 
 
 
Figure 4-W: Overview of the distribution in household waste for Danish houses and apartments in 2017. 
Garden waste, constructional waste and large electronics are not included in this overview. 
 
 
Figure 4-X: Overview of the distribution of household waste for Danish houses and apartments in 2017. 
Percentage of total mass without garden waste, constructional waste and large electronics. 
 
As seen the distribution of waste is similar to the residual waste content overview that is 
presented in figure 4-V. However, especially paper, cardboard and glass is significantly 
==PAGE:59==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 46 / 100 
higher, when considering the other channels the recyclable fractions are distributed through. 
Organic waste still takes up a large part of the entire waste content. Glass is seen to be 
significantly larger when considering these other channels, which corresponds well with the 
qualitative study, which showed that glass generally has high participation rates in the sorting 
programs. 
 
An interesting finding in these results is that the amount of cardboard and paper varies 
significantly from the results in the recent report published by the environmental protection 
agency (Kromann et al., 2019, p. 26 bilag 6). Their report uses data that dates back to 2012. 
The analysis indicates that the waste content in the Danish households has changed since 
2012. The amount of cardboard seems to have increased from approximately 3 % of the 
entire waste content in 2012 to 8 % in 2017. Paper seems to have decreased from 
approximately 21 % in 2012 to 16 % in 2017 (Kromann et al., 2019). One specialist has 
during the interviews highlighted that cardboard is shown to increase and paper to decrease in 
recent statistics (appendix 1A, reference DTU). An investigation of the general tendency of 
the content of the residual waste can be seen in appendix 4K. This shows that paper has 
significantly decreased over the last 40 years, and hereby verify our assumption. Therefore 
we find our content overview presented in this subsection more descriptive of the current 
waste content in Denmark. The newly established content overview will be important for 
further investigations of the environmental impacts on recycling of the different fractions. 
These findings will be further discussed in the analysis of the environmental impact in section 
4.7. This section will further analyse the content to get an overview of the volume the 
individual fractions consume. 
 
An analysis of the volume is important when considering the capacity of the containers and 
transportation. Here Volume-to-Weight Conversion Factors from the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency has been used for the calculation. Please see appendix 4L, which shows 
the individual conversion factors for each fraction that has been used. The volume has been 
calculated as an average volume in litters per week for each fraction when uncompressed. 
Please see figure 4-Y. 
 
 
Figure 4-Y: Overview of the average litters produced per week for each fraction for Danish houses and 
apartments in 2017. Conversion to volume is based on volume-to-weight Conversion factors for mass to volume 
conversion factors. Garden waste, constructional waste and large electronics are not included in this overview. 
==PAGE:60==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 47 / 100 
As seen in figure 4-Y the volume each fraction takes up is very different from the 
corresponding mass. Especially plastic and cardboard materials consume a lot of volume 
compared to their mass. This means that more than 60% of the entire volume of the waste is 
plastic or cardboard material when uncompressed. This is important to keep in mind when 
designing the waste management system. Especially when using off-site segregation, where 
the mixture of some fractions partly of completely removes the option of compression in the 
dustcart chamber. This should be kept in mind when analysing the environmental impacts of 
each fraction further.  
4.5.6 Round-off 
This section created a valuable overview of waste management in Denmark and investigated 
important aspects in relation to the main objective from the problem statement. This overview 
will be important for the further work of a standardised waste management system in 
Denmark. Please also see appendix 4M, which shows the recycling potential for different 
scenarios. Furthermore the analysis led to the conclusion that a standardisation of the 
collection services might be a disadvantage. As such the findings in this section led to a more 
precise definition of the scope. Here it was decided to focus on the fractions that should be 
collected and how they can be mixed in an off-site segregated system. With an overview of 
the Danish HWM system we decided that we wanted to investigate HWM practices in other 
countries. This will happen in the next section. 
 
4.6 Waste sorting in other countries  
We wanted to investigate waste management practices in other countries, to get inspired of 
other ways to handle waste. Here some practices and technical solutions allow the fractions to 
be mixed or treated differently than in the HWM systems in Denmark. This chapter presents 
some of the areas that were found relevant. 
4.6.1 Waste sorting in other countries  
The recycling rate in the EU was investigated to 
get an overview of countries that perform well in 
terms of recycling. Please see figure 4-Z.  
 
The graph to the right shows the recycling rate of 
municipal waste for 28 EU countries in 2017. 
Denmark was on an 11th place overtaken by 
countries like Italy, Lithuania, and Luxembourg. 
The two countries with the highest recycling rates 
were investigated further, to see if elements from 
the systems could be used, as inspiration for the 
design of the new technical system.  
 
Figure 4-Z Recycling rate in the EU member states 
(Data from Eurostat). 
==PAGE:61==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 48 / 100 
Germany 
Germany was according to Eurostat the country in the EU that recycles the most municipal 
waste. Germany has four different fractions for household waste10. These are: 
 
● Yellow fraction: Bins for apartments and bags for houses that is distributed for free. 
This fraction is used for lightweight packaging, which includes metal, rigid and soft 
plastic, and composite materials, e.g. Tetra-packs/milk cartons, coffee packs. This 
fraction is only used in some municipalities. 
● Green or blue fraction: This fraction is for paper and cardboard, e.g. paper bags and 
newspapers. It does not include stained paper. 
● Brown fraction: This fraction is for organic waste  
● Black or grey fraction: This fraction is for residual waste  
 
Electrical waste, bulky waste and textiles are collected through recycling centres. Glass is 
collected through station pick-up services and is sorted in three different colours; transparent, 
brown, and blue/green. 
 
Germany started the Green Dot initiative11, where manufacturers can pay to mark their 
products with the Green Dot stamp on their food packaging, where the weight of the 
packaging determines the cost. This can be a way to make the manufacturer use less material 
for packaging. 
 
Slovenia - Ljubljana 
Slovenia was the country in EU that recycled the second largest amount of municipal waste 
in 2017. In the capital of Slovenia the following five types of underground containers exist: 
 
● Green fraction: These containers are for glass  
● Yellow fraction: This fraction is for packaging waste, including rigid and soft plastic, 
metal, composite materials (e.g. Tetra-packs/milk cartons) and Styrofoam 
● Blue fraction: This fraction is for paper and cardboard e.g. magazines, books, 
wrapping paper. It does not include waxed or coated paper. 
● Black fraction: This fraction is for residual waste  
● Brown fraction: This fraction is for organic waste  
 
To be able to dispose organic and residual waste the citizens have a special identification card 
called SNAGA. When scanning the card on the container it opens and the waste can be 
disposed. The bag will then drop into the buried underground container.  
                                                
10 https://handbookgermany.de/en/live/waste-separation.html [Accessed 27/3/19] 
11 https://www.gruener-punkt.de/en.html [Accessed 28/3/19] 
==PAGE:62==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 49 / 100 
Ljubljana uses fines for wrongly disposal or for illegally dumped waste next to the 
containers12. These fines are typically around € 200-800, but higher if hazardous waste is 
among the misplaced or illegally dumped waste.  
A large difference between these two countries and Denmark, is that the two countries collect 
more materials for recycling, e.g. Tetra-packs, Styrofoam, and coffee packaging. However, 
finding ways to include more material into the fractions was not the main focus in this 
project. Here the focus was to investigate what fractions to collect and how these can be 
mixed in an off-site segregated system. Therefore we want to highlight a HWM system, 
which is currently being used in Oslo. 
 
Bag sorting in Oslo, Norway 
A different waste sorting strategy was found in Oslo, the capital of Norway13. The city uses 
one large container for the three fractions: Residual waste, organic waste and plastic. The 
fractions are sorted into different plastic bags with colour-codes; organic waste is disposed 
into a green plastic bag, and the plastic waste is disposed into a blue plastic bag. The citizens 
get these bags free of charge at supermarkets. The MRF uses optical identification to separate 
the coloured bags for recycling and biogas production.  
 
Containers for paper and cardboard include Tetra-packs, pizza boxes, and wrapping paper. 
Metal and glass is collected together through station pick-up services. 
 
The system with coloured bags is interesting because it allows the citizen to have fewer 
containers outside the household. This finding can be interesting to include in the further 
development of a homogenous HWM system. Here one or several fractions can be sorted into 
coloured bags, and collected through the existing infrastructure.  
 
The overview of the Danish HWM system and inputs from HWM in other countries is 
important for the further development of the new technical system. The next part of the 
analysis focuses on the environmental impacts and implications of the HWM system. 
 
4.7 Recycling benefits for the circular economy  
As seen in the previous sections, the waste management systems can be operationalised in 
many different ways. While municipalities are measured on their yearly recycling rates, other 
aspects are important when considering the waste management system. Here important 
aspects to keep in mind, when comparing the waste management systems are factors such as; 
environmental objectives, technical functions, types of recyclable materials collected and 
behaviour (Dahlén, 2005). These are investigated further in subsection 4.7.1, where the 
benefits of recycling are investigated from a life cycle perspective. Secondly, the behavioural 
                                                
12 https://www.total-slovenia-news.com/how-to-slovenia/1591-how-to-use-the-underground-trash-containers-in-
ljubljana [Accessed 28/3/19] 
13 https://www.oslo.kommune.no/english/waste-and-recycling/recycling-in-oslo/#gref [Accessed 28/3/19] 
==PAGE:63==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 50 / 100 
elements that seem to improve sorting behaviour are highlighted in subsection 4.7.2. Lastly 
the implications of mixing different fractions are discussed in subsection 4.7.3, in order to 
find pros and cons for the different types of off-site segregation systems. 
4.7.1 Recycling through a life cycle perspective 
As mentioned in the literature review, life cycle assessments (LCAs) are important in order to 
understand the potential environmental impact of a HWM system. With an overview of the 
current waste management systems in Denmark, the environmental impact is taken into 
account. Here the content overview from subsection 4.5.5 illustrates the materials that can be 
collected from the households. This section will focus on the environmental impacts of 
recycling of the individual fractions. Earlier we have mostly focused on understanding the 
overall systems. This means that an overview of the consequences of recycling these fractions 
is now presented, to identify what fractions to included into the HWM pick-up program. A 
research evaluation of 366 materials LCA datasets from production plants, shows that there 
are significant differences between the CO2 emissions of using recycled or virgin material in 
production (Brogaard, Damgaard, Jensen, Barlaz, & Christensen, 2014). Here recycling of 
aluminium has a significant advantage in terms of energy consumption and CO2 emissions, 
where glass has a less significant advantage. Generally the ranking of the environmental 
benefits for recycling of the materials are; aluminium >> steel/iron > copper > plastic > paper 
> glass in relation to recycled mass (Brogaard et al., 2014; Merrild, Damgaard, & 
Christensen, 2008) & (appendix 1A, reference DTU). Please note that the operation and 
system managing the materials affects the emissions significantly. The mean values of CO2 
emissions for the primary and the secondary production for several materials can be seen in 
table 4-AA below. The mean value of the CO2 emissions for production can be seen. This is 
an important aspect for the further development of the HWM system. 
  
  
Primary production 
mean kg CO2/kg material 
Secondary production 
mean kg CO2/kg material 
Paper 
1,24 
0,73 
Newsprint 
2,22 
0,89 
Cardboard 
1,85 
- 
Corrugated board 
1,14 
0,82 
Glass 
1,10 
0,74 
Plastic HDPE 
1,88 
0,35 
Plastic LDPE 
2,02 
0,45 
Plastic LLDPE 
1,65 
- 
Plastic PET 
3,43 
0,53 
Plastic PP 
2,41 
- 
Plastic PVC 
2,41 
- 
Types of PS 
2,99 
1,27 
Steel 
2,21 
1,27 
Aluminium 
13,82 
2,18 
Table 4-AA: Mean values of emissions of CO2 per kg material produced for the 
primary and secondary production. Data from Brogaard et al.’s research evaluation 
(2014) of 366 material datasets. Please note that the research highlights that the 
CO2 emissions of materials varies depending on the facility. 
==PAGE:64==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
51 / 100
The table illustrates that recycling generally seems to be better in relation to CO2, although 
differences between the processing technology and plants affect this. This is in relation to the 
mass of the material reproduced. The content analysis from subsection 4.5.5 revealed what 
materials there currently exist in the household waste. Here the amount of e.g. metal, which is 
generally rated as important in terms of environmental benefits per kilogram, only 
represented about 3-4 % of the household waste. Fibre material represented approximately 30 
% of the household waste, which is generally rated lower in terms of environmental benefits 
per kilogram. Therefore it is important to investigate three areas in the LCA; the 
environmental benefits when recycling the material, the amount of material produced in the 
households, combined with the operation of the waste management system. Please note that 
glass has one of the smallest advantages in terms of recycling. There are however other 
aspects to investigate, in the overall estimation of whether to include a material into the pick-
up program or not. An example is that metal and glass do not burn inside the incineration 
plant. This causes issues during this process, as it has to be specially treated (appendix 1A, 
reference VF, DTU). Involving such aspects means, that a life cycle assessment of the entire 
waste management system becomes highly complex. Because of this we investigated a recent 
life cycle study of HWM in Denmark. Here an LCA has been carried out for different waste 
management systems (Kromann et al., 2019). This represents a life cycle perspective of the 
waste management for 11 different waste management scenarios, which includes both off-site 
and on-site segregation systems. The general conclusion is that recycling of the five dry 
fractions increases the environmental performance. Systems using off-site and on-site 
segregation have a similar environmental impact (Kromann et al., 2019). The report estimates 
that mixing cardboard, plastic, metal and residual waste and keep organic waste, glass and 
paper separate is best in terms of CO2 emissions. However, it is also highlighted that scenario 
requires high risk, as the calculations are purely theoretically based. As such the report 
concludes that recycling generally is environmentally beneficial. The infrastructure can both 
increase and decrease the environmental performance. Here the loss of valuable materials due 
to the treatment lead to a reduction in environmental performance, while a more efficient use 
of the infrastructure could reduce the fuel consumption and hereby increase it. As such the 
material loss in the MRFs for off-site segregation systems is important to investigate in 
further work. 
 
An empirical study of MRFs in the U.S. has been conducted in 2015 (Pressley, Levis, 
Damgaard, Barlaz, & DeCarolis, 2015). This showed that complete separation in central 
facilities with a mixed waste stream, reduces the amount of recoverable material 
significantly. This is due to cross-contamination, that exists between certain materials and 
products. Therefore, to some extent, partly separation at the source is necessary for fulfilling 
the goals of a circular economy. Moreover the study showed that recovery rates are higher for 
facilities with a commingled waste stream of fibre, metal, glass and plastic, than from mixed 
waste MRFs, but cross-contamination between the materials still exist (Pressley et al., 2015). 
An on-site segregated waste stream leads to a significantly better recovery rates, when it is 
compared to the commingled waste stream of fibre, metal, glass and plastic. It has not been 
possible to find life cycle assessments of commingled waste streams containing fewer 
==PAGE:65==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 52 / 100 
fractions, e.g. metal and plastic, even after asking Anders Broberg, the co-author on this 
study (see interview questions, appendix 1A, page 5). A determination of an optimal waste 
management system is therefore currently hard to establish, due to the lack of research 
material and available life cycle assessments of MRFs with two or three mixed fractions. 
Planning and designing an optimal waste management system therefore relies on more 
research within the field. From the perspective of circular economy the cross-contamination 
is absolutely essential to understand, in order to insure that the materials are not damaged 
during the processing and treatment of the waste. Because of limited research this project 
relies on the qualitative information for the investigation of the benefits and environmental 
impacts of MRFs with fewer fractions. 
 
As found in the literature review, cross-contamination is essential to understand to determine 
the quality of recyclable materials. This can, as mentioned above, occur due to contamination 
of other unwanted products, e.g. glass pieces in recycled plastic, but also due to the mix of 
quality of similar materials. Plastic can be produced in different qualities, where low-quality 
product can never be recycled into better qualities (Eriksen, 2019). As mentioned in the 
literature review, the ideal circular economy can recycle products into similar products. This 
means that low-quality and high-quality materials should be able to be recycled separately. It 
would however, be difficult to ask citizens for an individual fraction for each material, as e.g. 
plastic can be produced from a large range of different polymer chains, leaving the citizen 
with an excessive amount of containers. The majority of rigid plastic waste in the households 
can be narrowed down to PET, PE and PP in Denmark (Eriksen, 2019), but it is hard to 
guarantee any quality level, without systematic processes in place. The demand for recycled 
plastic has been highlighted as unstable and hard to predict in the future, due to the 
complexity of the products and the on-going development (appendix 1A, reference HK, KK, 
REFA). Therefore the market for plastic is not stable, when compared to other fractions as 
e.g. glass, metal or paper. As such it is hard to completely establish an overview of the 
demands that are needed for the future market of recycled plastic material. It has been 
highlighted in the qualitative study, that plastic for recycling is distributed to Germany or 
Sweden for recycling purposes. Here it is claimed that a significant part of the material is 
determined to be of such poor quality, that it is mostly suitable for incineration (appendix 1A, 
reference HK, REFA). From an environmental perspective, it would be beneficial to use the 
established incineration infrastructure in Denmark for these materials, as it will avoid long-
distance transportation. Large complex MRFs can however improve the quality, as larger 
plants can separate the waste into more specific categories (Neidel & Kromann, 2019). Here 
one facility for plastic waste is estimated to be sufficient for plastic production in Denmark. 
As such the further planning should ensure a large waste stream for the establishment of 
MFRs in Denmark.  
 
Round-off 
The life cycle studies, combined with the content analysis from subsection 4.5.5, point 
towards that the fractions paper, cardboard, glass, metal and rigid plastic should be recycled. 
It leads to an environmental loss, if these are not included in the recycling program. 
==PAGE:66==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 53 / 100 
Therefore, in terms of the further planning, these fractions should be included in the waste 
management system. The materials should be collected as efficiently as possible, while the 
materials, corresponding to their quality, can be redistributed to the most suitable markets. As 
such, the focus is to create large streams of similar waste that can be treated in the same 
MRFs, and distributed to different markets depending on material quality. Large streams of 
waste will ensure capacity for larger MRFs.  
4.7.2 Identified human behaviour in HWM 
Human behaviour is important to understand to be able to adapt the HWM system to the 
identified behaviour. This subsection will highlight the most important behavioural findings 
that are relevant for the further development of the technical system. 
 
The literature review highlighted that empirical research found a correlation between the 
introduction of an organic waste fraction and the reduction of household waste production 
and the sorting quality. A Swedish study examined this, where the identified changes in waste 
behaviour was compared to changes in other variables such as income, employment, 
economic activity, socio- demographics, infrastructure, waste tariffs, illegal dumping, and 
awareness raising campaigns (Miliute-Plepiene & Plepys, 2015). Most of these variables 
were static during the research period. As such the introduction of an organic waste fraction 
was concluded to be the cause of the improved behaviour by the municipality. Since Sweden 
is similar to Denmark in terms of economic wealth, the introduction of an organic waste 
fraction might cause similar advantages in the Danish HWM. 
 
Recycling of plastic was identified as being difficult, especially the determination of rigid and 
soft plastic has proven to induce doubt. This has been highlighted in our qualitative study and 
in data from a municipality of Copenhagen. Copenhagen municipality only allowed rigid 
plastic in their plastic fraction until spring 2017. During this spring the municipality 
introduced a new sorting program, which allowed citizens to dispose rigid and soft plastic 
into the same plastic fraction. This led to a 30 % increase of the levels of plastic during the 
first two months. Please see figure 4-AB. Here the increased plastic was found to be mostly 
associated with increased rigid plastic, which accounted for more than half of the increase. As 
such almost 90 % of the collected waste was still rigid plastic after the 30 % increase. This 
has steadily increased since. Please see appendix 4N for more details. The municipality 
explained that this was caused by the removal of the situations, where citizens have to 
determine the differences between soft and rigid plastic. In these doubtful situations the rigid 
plastic was often disposed into the residual waste fraction. As such the benefits of mixing soft 
and rigid plastic for the collection, should be included in the further investigation of the 
technical system. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 54 / 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It has been investigated whether similar benefits exist for the mix of other materials. Here 
especially the mix of cardboard and paper has been discussed, as it has been found to cause 
some doubt during disposal. It has not been possible to find any empirical data that can 
support this idea. We believe that mixing cardboard and paper can reduce some doubt, but the 
effect and the benefits of this have not been determined. A further investigation of this is 
needed.  
 
The identified changes in waste behaviour should be included into the further investigation of 
a standardised HWM system. These benefits in relation to the environmental impacts are 
discussed further in the next subsection. 
4.7.3 Off-site segregation and cross-contamination 
As mentioned in the previous subsection, and in the literature review, it is important to strive 
for the ability to recycle products into materials of the same quality. This is also reflected in 
the EU regulation that states separation at the source as a standard practise (EU, 2018a). 
Article 10.2 in this directive describes how waste must be separated and cannot be mixed 
with other fractions or materials with different properties, unless the conditions in article 10.3 
are met. This section therefore investigates different off-site segregation system in relation to 
environmental, behavioural and regulatory aspects of the different mixes. 
 
Article 10.3 consists of four conditions that can abrogate article 10.2, if at least one of the 
conditions is valid. This means that member states are only allowed to use off-site segre-
gation, if at least one of the following conditions is present: 
 
a) If the different materials collected in the same container do not influence the potential 
to undergo preparing for reuse, recycling, recovery, or influence the quality of the 
recycled material negatively.   
b) If the environmental results for off-site segregation are not worse than for on-site 
segregation 
c) If separation at the on-site segregation is not technically feasible 
Figure 4-AB: The estimated amount of collected rigid and soft plastic in 
Copenhagen two month before and after the implementation of a plastic 
fraction with soft plastic. Please also see appendix 4N. 
==PAGE:68==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 55 / 100 
d) If on-site segregation will entail disproportionate high financial expense (EU, 2018a) 
 
Note that some of these conditions are not directly measurable, e.g. disproportionate high 
financial expense. This can signal that the conditions can be interpreted as necessary.  
 
With article 10.3 in mind, the following table 4-AC examines the pros and cons of different 
off-site segregation system, both from a circular economy and a behavioural aspect. To do so, 
different reports from the Danish Environmental Protection Agency are used, together with 
our theoretical and empirical knowledge from our own study (see sources in the table). All 
claims in the table can be found in the report (Neidel & Kromann, 2019) unless other sources 
are referenced. The bracket after the mix of fractions (column to the left), describes the 
number of municipalities that currently uses this system in Denmark today. 
 
Off-site 
segregation 
system 
Circular economy pros (+) and 
cons (-) 
Behavioural pros (+) and cons (-) 
Does it fulfil EU 
Legislation (Article 
10)? 
Paper & 
cardboard (24 
municipalities) 
 
 
+ No significant difference in quality 
and loss  
+ Ensures a large waste stream of 
fibre material, which ensures a 
high long-term capacity for 
recycling (appendix 1A, reference 
DTU) 
- Lower sales prices and lower 
commercial potential if not 
separated in a specialised MRF 
+ Can removes doubt about the 
distinction between cardboard and 
paper, this might lead to more 
materials recycled as it did with 
plastic in the municipality of 
Copenhagen (appendix 1A, 
reference KK) 
- Includes more wrong sorted 
waste, but these are sorted out in 
the mechanical separation process. 
A process that occur for both on-
site separation and off-site 
segregation 
Properly yes 
With the right material 
recovery facility 
(MRF) the EU Article 
10.3a is met 
Paper, 
cardboard & 
Soft plastic (8 
municipalities)     
- Risk of contamination of paper 
and cardboard, if the soft plastic 
has been in contact with food  
- Therefore soft plastic that has been 
in contact with food cannot be 
sorted  
- The soft plastic is not recycled at 
the same plant as paper & 
cardboard  
 
- The user has to consider if the soft 
plastic has been in contact with 
any food 
- Municipalities with this setup 
experience products that contain 
both cardboard and plastic to be 
disposed wrapped together.. These 
products are later sent to 
incineration (appendix 1A, 
reference DTU).  
 
 
Properly no 
There is a risk of 
contaminating the 
paper and cardboard 
with soft plastic that 
has been in contact 
with food. This means 
that EU Article 10.3a is 
properly not met. 
N.B. soft plastic has 
been difficult to 
separate from the other 
materials in the MRFs 
today, because it might 
wrap around the other 
materials and make the 
separation process 
difficult. This issue is 
==PAGE:69==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 56 / 100 
present for all mixes 
with soft plastic 
Paper, 
cardboard & 
tetra pack) 
(Sweden) (0 
municipalities) 
+ The fractions can be sorted at the 
same plant 
- Risk of contaminate paper and 
cardboard, if the milk cartons are 
not empty  
+ It might be intuitive to mix tetra 
pack with paper and cardboard  
Properly no 
The quality of the 
paper and cardboard 
are in risk of 
contamination from 
dirty milk cartons. This 
means that EU Article 
10.3a is properly not 
met 
Metal & plastic 
& tetra pack 
(Belgium, the 
Netherlands, 
Germany, 
Spain, Portugal) 
(0 
municipalities) 
+ No risk of food contamination, 
because the other fractions might 
also contain food  
+ The plants that sorts plastic are 
already able to identify and sort 
out cardboard (milk cartons) 
+ This system is in Germany called 
lightweight packaging, which 
might be intuitive to use 
Properly yes 
With the right material 
recovery facility EU 
Article 10.3a is met 
Metal & glass 
(2 
municipalities) 
+ Metal can be mixed with glass 
without a significant loss and lack 
in the quality 
+ Large quantities of glass might 
lead to a reduction in metal and 
vice versa. This will mean that the 
mix can lead to a more optimal use 
of the collection infrastructure (see 
subsection 4.5.4) 
+ Mixing metal and glass will ensure 
a fraction with a larger volume, as 
the two consume a minor part of 
the waste content on their own 
- A marginal loss of glass pieces 
might occur 
- The largest glass recycling 
company in Denmark Reiling, 
argues that glass should always be 
sorted as on-site separation  
+ Jars can be sorted with the metal 
lid, which can be easier for the 
citizen 
 
Properly yes 
A marginal loss of 
glass is assumed to be 
so little that the article 
10.3a is met. This 
might need further 
investigations  
Metal, glass & 
rigid plastic 
(used in e.g. 
Southern 
Jutland) (16 
municipalities) 
- Reiling describes, that if all 
Danish municipalities uses this 
mix, they will need to add virgin 
materials, to meet the requirements 
for packaging glass 
- The plastic industry in Denmark 
- No evidence found that this mix is 
easier for the citizen to use14   
Properly no 
The quality of the glass 
and plastic is 
influenced negatively 
in this mix. This means 
that EU Article 10.3a is 
                                                
14https://csr.dk/sites/default/files/Resume%20Kommunal%20affaldsindsamling.pdf?fbclid=IwAR1Soqu9zFVIm
0Xgo1F2Qfy134GfoZPBBWKvm9ckh_se75WtwZXylnzidvg [Accessed 4/5/19] 
 
==PAGE:70==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 57 / 100
says that it is inappropriate to 
collect plastic with glass, because 
the plastic might contain glass 
- Glass should not be mixed with 
plastic, paper, or cardboard14 
not met 
Metal & plastic 
(6 
municipalities)  
+ Minor loss of plastic and metal  
+ It is the same technical 
arrangement as for sorting plastic 
and sorting plastic/metal 
- The Forum for circular plastic 
packaging recommends that plastic 
is never mixed with other 
materials (Poll, Bach, & Auken, 
2018)  
- The soft plastic is costly and time 
consuming to remove leading to a 
loss of quality of the recycled 
metal (appendix 1A, reference 
AFLD) 
+ No need for evaluate if the plastic 
is rigid or soft 
 
Properly yes 
This depends on how 
small the loss of plastic 
is.  
This means that article 
10.3a is met.  
 
Metal & rigid 
plastic (4 
municipalities) 
+ Only a little loss of plastic, no loss 
of metal  
+ Same technical arrangement as for 
sorting plastic and sorting 
plastic/metal 
- The Forum for circular plastic 
packaging recommends that plastic 
is never mixed with other 
materials (Poll et al., 2018) 
- The citizen has to evaluate if the 
plastic is rigid or soft 
 
Properly yes 
This depends on how 
small the loss of plastic 
is.  
This means that article 
10.3a is met.  
N.B. soft plastic is not 
included  
Rigid & soft 
plastic 
(approximately 
18 
municipalities) 
+ The Forum for circular plastic 
packaging “recommend to align 
waste sorting in Denmark so that 
all households in the country in 
the future sort in the fraction 
Plastic (possibly both soft and 
rigid plastic together) without 
mixing glass and metal”  (Poll et 
al., 2018) 
+ Plastic takes up much space and 
can now be compressed in the 
dustcart 
- It takes up space to collect plastic 
alone  
+ Reduce confusion about what is 
rigid and soft plastic, this might 
lead to more materials recycled 
(Eriksen, 2019; Østergaard & 
Pawlak, 2013) & (appendix 1A, 
reference KK) 
+ Data indicates that this mix leads 
to significant more plastic (see 
subsection 4.7.2)  
Yes  
This means that article 
10.3a is met.  
N.B. A more detailed 
sorting of plastic (PE, 
PP, PET etc.) might 
higher the recycling 
rate. 
Table 4-AC: Examination of different off-site segregation systems 
 
Table 4-AC illustrates valuable insights that have been found and highlighted in the 
investigation of off-site segregations systems. These findings were included in the further 
development of the new technical system. An investigation of the benefits of household pick-
up and station pick-up services was also investigated and the primary findings from this can 
==PAGE:71==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 58 / 100 
be seen in table 4-AD below. This table presents the main differences between station pick-
up services and household pick-up services. 
 
Station pick-up service (cubes) vs. household pick-up service 
Collection price 
Household pick-ups are more expensive than station pick-up service, because of the increased number 
of containers that have to be emptied (Kromann et al., 2019) 
Time  
The time that the citizen spend on using the cubes may compensate for the collection price (Kromann 
et al., 2019) 
Quantity 
Household pick-up service makes the citizen sort more waste (Gallardo, Bovea, Colomer, Prades, & 
Carlos, 2010; Kromann et al., 2019). For glass it seems like station pick-up services are equal to the 
household pick-up service in relation to the amount of sorted glass (Cowi, 2017). This is verified by 
the analysis in subsection 4.5.4.  
Quality 
The quality of glass collected in cubes is higher than glass from household pick-up services. For 
household pick-up services ceramics, ovenproof glass, stones, plastic and other unwanted materials 
are more often found (Neidel & Kromann, 2019) 
Glass bottles can often be reused when collected through station pick-up services, but is broken into 
pieces when collected directly from the households. (Cowi, 2017) 
Table 4-AD: Important differences between station pick-up services and household pick-up services 
 
With this information at hand, the next section presents the main findings. These findings was 
translated into requirements for the new technical system.  
 
4.8 Important findings from the analysis  
The analysis found several aspects of the waste management system, which are important for 
the further work in this project. This section gathers these important findings, which will be 
essential for the further development and the foundation for the design requirements. The 
findings follow the chronological order of the analysis, and the brackets (x.x.x) describe 
where the findings are elaborated.  
The main findings from the analysis are:  
● The indicators from the literature review were concluded to be irrelevant for the 
further planning of the HWM system. The indicators did not predict large differences 
in the waste production and recycling rates of the organic waste and the five dry 
fractions. Therefore household type (houses, apartments and vacation houses) will be 
used in the further planning of the HWM system (subsection 4.4.1). 
● The Danish HWM system is complex, and there are missing publicly available data 
on recycling rates and MRFs. Moreover, the recycling rates do not describe the 
amount of material that is actually being recycled; it only describes the collected 
amount of the specific fraction (section 4.3 and section 4.5). 
==PAGE:72==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 59 / 100
● The solution for collection of waste can influence the adaptation to the local 
behaviour and infrastructure. Limited benefits were found for standardising the 
collection services. Local solutions seem to be important for the adaptation to the 
citizens’ needs, which can be essential for an optimal usage of the infrastructure, and 
high participation in the sorting programs (subsection 4.5.3). 
● We have not been able to identify differences in recycling rates from 2017, when 
comparing off-site and on-site segregation systems in Denmark (subsection 4.5.3, 
subsection 4.5.4). 
● Household pick-up services increase the collection of recyclable waste (subsection 
4.7.3). The positive effect seems to be depending on the type of fraction (subsection 
4.5.4). The best indicator for high recycling rates were in the statistical analysis found 
to be the number of fractions offered as a household pick-up service (subsection 
4.5.4).  
● There seems to be a relation between metal and glass, where large quantities of one 
fraction can lead to a reduction in the other. Therefore the amount of glass and metal 
seems to be more stable when collected together. However further investigations are 
needed to verify this finding (subsection 4.5.4). 
● The analysis indicates that the waste content in the Danish households has changed 
since 2012. The amount of cardboard has increased from approximately 3 % of the 
entire waste mass in 2012 to 8 % in 2017. Paper has decreased from approximately 21 
% in 2012 to 16 % in 2017 (subsection 4.5.5). 
● The volume of plastic consumed 35 % of the entire waste volume in 2017 of the 
uncompressed waste, and cardboard consumed 15 % in 2017. This means that the two 
fractions take up half of the entire waste volume (subsection 4.5.5)  
● When the plastic fraction includes soft plastic, the amount of rigid plastic has shown 
to rise considerably (subsection 4.7.2).   
● The analysis indicates that glass should not be mixed with other fractions than metal. 
Glass is claimed to reduce the quality of other materials. However, empirical 
investigations of the output quality are needed to verify these claims (subsection 
4.7.3). 
● Paper and cardboard as an off-site segregated fraction has not been found to cause any 
issues in the output quality, when an appropriate MTF is used (subsection 4.7.3). 
● The overall analysis found that the five dry fractions should be included in the 
household pick-up program to avoid an environmental loss. However, it was found 
that station pick-up services can be beneficial in some cases, especially for fractions 
such as glass or metal.  
 
These findings are important for the further development of the new technical HWM system, 
which are associated with the first objective in the problem statement. The analysis led to the 
development of design requirements for the new technical system. These can be found in 
appendix 4O. The design requirements have been used to keep the project on the right track 
in relation to the first objective. These were used in the development of the technical system, 
which will be presented in chapter 5.  
 
 
==PAGE:73==
Development
of the technical
system
5.
==PAGE:74==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 60 / 100 
5. Development of the technical system 
5.1 Introduction 
The purpose of this chapter is to describe the process of the development of the new technical 
system, and hereby answer the first objective in our problem statement. The analysis from 
chapter 4 provided an overview of important aspects of the HWM system and resulted in 
design requirements, which created the foundation for the following process. Moreover, the 
analysis indicated that the solutions for collection should not be standardised. Therefore this 
chapter will focus on what fractions to collect, and how these can be mixed when using off-
site segregation.  
 
As mentioned in the analysis textiles have not been investigated due to limited available data. 
Moreover, we will not focus on establishing requirements for hazardous waste, because this 
fraction is complex and further investigation is needed. Therefore we will focus on the five 
dry fractions and organic waste, in the development of the new technical system. The analysis 
led to the conclusion that a waste management system should be different for the three 
household types: Houses, apartments and vacation houses. However, we have found a limited 
amount of data on vacation houses, therefore the further development will focus on 
developing requirements for houses and apartments. 
 
The development of the new technical system followed a common design process with the 
generation of different ideas and hereafter narrowing these down into different concepts. The 
process and methods is presented in section 5.2. The development of the new technical 
system is compared with the draft for a uniform waste management system recently presented 
by the Danish Environmental Protection Agency15. The final suggestions for the technical 
system are presented in section 5.3.  
 
5.2 Process and methods 
The opening of the solution space was done through several design methods including; 
brainstorming, brainwriting pool, and negative brainstorming. The selection of one concept 
has been done according to the design requirements, by using the Weighted Objective 
Method (Roozenburg & Eekels, 1995). 
 
 
 
 
Brainstorm, brainwriting pool, and negative brainstorming are methods to explore the 
solution space, to ensure that, as many aspects as possible are included. During these 
processes it is important to leave out all criticism, and the results are first evaluated 
afterwards. The goal of a brainstorm is to generate as many ideas as possible in a short 
amount of time. It can be helpful to use negative brainstorming, where the participant has to 
come up with the worst ideas to solve a problem. This can provide valuable insights for the 
actual solution. Another way to open the solution space is by making the participants able to 
                                                
15 http://affaldskontoret.dk/onewebmedia/Lykkesholm%20-
%20Standarder%20for%20sortering%20og%20indsamling%20af%20husholdningsaffald.pdf [Accessed 
11/4/19] 
 
==PAGE:75==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
61 / 100
build on each other’s ideas, by using posters, a board or similar (brainwriting pool). It is all 
about investigating the solution space. 
 
The Weighted Objectives Method was used to evaluate the ideas, where each idea scored 
points based on the weighted design requirements. Hereafter the scores were summed up into 
an overall value per concept.  
5.2.1 Idea and concept generation 
During several rounds we used the design methods to generate as many solutions and ideas as 
possible. We focussed primarily on what fractions to collect and what materials to mix. 
Limitations were used where e.g. the amount of containers was limited to; three, four and 
five. Idea generation for both houses and apartments was established according to the set 
requirements from chapter 4. Throughout the process we used different focus areas to ensure 
solutions that was e.g. as intuitive as possible, or negative brainstorming focussing on e.g. the 
worst things to mix. We built on each other's ideas and it all ended up with many ideas, which 
was categorised and discussed. This process can be seen illustrated in appendix 5A. 
5.2.2 Selection through criteria 
When having explored the solution space, 
and no new ideas were identified the ideation 
process ended. Hereafter the ideas were 
narrowed down, first as a primary sorting 
over a discussion, with the demands and 
criteria in mind. Some of the ideas were 
combined, with the best parts from each idea. 
This ended up with five concepts for off-site 
segregation systems for both apartments and 
houses, and one solution for complete separa-
tion at the source for apartments. Here one of 
the presented suggestions was the draft from 
the Danish Environmental Protection Agency, 
please see appendix 5B. This was included to 
compare it with the established requirements 
from chapter 4. These six selected concepts 
are presented in figure 5-A. 
 
There are different solutions, where some of 
them use bag sorting e.g. by mixing plastic 
and residual waste in one container but in separate bags. The ‘complete separation’ is only 
suggested for apartments. If houses were to use on-site segregation for all fractions, it would 
increase the amount of containers for collection and hereby increase the number of dustcart 
trips. This will increase the environmental impact and significantly increase the cost of the 
collection. 
Figure 5-A: The five suggestions for off-site 
segregation systems and one suggested on-site 
segregation system for household pick-up. Please 
see appendix 5C for a larger figure. 
==PAGE:76==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 62 / 100 
 
For the selection of these suggestions, the Weighted Objectives Method was used to rate the 
off-site segregation suggestions together with the design requirements. The results of the 
weighted solutions can be found in appendix 5D. Please note appendix 5C, which presents 
the different suggestions used in the weighted method. The results from the Weighted 
Objectives Method showed that between the five off-site segregation system the ‘Residual 
and plastic in bags’ received the highest score with +9 points, similar to the ‘Metal & glass’ 
with +8 points. These two ideas are very similar; the only difference is that in ‘Residual and 
plastic in bags’ collects the plastic in bags, which means plastic can be collected with the 
residual waste. This means that only two containers would be needed, when using two-
chambered containers. This system will require a facility that can sort the coloured bags from 
the residual waste, which needs further investigations to be able to determine if it is suitable 
in a Danish context. Therefore ‘Residual and plastic in bags’ is not included in the final 
recommendation and we will proceed with the ‘metal & glass’ suggestion for off-site 
segregation. 
 
During the development of the different concepts it was identified, that an off-site segregation 
system would be very similar for houses and apartments. Therefore the overall suggestion is 
to keep the same fractions for off-site segregation. The suggestions for what fraction to 
collect and how they can be mixed can be found in the next subsection.  
 
5.3 Suggestions for the new technical system 
The overall suggestion on a homogeneous HWM system can be seen in figure 5-B, which 
illustrates the suggested fractions and how they are mixed for houses and apartments. Please 
note that the suggested solution includes two different types of waste management for 
apartments; off-site and on-site segregation, while houses are only recommended to use off-
site segregation. This is mainly to ensure an optimal usage of the waste management 
infrastructure. Please see figure 5-B, where the suggestion can be seen illustrated. 
==PAGE:77==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 63 / 100 
          
 
Figure 5-B: Illustration of the suggested household collection and how the fractions can be 
mixed in houses and apartments in Denmark. Please note that the suggestion does not 
include exact definitions on how the waste is or should be collected. 
  
The analysis and design requirements had led to this specific suggestion. The positioning of 
the fractions in relation to each other can be important to ensure an optimal sorting behaviour. 
This has been discussed during the development of these suggestions. It has however been 
decided that to find the optimal positioning of the fractions, in relation to each other, it will 
require a test setup, which we have determined to be unrealistic to achieve in the timeframe 
available. Therefore we will not include any suggestions to how the fractions are positioned, 
but we highlight the importance of investigating this further. 
 
We will in the following three paragraphs highlight the main benefits of this new technical 
system. 
 
Rigid and soft plastic together as one separated fraction 
The market for recycling plastic is, as mentioned in the analysis, relatively new, especially 
compared to e.g. paper and glass, which are more stable in both in- and outputs. Therefore 
keeping this fraction separated from other fractions can have advantages, as the future market 
demand for recycled plastic is hard to predict. As presented in the analysis MRFs for plastic 
processing are complex and will require large quantities of plastic waste. Furthermore 
keeping the plastic fraction separated from other materials can help establish a more stable 
output. An argument for including soft plastic in plastic fraction is that can be easier for the 
citizen to sort both soft and rigid plastic together, which is seen to increase the total amount 
of plastic. Soft plastic can get stuck around e.g. metal and reduce the quality of other 
materials if it is mixed (appendix 1A, reference VF). A large quantity of the plastic material 
is during processing reduced to such a poor quality that incineration is seen as a better option. 
==PAGE:78==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 64 / 100 
Moreover, as mentioned in the analysis, the Plastic Industry in Denmark advices 
municipalities to collect plastic separated from other materials (Poll et al., 2018).  
Metal and glass together when using off-site segregation 
The mix of metal and glass has been selected based on our knowledge from the analysis. 
Here it was found that the volume and the amount of these two fractions seemed to be more 
stable when collected together. This is seen in the indications in the analysis that point 
towards the fact that these two fractions are related to each other. Furthermore, metal, glass 
and paper, consume the least volume of the entire waste content. If glass or metal were to be 
kept separate it would result in very small fractions, leading to a suboptimal utilisation of the 
infrastructure. The analysis found that glass should be kept separate or only collected with 
metal. By mixing metal and glass the station pick-up services can still be used, as metal easily 
can be included here.  
Paper and cardboard together when using off-site segregation 
The mix of paper and cardboard has in the analysis indicated that it does not influence the 
potential to undergo preparing for recycling or reduce the quality of the recycled products 
negatively. Furthermore the volume of paper is relatively small, and therefore mixing paper 
with cardboard is a more optimal utilisation of the infrastructure. The tendencies of the waste 
content analysis points towards a reduction in paper, and an increase in cardboard over the 
last years. Therefore keeping these fractions together can ensure that the rising amount of 
cardboard is included in the recycling programs. Here higher quality paper can be separated 
in a MRF for off-site segregated systems and redistributed elsewhere. Moreover the mix 
might reduce doubt during disposal and hereby improve the sorting behaviour as seen with 
rigid and soft plastic. Doubt seems to be caused by the fact that citizens find some products 
hard to determine as either paper or cardboard.  
 
5.4 Round-off  
The ideation and development of the technical system was a relatively short phase, because 
of the limited number of different concepts that could be explored. Moreover the analysis 
contained considerations, which pointed towards specific suggestions on how to sort the 
waste in the new technical system. The analysis and the proposal of the new technical system 
for a homogeneous HWM system, answer the first objective in the problem statement.  
 
These results were presented to two field experts to get feedback on the suggested 
requirements (appendix 1A; reference DTU, HK). Their main response was positive. Here the 
off-site segregation system was highlighted to be very close to an optimal solution. The 
suggestion to mix metal and glass was received positively as well. Here it was highlighted 
that there are no issues with mixing these two fractions. Furthermore the technology for 
separating these two fractions are simple and the MRFs that currently handle glass does not 
require much adaptation to be able to handle this fraction. To keep plastic separated has been 
highlighted to be optimal, when glass and plastic are kept separated.  
 
==PAGE:79==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 65 / 100 
”With our recent LCA studies of HWM in mind, the off-site segregated system 
that is suggested here, where metal and glass are mixed, and paper and 
cardboard are mixed, is not far from an optimal solution  
  
Anders Damgaard, Senior researcher at DTU 
 
”If glass and plastic should not be mixed, then this suggestion seems better 
and more optimal than the recently presented draft for a standardisation of 
HWM from the Danish Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Bjarne Kallesø, environmental engineer at the municipality of Herning 
 
It should be noted that some areas are required to be investigated further to verify the 
suggested solution. These will be discussed and elaborated in chapter 7 and 8.  
 
With an establishment of a technical system, the behavioural interventions for this system can 
be fully developed. This will happen in the next chapter 6. 
 
==PAGE:80==
Development 
of behavioural
principles
6.
==PAGE:81==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 66 / 100 
6. Development of behavioural principles 
6.1 Introduction 
The previous chapter finalised the suggestions for the technical system. Now the further 
development and establishment of behavioural interventions can be developed. Part of the 
analysis in chapter 4 investigated human behaviour, to ensure that the new technical system 
could be adapted to identify waste behaviour. Here e.g. allowing soft plastic together with 
rigid plastic was found to lower the amount of uncertainty and doubt during disposal of 
plastic waste. This chapter presents the process of analysing, developing and presenting 
suggestions for behavioural interventions for the technical system. As such the purpose of 
this chapter was to find answers to the second objective from the problem statement. Here the 
theory of behavioural design, combined with empirical data, was used to analyse and develop 
principles for behavioural interventions. The focus in this chapter does therefore not focus on 
the adaptation to the current behaviour (as in chapter 4 and 5) but to direct and change it. This 
was done to ensure even better recycling rates and sorting behaviour.  
 
Parts of the behavioural design process were carried out in parallel with the investigations 
and development of the technical system. This was done to ensure that these topics could 
support each other, where e.g. the survey helped the overall focus for the project in the 
beginning. Key insights from the qualitative study also covered different aspects of 
behaviour. However, the major part of the behavioural design process was conducted after 
the development of the technical system. This was meant to insure that the interventions, or 
principles for such, supported this system. This chapter begins by clarifying the methods and 
overall process, which are the foundation for this analysis.  
 
6.2 Methods and our process 
The process was built upon the knowledge gained from the literature review combined with 
other projects and own insights. Here e.g. interviews and surveys were used to establish an 
overview of the attitudes towards recycling and the issues related to it. Behavioural projects 
and interventions was studied and included in the overall solution. The Behavioural Change 
Wheel framework was used to establish an overview and investigate interventions on several 
levels.  
 
The main purpose of the behavioural interventions was to increase recycling rates and the 
sorting quality. As highlighted in the analysis in chapter 4, more than 20 % of the Danish 
population currently use the MPG mix. Therefore it was also found necessary to focus on this 
type of off-site segregation system. Here we wanted to find interventions that can prevent 
people from putting plastic into the metal and glass fraction. This was an important part of 
the investigation, as similar projects with this specific focus were not found. We used the 
Photovoice method for this specific investigation. This area was later reframed to concern 
more generally, how to reinforce new habits. The analysis will be described in the next 
section 6.3. 
 
==PAGE:82==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 67 / 100 
6.3 Behavioural analysis 
This section presents the analysis of the citizens’ behaviour around household waste sorting.  
From the literature review it was found that waste disposal is an automatic behaviour. 
Moreover it was highlighted that “responsible household waste management is a repeat 
behaviour, characterized by initiation and persistence” (Tucker & Speirs, 2003). To ensure 
responsible consumption of household waste, the citizen must be able to correctly dispose the 
waste, not once or twice, but in a continuous manner. It was also highlighted in the literature 
review that habits are processed through system 1, where it can be done without really 
thinking about it. During the interviews with the municipalities and utility companies it was 
described how changing citizens’ habits was a difficult task. An example that was highlighted 
was a case from Rødovre municipality, where they tested a fraction with cardboard, tetra 
pack and pizza containers. After the test period Rødovre wanted the citizens to stop this 
behaviour again, which ended up being a difficult task (appendix 1A, reference LT). To 
include an investigation of citizens and their view on waste sorting in this project we 
conducted a questionnaire as an online survey. The online survey was part of the early 
investigation of this project, and therefore it also gave insights during the analysis in chapter 
4. The next subsection will describe the results and main findings. 
 
The behavioural analysis consists of five different methods/investigations and these will be 
described in the following subsections. These are: 6.3.1 Survey, 6.3.2 Desk research, 6.3.3 
Behavioural Change Wheel Method, 6.3.4 Photovoice Method, and 6.3.5 Customer Journey 
Map. These will all be elaborated in the following. 
6.3.1 Survey  
The purpose of the survey was to establish an overview of the citizens’ beliefs and 
experiences and hereafter to combine it with the qualitative study. The survey focussed on 
waste sorting, the importance of it and the related issues to the topic. The questions were 
written as neutral as possible and the phrasing and order of the questions were discussed. The 
language was decided to be in Danish to be able to get answers from all age groups, 
especially elderly users (response rate 6.1 % > 65 years, 23.4% 50 - 64 years). The survey 
was shared in different Facebook groups related to cities in Jutland and the capital region. It 
was shared on our Facebook walls and in six different groups. The Facebook groups were 
selected to get an even distribution of answers geographically. The respondents had to write 
down their answer, and this gave many different but correlated answers. This required more 
time to process, but provided more accurate answers than e.g. predefined answers. The 
important findings will here be discussed. 
 
Survey results 
The survey received 444 answers in a two-week period, with the majority of respondents in 
the age group 21 to 64 years. More than half of the users lived in a house and 35 % in 
apartments. The respondents’ residence reflected the Facebook groups where we posted the 
survey. However almost 40 % answers came from Herning municipality, which gives an 
==PAGE:83==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 68 / 100 
uneven representation when considering population. Furthermore, 16 % of the respondents 
came from Silkeborg and 12 % Copenhagen. The rest is more evenly distributed in other 
cities. To review all the answers, affinity diagrams were created (Beyer & Holtzblatt, 1998, p. 
154). This method was chosen to ensure that all answers were carefully read and categorised. 
Please see appendix 6A for a picture of this process. The five largest groups are listed below 
in table 6-A. 
 
What do you experience as being the biggest problem with 
sorting and handling waste? 
What can make you doubtful about how to sort 
your waste?  
Having to go to the recycling centre (26 %). When there 
is no household pick-up service (e.g. in Herning) the 
citizens often have to bring the waste to the recycling 
centres, if they want to recycle it.  
 
Lack of space (21 %). Waste sorting demands some kind 
of system, e.g. with different kitchen bins or bags. This 
takes up space and can look messy. 
 
Troublesome and time-consuming (12 %). Waste  
sorting takes up time and requires energy. It is 
troublesome when e.g. the products have to be cleaned 
after use.  
 
Lack of knowledge (6 %). Hesitations and doubt of 
sorting practices and if waste sorting really makes any 
difference. 
 
Resources vs. benefit and mixed materials (6 %). It is 
difficult to estimate, if it is a good idea to use water (and 
maybe soap) for cleaning waste. Moreover products made 
of mixed materials are difficult to sort. 
Nothing (25 %). This group claims that they 
were not in doubt on how to sort waste. 
 
Lack of knowledge (20 %). Issues like; what is 
rigid plastic, or how to sort batteries is identified 
in this category. Also questions like, if it is 
better to incinerate plastic than to recycle it has 
been found. Therefore this category cover a 
wide field of lack of knowledge. 
 
Mixed materials (> 17 %). Milk cartons and 
products consisting of more than one material 
are difficult to sort.  
 
Plastic (9 %). It is difficult to know if the 
plastic is soft or rigid 
 
How clean it needs to be (> 6 %). It seems 
difficult for the respondents to estimate if the 
material is clean enough to be recycled.  
Table 6-A: The five most common responses to two questions from the survey 
 
A more detailed description of the survey questions and findings can be found in appendix 
6A page 2. Here the main findings will be highlighted. 
 
25 % of the respondents claimed that they are never doubtful when sorting. It would be 
interesting to investigate this further to see if this actually is the case. Potentially, they could 
be unaware of the best practices concerning waste sorting. Furthermore they could be 
unaware of their own behaviour in this regard as they receive limited feedback on their 
behaviour. This is interesting as 20 % answered that the lack of knowledge creates doubt 
when sorting waste. 
 
As mentioned in this section the survey indicates how the users’ experience waste sorting. It 
can be discussed whether the results are representative for the entire country. This can be 
seen in the following three points: 
==PAGE:84==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 69 / 100 
 
● The users might be more willing to answer the survey, if they find the topic of 
interest. This can lead to a larger contribution from this group. 
● As mentioned earlier the survey was posted on Facebook and in certain Facebook 
groups, which means that it leaves out citizens that do not use social media. The 
survey could have been shared in more diverse municipalities, in different languages, 
and through different channels to be more representative.  
● It is important to remember, that what people say they do, is not always the same as 
what they actually do (Cash & Culley, 2014). People often want to seem better than 
what they are. With this in mind the survey is an indication of the users’ beliefs and 
experiences with waste sorting, and it was used as a starting point to understand the 
user behaviour around the waste management systems today.  
 
Round-off  
The main findings from the survey, which are not addressed by the implementation of the 
new technical system (e.g. having to bring the sorted waste to the recycling centre), are 
highlighted here. One of the findings was that waste sorting requires (kitchen) space and a 
good indoor system. This seemed to be difficult for the user to arrange and implement. 
Furthermore it was found that waste sorting can be time-consuming and troublesome, and 
something that requires energy to do. Moreover, the survey found indications that the 
respondents need both concrete and more abstract knowledge on waste sorting. The survey 
found that respondents expressed that lack of knowledge and effort of going recycling centre, 
are the largest issues with the current system. One quarter of the respondents claimed that 
they are never in doubt of how to sort waste, which might be because the system do not 
address wrong sorting behaviour. Products made of different materials and cleaning of 
products was highlighted as issues. 
 
6.3.2 Desk research 
A number of projects that investigated attitudes and behaviour of waste sorting in Denmark 
has been carried out during the last years (BRO, 2015b, 2015a; Interresearch, 2018; Norup & 
Ryberg, 2015; Østergaard & Pawlak, 2013). These were used as inspiration for the 
behavioural design suggestions. From these projects, we have highlighted the most common 
findings that have been determined important: 
 
● The Danes want to sort waste if it is easy (very easy)  
● There needs to be a link between indoor and outdoor sorting systems 
● There are not sufficient instructions in the sorting moment 
● The value of sorting is not clear to most people 
● The complexity around waste sorting is extensive, and creates doubt 
● The citizen receives limited or no acknowledgment and feedback on their effort  
 
==PAGE:85==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 70 / 100
This research covered other areas that have been determined interesting for the investigation 
of behaviour. Furthermore Google Trends was in this desk research used to investigate how 
many times the citizens in Denmark searched for e.g. “waste sorting”, “metal, glass, plastic”, 
or “waste sorting bins”. Google Trends can reveal the general search history for the last year 
and when a word or sentence has been used. It does not reveal how many people that used 
these search terms, but it can reveal areas in Denmark where words are more commonly 
search for. This search did not end up with any interesting findings, but it was found that 
Zealand and Northern Jutland searched 40 % more for “waste sorting” (affaldssortering) 
compared to other areas in Denmark. The MGP mix was also searched for in different terms, 
but with no result.  
 
A Facebook group was investigated to understand the reactions there might occur when 
implementing a new waste sorting system with the MPG mix. This was implemented in 
Aarhus municipality approximately one and a half years ago. The Facebook page Sortér mer' 
Aarhus16 (Sort more Aarhus) belongs to a department in the technical and environmental 
services called AffaldVarme Aarhus. They are responsible for managing waste from the 
municipality’s approximately 160.000 households and six recycling centres. We have 
investigated the reviews written on this Facebook page, to examine the reactions both before 
and after the implementation of the new waste sorting system. The results from this process 
can be found in appendix 6C, where the reviews are categorised under four different 
headlines.  
 
This investigation showed some of the issues that might occur when implementing a new 
sorting system. However, there were a limited number of reviews on the Facebook page. 
Therefore this method provided limited findings.  
 
6.3.3 Behavioural Change Wheel  
To begin the process of changing behaviour, we followed the Behavioural Change Wheel 
method (Michie et al., 2014). This method was described in the literature review. This was 
used to get an understanding of the entire system, and consider different aspects and 
behavioural change techniques.  
 
This Behavioural Change Wheel process followed the book, by completing the different 
worksheets for each step. The method consists of the following 3 stages with different steps 
during each stage. These can be seen in figure 6-B. 
 
                                                
16 https://www.facebook.com/pg/SorterMer/reviews/?ref=page_internal [Accessed 15/5/19] 
==PAGE:86==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
71 / 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first stage was important, because an understanding of the actual problem and the wanted 
behaviour was defined. In general the process was iterative, which were probably caused by 
the fact that the process was new to us. During stage 1 it was an advantage to describe the 
target behaviour as specific as possible. This makes it easier to develop correct intervention 
strategies (Michie et al., 2014). During the first three steps it was decided to focus on the 
largest existing off-site segregation system, the MPG mix. The target behaviour was 
described as: The citizens, who are currently mixing MGP (metal, glass, rigid plastic), have 
to sort rigid plastic as an on-site segregated fraction outside their homes. A more detailed 
description of stage 1 can be found in appendix 6D. 
 
After the target behaviour was defined, it was identified which changes were needed, by 
using the COM-B components (capability, opportunity, and motivation). These were also 
used in the following stage (stage 2) to understand what intervention functions and policy 
categories could be used to achieve the wanted behaviour. Stage 3 involved more concrete 
examples of behavioural change techniques (BTCs) on how to change this behaviour.  
 
Firstly the BCW method highlighted the fact that a more complete understanding of the 
behaviour is needed. Secondly the most important findings from the intervention strategy 
were selected and highlighted. These will be further elaborated in the following: 
 
● The unwanted habit that was identified can be disturbed by removing triggers and 
rewards and by adding barriers to the unwanted behaviour. It might be necessary to 
reconstruct the physical or social context. 
 
● To reinforce the wanted habit, think of ways to prompt rehearsal and repetition of the 
wanted behaviour. Add new triggers, rewards and remove friction. 
 
● Feedback on behaviour can stimulate the wanted behaviour, which can be 
implemented in numerous ways. Examples of feedback are: Messages, rewards or 
punishments.    
 
● Social comparison can be used to stimulate the wanted behaviour, by e.g. showing a 
respected person performing the behaviour 
Figure 6-B: The stages in the Behavioural Change Wheel process 
==PAGE:87==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 72 / 100 
 
● The wanted behaviour can be supported by using rules of thumb that guides the 
behaviour 
 
● It can be beneficial to establish some kind of commitment with the citizen. This can 
e.g. be a formal or informal agreement  
 
The intervention strategy from the BCW method was used as a starting point for the 
following work on the behavioural analysis and principles. First an understanding of the 
unwanted behaviour was investigated with the Photovoice method. 
6.3.4 Photovoice method 
To understand the shift from the MPG mix to the new technical system, we determined a 
need for a detailed investigation of this specific area. For this we focussed on key insights on 
the daily routines and habits. This made the citizens’ troubles more clear and created an 
understanding of their actions and reflections. Moreover we wanted to investigate where and 
when the behavioural designs should be placed to intervene in the moment of power. 
 
The results from the BCW were combined with other methods to change behaviour. This 
section presents the first step in our new intervention strategy developed from the BCW 1) 
Understanding behaviour. To be able to design for behavioural change, one should 
understand what this change means for those who will be affected by it. As such a deeper 
understanding of what barriers, triggers and cues the citizens experience was investigated. 
For this we used the method called Photovoice, which was developed in the early 90’s by 
Caroline C. Wang and Mary Ann Burris (Sutton-Brown, 2014). This method inspired us to 
analyse what barriers the citizens in Aarhus experienced with the new technical system. In 
this way we were able to investigate how the citizen behaved, when old habits needed to be 
changed in this setting. Our focus was on the rigid plastic, that could no longer be mixed with 
glass and metal, and the soft plastic, which was now to be recycled. We wanted to investigate 
the barriers that can prevent the wanted behaviour from happening.  
 
In this test we used both qualitative information (e.g. why they behave as they do) and 
quantitative information (e.g. where, who and how much). We know from literature that the 
citizen tends to represent him or herself as better than they actually are (P. J. Cash et al., 
2017). This risk is typically seen in qualitative studies, where being physically present 
influences the user. We have tried to reduce this influence by not being physically in the 
room with them where the sorting occurred. Furthermore the notebook was given to avoid 
any interference during the writing of important notes.  
 
Process and test setup 
To analyse the behaviour within the new system, we found six households in the municipality 
of Aarhus, who were currently using the MGP mix. These test persons were friends and 
family. This was determined the easiest way to find test persons, who were willing to spend 
==PAGE:88==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 73 / 100 
the required amount of time during the one-week test period. During the test they had to stop 
their current sorting behaviour and separate plastic into a new fraction. To do this we created 
a constructed setting, where we asked them to sort in this new way. We provided the six 
households with blue plastic bags and a notebook and made sure that all participants had a 
camera available. They were asked to take pictures combined with notes in the diary, in 
situations where they dealt the issue. Every morning they received an SMS with a daily 
focus. The test lasted for seven days and the insights were used to in further investigations. 
The method made it possible for us to observe the citizen’s behaviour in his or her own 
environment for a longer time period. After the test period we gathered the information and 
grouped the different topics. Interviews were made with the test persons after the test period, 
to hear more about their experiences during and after the test. The test description that was 
sent to them and the daily SMSs can be found in appendix 6E. 
 
Insights from the test 
50 pictures and 54 written pages were received during the test period. The results from the 
Photovoice contained information on the users’ considerations, frustrations, questions, and 
responses to the daily SMSs. These were grouped together under categories like cleaning, 
mixed materials, space etc. Afterwards these were further categorised according to Fogg’s 
FEM model (Fogg, 2009): Motivation, ability, or trigger. It was clear that the test persons 
experienced similar issues, where the main six challenges were: 
 
1. Knowledge and beliefs. During the week each participant described their frustrations 
about not knowing if their “hard” work actually made a difference. They were 
demotivated because they did not understand the value of sorting and were missing 
feedback. More than half of the test persons threw their waste in the residual fraction, 
when they were in doubt. This is consistent with other investigations, but it was 
surprising to see that two test persons often threw the waste into the recyclable 
fractions when in doubt. The test persons also handled the exact same product 
differently depending on the mood and time of day. 
 
2. Cleaning of recyclable waste. Together with the previous topic the test persons most 
commonly referred to cleaning as a challenge. They were in doubt how clean the 
materials should be, which resulted in different ways of handling the waste. One test 
person washed and dried the soft plastic before disposing it, where others did not 
clean the material at all. In general the participants were frustrated when excessive 
cleaning of the waste seemed necessary. As a result the test persons tended to make 
their own rules about cleaning procedures. Time-consuming cleaning resulted in more 
waste being disposed to the residual waste.  
 
3. Kitchen space. The new technical system required an additional fraction for plastic, 
which took up kitchen space. This was described as being the worst part of the new 
system, which led to occasional dissatisfaction. In general it was highlighted that a 
better waste management system inside the home would make sorting easier for them.  
==PAGE:89==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 74 / 100 
 
4. Habit. It was found that it was very different from person to person how difficult the 
habitual change was. Four test persons described in the diary and in the interviews 
that the blue plastic back worked as a reminder for them.  
 
5. Waste sorting effort. Sorting waste was identified as being a secondary behaviour. 
An example of this was seen in the situation where an ice cream was eaten and the 
sorting of packaging was less prioritised. Furthermore low amounts of mental 
resources and situations that required much thought was found to influence their 
sorting behaviour negatively. Therefore it is important to focus on the intuitively of 
the system, to ensure that the required time and effort is kept to a minimum when 
storing waste.  
 
6. Mixed materials. Products can be made of more than one type of material, which was 
found to create doubt in certain situations. It was moreover found to be difficult to 
determine what materials a product was made of. Other elements also led to confusing 
e.g. a paper sticker on a plastic bag or a metal lid with rubber inside. 
 
The test was valuable, since it made us able to investigate sorting behaviour inside the 
citizen’s home. There were downsides, which will be highlighted further in the discussion 
section in chapter 8. A more detailed description of the Photovoice method with quotes from 
the results can be found in appendix 6E. The insights from the investigation were included in 
the further development of behavioural intervention. To get an overview of the issues that 
occur during the sorting of waste a customer journey map was created. This will be presented 
in the next section. 
6.3.5 Customer Journey Map  
This part of the analysis investigated the citizens’ interactions with the system. A central 
question for this investigation was formulated the following: Where are the primary 
touchpoints that affect the citizen’s waste sorting behaviour? 
 
The interactions with the HWM system were 
investigated, by mapping out the customer 
journey, to establish a better understanding 
of the behaviour in the system. These were 
formed throughout experiences, exercises, 
instructions and learning. The mapping was 
constructed from the information from the 
test, the survey and the interviews with the 
citizens and stakeholders. The system was in 
the customer journey seen as a product and 
the correct sorting was seen as the value that 
should be maximised. When the customer 
Figure 6-C: The journey shows different issues that 
can occur in the new technical system.  
==PAGE:90==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 75 / 100
journey was mapped it was used to optimise and highlight effective and attractive journeys. 
Figure 6-C illustrates a small overview of the journey; please see appendix 6F for a larger 
illustration. 
 
As the initial analysis led to important insights in the waste sorting behaviour the initial 
suggestions for the behavioural intervention can be presented. The analysis led to key 
insights, which has been combined with the knowledge from the literature review. This led to 
the main elements that we have determined essential to address in HWM. These will be 
presented in the next section 6.4. 
 
6.4 Suggested principles for behavioural design 
Looking at the findings from the overall analysis in section 6.2, it was clear that some of the 
identified issues are being addressed by the technical system developed in chapter 5. For 
example the fact that the citizen will able to receive household pick-up, instead of having to 
go to the recycling centre, solves some of the identified issues. This system also solves issues 
like the difficulty of determining differences between rigid and soft plastic as well as 
differences between paper and cardboard. There are however issues, which was found in the 
behavioural analysis, that cannot be solved by the suggested new technical system alone. The 
behavioural interventions that have been determined to be of importance will be presented. 
These suggestions have been developed into five principles, which are to be used in the 
HWM sector. Do to the timeframe of this project it was determined to be unrealistic to test 
these principles in an appropriate setting. Therefore we found research literature that can be 
used to verify these principles as effective. There can be other principles that are relevant, but 
we have selected those, we find most relevant and those that seems to be most effective. 
These principles are created to answer the second objective in the problem statement. The 
five principles that have been developed are: 
 
● Principle 1: A homogeneous waste journey 
● Principle 2: Provide information in the moment of sorting 
● Principle 3: Feedback on sorting behaviour 
● Principle 4: Ensure transparency in HWM  
● Principle 5: Affect the physical waste sorting environment 
 
These principles will be explained in the following five subsections, where each section 
begins by presenting why this principle is important. Furthermore relevant literature that can 
support these principles will be highlighted. 
6.4.1 Principle 1: A homogeneous waste journey 
Principle 1 utilizes the new technical system’s homogeneity, by further aligning the main 
touchpoints that the citizen is in contact with. We found that it is important to keep a simple 
==PAGE:91==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 76 / 100 
and uniform system, where icons, colours etc. are identical across the system. The principle is 
supported by research and the findings from the behavioural analysis, and these will be 
described in the following, before the principle will be presented. 
 
Findings from the behavioural analysis 
Our behavioural analysis showed how the citizen finds the complexity around waste sorting 
an issue. This is a challenge because waste sorting should be intuitive to ensure that waste 
sorting is done correctly. We have identified that there is an inconsistency between the 
sorting systems, where e.g. the waste system inside and outside the citizen’s home often are 
different from each other. We have seen how different waste sorting practices can confuse the 
citizen and create doubt about the sorting procedure (Norup & Ryberg, 2015). Moreover 
different rules and communication strategies involve the risk of demotivating the citizen, and 
can also create mistrust about the waste management system (Østergaard & Pawlak, 2013).  
 
Findings from theory and studies  
Different findings from theories and studies have been found to support principle one. The 
effect salience is relevant, when designing the homogeneous HWM system. This effect can 
influence behaviour in mostly automatic ways (Dolan et al., 2012). Salience is used to 
influence what our attention is drawn to. Today people are exposed to large amount of 
stimuli, which has resulted in the fact that they unconsciously filter out much information 
(Dolan et al., 2012). One way to make people notice something is to use simplicity. This is 
important because people’s attention are more likely to be drawn to things that we can 
understand, as they can easily be ‘encoded’. Moreover salient can be used as behavioural 
cues, which can lead to actions (Dolan et al., 2012). Here motivation and ability are needed, 
to ensure that the behaviour will be performed (Fogg, 2009). Ability is highly affected by 
simplicity, and it should therefore be easy and simple to use the HWM system. When 
symbols are standardised, the citizen will find it easier to recognise them. A study highlighted 
certain factors that influenced the number of visits, that people made to recycling centres. 
These factors were, among other things, how convenient it was to recycle and how familiar 
the citizen was with the recycling infrastructure (Sidique, Lupi, & Joshi, 2010).  
 
Principle 1: A homogeneous waste journey  
Chapter 5 proposed requirements for the homogeneous technical system, and this should be 
supported by homogeneous rules and standards. Therefore the first principle focuses on main 
features, which can be aligned in order to reduce doubt and confusion. We suggest using the 
same icons, colours, and written text during the citizen’s waste journey. This should be used 
both inside and outside the citizen’s household. Furthermore the recycling centres, public 
spaces and institutions should use the same icons and information. In that way the citizen will 
experience a high familiarity with the symbols by being more commonly exposed to them. 
Part of the waste journey is illustrated in figure 6-D. 
==PAGE:92==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
77 / 100
 
Figure 6-D: Parts of the homogeneous waste management system is illustrated. The illustration to the left is 
inside the citizen’s kitchen and the one to the right is outside the building. The two systems use the same 
“language”. 
 
We suggest to use the pictograms, with the same icons, colours and text, 
that was developed in 2018 by the Local Government Denmark, the 
Environmental Protection Agency, the Danish Waste Association and 
the design company Futu (KL, Affaldsforening, Miljøstyrelsen, & Futu, 
2018). Please see appendix 6G for more information about the 
pictograms. There is currently no pictogram for an off-site segregated 
fraction with metal/glass. A pictogram for an off-site segregated fraction 
for paper/cardboard exists. Please see figure 6-E.  
 
 
The lid of the waste container should adapt to the system by having the same colour as the 
pictogram. We also recommend that the colours are marked on the ground, to minimise the 
risk that containers are placed in a new order each time the dustmen have emptied it17.  
 
To simplify the system and minimise the citizen’s 
time and effort when sorting, it is suggested to add 
pictograms to the packaging waste, to make every 
part of the system talk together. This might work as 
a cue to increase the information available in the 
moment of sorting. Naturli´, a food production 
company, has added the pictograms to their 
packaging. Please see picture 6-F. Such initiatives 
will become easier to implement, if all munici-
palities in Denmark uses the same pictograms for 
waste sorting. Our judgement is that this will reduce 
doubt, and make the system easier and more 
intuitive.  
                                                
17 https://genanvend.mst.dk/media/187005/rapport-mst-brugervenlige-affaldsordninger_final.pdf [Accessed 
20/5/19] 
Figure 6-E: Paper & 
cardboard pictogram 
(KL et al., 2018) 
Figure 6-F The packaging for one of Naturli’s 
products. Please note the purple pictogram in 
the right corner, next to the barcode, shows 
where the packaging should be disposed 
(https://www.naturli-foods.dk/naturli-foerst-
med-affaldspiktogram-paa-emballage/) 
==PAGE:93==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 78 / 100 
 
A standardised waste sorting system in Denmark will make it possible to use principle 1, 
where a homogeneous waste journey is formed.  
6.4.2 Principle 2: Provide information in the moment of sorting 
Principle 2 was created to ensure that the information delivered to the citizen, is as intuitive 
and simple as possible. This will increase the probability, that the citizen fully understands 
the given information. The principle also concerns timing of the information. Here it is 
important to ensure that the information is given, when it is relevant and needed. The findings 
from the analysis and theories that support this principle will be elaborated in the following. 
 
Findings from the behavioural analysis 
Our behavioural analysis showed, how missing tangible communication influences the 
Danish HWM system. In general it was found, that the citizen needs instructions in the 
sorting moment, e.g. on how to clean the recyclable materials and how to sort them. The last 
mentioned was especially the case for products that consist of more than one type of material. 
A utility company explained in the interview, how changes have to be communicated 
positively and with the right timing (appendix 1A, reference LTF). They described that the 
information should be available a few weeks, or a month before the implementation. It is 
important to time the communication, to ensure that the citizen is prepared for the change. 
 
Findings from theory and studies on communication 
Robert Beno Cialdini, a professor in Psychology and Marketing at Arizona State University18 
presents six basic categories, each governed by a fundamental psychological principle that 
directs human behaviour. One of these is consistency. Consistency refers to people’s 
tendency to behave in a manner that matches their past decisions or behaviours (Cialdini, 
2009). This means that we like to do more of the things we already do.  
 
Principle 2: Provide information in the moment of sorting 
During the implementation of the new system, different communication strategies are 
important to include. These will be presented under the headline: Before implementation. 
Secondly, the citizen should be provided with information when needed. The information 
should not require large amount of time and effort to understand. This will be elaborated 
under the headline: General guidelines for communication. 
 
Before implementation 
Preparing the citizen for the new technical system is an important part of the implementation 
strategy. The information can be added to different touchpoints, e.g. glass cubes, see figure 6-
G, or hangers on the outside containers. Information sent to the citizens’ mailbox, is at risk of 
being overlooked (appendix 1A, reference LTF). 
                                                
18 https://www.influenceatwork.com/robert-cialdini-phd/biography/ [Accessed 21/5/19] 
==PAGE:94==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 79 / 100
When communicating the changes to the 
citizen, phrasing is important. Here the 
behavioural principle consistency is relevant 
(Cialdini, 2009). The citizen should be told 
that they do not need to change their 
behaviour completely; they “just” need to 
build on their existing behaviour. This is to 
avoid, that the citizen feels that much effort 
is required (and system 2 effort). If the 
citizen has not sorted household waste 
earlier, make sure to identify what he or she 
already sorts (e.g. deposit, batteries, paper, 
or maybe glass).  
 
General guidelines for communication 
It is important to consider when and where communication should take place. The citizen 
should have the needed information at hand in the moment of sorting. It is about timing and 
thus understanding when to influence the citizen at the right moment, where they are 
susceptible and above the behaviour activation threshold (Fogg, 2009). Ensuring identical 
pictograms on the packaging waste already supports this, but there will be products without 
these pictograms. In these situations a simple one-page sorting guide that illustrates how to 
sort the waste can be used. This one-pager should primary be used inside the citizen’s homes, 
where the waste is sorted. A one-page sorting guide is already used in several municipalities 
today, e.g. in Copenhagen19 or Viborg20 municipality.  
 
Rules of thumb can be used as part of the communication strategy. This can e.g. help the 
citizen to distinguish different materials from each during separation. An example that is 
commonly used in municipalities for determination of plastic is: “Rigid plastic can be used 
for drumming and soft plastic can be tied into a knot”21. We suggest creating other rules of 
thumb for e.g. cleaning of the materials or how to distinguish between products with mixed 
materials. The rules of thumb must describe specific behaviour, without the possibility of 
interpretation.  
6.4.3 Principle 3: Feedback on sorting behaviour 
Feedback was found to be an important aspect of motivation and prevention of wrong sorting 
practices. To motivate the citizen, social comparisons can be used, where e.g. the collection 
of recyclable materials in different areas in a city, can be compared. This section first 
                                                
19  https://kk.sites.itera.dk/apps/kk_pub2/pdf/808_fooBRLgZcu.pdf [Accessed 20/5/19] 
20  https://www.revas.dk/downloads/Sorteringsguide_A3.pdf [Accessed 20/5/19] 
21 https://www.kk.dk/nyheder/nu-kan-du-baade-aflevere-bloed-og-haard-plast  
    https://www.silkeborgforsyning.dk/Default.aspx?Id=4775  
    https://www.odenserenovation.dk/sorteringsguide/containere-ngs/haard-plast/  [All three accessed 20/5/19] 
 
Figure 6-G: A note left on the glass cube can inform 
the citizen about the new services (BRO, 2015a) 
==PAGE:95==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 80 / 100 
presents the findings from the analysis, followed by supported findings in the literature. 
Lastly, the principle is elaborated in more detail.  
 
Findings from the behavioural analysis 
Our behavioural analysis showed that there was a lack of feedback in the waste management 
system. The citizens rarely experienced any consequences when sorting improperly; neither 
did they experience any support or credit for correct sorting. The most common type of 
identified feedback that was found was when the dustman either did not empty the container 
or left a note for the citizen. An example of this can be seen in appendix 6H. 
 
One consequence of missing feedback was seen in our test, were the test persons did not 
improve their waste sorting skills during the test period. Moreover they kept their sorting 
procedure as before the test, e.g. by washing and drying the waste before recycling. In the 
literature review we found that rewards are important when habits are developed. Feedback 
was also mentioned in the intervention strategy from the BCW (subsection 6.3.3).  
 
Findings from theory and studies on feedback  
The activation of the descriptive norm can be used to give feedback that compare recycling 
rates of waste among people (Schultz, Nolan, Cialdini, Goldstein, & Griskevicius, 2007). The  
descriptive norm describes the fact that people do not want to deviate from the norm. This is 
because people tend to evaluate if their behaviour is appropriate, by comparing it to how far 
they are from the norm (Schultz et al., 2007). 
 
Feedback was tested in a study in Manchester in 2011 involving 318 streets (Nomura, John, 
& Cotterill, 2011). These were divided into treatment and control groups, which were tested 
for three weeks. The average amount of sorted food waste was compared for each street in a 
neighbourhood. They found that feedback had a positive effect on the food waste 
participation with an effect size of 2.8 % compared with a control group that received no 
treatment. Other findings were that participants who received feedback twice were more 
engaged in sorting food waste. Moreover, if the street was small it seemed to have an effect 
on the participants' willingness to sort. Lastly the study found that the feedback was 
successful in encouraging non-recyclers to begin recycling food waste. It was however found 
that it discouraged existing recyclers from continuing to recycle food waste, when they were 
told that they were above the norm. 
 
A review of intervention studies aimed at household energy conservation also investigated 
the effect of feedback (Abrahamse, Steg, Vlek, & Rothengatter, 2005). They found that the 
more frequent the feedback, the more effect it had. It also highlighted that rewards seemed to 
have a positive effect on energy savings, but this might only be effective in the beginning.  
 
==PAGE:96==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
81 / 100
Principle 3: Feedback on sorting behaviour 
Feedback is an important mechanism to achieve and persist the wanted behaviour. It is 
suggested to create similar hangers as the presented examples in appendix 6I. Such 
interventions should however be tested before implemented. These are suggested, because 
they are in line with the literature. Here social norms are utilised, as people tend to avoid 
deviating from the norm (Dolan et al., 2012; Schultz et al., 2007). When using social 
comparisons it should be tested how local the comparisons should be designed to achieve the 
highest effect. One should be careful when using social comparison on citizens who are 
highly motivated, since it might have an opposite effect and cause demotivation (Nomura et 
al., 2011). The acknowledgments of the citizen’s effort should be made clear, since missing 
encouragement seems to affect the sorting behaviour. It seems that the more local these 
comparisons are, the better the citizen can relate to the results. The frequency of the feedback 
should also be tested.  
 
It should be noted that feedback is sensitive, and small variations can make a big difference 
on the effect. Moreover, some citizens might find feedback that places them above average as 
inspiring, while it might demotivate others. Different feedback strategies should be tested in 
specific contexts, since the effect can be hard to predict. Make sure to use both positive and 
negative feedback. 
Examples on feedback used today in Danish municipalities 
A Danish utility company has tested a different type of feedback, where hangers are placed 
on the handle of the waste containers. The information is hereby visible for other citizens in 
the neighbourhood and it indicates how well the specific person has handled the waste. The 
citizen receives a green, yellow, or red hanger representing the sorting quality as good, 
medium or bad. For more details please see appendix 6I. This has only been used once, and it 
an expensive solution to use for all citizens. The effect of these hangers has not been tested, 
but they did not receive any complaints about them (appendix 1A, reference LTF). 
 
Another way to give feedback is to use waste data. One municipality used their data to 
compare how much organic waste that was collected in different parts of the city in their 
newsletter. See appendix 6I. The effect of this intervention is also unknown, but social norms 
have seen to make people change habits.   
 
6.4.4 Principle 4: Ensure transparency in HWM  
The citizen’s lack of knowledge was found to affect the sorting behaviour. Principle 4 
focuses on the creation of a transparent HWM system, to ensure that the values of sorting are 
fully understood. 
 
Findings from the behavioural analysis 
The citizen found it hard to understand the value of sorting waste. They highlighted that they 
did not fully understand the difference waste sorting made. Moreover there exist untrue 
==PAGE:97==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 82 / 100 
myths and stories about waste sorting, which affects the citizens’ willingness to recycle 
(Norup & Ryberg, 2015). This has also been found in the empirical studies in this project. 
Therefore it is important to make it clear for the citizen, how the waste is actually treated. 
One of the most common myths that we have encountered is the belief that the sorted waste is 
being mixed in the dustcart and afterwards incinerated.  
 
Findings from theory and studies  
As stated in principle 2 it is important to create novel and simple communication. In general 
communication can be easier to recall when it is communicated fun, interesting, or surprising 
(Norup & Ryberg, 2015). Moreover, communication should be short and simple, with no 
risks for misinterpretation.  
 
An interesting study from 2011 conducted in Calgary, tested the effect of the behavioural 
principle called loss aversion. The loss aversion principle explains that people are more 
motivated to avoid a loss, than to seek a potential gain (Dolan et al., 2012; White, 
Macdonnell, & Dahl, 2011). Here it was found that concrete messages that told the citizen 
exactly how to sort waste, were more effective than abstract messages explaining why to sort 
waste. The study used a two-sided door hanger, where one side either presented ways for how 
to sort waste or reasons why to sort waste. The reverse side of the hanger delivered either a 
loss-framed or gain-framed message. The results showed how loss combined with how 
messages were most effective. See appendix 6J for an illustration of the hangers and the 
results from the study. 
 
Principle 4: Ensure transparency in HWM  
There are different ways to ensure a 
higher transparency in the HWM system. 
The first way is to eliminate untrue 
myths about recycling. One way to 
ensure that one of the most common 
myths are minimised, is to make sure 
that the citizen understands that the 
dustcart has two separate chambers. We 
suggest using a similar approach as the 
municipality of Aarhus, where they illu-
strats, on the dustcart, that it has two 
rooms inside the vehicle. Please see 
figure 6-H.  
 
 
 
Figure 6-H: A dustcart from Aarhus municipality, which 
explains the two separate rooms. It says, “I have two rooms” 
(https://www.transportmagasinet.dk/article/view/558636/klim
avenlige_skraldebiler_henter_sorteret_affald) 
==PAGE:98==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 83 / 100 
Explaining the value of sorting should be done so that it is simple and easy to understand. We 
found the following two examples that can be used for this: 
 
● Use narratives to explain the value of 
sorting. The effect seems highest if the 
recycled products from the sorted waste are 
something the citizen can relate to 
(Nomura et al., 2011). An example of this 
is the implementation of organic waste in 
the municipality of Copenhagen. During 
implementation of the new bin for organic 
waste, a folder was attached to the bin. It 
contained information on how to sort the 
organic waste22. The folder also presented 
a narrative explaining that the gathered 
food waste would be used as biogas for bus 
line 5C in Copenhagen. This would hereby 
minimise air pollution in the city. This bus 
drives from the north of Copenhagen to the 
south and is therefore used by many 
citizens.  
 
● Another way to make the value of sorting easier for the citizen to understand is to 
make it specific. The citizen can be provided with simple illustrations, of what the 
recycled material is turned in to. An example of this can be seen in Odense 
municipality (Odense Renovation), where the recycling of bottles were compared to 
the production of a fleece jersey, please see figure 6-I.  
 
This can also be seen in Lyngby-Taarbæk municipality, where it was explained how 
500 cans can be recycled into a bike23. Copenhagen municipality made similar 
statements with their campaign ‘Recycle is gold’ (Genbrug er guld)24, saying “one kg 
of potato peelings or other bio waste contain energy for 33 hours of lighting”. This 
information is easier for the citizen to relate to, compared to statements that just 
pronounce recycling to be good for the environment. Please see figure 6-J on the next 
page. 
 
 
 
                                                
22 https://www.kk.dk/nyheder/nu-skal-hovedparten-af-koebenhavns-300000-husstande-i-gang-med-sortere-
bioaffald [Accessed 23/5/19] 
23 http://lyngby-taarbaek.lokalavisen.dk/nyheder/2019-02-06/-Affaldssortering-n%C3%A5r-nye-
h%C3%B8jder-i-Lyngby-Taarb%C3%A6k-4102387.html [Accessed 23/5/19] 
24 https://kbkbh.dk/cases/genbrug-er-guld/ 
Figure 6-I: 30 plastic bottles can be recycled 
into one fleece jersey 
(https://www.odenserenovation.dk/projekter/
sorter-mere-forsoeg/hvad-bruges-affaldet-
til/).  
==PAGE:99==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 84 / 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is important that the communication is tangible, but does not promise more than the HWM 
can deliver. If promising too much, it can create myths and unwanted stories about HWM, if 
citizens realise that the communication exaggerate the effect of recycling (appendix 1A, 
reference HK). 
 
When using principle 4 think of ways to include the loss/how communication strategy, e.g. 
by explaining what the citizen will lose, if he or she does not continue sorting as they do 
today. Remember to ensure that the citizen can relate to the information, e.g. by making it 
locally relevant. 
6.4.5 Principle 5: Affect the physical waste sorting environment 
It can be difficult to change habits, and this principle suggests how to help the citizen with 
this change. Adding barriers to the existing behaviour or removing friction from the wanted 
one can support the wanted habit formation. This section will start by presenting the findings 
from the analysis and support the claims with theory. Lastly the main principle will be 
elaborated. 
 
Findings from the behavioural analysis 
In the Photovoice test it was highlighted how changing habits is very different from person to 
person. For several test persons, the blue bag for plastic worked as a reminder of the new 
technical system. Furthermore we know that sorting waste should be easy, convenient and 
take up as little time as possible. 
 
An identified barrier from the behavioural analysis was that the citizen found it hard to create 
a new waste sorting system inside their home. Often this was due to a lack of space, but it 
was also found to be difficult to design a proper sorting system. This was one of the most 
highlighted elements in the survey. One person from the survey described her largest issue 
with the waste sorting the following: “It is space demanding with so much waste sorting. It 
demands easy solutions for the citizen, to be successful”. This is supported by other cases 
(Norup & Ryberg, 2015). 
 
Figure 6-J: “Sort your waste - give it value” 
(http://www.odsherred.dk/borger/affald-og-genbrug) 
==PAGE:100==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 85 / 100 
Findings from theory and studies  
Fogg’s behaviour model states that for behaviour to happen, a person must have; sufficient 
motivation, sufficient ability, and an effective trigger (Fogg, 2009). Moreover from 
Miltenberger’s ABC model (Miltenberger, 2008), we know that for behaviour to occur again 
we need a positive consequence. These factors can be modulated so that old habits are less 
attractive than the new behaviour. One important element is to know that people are 
fundamentally lazy and are therefore attracted to easy choices (Fogg, 2009). This entails, that 
if the new system requires too much effort, it is at high risk of falling short (Fogg, 2009).  
 
A study has identified, how different inconvenience factors prevented the citizen from 
recycling. The factors included the needed effort, lack of storage space and required time. 
People who perceive waste sorting as more inconvenient tend to recycle less (Tucker & 
Speirs, 2003). Another paper agrees by explaining that the easier the system, the more likely 
it is that waste sorting will be successful (Andersson & Stage, 2018). 
 
The behavioural principle reciprocation can be used as a way to make the citizen commit to 
waste sorting. This principle is one of the basic laws of social psychology. It states that 
people tend to attempt to repay what they have received from others. This means that if 
someone does you a favour, you are likely to feel that you have to give something in 
exchange (Cialdini, 2009). 
 
Principle 5: Affect the physical waste sorting environment 
We suggest making waste sorting easier, by e.g. providing physical artefacts that can ensure a 
simple sorting system inside the households. It is important to create solutions that are easy to 
install and fit to different kitchens. This can result in several advantages, which will be 
described in the following: 
 
● By providing a system, with the same colours, icons and text as the ones used in the 
HWM system, it will increase the homogeneity of the sorting system. These might 
perform as triggers that make the citizen aware of the waste sorting. 
● The order of the fractions can be controlled, where e.g. the bags or bins for the sorted 
fractions can be placed, so that they are easier to access. Here the residual waste bin 
can be placed where it is a bit more troublesome to access. In that way, barriers for 
the target behaviour are removed (e.g. recycling of plastic) and friction for the 
unwanted behaviour is added (e.g. dispose plastic into the residual waste). The 
placement of the residual fraction needs to be tested, to avoid residual waste in the 
recyclable fractions. From the behavioural analysis we found that this risk was low, 
but this needs to be investigated further.  
● When providing free bags or bins for the citizen, the behavioural principle 
reciprocation is used. This means that the citizen might feel that they have to repay 
the investment, by sorting materials into them. 
 
==PAGE:101==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 86 / 100 
Rewards are important for habit formation and this can e.g. be given through feedback (see 
principle 3). Moreover, it is important to make sure that the citizen keeps performing the 
wanted behaviour in the reflected motivation until it is a habit. Therefore ways to prompt 
rehearsal and repetition of this behaviour is needed. 
 
Please note that after the implementation, it is important to check if the habits have changed. 
If they have, this influences the use of the behavioural principles. These need to be adjusted 
according to the identified changes. For example, after a few years of operation it might be 
needed to create a feedback loop, to investigate if anything needs to be updated to adapt to 
the behaviour. When behaviour changes, the social norms are likely changing as well. 
Therefore a feedback loop can be important. 
 
6.5 Round-off 
We suggest implementing the behavioural principles simultaneously. This means that all five 
principles should be addressed at the same time, and adapted to the municipality. The 
principles should be seen as a holistic solution. Other behavioural interventions can be 
effective in HWM, but these five principles are determined to be important to address. Please 
note that the principles originate from empirical and theoretical knowledge on human 
behaviour. Therefore they need to be tested before implementation. This will ensure that the 
principles have an effect both short-term and long-term. This will be elaborated in chapter 8. 
 
 
==PAGE:102==
Discussion
7.
==PAGE:103==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 87 / 100 
7. Discussion 
7.1 Introduction 
This chapter will investigate and critically examine the process and results, with the problem 
statement in mind. Both the technical and behavioural analysis will be discussed together 
with the selected methods. Some findings in this project can contribute with new perspectives 
on waste management in Denmark. These contributions are mainly practical, but some 
empirical findings might help the theoretical understanding of the Danish HWM. The 
findings should be included in the further planning and development of a transition towards a 
circular economy within waste management. 
 
7.2 Discussion on results 
Our empirical studies were combined with knowledge on the topic of waste management. We 
were not able to find sufficient data and literature, which could support all decisions in the 
development of a homogeneous HWM system. This resulted in a process, where a large part 
of the analysis relied on interviews. 
 
The municipal dataset 
The municipal dataset was a valuable resource during the project. It allowed us to calculate 
our own waste content overview of Danish household waste. An interesting finding from this 
analysis was that the amount of recycled paper and cardboard differed from a recently 
published report (Kromann et al., 2019). When examining the report it was found that they 
used older data from 2012. They used the content of the household waste for the assumptions 
for a life cycle assessment of recycling household waste. It seemed that the amount of 
cardboard was underestimated, which can lead to the conclusion that this fraction should be 
incinerated, rather than collected for recycling. Therefore we consulted the main responsible 
researcher for the LCA studies in the report (Kromann et al., 2019). He confirmed the trend 
of an increasing amount of cardboard based on other statistics (appendix 1A, reference DTU). 
Therefore we find the established content overview from 2017 more up to date. The trend of 
an increasing amount of cardboard should be kept in mind in future projects regarding waste 
management. The quantity of the different fractions is changing over time, which was 
reflected in the results.  
 
The fact that the project relied on the reported municipal data, made the uncertainty of the 
results higher. As highlighted in the analysis there were issues related to the reporting of 
waste data. Here the recycling rates might be influenced by hidden factors, such as the waste 
management strategies, behavioural interventions and political climate. Furthermore the 
municipal dataset used in the analysis was based on data from a single year. This further 
increases the uncertainty of the analysis. This was the only available data, but it would 
strengthen the project, if a dataset containing waste data from several years had been 
included. Moreover, using a confidential dataset has downsides, as it removes the option for 
others to review the calculations in the presented results. This makes our findings less 
==PAGE:104==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
88 / 100 
transparent. We estimate the dataset to be reliable, as municipalities with publicly available 
information on their waste data, enabled us to control some of the data.  
 
Waste statistics  
The analysis in chapter 4 revealed that the average Danish household was estimated to 
produce 1309 kg each year, which was higher than any other European country. However, 
our study showed that the average production of the main seven fractions was 470-533 kg per 
household. Even though garden waste, construction waste and large electronics were not 
included in our results, it became clear that the national statistics might include more than 
household waste. This was therefore investigated further. All stakeholders from our 
qualitative studies presented with these results claimed, that they did not expect Denmark to 
perform different from similar countries in terms of economic wealth (appendix 1A, 
reference KK, LT, VF, DTU). They believed that the differences primarily were due to 
different methods of registering waste, where e.g. smaller businesses sometimes use the 
recycling centres in the Danish HWM system. This means that the recycling rates are very 
hard to compare from country to country, but primarily a tool to see developments from year 
to year on a national level (appendix 1A, reference DTU).  
 
New technical system - a requirement or a guideline? 
We experienced a sceptical attitude towards forcing a specific collection service upon all 
municipalities (appendix 1A, reference KK, LT, HK, RS, REFA, DIN). One reason for this 
was that it might influence the local adaptation and innovation. This area was mostly 
examined in the beginning of the project, where we experienced a clear consensus between 
the interviewees. Therefore, we narrowed the scope to investigate what fractions to collect 
and the consequences of mixing materials as off-site segregation. 
 
Moreover, it was considered if the new waste management system should be a guideline 
rather than a requirement. The collection of one large, uniform and stable quantity of each 
fraction seemed to be a more efficient solution, where also better treatment could be 
achieved. There were however highlighted disadvantages in such a system. Important 
stakeholders should be on-board during the implementation and operation of a new HWM 
system. If these stakeholders are dissatisfied with the new requirements, it is expected that 
this can influence the citizens’ participation in the sorting program. We do however see many 
benefits if all municipalities comply with the new requirements. As highlighted in the 
analysis more research is needed to be able to fully understand the consequences of off-site 
segregation. We do however believe that the new system should be a requirement, when the 
consequence of mixing is fully understood. 
 
What is the goal for a new system? 
It was clear in the analysis that the HWM system is influenced by many different 
stakeholders. It is a complex network that seems to be highly affected by politics. Here 
satisfying the citizens or cutting down cost can easily be prioritised before environmental 
==PAGE:105==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
89 / 100 
concern. Often the politicians do not want to “encumber” the citizens with too many 
containers and time consuming sorting activities (appendix 1A, reference HK, LT, RS). The 
topic is moreover affected by economics. We also identified a pattern showing that 
municipalities often plan HWM, based on the surrounding municipalities. The joint invest-
ment programs for MRFs or incineration plants, resulted in a more constricted approach to 
waste management. 
 
We identified conflicts of interest, and it can be discussed whether the selection of a new 
HWM system is based on the best environmental solution. Here the factors, mentioned above, 
influence the planning of the HWM system. This can conflict with the idea of a circular 
economy, where recycled waste is kept at the highest possible level at all times. 
 
Off-site segregation in the new system 
Mixing glass and plastic, as an off-site segregated waste stream, seems to reduce the quality 
of the recycled materials. This was the consensus from field experts during the analysis, 
which was in line with the conclusion from the published information from the 
Environmental Protection Agency (Neidel & Kromann, 2019). However, it was complex to 
navigate through this, since some stakeholders disagreed. For the mix of glass and plastic, 
some stakeholders claimed they did not experience any issues or complaints about the output 
quality. Other stakeholders claimed that the two fractions together could reduce the quality. 
These different claims seemed to be caused by different interests. Our conclusion in this 
project leads us to believe, that there are quality issues when mixing plastic and glass. It is 
however, hard to fully understand them, as the plastic waste is currently exported for 
recycling which complicates such an investigation. As such we believe that a further 
investigation of the output quality should be considered. 
 
Behavioural interventions 
The behavioural interventions were created on the basis of our own studies, other behavioural 
projects and behavioural theories. Due to the limited timeframe for this project, we did not 
test the principles. This means that we have suggested elements, which we do not know the 
complete effect of. The literature was used to support the principles, but these have to be 
tested to understand their effect in a Danish context. 
 
7.3 The process and methods 
Throughout the process one goal was to provide knowledge through our own study and 
combine it with the recent published knowledge on the subject. The theory of circular 
economy was used, as a framework for the overall purpose and focus area. It was decided to 
pay attention to the part of CE that involves recycling and to use CE as a main framework 
during the process. We determined behaviour and behavioural design to be important for this 
topic. This was the case as many projects that recently analysed the effects of a homogeneous 
HWM system in Denmark only briefly discussed behaviour (Kromann et al., 2019; Mønsted 
et al., 2019; Neidel & Kromann, 2019).  
==PAGE:106==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 90 / 100
The qualitative study 
The lack of data and research material of MRFs in Denmark made us dependent on more 
qualitative information for the study. Therefore many different stakeholders were interviewed 
to increase the validity of the project. The project had to rely on our own and other projects’ 
conducted interviews to a large extent. We decided that interviews were the best method, as 
we were unable to find relevant research literature on MRFs. Many stakeholders in the HWM 
system had strong opinions about the topic, and some even had commercial interests at stake, 
which we were aware of during the interviews. Furthermore several municipalities had 
through the past years, planned and implemented new waste management systems. These 
were during the planning seen as optimal for their own needs. Therefore it is inevitable that 
requirements, which leave out some of the implemented systems today, will lead to criticism. 
Therefore it could be difficult to define the exact reasoning of the claims presented during the 
interviews This was also the case for the recent report that investigated the issues with current 
HWM (Neidel & Kromann, 2019), where claims from primary stakeholders were central for 
the foundation of the conclusion. This increased the difficulty of navigating in the complex 
network of different stakeholders, where it was important to consider what interests the 
interviewee had. Sometimes we experienced direct conflict with claims and other gathered 
information. We were not able to contribute with information that removed the uncertainty of 
these claims entirely, as this would require research of the municipal waste output in relation 
to quality and amount. Without empirical evidence of such character, it will be hard to 
precisely define the most optimal waste management system. We discussed the possibility to 
investigate the outputs of the recycling facilities further, by tracing the waste output until 
second production. However, we did not consider our resources for this project appropriate 
for this matter. Therefore we relied on the qualitative study combined with information from 
other projects. To strengthen our qualitative study, we decided to include the recently 
published information from the Environmental Protection Agency (Kromann et al., 2019; 
Mønsted et al., 2019; Neidel & Kromann, 2019; Åstrøm-Andersen et al., 2019). This gave a 
large amount of information, but this was also based on interviews with different approaches, 
and different objectives. This meant that not all interviewees were able to answer and reflect 
on the same identified issues, as these gradually evolved over time. Therefore some 
stakeholders were not able to respond to the primary results from our analysis. We got 
feedback on our results, by creating a presentation folder for this project. This was presented 
to important stakeholders but we were not able to contact all interviewees again due to the 
time frame.  
 
We had an on-going dialog with important stakeholders throughout the project, to ensure 
feedback on findings. This created a more dynamic process, which gave us the possibility to 
adapt and find issues to focus on. However, this complicated the documentation of all the 
claims and statements we received during the project. This project is a contribution to the on-
going debate of an alignment of the waste management system in Denmark. Therefore it was 
a key priority to ensure transparency in the given information. It is however difficult to 
present all the information gained, especially with more sensitive information. As such we 
==PAGE:107==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
91 / 100 
determined what information that was important, which can limit the transparency in the 
presented information.  
 
Using interviews as a method entailed uncertainty, because the interviewee could easily be 
primed or led in a certain direction. In general the interviewee might be affected by elements 
such as the phrasing of the questions and the order of them. This might influence the 
reliability of this research, which is one of the issues discussed in the following. 
 
Behavioural design 
The results from our behavioural analysis included different sources of error, which will be 
discussed in this section. In the survey and the interviews we asked the participants to 
describe their behaviour, which meant that they described it according to their memory, 
which might distinguish itself from their actual behaviour. The Photovoice test identified this, 
as a test person described that doubt would lead to the disposal of waste into the residual bin. 
The test revealed that the test person often threw the waste into the recyclable fraction even 
when in doubt. This illustrates the ‘social desirability effect’, where the participant knows 
that he or she is being observed, and therefore wants to do the "right" thing (Green, 1977). 
Here the participant might feel the need to disguise negative behaviour or emphasise positive 
behaviour (Cash & Culley, 2014). Therefore negative behaviour might be excluded, because 
the participants could select what they presented to us. They might also have excluded parts 
that they did not believe were in our interest.  
 
In general the participants were probably affected by the Awareness of participation, which 
means that the participant knows about the research process and therefore modify his or her 
behaviour (Gephart & Antonoplos, 1969). This can be an issue when using family and friends 
as participants. Although we did not tell the participants much about our project, they were 
properly affected by their relationship with us. In general, this was seen in their feedback, 
where they seemed to overstate their positive attitudes towards the new system. The main 
area that led to criticism was the need for an extra fraction in the kitchen. This risk could 
have been minimised by using participants who did not know us. Moreover the test should 
have involved a more diverse and larger group of participants. The test only showed how 
people (mostly women) in the age group 24 to 32 behaved. Moreover, the fact that the test 
only ran for one week influenced the results. The participants were properly affected by the 
novelty value and therefore it might have been easier for them to change their habits (Wood 
& Neal, 2016). 
 
Another uncertainty about the behavioural analysis, which especially was the case for the 
survey, was our interpretation of the few lines of text answered. The respondent might have 
meant something else than what we interpreted. This was also the case for the Photovoice 
method, but the interviews made it possible for us to make them elaborate on their responses. 
The answers might also be affected by e.g. the participant’s mood, experiences, and time a 
day.  
In continuation of this the Pygmalion effect should be considered. Here the researchers or 
==PAGE:108==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 92 / 100 
designers expect certain behaviours of the participants, and there is a risk that they act in 
ways that make the expected behaviour more likely to occur (Barnes, 2010). 
 
Since we did not conduct a randomised control trial, the results were mostly used as 
qualitative insights about recycling behaviour. This was especially the case for the survey, 
which was only used as an indication of the citizens’ behaviour and believes. It is important 
to emphasise that this analysis cannot necessarily define a correct picture of the behaviour, 
but rather indicate it.  
 
7.4 Theoretical and practical contributions  
Throughout the project we identified gaps in the data and literature around the Danish HWM 
system. The first gap was the missing statistics of the quality of the recycled materials. Today 
recycling rates are measured as the collected amount of recyclable material, without 
including the loss that occur during the treatment and processing. This made it difficult to 
compare different recycling rates of e.g. the different municipal systems, since it did not 
indicate anything about the sorting quality. A second gap was the missing data and academic 
literature of the consequences of the different off-site segregation systems and treatments. As 
highlighted in the literature review, it is important to establish an overview of the 
consequences of mixing certain materials. The quality of the recycled material is an important 
aspect of circular economy, as it determines the possibilities for recycling. Some off-site 
segregation systems were highlighted as a potential issue in this regard. Mixing glass and 
plastic seemed to influence the quality of the materials negatively. The third and last gap was 
the missing public available data on the field. Some municipalities do not want to publish 
their recycling rates, which minimise the transparency of the system. By having all these gaps 
filled, it will be easier to determine the optimal waste management system. 
 
Indicators 
As identified in the project we did not find any of the indicators from the literature review 
important for the overall planning of waste management. There were however, several 
interesting findings, where e.g. population density, mean age and education level, seemed to 
be a strong predictor for the production of garden and construction waste. As this was not the 
main focus in this project, these findings did not lead to any diverse planning of the waste 
management system. However the findings can be interesting to investigate further, 
especially when planning waste management of garden waste. The mean mass of garden 
waste, produced in municipalities with a high mean age, was found to be twice the size of 
municipalities with a low mean age. This investigation can be important for the further 
investigation of waste behaviour and waste prediction in Denmark. 
 
As highlighted in the literature review, income level was identified as a strong predictor for 
the production of household waste. This was however not found in our results in a Danish 
context. Although no conclusions in this regard can be drawn upon the small data sample, 
this is interesting. It is highlighted in the literature that there might exist a saturation point, 
==PAGE:109==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 93 / 100 
where an increase in the production of waste only applies until a certain income level 
(Miliute-Plepiene & Plepys, 2015). As our project investigated the mean income level in 
municipalities in a Danish context, the level of inequality in Denmark might have affected the 
results. Here municipalities with a low mean income might have reached this saturation point. 
This can explain why no further increase in waste production was found for municipalities 
with a higher income level. As such these results might indicate that the income levels in 
Denmark have reached such a saturation point. This further supports the idea of the existence 
of a saturation point in relation to income and household waste production.  
 
Another explanation to the missing link between the indicators and the statistical findings can 
be that our investigation used data on a municipal level. Therefore the behavioural 
differences within the municipalities might not be visible. Potentially the indicators could 
have predicted waste behaviour on an individual level. Therefore these findings are merely to 
be used as support for further research of waste behaviour. 
 
The findings from the literature review showed that there is a need for research on consumer 
behaviour in regards to circular economy (EMF, 2013). It furthermore highlighted that 
behaviour plays an important role when trying to solve or improve social issues. Throughout 
this master’s thesis it has been clear to us that environmental, economic, and social impacts 
should be taken into consideration when designing the Danish HWM system. One main 
contribution is therefore the synthesis between the two topics Circular Economy and 
Behavioural Design. We claim that one should take behaviour into consideration, since the 
solution is dependent on the citizens’ participation and therefore human behaviour. We have 
not been able to find this synthesis in other projects regarding the design of a homogeneous 
HWM system.  
 
The project added new voices to the debate, by including stakeholders that were not 
interviewed regarding this topic earlier. As such, the qualitative study can be added to the 
further investigation of an optimal waste management system. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
Limitation &
further work
8.
==PAGE:111==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 94 / 100 
8. Limitations and further work 
8.1 Introduction 
As highlighted in the discussion, there are areas within HWM that lack research. This will be 
needed for the further planning of an optimal waste management system. Therefore the 
results in this project have limitations, as uncertainty exists for important conclusions. 
Furthermore, the beginning of the process was characterised by investigating a new field, 
which was highly complex. Do to this, and do to the timeframe we have not been able to 
address all identified issues, or potential areas of importance in relation to the planning of 
HWM. Therefore this chapter will describe and discuss the further work that is needed before 
implementation, and the process and limitations of this project. 
 
8.2 Process and limitations 
Waste management was a fairly new subject to us and therefore it took time to establish an 
overview of the sector. This meant that the research clarification stage and early planning of 
this project was challenging, because of the complexity of the waste management system. 
This entailed that the scope was developed throughout the project. The decision to include 
interviews as an important foundation for the analysis was early clear. We could however 
have developed a better plan for exactly what to include in the qualitative study, as we early 
in the project investigated areas that we later determined not to be part of our primary focus. 
As such, we have also used the interviews to investigate the potential areas that could be 
important for the development of a uniform system. Therefore, if we were to investigate this 
area again, we are now able to more precisely define the areas that are important to 
investigate.  
 
As explained in the analysis, we tried to select diverse municipalities. This selection was 
based on the indicators that were determined important in terms of waste behaviour in the 
literature review. We have throughout the project found several other aspects that could have 
been included, in order to create a study that could illuminate all potential opinions in waste 
management. The road infrastructure and urban architecture greatly influence the planning of 
waste management. It could have strengthened the qualitative study if we had included these 
focuses from the beginning of the project. 
 
The entire waste management system was analysed through a holistic and a lifecycle 
perspective. As life cycle assessments are comprehensive to create, it was decided to use a 
recently published report (Kromann et al., 2019). Here different scenarios of HWM in 
Denmark were assessed in a life cycle perspective. Our main results from the analysis were 
compared to the main assumptions that were the foundation of these life cycle calculations. 
Therefore the process allowed us to challenge their main assumptions, but due to the 
timeframe, it was not possible to simulate the potential impacts of the waste management 
system in our own LCA. This would have been relevant to investigate further. 
 
The process of developing behavioural principles only took up approximately 30 % of the 
workload. This was, among other things caused by the fact that overall requirements for a 
==PAGE:112==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 95 / 100
technical waste management system, had to be established before any behavioural 
interventions could be fully developed.  
 
Time was not the only limitation in this project, as we had limited resources available. Here 
e.g. participation fees have been funded on our own expenses (appendix 1A, reference 
DAKOFA), which naturally made some investigations unattainable. This meant that some of 
the areas we found important for the further investigation could have been tested further, if 
we had the time and necessary resources. For example it was discussed with a municipality to 
analyse household waste content during the project, but due to the necessary approval and 
safety equipment it was determined to be unrealistic to obtain any reliable results without 
more resources.  
 
Further work needs to be accomplished before the requirements and behavioural principles 
can be fully verified. This will be discussed in the next section. 
 
8.3 Further work 
It is essential that the conclusions drawn in the analysis are verified through more 
investigations. Especially research on the output quality of the different systems is essential 
to understand. Therefore we argue that research of the output quality should be established 
for the largest MRFs. Furthermore we identified indications that metal and glass might be 
more stable in amount if collected together. If this is the case, it can be an advantage to 
collect metal and glass together. Metal can easily be included in the current glass cubes that 
exist across the country. Therefore we suggest analysing this relationship further.  
 
We identified several issues that impact citizen behaviour during waste disposal. Here 
complexity in the sorting process, such as not allowing soft plastic together with rigid plastic, 
seems to increase the probability of wrongly disposal of rigid plastic. We suggest 
investigating this relationship further before an implementation. 
 
The positioning of the fractions in relation to each other seems important to ensure an optimal 
sorting behaviour. As highlighted in the chapter 5 we did not find sufficient time to 
investigate this matter further. This should be investigated further, in several different test 
groups that represent both houses and apartments to find an optimal positioning of the 
fractions.  
 
We found arguments for creating separate requirements for vacation houses in Denmark, but 
we did not investigated this further and therefore we cannot suggest any suitable 
requirements for this type of household. Therefore the further development of a 
homogeneous HWM system, should investigate the optimal requirements for vacation 
houses.   
 
==PAGE:113==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 96 / 100 
When these main areas have been investigated, the further establishment of requirements can 
be finalised. Here we recommend investigating the benefits and downsides of station pick-up 
service. This service was found to increase sorting quality and the reuse of glass bottles, and 
metal can easily be implemented into the current cubes for glass. Moreover, our statistical 
analysis did not find significant differences in the collected amount of glass and metal, 
between municipalities that offer household pick-up of these fractions and those who do not. 
Therefore it should be investigated further if station pick-up services can collect as much 
recyclable material as household pick-up services for these fractions. 
 
The behavioural principles build upon our empirical and theoretical investigations and should 
be tested in more accurate scenarios. This is due to the fact that some behavioural 
interventions might work in one context but not in another. The theoretical investigations that 
were found were often based on research from other countries, where e.g. cultural differences 
might have influenced the effect. Therefore we suggest testing these principles in a small 
scale and hereby understand their effects, before implementation of these. This should be 
done by having a control group and an experimental group. Here each principle should be 
tested and adjusted individually before combining them. This test should take place in 
different places in Denmark, as behaviour can vary from citizen to citizen. The behavioural 
principles might have unintended consequences, which will be visible when they are tested 
and later implemented.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:114==
Conclusion
9.
==PAGE:115==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 97 / 100
9. Conclusion 
9.1 Objective one: The technical system 
The overall goal of this project was determined by the problem statement. Here two main 
objectives were created to ensure a focus on circular economy and human behaviour in the 
planning of the HWM. This section concludes the important findings for the development of 
the technical HWM system in Denmark, concerning the first objective in the problem 
statement: 
 
1. How should the requirements for a homogeneous HWM system be designed, to 
improve the conditions for circular economy through recycling and adaption to 
current behaviour? 
 
This project originated from the agenda to have a homogeneous HWM system in Denmark. 
The identified benefits for an alignment of the collection services, was not found sufficient to 
justify a removal of the possibility to adapt the HWM to local needs. As such we do not 
recommend establishing requirements for the specific solutions, but to focus on what 
materials that are collected and how they are mixed.  
 
The new technical system suggests using two overall systems: 
 
● A waste management system with on-site segregation of the two fractions; organic 
waste and plastic, and off-site segregation where metal/glass are mixed and 
cardboard/paper are mixed. 
 
● A waste management system with on-site segregation of the six fractions; organic 
waste, paper, cardboard, metal, glass and plastic. This is only recommended for 
apartments. 
 
In the creation of a homogeneous HWM system, specific MRFs will be required to be 
implemented. As such, we see a great potential to take advantage of these facilities and use 
off-site segregation as part of all houses in Denmark. This will reduce the number of 
necessary trips for collection significantly compared to a system where all fractions are on-
site segregated. Apartments often have a larger amount of containers and therefore allowing 
on-site segregation for all fractions does not increase the necessary trips. Both on-site 
segregation and off-site segregation can be used for apartments.  
 
In the analysis we primarily investigated the five dry fractions and organic waste. Based on 
this we recommend to include all these fractions in the household pick-up program. However, 
we highlight that there might be benefits when allowing some areas to use station pick-up 
services for metal and glass. The recommendations for each fraction will here briefly be 
elaborated. 
 
==PAGE:116==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
98 / 100 
Organic waste 
Organic waste takes up almost half of Danish household waste in relation to mass and is 
required to be separated from other fractions by EU regulation. Furthermore to be able to 
extract chemicals and fertilisers from the waste it has to be separated in order to avoid 
contamination of residual waste. This is highlighted as important in circular economy. 
Separating the organic waste also improves the ability to regain materials from the residual 
waste fraction. As such we recommend separating organic waste and including it in the 
household pick-up program. 
 
Fibre materials 
Tendencies in the amount of fibre material in the household waste points towards an 
increasing amount of cardboard and a decreasing amount of paper. Here cardboard has been 
found to consume 8 % of the entire waste mass and paper to consume 16 %. Therefore we 
recommend that both cardboard and paper is collected from the households. Household pick-
up was found to have the strongest impact on the recycling rate of paper in the statistical 
analysis. We also found that paper and cardboard can be mixed without environmental loss if 
treated at a specialised MRF. Mixing these two fractions might also remove doubt during 
disposal, as the citizen does not have to decide whether a material is cardboard or paper. 
 
Metal and glass 
Metal is a valuable material and here the most beneficial materials to reuse are found to be 
aluminium and steel. Metal does not burn and has to be specially treated inside the 
incineration plants. Therefore it is recommended that this fraction is included into the 
household pick-up program. Indications point towards that mixing this fraction together with 
glass can be beneficial. Metal and glass are furthermore found to be unproblematic to mix in 
relation to quality of the recyclable materials. Mixing glass and metal can also lead to a 
utilisation of the existing station pick-up services for glass, where metal can easily be 
included. As such we recommend that metal is collected separately or together with glass. 
 
Glass was found to be the smallest fraction in relation to volume. It was also found to be the 
least beneficial fraction to recycle. However the brittle fraction was found cause issues when 
being mixed with most other fractions except metal. In relation to output quality, it seems that 
mixing glass with plastic can lead to quality issues. This should be further investigated 
through empirical research on quality outputs from the MRFs. Based on the current available 
information we recommend to treat glass separately or to mix it with metal.  
 
Plastic 
Plastic was found to consume 35 % of the entire uncompressed waste volume. The plastic 
fraction is currently hard to recycle, due to the extensive amount of different production 
methods and additives used for the plastic products. This also means that the market demand 
for recycled plastic is not stable, and it is hard to determine the exact requirements the future 
will bring. Approximately half of the plastic waste is rigid plastic, which was found to be 
==PAGE:117==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
 99 / 100
beneficial to recycle. Disposal of plastic products was found to cause doubt, and especially 
the determination between rigid and soft plastic seems to lead to large quantities of rigid 
plastic to be disposed for incineration. One study, conducted over two months, showed a 
significant increase in rigid plastic when allowing soft plastic into the fraction. Based on the 
current information at hand, we therefore recommend that plastic is collected separate from 
all other waste, and that both rigid and soft plastic is allowed into this fraction. Keeping 
plastic separated, will also ensure that it will be easier to adapt it to the future coming needs.  
 
We have highlighted the fact that further research is still necessary for a verification of the 
new technical system. Based on feedback from two experts on the suggested requirements in 
this project, we do not expect the optimal solution to vary much from the presented 
suggestions, when including a focus on human behaviour.  
 
9.2 Objective two: Behavioural interventions 
This section will draw a conclusion on the findings and the main suggestions that was 
developed to answer the second objective: 
 
2. How can behavioural design be used to support the homogeneous HWM system, 
to potentially increase the sorting quality and recycling rates? 
 
The behaviour around waste sorting was investigated, because we found that the success of 
the technical system depended on human behaviour. A behavioural analysis was conducted to 
identify, what issues and barriers the citizen experienced when sorting waste. Commonly 
identified issues were among others; uncertainty of the value of sorting, not knowing the 
correct cleaning procedure, and a missing progress in developing correct sorting behaviour. 
These elements were used to suggest five principles that were developed to support the 
technical system, to increase the recycling rates and the quality of the sorting. Hereby the 
second objective was answered. It is important to emphasise that there are many ways to 
change behaviour and these five presented principles are only an excerpt of possible 
principles. These were selected based on the findings from the behavioural analysis. The 
principles were 1) A homogeneous waste journey, 2) Provide information in the moment of 
sorting, 3) Feedback on sorting behaviour, 4) Ensure transparency in HWM, and 5) Affect the 
physical waste sorting environment. Principle 1 suggests to use identical icons, colours, and 
written text during the citizen’s waste journey, to ensure that the entire system is 
homogeneous. Moreover the citizen should be provided with information when needed, e.g. 
by adding icons to the packaging waste. Principle 2 concerns the communication both before 
and after the implementation of the new system. This communication builds on different 
behavioural principles. Principle 3 suggest to use different types of both negative and positive 
feedback, to make the sorting effort visible. Principle 4 explains the value of sorting and 
makes the HWM system more transparent. For this e.g. narratives and comparisons are 
recommended. Principle 5 suggests ways to interrupt old sorting habits and reinforce the new 
habits. This is e.g. done by adding friction to old habits and creating cues that can remind the 
==PAGE:118==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
100 / 100 
citizen of the wanted behaviour. It is suggested to apply all principles to the waste 
management system, to increase the effect of it. It is important to emphasise that these 
principles needs to be verified through testing, to ensure that they will be applicable to a 
Danish context 
 
The development of the new technical system combined with the behavioural principles 
answers the problem statement: 
 
How should a homogeneous Danish HWM system be designed, to ensure a 
higher environmental performance for the circular economy from a 
behavioural and holistic perspective? 
 
Please note the presentation folder that illustrates the main results from this project. We hope 
that this together with the report can help the further development of a Danish HWM system 
in the transition towards a circular economy. 
 
==PAGE:119==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Bibliography 
Abbott, A., Nandeibam, S., & O’Shea, L. (2011). Explaining the variation in 
household recycling rates across the UK. Ecological Economics. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2011.06.028 
Abrahamse, W., Steg, L., Vlek, C., & Rothengatter, T. (2005). A review of 
intervention studies aimed at household energy conservation. Journal of 
Environmental Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2005.08.002 
Ajzen, I. (1991). The Theory of Planned Behavior. ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR 
AND HUMAN DECISION PROCESSES (Vol. 50). 
Andersson, C., & Stage, J. (2018). Direct and indirect effects of waste management 
policies on household waste behaviour: The case of Sweden. Waste 
Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.03.038 
Andreasi Bassi, S., Christensen, T. H., & Damgaard, A. (2017). Environmental 
performance of household waste management in Europe - An example of 7 
countries. Waste Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.07.042 
Bach, H., Mild, A., Natter, M., & Weber, A. (2004). Combining socio-demographic 
and logistic factors to explain the generation and collection of waste paper. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2003.08.004 
Barnes, B. R. (2010). The Hawthorne Effect in community trials in developing 
countries. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 13(4), 357–
370. https://doi.org/10.1080/13645570903269096 
Benítez, S. O., Lozano-Olvera, G., Morelos, R. A., & Vega, C. A. de. (2008). 
Mathematical modeling to predict residential solid waste generation. Waste 
Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2008.03.020 
Beyer, H., & Holtzblatt, K. (1998). Contextual Design: Defining Customer-Centered 
System. Academic Press. 
Bhamra, T., Lilley, D., & Tang, T. (2011). Design for Sustainable Behaviour: Using 
Products to Change Consumer Behaviour. The Design Journal, 14(4), 427–445. 
https://doi.org/10.2752/175630611X13091688930453 
Biolchini, J., Gomes Mian, P., Candida Cruz Natali, A., & Horta Travassos, G. 
(2005). Systematic Review in Software Engineering. 
Blessing, L. T. M., & Chakrabarti, A. (2009). DRM, a Design Research Methodology. 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84882-587-1 
Blomsma, F. (2018). Collective ‘action recipes’ in a circular economy – On waste and 
resource management frameworks and their role in collective change. Journal of 
Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.07.145 
Blomsma, F., & Brennan, G. (2017). The Emergence of Circular Economy: A New 
Framing Around Prolonging Resource Productivity. Journal of Industrial 
Ecology. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12603 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Boldero, J. (1995). The Prediction of Household Recycling of Newspapers: The Role 
of Attitudes, Intentions, and Situational Factors. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1995.tb01598.x 
BRO. (2015a). Implementering af ny affaldsordning. The Nudging Company, Lyngby-
Taarbæk Forsyning, 52. Retrieved from 
https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:aAABTXuy1MwJ:http
s://genanvend.mst.dk/projekter/projektbibliotek/2015/nudging-fra-koekken-til-
spand-i-lyngby-taarbaek-kommune/+&cd=1&hl=da&ct=clnk&gl=dk 
BRO. (2015b). Nudging og affaldssortering. Hvordan får vi borgeren til at agere 
hensigtsmæssigt? The Nudging Company, Morsø Kommune. Retrieved from 
https://genanvend.mst.dk/projekter/projektbibliotek/2015/nudging-
affaldssortering-hvordan-faar-vi-borgerne-til-at-agere-hensigtsmaessigt/ 
Brogaard, L. K., Damgaard, A., Jensen, M. B., Barlaz, M., & Christensen, T. H. 
(2014). Evaluation of life cycle inventory data for recycling systems. Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling, 87, 30–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.03.011 
Bryce, W. J., Day, R., & Olney, T. J. (1997). Commitment approach to motivating 
community recycling: New Zealand curbside trial. Journal of Consumer Affairs. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6606.1997.tb00825.x 
Cash, P., & Culley, S. (2014). The Role of Experimental Studies in Design Research. 
In: Rodgers P, Yee J (eds). Routledge Campanion to Design Research, 
Routledge, Chapter 14, 175–189. 
Cash, P. J., Hartlev, C. G., & Durazo, C. B. (2017). Behavioural design: A process for 
integrating behaviour change and design. Design Studies, 48, 96-128. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2016.10.001 
Christensen, T. H. (2011). Solid waste technology & management. Wiley. 
Cialdini, R. B. (2009). Influence. The Psychology of Persuasion. HarperCollins e-
books. 
Cowi. (2017). Fordele og ulemper ved at medtage glas som kildeopdelt fraktion til 
automatisk sortering. Opsamlende notat. Miljøstyrelsen, Miljøprojekt Nr. 1927, 
41. Retrieved from https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2017/03/978-87-
93529-79-3.pdf 
Dahlén, L. (2005). To Evaluate Source Sorting Programs in Household Waste 
Collection Systems. Retrieved from http://epubl.luth.se/1402-1757/2005/71 
Dahlén, L., Vukicevic, S., Meijer, J.-E., & Lagerkvist, A. (2006). Comparison of 
different collection systems for sorted household waste in Sweden. 
https://doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2006.06.016 
Dahlén, L., Åberg, H., Lagerkvist, A., & Berg, P. E. O. (2009). Inconsistent pathways 
of household waste. Waste Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2008.12.004 
Dolan, P., Hallsworth, M., Halpern, D., King, D., Metcalfe, R., & Vlaev, I. (2012). 
Influencing behaviour: The mindspace way. Journal of Economic Psychology, 
33(1), 264–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2011.10.009 
 
==PAGE:121==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Dumlao-Tan, M. I., & Halog, A. (2017). Moving Towards a Circular Economy in 
Solid Waste Management: Concepts and Practices. In Advances in Solid and 
Hazardous Waste Management. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57076-1_2 
EC, (European Commission). (2014). Towards a circular economy: A zero waste 
programme for Europe. Retrieved from http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-
economy/pdf/circular-economy-communication.pdf 
EC, (European Commission). (2019). Circular Economy Strategy - Environment - 
European Commission. 
EFK, Energi-, Forsynings- og Klimaministeriet. (2016). Forsyning for fremtiden - En 
forsyningssektor for borgere og virksomheder. 
EMF, (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2013). TOWARDS THE CIRCULAR 
ECONOMY: Economic and business rationale for an accelerated transition. 
EMF, (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2015). GROWTH WITHIN: A CIRCULAR 
ECONOMY VISION FOR A COMPETITIVE EUROPE. 
EMF, (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2016). INTELLIGENT ASSETS: UNLOCKING 
THE CIRCULAR ECONOMY POTENTIAL. Retrieved from 
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/publications/Ellen
MacArthurFoundation_Intelligent_Assets_080216.pdf 
EMF, (Ellen MacArthur Foundation). (2017). Building Blocks: Circular economy 
design, business models, reverse cycles and enabling conditions are essential. 
Retrieved March 12, 2018, from 
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/concept/building-
blocks 
Eriksen, M. K. (2019). Quality and Recyclability of Plastic from Household Waste. 
EU, E. U. (2018a). DIRECTIVE (EU) 2018/851 OF THE EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 
2008/98/EC on waste. Official Journal of the European Union, 109–140. 
EU, E. U. (2018b). DIRECTIVE (EU) 2018/852 OF THE EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 30 May 2018 amending Directive 
94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste. Official Journal of the European 
Union, 141–154. 
Fogg, B. (2009). A Behavior Model for Persuasive Design. Acm International 
Conference Proceeding Series, 350, 7. https://doi.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999 
Gallardo, A., Bovea, M. D., Colomer, F. J., Prades, M., & Carlos, M. (2010). 
Comparison of different collection systems for sorted household waste in Spain. 
Waste Management, 30(12), 2430–2439. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2010.05.026 
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. M. P., & Hultink, E. J. (2017). The Circular 
Economy – A new sustainability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048 
Gellynck, X., Jacobsen, R., & Verhelst, P. (2011). Identifying the key factors in 
increasing recycling and reducing residual household waste: A case study of the 
Flemish region of Belgium. Journal of Environmental Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2011.06.006 
==PAGE:122==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Gephart, W. J., & Antonoplos, D. P. (1969). he effects of expectancy and other 
research- biasing factors. The Phi Delta Kappan, 50, 579–583. 
Green, L. W. (1977). Evaluation and measurement: Some Dilemmas for Health 
Education. American Journal of Public Health, 67, 155–161. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.67.2.155 
Hauschild, M. Z. (2005). Assessing Environmental Impacts in a Life-Cycle 
Perspective. Environmental Science & Technology, 39(4), 81A-88A. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/es053190s 
Hauschild, M. Z., Rosenbaum, R. K., & Olsen, S. I. (2018). Life Cycle Assessment - 
Theory and Practice. Springer international Publishing AG. 
Interresearch. (2018). KUNDETILFREDSHEDSMÅLING - Lyngby-Taarbæk 
Forsyning. Lyngby-Taarbæk Forsyning. 
Johnstone, N., & Labonne, J. (2007). Generation of Household Solid Waste in OECD 
Countries: An Empirical Analysis Using Macroeconomic Data. Land Economics. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/3655808 
Jørgensen, U. (2009). I teknologiens laboratorium - ingeniørfagets videnskabsteori. 
Polyteknisk Forlag. 
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Kalmykova, Y., Sadagopan, M., & Rosado, L. (2018). Circular economy - From 
review of theories and practices to development of implementation tools. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.10.034 
KL, Affaldsforening, D., Miljøstyrelsen, & Futu. (2018). Brugerguide. 
Piktogramsystem til affaldssortering. Henteordninger & genbrugsplads. Dansk 
Affaldsforening. https://doi.org/10.2519/jospt.2018.48.12.986 
Kromann, M., Jakobsen, J. B., Pedersen, J. K., Damgaard, A., & Henriksen, T. 
(2019). På vej-Mod øget genanvendelse af husholdningsaffald 
(livscyklusvurdering og samfundsøkonomisk konsekvensvurdering). 
Miljøstyrelsen, Miljøprojekt Nr. 2059. 
Lerche, F., Petersen, C., & Tønning, K. (2018). Kortlægning af sammensætningen af 
dagrenovation og kildesorteret organisk affald fra husholdninger 2017. 
Miljøstyrelsen, Undgå Affald, Stop Spild Nr. 17. https://doi.org/978-87-93614-
78-9 
Lilley, D. (2009). Design for sustainable behaviour: strategies and perceptions. 
Design Studies. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2009.05.001 
McCarty, J. A., & Shrum, L. J. (1994). The recycling of solid wastes: Personal values, 
value orientations, and attitudes about recycling as antecedents of recycling 
behavior. Journal of Business Research. https://doi.org/10.1016/0148-
2963(94)90068-X 
McDonough, W., & Braungart, M. (2002). Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We 
Make Things. Journal of Macromarketing. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0276146704264148 
 
==PAGE:123==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Merrild, H., Damgaard, A., & Christensen, T. H. (2008). Life cycle assessment of 
waste paper management: The importance of technology data and system 
boundaries in assessing recycling and incineration. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 52(12), 1391–1398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2008.08.004 
MFM, (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet), & EM, (Erhvervsministeriet). (2018). Strategi 
for cirkulær økonomi. Mere værdi og bedre miljø gennem design, forbrug og 
genanvendelse. Retrieved from 
https://mfvm.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/MFVM/Miljoe/Cirkulaer_oekonomi/Stra
tegi_for_cirkulaer_oekonomi.pdf 
Michie, S., Atkins, L., & West, R. (2014). The Behaviour Change Wheel. A Guide to 
Designing Interventions. Silverback Publishing. 
Miliute-Plepiene, J., & Plepys, A. (2015). Does food sorting prevents and improves 
sorting of household waste? A case in Sweden. Journal of Cleaner Production. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.04.013 
Miljøministeriet. (2013). Danmark uden affald: Genanvend mere - forbrænd mindre. 
Miljøministeriet, (Februar), 56. Retrieved from 
http://mst.dk/media/130620/danmark_uden_affald_ii_web-endelig.pdf 
Miljøstyrelsen. (2016). Affaldsstatistikken 2014. Miljøprojekt Nr. 1878. 
Miljøstyrelsen. (2018). Affaldsstatistikken 2016. Miljøprojekt Nr. 2020. 
Miltenberger, R. G. (2008). Behavior Modification: Principles and Procedures, 
fourth edition. Thomson Learning. Retrieved from 
www.thomsonedu.com/psychology 
Monavari, S. M., Omrani, G. A., Karbassi, A., & Raof, F. F. (2011). The effects of 
socioeconomic parameters on household solid-waste generation and composition 
in developing countries (a case study: Ahvaz, Iran). Environmental Monitoring 
and Assessment. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-011-2082-y 
Morlok, J., Schoenberger, H., Styles, D., Galvez-Martos, J.-L., & Zeschmar-Lahl, B. 
(2017). The Impact of Pay-As-You-Throw Schemes on Municipal Solid Waste 
Management: The Exemplar Case of the County of Aschaffenburg, Germany. 
Resources. https://doi.org/10.3390/resources6010008 
Møller, N. B., & Nyborg, J. H. (2018). Undersøgelse af restaffald fra 
sommerhusområder i Varde og Ringkøbing-Skern Kommuner. DIN Forsyning 
og Ringkøbing-Skjern Kommune. JHN Processor. 
Mønsted, C., Larsen, C., Bøgelund, M., Johnsen, H., & Jørgensen, H. (2019). 
Effektiviseringspotentialet ved kommunal affaldsindsamling. Miljøstyrelsen, 
Miljøprojekt Nr. 1953. 
Neal, D. T., Wood, W., & Quinn, J. M. (2006). Habits - A Repeat Performance. 
Association for Psychological Science, 15(4), 198–202. 
Neidel, T. L., & Kromann, M. (2019). Analyse af miljø og økonomi ved 
kildesortering og kildeopdeling - Sammenligning af forskellige kombinationer af 
tørre genanvendelige fraktioner Miljø. Miljøstyrelsen, Miljøprojekt Nr. 2066. 
Noehammer, H. C., & Byer, P. H. (1997). Effect of design variables on participation 
in residential curbside recycling programs. Waste Management and Research. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/wmre.1996.0096 
==PAGE:124==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Nomura, H., John, P. C., & Cotterill, S. (2011). The use of feedback to enhance 
environmental outcomes: a randomised controlled trial of a food waste scheme. 
Local Environment, 16(7), 637–653. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2011.586026 
Norup, N., & Ryberg, A. (2015). Fra holdning til handling, Trashypeople, 
Kildesortering i etageejendomme. Miljøstyrelsen, 80. 
Pauli, G. (2010). The Blue Economy: 10 Years, 100 Innovations, 100 Million Jobs. 
Retrieved from 
https://books.google.se/books?hl=en&lr=&id=aJ3HZD1H7ZsC&oi=fnd&pg=PR
17&ots=nZug9bea9u&sig=wbTCIoFOCmLp5Cj9WVX2ec-
cfns&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false 
Pelău, C., & Chinie, A. C. (2018). Econometric model for measuring the impact of the 
education level of the population on the recycling rate in a circular economy. 
Amfiteatru Economic. https://doi.org/10.24818/EA/2018/48/340 
Pieroni, M. P. P., McAloone, T. C., & Pigosso, D. C. A. (2019). Business model 
innovation for circular economy and sustainability: A review of approaches. 
Journal of Cleaner Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.036 
Poll, C., Bach, C., & Auken, I. (2018). Forum for cirkulær plastemballage – 
anbefalinger og handlinger, 16. Retrieved from 
https://avl.dk/images/CirkulaerPlastemballage/Forum-for-cirkulr-plastemballage-
--anbefalinger-og-handlinger.pdf 
Pressley, P. N., Levis, J. W., Damgaard, A., Barlaz, M. A., & DeCarolis, J. F. (2015). 
Analysis of material recovery facilities for use in life-cycle assessment. Waste 
Management, 35, 307–317. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2014.09.012 
Roozenburg, N. F. M., & Eekels, J. (1995). Product Design: Fundamentals and 
Methods. Utrecht: Lemma. 
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. 
(2007). The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social 
Norms. Association for Psychological Science, 18(5), 429–434. Retrieved from 
http://proquest.umi.com.proxy.lib.umich.edu/pqdweb?did=1290162781&Fmt=7
&clientId=17822&RQT=309&VName=PQD 
Sidique, S. F., Lupi, F., & Joshi, S. V. (2010). The effects of behavior and attitudes on 
drop-off recycling activities. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 54(3), 
163–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2009.07.012 
Stahel, W. R. (2010). The Performance Economy. The Performance Economy. 
https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230274907 
Starr, J., & Nicolson, C. (2015). Patterns in trash: Factors driving municipal recycling 
in Massachusetts. Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2015.03.009 
Sutton-Brown, C. A. (2014). Photovoice: A Methodological Guide. Photography and 
Culture, 7(2), 169–185. https://doi.org/10.2752/175145214X13999922103165 
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). NUDGE: Improving Decisions About Health, 
Wealth, and Happiness. Caravan. 
 
==PAGE:125==
Sustainable waste management through holistic and behavioural design - Stenholt & Lundgård
 
 
Thomsen, M., Seghetta, M., Mikkelsen, M. H., Gyldenkærne, S., Becker, T., Caro, D., 
& Frederiksen, P. (2016). Comparative life cycle assessment of biowaste to 
resource management systems – A Danish case study. Journal of Cleaner 
Production. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.034 
Tonglet, M., Phillips, P. S., & Read, A. D. (2004). Using the Theory of Planned 
Behaviour to investigate the determinants of recycling behaviour: A case study 
from Brixworth, UK. Resources, Conservation and Recycling. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2003.11.001 
Topi, C., & Bilinska, M. (2017). The economic case for the circular economy: From 
food waste to resource. In Food Waste Reduction and Valorisation: 
Sustainability Assessment and Policy Analysis. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-50088-1_3 
Tromp, N., Hekkert, P., & Verbeek, P.-P. (2011). Design for Socially Responsible 
Behavior: A Classification of Influence Based on Intended User Experience. 
Design Issues. https://doi.org/10.1162/desi_a_00087 
Tucker, P., & Speirs, D. (2003). Attitudes and behavioural change in household waste 
management behaviours. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0964056032000070927 
Watson, M. (2012). Household Waste Recycling. International Encyclopedia of 
Housing and Home (Vol. 3). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-047163-
1.00582-8 
Wendel, S. (2014). Designing for Behavior Change: Applying psychology and 
behavioral economics, second edition. (M. Treseler, Ed.). O’Reilly. 
Werner, C. M., & Makela, E. (1998). Motivations and behaviors that support 
recycling. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/jevp.1998.0114 
White, K., Macdonnell, R., & Dahl, D. W. (2011). It’s the Mind-Set that Matters: The 
Role of Construal Level and Message Framing in Influencing Consumer 
Efficacy and Conservation Behaviors. Journal of Marketing Research, 48(3), 
472–485. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.48.3.472 
Wood, W., & Neal, D. T. (2016). Healthy through habit: Interventions for initiating & 
maintaining health behavior change. Behavioral Science & Policy, 2(1), 71–83. 
https://doi.org/10.1353/bsp.2016.0008 
Østergaard, K., & Pawlak, L. (2013). Danskernes affaldshåndtering, -holdninger og -
værdier. Dansk Affaldsforening. 
Åstrøm-Andersen, L., Appelqvist, B., Danielsson, S. E., Fredenslund, A. M., Nielsen, 
P., & Petersen, C. (2019). Sorteringskriteriers betydning for kvalitet og 
genanvendelse Teknik og adfaerd. Miljøstyrelsen, Miljøprojekt Nr. 2067. 
 
