==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Sound Field Control using Nonlinear
Transducers
Elias D. Lumpert
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Acoustic Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
ACT
Ørsteds Plads
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3949
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
If a loudspeaker is driven at high levels, its output is likely to be affected by nonlinearities.
The result is a distortion of the loudspeaker output which depends on the input signal.
The performance of sound field control systems is lowered by the introduction of such
nonlinearities. This thesis investigates the extent of such effects and looks at strategies
to counteract the problem. The thesis specifically focuses on quantifying the effect of
compression on the output of the system at the input frequency, finding a model to
represent the coherent distortion and counteract accordingly. A comparison of different
strategies to counteract the effect of nonlinearities is presented. The results show that
a compensation based on an input voltage level adapted response of a loudspeaker can
improve a sound field control algorithm up to 20dB. Alternative compensation methods
are discussed and show the benefit of a displacement level dependent compensation
at low frequencies. To validate these findings measurements were conducted during a
sound field control field test. Simulations with those measurements imply that such a
compensation would benefit a given sound field control algorithm.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Electrical Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a master’s
degree in engineering acoustics.
Kongens Lyngby, June 28, 2019
Elias D. Lumpert
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Finn Agerkvist and Jonas Brun-
skog who supported and inspired my work with their inputs. I especially would like
to thank Franz Heuchel for being a consistent help during the course of the project. I
would also like to thank the entire MONICA project team for the useful comments and
engagement throughout the learning process of this master thesis. Also, I like to thank
my family for keeping me harmonious. Finally, I would like to thank my friends, who
have supported me throughout the entire process by keeping me motivated and enduring
my stupid jokes.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art and Motivation
3
3
Theoretical Background
5
3.1
Nonlinearities and Time Variances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
A Sound Field Control Optimization Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Performance Metric: Achievable Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Compensation Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Results
31
5.1
Level Dependent Transfer Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Field Test Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Conclusion
51
A ICA Paper
53
B Additional Measurements
61
B.1 Transfer Functions of All Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B.2 Level Dependent Changes in Transfer Function for All Signals . . . . . .
63
B.3 Comparison of Transfer Functions of Different Signals . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.4 Noise-Displacement Approach for Different Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.5 Sweep-Voltage Approach at Field Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
C Other Appendices
71
C.1 Simulations of Loudspeaker Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
C.2 Approximating of Displacement from Near Field Pressure . . . . . . . . .
72
C.3 Distortion Product Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
C.4 Data sheet 10-inch Peerless Driver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
C.5 Data sheet V-Sub . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
C.6 Field Test Impressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
C.7 Python Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In recent years the area of sound field control gained increasing attention. Progress in
research and computing power allows the use of sophisticated algorithms to shape sound
fields or create zones with reduced sound pressure levels. Sound field control systems
rely on accurate estimations of the transfer of sound between sources (loudspeakers) and
the controlled zone. This transfer is not constant but can change due to various reasons
like influences of weather, reflections and anomalies in the sound reproduction system.
The influence of the latter will be discussed in this thesis.
Loudspeakers are often represented by their linear response, which is a simplified
representation of the input-output relationship of a system. It can be useful to describe
a loudspeaker for low reproduction levels where linear time invariance is assumed. At
high levels loudspeakers tend to act increasingly nonlinear and a linear response does not
provide an accurate description. Section 3.1 discusses a variety of nonlinear effects in a
loudspeaker and their influences on its output. An example for such a nonlinearity is
connected to the rubber surround of moving-coil loudspeaker membranes. For increasing
level the loudspeaker membrane movement increases, stretching the rubber surround.
Similar to a rubber band, when stretched, a restoring force acts on the surround. Such
a restoring force lowers the output of a loudspeaker at high levels. A linear response
does not take into account such level dependent compression of the output.
Sound field control algorithms often make use of a measured linear response. The
influences of nonlinearities are thereby not taken into account. At high levels this neglec-
tion results in a performance loss of such algorithms. This thesis investigates approaches
to describe and compensate the effects of nonlinearities in sound field control. The basic
approach is to take into account changes in response at different voltage and voice-coil
displacement levels. First, a given loudspeakers response is measured at different levels
(voltage or displacement).
Then, the change in response towards a reference is esti-
mated for any other level, using a curve fitting algorithm.
Eventually, knowing the
level of a signal the estimate can be used to compensate the change in the loudspeakers
response. This compensation method presents a fast and easy-to-implement solution to
the problem. To validate the performance of the presented strategy the nonlinear com-
pensation was tested using an electro-dynamic coil transducer. The results of those tests
show promising results of up to 20dB of improvement on broad ranges of frequencies
for a given sound field control system. For sound cancellation, 20dB of improvement
corresponds to a 10 times lower amplitude of sound pressure or around 4 times lower
experienced loudness in the controlled area. Additional measurements have been made
with a commercial sub woofer used in a sound field control field test. The results validate
the findings in the anechoic chamber and discuss the influence of amplifier compression.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Sound field control algorithms present promising strategies to decrease noise exposure
where physical barriers cannot bring relief. The presented nonlinear compensation strat-
egy could extend sound field control algorithms to take into account nonlinear effects
and improve their performance in doing so.
The following chapters focus on introducing the theoretical and methodological back-
ground, presenting the performed measurements and interpreting the results.
First,
chapter 2 describes the underlying literature presenting both foundation and motivation
for this work. Then, chapter 3 provides the theoretical background necessary to under-
stand the problem. Chapter 4 describes the measurement process and signal processing
of the data, followed by the introduction of the compensation approach. The results
in chapter 5 discuss the influence of nonlinearities on the used speakers and interpret
the outcome of the compensation. It further focuses on interpreting the validity of the
results and discussing limitations of the presented approach. A collection of reflections
considering a practical application motivate the implementation of this compensation
approach. Eventually, chapter 6 provides a summary of the main findings.
A conference paper was written accompanying the presented work. The paper was
accepted in June 2019 and will be presented in September 2019. The handed in version
of the paper is attached in the appendix A.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
State of the Art and
Motivation
Nonlinearities are the physical causes for signal distortion in loudspeakers. Such dis-
tortions impose difficulties in sound field control. Effects and causes of nonlinearities
have been repeatedly discussed in technical acoustical literature and build a foundation
for the content of this thesis. Klippel describes in ”Loudspeaker nonlinearities - Causes,
parameters, symptoms” [1] several nonlinearities, their causes and effects on the phys-
ical system of a loudspeaker. The understanding and modelling of such nonlinearities
is a persistent area of interest in loudspeaker related research fields.
Corresponding
examples for recent scientific investigations are the modelling of the compliance using
frictional elements by Johannes Heinz Zimmermann [2], an estimation of loudspeaker
voice coil temperature by Adam Hill [3] or modelling of loudspeakers suspension and
voice coil using fractional derivatives by Alexander King [4]. Models of nonlinearities
can be used to predict and eventually compensate the negative effects of nonlinearities.
Various nonlinear compensation methods have been developed and documented. There
are two general approaches to compensate a nonlinear system. Klippel presented in ”Ac-
tive Compensation of Transducer Nonlinearities” [5] a compensation based on modelled
nonlinearities of a loudspeaker. This approach requires detailed knowledge about the
properties of the used unit. Such a compensation could be referred to as a ”white-box ap-
proach”. In contrast to Klippel, Bard introduced in ”Characterization of nonlinearities of
electro-acoustic devices using Volterra kernels” [6] an approach that tries to compensate
nonlinear effects using a representation of its output by a Volterra series. This approach
does not require any prior knowledge of the loudspeaker unit and can be described as a
”black-box approach”.
As aforementioned, distortion caused by nonlinearities has a negative influence on
sound field control systems. This is confirmed by Ma [7] in his paper ”Impact of loud-
speaker nonlinear distortion on personal sound zones”. So far, compensation strategies
to counteract these effects in sound field control gained limited attention, which mo-
tivated this thesis to address this issue. In a sound field control application the used
loudspeakers are usually acquired from commercial suppliers. This includes the difficulty
of not knowing the exact properties of the used loudspeakers, like the Thiele-Small pa-
rameters or the nonlinear parameters [8, p. 252,282]. Nonlinear compensation strategies
as proposed by Klippel rely on detailed knowledge about such loudspeaker properties.
This thesis focuses on developing a ”black-box algorithm” that addresses the symptoms
==PAGE:14==
4
2 State of the Art and Motivation
of nonlinearities without entirely describing their causes. The benefit of this approach is
that it does not require any prior knowledge about the properties of the loudspeaker unit.
However, it is very important to understand the physical causes of nonlinearities, to not
only explain their influences on sound field control algorithms, but also to interpret the
outcome of the presented compensation strategy.
The thesis was performed in collaboration with the MONICA research group [9] and
their sound field control algorithm in use [10]. This collaboration enabled an exchange
with ongoing sound field control research and allowed the measurement of a speaker in
a sound field control setup.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Background
The investigations of nonlinearities in sound field control and the development of a corre-
sponding compensation strategy require the comprehension of several acoustic concepts.
This chapter presents the main theory necessary to understand the problem, structured
in three sections. First, nonlinearities and time variances in loudspeakers are discussed,
focusing on causes, parameters and symptoms. Then, a sound field control application
is introduced. Finally, a performance metric to quantify the influence of nonlinearities
on sound field control relates the two preceding sections.
3.1
Nonlinearities and Time Variance1
Distortion describes a change in wave form, that is in most cases not desirable. For
loudspeakers, distortion occurs at high levels as a result of nonlinearities in the speaker.
The transfer of a single sine wave applied to the input of such a nonlinear system is
influenced by two typical effects:
• nonlinear amplitude compression of the fundamental,
• and addition of distortion products at multiples of the fundamental frequency
(harmonic distortion).
Klippel states [1, p. 22] that at higher amplitudes also the phase response changes
significantly. He further states that this behaviour plays a minor role in loudspeaker
diagnostics so far. For sound field control algorithms such behaviours are relevant. Liter-
ature about phase response changes at high reproduction levels are scarce which hampers
and limits the interpretation of the phase behaviour to a certain extent.
1Nonlinearity and time variance are interconnected and a strict separation requires extensive arguing.
In this thesis time variances are referred to as changes that can be assumed constant during the period
of the cycle of the lowest considered frequency (20Hz), but vary for bigger time intervals. An example
for such a time variance is a consistent change in temperature. When the expression nonlinearities is
used, time-variances are often meant to be included
==PAGE:16==
6
3 Theoretical Background
For more complex signals than a single tone the interaction of two or more frequencies
leads to amplitude and frequency modulation. The additionally occurring typical effects
are:
• additional nonlinear amplitude compression of the fundamental,
• and addition of distortion products at linear combinations of the differences of mul-
tiples of the fundamentals of interacting frequencies (intermodulation distortion)
[1].
The occurrence of harmonic and intermodulation distortion influences the amplitude and
phase response at frequencies where those products occur. Destructive and constructive
interference of fundamental components and distortion products combine to the response.
In this work the influences of distortion products will not be discussed in detail. It
is assumed that for the given problem the influence such products is dominated by
the compression of the fundamental components. This is discussed in greater detail in
section C.3.
Common loudspeakers are designed in a way to have a linear time invariant behaviour
for certain input levels. In this linear range the output level increases linearly with the
input level (no compression of the fundamental), and distortion products are barely to
not present. With increasing level nonlinearities introduce growing compression and
distortion products. To understand the nonlinearities and time variances, first the pa-
rameters to describe a loudspeaker are introduced. The parameters of a loudspeaker can
be separated into a linear and a nonlinear part. Those loudspeaker parameters explain
the response of a speaker and can be used to predict its behaviour. At low reproduc-
tion levels speakers act approximately linear and the linear parameters are sufficient to
describe a given system. At higher reproduction levels nonlinearities influence the sys-
tem and an accurate description of a loudspeaker requires the consideration of nonlinear
parameters.
3.1.1
Linear Parameters
The understanding of the linear components of a loudspeaker requires a general un-
derstanding of its functionality. The sound of common loudspeakers is generated by
electro-mechanical drivers. The driver thereby transforms electrical energy into mechan-
ical energy using electromagnetic forces. The mechanical energy is used to radiate acous-
tical waves through the movement of a membrane. The electro-mechanical components
of a typical driver unit are shown in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Nonlinearities and Time Variances
7
Figure 3.1: Cross-sectional sketch of a direct-radiator loudspeaker driver [8].
The lumped linear parameters describe the vibration and transfer behavior of a
transducer in the small signal domain and at frequencies where the size of the transducer
is small compared to the wavelength [11]. The corresponding electro-mechanical system
can be described by an equivalent electrical circuit. The circuit of the lumped transducer
model is shown in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Linear parameters of the lumped transducer model [11].
Table 3.1 collects and describes the electrical components shown in Figure 3.2.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Theoretical Background
Table 3.1: Linear parameters of the lumped transducer model.
Electrical Parameters
Re
Ω
electrical voice coil resistance at DC
Le
mH
frequency independent part of voice coil
inductance
L2
mH
para-inductance of voice coil
R2
Ω
electrical resistance due to eddy current
losses
Mechanical Parameters
Mms
g
mechanical mass of driver diaphragm
assembly including air load and voice coil
Rms
kg/s
mechanical resistance of total-driver losses
Cms
mm/N
mechanical compliance of driver suspension
Kms =
1
Cms
N/mm
mechanical stiffness of driver suspension
Bl
N/A
force factor (Bl product)
Eddy currents
The changing magnetic field introduces eddy currents in the magnet
that affect the inductance of the speaker. Eddy currents are loops of electrical current
induced within conductors emerging from a changing magnetic field in the conductor.
These loops of electrical currents, or Eddy currents, then create an opposed magnetic
field that results in losses. These losses can be described using models by Leach [12]
and Wright [13] as a combination of displacement and current dependent inductance
and resistance. This explains the usage of a a system with Le, L2 and R2 instead of a
single inductance L. The introduction of shorting rings [14] can limit this behaviour.
At high levels linear parameters fail to model the behaviour of a loudspeaker. The
following section introduces an extension of the linear model by taking into account
several nonlinear effects.
3.1.2
Nonlinear Parameters
At high levels loudspeakers tend to act increasingly nonlinear. In ”Loudspeaker non-
linearities - Causes, parameters, symptoms” [1], Klippel describes an extension of the
lumped transducer model. This extended model includes most dominant regular nonlin-
earities found in woofers, tweeters, micro-speakers, horn compression drivers and loud-
speaker systems. It thereby takes into account nonlinear dependencies on current and
displacement of certain components of a loudspeaker. The introduced current and dis-
placement dependent components can be found in Table 3.2. The equivalent electrical
circuit is shown in Figure 3.3.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Nonlinearities and Time Variances
9
Table 3.2: Nonlinear parameters of the lumped transducer model.
Bl(x)
N/A
displacement dependent force factor
Kms(x) =
1
Cms(x)
N/mm
displacement dependent suspension
Le(x, i) , L2(x, i2), R2(x, i3)
H, H, Ω
current and displacement dependent
model considering back induced voltage
by magnetic flux and eddy currents.
Fm(x, i, i2)
N
reluctance force driving the mechanical
system
Figure 3.3: Electrical equivalent circuit of the loudspeaker considering nonlinearities in
the motor and suspension system [1].
The following paragraphs focus on describing the causes of nonlinearities and the
symptoms accompanying them [1] [8, p. 282-287]. The focus will thereby be set on the
influence of nonlinearities on the response at the fundamental frequency.
Driving force
When the coil leaves the dimension of the magnet the magnetic field
it is exposed to is lower and the Bl-factor is reduced (Figure 3.4, left). The coil-gap
configuration of a loudspeaker defines the excursion dependent nonlinear Bl-factor. The
nonlinear driving force is dependent on current and displacement F = Bl(x)i and symp-
toms of this nonlinearity occur at low frequencies where displacement is high.
The
symptoms occur as a compression of the loudspeaker’s response.
Restoring force of suspension
With increasing excursion the suspension stretches
and becomes stiffer. This results in a displacement dependent stiffness Kms(x) (Fig-
ure 3.4, right) and introduces a compression of the response at low frequencies where
the displacement is high.
Displacement dependent inductance
The inductance varies according to its po-
sition relative to the magnetic system.
The inductance is greatest when the coil is
surrounded by iron. When the coil leaves the dimensions of the magnetic system the
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Theoretical Background
inductance is lowered. This behaviour is connected to the permeability of iron and air.
The result is a displacement dependency of Le(x) (Figure 3.4, middle). The change in
inductance has mostly effects at high frequencies. However, the symptoms of this non-
linearity arise when a high frequency tone is modulated by a low frequency tone with
high displacement. The effects at the fundamental frequency are expected to be small
due to the asymmetric shape of the inductance. The inductance is higher for negative
displacement and lower for positive displacements. This equalizes to a certain extent,
when looking at the (de-)compression at the fundamental frequency. The presented cir-
cuit models the inductance using Le, L2 and R2. The displacement dependency thereby
influences all those components Le(x), L2(x) and R2(x).
Figure 3.4 illustrates the displacement dependent behaviour of Bl(x), Kms(x) and
Le(x) for a common moving-coil loudspeaker driver.
Figure 3.4: Displacement dependent nonlinearities of a 5-inch driver, measured with a
”Klippel Analyzer” [15].
Nonlinear damping
An electromagnetic force, generated by a coil moving in a per-
manent field, reduces the Bl-factor dependent on the velocity relative to the voice coil.
This nonlinear damping is coupled to position and velocity of the voice coil (E = Bl(x)u).
Symptoms of a compression of response arise at low frequencies where displacement is
high.
Suspension softening
With increasing level the suspension is likely to soften. Elas-
tomers show level dependent compliance and damping. This includes the behavior of
breaking molecular connections at high levels [2]. This manifests in a displacement level
dependent stiffness Kms and a change in the resonance frequency of the loudspeaker [16].
The resulting symptom are a decompression of the response below the resonance of the
loudspeaker.
Reluctance force
The variation of the inductance versus displacement introduces an
electro-magnetic driving force (reluctance force)
Fm(Le, Li, i, i2, x) = i1
2
δ(Le(x, i)i + L2(x, i)i2
δx
.
(3.1)
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Nonlinearities and Time Variances
11
In Figure 3.3 Fm is only a function of x, i and i2. The flux generated in L2 interacts
with the flux from Le. This has not been considered in Klippels presented model [1].
The extended model displayed in Equation 3.1 was presented by Risbo [17]. Symptoms
occur at high frequencies modulated by low frequencies as a compression of response.
Nonlinear permeability
The inductance shows current dependent changes caused
by a nonlinear relationship between flux density and magnetic field strength B = µ(i)H.
The field strength is thereby dependent on the current. At high positive currents the
iron is more saturated and the permeability µ decreases, for negative currents the perme-
ability increases. The field strength and therefore current dependency of the inductance
leads to symptoms at high frequencies. Similar to the displacement dependent induc-
tance, the shape of the current dependent inductance L(i) is asymmetric and the effect
at the fundamental is assumed to be small. The presented circuit models the inductance
using Le, L2 and R2. The current dependency thereby influences all those components
Le(i), L2(i2) and R2(i3).
Voice coil temperature
The temperature in the voice coil increases depending on the
current. The DC-resistance (Re) of the speaker increases with increasing temperature.
This changes the response of the speaker. The increase in DC-resistance results in a
compression of the response across the whole frequency range. Hill [3] has shown that
an increased voice-coil temperature also can affect the impedance of a speaker. This
behaviour was shown for a speaker measured after being played for more than 3 hours
reaching a voice-coil temperature of around 76◦Celcius. Such time variances can change
the response of a speaker over time if a system is played consistently for a long a time. A
subsequent effect of increasing voice coil temperature is the heating of the magnet and
the air inside the loudspeaker box.
Magnet temperature
A rise in temperature of the magnet changes the flux density
B and therefore the linear and nonlinear Bl-factor. Most materials used in loudspeakers
however are assumed to lead to small losses in the magnet performance2. The effects of
a heated magnet result in a change in magnetic flux density B and therefore a change
in force factor (Bl(x)). The change in response is reflected on all frequencies.
Increased air temperature
The rise in voice coil temperature causes the air inside
the speaker to rise in temperature. The result is a rise in speed of sound inside the
enclosure. This causes an upwards shift in response patterns of acoustical resonances
and interferences in the speaker. The symptom of such a shift in resonance frequencies
is a peaky change in response at these frequencies.
2Effects of temperature for a range of magnetic materials are stated by a magnet supplier[18]. The
error in residual flux density is stated to be less than 0.02 - 0.18% per degree. Irreversible losses are
claimed to occur for temperatures above 180 to 525◦C.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Theoretical Background
Linear parameters and nonlinear parameters are not necessarily constant over time.
Changing conditions (e.g. temperature, material properties) are likely to effect nonlinear
and linear parameters. These effects are likely to have an influence when a system is
driven at a high levels over a long period.
A collection of effects occurring at high levels is presented in this thesis. It should
be noted that there are various other effects like for example the flow resistance in ports,
the Youngs Modulos or the Doppler effect. The complexity of the subject required a
limitation. The introduced nonlinearities are again collected in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Nonlinearities and time invariances in loudspeakers.
nonlinearity /
time variance
as function of
mechanism
frequency range
of symptoms
force factor Bl
displacement x,
current i
nonlinear driving
force
low frequencies where
displacement is high
displacement x,
velocity u
nonlinear damping
magnet temperature TM
magnet temperature
all frequencies
stiffness Kms
displacement x
suspension softening
below loudspeaker
resonance fs
nonlinear restoring
force
low frequencies where
displacement is high
coil inductance Le
displacement x
displacement dependent
induction
high frequencies
modulated by
low frequencies
displacement x,
current i
reluctant force on
inductance
current i
nonlinear permeability
high frequencies
coil resistance Re
voice coil temperature Tv
voice coil temperature
all frequencies
resonances
air temperature Ta
air temperature
around resonating
frequencies
Level dependent changes in loudspeaker responses due to nonlinearities present the
underlying problem of this thesis. While the occurrence of such changes has been dis-
cussed in the preceding paragraphs, Figure 3.5 gives a more visual presentation of some
of those effects.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 A Sound Field Control Optimization Problem
13
Figure 3.5: Simulated responses of a 5-inch driver with different linear and nonlinear
parameters
Displayed are the responses of the same 5-inch loudspeaker driver mentioned in Fig-
ure 3.4 with introduced nonlinearities and changes in linear parameters. The responses
were thereby simulated using a state space model excited by an exponential sweep (de-
tails are provided in appendix C.1). The linear and nonlinear parameters were obtained
using a ”Klippel Analyzer” [15]. The reference is a response with constant Bl,Kms and
Le. The nonlinear force factor Bl(x) and the nonlinear stiffness Kms(x) both introduce
a compression in the response at low frequencies. The compression of low frequencies
can be led back to the high displacement at those frequencies and therefore influences
of the displacement dependent restoring force and suspension (displayed in Figure 3.4).
The increase in electrical DC resistance Re results in a compression of response across
the whole frequency range. Such an increase in Re could be caused by an increase in
temperature. The remaining curve shows the effect of a decrease in suspension stiffness
Kms. A softened suspension results in a response increase or decompression at frequen-
cies below the resonance frequency. Above the resonance frequency a slight decrease
occurs. This behaviour can be led back to a change in the resonance of the loudspeaker.
The increase in Kms can emerge from a suspension softening due to a level dependent
compliance of elastomers. The displacement dependent inductance Le is not shown in
Figure 3.5. The reason behind that is the asymmetric displacement dependency of Le.
3.2
A Sound Field Control Optimization
Problem
This section explains a specific sound field control (SFC) approach. The thesis was writ-
ten in collaboration with the research group of the project ”MONICA - An Adaptive,
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Theoretical Background
Data Driven Sound Field Control Strategy for Outdoor Concerts” [9]. The collaboration
motivates the explanation of their SFC algorithm in use. Even though the results of
this thesis apply to any given sound cancellation strategy, the relation to a given SFC
algorithm helps to illustrate the results.
The general idea of the algorithm is to decrease the sound pressure level (SPL)
in a dark zone using destructive interference, while maintaining high SPL and audio
quality in a designated bright zone.
The algorithm makes use of measured transfer
functions between loudspeakers (sources) and microphones (receivers). The loudspeakers
are grouped into primary sources and secondary sources, where the primary sources
produce the content of the application (music in the case of concerts), and the secondary
sources control the sound field to optimize the dark zone. To solve the SFC problem first
the transfer functions H from each loudspeaker to microphone position are measured.
Having the transfer functions an optimization problem minimizing the sound pressure
level in the dark zone can be solved. The solution of the optimization problem results in
a set of filters w. This set of filters can then be applied to the secondary array to cancel
the sound in the designated dark zone. There are different approaches to solve such
a problem. For this report the pressure-matching acoustic contrast control (PM-ACC
[19]) was chosen, which complies with the approach used in the MONICA project. This
objective function minimizes the SPL in the dark zone. The cost function for the control
weights ws was chosen as:
min
ws ||Hsws + hp||2,
(3.2)
where Hs is the transfer matrix between secondary sources and dark zone and
hp reflects the transfer function matrix generated by the primary sources in the dark
zone. The transfer function matrices thereby contain transfer functions for every source-
receiver (loudspeaker-microphone) combination. Fig. 3.6 gives an overview of the corre-
sponding signal path.
Figure 3.6: Signal path diagram: total sound pressure as sum of primary and secondary
source contributions. [10]
In the case of a setup with one primary source and one secondary source and a single
receiver point in the dark zone the optimization problem reduces to
||Hsws + hp||2 = 0
(3.3)
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Performance Metric: Achievable Reduction
15
and the filter ws can be calculated as
ws = −hp
Hs.
(3.4)
3.3
Performance Metric: Achievable
Reduction
To relate the symptoms of nonlinearities described in section 3.1 to a SFC problem pre-
sented in section 3.2, a performance metric, the achievable reduction, will be introduced.
This achievable reduction describes the achievable performance of any sound cancella-
tion algorithm given an error in the measured transfer functions of primary sources hp.
For the SFC algorithm described in section 3.2 the transfer of a sound S to a sin-
gle receiver point in the dark zone results in an addition of the transfer through pri-
mary sources hp and the transfer through secondary sources Hs convolved with the
control weitghts ws (multiplications in the frequency domain). The control weights are
thereby calculated using the measured transfer functions of Hs and ˆhp (Equation 3.4).
If this transfer functions were measured at a different level than the playback level,
their responses might differ due to nonlinear effects3. Which introduces a certain error
ˆhp = hp ∗e. The transfer to a single receiver point in the dark zone results as
D = S(Hsws + hp) = S(Hs−ˆhp
Hs + hp) = S(hp −ˆhp),
(3.5)
where D is the pressure in the dark zone and S is the play back signal, both in the
frequency domain. The fourier transform allows to describe a time signal decomposed
into its constituent frequencies. In the following the introduction of an error in hp will
be described for a single frequency. The two sound waves
p1 = IFFT{S(f)hp(f)} = a ∗sin(2πft),
(3.6)
p2 = IFFT{−S(f)ˆhp(f)} = −b ∗sin(2πft + ϕ)
(3.7)
are introduced, where p1 is a primary sound wave, and p2 is a a secondary sound
wave meant to cancel out the primary sound wave. The resulting total sound pressure
can be written as
ptot = p1 + p2 = c ∗sin(2πft + θ).
(3.8)
.
It can be shown that for b = a and ϕ = 0, the total sound pressure ptot becomes
zero. This represents the optimal case of total cancellation of sound pressure. In a case
3It is assumed, that the secondary sources are located closer to the controlled dark zone and are
therefore played at lower levels than the primary sources. The influence of nonlinearities on Hs is
assumed limited and the error in Hs can be neglected.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Theoretical Background
where ˆhp includes an error, b ̸= a or ϕ ̸= 0 total destructive interference is not reached
(Figure 3.7). The reduction of level of the primary wave is defined as
∆LR = 20 log10
c
a,
(3.9)
where c
a can be found using basic trigonometric laws
c
a =
√
(1 + (b
a)2 + 2 ∗b
a cos(ϕ)).
(3.10)
Using the described formulas, an error of phase and amplitude of measured transfer
function ˆhp can be directly translated into the achievable reduction. ∆LR indicates the
achievable reduction of primary sound given a certain error in secondary wave phase ∆ϕ
or amplitude ∆La−b . Figure 3.7 illustrates this achievable reduction (∆LR).
Figure 3.7: Reduction in amplitude of a primary sound wave as a function of the dif-
ference of amplitude and phase between primary and secondary sound wave for two
different ranges in level and phase deviation: ±15dB and ±180◦(left) and ±1dB and
±12◦(right).
It can be seen that for no error in phase or amplitude ∆LR approaches -∞dB
which corresponds to total cancellation. Already slight deviations in level and phase
compromise a given SFC application. Assuming a constant phase error of ±2.5° and a
magnitude error of +1dB a given sound cancellation application could only achieve an
attenuation of primary sound of around -17dB. A reduction of this errors to ±0.5°and
+0.2dB improves its performance to -32dB. For a deviation in transfer function the
formula can be directly applied by calculating ∆LR for every frequency bin. According
to Equation 3.4 errors in the measured transfer function translate directly to errors in the
calculated filters (ws) that define the secondary source signal. This behavior allows to
directly estimate the maximal achievable reduction given an error in measured transfer
function of such a SFC algorithm. In other words, using Equation 3.9 the maximal
achievable reduction of a SFC algorithm can be calculated given a certain error in
measured transfer function phase and amplitude.
In this thesis such errors occur if
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Performance Metric: Achievable Reduction
17
the transfer functions to calculate the solution of the optimization hp are measured
at different levels than the played back sound, transferred with a transfer function ˆhp.
The derivation for the achievable reduction ∆LR is made for one single source and one
receiver. The achievable reduction ∆LR is expected to be a good approximation also
if multiple sources and receivers are used, e.g.
the optimization problem cannot be
simplified to Equation 3.3. This assumption is valid under the condition that all sources
show the same changes in response due to nonlinearities, e.g. are identical and play at
the same level. In that case all transfer functions include the same error ˆhp = hp ∗e.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This chapter describes the methods used in this thesis. First the measurement setup
and procedure is described. Then the proposed compensation methods are introduced
in detail.
4.1
Measurement
Measurements in different setups using different signals were performed to validate the
findings of this thesis. First, the measurement setups located in an anechoic chamber at
DTU Lyngby and at a field test in an open field in Roskilde are discussed. Then, the
loudspeaker units are introduced to give context to the measured loudspeaker responses.
This is followed by an explanation of the calculation of those responses and a detailed
description of the excitation signals. Eventually, the calibration of the measurements is
discussed.
4.1.1
Measurement Setups
The full measurement setup used in the anechoic chamber is shown in Figure 4.1. This
is an extended setup used to measure various signals to investigate different variables
like impedance, voice-coil displacement, pressure and voltages.
Figure 4.1: Signal chain of full measurement setup in an anechoic chamber.
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Methodology
The setup used to finally calculate and apply the compensation is shown in Fig-
ure 4.2a. This setup is simplified to include only the pressure and voltage signals re-
quired for the compensation. The setup at the field test was limited to the near field
pressure, a fraction of the amplifier voltage1 and the excitation signal. The according
setup is displayed in Figure 4.2b.
(a) Signal chain of reduced measurement
setup in an anechoic chamber.
(b) Signal chain of measurement setup at the
field test.
The device lists of the both setups are given in Table 4.1 and Table 4.2
Table 4.1: Device list anechoic chamber.
Device List
Brand
10-inch closed box loudspeaker
own-brand
Laser Head, OFV-505
Polytec
Laser Amplifier, OFV-5000
Polytec
Loudspeaker amplifier, LAB300
Lab.Gruppen
Microphone, Type 4192
Brüel and Kjaer
Microphone amplifier, Nexus 2692
Brüel and Kjaer
1/5 Voltage divider
own-brand
5 Ohm adjustable resistance
own-brand
Audio interface, RME Fireface UCX
RME audio
Voltmeter, IDM93N
ISO-TECH
Voltage Divider (-27dB)
own brand
Table 4.2: Device list field test.
Device list
Brand
Subwoofer, V-SUB
d&b audiotechnik
Loudspeaker amplifier, D80
d&b audiotechnik
Audio Interface, Rio 3216
Yamaha
Dante Input for network audio, D10
Ampetronic
Microphone, Type 4966
Brüel and Kjaer
Microphone amplfiier, type 2694
Brüel and Kjaer
.
4.1.2
Test Speakers
The loudspeaker investigated in the anechoic chamber is a Peerless 850146 Csx 10-inch
8 ohm woofer driver mounted in a closed wooden box (data sheet in section C.4). The
wooden box has outer dimensions 36x36x24cm and wood thickness of 2cm. The driver
was mounted on the top plate of one of the 36x36 cm surfaces. The enclosure was screwed
1The Voltage output from a loudspeaker amplifier often exceeds the limits of common sound cards.
In order to capture the voltage signal of the amplitude of the original signal is divided by a certain
factor.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Measurement
21
to the rest of the cabinet with rubber connections to ensure full closure. The rest was
glued together. The cabinet was filled with glasswool. A photo of the loudspeaker is
displayed in Figure 4.3
Figure 4.3: 10-inch sub woofer used in tests in the anechoic chamber.
The sub woofer used during the field test was a Sub-V from d&b audiotechnik. The
data sheet of this unit can be found in section C.5. A picture of the field test setup is
appended in section C.6.
4.1.3
Transfer Function Measurement
The transfer functions were estimated using a dual-channel FFT-analysis. The following
explanations are based on Swen Müllers ”Transfer-Function Measurement with Sweeps”
[20].
The signal processing steps of the dual-channel FFT-analysis are displayed in
Figure 4.4
Figure 4.4:
Signal processing steps for classical 2-channel FFT analysis with asyn-
chronous noise used as excitation signal [20]
The dual-channel FFT-analysis requires the capture of both the input and the output
signal of the loudspeaker (channel A and B in Figure 4.4). The signals are thereby cut
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Methodology
in overlapping segments, which are windowed and transformed to the spectral domain.
The resulting spectra are used to calculate the averaged auto spectra
GAA(f) = 1
n
∑
A(f)∗A(f),
(4.1)
GBB(f) = 1
n
∑
B(f)∗B(f)
(4.2)
and the averaged cross spectrum
GAB(f) = 1
n
∑
A(f)∗B(f),
(4.3)
with n being the number of segments. The complex transfer function is defined as
H = B(f)
A(f).
(4.4)
Using auto and cross spectra the transfer function can be calculated in two ways as
H1 = A(f)∗B(f)
A(f)∗A(f) = GAB(f)
GAA(f)
(4.5)
and
H2 = B(f)∗B(f)
B(f)∗A(f) = GBB(f)
G∗
AB(f).
(4.6)
If output noise prevails, H1(f) presents a better transfer function estimate than H2(f).
If the input noise predominates H2(f) leads to more accurate results.
In this application the input signal (channel A) was the measured voltage applied
across the loudspeaker and the output signal (channel B) the near field pressure in front
of the woofer membrane. Since the voltage is directly measured at the voltage inputs of
the speakers the input noise is assumed to be very low. The output noise consisted of
the ambient noise and the noise introduced by the equipment. Even though this output
noise is assumed to be low due to the low acoustic noise floor in the anechoic chamber
and the usage of a high quality equipment, it is assumed to prevail; thus, H1(f) is chosen
as the transfer function estimate. The corresponding signal processing was performed
using a Python script appended in subsection C.7.1. This work includes the comparison
of measurements using different excitation signals.
The dual-channel analysis offers
the possibility to measure a loudspeaker using music as the excitation signal. Music
has an erratic spectral distribution and requires longer averaging periods to achieve
reliable results than for example noise. The need of long averaging periods motivated
the excitation signal length to be set to 15 seconds. The number of samples per averaging
period were set to 48000 samples which corresponds to 1 second segments. The choice
of those parameters assured a frequency resolution of 1 Hz and an averaging over 15
segments. The optimal choice of measurement length for music is not obvious since music
does not represent a well defined signal. The choice of 15 seconds is therefore to some
extent arbitrary but based on a trade-off between sufficiently accurate transfer functions
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Measurement
23
and reasonable short measurement times.
The resulting transfer functions attached
measured with 15 second excitations were thereby considered satisfactory (Measurement
display in Appendix B). The subsequent section introduces the used excitation signals
in this work.
4.1.4
Excitation Signals
The usage of a set of excitation signals allows an extensive interpretation of the compen-
sation strategy. Well defined signals can be useful to interpret the influence of nonlinear-
ities on a loudspeaker and the functionality of the compensation. But, SFC systems are
often implemented at concerts where the played back signals are mainly musical. Even
though such signals are not well defined, a representative sample is used to illustrate the
performance of the compensation for the case of a loudspeaker system driven with music
content. The choice of signals ranges from signals with well defined characteristics like
sweeps and broadband noise to more complex signals like a generated beat or a snippet
of music. The characteristics and benefits of the used signals are illustrated hereafter.
4.1.4.1
Sweep
The exponential sweep consists of a sine wave that increases exponentially in frequency
over time. A device under test (DUT) experiences an excitation at only one frequency
at a time. This property is helpful when analyzing a system since a certain behaviour at
a discrete time can be related to a single frequency of the sweep at that time. This way
mainly distortions at the fundamental frequency and harmonic distortion are recorded.
An exponential sweep has a frequency spectrum such that the power spectral density
is inversely proportional to the frequency of the signal. The length of the sweep was
chosen as 15 seconds. The frequency range spanned 1 - 24000 Hz, where the upper
limit of 24000 Hz was chosen as half of the sampling frequency to avoid aliasing [21].
Frequency windows (half Hann-windows [22]) were applied from 0 - 20 Hz and 23000 -
24000 Hz. The lower frequency window (0 - 20 Hz) was applied to avoid high excursions,
and therefore loading of the speaker, below the frequency range of interest. The higher
frequency window (23000 - 24000 Hz) was applied to avoid an abrupt end of the signal.
Figure 4.5 shows the time and frequency representation of the exponential sweep signal
used in this thesis.
Figure 4.5: Time signal (left) and frequency content (right) of the sweep signal.
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Methodology
4.1.4.2
M-Noise
M‑Noise is a new test signal, introduced by Meyer Sound [23]. It was developed for
measurements of a loudspeaker system’s maximum linear output. It is a mathematically
derived test signal that emulates the characteristics of music. The spectrum of M-Noise
is similar to pink noise and the exponential sweep, having a power spectral density
inversely proportional to the frequency of the signal.
Similar to pink noise, various
frequencies are excited at the same time.
In contrast to an exponential sweep, M-
Noise allows an interaction between frequencies and amplitudes when measuring a DUT.
Figure 4.6: Pink vs M-Noise (Meyer Sound M-Noise In-
tro Video [24]).
The interpretation of the re-
sults of this approach is less
obvious due to the random
structure of amplitude and
frequency content.
The dif-
ference to pink noise is an
increasing crest factor2 with
increasing frequency as dis-
played in Figure 4.6 [23].
It
can be seen that the difference
in crest factor evolves above
600Hz.
The increased crest
factor of M-Noise mirrors the
crest-factors observed during
an extensive spectral analysis
of a variety of music material
by Meyer Sound.
Frequency
windows (half Hann-windows [22]) were applied from 0 - 20 Hz and 4000 - 4500 Hz. The
lower frequency window (0 - 20 Hz) was applied to avoid high excursions, and therefore
loading of the speaker, below the frequency range of interest. The higher frequency win-
dow (4000 - 4500 Hz) was applied to limit the signal at very high frequencies exceeding
the frequency range of the used speaker (data sheets in section C.4 and section C.5). The
same frequency windows were applied to all subsequently discussed signals. Figure 4.7
shows the time and frequency representation of the M-Noise signal used in this thesis.
Figure 4.7: Time signal (left) and frequency content (right) of the M-Noise signal.
2The crest factor of a signal describes the ratio of its peak value to its RMS value [25, p. 39].
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Measurement
25
4.1.4.3
White Noise
White noise is a stationary noise signal with a flat power spectral density, which means
that it has constant mean square value per hertz [25].
In Figure 4.8 the time and
frequency representation of the white noise signal used in this thesis is shown.
Figure 4.8: Time signal (left) and frequency content (right) of the white noise signal.
4.1.4.4
Generated Beat
The urge to test the developped algorithm in a more realistic scenario motivated the
introduction of signals that resemble time variance and frequency content of an actual
music signal. To still have a rather simple signal a ”test beat” has been created. The
beat should contain the most common low frequency sounds used in live performances.
The choice was set on a broadband kick drum, a snare drum peaking around 100 Hz and
a colored bass sound with step wise increasing frequency. A hi-hat was added creating
frequency content above 300 Hz. The time signal and frequency content of the signals
are shown in Figure 4.9
Figure 4.9: Individual beat signal components.
The different sounds were arranged in a way to generate a 4/4 signature standard
beat accompanied by a simple increasing bass line. Figure 4.10 shows the beat signal
decomposed in the different sounds and mixed together.
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Methodology
Figure 4.10: Mixed beat test signal.
Replicating this signal 4 times and cutting it at 15 seconds results in the excitation
signal used in this thesis. Figure 4.11 shows this signal in the time and frequency domain.
Figure 4.11: Time signal (left) and frequency content (right) of the beat signal.
4.1.4.5
Music Signal
The chosen test signal consists of the first 15 seconds of the song ”Self vs. Self” by
Pendulum featuring In Flames. This music signal was chosen based on its strong and
dynamic low frequency content.
It should be kept in mind that music shows huge
difference in dynamics and frequency content depending on the genre. The scope of this
study required a limitation to this one music sample. The Figure 4.12 shows the time
signal and spectrum of this signal.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Measurement
27
Figure 4.12: Time signal (left) and frequency content (right) of the test music signal.
4.1.5
Calibration
Calibrations were performed to supervise the results and identify errors. For the micro-
phone, a pistonphone was used exciting a sine wave of 114 dB at 250 Hz. The calibration
was conducted by attaching a pistonphone to the microphone and measuring for 10 sec-
onds. A section of 1 second of this measurement was then used to match the recorded
file to 114 dB. The found microphone gain was applied to all measurements conducted
with this microphone. First the amplitude of the pressure excited by the calibrator was
calculated
|pcalib| = 10114dB/20 · pref ·
√
2 = 14.16Pa,
(4.7)
with pref = 20 · 10−6. Then the calibration gain was calculated having the amplitude
of the signal recorded at the microphone amplifier output |smic| during the microphone
calibration.
gmic = |smic|
|pcalib|.
(4.8)
Eventually, the calibration factor can be applied to all signals measured with the cali-
brated microphone.
The voltage was calibrated by applying a constant 500Hz sine wave to the amplifier.
The signal was applied and recorded for 5 seconds. The voltages where measured using a
volt meter and transcribed to the measurement log. This allowed to match the recorded
files with the measured voltage at the voltmeter. The found calibration gain was again
applied to the voltage signals measured. The amplitude of the calibration voltage was
calculated by multiplying the RMS voltage read from the voltmeter by
√
2
|vcalib| = 12.55VRMS ·
√
2 = 17.74Vpeak.
(4.9)
The calibration gain was calculated using the amplitude of the recorded signal |svolt| at
the loudspeaker amplifier output during the voltage calibration as
gvolt = |svolt|
|vcalib|
(4.10)
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Methodology
The displacement and velocity signals were calibrated using the given sensitivity from
laser amplifier and audio interface. During the field test a calibration was not performed
due to time constraints. These results are therefore presented in relative dB values.
4.2
Compensation Method
Eventually, the compensation method is introduced. Due to its nonlinear behaviour at
high levels, the response of most loudspeakers is dependent on the input signal. The pro-
posed compensation method aims on identifying those dependencies. First, the transfer
function between voltage and near field sound pressure of a given loudspeaker is mea-
sured at different input gains. The resulting magnitude and phase responses characterize
the nonlinearity of this loudspeaker by its apparent linear transfer function at different
levels. The level dependent changes can be used to approximate the expected change
in transfer function at any other level. This expected change is calculated as a func-
tion of input level using a polynomial fitting function of fourth order. Finally a linear
compensation filter can be applied using the expected change at a given level.
The estimation signals ei(t) with correspondent level Li = L(ei(t)) are introduced,
where the level can either be an RMS (root mean squared) voltage or an RMS voice coil
displacement level. One level is chosen as the reference level Lref.
To compute the compensation filters one:
1. measures the transfer functions H(f, Li) at levels Li (Figure 4.13a),
2. computes the change in transfer function compared to the reference level (Fig-
ure 4.13b),
∆H(f, Li) = H(f, Li)/H(f, Lref),
3. approximates ∆H using a polynomial regression (4thorder) to get changes for a
continuum of input levels: ∆˜H(f, L). Eventually, ∆˜H(f, L)∗presents the linear
compensation filter in the frequency domain.
To apply the compensation filters one:
1. measures the test signal level Ltest = L(s(t)),
2. applies the compensation filter to the test signal
s′(t) = IFFT{∆˜H(f, Ltest)∗FFT{s(t)}},
3. plays back s′(t) instead of s(t).
The signals to estimate the compensation will be referred to as estimation signals.
The signals the compensation is applied to will be called test signals.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Compensation Method
29
(a) Loudspeaker magnitude response at
four different levels.
(b) Differences in magnitude response
at a single frequency for different lev-
els together with polynomial regres-
sion.
Figure 4.13: Figurative display of measurements and approximation of the presented
compensation method
As has been discussed in section 3.1 nonlinear effects in loudspeakers emerge from
different causes. These causes are coupled to time varying variables like current, velocity
and displacement. An efficient compensation strategy should be based on the level of
the variable that is directly connected to changes in response.
In other words, the
compensation for the symptoms of the nonlinearities should be based on the variable
causing these symptoms. In this thesis, a simple approach using the displacement and
voltage variable (which is coupled to current) were investigated. Three variations in
compensation procedure were investigated:
Sweep-Voltage Approach
: This approach uses exponential sweep, described in
subsubsection 4.1.4.1, as the estimation signal and the RMS voltage as the considered
level. The compensation thereby takes into account differences of transfer functions at
different voltage levels measured with a sweep excitation. These changes are then used
to calculate a compensation filter at any given RMS voltage level.
Noise-Voltage Approach
: Here, M-Noise (subsubsection 4.1.4.2) is used as the es-
timation signal. The nature of this test signal allows an interaction between different
frequencies and amplitudes when measuring the transfer function, e.g. occurrence of in-
termodulation. So, the compensation takes into account differences of transfer functions
at different voltage levels measured with an M-Noise excitation. The changes are again
used to calculate a compensation filter at any given RMS voltage level.
Noise-Displacement Approach
: In this case the calculation and application of the
compensation is performed using the RMS voice-coil displacement. Therefore, the com-
pensation takes into account differences in transfer functions at different displacement
levels measured with an M-Noise excitation. In contrast to the compensation strate-
gies using the voltage level, this approach applies more compensation for signals with
high displacement (e.g. signals with strong low frequency components). The estimated
changes in transfer function are used to calculate a compensation filter at any given RMS
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Methodology
voice-coil displacement level. The voice-coil displacement level is thereby approximated
from the pressure of the near field microphone (section C.2).
The outcome of these compensation approaches was on one hand measured and on
the other hand simulated. The simulated transfer functions are thereby calculated by
applying the estimated compensation filter directly to the measured not compensated
transfer function,
Hcomp,sim(f) = Hno_comp(f, Ltest) · ∆˜H(f, Ltest)∗.
(4.11)
The simulation estimates the effect of the compensation, by assuming a linear translation
of the compensation from the input signal to the output pressure3. For the measurements
the estimated compensation filters are applied to the test signal
s′(t) = IFFT{∆˜H(f, Ltest)∗FFT{s(t)}}.
(4.12)
The compensated test signals s’(t) are calculated and transfer functions Hcomp,meas(f)
are measured at different levels Ltest.
3For small changes in phase and amplitude, this approximation was assumed to be valid. Even
though the compensation is applied in the nonlinear range of a loudspeaker.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Results
To test the presented compensation strategies, a series of measurements was conducted.
First, measurements in the anechoic chamber using the 10-inch loudspeaker described
in subsection 4.1.2 are shown, investigating level dependent changes in the response and
their connection to nonlinearities. Next, the compensation method is calculated and the
outcome of the compensation is presented. Then, similar measurements are repeated for
a sub woofer used in a SFC field test of the Monica project. The measurements include
responses at different levels and simulations predicting the outcome of the presented
compensation. The compensation was always calculated for 11 different measurement
levels, where the lowest level was chosen as the reference level. For illustrative reasons
the results show a selection of the measured and compensated levels. Finally, limitations
and considerations concerning a practical implementation are presented.
5.1
Level Dependent Transfer Functions
Figure 5.1 shows the transfer function of the 10-inch loudspeaker at different RMS
Voltage levels. The excitation signal is thereby a 15 seconds exponential sweep.
Figure 5.1: Frequency response of the 10-inch sub woofer at 5 different levels.
The considered frequency range is limited to 20 - 2000 Hz, which resembles the
effective frequency range of this particular loudspeaker. The magnitude response shows
a rather flat curve between 70 - 700 Hz. The drop in magnitude below 70 Hz is explained
by the lower cut off frequency of a closed box loudspeaker below its resonance frequency,
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Results
which lies between 60-70 Hz (Figure 5.4) [26, p. 119-125]. At 160 Hz and above 400 Hz,
the response shows irregularities and peaks. These anomalies might be a product of the
construction of the box, setup or driver and are connected to (anti-)resonant behaviours.
To investigate the changes in transfer function for different levels, 0.43VRMS was chosen
as the reference level. The change in response (∆Magnitude, ∆Phase) is the difference
to the reference response at 0.43VRMS. Figure 5.2 shows this change in response for the
five levels used in Figure 5.1 measured with an exponential sweep.
Figure 5.2: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker at 6 different levels relative
to responses at 0.43Vrms.
Above 60 Hz the magnitude response decreases and the phase response shows a
negative shift for increasing level.
At high frequencies this effect is likely to be a
Figure 5.3: Approximated voice-coil dis-
placement derived from pressure (sec-
tion C.2) at five different levels.
product of voltage dependent nonlinearities,
as voice coil displacement and velocity are
small. Figure 5.3 shows the approximated
displacement1 for the considered levels. It
can be seen that the displacement becomes
very small for frequencies above 200 Hz. For
frequencies that generate high displacement
or velocity, nonlinearities dependent on dis-
placement and velocity are likely to be co-
responsible for the change in transfer func-
tion2. Below 60 Hz the magnitude response
shows a rise until 4.25V and drops for higher
levels. This behaviour is related to a change
1The displacement approximation is explained in section C.2.
2At this point it should be noted that high frequencies can be influenced by voice coil displacement
dependent nonlinearities if the exciting signal differs from a sweep. The sweep is a special case where
only one frequency is excited at a time. If multiple frequencies are excited simultaneously, the transfer
of a high frequency tone can be influenced by the displacement or velocity generated by a low frequency
tone.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Level Dependent Transfer Functions
33
in the electrical impedance.
Figure
5.4:
Loudspeaker
electrical
impedance at five different levels (the
data
originates
from
another
mea-
surement
session,
which
explains
the
differences in VRMS levels.)
Figure 5.4 shows a downwards shift in
the impedance resonance and a damping in
peak magnitude for increasing level. It can
be noted that the impedance curve stops
shifting downwards above 3.83V and only
the dampening effect persists for higher lev-
els. It is in accordance with the aforemen-
tioned theory that a downwards shift in
impedance resonance leads to an increase
in transfer function magnitude below this
resonance frequency [26, p. 119-125].
The
damping of the resonance peak magnitude
suggests a decrease in transfer function mag-
nitude. This effect appears to be predomi-
nated by the resonance shift at lower levels,
but becomes visible once the shift in resonance slows down. The various peaks in Fig-
ure 5.2 indicate a shift in frequency of (anti-)resonances.
The interpretation of the
results focused on explaining changes in magnitude response, but not changes in phase
response. The effects of nonlinearities on the phase have barely been studied so far.
Such effects might have gained limited attention in loudspeaker related fields due to the
fact that small changes in phase response are not audible. For applications that make
use of destructive interference (like SFC) small deviations in phase can have big impact
on the performance as Figure 3.7 shows. In this thesis the effects of nonlinearities on
the phase response are assumed to be linked to the effects of the magnitude response,
and are therefore not discussed in greater detail.
Origins of level dependent changes in response
This paragraph tries to link the
symptoms of the level dependent changes in response to the underlying causes of certain
nonlinearities. The variety and complexity of nonlinearities complicate the argumenta-
tion and prevent absolute statements. Further the possible causes are limited to the
nonlinearities discussed in subsection 3.1.2
The compression at high frequencies, above 200Hz can be assumed to be linked to
causes independent of displacement. Table 3.3 suggests three causes: increased voice-
coil temperature, the nonlinear permeability and increased magnet temperature. The
increased magnet temperature appears improbable due to the short excitation time.
The nonlinear permeability shows an asymmetric current dependency and is assumed to
have low impact on the response. The increased DC-resistance Re due to an increased
coil temperature remains a possible explanation for the high frequency behaviour. It
should be noted that there are various effects occurring at high frequencies due to high
displacement of a low frequency tone. The nature of the sweep measurement prevent
those effects to occur since only one frequency is excited at a time. At low frequencies the
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Results
effect of an increased DC-resistance would also be visible but is likely to be dominated
by the behaviour of the change in impedance. Figure 5.4 shows that the resonance of
the impedance shifts and its peak drops for increasing level. This leads to an increase
in magnitude response up to a certain voltage level and a drop at very high levels. The
initial shift in impedance resonance could be led back to a softening of suspension. At
higher levels the combined effects of the nonlinear driving force Bl(x), the nonlinear
restoring force Kms(x) and increased DC-resitance Re are likely to be the cause for
the compression in magnitude response. These effects are probably present at lower
levels but dominated by the shift in impedance. The origin of the resonances found in
Figure 5.2 could not be identified, but are assumed to occur due to structural resonances
or acoustical resonances due to the dimensions of setup or loudspeaker components.
5.2
Compensation
Following the identification of the level dependent changes in transfer function, compen-
sation strategies can be applied.
5.2.1
Sweep-Voltage Approach
The changes in transfer function displayed in Figure 5.2 can be used to calculate a
correspondent compensation. Figure 5.5 shows the measured and estimated changes in
transfer function as a function of RMS voltage for certain discrete frequencies. The used
approach corresponds to the sweep-voltage approach described in section 4.2.
Figure 5.5: Changes in transfer function for a sweep signal measured at different lev-
els and discrete frequencies (cross-marker) and estimation ˜H(f, L) (dashed line) of the
sweep-voltage approach estimation.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Compensation
35
For the displayed frequencies the estimation using a 4th order polynomial regression
manages to estimate the measured changes (cross-markers) with a small error.
The
estimated function ˜H(f, L) can be used to calculate the compensation filter ˜H(f, L)∗at
any other levels for all frequency bins in the considered frequency range. In a first step
the compensation is calculated for a sweep test signal at the same RMS voltage levels.
Figure 5.6 shows the measured changes in transfer function with applied compensation.
Figure 5.6: Changes in response with applied sweep-voltage compensation for a sweep
test signal.
Figure 5.6 shows smaller changes in transfer function than the measurement without
compensation in Figure 5.2. The performance of the compensation appears to be less
effective around areas where the speakers shows resonant behaviours (e.g. around 160
Hz). To relate the influence of such a compensation to a sound cancellation problem, the
achievable reduction at one level with and without compensation is shown in Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.7: Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied sweep-voltage
compensation. Measured and simulated for a sweep test signal at 5.67Vrms.
Figure 5.7 shows that a compensation using the sweep-voltage approach applied to
a sweep test signal can improve a sound cancellation problem by 20-30 dB on a broad
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Results
range of frequencies. The compensation performs worse in areas where the loudspeaker
appears to have certain resonances. It should be kept in mind that in this specific case
the test signal matches the estimation signal and the test levels are as the estimation
levels.
In other words, the compensation is applied to a signal that is very similar
to the signal that is used to estimate the compensation. This results in a very good
performance. In a real scenario the compensated signals are likely to differ from an
exponential sweep. Figure 5.8 displays the performance of the sweep-voltage approach
applied to other test signals.
Figure 5.8: Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied sweep-voltage
compensation, measured and simulated for different signals around 5.7Vrms.
For M-Noise as a test signal (a) the compensation shows an improvement in achiev-
able reduction of 10-20dB on a broad range of frequencies. Around the loudspeakers
resonant irregularities there is less improvement visible. The performance of the com-
pensation is comparable to the compensation using a sweep test signal. For the beat (c)
and music (d) signal, the compensation reaches an improvement of 5-20 dB on a broad
range of frequencies. The energy below 30-40 Hz is not sufficient to make meaningful
statements for both signals. The improvement in achievable reduction is smaller than
for noise and sweep test signals. This is assumed to be a product of the dynamic changes
in frequency content and energy of the beat and music signal. For white noise (b) the
compensation shows improvements of 10-20 dB for high frequencies from 200-2000Hz.
Between 50-190Hz the compensation tends to decrease the achievable reduction. Below
50 Hz an improvement in achievable reduction can be found. The following section fo-
cuses on the performance of the sweep-voltage compensation applied to a white noise
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Compensation
37
test signal.Figure 5.9 displays the measured and estimated change in transfer function
for a white noise test signal at three different frequencies.
Figure 5.9: Changes in transfer function for a white noise signal measured at different
levels and discrete frequencies (cross-marker) and estimation ˜H(f, L) (dashed line) of
the sweep-voltage approach estimation.
For 30 Hz the magnitude response is estimated to increase for increasing voltage level
until around 5V. After 5V the estimated change magnitude response is getting smaller
again crossing 0 around 9.5V. In contrast to the estimation, the measurement shows an
increasing magnitude response for levels up to 8-9V. Above 9V the magnitude response
gets smaller again. For 80Hz the compensation strategy estimates a compression higher
than the measured one for all levels. Both behaviours imply an overcompensation at the
frequencies 30Hz and 80Hz. Below 50Hz Figure 5.8 shows an improvement in achievable
reduction despite the discussed overcompensation around 30Hz. Figure 5.9 shows that
around 6V, where this achievable reduction is measured, the estimation curve is close to
the measurement due to the shape of the level dependent changes in transfer function. At
lower and especially higher levels the estimation deviates more from the measurements
and the achievable reduction drops.
The estimation for 1100Hz is considerably better, compared to 30 and 80Hz. The
overestimation at low frequencies might evolve from the fact that white noise and an
exponential sweep have different spectra. White noise has a flat spectrum while the
exponential sweep has a power spectral density inversely proportional to frequency. This
means that at low frequencies, at the same voltage level, the sweep signal creates more
displacement than the white noise.
For low frequencies the sweep-voltage approach
estimates a higher displacement than the actual displacement of the compensated test
signal. If the changes in transfer function at low frequencies are mostly dependent on
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Results
the displacement, this would lead to an overcompensation. Following this hypothesis,
two assumptions can be made:
• The sweep-voltage approach shows similar performance for high frequencies, inde-
pendent of the spectrum of the test signal;
• The sweep-voltage approach shows worse performance at low frequencies, the more
the test signals spectrum differs from the spectrum of the exponential sweep.
The results indicate that the proposed compensation can reach an improvement on a
broad range of frequencies. The extent of the improvement is dependent on the frequency
content and time variance of the applied test signal.
5.2.2
Noise-Voltage and Noise-Displacement
Approach
In addition to the sweep-voltage approach, a noise-voltage approach and a noise-displacement
approach were tested. Figure 5.10 shows a comparison of the three approaches using
white noise as a test signal. White noise was chosen as test signal due to its difference
in spectrum compared to the estimation signals.
Figure 5.10: Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied compensation,
for different compensation approaches. Measured and simulated for white at 6.19Vrms
Figure 5.10 reveals that both the sweep-voltage approach (a) and the noise-voltage
approach (b) show poor performance between 50-200Hz. The noise-voltage approach
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Compensation
39
shows similar behaviour as the sweep-voltage approach. This observation aligns with
the assumption that the performance of voltage level dependent compensation is worse
in areas with high displacement the more the spectra of estimation and test signal differ.
The displacement level dependent compensation (c) shows improvements of 5-15dB at
levels below 80Hz. At higher frequencies the approach shows less improvement of 1-4dB.
Figure 5.11 shows the measured and estimated change in transfer function using the
noise-excursion compensation approach for a white noise test signal.
Figure 5.11: Changes in transfer function for a white noise signal measured at different
levels and discrete frequencies (cross-marker) and estimation ˜H(f, L) (dashed line) of
the noise-excursion approach estimation.
In contrast to Figure 5.9 the compensation based on displacement level shows a better
estimation for the frequencies at 30Hz and 80Hz. At 1100Hz the compensation shows an
underestimation compared to the measurements. This aligns with the previous findings
and supports the assumption that the change in transfer function at low frequencies is
mainly dependent on the displacement level. Based on that, again two assumptions can
be made:
• The noise-displacement approach shows similar performance for low frequencies,
independent of the spectrum of the test signal;
• The noise-displacement approach shows worse performance at high frequencies, the
more the test signals spectrum differs from the spectrum of the M-Noise signal.
Further measurements of the noise-displacement approach applied to different test
signals are attached in section B.4. Complementary graphs to the results in this chapter
are collected in the appendix in Appendix B. In following chapter the presented results
are interpreted and discussed in detail.
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Results
5.3
Field Test Measurements
To relate the above findings to a real scenario, a sub woofer used in a SFC setup was mea-
sured. Due to time constraints the compensation could not be applied, but simulations
of a possible compensation are shown. The measurements of the 10-inch loudspeaker
showed that the simulation of the compensation align with the measurements.
The
exception is where the estimation and test signal are the same. There the simulation
shows better results of 10-20dB. First the level dependent changes in transfer function
are shown. To have a feeling of the levels used, levels were chosen in dB relative to
the reference measurement at Lref. The choice of Lref was thereby chosen at a low
level above the noise floor. The other measurement levels were chosen such that the
relative level differences matched the relative differences used in the anechoic chamber.
Figure 5.12 shows the transfer function of the loudspeaker at different dB levels. The
excitation signal is thereby an M-Noise signal.3
Figure 5.12: Frequency response of the Sub V sub woofer at 6 different levels.
As for the 10-inch speaker in Figure 5.1, the response shows a roll-off above and below
certain frequencies. The argumentation for this behaviour is the same, as in Figure 5.1.
The response in Figure 5.12 decreases below 50Hz and above 500Hz. The data sheet
states a working range 37-115Hz (section C.5), which is also the frequency range where
the high and low pass filters of the amplifier are located. Since the voltage is measured
after the amplifier, the low and high pass filtering of the amplifier is not mirrored in the
transfer function. It should be kept in mind that this still means that above 115 and
below 35Hz the excitation signal is attenuated by the amplifiers filtering which results
in a low signal to noise ratio. Compared to Figure 5.1 the response is very flat between
50-200Hz and shows no resonant behaviours. This might be due to the fact that those
sub woofers were designed and developed more thoroughly than the loudspeaker used
in the anechoic chamber. Figure 5.13 illustrates the changes in response relative to the
measurement at the reference level Lref.
3An extensive argumentation why results are shown for M-Noise as measurement signal and not the
sweep signal is given in section B.5.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Field Test Measurements
41
Figure 5.13: Changes in response of the Sub V sub woofer at 6 different levels relative
to responses at 0dB.
Figure 5.13 shows that for levels below 11dB, changes in transfer function are mini-
mal. This can be assumed to be the linear working range of this speaker. Above 11dB
changes in transfer function start to become more visible. It can be further seen that
the magnitude response changes less from 11dB to 20dB than from 20 to 25dB. This
illustrates that the transfer functions show bigger changes per level difference at higher
levels. Below 30Hz and above 250Hz the response gets increasingly noisy. It can be seen
that the amplifier applies a band pass below 37Hz and above 115Hz limiting the voltage
level outside this range. The voltage level outside this range is therefore attenuated and
a low signal to noise ration leads to noisy results in transfer function. The considered
range will be limited to 30-250Hz. In the application of a SFC algorithm, the achievable
reduction, often called insertion loss4, is an important performance measure. Figure 5.14
shows the achievable reduction of a SFC system at a certain level, given the transfer
functions to solve the optimization problem were measured at the reference level of 0dB.
Figure 5.14: Achievable reduction without compensation for changes in response relative
to 0 dB for an M-Noise signal.
4In SFC insertion loss describes the attenuation of the original signal if the SFC system is active,
which is equivalent to the achievable reduction of the SFC algorithm.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Results
The curve at 0dB is not visible in Figure 5.14. The achievable reduction assumes
that changes in transfer function only occur due to level dependent changes in response.
At 0dB there is no such error and the achievable reduction is infinity. For increasing level
the achievable reduction declines. Assuming a play back level that is 28dB higher than
the measurement level to solve the SFC problem, the level dependent changes in response
would limit the achievable reduction of a given SFC system to 10dB from 50-250Hz and
5dB from 30-50Hz. The presented compensation could be a suitable method to improve
the performance of such a SFC system. The outcome of the simulated noise-voltage
compensation at 25dB is shown in Figure 5.15.
Figure 5.15: Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied compensation,
for the noise-voltage compensation approach.
Measured and simulated for different
signals at 25dB.
For M-Noise (a) the simulation suggests an improvement of 20-30dB. The simulation
of the compensation on the same signal however tends to be higher than the measured
improvement as can be seen in Figure 5.7.
Even though the actual improvement is
assumed to be lower, the curve indicates an improvement on all frequencies. For the beat
signal (b) an improvement of achievable reduction of 5-10 dB can be found on a broad
range of frequencies between 30-200Hz. For the music signal an improvement of 10-15dB
can be found. Results for the noise-excursion compensation show similar results and are
attached in section B.45. Results of the compensation were so far only shown at discrete
5White noise was not measured during the field test measurements. Due to the low, narrow frequency
range of interest, differences between the M-Noise and white noise measurements were expected to be
minimal.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Field Test Measurements
43
levels. It is also interesting to see the expected effect of the compensation at different
levels. Figure 5.16 shows the achievable reduction with and without compensation.
(a) Without compensation.
(b) With applied noise-voltage compensation
(simulated)
Figure 5.16: Achievable reduction for an M-Noise test signal measured at 5,11,20,25 and
28dB above the reference level.
Figure 5.16a shows that the achievable reduction of an uncompensated system drops
for test signals with increasing level difference to the reference level. Figure 5.16b sug-
gests that the noise-voltage compensation applied to an M-Noise signal manages to as-
sure a constant reduction in sound pressure level of at least 20 to 40dB in the considered
range 30-250Hz.
5.3.1
Choice of Reference
Section 5.3 shows all results measured and compensated for the transfer function from
output voltage of the amplifier to the sound pressure level at the microphone. This
requires the measurement of the output voltage of the amplifier. In many cases it can
be easier to measure the signal at the input of the amplifier instead. Figure 5.17 shows
the performance of the noise-voltage approach using the voltage signal at the amplifier
input.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results
Figure 5.17: Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied compensation,
for the noise-voltage compensation approach.
Measured and simulated for different
signals at 25dB, using the input voltage of the amplifier as the reference signal.
It can be seen that the performance of the compensation applied to M-Noise (a)
appears to be similar as the one found in Figure 5.15. For the beat (b) and music signal
(c) the compensation shows almost no improvement. The field test was performed with
a Sub-V sub woofer (section C.5), which was connected to a D80 amplifier. To protect
the sub woofer from being damaged the amplifier on one hand applies a high and low
pass filter and on the other hand limits the signal if it gets too high. This behaviour
can be investigated by observing the transfer function across the amplifier displayed in
Figure 5.18.
Figure 5.18: Frequency response of the D80 amplifier at 11 different levels.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Field Test Measurements
45
At low levels, up to +20dB, the amplifier response shows a similar curve for all signals
(a-d). For increasing level the shape of the transfer function is different for all signals.
M-Noise (b) shows the least deviations. This might be due to the property of M-Noise,
which has its energy spread across all frequencies. The beat (c) and (d) signal show
large compression in the frequency areas where a lot of energy is located. Comparing
the compression in the amplifier to the content of the beat signal in Figure 4.9, shows that
the compression occurs in the frequency area of the bass drum. The short, high levelled
impacts of the bass drum hits might thereby be compressed by the limiter of the amplifier.
For the sweep signal (a) the amplifier response shows a certain oscillation in the curve.
This can not be directly explained but might occur due to a certain behaviour of the
implementation of the limiter. The observations suggest that the amplifiers response
depends on frequency content and time variance of the signal. This behaviour is difficult
to predict and could not be compensated by the presented compensation method.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results
5.4
Discussion
The presented approach compensates a nonlinear system using level dependent changes
in the linear transfer function. The results show that such a compensation can increase
the achievable reduction of a given sound cancellation system on a broad range of frequen-
cies. The performance is thereby dependent on the estimation and test signal and the
compensation approach chosen. Three compensation approaches have been presented.
The results indicate that the voltage level dependent approaches perform better at high
frequencies while the voice coil displacement level dependent approach shows better re-
sults at low frequencies. This becomes particularly visible when estimation and test
signals with different spectra are analyzed. The presented compensation approaches
describe a simplification of the problem and are therefore limited. The following sec-
tions discuss the robustness of the compensation method, summarize its limitations and
analyze a potential implementation of the compensation.
5.4.1
Robustness
In the measurement process of this thesis several loudspeakers where tested and mea-
sured. This included 5-inch, 10-inch and 12-inch loudspeakers of similar construction
as the loudspeaker shown in Figure 4.3 and the Sub-V sub woofer used in the field
test. While only measured results of the compensation of the 10-inch loudspeaker are
displayed, the other loudspeakers showed similar trends in their behaviour. The com-
pensation is therefore expected to show similar results for those units. Further testing
of the presented compensation on different units could increase the robustness of the
compensation. The measurement of the V-Sub in the field test show similar results for
simulated compensation as have been found in the anechoic chamber. The alignment
of measurement and simulation in the anechoic chamber, and the positive results of the
simulated compensation indicate that such a compensation could improve a SFC setup.
The results often show the outcome of the compensation at one level. Measurements were
performed at 11 different levels and the compensation managed to reliably increase the
achievable reduction for levels with introduced response changes due to nonlinearities.
5.4.2
Limitations
The presented approaches make use of simplifications and approximations and are there-
fore limited. The following paragraphs aim on addressing those limitations.
Dependency of compensation filter on single variable
The effects of nonlin-
earities are dependent on different variables (e.g. displacement, current, velocity, tem-
peratures) while the presented compensation approaches depends only on one variable
(displacement or voltage). That becomes clearly visible if the compensated signal con-
tains a different power distribution over frequency than the test signal (Figure 5.10).
A more sophisticated approach should be based on a compensation based on multiple
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Discussion
47
variables. The results motivate a mix of a displacement level dependent low frequency
compensation and high frequency voltage level dependent compensation.
Estimation of displacement
In a practical application the displacement cannot eas-
ily be measured. In this work displacement was estimated from the near field pressure.
Since the presented compensation method makes use of relative differences in level,
the absolute value of the approximated displacement is secondary. However, the dis-
placement estimation can introduce errors in the relative differences between different
displacement levels. Such errors would directly lead to errors in the compensation filter.
Section C.2 aims on providing more insight in the displacement approximation used in
this thesis and the accuracy of the method. An alternative to that approach would be
an estimation of the displacement using a linear transfer function from voltage to dis-
placement. This approach would allow to estimate the displacement directly from the
voltage and avoid influences of the noise floor of pressure at low levels.
Usage of voltage instead of current
Two of the discussed compensation approaches
are dependent on the RMS voltage of the signal. In section 4.2 it is argued that instead
of current level the voltage level is used to calculate and apply the compensation due
to their interconnection.
The relation between current and voltage is dependent on
the impedance, where voltage is defined as the multiplication of impedance and current
U = ZI [27]. The impedance changes with level (e.g. change in impedance resonance
in Figure 5.4). The use of voltage is therefore imprecise and a compensation using the
RMS current could be beneficial to the performance of the compensation.
Distortion products
Distortion products have not been considered in the presented
compensation. It should be noted that such spurious artifacts compromise a SFC strat-
egy as has been discussed by Ma [7] . Even though they are assumed to be a secondary
issue, they become a more relevant issue the more the compression of the fundamental
is compensated. A brief summary of investigations on distortion products in the 10-inch
speaker is appended in section C.3.
Effects of intermodulation distortion
The comparison of the noise-voltage and
sweep-voltage approach show similar results for different test signals. The noise-voltage
approach includes effects of intermodulation, which can not be measured using a sweep
signal. It could therefore be argued that the noise-voltage approach is expected to lead
to better results, due to its inclusion of effects of intermodulation (high frequencies
affected by low frequencies). The choice of the optimal estimation signal could be a
topic of further investigations about such compensation methods.
Compensation at low levels
The compensation method shows less improvement at
low levels. This behaviour is directly linked to the small changes in transfer function at
low levels. At higher levels the response differs more from the reference measurements.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results
The more there is to compensate, the greater improvement the compensation method is
able to reach.
Creeping time variances
The compensation algorithm manages to capture time
variances that occur in short time intervals (fraction of estimation measurement time).
Such time variances include for example short-time heating of the voice-coil.
Time
variances that exceed the estimation signal length are not taken into account by the
compensation. Such time variances can for example occur as a rise in voice-coil, magnet
and cabinet temperature that evolve during hours. During concerts loudspeakers are
driven at high levels over long periods and such temperature rises are probable.
A
Master thesis by Hill [3] investigates the effects of temperature on the response.
Poor performance around resonant behaviour
The compensation strategy showed
poor performance around areas where the loudspeaker or setup appeared to have reso-
nant behaviour. This behaviour is assumed to emerge from the steep changes in response
and complicated level dependent patterns. The compensation of such effects was not
considered a major issue since commercial loudspeakers are designed in a way to prevent
such resonances. In the measurement setup in the anechoic chamber the microphone had
a structural connection to the pole holding the speaker. Even though some vibration
isolation was applied, the resonant behaviour could origin from structural vibrations
in this configuration. In a practical application, stiff connections between speaker and
microphone should be avoided.
The presented compensation is a first approach to counteract nonlinearities in an
easy-to-implement manner. The addressing of these limitations could lead to even better
results. A compensation method as presented in this work could build the basis for an
implementation in a SFC application.
5.4.3
Implementation
The application of the presented compensation is connected to challenges that are dis-
cussed hereafter.
Real Time Filtering
The compensation method requires the application of a compen-
sation filter dependent on the voltage or displacement level of the signal. This requires
a filter that is applied and updated in real time. The sound field control per se requires
a real time filtering of the input signal with the weights ws. The application of the com-
pensation would require an additional filtering with a compensation filter that adapts
to the level.
Compensation filter length
The calculated compensation filter is finite. The length
of the filter determines the interval in which the compensation filter is calculated and
the frequency resolution of the compensation. For very dynamic signals like music there
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Discussion
49
is a trade-off between a sufficiently high frequency resolution and a short compensation
interval to take into account the dynamic changes in signal. The consideration of the
Crest factor (the ratio of peak and RMS value), could be implemented as a possible
extension to consider such dynamic changes. The length of the filter further defines the
system latency introduced by the real time filtering.
Compensation delay
The voltage or voice-coil displacement level has to be measured
before the compensation can be applied. This means that the compensation lags behind
the produced content of the loudspeakers. The compensation is calculated in one time
interval but will be applied in the next time interval. For fast dynamic changes this
behaviour is probable to result in certain errors. The optimal measurement length and
compensation interval would have to be further investigated and might differ dependent
on the input signal.
Frequency resolution
The frequency resolution to calculate the compensation was
1Hz. The usage of a high resolution uncovers details and allows to compensate nar-
row band changes like resonance shifts. The effect of compression of the fundamental
due to nonlinearities is not expected to change abruptly for neighbouring frequencies.
Only looking at the compression of the fundamental, a coarse resolution might not only
perform better but also limit the computational cost.
Curve fit
The curve fits in the estimation of the compensation were calculated using
a 4th order polynomial.
The optimal curve fit approach can vary dependent on the
amount of data points (measured levels) and the shape of the transfer function changes
over level.
Measurement process
The calculation of the compensation filter requires the mea-
surement of transfer functions at different levels. The measurement levels should thereby
be chosen in a range where the noise floor does not impair the measurement and in the
expected dynamic range where the compensation will be applied. The amount of mea-
sured levels should be higher than the order of the curve fitting function. A near field
pressure and amplifier output-voltage measurement are required.
Beam-forming
Sub woofer arrays are often designed to have a directional sound field
to ensure a desired distribution of sound pressure at low frequencies [28]. There are
different approaches to achieve a certain beamforming. One approach is to position the
loudspeakers in a certain way, another to apply delays or gains for individual loudspeak-
ers. The presented compensation approach can be directly applied to a loudspeaker
array if the units are identical, driven at the same level and share the same excitation
signal.
In the case of beamforming some of those prerequisites are not fulfilled and
require an adjustment of the compensation for individual speakers. The position does
not have an influence on the compensation. If individual delays are applied, the corre-
sponding delay of a loudspeaker has also to be applied to its compensation filter. In the
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results
case of individual gains the compensation filter of each loudspeaker has to be calculated
individually taking into account its corresponding level Ltest.
Choice of reference signal
Most amplifiers include a limiter that protects the loud-
speaker from being damaged. In most cases it is easier to use the signal before the
amplifier (coming from the mixing desk) as a reference signal to calculate transfer func-
tions. The limiting of the amplifier occurs as a compression that has its own level and
frequency dependency. This compression is not necessarily modelled by the compensa-
tion strategy and can not be compensated accurately. The results show that in the field
test the compensation strategy failed to estimate the changes in transfer function if the
compression of the amplifier is included. It is therefore beneficial to use the voltage at
the output of the amplifier as the reference signal for the transfer function calculation.
Choice of reference Level
In section 4.2 it was argued that the reference transfer
function wit level Lref should be chosen at a level well above the noise floor.
In a
practical application the reference response has to be measured at the level where the
transfer function to the SFC is measured. The best choice of this measurement level is
thereby close to the level where most of the controlled content will be played. In this
work the reference level was always chosen as the lowest level with satisfactory low noise
floor and compensation was applied to higher levels. The presented algorithm is not
limited to the reference level being the lowest one.
Compensation on same speaker
In this work, the compensation of effects of nonlin-
earities is performed at the same speaker that excites the signal. This strategy includes
the problem that the speaker is already working in a range where it is struggling to
produce more level. In the following the compensation can be limited by the capability
of the speaker to create more output, or the amplifier limiting the signal. Considering a
SFC algorithm, it could be useful to compensate nonlinear effects occurring at a primary
source with the secondary sources. The exact same procedure could be performed in
this case. The complex conjugate of the compensation filter would then be applied to
the secondary speakers.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
This thesis shows that nonlinear effects in loudspeakers can be partly compensated by
applying a level dependent linear compensation filter. A compensation approach based
on a sweep test signal measured at different voltage levels is able to counterbalance effects
of (de-)compression. The compensation was applied to different signals. For test signals
with similar frequency content as the estimation signal, results show an improvement
in sound cancellation. This improvement is lowered if the test and estimation signal
have different spectra. The results motivate a compensation method that takes into
account the displacement level for low frequencies.
Such a method would especially
benefit cases where test and estimation signal have different spectra. The functionality
of the compensation strategy is shown in the anechoic chamber and analyzed for a sub
woofer measured at a sound field control field test. These measurements imply that such
a compensation is applicable. Several limitations of the presented work are discussed
followed by considerations that have to be made considering a practical implementation.
The results motivate an implementation of the presented strategy while the discussion
aims on providing support to do so.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
ICA Paper
The following pages include an ICA conference paper submitted by the author of this
thesis. The paper was accepted in June and will be published in September 2019.
==PAGE:64==
 
PROCEEDINGS of the  
23rd International Congress on Acoustics  
 
9 to 13 September 2019 in Aachen, Germany 
 
 
 
Nonlinearities in sound field control systems 
Elias D. LUMPERT1; Finn T. AGERKVIST2; Franz HEUCHEL3; Jonas BRUNSKOG4 
1,2,3,4 Technical University of Denmark, Acoustic Technology Group, 2800 Kgs. Lynby, Denmark 
ABSTRACT 
If a loudspeaker is driven at high levels, its output is likely to be affected by nonlinearities. The result is a 
distortion of the loudspeaker output which depends on the input signal. When looking at a sound 
cancellation or sound field control system the introduction of such nonlinearities lowers the performance. 
This paper investigates the extent of such effects and looks at strategies to counteract the problem. The 
paper specifically focuses on quantifying the effect of compression on the output of the system at the input 
frequency, finding a model to represent the coherent distortion and counteract accordingly. A comparison of 
different strategies to counteract the effect of nonlinearities is presented. The results show that a 
compensation based on an input voltage level adapted linear response of a loudspeaker can improve a 
sound zoning algorithm up to 20dB. Alternative compensation methods are discussed and show the benefit 
of a displacement level dependent compensation at low frequencies. 
 
Keywords: Sound Field Control, Nonlinearities 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Sound field control systems rely on accurate estimations of the transfer function between source 
and the controlled zone and often assume linear time invariance of the source. However, real 
loudspeakers behave nonlinear at high output levels. This leads to compression of the fundamental 
frequency and a rise of distortion products. In a previous paper Ma (1) shows that nonlinear 
distortion degrades the acoustic contrast, a performance metric in a sound zoning system. Further he 
states that nonlinear effects on the fundamental component appear to be the main cause for this 
contrast loss. 
 This paper investigates first approaches to compensate this effect. In contrast to more 
sophisticated compensation models (2,3) this work aims on developing a fast and easy-to-implement 
solution to the problem. The proposed approach is based on a prediction of the change in linear 
transfer function at different voltage and displacement levels. Specifically, the compression and 
decompression of the linear transfer function due to changing level will be compensated. The 
complexity of the subject required limitations and simplifications at several points. Nevertheless, 
the outcome of the paper shows promising results of an improvement of up to 20dB on a broad 
range of frequencies. The effect of distortion products will be touched but not discussed in detail. 
The following sections focus on explaining the proposed compensation method and present 
experimental results on a real loudspeaker. 
2. METHOD 
2.1 
Compensation Method 
The magnitude and phase response of most loudspeakers is dependent on the input signal due to 
its nonlinear behavior at higher input levels. The first step of the proposed compensation method is 
to identify those dependencies. First, we measure the transfer function between voltage and near-
field sound pressure of a given loudspeaker at different input gains to characterize the nonlinearity 
of a loudspeaker by its apparent linear transfer function at different levels. The level dependent 
changes can be used to calculate an approximation of the expected change in transfer function at any 
other level. This expected change can be described as a function of input level using a polynomial 
fitting function of fourth order. This expected change is used to compute a linear compensation filter 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
 
We introduce the estimation signals 𝑥" 𝑡 with correspondent level 𝐿" = 𝐿𝑥" 𝑡
. One level is 
chosen as reference level 𝐿&'(. The level can thereby either be a RMS (root-mean-squared) voltage 
or RMS voice coil displacement. 
 
To compute the compensation filters one 
1. measures transfer functions 𝐻𝑓, 𝐿"  at levels 𝐿" (Fig.1, left), 
2. computes the change in transfer function ∆𝐻𝑓, 𝐿" = 𝐻𝑓, 𝐿"
𝐻𝑓, 𝐿&'(  compared to the 
reference level (Fig.1, right), 
3. approximates ∆𝐻 using a polynomial regression (4th order), to get changes for a continuum 
of input levels: ∆𝐻𝑓, 𝐿. These are the linear compensation filters in frequency domain. 
 
To apply the compensation filters one 
1. measures the test signal level 𝐿-'.- = 𝐿𝑢𝑡
, 
2. applies the compensation filter to the test signal 𝑦𝑡= 𝐼𝐹𝐹𝑇{∆𝐻𝑓, 𝐿-'.- 𝐹𝐹𝑇{𝑢𝑡}}, and 
3. plays back 𝑦𝑡 instead of 𝑢𝑡. 
 
In the following, the signals to estimate the compensation are called estimation signals. The signals 
the compensation is applied to will be referred to as test signals. 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1 – Left: sketch of a loudspeaker magnitude response at four different levels. Right: differences in 
magnitude response at a single frequency for different levels together with polynomial regression. 
 
 
 
It has been elaborated by Klippel (4) that nonlinear behaviors of loudspeakers are dependent on 
different variables. These variables include current, velocity and displacement. An effective 
compensation strategy should be based on the level of a variable that is directly connected to the 
change in response. In this work, a simple approach of using the voltage (which is coupled to the 
current) and the displacement variable was investigated. In the following we focus on three 
variations of the compensation procedure: 
1) Sweep-voltage approach: the transfer functions are measured with an exponential sweep 
excitation. The compensation is based on the RMS voltage level. 
Measuring with sweep signals excites only one frequency at a time. This way mainly distortions at 
the fundamental frequency are recorded. 
2) Noise-voltage approach: the transfer functions are measured with M-Noise1, a noise with 
music like crest-factor. The compensation is based on the RMS voltage level. 
In contrast to the sweep-voltage approach, this test signal is closer to music which allows 
interaction between frequencies and amplitudes when measuring the transfer function. The 
interpretation of the results of this approach is less obvious due to the random structure of amplitude 
and frequency content. 
3) Noise-displacement approach: the transfer functions are measured with M-Noise. The 
compensation is based on the RMS displacement level. 
Here, the calculation and application of the compensation is performed using voice coil 
displacement instead of the voltage level. This compensation assumes that changes in transfer 
function are related to displacement. In contrast to the two preceding approaches this approach 
applies more compensation for signals with high displacement (signals with strong low frequencies). 
 
 
1 https://m-noise.org 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
2.2 
Performance Metrics 
Sound cancellation applications are based on a primary wave cancelled by a secondary wave. A 
perturbation of amplitude or phase of the secondary wave, e.g. due to nonlinear distortion, directly 
translates to an achievable reduction of sound (𝛥𝐿7. Fig. 2, right illustrates this 𝛥𝐿7 as a function of 
amplitude and phase deviation (5). For no error in phase or amplitude, 𝛥𝐿7  approaches negative 
infinity, which corresponds to total cancellation. Using the formula of 𝛥𝐿7 the maximal achievable 
reduction of a sound cancellation application can be calculated given a certain error in transfer 
function. From Fig.4, already slight deviations in level and phase compromise a given sound 
cancellation application. Assuming a constant phase error of ±2.5° and a magnitude error of +1dB a 
given sound cancellation application could only achieve an attenuation of primary sound of around  
-17dB. A reduction of this errors to ±0.5°and +0.2dB improves the performance to -32dB. 
 
Figure 2 – Reduction in amplitude of a primary sound wave as a function of the difference of amplitude and 
phase between primary and secondary sound wave  
3. Results 
To test the discussed compensation strategies measurements were made using a 10-inch closed 
box subwoofer. This section first presents measurements of the variation of transfer function for 
changing level of this loudspeaker. Next, the compensation method is applied. 
3.1 
Loudspeaker frequency response at different input levels 
The measured transfer functions for measurement signals with different RMS voltage levels are 
shown in Fig. 3. 
 
Figure 3 – 10-inch subwoofer frequency response measured in near-filed at 5 different levels with 15 
second exponential sweeps. 
 
The considered frequency range has been limited to 20Hz to 2000Hz, which is the effective range 
==PAGE:67==
 
 
of this speaker. The amplitude response shows a rather flat curve from 70 to 700Hz. The resonance 
of the loudspeaker lies between 60-70 Hz which explains the drop in transfer function below that 
frequency (6). At higher frequencies (above 400Hz) the response shows irregularities due to the 
construction of the loudspeaker box. Another irregularity can be observed around 160 Hz. To 
identify a change in response we chose 0.43 V as a reference measurement. The change in response 
is the difference to the reference response. Fig. 4 shows the differences in transfer function to the 
reference level at 0.43V. 
 
 
Figure 4 – Differences of magnitude and phase response at different levels relative to responses at 0.43V. 
 
Above 60 Hz the transfer function decreases in amplitude and has a negative phase shift for 
increasing level. At high frequencies, this effect might be mainly a product of voltage dependent 
nonlinearities, as the voice coil displacement is small. At lower frequencies, the displacement 
increases which allows displacement and velocity dependent nonlinearities to have an effect. Below 
60Hz the transfer function amplitude shows a rise up to 4.25V and drops at higher levels. This 
behavior is related to a downwards shift in the impedance resonance frequency. Above 5V 
dampening effects due to high displacements start to dominate (e.g. voice coil leaving the magnet or 
reluctant force of the suspension (4)). The shape of the various peaks in Fig. 4 indicate a shift in 
frequency of (anti-)resonances. 
3.2 
Sweep-Voltage Compensation 
Fig.5 shows the measured transfer function with applied compensation of the sweep-voltage 
approach. The differences in transfer function for varying level are smaller than the changes 
observed in Fig. 4. Around the area of certain resonances in the speaker (e.g. around 160Hz) the 
performance of the compensation is less effective. 
 
Figure 5 – Differences in loudspeaker response (Fig.1) with applied compensation filters at different levels 
relative to measurement at 0.43V 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
 
In order to relate the influence of such a compensation to a sound cancellation problem, the 
achievable reduction with and without compensation is shown in Fig.6 (as explained in Sec.2.2).  
 
 
Figure 6 – Achievable reduction calculated from an error in transfer function. Simulated and measured for a 
sweep measurement at 4.25V compensated for a reference at 0.43V 
 
The Figure shows that, for a sweep test signal, the compensation using the sweep-voltage 
approach improves a sound cancellation problem by 10-30 dB on a broad range of frequencies. It 
can be seen that the compensation tends to perform worse in the areas with resonances. Note that the 
test signal matches the estimation signal which leads to a good performance of the compensation. 
Fig.7. shows the performance of the sweep-volt compensation filter applied to other test signals.  
 
Figure 7 – Achievable reduction calculated from the error in transfer function for different signals. 
Simulated and measured for signals around 4 - 5 V compensated for a reference at 0.43V 
 
For M-Noise (a) the compensation reaches an improvement of 10-20dB on a broad range of 
frequencies. Applied to white noise (b) the compensation shows improvement at higher frequencies 
(above 200Hz) but not between 50-190Hz, where the displacement is high. As two different signals 
can have the same voltage level but different displacement levels, the choice of level is critical. The 
compensation might be ineffective, if the voltage and displacement levels of the estimation and test 
signal are different. We assume that at low frequencies the compression due to nonlinearities is 
mostly dependent on displacement and at higher frequencies there is more dependency on voltage. 
This might be the reason for the poor performance from 50-190Hz, since displacement is high but 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
the voltage level is used to calculate the compensation. The presence of high displacement below 
50Hz suggests an inefficient compensation below 50Hz. but Fig.7 shows an improvement in 
achievable reduction. This is no contradiction since an over- or underestimation of a change in 
transfer function can still lead to a compensation filter that improves the error in transfer function 
compared to the uncompensated state. The compensation filter improves cancellation for both beat2 
(c) and music3 (d) signals on a broad range of frequencies of 5-20dB. Below 30-40 Hz the beat and 
music signals do not contain enough energy to make meaningful statements. 
In general, the results indicate that the proposed compensation shows an improvement on a broad 
range of frequencies. The extent of the improvement however is dependent on the frequency content 
and time variance of the applied signal. 
 
3.3 
 Noise-voltage and noise-displacement approaches 
As has been stated in Sec. 2.1, compensations based on different models were investigated. Apart 
from sweep-voltage approach, a noise-voltage approach and a noise-displacement approach were 
tested. The comparison of those three approaches is shown in Fig. 8. White noise was chosen as a 
test signal due to the difference in spectra compared to the estimation signals used to calculate the 
compensation. White noise has a flat spectrum in contrast to exponential sweeps and M-Noise, 
which have decaying spectra with increasing frequency. 
 
 
Figure 8 – Achievable reduction calculated from error in transfer function for different compensation 
approaches. Simulated and measured for a signal at 4.64V compensated for a reference at 0.43V. 
 
Fig. 8 shows that for a white noise test signal and the sweep-voltage approach (a) or noise-
voltage approach (b) there is no improvement visible at frequencies from 50-200Hz. For higher 
frequencies, 200-2000Hz, a consistent improvement of 10-20dB is present. The compensation based 
on displacement levels (c) shows an improvement of 5-10dB at low levels (below 80 Hz), while 
higher frequencies show less improvement (1-4dB). This behavior indicates that at lower 
frequencies a change in response is mainly dependent on displacement while at higher frequencies it 
is rather connected to voltage levels. 
 
 
2 A simple generated beat signal using kick drum, snare drum and hihat samples in a 4/4 signature standard 
beat accompanied by a simple increasing bass line. 
3 The music test signal was chosen such that it contained strong low frequency content, dynamic changes 
and a broad frequency spectrum 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
4. Discussion  
The presented approach compensates a nonlinear loudspeaker system using level dependent 
changes in the linear transfer function. Results show that such a compensation can improve a sound 
cancellation system by several dB on a broad range of frequencies. Experiments with other 
loudspeakers show similar results. The compensation was performed for 10 different voltage and 
displacement levels spanning a range of around 24dB. While the results show the compensation 
around one RMS voltage level (4-5 V), the measurements at other levels show similar results. 
The approach is rather simple and therefore limited. Especially if estimation and test signals have 
large spectral differences, the improvement from the compensation approach is small. This is 
assumed to be due to the dependency of nonlinear effects on multiple variables (e.g. current, 
displacement, etc.). A more sophisticated approach should be based on a compensation based on 
multiple variables. 
Distortion products have not been considered in the presented compensation. It should be noted 
that such artifacts compromise a sound field control strategy as has been discussed by Ma (7). Even 
though might not be the primary issue, they become more relevant the more the compression of the 
fundamental is compensated. 
The frequency resolution to calculate the compensation was 1Hz. The usage of a high resolution 
uncovers details and allows to compensate narrowband changes like resonance shifts. The effect of 
compression of the fundamental due to nonlinearities is expected to be similar for similar 
frequencies. Only looking at the compression of the fundamental, a coarse resolution might not only 
perform better but also limit the computational cost. 
Two of the discussed compensation methods are dependent on the RMS voltage of the signal. In 
section 2.1 it is argued that instead of current level the voltage level is used to calculate and apply 
the compensation due to their interconnection. The relation between current and voltage is 
dependent on the impedance. But the impedance changes with level (e.g. DC resistance or resonance 
frequency shift). The interconnection between voltage and current is therefore level dependent. 
Using the RMS current instead of RMS voltage might improve the compensation strategy. 
Addressing such limitations could further improve the presented compensation approach of 
nonlinearities in sound cancellation systems. 
5. Conclusion 
We showed that nonlinear effects in loudspeakers can be partly compensated by applying a level 
dependent linear compensation filter. A compensation approach based on a sweep test signal 
measured at different voltage levels was able to counterbalance the effect of (de-)compression on 
the excited frequency. The compensation was applied to different signals. For test signals with 
similar frequency content as the estimation signal, results show an improvement in sound 
cancellation of 10-20dB on average from 20-2000Hz. If test and estimation signal have different 
spectra the compensation approach shows only small improvements. 
REFERENCES 
1. Ma X, J. Hegarty P, Abildgaard Pedersen J, Larsen JJ. Impact of loudspeaker nonlinear distortion on 
personal sound zones. Acoustical Society of America. Journal. 2018 Jan;143(51):51-59. 
2. Bard D. Characterisation of nonlinearities of electroacoustic devices using volterra kernels. 12th 
International Congress on Sound and Vibration. 2005;5:4310–4316. 
3. Klippel W. Adaptive stabilization of electrodynamic transducers. AES: Journal of the Audio Engineering 
Society. 2015;63(3):154–160. 
4. Klippel W. Loudspeaker nonlinearities - Causes, parameters, symptoms. Journal of the Audio 
Engineering Society. 2006;54(10):907-939. 
5. Nelson, P. A., & Elliott, S. J. Active control of sound. San Diego, USA: Academic Press; 1993, p. 15 
6. Marshall Leach Jr. W. Introduction to Electroacoustics and Audio Amplifier Design. 4th ed. Dubuque, 
USA: Kendall Hunt Pub Co.; 2011. p. 119-125. 
7. Ma X, J. Hegarty P, Abildgaard Pedersen J, Johansen LG, Larsen JJ. Personal Sound Zones: The 
significance of loudspeaker driver nonlinear distortion. 2016. Paper presented at 2016 AES International 
Conference on Sound Field Control, Guildford, United Kingdom. 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Additional Measurements
B.1
Transfer Functions of All Signals
Figure B.1: Frequency response of 10-inch sub woofer at 5 different levels measured with
M-Noise.
Figure B.2: Frequency response of 10-inch sub woofer at 5 different levels measured with
white noise.
==PAGE:72==
62
B Additional Measurements
Figure B.3: Frequency response of 10-inch sub woofer at 5 different levels measured with
a beat signal.
Figure B.4: Frequency response of 10-inch sub woofer at 5 different levels measured with
a music signal.
==PAGE:73==
B.2 Level Dependent Changes in Transfer Function for All Signals
63
B.2
Level Dependent Changes in Transfer
Function for All Signals
Figure B.5: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker at different levels relative
to responses at 0.44Vrms measured with M-Noise.
Figure B.6: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker at different levels relative
to responses at 0.46Vrms measured with white noise.
==PAGE:74==
64
B Additional Measurements
Figure B.7: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker at different levels relative
to responses at 0.4Vrms measured with a beat signal.
Figure B.8: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker at different levels relative
to responses at 0.44Vrms measured with a music signal.
==PAGE:75==
B.3 Comparison of Transfer Functions of Different Signals
65
B.3
Comparison of Transfer Functions of
Different Signals
Figure B.9: Frequency response of 10-inch loudspeaker for different signals measured
around 5.5Vrms.
Figure B.10: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker measured with different
signals at around 5.5Vrmsrelative to responses around 0.44Vrms .
==PAGE:76==
66
B Additional Measurements
Figure B.11: Frequency response of 10-inch loudspeaker for different signals measured
around 10Vrms.
Figure B.12: Changes in response of the 10-inch loudspeaker measured with different
signals at around 10Vrmsrelative to responses around 0.44Vrms .
==PAGE:77==
B.4 Noise-Displacement Approach for Different Signals
67
B.4
Noise-Displacement Approach for
Different Signals
Figure B.13:
Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied noise-
displacement compensation, measured and simulated for different signals around 5.5Vrms
for the 10-inch loudspeaker measured in the anechoic chamber.
Figure B.14:
Achievable reduction without compensation and with applied noise-
displacement compensation, measured and simulated for different signals at 25dB for
the Sub-V sub woofer measured at the SFC field test.
==PAGE:78==
68
B Additional Measurements
B.5
Sweep-Voltage Approach at Field Test
The results of the field test are shown for the measurements of the M-Noise signal. The
reason for not taking the measurements with a sweep excitation is the influence of the
amplifier. The exponential sweep consists of a tone that increases in frequency but has
equal amplitude (Figure B.15a). The amplifier in the anechoic chamber amplified the
magnitude of this signal without changing its properties . Therefore the RMS voltage
could be calculated for a selection of the signal (except before 5 seconds, where the
frequency window below 20Hz influences the magnitude). This RMS voltage presented
the RMS voltage of every frequency of this excitation signal. In contrast to the amplifier
in the anechoic chamber, the amplifier at the field test applied a frequency window to
protect the speaker. This property changed the sweep signal at the amplifier output to
a signal that does not have equal amplitude at all frequencies (at different times of the
sweep signal) as can be seen in Figure B.15b.
(a) Sweep excitation at amplifier input.
(b) Sweep excitation at amplifier output at the
field test.
This behaviour of the amplifier makes the calculation of the compensation using the
amplifier output more difficult. In the anechoic chamber the RMS voltage could be
calculated over the whole time interval of the frequency range of interest. This RMS
voltage could be assumed to be the RMS voltage at each frequency. At the field test this
is not the case. There, the RMS voltage at every frequency is different. Therefore the
RMS voltage would have to be calculated at every single frequency. A first idea could
be to calculate the RMS voltage at every frequency by using the fourier transform of
the time signal. This is not easily possible since the frequency representation includes
length and amplitude of a tone excited at a certain frequency. Low frequencies are excited
longer in an exponential sweep and the fourier transform of the exponential sweep does
not lead directly to the RMS Voltage at every frequency. An alternative option could
be to calculate the RMS voltage for certain segments of the time signal and assume this
RMS voltage for the excited frequencies in this time interval. This is an approximation
that is dependent on the choice of time interval. The time interval can thereby not
be infinitely small. The calculation of the RMS at every frequency would require an
extended implementation of the presented compensation strategy which extends the
scope of this thesis. To have an idea of the performance of the sweep voltage approach
at the field test, a simplified approximation of the RMS voltage was calculated. As a
coarse approximation, the RMS voltage of the amplifier output was approximated to be
==PAGE:79==
B.5 Sweep-Voltage Approach at Field Test
69
equal for all frequencies. The RMS voltage was thereby calculated in the time interval
from 5 to 7.5 seconds. Figure B.16 shows the achievable reduction of this altered sweep
voltage approach.
Figure B.16: Achievable reduction of the sweep-voltage approach applied to different
test signals at 25dB, measured for the sub V sub woofer measured at the field test.
With the amplifier output voltage as reference signal.
Figure B.16 shows that for different tests signals than the estimation signal the
compensation performs worse than the compensation using noise-voltage approach in
Figure 5.15. This can be directly led back to the approximated RMS voltage calculation
that does not reflect the actual RMS voltage at the individual frequencies. The result
is an estimation based on erroneous voltage levels which leads to poor performance in
compensation.
The poor performance and erroneous estimation motivated to use of
measurements with M-Noise signals instead of sweep signals in section 5.3.
The problem occurring due to the filtering of the amplifier does not persist if the
amplifier input is used as a reference to calculate the transfer functions. However, sub-
section 5.3.1 shows that the usage of the amplifier input introduces other problems that
prevent a performant compensation. Figure B.17 shows the achievable reduction using
the amplifier input voltage as the reference signal.
==PAGE:80==
70
B Additional Measurements
Figure B.17: Achievable reduction of the sweep-voltage approach applied to different
test signals at 25dB, measured for the sub V sub woofer measured at the field test.
With the amplifier input voltage as reference signal.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Other Appendices
C.1
Simulations of Loudspeaker Response
To simulate the loudspeaker responses displayed in Figure 3.5 the system can be de-
scribed with the state space equation
δX
δt = FX + Geg
(C.1)
with matrices:
F =


−Re+R2
Le
0
−Bl
Le
R2
Le
−R2
Le
0
0
0
1
Bl
Mms
−1
CmsMms
−Rms
Mms


(C.2)
,
X =


i
iL2
x
u

=


i
iL2
x
δx
δt


(C.3)
and
G =


1
Le
0
0
0


(C.4)
.
These equations can then be solved for u using a midpoint method solver. From u the
pressure in the near field can be approximated. The result can eventually be displayed
as a magnitude frequency response. [29]
The state space equations were solved for different cases using MATLAB. The inves-
tigated cases include
1. a linear case
==PAGE:82==
72
C Other Appendices
2. introduced nonlinear Bl, where a displacement dependency is introduced as Bl(x)
3. introduced nonlinear Kms, where a displacement dependency is introduced as
Kms(x)
4. increased DC-resistance Re, where Re is increased by 50%
5. decreased stiffness Kms, where stiffness Kms is decreased by 30%
The resulting sound pressure level of those solutions has then been calculated and
plotted in Figure 3.5.
C.2
Approximating of Displacement from
Near Field Pressure
To find the displacement from the near field pressure an approach using the acoustic
radiation impedance of a piston was considered. The formula to find is valid for a pres-
sure measurement close to the piston and sufficiently low frequencies which is a valid
assumption for this project.
The analogous circuit of the acoustical impedance of a piston in a baffle is given in
Figure C.1. The circuit includes an acoustic mass MA1, and a an acoustic resistances
RA2 in series with an acoustic resistance RA1 and compliance CA1 in parallel [26, p. 45].
Figure C.1: Left: Analogous circuit for radiation impedance on one site of an infinite
baffle. Right: Circuit for ka < 1 [26, p. 45].
For very low frequencies the circuit in Figure C.1 (b) is dominated by the acoustic
mass
The pressure can be approximated by:
p = u ∗jωMA1
(C.5)
==PAGE:83==
C.2 Approximating of Displacement from Near Field Pressure
73
where MA1 is the acoustical mass defined as
MA1 = 8ρ0
3π2a
(C.6)
with a being the radius of the piston.
Displacement being the time derivative of the velocity u
U = Sdu = Sd
∂x
∂t
(C.7)
and using u = ue−jωt, the approximated displacement can be found as
x =
∫udt
Sd
=
u
−jωSd
(C.8)
and using Equation C.5 it follows
x =
1
−Sdjω
p
jω 8ρ0
3π2a
=
p
4Sdf 2 8ρ0
3a
(C.9)
Measurements have been performed in order to validate the approximation of the
displacement introduced in Equation C.9. Figure C.2 shows the laser-measured and
approximated voice coil displacement for a exponential sweep excited with 4.42 VRMS.
The device under test was the 10-inch loudspeaker used in the chapter 5. Here , the
lower frequency window was applied from from 0 - 30 Hz. This explains the drop in
displacement below 30 Hz.
Figure C.2: Displacement approximation and measurement (left) and normalized ap-
proximation and measurement (right), measured at 4.42 V
The approximated displacement is much lower than the measured displacement. This
error is assumed to emerge from the approximation assuming to be infinitely near to
==PAGE:84==
74
C Other Appendices
the baffle. The decay of sound for increasing distance is not taken into account, which
could explain the lower level of the approximation. The approximation also assumes a
uniform baffle, which is not the case in reality. The position of the microphone and laser
has an effect both approximation and laser measurement and introduces a certain error.
Figure C.2 therefore stresses that the used approximation is a coarse one. The usage
of the excursion in this project will be limited to the relative change in excursion for
different levels. Therefore it is not important that the absolute value of the displacement
is correct but much more that the relative differences at different levels resemble the
differences in reality. The usage of an approximated displacement is motivated by the
challenge of using a laser or sensor in a sound field control system. Figure C.2 (right)
displays the approximated displacement normalized to the measured displacement at
40Hz. Figure C.2 shows that the approximated and measured displacement overlap when
normalization is applied. The bump around 25 Hz cannot be explained but is expected
to emerge from cancellation at this frequency at this microphone position. Figure C.3
shows the absolute error and error percentage between approximated normalized and
measured displacement.
Figure C.3: Error in the displacement approximation at 4.42 V in mm (left) and per-
centage of measured displacement (right), measured
It can be seen that the error does not exceed 5% below 100Hz, where the displacement
is high. At high frequencies (Above 100Hz) the error in percentage rises due to little
excursion at high frequencies. Around 160-200Hz a higher error can be observed due
to the behaviour of the speaker discussed in [SEC]. As mentioned before, the used
application does not require an exact absolute approximation of the displacement. But
it is important that the relative difference of displacement at different levels is accurate.
This is the case if the relative error in displacement is the same at different levels. This
was tested and is shown in Figure C.4.
==PAGE:85==
C.3 Distortion Product Measurements
75
Figure C.4: Error in the displacement approximation at different levels in mm (left) and
percentatge of measured displacement (right)
Figure C.4 (left) shows that the relative error in displacement overlaps for differ-
ent levels between 0.76 to 10.62 V. It should be noted that the pressure needs to be
sufficiently high to have an accurate displacement approximation. The approximation
calculates the displacement from pressure. The presence of noise floor leads to an in-
creased approximated displacement, which especially becomes problematic at very low
levels.
The compensation strategy uses the approximated rms displacement instead of a
measured one.
C.3
Distortion Product Measurements
The presented compensation uses a linear model to counteract (de-)compression oc-
curring at the excited frequency.
An often discussed but in this thesis not consid-
ered product of nonlinearities are distortion products. These can also have an influ-
ence on sound zoning problems, as has been discussed by Ma [7]. To classify the im-
pact of such distortion products multi-tones were measured at comparable levels of
the results shown in chapter 5. Figure C.5 shows the sound pressure level created by
such a multi-tone excitations. The multi-tone signal thereby consists of sine waves at
19,31,41,59,79,97,109,127,149,173,199,263,347 and 419Hz, played at the same level, with
random phase shifts. The frequencies were chosen as prime numbers to avoid the oc-
curence of too many distortion products at fundamental excitation frequencies.
==PAGE:86==
76
C Other Appendices
Figure C.5: Multitone measurement of 10-inch loudspeaker at different levels
Figure C.5 shows that at 5.29V most distortion products occur at 40-60dB below the
excitation levels. At the same voltage, Figure 5.8 shows that the achievable reduction
for different signals lies of around 30dB. If distortion products would present the main
limitation for the achievable reduction, its value should lie around 40-60 dB, in the range
of the occurring distortion products. This is not the case and the compression of the
fundamental seems to limit the achievable reduction. With applied compensation the
achievable reduction rises to 40-60dB and the influence of distortion products is more
relevant. A multi-tone creates very high levels at single frequencies while the broadband
signal has lower amplitudes at a broad range of frequencies. A multitone is therefore
expected to create stronger distortion products then a broad band signal at the same
RMS voltage level. This supports the assumption that the influence of distortion prod-
ucts is secondary.
The effect of distortion products can not be neglected but was considered of secondary
importance in this thesis. If very cheap speakers with a lot of distortion are used, these
assumption might not apply.
C.4
Data sheet 10-inch Peerless Driver
The following pages include the data sheet of the 10-inch Peerless woofers.
==PAGE:87==
CSX257H - 257 SWR 39 115 SDX 4L AL 8 ohm
High-end 10" woofer with a 5 layer "Sandwich" cone, extra heavy magnet, extra long 4 layer coil and distortion killer
shortcirquit ring in the magnet system. This gives exceptionally good linearity and very deep and clean bass. Also,
remark the very smooth response. This CSX 10" woofer is recommended for very versatile use in closed as well as
vented boxes. In a reflex box of 100 ltrs. with tunings around 23 Hz it keeps level down to 30 Hz. A remarkable
characteristic is the very robust extra thick iron plate basket with a nice structure lacquering.  Extra long voice coil
wound with large gauge copper to four layers! This driver gives exceptionally good linearity and very deep and clean
bass. This driver is designed for home hifi 3/4 way systems but is also suitable for Subs, etc.
Parameters
Free Air Common
Baffled
Nominal impedance
Zn
(ohm)
8
Minimum impedance/at freq.
Zmin
(ohm/Hz)
6.2/130
Maximum impedance
Zo
(ohm)
40.3
DC resistance
Re
(ohm)
5.5
Voice coil inductance
Le
(mH)
2.9
Capacitor in series with 8 ohm
(for impedance compensation)
Cc
(µF)
25
Resonance Frequency
fs
(Hz)
22.6
21.9
Mechanical Q factor
Qms
2.56
2.64
Electrical Q factor
Qes
0.40
0.42
Total Q factor
Qts
0.35
0.36
F (Ratio fs/Qts)
F
(Hz)
61
Mechanical resistance
Rms
(Kg/s)
2.87
Moving mass
Mms
(g)
51.9
55.1
Suspension compliance
Cms (mm/N)
0.96
Effective cone diameter
D
(cm)
20.5
Effective piston area
Sd
(cm²)
330
Equivalent volume
VAS
(ltrs)
144.4
Force factor
Bl
(N/A)
10.0
Reference voltage sensitivity
Re 2.83V 1m at 130 Hz (Measured)
(dB)
88.2
Voice coil diameter
d
(mm)
39
Voice coil length
h
(mm)
26
Voice coil layers
n
4
Flux density in gap
B
(T)
0.85
Total useful flux
(mWb)
1.34
Height of the gap
hg
(mm)
8
Diameter of magnet
dm
(mm)
115
Height of magnet
hm
(mm)
22
Weight of magnet
(kg)
0.87
Long term Max System Power (IEC)
(W)
200
Code
850146
850146
WOOFER 10" HIGH END WOOFER CSX
Page 1/2
255mm
100mm
245mm
4mmØ
220mm
115mm
==PAGE:88==
Page 2/2
850146
10" HIGH END WOOFER CSX
255mm
100mm
245mm
4mmØ
220mm
115mm
660(H) x 290(D) x 460(W)mm
100L (3.5'cu ft.)
535(H) x 230(D) x 370(W)mm
50L (1.6'cu ft.)
2 or 3 way
Dramatically improves the quality of
your sound for a reasonable price!
The examples below shows the
versatility of this exceptional driver
as a replacement or as a new DIY
kit speaker. Dimensions are internal.
Sealed enclosure design offers
simplified construction and no
hassles with port tuning or wind
noise from the port. Good, firm bass
response with the -12dB point being
about 25Hz with a soft roll off.
Boxes as small as 30L will be OK,
CLOSED BOX 50L
See graph....
PORTED BOX 100L
The optimum recommended
enclosure type and size for this
driver. A flat response all the
way down to below 25Hz!
Dimensions given are internal.
Port should rear fire because
of edge turbulence at high SPL
or use a larger tapered port.
Tuning
Port DxL
25Hz
110 x 400mm
25.5Hz
70 x 140mm
26Hz
66 x 120mm
24Hz
60 x 100mm
Excellent universal 10" driver with exceptional low bass, well behaved characteristics in numerous box types and sizes,
and proves itself ideal as a premium quality replacement driver for larger ported style speaker boxes or compact sealed.
==PAGE:89==
C.5 Data sheet V-Sub
79
C.5
Data sheet V-Sub
The following pages include the data sheet of the V-Sub sub woofer from d&b audiotech-
nik.
==PAGE:90==
2.4 Technical specifications
V-SUB system data
Frequency response (–5 dB standard)
37 Hz - 115 Hz
Frequency response (–5 dB 100 Hz mode)
37 Hz - 95 Hz
Max. sound pressure (1 m, free field) 
with D12/D20/30D
133 dB
with D80
137 dB
(SPLmax peak, pink noise test signal with crest factor of 4)
V-SUB loudspeaker
Nominal impedance
8 ohms
Power handling capacity (RMS/peak 10 ms)
800/3200 W
Components
1 x 18“ driver
1 x 12“ driver
Connections
2 x NL4 M or NLT4 F/M
optional 2 x EP5
Pin assignment
NL4 M and NLT4 F/M: 2+ / 2–
EP5: 3: + / 4: –
Weight
64 kg (141 lb)
V-SUB cabinet dimensions in mm [inch]
V-SUB frequency response, standard and 100 Hz mode
 
d&b V-SUB Manual 1.4 en
8
==PAGE:91==
C.6 Field Test Impressions
81
C.6
Field Test Impressions
In mid June 2019 the MONICA project tested their algorithms in a SFC field test in
Roskilde.
Measurements supporting this thesis could be made and are evaluated in
section 5.3. A single sub woofer was measured at different levels to obtain the level
dependency of its response. the following figures aim to give an impression of the setup
and the environment of those measurements.
Figure C.6: Picture of the full SFC setup at the field test in roskilde
==PAGE:92==
82
C Other Appendices
C.7
Python Code
C.7.1
Transfer Function Estimation
1 import numpy as np
2 from scipy.signal import (
3
csd,
4
welch,
5
correlate
6 )
7
8 def delay(fs, x, dt, axis=-1):
9
"""Delay time signal by dt seconds by inserting zeros."""
10
dn = int(round(dt * fs))
11
n = x.shape[axis]
12
13
if dn > 0:
14
# delay
15
zeros_shape = list(x.shape)
16
zeros_shape[axis] = dn
17
zeros = np.zeros(zeros_shape)
18
19
delayed = np.concatenate((zeros, x), axis=axis)
20
21
elif dn < 0:
22
# pre-delay
23
slc = [slice(None)] * len(x.shape)
24
slc[axis] = slice(-dn, n)
25
delayed = x[slc]
26
else:
27
# no delay
28
delayed = x
29
30
return delayed
31
32
33
34
def zeropad(x, after):
35
"""Zeropad time response to length. """
36
dims = x.ndim
37
pads = after-len(x)
38
pad_width = [(0, 0) for n in range(dims)]
39
pad_width[-1] = (0, int(pads))
40
41
h = np.pad(x, pad_width , "constant")
42
43
return h
44
45
46 def transfer_function_csd(x, y, fs=48000, fwindow=((10,15) ,(4500,5000)),
nperseg=48000):
==PAGE:93==
C.7 Python Code
83
47
"""Compute transfer -function between time domain signals using Welch's
method.
48
Delay compensation mentioned e.g. in S. Muller , A. E. S. Member , and P
. Massarani ,“
49
Transfer -Function Measurement with Sweeps”.
50
51
x = Reference signal
52
y = Measurement signal
53
"""
54
55
n = x.size
56
# delta time array to match xcorr
57
s = np.arange(1 - n, n)
58
59
# cross correlation
60
xcorr = correlate(y, x, mode="full")
61
62
# estimate delay in time
63
dt = s[xcorr.argmax()] / fs
64
65
# match both responses in time and length
66
if dt >= 0:
67
x = delay(fs,x,dt)
68
y = zeropad(y,x.size).in_time
69
else:
70
y = delay(fs,y,-dt)
71
x = zeropad(x,y.size).in_time
72
73
74
75
f, S_xy = csd(x, y, fs=fs, nperseg = nperseg)
76
_, S_xx = welch(x, fs=fs, nperseg = nperseg)
77
78
H = S_xy / S_xx
79
80
# reintroduce delay
81
H *= np.exp(-1j * 2 * np.pi * f * dt)
82
83
startwindow , stopwindow = fwindow
84
fs_new = 2 * int(f[-1])
85
n_new = (H.shape[-1] - 1) * 2
86
W = freq_window(fs_new, n_new, startwindow , stopwindow)
87
H *= W
88
89
return f, H
Listing C.1: Python code to calculate the transfer function estimations
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
W. Klippel. “Loudspeaker nonlinearities - Causes, parameters, symptoms”. In: Au-
dio Engineering Society - 119th Convention Fall Preprints. 2005.
[2]
J. H. Zimmermann. “Material models using frictional elements, Materiale modeller
med friktions elementer”. Master’s thesis. 2017.
[3]
A. Hill. “Voice coil temperature in loudspeaker performance: Causes, effects and
prevention techniques”. Master’s thesis. August 2008.
[4]
Alexander Weider King and Finn T. Agerkvist. “Fractional Derivative Loudspeaker
Models for Nonlinear Suspensions and Voice Coils”. eng. In: Journal of Audio
Engineering Society 66.7/8 (2018), pages 525–536. issn: 15494950, 00047554. doi:
10.17743/jaes.2018.0030.
[5]
W. Klippel. “Active Compensation of Transducer Nonlinearities”. In: Audio Engi-
neering Society Conference: 23rd International Conference: Signal Processing in
Audio Recording and Reproduction. May 2003. url: http://www.aes.org/e-
lib/browse.cfm?elib=12335.
[6]
D. Bard. “Characterisation of nonlinearities of electroacoustic devices using volterra
kernels”. eng. In: 12th International Congress on Sound and Vibration 2005, Icsv
2005 5 (2005), pages 4310–4316.
[7]
Xiaohui Ma et al. “Impact of loudspeaker nonlinear distortion on personal sound
zones”. eng. In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 143.1 (2018).
[8]
Leo L. Beranek and Tim Mellow. Acoustics: Sound Fields and Transducers. eng.
Elsevier Inc., 2012, pages 252, 267, 282. isbn: 9780123914217. doi: 10.1016/
C2011-0-05897-0.
[9]
Franz M. Heuchel et al. “An Adaptive, Data Driven Sound Field Control Strat-
egy for Outdoor Concerts”. In: Audio Engineering Society Conference: 2017 AES
International Conference on Sound Reinforcement – Open Air Venues. August
2017.
[10]
“Sound field control for reduction of noise from outdoor concerts”. eng. In: Pro-
ceedings of 145th Audio Engineering Society Convention (2018).
[11]
Ulf Seidel and wolfgang Klippel. “Fast and Accurate Measurement of the Linear
Transducer Parameters”. In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 110. May 2001.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[12]
W. Marshall Leach. “Loudspeaker voice-coil inductance losses: Circuit models, pa-
rameter estimation, and effect on frequency response”. eng. In: Aes: Journal of the
Audio Engineering Society 50.6 (2002), pages 442–450. issn: 15494950, 00047554.
[13]
Julian R. Wright. “An Empirical Model for Loudspeaker Motor Impedance”. In:
J. Audio Eng. Soc 38.10 (1990), pages 749–754. url: http://www.aes.org/e-
lib/browse.cfm?elib=6011.
[14]
Douglas J. Button. “Shorting rings in dual-coil dual-gap loudspeaker drivers”. eng.
In: Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 117.6 (2005), page 3352. issn:
15208524, 00014966. doi: 10.1121/1.1948243.
[15]
Klippel, Diagnostics of Audio Systems Speaker Control - Klippel Analyzer 3. https:
//www.klippel.de/products/rd-system/hardware/ka3-klippel-analyzer-
3.html. Accessed: 2019-06-19.
[16]
Bo Rohde Pedersen and Finn Agerkvist. “Time-varying compliance”. eng. In: Audio
Engineering Society Convention Papers (2008).
[17]
Lars Risbo et al. “Force Factor Modulation in Electro Dynamic Loudspeakers”.
English. In: Proceedings of 141st International Audio Engineering Society (AES)
Convention. Audio Engineering Society, 2016.
[18]
Manget Expert: Temperature effects on mangets. Accessed: 2019-06-14. url: https:
//www.magnetexpert.com/technical-advice-i685/temperature-effects-
on-magnets-i683?.
[19]
Jiho Chang and Finn Jacobsen. “Sound field control with a circular double-layer
array of loudspeakers”. eng. In: Acoustical Society of America. Journal 131.6 (2012).
issn: 15208524, 00014966.
[20]
P. Welch. “The use of fast Fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra:
A method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms”. eng. In:
Ieee Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics 15.2 (1967), pages 70, 71, 72, 73,
70–73. issn: 15582582, 00189278. doi: 10.1109/TAU.1967.1161901.
[21]
J.G. Proakis and D.G. Manolakis. Digital signal processing : principles, algorithms,
and applications. eng. Prentice-Hall, 2007. isbn: 9780131873742.
[22]
F. J. Harris. “On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the discrete Fourier
transform”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee 66.1 (1978), page 68. issn: 00189219,
15582256.
[23]
Meyer Sound - M-Noise. https://m-noise.org. Accessed: 2019-06-18.
[24]
Meyer Sound - Introducing M-Noise (Video). https://meyersound.com/video/
introducing-m-noise/. Accessed: 2019-06-18.
[25]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Møller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics.
eng. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2013. isbn: 9781118636176.
[26]
W. Marshall. Leach. Introduction to electroacoustics & audio amplifier design. eng.
Kendall Hunt, 2010, 303 s. : isbn: 9780757572869.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[27]
W. M. Leach. Introduction to electroacoustics and audio amplifier design. eng.
Kendall/Hunt, 2003. isbn: 0757503756.
[28]
Bob McCarthy. Sound Systems - Design and Optimization : Modern Techniques
and Tools for Sound System Design and Alignment. eng. Focal Press, 2007. isbn:
0240520203.
[29]
Finn Agerkvist. Lecture notes in Advanced Loudspeaker Models: Discrete time
modelling of nonlinear loudspeakers. January 2018.
==PAGE:98==
