==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Detailed Modelling of Mechanical
Ventilation and Occupancy
Behaviour in Danish Residences
Using a Commercial Building
Simulation Tool
Siri Wistoft, s143909
To Quyen Hoang, s143924
June 2019
==PAGE:2==
Danish title:
Detaljeret
modellering
af
mekanisk
boligventila-
tion
og
brugeradfærd
ved
brug
af
et
kommercielt
byggesimuleringsværktøj
English title:
Detailed Modelling of Mechanical Ventilation and Occu-
pancy Behaviour in Danish Residences Using a Commercial
Building Simulation Tool
Authors:
Siri Wistoft, s143909
To Quyen Hoang, s143924
Supervisors:
Jakub Kolarik, Associate Professor, DTU Civil Engineering
Rune Korsholm Andersen, Senior Researcher, DTU Civil
Engineering
Education:
Master of Science
Field:
Architectural Engineering
ECTS:
2 x 30 ECTS
Project period:
January 28th, 2019 - June 28th, 2019
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Section for Energy and Services
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 17 00
E-mail: byg@byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was conducted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the
degree of Master of Science in Architectural Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark. The project was written in cooperation with the Department of Civil
Engineering and was started on January 28th, 2019 and submitted on June 28th,
2019. The project is credited a total of 60 ECTS points and the work has been
divided equally amongst the two authors.
We would like to thank our supervisors Jakub Kolarik, Associate Professor at DTU
Civil Engineering, and Rune Korsholm Andersen, Senior Researcher DTU Civil
Engineering, for their much appreciated guidance and vital assistance throughout
the project both through our regular meetings and written communication.
Furthermore, we would like to thank Christen Lautrup, Product Manager at Genvex,
Rasmus Hansen, Sales Technician at Lindab, and Henning Grønbæk, Product Expert
at Exhausto for their expertise and guidance.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 28th, 2019
Siri Wistoft, s143909
To Quyen Hoang, s143924
i
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The aim of this master’s thesis was to demonstrate detailed modelling of mechani-
cal ventilation and user behaviour in Danish residences using a commercial building
simulation tool. Regulations for energy consumption of buildings are continually
becoming stricter and the demand for a good indoor environment is rising. There-
fore, the use of dynamic simulation tools is increasing. However, current guidelines
are inadequate.
Dynamic simulation models of an apartment in Copenhagen were built in the soft-
ware IDA ICE. A base case model was created with speciﬁed occupancy and equip-
ment schedules based on guidelines. The model also included a thermostat temper-
ature window opening control and a solar radiation level based shading control. A
detailed model was created with speciﬁed occupancy and equipment schedules based
on a scientiﬁc occupancy behaviour and time use study. This model also included a
stochastic model for window opening control and an illuminance based solar shading
control, both based on recent research. Two air handling units were modelled in the
detailed model based on realistic bestselling units for Danish dwellings with diﬀerent
heating coils and heat exchanger eﬃciencies. Both simulation models also contained
activity related moisture productions and the air handling units had deﬁned air ﬂow
week programmes.
A comparison of the base case and the detailed simulation results showed an increase
in energy consumption of up to 93 kWh/m2 and in overheating of up to 662 hours
for the detailed model.
In general, the use of recent research results for implementation in dynamic simu-
lation is preferred even though limitations and uncertainties are present, as this is
simply more realistic. Simulations with too simpliﬁed inputs often result in lower
energy consumption and better indoor environment than in reality. Thus, the need
for uniformity, correctness and functionality in dynamic simulation inputs remains.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background and motivation
3
2.1
Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Air handling unit investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methods
11
3.1
Case description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
IDA ICE modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Base case according to guidelines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.1
Occupancy presence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.2
Window opening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.3
Solar shading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4.4
Air handling units
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Comparison of simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Results and analysis
35
4.1
Occupancy schedules in test model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Comparison of base case and detailed models . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Discussion
53
5.1
User-deﬁned macros . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Air handling units
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3
Occupancy schedules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
61
7
Further work
63
References
65
v
==PAGE:8==
Appendices
69
A Project plan
71
B Eauipment schedules in IDA ICE
73
B.1 Equipment schedules for the base case model . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2 Equipment schedules for the detailed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C Air handling units in IDA ICE
77
D Simple three zone model geometry
79
E Coeﬃcients of the opening and closing model
81
F Window opening control macros for living room from IDA ICE
83
G Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
85
H Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
103
I
20 random number compositions
119
J
Time use study and randomly based occupancy schedule for living
room
121
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
AHU
Air handling unit
BR18
Building Regulations 2018
CAV
Constant air volume
DS/EN
Danish Standard/European Standard
HVAC
Heating, ventilation and air conditioning
IDA ICE
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy - simulation tool
RH
Relative humidity
SBi
Danish Building Research Institute
(Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut)
SFP
Speciﬁc fan power
TUS
Time use study
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The subjects of energy consumption and CO2 emissions have for a long time been
a part of the public and political debate.
In Denmark 40% of the total energy
consumption is used for operation and use of buildings for heating, cooling and
electricity (Havelund, M., 2013). Regulations for energy consumption of buildings
are continually becoming stricter (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019) and the
demand for a good indoor environment is rising (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017). In newer
buildings, mechanical ventilation is often implemented to meet these requests, as the
role of ventilation is twofold. In addition to energy saving contribution, the main
task of ventilation is to provide fresh air so that indoor air quality and thermal
comfort are ensured (Kurnitski, J. et al., 2018).
Consulting engineers and building designers seek to show compliance of meeting the
energy consumption requirements and indoor environment demands by increasingly
using diﬀerent simulation tools for dynamic simulations. The quality and reliability
of many simulation tools are comparable, but often not adapted to national practices
for building construction, services and systems. When adjusting the generic models,
many input parameters for the simulations, such as setpoints and control algorithms,
often diﬀers amongst the consulting companies, which can lead to varying results.
This diﬀerence is both seen when comparing across companies and also against real-
ity (Gram-Hanssen, K. and Hansen, A. R., 2016). Guidelines with recommendations
for simulation inputs have recently been published by the Danish Building Research
Institute and several industrial partners (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017). However, the
guidelines do not suﬃciently detail issues such as occupancy behaviour and technical
parameters of installations, for example for ventilation.
This master’s thesis investigates and compares diﬀerent inputs in dynamic simula-
tion models using the current guidelines, recent research results and existing ven-
tilation units. The simulation models are based on an actual apartment located in
Nordhavn, Copenhagen. The intention is to create uniformity, correctness and func-
1
==PAGE:12==
Introduction
tionality in simulation inputs to ensure that the clients receive the expected indoor
environment and energy consumption.
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background and motivation
In this chapter, current regulations and requirements are outlined and the objective
of the project is deﬁned. The preliminary literature review is described, in which
recent research results from scientiﬁc studies are presented.
2.1
Regulations
During the last years, the Danish Building Regulations have continuously tight-
ened the requirement of the energy consumption of buildings. This has resulted in
tighter buildings with lower inﬁltration leading to a higher demand for natural or
mechanical ventilation. For newly built residential buildings the total energy con-
sumption for heating, cooling, ventilation and domestic hot water must not exceed
30.0 kWh/m2 + 1000 kWh per m2 heated ﬂoor area per year in order to comply
with BR18 (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019). For the even stricter building
class 2020 (low energy building) the total energy consumption must not exceed 20.0
kWh/m2 per year. Similar regulations for sustainable classiﬁcations of buildings are
seen internationally such as BREEAM (Building Research Establishment Ltd, 2019)
and LEED (Green Building Council, 2019), which often also contain restrictions for
CO2-emissions and use of sustainable materials.
The Danish Building Regulations dictate that the supply of fresh air in residential
buildings at any given time should be at least 0.3 L/s per m2 heated ﬂoor area.
Fresh air should be supplied in living spaces and exhausted in kitchens, bathrooms,
toilets and utility rooms. Fresh air can be provided by natural means (windows
or hatches) or from a mechanical AHU. When using the latter, heat recovery must
be ensured. Furthermore, kitchens should be equipped with an exhaust hood with
a boost mode of at least 20 L/s. In bathrooms the exhaust should be able to be
boosted to at least 15 L/s, while this requirement is lower for toilets and utility
rooms of 10 L/s (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019).
3
==PAGE:14==
Background and motivation
The Danish Building Regulations set requirement for the maximum amount of over-
heating hours for residential buildings of 100 hours above 27 ◦C and 25 hours above
28 ◦C (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019). At the same time a demand for
a comfortable and good indoor environment has risen (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017).
This had lead to a demand from the property developer of proof of a low energy
consumption while maintaining a good indoor environment. Therefore, a number of
consulting engineers have in cooperation with amongst others the Danish Building
Research Institute, the Ministry of Higher Education and Science and several Dan-
ish Universities, created Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations (Vorre, M. H.
et al., 2017). In this guide, values for minimum fresh air supply, window opening
and shading parameters, internal heat gains from occupants and equipment and oc-
cupancy and equipment schedules are suggested. The guide also suggests that hours
of overheating should be investigated in a dynamic simulation tool such as IDA ICE
or BSim (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017).
Due to the increasing requirements for energy consumption and indoor environment
in national and international regulations and from property developers, simulations
are needed. In order to make the simulations detailed and user-deﬁned, dynamic
simulations are used more and more often.
Many dynamic simulation tools are
available on the market. However, these are rarely adapted to national building
regulations and practices. Therefore, many consulting engineers adjust the generic
models according to their own perceptions and preferences. This can lead to big
discrepancies for similar buildings amongst the calculations by the consulting engi-
neers. In the end, this often leads to a much higher measured energy consumption
than that calculated by the engineers (Gram-Hanssen, K. and Hansen, A. R., 2016)
and a less satisfying indoor climate (Knudsen, H. N. et al., 2015) compared to simu-
lations. Hence, detailed guidelines which cover more aspects and parameters of the
dynamic simulations are desired.
2.2
Objectives
The aim of this master’s thesis was to demonstrate detailed modelling of mechani-
cal ventilation and user behaviour in Danish residences using a commercial building
simulation tool. For the detailed model, recent research results regarding occupancy
time use and behaviour, moisture level and internal heat gains will be implemented
in simulation models in a simulation tool. Typical ventilation systems in Danish
dwellings, including ventilation aggregate composition and their capacity and con-
trol, will be developed and implemented in the simulations. The functionality of the
detailed simulation model will be demonstrated through comparison of simulation
results obtained using the parameters and values given by the published Guidelines
for Indoor Climate Calculations (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017) and recent research.
4
==PAGE:15==
2.3. Literature review
2.3
Literature review
A literature review has been performed in order to obtain information of appropriate
studies.
Building occupancy is a paramount factor in building energy simulations (D’Oca, S.
and Hong, T., 2014) and is impacting the indoor environment as occupants aﬀect the
moisture- and CO2-level and the indoor temperature and thereby also the need for
heating. Typically, occupant behavior is not adequately considered when calculating
the expected performance. As a result, ﬁeld test studies all over Europe have shown
discrepancies between real and expected energy performance of buildings (Cali, D.
et al., 2016). To account for occupants’ adaptive behaviors as part of the building
design and operation processes, several behavior models have been developed over
the last decade for integration with building energy simulations (Langevin, J. et al.,
2014).
Barthelmes et al. (2018) investigated occupant behaviour in 4679 Danish households
consisting of 9640 individuals in 2008-2009. The chosen households were ensured to
represent the entire Danish population in terms of family background, income and
labour market connection. The occupants logged their activities in 10-minutes time
intervals in several diﬀerent categories, such as sleeping, eating and not at home.
The gathered data shows great diﬀerences between households but shows a clear
pattern in main activities in diﬀerent time slots throughout the day. The result of
this time use study (TUS) is seen in ﬁgure 2.1 below.
5
==PAGE:16==
Background and motivation
Figure 2.1: Daily activity proﬁles based on Danish time use study 2008/2009
(all days) (Barthelmes, V. M. et al., 2018).
With the same data, the duration probability of each activity could also be expressed
as follows in ﬁgure 2.2 (Barthelmes, V. M. et al., 2018).
Figure 2.2: Survival functions of the daily time durations of the activities
(Barthelmes, V. M. et al., 2018).
6
==PAGE:17==
2.3. Literature review
The study shows diﬀerences in weekdays and weekends and provide valuable insight
into the occupants’ behaviour’s inﬂuence on energy consumption.
The study mentioned above by Barthelmes et al. (2018) collects all the activities
of the day into 10 categories, but does not reﬂect the occupants’ tendency to ad-
just their thermal environment by opening and closing windows, using curtains and
turning the thermostat on their heating units up or down.
A study by Andersen et al. (2013) deﬁnes the occupants’ window opening behaviour
patterns based on measurements in 15 dwellings in Denmark during a period of eight
months, from January to August 2008. The measurements consisted of indoor en-
vironmental factors, such as dry bulb temperature and CO2-concentration, and of
outdoor environmental factors, such as air temperature and global solar radiation.
The dwellings were categorised in four groups based upon their ventilation type and
ownership: group 1 is owner-occupied and natural ventilation, group 2 is owner-
occupied and mechanical ventilation, group 3 is rental and natural ventilation and
group 4 is rental and mechanical ventilation.
Mechanical ventilation consists of
exhaust in kitchens and bathrooms. The study resulted in a stochastic model of
logistic regression of the probability of opening and closing a window for each of the
four groups. Not all environmental factors were present as variables in all of the
models. The article outlines how the environmental factors in the stochastic models
are only valid within certain intervals of each variable. The equation for the linear
regression is given below.
log

p
1 −p

= a + b1 · x1 + b2 · x2 + ... + bn · xn,
(2.1)
where:
p is the probability of an opening/closing event
a is the intercept
b1-n are coeﬃcients
x1-n are explanatory variables such as temperature, CO2-concentration, etc.
According to a veriﬁcation study by Fabi et al. (2015), the stochastic models of
group 2 and 3 were best at predicting opening and closing actions and the number
of actions, where the model for group 2 was best at predicting both the state of
the window and the number of actions, while the model of group 3 best predicted
transition probabilities. The stochastic models of group 1 was neither capable of
replicating the state nor the actions (Fabi, V. et al., 2015).
Another study by Jones et al. (2017) also investigates the occupants’ window open-
ing behaviour in 10 UK dwellings (7 ﬂats and 3 houses) equipped with either exhaust
air ventilation or mechanical ventilation with heat recovery systems for a year, in the
7
==PAGE:18==
Background and motivation
period October 2013 to November. The results were also presented in a stochastic lo-
gistic regression behavioural model. In this study, only the opening behaviour of the
main bedroom window(s) was investigated and the study suggests that occupants’
main bedroom window operation is inﬂuenced by a range of physical environmental
such as indoor and outdoor air temperature, and of contextual variables, such as
time of day and season. In addition, the eﬀects of the physical environmental vari-
ables were observed to vary in relation to the contextual factors (Jones, R. V. et al.,
2017).
The studies by Andersen et al. (2013) and Jones et al. (2017) do not include results
for window opening angles. A study by Henriksen and Olesen (2018) investigates
the window operations including the opening angle and opening duration for 37
townhouses located north of Copenhagen for a period of 9-12 months. Three types
of models were derived, one for window opening probability, one for window closing
probability and a model predicting the angle of a window opening for each dwelling.
The models for opening and closing probabilities were stochastic linear models us-
ing logistic regression, while the last model was derived using basic linear regression.
The models showed that there were diﬀerent behavioural patterns in each dwelling
including amongst others variables for indoor temperature, outdoor temperature,
indoor relative humidity, but the two most included variables were season and room
type. The models were validated for use in energy simulations. However, as the
models were based on only one dwelling each, they would be applicable for only
similar dwellings and occupancy behaviour, and could still beneﬁt from further ex-
ploration (Henriksen, N. F. and Olesen, B. V., 2019).
Reinhart (2004) proposes a simulation algorithm for manual and automated con-
trol of electrical lighting and blinds systems. The algorithm consists of an occu-
pancy schedule input and a work plane illuminance input and accounts for four
diﬀerent user types with sensitivity or independancy of ambient daylight and static
or dynamic blinds control (Reinhart, C. F., 2004). The study was performed in
Canadian oﬃces, which has other requirements than dwellings (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og
Boligstyrelsen, 2019).
A study of building design parameters (Sarran, L., 2016) uses a linear proportional
relationship to express the usage of the solar shading based on the illuminance level
in a Danish residence. At 1500 lux the blinds are kept open and at 2000 lux the
blinds are completely closed. This level of illuminance is supported by another study
(Nabil, A. and Mardaljevic, J., 2006) stating that daylight illuminances higher than
2000 lux are likely to produce visual (such a glare) or thermal discomfort, or both.
Another study (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018) describes a dependency of ei-
ther the illuminance level or the indoor air temperature for the solar shading control.
This however, would not always seem appropriate, as it is assumed that occupants
8
==PAGE:19==
2.3. Literature review
would not draw solar shading solely if the indoor air temperature is high, but no
direct sunlight is coming in through the glazing. Solar shading would most likely be
drawn only to keep out direct sunlight, glare or for privacy. For instance, the indoor
temperature could be high at night where there is no sunlight, or at times with a
large internal heat gain and an overcast sky. Hence, in these period solar shading
might most likely not be in use.
A study uses logistic regression to infer the probability of adjusting the setpoint of
thermostatic radiator valves (Fabi, V. et al., 2013) - which is the only study of its
kind found in this literature review. The study was conducted in 13 Danish dwellings
which were divided into three groups: active, medium and passive users. A series of
variables concerning indoor and outdoor environmental conditions were monitored,
and meteorological data were obtained and used for the stochastic model.
This
study was deemed inappropriate for use in this project as the data was collected
from March to August. Most of this period falls outside the Danish heating season,
where the outdoor temperature is higher and occupants are therefore not as likely
to adjust their radiator valves.
SBi prescribes a moisture production of 45 g/hour per person and in addition 60
g/hour per person for activities such as bathing, cloth washing etc. (Valbjørn, O.
et al., 1999). Hence, an active person emits 105 g/hour of moisture. These values
were published in 1999. Newer studies including moisture production (Smith, K. M.
and Svendsen, S., 2015) and (Svendsen, S. and Smith, K. M., 2018) give speciﬁc val-
ues for the moisture loads for cooking, sleeping, bathing etc.. Smith and Svendsen
(2015) divides the assumed moisture release for diﬀerent activities into three scenar-
ios: worst-case for the highest moisture production, typical case and best-case for
the lowest moisture production. The moisture values of Smith and Svendsen (2015)
are based on numerous other studies from this century, and even best-case values
are higher than the ones prescribed by SBi (Valbjørn, O. et al., 1999).
2.3.1
Air handling unit investigation
As for the literature review, an investigation of the bestselling decentral AHUs used
in dwellings on the Danish market have been performed to obtain information for
further use.
According to air handling units manufacturers and ventilation components manu-
facturers, the mainly used decentral CAV AHUs in Danish apartment buildings are
Nilan Comfort 300LR (Nilan, 2019) and Exhausto VEX35-2DV (Exhausto, 2019).
These units have diﬀerent operation of the heating coils as Nilan Comfort 300LR is
equipped with a hot water heating coil while Exhausto VEX35-2DV has an electrical
9
==PAGE:20==
Background and motivation
one. Both units have high heat exchanger eﬃciencies which exceed the requirements
in the Danish Building Regulations (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019). Over-
all, both units comply with the regulations and are both marked with eﬃciency class
A according to the European Union energy labelling.
Several bestselling CAV AHUs on the Danish market have diﬀerent air ﬂow steps,
for instance step 1 = 25% and step 4 = 100% of the maximum capacity. These
steps are often preinstalled into week programmes in order to ensure a low energy
consumption and a good indoor climate whilst remaining user-friendly. Nilan Com-
fort 300LR comes with three preinstalled week programmes: One for the family
who works outside the home, one for the the family working at home and one for
professions. In addition, it is possible to make a user-deﬁned programme.
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Methods
This chapter includes a description of the created simulation models including in-
ternal gains for occupancy and equipment, moisture production, window opening
controls and details, and ventilation air ﬂow rates and air handling units. The dia-
gram in ﬁgure 3.1 gives an overview of the method process.
The simulation models are created in the simulation tool IDA Indoor Climate and
Energy (IDA ICE), which is a whole-year detailed and dynamic multi-zone simula-
tion application for study of thermal indoor climate as well as the energy consump-
tion of the entire building (EQUA, 2019).
11
==PAGE:22==
Methods
Figure 3.1: Overview diagram illustrating the method process of the project.
12
==PAGE:23==
3.1. Case description
3.1
Case description
The study in this master’s thesis is based on IDA ICE simulations of an apartment
previously used in other studies at the Technical University of Denmark (Sarran, L.,
2016), (Zilio, E., 2016), (Guglietti, A. and Pesavento, M., 2017) and (Larsen, M. J.
and Bojsen, J., 2018). The apartment has been subjected to many measurements
and processing which allows for comparisons of simulated and measured data. How-
ever, this was not in scope for this project.
The apartment is placed in the new north eastern part of Copenhagen, Nordhavn,
and was built in 2016. Therefore, the building complies with the requirements of
the previous Danish Building Regulations 2015.
Figure 3.2: Placement of the apartment in Nordhavn, Copenhagen used for
the IDA ICE simulation models. [Copyright: Google Maps]
Figure 3.2 illustrates the placement and orientation of the apartment building. As
seen, the apartment is facing the waterfront with no buildings placed south of it
causing shade for wind or sun. The physical surroundings of the apartment building
were observed in reality and investigated in order to obtain a good understanding
of the actual conditions.
13
==PAGE:24==
Methods
Figure 3.3: Photo of the apartment building’s south facade.
[Copyright: To Quyen Hoang]
The photo in ﬁgure 3.3 shows the south facade of the apartment building. The
building consists of six storeys and each apartment has a large balcony to the south
and a minor one to the north. The apartment used in this study is placed on the
ﬁfth ﬂoor.
14
==PAGE:25==
3.2. IDA ICE modelling
Figure 3.4: Floor plan of the apartment used for the IDA ICE simulation
models.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the ﬂoor plan of the apartment showing that a large kitchen/liv-
ing room area is placed towards south. From the kitchen/living room there is ac-
cess to the large balcony. The apartment has three bedrooms, a depot and two
bathrooms. From the master bedroom there is access to a smaller balcony. The
bathrooms are placed in the core of the apartment and have no windows.
3.2
IDA ICE modelling
The geometry of the simulation model is based on previous studies (Sarran, L.,
2016), (Zilio, E., 2016), (Guglietti, A. and Pesavento, M., 2017) and (Larsen, M. J.
and Bojsen, J., 2018) and various important inputs for the simulation are listed in
table 3.1.
15
==PAGE:26==
Methods
Table 3.1: Various input values for the IDA ICE simulation models.
Input
Value
Comment
Weather ﬁle
Denmark, DRY 2013
According
to
BR18
(Traﬁk-,
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019)
Simulation year
2010
According
to
BR18
(Traﬁk-,
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019)
Ceiling height
2.54 m
(Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J.,
2018)
External wall, U-value
0.125 W/m2K
Concrete (0.15 m), Rockwool
(0.275 m), air gap (0.025 m) and
brick (0.108 m) (Larsen, M. J.
and Bojsen, J., 2018)
Internal wall, thickness
0.2 m
Concrete (Larsen, M. J. and Bo-
jsen, J., 2018)
Glazing:
U-value
g-value
T-value
0.53 W/m2K
0.67
0.66
(Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J.,
2018)
Frame, U-value
1.8 W/m2K
Frame fraction of 22% (Larsen,
M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018)
Heating setpoint
20 ◦C
According
to
BR18
(Traﬁk-,
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019)
Cooling setpoint
26 ◦C
According
to
DS/EN
15251
(Dansk Standard, 2007)
Supply air temperature
18 ◦C (summer)
19 ◦C (winter)
(Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J.,
2018)
Number of occupants
4
Two adults and two children
Only the single apartment was modelled in IDA ICE, not taking account of the rest
of the building. Therefore, a shading object was implemented imitating the total
building facade facing the building yard. This acts as the shelter that the building
would provide.
Additionally, two balcony objects were created for the overlying
apartment, as these would cause shading of the sun. An illustration of this is found
in ﬁgure 3.5.
16
==PAGE:27==
3.3. Base case according to guidelines
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the shading and balcony objects implemented in the
IDA ICE simulation models.
The apartment is heated through ﬂoor heating with a design power of 16 W/m2 and
a water-pipe heat transfer coeﬃcient of 10 W/m2K in all rooms provided by district
heating (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018). The ﬂoor heating is adjusted by an
operative temperature PI controller according to the deﬁned heating setpoint, which
is the standard control in IDA ICE. The supply temperature of the district heating
is 70 ◦C during the summer period and 79 ◦C during the winter period according to
values reported by HOFOR A/S (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018). Furthermore,
the heating system is turned oﬀfrom May to September as there is not need for
space heating during this period.
Domestic hot water is not accounted for in the simulation model as this is often
calculated as a set value per m2. The energy consumption for domestic hot water
should therefore be added to the total energy consumption from the simulations if
comparing to the Danish Building Regulations.
3.3
Base case according to guidelines
A simulation model was created according to the current guidelines and practices
(Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017), (Dansk Standard, 2007), (Aggerholm, S., 2018), (Valb-
jørn, O. et al., 1999) and others, hereon known as the base case. For this model the
geometry and inputs listed in table 3.1 in the section above have been used, whilst
several schedules, coeﬃcients and other inputs have been deﬁned.
The Danish Building Research Institute suggests that internal heat gain from occu-
pants can be implemented as 1.5 W/m2 throughout all hours of the day (Aggerholm,
S., 2018). However, studies show that the use of realistic schedules for speciﬁc cat-
egories of buildings is of great importance in energy simulation (Ahmed, K. et al.,
2017). In the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017)
occupancy schedules are given for bedrooms, kitchens and living rooms with a heat
17
==PAGE:28==
Methods
release of 100 W per person during daytime and 80 W per person during the night.
Therefore, the heat releases have been implemented in the base case IDA ICE sim-
ulation model by converting these to activity levels given in met (metabolic rate).
The night heat release takes place solely in the bedrooms while the daytime release
is located in the bathrooms and the kitchen/living room area.
Figure 3.6: Occupancy schedule for bedrooms according to the guidelines.
Figure 3.7: Occupancy schedule for the kitchen and living room area
according to the guidelines.
Figure 3.6 and 3.7 shows the occupancy schedules created in the IDA ICE simulation
model according to the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations (Vorre, M. H.
et al., 2017). Similar schedules for equipment given by Guidelines for Indoor Climate
Calculations were also implemented in the simulation model for the kitchen/living
18
==PAGE:29==
3.3. Base case according to guidelines
room and bedrooms. The equipment schedules are found in Appendix B.
The Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations do not prescribe occupancy for bath-
rooms. As having no occupancy in the bathrooms would be unrealistic, a schedule
seen in ﬁgure 3.8 has been created based on initial assumptions with occupancy
during morning hours as people often shower during this time slot.
Figure 3.8: Occupancy schedule for the bathroom based on assumptions.
As the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations do also not prescribe heat release
from equipment in bathrooms, this has been deﬁned according to other guidelines
(Aggerholm, S., 2018) as 3.5 W/m2 at all hours of the day.
The Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations do not deﬁne levels of and heat
release from lighting. As modern LED lights have a very low energy consumption
and heat release, and as IDA ICE deﬁnes lights as an internal heat gain, no lights
have been implemented in the IDA ICE simulation models. General heat release
from lighting is considered included in the 3.5 W/m2 for equipment (Aggerholm, S.,
2018).
The windows in the apartment are side-hung. According to the Guidelines for Indoor
Climate Calculations the reduction factor of the eﬀective opening area of the window
is 0.6 for side hung windows. This is deﬁned in IDA ICE as having an opening area
of 60 %.
For detailed evaluation the guidelines prescribe that window openings
should occur at a temperature setpoint of minimum 25 ◦C, however nothing else
regarding window openings is described. To replicate this guideline a thermostat
window opening control macro has been created in IDA ICE. This will cause the
window to open fully when the indoor temperature of the zone rises above 25 ◦C.
The window will close fully when the temperature again falls below 25 ◦C. This
opening control macro is found in ﬁgure 3.9. An occupancy schedule is included in
19
==PAGE:30==
Methods
the control of window openings ensuring that windows cannot be opened or remain
open when occupants are not present in the apartment.
Figure 3.9: Created thermostat window opening control macro in the IDA
ICE simulation model.
The Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations recommend manual activation of
solar shading when the solar radiation level on the facade reaches 500 W/m2 and/or
when the indoor operative temperature reaches 25 ◦C and/or when the illuminance
on the facade is 60,000 lux. As all three factors cannot be implemented together
in predeﬁned ﬁelds in IDA ICE, only the solar radiation level of 500 W/m2 has
been deﬁned as the solar shading activator. Again, an occupancy schedule has been
included to ensure that solar shading cannot be drawn or remain drawn when oc-
cupants are not present in the apartment. In order to implement all three factors
given in the guidelines, a user-deﬁned macro would need to be created, which re-
quires knowledge of the advanced level in IDA ICE. As internal solar shading is a
very occupancy independent factor, a simple internal blind has been chosen for the
base case.
According to the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations, the fresh air supply
should be minimum 5 L/s per person. For the four occupants in the Nordhavn
apartment, this would correspond to 0.18 L/s per m2 ﬂoor area which does not com-
ply with the Danish Building Regulations 2018 of 0.3 L/s per m2 ﬂoor area (Traﬁk-,
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019). The Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations do
not account for the ﬂoor area.
In the apartment in Nordhavn, a centralized CAV AHU is installed. If this was to
be implemented in IDA ICE, all apartments served by the AHU would need to be
modelled. This would lead to a very large simulation model, hence a generic decen-
tralized CAV unit is implemented in the IDA ICE simulation model. An illustration
of the unit can be seen in Appendix C.
The heat exchanger eﬃciency in the AHU is modiﬁed from a standard value to 85%
in order to comply with BR18 Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen (2019), but the
20
==PAGE:31==
3.3. Base case according to guidelines
air ﬂow capacity of this unit is "unknown" according to IDA ICE. The speciﬁc fan
power (SFP) is likewise altered in order to comply with the regulations to 400 J/m3
for each fan, giving a total of 800 J/m3.
The CAV AHU in IDA ICE is deﬁned with a week programme corresponding to the
occupancy schedules of a family who is not at home during the daytime.
Figure 3.10: Week programme schedule for all days in the IDA ICE
simulation model.
Figure 3.10 illustrates the week programme of the CAV AHU in IDA ICE. This
programme is based on the worst case zone in regards to CO2-concentration, which
during the night time is the master bedroom and during the afternoon and evenings
is the kitchen/living room. The week programme is in use all days of the year. The
fans run at the lowest step 1 when the family is not at home corresponding to the
minimum requirement in the Danish Building Regulations with a fresh air supply of
0.3 L/s per m2. In the mornings and evenings, the fans run at step 2 corresponding
to 0.6 L/s per m2 and during the night at step 3 = 0.9 L/s per m2. The highest step
4 of 1.2 L/s per m2 is not used for the week programme, but in reality this would
probably be manually turned on if more occupants were to be present, for instance
at dinner parties.
The use of moisture loads for cooking, sleeping, bathing etc. have been inserted in
the IDA ICE simulation models according to the newest studies (Smith, K. M. and
Svendsen, S., 2015), (Svendsen, S. and Smith, K. M., 2018). As the apartment is
newly build, a best-case scenario-value (Smith, K. M. and Svendsen, S., 2015) of
moisture production is assumed.
21
==PAGE:32==
Methods
Table 3.2: Moisture production for the diﬀerent zones in the IDA ICE
simulation model.
Moisture production [kg/s]
Master bedroom
6 · 10 -5
Bedroom 2
2 · 10 -5
Bedroom 3
2 · 10 -5
Kitchen/living room
1.1 · 10 -4
Bathroom 1
1.7 · 10 -4
Bathroom 2
1.7 · 10 -4
Depot
No production
The moisture production loads inserted in the IDA ICE simulation model is listed in
table 3.2. The moisture production takes place when the occupants are present in the
given zone, thereby following the occupancy schedules. The moisture production in
the three bedrooms varies as two adults are assumed sleeping in the master bedroom
whilst one child is sleeping in each of the other bedrooms.
The occupants’ activity levels have likewise been deﬁned in the IDA ICE simulation
model and can be found in table 3.3 below.
Table 3.3: Activity level in the diﬀerent zones in the IDA ICE simulation
model.
Activity level [met]
Master bedroom
0.9
Bedroom 2
0.9
Bedroom 3
0.9
Kitchen/living room
1.2
Bathroom 1
1.2
Bathroom 2
1.2
Depot
No occupancy
The activity levels are based on several guidelines used at the Technical University
of Denmark (Svendsen, S. and Smith, K. M., 2018), (Nielsen, T. R., 2014). The
guidelines list activity levels for generic rooms, such as kitchen, bedroom and living
room, but as the apartment in Nordhavn consists of a combined kitchen and living
room area, the activity level for this zone is a fusion of the values given in the
guidelines.
22
==PAGE:33==
3.4. Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
The simulation is run in IDA ICE and the results hereof is then compared to the
results of the detailed model which is described in the following section.
3.4
Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
A detailed simulation model was created using various studies to create realistic oc-
cupancy behaviour and presence and realistic AHUs have been built in the advanced
level of the IDA ICE simulation tool.
3.4.1
Occupancy presence
When studying the occupancy schedules in the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Cal-
culations used in the base case, it is found that occupants are overlapping in the
diﬀerent zones, meaning that for instance between 20 and 22 o’clock, there is 100
% presence in all rooms. For the apartment in Nordhavn, this will give a total of 8
occupants: 2 in the master bedroom, 1 in each of the other bedrooms, and 4 in the
kitchen/living room. For dwellings where the kitchen and living rooms are separate,
this would result in 12 occupants during the two hours. This is intentionally done
in order to take varying occupancy behaviour into account, but this large time span
is not realistic. In order to create schedules which represent the actual behaviour
of occupants, a large time use study of occupancy in Danish dwellings have been
implemented in IDA ICE (Barthelmes, V. M. et al., 2018). The various activities
recorded in this time use study have been assigned in the diﬀerent zones according
to previous studies (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018) and are as follows in table
3.4.
23
==PAGE:34==
Methods
Table 3.4: Division of total time in percentage of each activity assigned to
diﬀerent zones.
Activity
Master bedroom
(2 adults)
100% Sleeping
50% Relaxing/TV/IT
Bedroom 2
(1 child)
100% Sleeping
50% Relaxing/TV/IT
Bedroom 3
(1 child)
100% Sleeping
50% Relaxing/TV/IT
Kitchen/living room
(all occupants)
100% Eating
100% Cooking/washing dishes
100% Family care/free time
50% Relaxing/TV/IT
100% Practical work
Bathroom 1
(all occupants)
50% Toilet
50% Cleaning/washing clothes
Bathroom 2
(all occupants)
50% Toilet
50% Cleaning/washing clothes
Depot
No activities
Based on the ﬁndings in the time use study, also seen in ﬁgure 2.1 and the activity
assignment listed in table 3.4, the occupancy schedules found in the following ﬁg-
ures 3.11, 3.12 and 3.13 have been created and veriﬁed in comparison with randomly
generated schedules. The veriﬁcation process is described later.
The occupancy and thereby occupancy schedules were created by the highest prob-
ability of performing a certain task in a zone. For instance at 2:30 in the morning,
the largest probability according to the time use study is sleeping. This activity is
100% assigned to the bedrooms as listed in table 3.4. As is the case in the time
period from 23 in the evening to 7 in the morning on weekdays and 8 on weekends.
In the evening hours from 21 to 23 the probability of relaxing/IT/TV is the highest.
This activity is assigned with 50% in the bedrooms and 50% in the kitchen/living
room, hence the occupancy being divided in the rooms as such.
24
==PAGE:35==
3.4. Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
Figure 3.11: Time use study based occupancy schedule for bedrooms in the
IDA ICE simulation model.
As seen in the occupancy schedules based on the guidelines, occupants will also stop
sleeping/being in the bedrooms from 7 o’clock on weekdays and 8 o’clock in the
weekends in the TUS schedule seen in ﬁgure 3.11. In the evening time however, the
time use study shows that occupants will enter the bedroom later on weekends than
on weekdays, which in the guideline based schedules (ﬁgure 3.6) are at the same
time all days of the week.
Figure 3.12: Time use study based occupancy schedule for kitchen and living
room area in the IDA ICE simulation model.
During the morning time, occupants will be present in the kitchen and living room
area from the same time in the TUS based schedule as in the guideline based schedule
(ﬁgure 3.7) seen in ﬁgure 3.12, however, for a shorter period of time during weekends.
25
==PAGE:36==
Methods
In the evening time, bigger diﬀerences are seen between the two schedules.
Figure 3.13 shows that occupants are present at two diﬀerent times of the day: in
the mornings and in the evenings. This is a diﬀerence from the guideline based
schedule (ﬁgure 3.8), where occupants were not included during evening hours.
Figure 3.13: Time use study based occupancy schedule for bathrooms in the
IDA ICE simulation model.
When looking at the TUS based schedules combined, the overlap of occupants in
the zones is shorter than the guidelines prescribe. The overlap is kept to still take
varying occupancy behaviour into account, but is decreased to avoid the "8 person
situation" for several hours described for the base case.
In order to verify the created TUS based occupancy schedules, these have been
compared randomly generated occupancy schedules in various simulations run using
a simple model. A simple simulation model is used to decrease the simulation time
and thereby the shortening the veriﬁcation process time. In order to simplify the
randomly generated schedules, 7 days have been generated and manually entered in
IDA ICE in 10 minutes intervals, and this week repeats throughout the year of the
simulation. The days have been generated using the work of a previous master’s
thesis (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018), in which an Excel sheet for random
occupancy schedule generation was created. The Excel sheet contains commands
which generate a random probability and hereafter compares this to the actual
probability of performing a certain task, such as sleeping, eating, cooking, etc..
26
==PAGE:37==
3.4. Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
Figure 3.14: Example of the Excel sheet for random occupancy schedule
generation.
Figure 3.14 shows an example from the Excel sheet for random occupancy schedule
generation (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018). In the example, the type of house-
hold is number 7 marked in the green box, which is a household of 2 parents and no
children. When this type is chosen, the Excel sheet ﬁlls out the cells in the red box
with the amount of occupants in each zone based on the probability of occupants
being present in the diﬀerent rooms.
10 randomly generated occupancy schedules were implemented in individual simula-
tions of a simple model consisting of only three zones (one bedroom, one bathroom
and a kitchen/living room) with a total of two occupants. As there were only three
zones in the simple simulation model, the amount of occupants from the Excel sheet
were added together for similar zones. For instance, if one occupant was present
in bedroom 1 and 3 respectively, the occupancy schedule for the simple three zone
model would contain two occupants in the bedroom as the simple model contains
only one bedroom.
Only the occupancy schedules set the 10 individual simulations apart - all other
parameters and inputs are kept the same. According to a previous study in occu-
pant behaviour (Filippini, L., 2016), 10 simulations are suﬃcient as the standard
deviation will be stable hereafter. An illustration of the simple simulation model is
seen in Appendix D.
The results for energy consumption and overheating from a simulation in the simple
simulation model using the created TUS based occupancy schedules were compa-
rable to the 10 simulations with the randomly generated schedules. Therefore, the
created schedules were deemed veriﬁed and hence implemented in the ﬁnal detailed
simulation model. Results of this veriﬁcation process will follow in the next chapter.
27
==PAGE:38==
Methods
3.4.2
Window opening
According to the thermostat window opening control in the base case, the window
will be completely opened or closed at certain temperatures. In reality, this would
mean that occupants would stand by the window opening and closing it as soon as
the setpoint is met. To make the window opening control more realistic, a window
opening control macro has been built for this based on a stochastic model found
in a study (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013). The macro in IDA ICE is based on group
3 of the study which includes measurements of ﬁve rented dwellings with natural
ventilation - Group 4 and 2 were attempted used preliminary, but were unable
to successfully complete the simulations due to numerical issues. This is further
explained in the discussion chapter. The intercepts and coeﬃcients included in the
probability regressions for opening and for closing diﬀer for bedrooms and living
rooms, thus two main macros have been created. In the following text, the main
macro for the bedrooms will be further explained, starting with an overview of the
components used in the IDA ICE macros in ﬁgure 3.15. Hereon follows a description
of the two opening and closing probability macros within the main macro. Lastly
the main macro itself will be described.
Figure 3.15: Illustration and names of components used in the IDA ICE
macros.
28
==PAGE:39==
3.4. Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
Figure 3.16: Opening probability macro for bedrooms in the IDA ICE
stochastic window opening control main macro.
Figure 3.16 shows the opening probability macro for bedrooms with the components:
intercept schedule and one variable (CO2-concentration) and its associated coeﬃ-
cient. The intercept schedule has diﬀerent coeﬃcients for night, morning, day, after-
noon and evening. The components are linked in a "Logistic Regression"-component
(Andersen, R. K., 2018a), which calculates the probability previously given in equa-
tion (2.1).
A table of the coeﬃcients is found in Appendix E. The variable for
CO2-concentration is log-transformed to obtain a better distribution (Anderesen,
R. et al., 2013).
Figure 3.17: Closing probability macro for bedrooms in the IDA ICE
stochastic window opening control main macro.
29
==PAGE:40==
Methods
Figure 3.17 shows the closing probability macro for bedrooms including the same
"Logistic Regression"-component as the opening probability macro. The variables
for this probability are indoor temperature, outdoor temperature, indoor RH and
solar hours loaded in through a source ﬁle. The intercept and the coeﬃcient for
three variables are here also implemented as schedules as these numbers vary for the
diﬀerent times of the day. A constant of 100 is multiplied to the indoor RH variable
in order to ensure a correct unit in percentage.
The opening and closing probability macros are joined in a main window opening
macro found in ﬁgure 3.18.
Figure 3.18: Main macro for window opening control for bedrooms in IDA
ICE.
The main window opening macro compares the probabilities from the two opening
and closing probability macros to a random number source ﬁle (Andersen, R. K.,
2018b). The random number source ﬁle consists of 19 sets of numbers where each
set has a new number every ten minutes for a whole year. A section of the random
number source ﬁle is found in ﬁgure 3.19.
Figure 3.19: Section of the random number source ﬁle (Andersen, R. K.,
2018b). Time is given in decimal number of hours.
If the probabilities from the opening or closing macro are larger than the ones given
in the random number source ﬁle, the two Thermostat-components will give an
30
==PAGE:41==
3.4. Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
opening or closing signal: The thermostat linked to the opening probability macro
will send out 1 if the probability is larger than the random number from the source
ﬁle, and 0 if it is lower. The thermostat linked to the closing probability macro will
send out -1 if the probability is larger than the random number from the source ﬁle,
and 0 if it is lower. Hence, 1 is open, -1 is close, and 0 is no change. The outsignals
from the thermostats are each linked to a Logical switch-component. The Logical
switches compare the signal from the thermostats to the constant of 0 and a sig-
nal from an The On/oﬀwith delay-component. The On/oﬀwith delay-components
ensures that a new window signal is delayed 60 seconds, hence a new opening or
closing action for the window cannot be performed within 60 seconds of the previous
action.
The logical switches have 3 insignals: signal 1 (upper), 2 (middle) and 3 (lower).
If signal 2 is equal to signal 3, the component will sent out signal 1.
If signal
2 is not equal to signal 3, the component will sent out signal 3.
For the main
macro, this means that an open window cannot be opened and a closed window
cannot be closed.
The two outsignals from the logical switches are added in a
Sum-component. This ensures that if one logical switch says to open and the other
says to close, no change will occur (as 1 + -1 = 0). The Sum outsignal is linked
to a new Thermostat-component. This insignal is compared to the constant 0: If
the insignal is 1: to open the window, 1 will be sent out of the thermostat.
If
the insignal is -1: to close the window, 0 will be sent out of the thermostat. The
outsignal from the Thermostat-component is multiplied by a signal from a Greater
Than-component in a Multiplication-component. The outsignal from the Greater
Than-component is 1 if occupants are present in the apartment and able to perform
a window opening/closing, and 0 if no occupants are present. This ﬁnal outsignal
from the Multiplication-component is linked to the opening signal of the window: 1
to open the window, 0 to close the window.
A similar main macro including the opening probability macro and closing proba-
bility macro for the living room can be found in Appendix F.
In the window opening behavior study (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013), the opening
angle was measured in three of the 15 dwellings. The result of this measurement is
however not included in the article describing the ﬁndings of the study. The degree
of opening angle has therefore not been implemented in IDA ICE. The guidelines
(Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017) prescribe an eﬀective opening area reduction factor of
0.6, resulting in opening area of 60 % in IDA ICE as also previously described in
the base case. This is also implemented in the detailed model.
31
==PAGE:42==
Methods
3.4.3
Solar shading
In the literature review no published data of measurements clarifying the user be-
haviour for solar shading in dwellings was identiﬁed. Therefore, a solar shading
control macro has been built in IDA ICE based on a building design parameter
study (Sarran, L., 2016) which describes a linear proportional relationship between
illuminance and position of the solar shading. This is implemented in IDA ICE by
using a proportional controller deﬁning that the solar shading is fully drawn at 2000
lux in the zone and fully open at 1500 lux, an illuminance level also supported by
another study (Nabil, A. and Mardaljevic, J., 2006). The macro also ensures that
the solar shading cannot be drawn or remain drawn when occupants are not present
in the apartment. The solar shading control macro is found in ﬁgure 3.20. As in the
base case, a simple internal blind has been chosen for the detailed model as internal
solar shading is a very occupancy independent factor.
Figure 3.20: Shading control macro in IDA ICE.
3.4.4
Air handling units
AHUs have been created in IDA ICE based on the two AHUs, Nilan Comfort 300LR
(Nilan, 2019) and Exhausto VEX35-2DV (Exhausto, 2019) as these are two of the
best selling decentral AHUs for dwellings in Denmark according to ventilation man-
ufacturers. Nilan Comfort 300LR has a heat exchanger eﬃciency of 94% at an air
ﬂow of 100 m3/h, while Exhausto VEX35-2DV has a heat exchanger eﬃciency of
87% at an air ﬂow of 100 m3/h. Both units have a total SFP of 800 J/m3. These
values are implemented in the AHU components in IDA ICE. Both units are CAV
AHUs and as previously described, these are delivered with preinstalled step based
week programmes. In the detailed model, the same week programme is used as in
the base case, as occupancy schedules are quite similar and for better comparison
of the results.
The two AHUs are comparable in components, but especially one thing sets them
apart: the heating coil. The Nilan unit is equipped with a hot water heating coil
whilst the Exhausto unit has an electrical one. The power used for the electrical
heating coil is deﬁned in IDA ICE to reﬂect the value given by the manufacturer
(see Appendix G and Appendix H).
The standard CAV AHU of IDA ICE has fans with constant pressure and eﬃciency.
32
==PAGE:43==
3.4. Detailed model with user-deﬁned elements
For the Nilan and Exhausto unit, capacity curves for the fans have been deﬁned
according to the manufacturers technical data. These are found in ﬁgure 3.21 and
ﬁgure 3.22.
Figure 3.21: Capacity curve for the fans of the Nilan CAV AHU in IDA ICE.
Figure 3.22: Capacity curve for the fans of the Exhausto CAV AHU in IDA
ICE.
The two deﬁned capacity curves will result in varying energy consumption for dif-
ferent air ﬂows. Detailed models have been simulated separately for the two AHUs.
The resulting energy consumption of the simulations including the IDA ICE stan-
dard AHU used in the base case and the two detailed units based on Nilan Comfort
300LR and Exhausto VEX35-2DV will be compared in the next chapter.
Further data from the manufacturers of the two AHUs such as dimensions, illustra-
tions and acoustics can be found in Appendix G and Appendix H.
33
==PAGE:44==
Methods
3.5
Comparison of simulations
The detailed model is duplicated to 20 models for each AHU giving a total of 40 mod-
els. The diﬀerence in the 20 models is solely found in the window opening control
macro where the link from the random number source ﬁle to the thermostats de-
scribed previously is setup with 20 diﬀerent compositions. The 20 compositions are
randomly based on the 19 sets of numbers and are consistent for the two AHUs. The
20 compositions are found in Appendix I. When simulations are run with stochastic
models which is the case for the detailed model, numerical issues often occur lead-
ing the simulation to fail. Therefore 20 models were created in order to ensure that
results from at least 10 models were available for the comparison. 10 simulations
are, as previously described, suﬃcient for a stable standard deviation (Filippini, L.,
2016).
The results from the base case model and the detailed models are compared for
simulations of one year. The comparison of the simulations consist of an analysis
of the total energy consumption of the apartment and the amount of overheating
hours annually. The overheating hours is investigated for the worst zones, being the
kitchen/living room and bedroom 3.
The total energy consumption is read of the "Delivered Energy" results report from
the IDA ICE simulation. The energy consumption results will be presented in a
graph with and without primary energy factors (0.85 for district heating and 1.9 for
electricity) for better comparison.
The amount of overheating hours will represented by the occupancy hours above 27
◦C from the "Summary" tab in IDA ICE. Hence, the amount of overheating hours
is dependant upon the number of occupants in the given zone. This will also be pre-
sented in a graph for better comparison of the base case and of the detailed models
with diﬀerent AHUs.
Additionally, the usage of solar shading and the amount of window opening will
be investigated for the base case and detailed models, as these impact the energy
consumption and overheating hours.
Furthermore comparisons of the energy consumption of the three diﬀerent AHUs
(generic IDA ICE component, Nilan 300LR and Exhausto VEX35-2DV) will be
performed using only the base case model. Likewise the diﬀerence in energy con-
sumption for space heating is compared for the guideline based occupancy schedules
and the time use based occupancy schedules, also using only the base case model.
34
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Results and analysis
In this chapter the results of the simulations run in IDA ICE are presented and
analysed. The ﬁrst part of the chapter will revolve around the time use study based
occupancy schedules and the veriﬁcation of these. Secondly, the results from the
simulations of the base case and the detailed models are presented and compared.
4.1
Occupancy schedules in test model
As written in the previous chapter, the created TUS based occupancy schedules and
10 randomly generated occupancy schedules were compared in order to verify the
use of the TUS schedule. This was done in a simple simulation model.
The TUS based schedule and three of the random based schedules for the living room
are shown in ﬁgure 4.1, ﬁgure 4.2, ﬁgure 4.3 and ﬁgure 4.4. The graphs show the
occupancy presence during one week. The three green randomly generated sched-
ules show great variation throughout the week, whilst the red TUS based schedule
shows a clear pattern during weekdays and weekends. It is seen that occupants are
more often present in the living room during the daytime when using the randomly
generated schedules than in the TUS based schedule.
All occupancy schedules used in the veriﬁcation process can be found in Appendix
J.
35
==PAGE:46==
Results and analysis
Figure 4.1: Time use study based occupancy schedule for living room.
Figure 4.2: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 1 for living room.
36
==PAGE:47==
4.1. Occupancy schedules in test model
Figure 4.3: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 2 for living room.
Figure 4.4: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 3 for living room.
When looking at the total amount of hours occupants spent in the living room, this
number is similar for the TUS based schedule and the 10 randomly generated sched-
37
==PAGE:48==
Results and analysis
ules. The yearly total amount of occupancy hours for the entire three zone model
for all schedules are found in table 4.1. The results from the 10 simulations with
randomly generated schedules are shown with the minimum, median and maximum
value.
Table 4.1: Yearly total occupancy hours for the time use study based
occupancy schedule and for the 10 randomly generated occupancy schedules.
Yearly
occupancy hours
TUS schedule
13066.1
Randomly generated schedules
Minimum
Median
Maximum
12247
13042.8
13911.5
It is seen in table 4.1 that the amount of occupancy hours of the randomly generated
occupancy schedules varies with a span of approximately 1700 hours. It is also seen
that the yearly amount of occupancy hours of 13066 in the TUS based schedule is
well within this interval of the yearly amount of occupancy hours in the 10 randomly
generated occupancy schedules and fairly close to the median.
The same pattern is seen when looking at the energy consumption for space heating
of the simple three zone model as seen in table 4.2: the energy consumption for the
TUS based schedule model is well within the interval of the 10 randomly generated
occupancy schedule models and actually meets the median. The span in energy
consumption of the randomly generated occupancy schedule models is less than 1
kWh/m2. The energy consumption is only investigated for the space heating as
all simulation models have the same CAV AHU and therefore the same energy
consumption for ventilation.
38
==PAGE:49==
4.1. Occupancy schedules in test model
Table 4.2: Energy consumption for space heating for the simulation with the
time use study based occupancy schedule and for the 10 simulations with
randomly generated occupancy schedule.
Energy consumption
for space heating
[kWh/m2]
TUS schedule
34
Randomly generated schedules
Minimum
Median
Maximum
33.5
34
34.3
When investigating the amount of overheating hours above 27 ◦C, a slightly diﬀerent
result is seen. Here, the simulation with the TUS based schedule is in the lower end
of the interval, yet within it, as seen in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Overheating hours in the living room for the simulation with the
time use study based occupancy schedule and for the 10 simulations with
randomly generated occupancy schedule.
Occupancy
hours <27 ◦C
in living room
Total
hours <27 ◦C
in living room
TUS schedule
1.7
5.04
Randomly generated schedules
Minimum
Median
Maximum
0.9
5.4
6.9
5.0
6.8
8.4
As seen in the occupancy schedules in ﬁgure 4.1, ﬁgure 4.2, ﬁgure 4.3 and ﬁgure 4.4,
the occupants are present in the living room more often during the daytime in the
randomly generated schedules than in the TUS based schedule. During daytime,
the indoor temperature will be higher due to solar radiation as the living room is
facing south. When occupants are present and contribute to the internal heat gain,
the temperature in these hours will more often rise above 27 ◦C. The higher amount
of occupancy overheating hours when using the randomly generated schedules is
therefore to be expected. Even when occupants have left the zone, the temperature
will not immediately drop which is reﬂected by the amount of total overheating
39
==PAGE:50==
Results and analysis
hours in table 4.3. Hence, the TUS based schedule is considered veriﬁed for further
use.
4.2
Comparison of base case and detailed models
When looking at the results from the simulation of the base case and the 20 simu-
lations for the detailed models of each of the implemented AHUs, great diﬀerences
are seen in both the energy consumption and indoor environment.
The simulation results of the detailed models show an increase in the total energy
consumption (excluding primary energy factors) of 1,133-2,987% with the Nilan
AHU and 1,917-3,107% with the Exhausto AHU compared to the base case. The
simulation results for the total energy consumption ﬂoor heating and ventilation is
shown in ﬁgure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Total energy consumption of the simulation of the detailed models
compared to the base case model.
As occupants are present approximately 12% more often in the base case schedule
than in the TUS based schedules, a lower energy consumption is to be expected as
the occupants will emit more heat. This was investigated further using the base case
simulation model. In the two simulation models only the occupancy schedules were
changed. The resulting energy consumptions for space heating are found in table
4.4.
40
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Comparison of base case and detailed models
Table 4.4: Energy consumption for space heating for simulations in the base
case model with the two diﬀerent occupancy schedules: Guideline based and
time use study based.
Energy consumption
for space heating
excl. primary
energy factors
[kWh/m2]
Energy consumption
for space heating
incl. primary
energy factors
[kWh/m2]
Base case
occupancy schedules
1.1
0.9
TUS
occupancy schedules
1.4
1.2
The energy consumption for space heating does not diﬀer a lot when using the
guideline based occupancy schedules compared to the TUS based schedules: only
0.3 kWh/m2. Therefore the extremely large diﬀerence in energy consumption in the
detailed models compared to the base case cannot be explained by occupancy alone,
but is mainly a result of all other implemented detailed parameters such as window
opening and solar shading behaviour. These implementations are analysed later in
this chapter.
A diﬀerence is seen when comparing the simulations of the detailed models as seen
in ﬁgure 4.5. The simulations with the Nilan AHU gives a larger span in energy
consumption than the simulations with the Exhausto AHU. Overall the Nilan unit
gives a lower energy consumption than the Exhausto AHU, but the maximum value
is within the span of the Exhausto AHU. The resulting energy consumption is shown
both excluding and including primary energy factors (0.85 for district heating and
1.9 for electricity (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019)) for better comparison.
The Nilan AHU with a hot water heating coil has a lower energy consumption when
applying primary energy factors, whereas the resulting energy consumption of the
Exhausto unit with an electrical heating coil becomes higher.
The 20 detailed model simulations for each AHU is only set apart by this particular
input: the AHU. All other implemented values and parameters are the same, as
previously described. The diﬀerence in energy consumption is therefore mainly a
result hereof. Therefore an investigation of the AHUs was carried out.
The investigation of the three diﬀerent AHUs was performed using the base case
simulation model. In the simulation models only the AHU component was changed.
The resulting energy consumption and amount of overheating hours are found in
41
==PAGE:52==
Results and analysis
table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Energy consumption and hours of overheating for simulations with
the three diﬀerent air handling units in the base case: IDA ICE standard,
Nilan and Exhausto.
IDA ICE
standand AHU
Nilan
Exhausto
Total energy consumption excl. pri-
mary energy factors [kWh/m2]
3.0
5.4
13.2
Total energy consumption incl. pri-
mary energy factors [kWh/m2]
4.5
7.0
23.9
Heat exchanger eﬃciency [-]
0.85
0.94
0.87
Heat recovered by heat exchanger
[kWh/m2]
76.9
76.2
68.3
Energy consumption of heat ex-
changer [kWh/m2]
0.85
1.94
9.76
Hours of overheating (<27
◦C) in
kitchen/living room
17.9
17.7
17.8
Hours of overheating (<27
◦C) in
bedroom 3
0.5
0.2
0.2
The energy consumption is higher when simulating with the Nilan unit and much
higher when using the Exhausto unit compared to the IDA ICE standard unit. The
lowest heat exchanger eﬃciency for the IDA ICE standard AHU gives the highest
amount of heat recovered. This is not the expected result, but is entirely a result of
the "unknown" air ﬂow capacity deﬁned for the unit as previously described. When
looking at the two detailed AHUs, the Nilan unit with the highest heat exchanger
eﬃciency has the highest amount of heat recovered, which was to be expected. As
the Exhausto unit recovers less heat, a higher energy consumption for the heat ex-
changer is required. The diﬀerences in the capacity and eﬃciency of the fans also
contribute to the diﬀerences between the results from the two units.
When looking at the amount of overheating hours, only a very slight decrease is seen
when using the Nilan and Exhausto units compared to the standard unit. This can
be explained by the better capacity of these two units.
This stresses the importance of using the actual data of capacity curves, heat ex-
changing eﬃciencies and overall design of AHUs in dynamic simulations.
The amount of overheating hours illustrated in ﬁgure 4.6 show the same pattern as
the energy consumption for the detailed models compared to the base case. Here,
42
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Comparison of base case and detailed models
the simulation results from the detailed models are 673-3,796% and 6,420-59,200%
higher in the living room and bedroom 3, respectively, for the Nilan AHU and 701-
3,129% and 9,240-55,040% higher in the living room and bedroom 3, respectively,
for the Exhausto AHU than in the base case which shows only a few hours above
27 ◦C. The diﬀerent values and components in the detailed AHUs give slight diﬀer-
ences in the supply air temperature, when the units are not able to meet the given
setpoint temperature (18 ◦C during summer and 19 ◦C during winter). These small
diﬀerences of the two AHUs add up to a larger amount of overheating hours in the
kitchen/living room in the detailed model with the Nilan AHU compared to the
model with the Exhausto AHU. However, the media for the amount of overheating
hours for both rooms is similar for the two AHUs.
Figure 4.6: Occupancy hours above 27◦C for the simulations of the detailed
models compared to the base case model.
The extreme diﬀerence in the amount of occupancy overheating hours between the
base case and the detailed model intervals is mainly a result of the change in solar
shading control and the implementation of the window opening control macro.
A diﬀerence in the use of solar shading is expected between the base case and the
detailed models as two diﬀerent controls are used. In the base case, the solar shading
is drawn fully when the solar radiation on the exterior surface of the facade is above
500 W/m2 and if the solar radiation is less, the solar shading is fully open. In the
detailed models, the solar shading is fully open when the illuminance in the zone
is below 1500 lux, fully drawn when the illuminance is above 2000 lux and linear
proportional at illuminances in between.
43
==PAGE:54==
Results and analysis
(a) Use of solar shading in bedroom 3 for the base case simulation.
(b) Use of solar shading in bedroom 3 for the detailed model simulations.
Figure 4.7: Use of solar shading in bedroom 3.
Figure 4.7 shows the position of the solar shading in bedroom 3. It is seen that
the internal blinds are only drawn up to 0.95 in the detailed models and often less
than this. In January, November and December the two solar shading controls show
the same pattern where the solar shading is seldom drawn. During the summer
44
==PAGE:55==
4.2. Comparison of base case and detailed models
period (May to July) the solar shading in the detailed models is often drawn less
than 0.6 when drawn. This is a result of the solar altitude being highest in these
months, meaning that the sun is positioned in a higher angle from the horizontal
plane (Johansen, A. L., 2016). Therefore, the illuminance does not reach the middle
of the zone, but the solar radiation on the facade is high. The solar altitude also
explains that the internal blinds are often drawn more than 0.9 during February-
March and September-October as the sun is positioned lower in the sky and thus
higher levels of illuminance reach the middle of the zone.
When looking at the use of solar shading in the kitchen/living room seen in ﬁgure
4.9, similar patterns are seen in January, November and December where the solar
shading is seldom drawn, and also in February-March and September-October where
the internal blinds are often drawn more than 0.9 in the detailed model. In the
summer period however, the solar shading is rarely used in the kitchen/living room
in the detailed models and never in the base case. This is due to the fact that
a balcony is placed above the windows in this zone causing shade for both the
illuminance in the zone and the solar radiation on the facade. Illuminance levels
can, however, still be high due to diﬀuse solar radiation which causes the solar
shading to be drawn in May and August in the detailed model. An example of the
shading from the balcony is seen on the photo in ﬁgure 4.8 on sunny day with a
clear sky.
Figure 4.8: Photo of the apartment’s south facade (second apartment from the
top). [Copyright: To Quyen Hoang]
45
==PAGE:56==
Results and analysis
(a) Use of solar shading in the kitchen/living room for the base case
simulation.
(b) Use of solar shading in the kitchen/living room for the detailed model
simulations.
Figure 4.9: Use of solar shading in the kitchen/living room.
When comparing the graphs of solar shading in bedroom 3 and the kitchen/living
room (ﬁgure 4.7 and ﬁgure 4.9) for the base case and the detailed model, it is unclear
46
==PAGE:57==
4.2. Comparison of base case and detailed models
which solar shading control is used most frequently. Therefore, an investigation of
the amount of hours where the solar shading is in use has been performed.
Table 4.6: Hours of percentage drawn solar shading for bedroom 3 and the
kitchen/living room for the base case and detailed model.
Percentage of solar shading drawn
>25%
>50%
>75%
>90%
100%
Bedroom 3:
Base case [h]
-
-
-
-
192
Detailed model [h]
275
194
120
45.5
0
Kitchen/living room:
Base case [h]
-
-
-
-
85.9
Detailed model [h]
259
210
134
31.8
0
Table 4.6 shows the amount of hours where the solar shading is in use for the two
investigated zones. As previously described, the solar shading in the detailed model
is never fully drawn (100%). Therefore, it was investigated how much and for how
long the solar shading was drawn in the detailed model. When looking at bedroom
3, the solar shading is drawn at least 25% for 275 hours during the simulation period
of one year in the detailed model, whereas the solar shading was less used, namely
for 192 hours, in the base case. For the kitchen/living room the same pattern is
found, however the diﬀerence is much greater. The solar shading is here drawn at
least 25% for 259 hours in the detailed model and in use for 85.9 hours in the base
case. This diﬀerence is mainly due to the fact that solar shading is in use in the
detailed models during the summer period, where illuminance is still able to reach
the zone. The solar radiation on the facade will not reach high enough levels due to
the shade from the overlying balcony.
As seen in ﬁgure 4.10, there is a great diﬀerence in the window opening in the base
case controlled by a thermostat with the setpoint of 25 ◦C and in the detailed model
using the opening control macro with the stochastic model. When zooming in to
speciﬁc dates, there is no consistency in days with window opening between the base
case and the detailed models. The graphs show that the windows in the base case are
only opened once during January and never in December. This is due to the fact that
the indoor temperature rarely exceeds the setpoint of 25 ◦C during winter. However,
in the detailed model the window is often opened during winter as the probability
of opening the window is not based on indoor temperature. This fact contributes a
great deal to the much higher energy consumption of the detailed model than the
base case, as previously described, because the need for heating becomes higher as
47
==PAGE:58==
Results and analysis
the cold outdoor air enters the apartment through the open windows.
(a) Window opening in the kitchen/living room for the base case simulation.
(b) Window opening in the kitchen/living room for a detailed model
simulation (Exhausto no. 4 presentable for the detailed models).
Figure 4.10: Window opening in the kitchen/living room.
When looking at the total amount of hours in which the windows are opened ac-
cording to the two diﬀerent window opening controls, the diﬀerence is not as big as
48
==PAGE:59==
4.2. Comparison of base case and detailed models
assumed when looking at the graphs in ﬁgure 4.10. In the base case, one window in
the kitchen/living room is open for 434 hours during the simulation period of one
year, while the same window is open for 321 hours in the detailed model as seen in
table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Hours of window opened for one window in the kitchen/living room
according to window opening control for the base case and a detailed model
(Exhausto no. 4 presentable for the detailed models).
Base case model
Detailed model
Hours of window opened according
to window opening control
434
321
The pattern in the graph in ﬁgure 4.10a is caused by multiple minor openings of
the window ranging from ten seconds to three minutes illustrated in ﬁgure 4.11,
where the graph has been zoomed in on one hour from 10:00-11:00 on September
18th. During this one hour, the window is opened a total of 24 times, which is an
unrealistically amount of times.
Figure 4.11: Window opening in the kitchen/living room zoomed in for one
hour for the base case model using thermostat window opening control.
The amount of window opening hours has a great inﬂuence on the indoor tempera-
ture. Figure 4.12 shows the operative temperature for the kitchen/living room for
the base case and the detailed models. It is seen that the operative temperature in
the detailed model has very high ﬂuctuations compared to the base case.
49
==PAGE:60==
Results and analysis
(a) Operative temperature in the kitchen/living room for the base case
simulation.
(b) Operative temperature in the kitchen/living room for a detailed model
simulation (Exhausto no. 4 presentable for the detailed models).
Figure 4.12: Operative temperature in the kitchen/living room.
The many smaller low peaks for the detailed model are the direct result of a window
opening, whereas the general ﬂuctuation is a result of all implemented parameters,
50
==PAGE:61==
4.2. Comparison of base case and detailed models
inputs and macros. The indoor temperature in the base case is more stable and
keeps within the span of 25 ◦C and 26.5 ◦C for the period April-October. The 26.5
◦C is above the cooling setpoint of 26 ◦C deﬁned in the model according to DS/EN
15251 (Dansk Standard, 2007), but below the restriction of 27 ◦C for the level of
overheating given in BR18 (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019).
51
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Discussion
This chapter contains a discussion of the design and modelling of the simulation
models and their chosen inputs. Furthermore uncertainties in the simulation results
and analysis hereof will be discussed.
5.1
User-deﬁned macros
As described in the previous chapter, there is a great diﬀerence of the window open-
ing when using the thermostat control and the user-deﬁned macro based on the
stochastic model (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013). The stochastic model is based on
measurements from only ﬁve dwellings located in the similar apartment buildings
in the same geographical area North of Copenhagen (Andersen, R. K., 2019). The
dwellings were constructed in 1945, but the ﬂoor plan, orientation and building ma-
terials are unknown. It is therefore likely that the rooms, in which the measurements
were performed, have other orientations that the ones in the apartment in Nordhavn.
Furthermore, the heat loss coeﬃcient and thermal conductivity of exterior walls and
the window construction may be quite diﬀerent than in newly built residencies.
The dwellings in group 3 (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013), which the window open-
ing macro is based upon, only have natural ventilation and not mechanical supply
and exhaust which is the case for the apartment in Nordhavn, thus implemented
in the IDA ICE simulation model. The intercepts and the coeﬃcient of the open-
ing probability in the stochastic model is the same for bedroom and living room,
giving the exact same probability of opening the windows in these two diﬀerent
zones. Furthermore, only the level of CO2 inﬂuences the openings probability, not
other variables such as high indoor temperatures or relative humidities. The sim-
ulation models in IDA ICE are ventilated using mechanical ventilation in order to
obtain a CO2-concentration according to the guidelines (Dansk Standard, 2007).
Therefore, the CO2-concentration is always below 1100 ppm, and actually never
reaches levels higher than 900 ppm in any of the simulation models. The low CO2-
53
==PAGE:64==
Discussion
concentration will result in lower opening probabilities in the simulation models than
in the dwellings measured in the study (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013).
Initially group 4 was chosen for the window opening macro as the dwellings in
this group have mechanical ventilation (exhaust in kitchens and bathrooms). As
the stochastic model for the opening probability for group 4 had seven variables
(outdoor temperature, solar radiation, solar hours, outdoor relative humidity, illu-
mination, indoor temperature and CO2-concentration), the simulation tool was not
able to run the simulations without failing due to numerical problems, even with
very low tolerances (standard tolerance is 0.02, and tolerances down to 1 · 10-8 were
applied). It was assumed that the numerical issues were a result of the illuminance
variable which was log-transformed. Simulations run with other log-transformed
variables (such as CO2-concentration) did not result in numerical problems, and a
test of a replacement of the log-transformed illuminance with indoor relative hu-
midity did also not result in numerical problems. Group 4 was attempted replaced
with group 2 (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013) as the dwellings in this group also had
mechanical ventilation (owner-occupied and not rental). This group had 3 variables
(illumination, CO2-concentration and outdoor relative humidity), but simulations
run with this group also resulted in numerical problems. Thus group 4 and 2 was
replaced with group 3 as this did not contain the log-transformed illuminance. The
stochastic model for this group was based on measurements from more dwellings
than the one for group 1 and was, furthermore, better at predicting window opening
than group 1 (Fabi, V. et al., 2015).
In the IDA ICE simulation models, the sensor for the variables (CO2-concentration,
indoor relative humidity and temperature) is placed in the middle of each zone.
This is not necessarily the case for the measurements in the study of the window
opening behaviour (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013). The sensors used in the study could
for instance be inﬂuenced by solar radiation, if these were placed near the windows.
Especially the measurement of illuminance will be greatly aﬀected by the placement
of the sensor, as the illuminance level will drop the further away from the window
the sensor is placed.
In the user-deﬁned window opening macro in IDA ICE, the "On/oﬀwith delay"-
component ensures that a new window signal is delayed 60 seconds, resulting in the
window being opened at least 60 seconds at a time. This is not a factor included in
the study (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013), but is implemented to avoid constant actions
of the window which could lead to numerical problems and longer simulation times.
In the study (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013), the actual opening angle of the windows
for three of the dwellings were measured. The result of these measurement was
however not included in the stochastic models, thus not implemented in the window
54
==PAGE:65==
5.1. User-deﬁned macros
opening macro in IDA ICE. The windows in the IDA ICE simulation models are
either wide open or fully closed. If window opening angles were included in the sim-
ulation models, the windows might not be wide open when venting during winter
and on cold night which could result in a lower energy consumption for heating.
The heating setpoint has been set to 20 ◦C for all zones according to DS/EN 15251
(Dansk Standard, 2007). However, studies have shown that 67 % of Danish occu-
pants prefer their bedrooms colder than 20 ◦C (Bolius, 2018). Especially for the
simulations for the detailed models, this would lead to a lower energy consump-
tion for heating as not as much heating is needed when windows are opened during
winter. Additionally, studies have shown, that the heating setpoint as a stochastic
parameter has a relative contribution of 34-42 % of the total energy consumption
(Brohus, H. et al., 2010).
As written in the literature review, a study using logistic regression to infer the
probability of adjusting the setpoint of thermostatic radiator valves (Fabi, V. et al.,
2013) was deemed inappropriate for use in this project. However, the heating set-
point is of great inﬂuence to the energy consumption. As appointed most occupants
prefer colder temperatures in their bedrooms and other studies show that occupants
living in energy eﬃcient dwellings have a tendency to adjust their thermostats to a
higher heating setpoint or heat a larger proportion of their building (Energistyrelsen,
2016). The implementation of research based heating setpoints in the dynamic sim-
ulations could aﬀect the energy consumption for heating and the thermal comfort
immensely.
The stochastic models in the window opening behaviour study (Anderesen, R. et al.,
2013) do not account for the use of solar shading. An implementation of solar shad-
ing could potentially inﬂuence the variables of the stochastic models such as indoor
temperature and illumination and their coeﬃcients and thereby the probability of
opening or closing the window.
A user-deﬁned solar shading macro was implemented in the detailed models based
on a theoretical design parameter study and not actual measured data. The imple-
mentation of the solar shading control makes the use of the window opening control
macro uncertain.
In order for the implemented user-deﬁned macros for window opening and solar
shading to be fully justiﬁed for further use, more studies and measurements of ac-
tual conditions in newer buildings is required. It is however evaluated that the use
of the window opening macro gives more realistic results than the use of the ther-
mostat temperature window opening control. The guidelines prescribe that window
openings should occur at a temperature setpoint of minimum 25 ◦C, however the
opening angle of the window is not described (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017). As previ-
55
==PAGE:66==
Discussion
ously seen in ﬁgure 4.11 the thermostat opening control causes the window to open
an absurd amount of times for very short periods. This is not realistic.
As described, the windows in the base case with thermostat temperature control
are almost never opened during winter. Nonetheless, studies show that 71% of oc-
cupants open windows during winter for some amount of time during the day and
11% have at least one window open all night (Knudsen, H. N., 2018). Therefore the
use of the thermostat temperature window control is deemed unrealistic.
Additionally, it is evaluated that the use of the linear proportional solar shading
macro based on illuminance in the zone is more realistic than the standard sun
control in IDA ICE where the shading is either fully drawn at 500 W/m2 or fully
open at solar radiation levels below this. As seen in the simulation results for the
kitchen/living room with the overlying balcony the illuminance levels in the zone
can be high whilst the solar radiation on the facade is low. Furthermore, glare issues
could arise without the solar radiation level on the facade being high. The solution
given in the guidelines based on temperature, illuminance and solar radiation on the
facade (Vorre, M. H. et al., 2017) does not give further explanation as to whether
one or all factors should be reached in order for the solar shading to be drawn. The
Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations is overall a bit vague in its description
of the use of solar shading.
A general issue with the window opening controls and solar shading controls for
both the base case and for the detailed model, is that the windows will always be
closed and solar shading undrawn when occupants are not present in the apartment.
This could be resolved by adding macros where there are none and complicating the
existing macros by adding further components, which is not user-friendly solution.
However, this is a cause for further work.
In previous studies using dynamic simulations for the same apartment in Nordhavn
(Sarran, L., 2016) and (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018), the balcony for the over-
lying apartment was not included. In the analysis of the results a great inﬂuence of
the overlying balcony was seen for the kitchen/living room. Hence, the inclusion of
the overlying balcony and shading objects in general should be included in future
studies.
5.2
Air handling units
Two AHUs have been implemented in IDA ICE based on the two bestselling units
for Danish dwellings. For each unit, a heat exchange eﬃciency is given for a certain
airﬂow, being 94% and 87% at 100 m3/h for the Nilan and Exhausto unit, respec-
tively. It is not possible to insert a curve for the heat exchange eﬃciency which both
56
==PAGE:67==
5.2. Air handling units
manufacturers provide in their technical data sheets (Appendix G and H).
The capacity curves for the fans were deﬁned according to the manufacturers tech-
nical data. As these were read of of their capacity curves, small inaccuracies might
occur, which in term will lead to small diﬀerences in the energy consumption.
The week programme implemented for the AHUs was created based on the worst
case zone in regards to CO2-concentration and is not a programme provided by the
AHU manufacturers. The week programme is applicable for this exact apartment
and amount of occupants and might not be suitable for dwellings of other sizes or
for larger or smaller households.
According to the Danish Building Regulations (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen,
2019), a kitchen hood should be placed in the kitchen and it should be possible
to increase the exhaust of the kitchen hood to at least 20 L/s. In bathrooms it
should be possible to increase the exhaust to at least 15 L/s. This has not been
implemented in the IDA ICE simulation models. An increase in the exhaust in the
kitchen and bathrooms would lead to lower moisture levels and changes in the indoor
temperature when cooking and bathing.
Moisture production has been implemented as best-case scenario values according
to newer studies (Smith, K. M. and Svendsen, S., 2015). The best-case scenario was
chosen as the apartment is newly built, but even these moisture production levels
are higher than the ones given in SBi 196 (Valbjørn, O. et al., 1999). The result-
ing indoor relative humidity when applying the best-case scenario values illustrated
in ﬁgure 5.1 is acceptable and often within the range 25-65 %, and therefore the
moisture production values implemented in the simulation model seem applicable.
The RH exceeds the boundaries of 25% for 1510 hours and 65% for 528 hours in
the kitchen/living room. The lower RHs in the winter and the higher RHs in the
summer are due to especially window openings. Higher RHs in bathrooms are due
to intense moisture production, and lower and higher RHs in bedrooms are also
due to window opening. The RH could be kept at a lower level in the bathrooms
and the kitchen, if the possibility of increasing the exhaust to 15 L/s and 20 L/s,
respectively, had been implemented in the simulation models.
57
==PAGE:68==
Discussion
Figure 5.1: Relative humidity in the kitchen/living room for a detailed model
simulation (Exhausto no. 4 presentable for the detailed models).
Overall, the implemented AHUs are deemed acceptable for further use for consulting
engineers, especially if these were available as predeﬁned HVAC components in IDA
ICE.
5.3
Occupancy schedules
As described in the previous chapter, the time use study based occupancy (Barthelmes,
V. M. et al., 2018) schedules were veriﬁed against randomly generated occupancy
schedules. They are therefore deemed applicable for further use in dynamic simula-
tions. However, any application of occupant behaviour outside the research environ-
ment needs to be done with great cautiousness given the high number of unexplored
inﬂuences underlying behavioural patterns (Schweiker, M., 2017).
If desired, randomly generated occupancy schedules for an entire year (or other
simulation periods) could be implemented in IDA ICE as done in the test model
study. For the current setup in IDA ICE, this is however extremely time consum-
ing as this is a manual process. Also, the randomly generated occupancy schedules
vary throughout the week which is most often not the case for actual occupancy
(Barthelmes, V. M. et al., 2018).
The process of implementing randomly generated occupancy schedules could be
made a lot easier and faster if it was possible to load data directly from an Excel
sheet in into IDA ICE. In this case, the Excel sheet for random occupancy schedule
58
==PAGE:69==
5.3. Occupancy schedules
generation made for a previous master’s thesis (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018)
could be slightly altered with a new sheet in the current Excel ﬁle. This sheet could
sum up the needed data for the IDA ICE input and generate new random occupancy
schedules for each simulation.The loading of an Excel ﬁle in IDA ICE is not at all
possible in its current version. However, it is possible to load in PRN-ﬁles (text
ﬁles).
Figure 5.2: Example of PRN-ﬁle for loading into IDA ICE for occupancy
schedule generation.
The possibility of loading in PRN-ﬁles is currently used for instance for loading
in weather ﬁles and source ﬁles in macros, but cannot be loaded in for occupancy
schedules as is. It is possible to create a so called "Graphical script" in IDA ICE
for the occupancy, and here a macro for the occupancy schedule could be created.
However in this macro, it is not possible to insert a source ﬁle as in other macros,
such as done in the window opening control macro. If this became a possibility for
the occupancy schedule, a PRN-ﬁle could be created by copying data from the Excel
sheet (Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J., 2018). An example of a PRN-ﬁle is found in
ﬁgure 5.2. In this way, a randomly generated occupancy schedule could easily be
implemented in IDA ICE. However, this ﬁle would not renew its randomness as the
Excel sheet would.
59
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The aim of this master’s thesis was to demonstrate detailed modelling of mechani-
cal ventilation and user behaviour in Danish residences using a commercial building
simulation tool.
The base case simulation model created according to current guidelines, especially
the ones given in the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations (Vorre, M. H. et al.,
2017), included occupancy schedules with an overlap in the zones to take varying
occupancy behaviour into account, giving a 12% higher occupancy than studies have
shown (Barthelmes, V. M. et al., 2018). The higher occupancy contributes to a lower
energy consumption for heating as the occupants release heat. Furthermore, the oc-
cupancy schedules described by the guidelines had its shortcomings as no schedule
was given for bathrooms.
In the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations, a minimum fresh air supply of 5
L/s per person is given. This would correspond to 0.18 L/s per m2 for the apartment
in Nordhavn which does not comply with the requirement the Danish Building Reg-
ulations 2018 of 0.3 L/s per m2 and other guidelines such as DS/EN 15251 (Dansk
Standard, 2007).
The detailed simulation model based on recent research results included simpliﬁed
occupancy schedules veriﬁed with randomly generated schedules based on ﬁndings
by Andersen et al. (2013). The simpliﬁed occupancy schedules are recommended
for use when performing dynamic simulations.
Occupancy behaviour was included for window openings based on a stochastic model
derived of measurement in Danish dwellings (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013) and a solar
shading control was implemented based on a design parameter study (Sarran, L.,
2016). The window opening control resulted in openings during the winter period
leading to a much higher energy consumption for heating than in the base case.
Air handling unit components were created based on two typical constant air volume
ventilation systems in Danish dwellings, including ventilation aggregate composition
61
==PAGE:72==
Conclusion
and their capacity. An investigation solely of these AHUs resulted in a higher total
energy consumption than when using the standard AHU component in the simu-
lation tool, whilst the amount of overheating hours was slightly decreased. If the
created AHUs could be made available as predeﬁned HVAC componenets in simu-
lations tools, it is recommended that these are used instead of the standard units.
A comparison of the base case and the detailed simulation results showed a large
increase in energy consumption of up to approximately 2,000 % and in hours of over-
heating of up to approximately 33,000 % for the detailed models. This is mainly a
result of the stochastic window opening model, resulting in a higher need for heating
during winter and a lack of venting heat out through windows during summer. The
use of the stochastic model for window opening is more realistic than the use of a
thermostat control which is often used in simulation tools. However, the stochastic
model has its limitation as it does not take zone orientation, building construction
materials and window opening angle into account, resulting in various degrees of
uncertainties depending on the type of residence modelled.
In general, the use of recent research results for implementation in dynamic simu-
lation is preferred even though limitations and uncertainties are present, as this is
simply more realistic. Simulations with too simpliﬁed inputs such as a thermostat
window control often results in a lower energy consumption and better indoor envi-
ronment than in reality. So far however, the detailed inputs are not comprehensive
enough to ﬁt all dwelling types and there is therefore still room for improvement.
62
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
Further work
The investigation performed in this master’s thesis is based on only one apartment
with three bedrooms, two bathrooms and a combined kitchen/living room area. This
is not representative for the entire Danish building mass. Further studies of other
dwelling types such as smaller or larger apartments and houses could show better or
worse compliance with the Guidelines for Indoor Climate Calculations (Vorre, M.
H. et al., 2017) and other guidelines used for the base case simulation model.
As written in the discussion the possibility of increasing the exhaust in the kitchen
and bathrooms to minimum 20 L/s and 15 L/s required by the Danish Building
Regulations (Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, 2019) has not been implemented in
the simulation models. The increase would lead to a change in the indoor environ-
ment and would also lead to more realistic results, as occupants would use this when
for instance cooking.
The stochastic model implemented for the window opening control does not include
the opening angle of the window. An implementation of this would occasionally lead
to a decrease in the air ﬂow through the open windows and would thereby change
the indoor environment and possibly the need for space heating.
As written previously the heating setpoint has been set to 20 ◦C for all zones ac-
cording to DS/EN 15251 (Dansk Standard, 2007). An investigation of the preferred
temperature setpoints for all types of zones could be implemented in a simulation,
which could lead to a higher energy consumption for space heating for some zones
while lowering it in others.
As written in the discussion the windows will always be closed and solar shading
undrawn when the occupants are not present in the apartment. In order to ensure
that this does not occur as it might not reﬂect reality, improvements of the imple-
mented macros could be investigated.
The implemented window opening control macro was based on a study of dwellings
63
==PAGE:74==
Further work
with natural or mechanical exhaust ventilation (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013). In the
simulation model mechanical ventilation with both exhaust and supply is imple-
mented, which would be the case for many future buildings. A study of the window
openings in Danish dwellings with mechanical exhaust and supply ventilation could
be performed and implemented in dynamic simulations for better accuracy.
A typical Danish advice is to turn oﬀthe heating thermostats when opening windows
for longer periods at a time during the heating season. There is no implementation
in the simulation models to ensure this. An investigation of whether or not Danish
occupant actually follow this advice would be interesting to implement in simulations
as this could aﬀect the energy consumption for space heating.
64
==PAGE:75==
References
Aggerholm, S.
SBi-anvisning 213: Bygningers energibehov.
Statens Byggefork-
sningsinstitut, Aalborg Universitet, København SV, Denmark, 2018.
Ahmed, K., Akhondzada, A., Kurnitski, J., and Olesen, B. Occupancy schedules
for energy simulation in new prEN16798-1 and ISO/FDIS 17772-1 standards.
Sustainable Cities and Society, (35):134–144, 2017.
Anderesen, R., Fabi, V., Toftum, J., Corgnati, S. P., and Olesen, B. W. Window
opening behaviour modelled from measurements in Danish dwellings. Building
and Environment, 69(2013):101–113, 2013.
Andersen, R. K. Logisticversion2.dll, 2018a. Teaching material for course 11522
Simulation of indoor environment and energy consumption using IDA ICE, taught
at the Technical University of Denmark in August 2018.
Andersen, R. K. random numbers.prn, 2018b. Teaching material for course 11522
Simulation of indoor environment and energy consumption using IDA ICE, taught
at the Technical University of Denmark in August 2018.
Andersen, R. K. Personal e-mail communication, 2019. received 24-06-2019.
Barthelmes, V. M., Li, R., Andersen, R. K., Bahnﬂeth, W., Corgnati, S. P., and
Rode, C. Proﬁling occupant behaviour in Danish dwellings using time use survey
data. Energy & Buildings, 117(2018):329–340, 2018.
Bolius.
Undersøgelse:
Så
varmt
har
danskerne
det
i
deres
hjem,
2018.
URL
https://www.bolius.dk/
undersoegelse-saa-varmt-har-danskerne-det-i-deres-hjem-39458.
Vis-
ited on 15-06-2019.
Brohus, H., Heiselberg, P., Simonsen, A., and Sørensen, K. C. Inﬂuence of Occu-
pants’ Behaviour on the Energy Consumption of Domestic Buildings. Clima 2010:
10th Rehva World Congress, 2010.
Building Research Establishment Ltd. Breeam: the world’s leading sustainability
assessment method for masterplanning projects, infrastructure and buildings -
breeam, 2019. URL https://www.breeam.com/. Visited on 04-04-2019.
65
==PAGE:76==
REFERENCES
Cali, D., Andersen, R. K, Müller, D., and Olesen, B. W. Analysis of occupants’
behavior related to the use of windows in German households.
Building and
Environment, (103):54–69, 2016.
Dansk Standard. DS/EN 15251:2007 - Input-parametre til indeklimaet ved design
og bestemmelse af bygningers energimæssige ydeevne vedrørende indendørs luftk-
valitet, termisk miljø, belysning og akustik.
Dansk Standard, Charlottenlund,
Denmark, 1. udgave edition, 2007.
D’Oca, S. and Hong, T. Occupancy schedules learning process through a data mining
framework. Energy and Buildings, (88):385–408, 2014.
Energistyrelsen. Reboundeﬀekten for opvarmning af boliger - hvor stor forskel er
der på det faktiske energiforbrug og det teknisk beregnede behov?, 2016.
EQUA.
Ida indoor climate and energy, 2019.
URL https://www.equa.se/en/
ida-ice. Visited on 03-02-2019.
Exhausto.
Vex35-2dv,
2019.
URL https://www.exhausto.dk/produkter/
Decentralised/VEX35/VEX35DV. Visited on 15-02-2019.
Fabi, V., Andersen, R. V., and Corgnati, S. P.
Inﬂuence of occupant’s heating
set-point preferences on indoor environmental quality and heating demand in
residential buildings. HVAC&R Research, (19:5):635–645, 2013.
Fabi, V., Andersen, R. V., and Corgnati, S. P. Veriﬁcation of stochastic behavioural
models of occupants’ interactions with windows in residential buildings. Building
and Environment, (94):371–383, 2015.
Filippini, L. Occupant behaviour driving rooftop additions’ design. Master’s thesis,
Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, 2016.
Gram-Hanssen, K. and Hansen, A. R. Forskellen mellem målt og beregnet energi-
forbrug til opvarmning af parcelhuse. Statens Byggeforksningsinstitut, Aalborg
Universitet, København SV, Denmark, 2016.
Green Building Council. Leed green building certiﬁcation usgbc, 2019. URL https:
//new.usgbc.org/leed. Visited on 04-04-2019.
Guglietti, A. and Pesavento, M. Control strategies for mechanical ventilation in
low-energy residences. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark, 2017.
Havelund, M. Hvidbog om bygningsrenovering - Et overblik over den eksisterende
viden og de væsentligste studier af renoveringseﬀekter.
Bygherreforeningen og
Grundejernes Investeringsfond, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2. udgave edition, 2013.
66
==PAGE:77==
REFERENCES
Henriksen, N. F. and Olesen, B. V. Modelling of occupant behaviour in relation
to window operations. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs.
Lyngby, Denmark, 2019.
Johansen, A. L. Solar radiation - educational note on solar radiation, 2016. Teaching
material for course 11142 Daylight and Lighting, taught at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark in Autumn 2016.
Jones, R. V., Fuertes, A., Gregori, E., and Giretti, A. Stochastic behavioural mod-
els of occupants’ main bedroom window operation for UK residential buildings.
Building and Environment, 118(2017):144–158, 2017.
Knudsen, H. N. House owners’ experience and satisfaction with Danish low-energy
houses - focus on ventilation. CLIMA 2019 - Proceedings of 13th REHVA World
Congress, 2018.
Knudsen, H. N., Mortensen, L. H., and Kragh, J. Satisfaction with indoor climate
in new Danish low-energy houses. Proceedings of 7PHN Sustainable Cities and
Buildings 2015, BYGDTU Rapport(R-334), 2015.
Kurnitski, J., Thalfeldt, M., van Weele, H., Toksoy, M., Carlsson, T., Bednarova, P.
V., and Seppänen, O. Residential Heat Recovery Ventilation. REHVA, Brussels,
Belgium, 2018.
Langevin, J., Wen, J., and Gurian, P. L. Simulating the human-building interaction:
Development and validation of an agent-based model of oﬃce occupant behaviors.
Building and Environment, (88):27–45, 2014.
Larsen, M. J. and Bojsen, J. Sensitivity analysis of control strategies for mechan-
ical ventilation in low-energy residence. Master’s thesis, Technical University of
Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, 2018.
Nabil, A. and Mardaljevic, J.
Useful daylight illuminances: A replacement for
daylight factors. Building and Environment, (38):905–913, 2006.
Nielsen, T. R. Energi og indeklima - forelæsningsnotat, 2014. Teaching material for
course 11141 Energy and indoor environment, taught at the Technical University
of Denmark in autumn 2014.
Nilan.
Comfort 300lr, 2019.
URL https://www.nilan.dk/da-dk/forside/
loesninger/boligloesninger/ventilation/comfort-serien/comfort-300.
Visited on 15-02-2019.
Reinhart, C. F. Lightswitch-2002: a model for manual and automated control of
electric lighting and blinds. Solar Energy, 77(2004):15–28, 2004.
67
==PAGE:78==
REFERENCES
Sarran, L. Impact of building design parameters on energy ﬂexibility in nordhavn
district. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark,
2016.
Schweiker, M. Understanding Occupants’ Behaviour for Energy Eﬃciency in Build-
ings. Current Sustainable/renewable Energy Reports, (4):8–14, 2017.
Smith, K. M. and Svendsen, S. The eﬀect of a rotary heat exchanger in room-
based ventilation on indoor humidity in existing apartments in temperate climates.
Energy & Buildings, 116(2016):349–361, 2015.
Svendsen, S. and Smith, K. M. Guide to assignment 1, 2018. Teaching material
for course 11116 Sustainable Buildings, taught at the Technical University of
Denmark in autumn 2018.
Traﬁk-, Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementet.dk, 2019. URL https://
www.bygningsreglementet.dk. Visited on 03-04-2019.
Valbjørn, O., Laustsen, S., Høwisch, J., Nielsen, O., and Nielsen, P. A. SBi-anvisning
196: Indeklimahåndbogen. Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, Hørsholm, Denmark,
2. udgave edition, 1999.
Vorre, M. H., Wagner, M. H., Maagaard, S. E., Noyé, P., Lyng, N. L., and Mortensen,
L. Branchevejledning for indeklimaberegninger. Statens Byggeforksningsinstitut,
Aalborg Universitet, København SV, Denmark, 2017.
Zilio, E. Analysis of building services systems for ﬂexible operation of buildings in
smart city district nordhavn. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark,
Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, 2016.
68
==PAGE:79==
Appendices
69
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
Appendix A
Project plan
Start up and initial research
Literatur studies #1
- Videnscenter for byggeri og anlæg
- Study of typical residential types for later case study
- Other literature (master thesises, Ph.D. thesises and their references)
Literatur studies #2
- User behaviour and time use studies
- Mechanical ventilation systems suitable for Danish Residences (product catalouges, 
guidelines, etc., information paper from K. M. Smith?)
- Mechanical ventilation in IDA ICE (guidelines, forums, macro codes, etc.)
Input study
- user behavior / time-use
- moisture production
- internal heat gains
- mechanical ventilation systems
- check of itterations of case study
Implementation of typical mechanical ventilation systems in IDA ICE
Case study #1
- building model in IDA ICE
- simulations of "base case" (branchevejledning)
Case study #2
- simulations of "detailed cases" (including defined inputs and mechanical 
ventilation)
- possibly consulting engineer check
Initial writing phases
Final writing phase
Proofreading and other corrections
Hand in master thesis
May
June
Task
5
6
7
8
February
2019
16 17 18 19 20 21
10 11 12 13 14 15
9
March
April
22 23 24 25 26
Figure A.1: Initial project plan of the master’s thesis.
Mandatory submission to DTU inside.
71
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
Appendix B
Eauipment schedules in IDA ICE
B.1
Equipment schedules for the base case model
Figure B.1: Equipment schedule for the bedrooms in the base case IDA ICE
model.
73
==PAGE:84==
Eauipment schedules in IDA ICE
Figure B.2: Equipment schedule for the kitchen/living room in the base case
IDA ICE model.
B.2
Equipment schedules for the detailed model
Figure B.3: Equipment schedule for the bedrooms in the detailed IDA ICE
model.
74
==PAGE:85==
B.2. Equipment schedules for the detailed model
Figure B.4: Equipment schedule for the kitchen/living room in the detailed
IDA ICE model.
75
==PAGE:86==
76
==PAGE:87==
Appendix C
Air handling units in IDA ICE
Figure C.1 shows the generic standard air handling unit in IDA ICE used in the
base case simulation. Figure C.2 and ﬁgure C.3 show the implemented AHUs used
in the detailed models.
Figure C.1: Generic air handling unit in IDA ICE.
77
==PAGE:88==
Air handling units in IDA ICE
Figure C.2: Exhausto air handling unit in IDA ICE.
Figure C.3: Nilan air handling unit in IDA ICE.
78
==PAGE:89==
Appendix D
Simple three zone model geometry
Figure D.1: Simple three zone model in IDA ICE for veriﬁcation of the time
use study based occupancy schedules.
79
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
Appendix E
Coeﬃcients of the opening and
closing model
Table of intercepts and coeﬃcients for group 3 (rented dwelling with natural venti-
lation) (Anderesen, R. et al., 2013) used in the window opening control macros.
Figure E.1: Coeﬃcients of the opening and closing models based on data from
Group 3.
81
==PAGE:92==
82
==PAGE:93==
Appendix F
Window opening control macros for
living room from IDA ICE
Figure F.1: Opening probability macro for living room in the IDA ICE
stochastic window opening control main macro.
83
==PAGE:94==
Window opening control macros for living room from IDA ICE
Figure F.2: Closing probability macro for living room in the IDA ICE
stochastic window opening control main macro.
Figure F.3: Window opening and closing control macro for living room in
IDA ICE.
84
==PAGE:95==
Appendix G
Technical data for Nilan Comfort
300LR
85
==PAGE:96==
COMFORT 300LR BY NILAN
PRODUKTDATA
Bolig
Ventilation 
< 400 m3/h
Passiv 
varmegenvinding
Ventilation & passiv varmegenvinding
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
86
==PAGE:97==
COMFORT 300LR 
Produktbeskrivelse
Comfort 300LR er et energieffektivt ventilationsaggregat med 
varmegenvinding for boliger og mindre erhvervsbygninger 
med et ventilationsbehov på op  til 400 m3/h.
Derfor er der serviceadgang fra begge sider, hvilket betyder, 
at Comfort 300LR kan anvendes som ”højre” eller ”venstre” 
model. Det giver en fleksibel og enkel installation.
Comfort 300LR leveres afprøvet og klar til drift. Installation og 
igangsætning skal foretages af en autoriseret el-installatør.
Comfort 3OOLR
  A+
  A
  B
  C
  D
  E
  F
  G
  A
2016
1254/2014
ENERGIA · ЕНЕРГИЯ · ΕΝΕΡΓΕΙΑ · ENERGIJA · ENERGY · ENERGIE · ENERGI
37
db
400 m3/h
87
==PAGE:98==
Tidsstyret alarm for filterskift.
Filter udskiftes nemt ved at åbne den 
øverste låge ved hjælp af fingerskruer. 
God plads til rengøring med støvsuger.
Optisk alarm for filterskift.
Automatisk bypass spjæld leder udeluften forbi 
varmeveksleren, når der ikke er behov for varme-
genvinding, og sparer dermed energi.
Effektiv modstrømsveksler med høj temperatur- 
virkningsgrad og lavt tryktab, giver god varme-
genvinding og lavt energiforbrug.
De effektive ventilatorer er drevet af energivenlige 
EC-motorer.
De leverer en konstant luftmængde og er reguler-
bare i fire trin.
Forberedt for integreret vandvarmeflade eller 
ekstern vand- eller elvarmeflade.
Der medfølger et overskueligt og 
brugervenligt HMI touch panel.
Den moderne CTS 602 styring kører 
Modbus kommunikation
Pulverlakeret kondensbakke 
forhindrer dannelsen af ”sur vand”, 
og leder kondensvandet ud.
Med indbygget fugtstyring til behovsstyret venti-
lation. 
Lav ventilationstrin ved lav luftfugtighed og højt 
ventilationstrin ved høj luftfugtighed (f.eks. ved 
bad).
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
88
==PAGE:99==
TEKNISKE DATA
Dimensioner (B×D×H)
1000 x 508 x 560 mm 
Vægt  (*1)
45/33 kg
Pladetype kabinet
Aluzink stålplade
Varmevekslertype 
Modstrømsveksler i 
Polyethylenterephthalat  
med aluminiumskasse
Ventilatortype
EC, volumenkonstante
Filterklasse
ISO Coarse >90% (G4)
Kanaltilslutninger
Ø 160 mm
Kondensafløb
PVC, Ø 20×1,5 mm
Lækage klassifikation (*2)
A1
 
SEC* gennemsnitligt klima
-38,9 kWh/(m2.a)
SEC koldt klima
-77,1 kWh/(m2.a)
SEC varmt klima
-14,5 kWh/(m2.a)
SEC-klasse
A
Type
Tovejsventilationsaggregat 
til bolig
Type drev
Trinløs regulering
Type varmegenvindingssystem
Rekuperatur (modstrømsveksler)
Temperaturvirkningsgrad
87 %
Maksimal volumenstrøm
400 m3/h (100 Pa)
Tilført elektrisk effekt til 
ventilatorer og styring ved 
maksimal volumenstrøm
 108 W
Lydeffektniveau (LWA)
37 dB(A)
Referencevolumenstrøm
0,078 m3/s (280 m3/h)
Referencetrykforskel
50 Pa
SEL
0,27 W/(m3/h)
Centralt behovsstyret regulering
0,85
Maksimal intern lækage
1,8 %
Maksimal ekstern lækage
1,12 %
Filteralarmsignal
Ved behov for udskiftning 
af filter vises en alarm på 
betjeningspanelet.
NB! Det er vigtigt med 
regelmæssig filterskift af hensyn 
til aggregatets præstationer og 
energieffektivitet.
Anvisning vedr. demontage
 www.nilan.dk
 * Specifikt energiforbrug
Forsyningsspænding
230 V (±10 %), 50/60 HZ
Max. optagen effekt/strøm
270 W/1,2 A
Tæthedsklasse
IP31
Standby effektforbrug 
3 W
Omgivelsestemperatur
-20/+40 °C
Varmetab (*3)
0,82 W/m2K
Varmetabsklassifikation
T2
 
AEC - årligt elforbrug
289 kWh/år (100 m2)
AHS** gennemsnitligt klima
4548 kWh (100 m2)
AHS koldt klima
8898 kWh (100 m2)
AHS varmt klima
2057 kWh (100 m2)
 ** Årlig varmebesparelse, primær energi
 
*1	
33 kg er uden sideplader og veksler
*2	
Testet i henhold til EN13141-7
*3	
Testet i henhold til EN1886
Tekniske specifikationer
Data ecodesign
Comfort 3OOLR
  A+
  A
  B
  C
  D
  E
  F
  G
  A
2016
1254/2014
ENERGIA · ЕНЕРГИЯ · ΕΝΕΡΓΕΙΑ · ENERGIJA · ENERGY · ENERGIE · ENERGI
37
db
400 m3/h
89
==PAGE:100==
COMFORT 300LR BY NILAN
Målskema
Tilslutninger
	
1:	 Udeluft
	
2:	 Tilluft
	
3:	 Fraluft
	
4:	 Afkastluft
	
5:	 Kondensafløb
	
6:	 El- og vand-eftervarmeflade
Alle mål er i mm.  
Comfort 300LR vist med tilgang til primær side (veksler) og tilslutning mod højre. Vendes 180°, hvis tilslutning mod venstre ønskes.
 1000 
 136 
 340 
 254 
 296 
 560 
 508 
Ø 160 mm
 136 
 340 
 254 
 212 
1
2
4
3
5
5
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
90
==PAGE:101==
Lyddata
Lyddata er for qV = 200 m3/h og Pt, ext = 100 Pa iht.  
EN 9614-2 for overflade og EN 5135 for kanaler.
Lydeffektniveauet LWA falder med faldende luftmængde  
og faldende modtryk.
Lydtryksniveauet LpA i en given afstand vil afhænge af de 
akustiske forhold på installationsstedet.
Temperaturvirkningsgrad
Temperaturvirkningsgrad for aggregat med 
modstrømsvarmeveksler i henhold til EN13141-7.
PROJEKTERINGSDATA
Oktavbånd 
Hz
Overflade 
dB(A)
Tilluft 
dB(A)
Fraluft 
dB(A)
63
26
 –
 –
125
32
58
45
250
26
58
39
500
27
58
34
1.000
17
61
30
2.000
11
56
30
4.000
10
50
23
8.000
 –
43
21
Total ±2 dB(A)
35
66
47
Kapacitet
Kapacitet af standardaggregat som funktion af qv og Pt, ext.
SEL-værdier iht. EN 13141-7 er for standardaggregat 
med ISO Coarse >90% (G4) filtre og uden eftervarmeflade. 
SEL-værdier indeholder aggregatets samlede elforbrug  
excl. styring.  
Konverteringsfaktor: 
OBS! SEL-værdierne er målt og angivet som en samlet værdi 
for begge ventilatorer.
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
0
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
qv(m3/h)
qv(l/s)
Pa
Max Pa
1000 J/m3
800 J/m3
Lydeffektniveau (LWA)
Nilans aggregater er testet efter gældende normer af akkrediterede uafhængige testinstitutter.
J/m3
= W/m3/h
3600
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
qv(m3/h)
qv(l/s)
ŋt (%)
91
==PAGE:102==
COMFORT 300LR BY NILAN
Kapacitet – Eftervarmeflader (tilbehør)
El-eftervarmeflade
El-eftervarmefladen monteres i tilluftskanalen i en afstand på min. 2 x kanaldiameter 
fra aggregatets tilluftsstuds (normalt min. 320 mm) og tilsluttes CTS 602-styringen 
og 230 V-forsyning. El-eftervarmefladen kan yde op til 1,2 kW varme. 
Vand-eftervarmeflade til indbygning
Vand-eftervarmefladen er til indbygning i anlægget og skal tilsluttes den primære
varmeforsyning og CTS 602-styringen. Vand-eftervarmefladen er med Cu-rør og  
AIu-lameller. 
Kapaciteten fremgår af nedenstående tabel.
Vandside
Luftside
Temperatur 
frem/retur 
[°C]
Flow 
 
[m3/h]
Trykfald 
 
[kPa]
Ydelse 
 
[kW]
Flow 
 
[m3/h]
Temperatur 
før VF* 
[°C]
Temperatur 
efter VF* 
[°C]
Trykfald  
over VF* 
[Pa]
40/30
0,05
0,8
0,53
100
16
32
2
0,06
1,2
0,66
135
16
30
3
0,08
2,1
0,89
210
16
29
5
0,10
3,4
1,17
310
16
27
10
60/40
0,04
0,7
0,96
100
16
44
2
0,05
1,0
1,19
135
16
42
3
0,07
1,7
1,63
210
16
39
5
0,09
2,7
2,10
310
16
36
10
70/40
0,03
0,4
1,09
100
16
48
2
0,04
0,6
1,34
135
16
45
3
0,05
1,0
1,82
210
16
41
5
0,07
1,6
2,34
310
16
38
10
Kapacitet vand-eftervarmeflade
* Varmeflade.
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
92
==PAGE:103==
CTS 602 styring
Betjeningen af Comfort 300LR sker med det tilhørende  
CTS 602 HMI touch panel, der tilbyder en lang række funk-
tioner, f.eks. menustyret betjening, ugeprogram, tidsstyret 
filtervagt, justering af ventilatorhastighed, bypass om 
sommeren, styring af eftervarmeflade, fejlmeddelelser m.m.
CTS 602 leveres fabriksindstillet med en grundindstilling, der 
kan tilpasses de driftsmæssige ønsker og krav, for at opnå en 
optimal drift og udnyttelse af aggregatet.
Der er mulighed for at vælge mellem 2 forsidebilleder til 
hovedskærmen. 
Vejledning i betjening af CTS 602 fremgår af en separat
brugervejledning, som leveres med aggregatet.
AUTOMATIK
Tilslutninger
	
1:	 Udeluft
	
2:	 Tilluft
	
3:	 Fraluft
	
4:	 Afkastluft
	
5:	 Kondensafløb
	
6:	 El- og vand-eftervarmeflade
Automatik
	T2/T7:	 Tilluftsføler
	T9/TC:	 Eftervarmeflade frostsikring
	
T3:	 Fraluftsføler
	
T4:	 Afkast- og afrimningsføler
	
T8:	 Udeluftsføler
	
Funktionsdiagram
1
T7
TC
T4
T9
T3
T8
T2
2
3
4
5
7
6
93
==PAGE:104==
Funktionsoversigt
+ Standard
- Tilbehør
3 niveauer
Styringen er opdelt i 3 niveauer: Bruger/Service/Fabrik med forskellige muligheder 
på de enkelte niveauer.
+
Ugeplan
Aggregatet er udstyret med 3 ugeprogrammer (fra fabrikken indstillet til off).
• Program 1: til den udearbejdende familie
• Program 2: til den hjemmegående familie
• Program 3: til erhverv
Herudover er der mulighed for at programmere sit eget ugeprogram.
+
Brugervalg 1 & 2
Giver mulighed for at overstyre driftstilstanden i hovedmenuen via eksternt potentialfri kontakt eller PIR-
sensor.
+
Alarmer
Alarmlog med seneste 16 alarmer.
+
Datalog
Mulighed for datalogning med kapacitet på 46.000 logninger:
• Kan indstilles mellem 1 og 120 minutter
• Hvis “OFF” vælges logges kun events og alarmer
+
Filtervagt
Tidsstyret filteralarm (fabriksindstillet til 90 dage). Indstillelig til 30/90/180/360 dage.
+
Bypass
Luften ledes forbi varmeveksleren, hvis der ikke er behov for varmegenvinding.
+
Luftkvalitet
Giver mulighed for at vælge fugtføler og/eller CO2-føler til og fra.
+/-
Fugtstyring
Giver mulighed for højere eller lavere ventilationstrin ved høj/lav luftfugtighed.
+
CO2 styring
Giver mulighed for højere ventilationstrin ved højt CO2-niveau.
-
Sommer/vinter drift
Mulighed for indstilling af sommer og vinter drift
Vinter lav
Giver mulighed for at vælge lavt ventilationstrin ved lave udetemperaturer.
+
Afrimning
Temperaturbaseret automatisk funktion for afrimning af veksler.
+
Frostsikring
 I tilfælde af svigtende varmesystem slukkes aggregatet for at undgå yderligere nedkøling med risiko for 
frostsprængning af varmefladen.
+
Temperaturstyring
Giver mulighed for at vælge den styrende temperaturføler for aggregatet.
• T3 UDSUG (fraluft)
+
Rum lav
Stopper aggregatet ved lav rumtemperatur. Hermed undgås nedkøling af boligen, hvis centralvarme-
systemet svigter. Standard sat til OFF. Indstillelig mellem1 - 20 °C og kan styres af:
• T3 UDSUG (fraluft)
+
Luftmængde
Trinløs indstilling af fire ventilationstrin. Tilluft og fraluft kan indstilles individuelt.
Trin 1 < 25%  -  Trin 2 < 45%  -  Trin 3 < 70%  -  Trin 4 < 100%
+
Ekstern brandautomatik
Mulighed for tilslutning til ekstern brandautomatik.
+
Integrerert brandautomatik
Mulighed for integreret brandautomatik. Styring af aggregat, brand- og røgspjæld samt brandtermostat.
Til brug for decentral boligventilation i lejligheder.
-
Fælles alarm
Udgang for fælles alarm.
+
Konstanttrykregulering
Mulig på både fralufts- og tilluftssiden.
-
Køling
Via bypass (kan kun køle med udetemperatur) eller kølegenvinding (kan kun køle med indetemperatur)
Mulighed for at vælge om aggregatet skal køre et højere eller højeste ventilationstrin under køling.
Via ugeplan mulighed for opsætning af natkøling.
+
Indblæsningsstyring
Mulighed for at indstille regulatoren for styringen af indblæsningstemperaturen/tilluft
(kun tilgængelig, hvis styringen er sat op til eftervarmeflade).
+
Ekstern vandvarmeflade
• Temperaturføler T7 er tilluftsføler
• Integreret frostsikring af ekstern vandvarmeflade
• Styring af motorventil og cirkulationspumpe
-
Ekstern elvarmeflade
• Temperaturføler T7 er tilluftsføler
• Overophedningssikring
-
Forsinket opstart
Mulighed for forsinket opstart af ventilatorer, når der er lukkespjæld monteret.
+
Nulstil
Giver mulighed for at vende tilbage til fabriksindstillingerne.
+
Manuel test
Giver mulighed for manuel test af aggregatets funktioner.
+
Sprog
Indstilling af sprog (dansk/finsk/norsk/svensk/tysk/engelsk/fransk/polsk).
+
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
94
==PAGE:105==
Ekstern kommunikation
Tilslutning til IHC
CTS 602 styringen kommunikerer som standard med Modbus 
RTU RS485 kommunikation. Et CTS-anlæg, der benytter 
denne kommunikationsform, kan let forbindes til aggregatet.
Nilans aggregater har en åben Modbus kommunikation, 
hvilket vil sige, at det ikke blot er muligt at overvåge 
aggregatet via et eksternt system/computer, men det er 
også muligt at indstille driften på samme måde, som via 
betjeningspanelet.
Protokollen er som standard opsat til en Modbus RTU 30 
adresse, men kan indstilles til en værdi imellem 1 og 247.
Via en Modbus konverter er det muligt at tilslutte et eller 
flere aggregater til en computer for overvågning og styring 
af aggregatet.
Det er muligt at tilslutte aggregatet til husets IHC-system. 
Dermed er det muligt at optimere driften på ventilationen, da 
IHC-systemet kender husets tilstand. Dermed opnås mindre 
energiforbrug til ventilatordrift og opvarmning i forbindelse 
med luftskifte uden at gå på kompromis med luftkvaliteten.
Der fås adgang til betjening af ventilationssystemet fra IHC-
systemets mange brugerflader på almindelige betjeningstryk, 
pc, smart phones, tablets, e-mail og SMS (både til status-
visning og betjening).
Aggregatet kan betjenes på tre forskellige måder:
•	
IHC Automatik
	
Vælges denne betjeningsform vil aggregatet køre iht.
	
beskrivelse for ”Styring via hustilstand”.
	
Hastighed, temperatur og driftform kan ses, men ikke 
	
ændres på CTS 602 betjeningspanelet.
•	
IHC Manuel
	
Vælges denne betjeningsform er det muligt selv at vælge 
	
hastighed, temperatur og driftform fra IHC-systemet.
	
Hastighed, temperatur og driftform kan ses, men ikke 
	
ændres på CTS 602 betjeningspanelet.
•	
Panelstyret
	
Vælges panelstyret, kan ventilationsanlægget styres fra 
	
CTS 602 betjeningspanelet.
Skærmbillede af styringsmuligheder via iPad
Aggregatet forbindes med Nilan Gateway funktionsblok og 
Schneider TWIDO PLC med tilhørende memorycard og Modbus 
interface.
KOMMUNIKATION
95
==PAGE:106==
COMFORT 300LR BY NILAN
FROSTSIKRING
Alle ventilationsaggregater med modstrømsveksler vil opleve 
tilisning ved vedvarende frostgrader i udetemperaturen. 
Der sker en kondensering af fraluften, når den ved varmegen-
vindingen nedkøles. På grund af den høje temperaturvirknings-
grad vil kondensvandet langsomt omdannes til is, som vil til-
stoppe modstrømsveksleren, hvis der ikke reageres på dette.
Der skal tages stilling til, om aggregatets drift skal sikres ved 
vedvarende frost, eller der kan accepteres reduktion i driften.
I boliger med ophold om natten, hvor udetemperaturen er kol-
dest, vil det være tilrådeligt at frostsikre aggregatet via en for-
varmeflade. Er det derimod et kontor, der skal ventileres, kan 
det muligvis accepteres med reduceret drift om natten.
tude > -3°C
tude < -3°C
ɳt[%]
Temperaturvirkningsgrad
Drift
Isdannelse
Isdannelse
Afrimning
Afrimning
Med forvarmeflade
Afrimningsfunktion
Energien brugt til forvarmefladen er ikke spildt, da den sikrer 
en konstant høj temperaturvirkningsgrad.
Udetemperatur
< -3 °C
Normaldrift
Forvarmeflade
monteret
Afrimningsfunktion 
starter når:
Udeluft < 1 °C (T8)
Afkastluft < 3 °C i 5 min.
Afrimningsfunktionen 
afsluttes når:
Afkastluft > 7°C (T4)
Nej
Efter 30 min.
Nej
Ja
Ja
1. Bypass spjæld åbner
2. Indblæsningsmotoren slukker
3. Varm udsugningsluft blæses
      igennem veksleren 
4. Isen smelter
Normaldrift sikret til
udetemp. = -12 °C
Reduceret luftmængde
udetemp. < -12 °C
Frostsikring
Luftmængde
126 m3/h
216 m3/h
Frostsikring ved udetemperatur
-2 °C
-2 °C
Timer om året 
676
676
Energi til frostsikring via forvarmelegeme
107 kWh/år
183 kWh/år
Tab af energi ved tilisning
105 kWh/år
180 kWh/år
Tab af energi ved afisning
200 kWh/år
343 kWh/år
Energibesparelse ved frostsikring
198 kWh/år
340 kWh/år
Gennemsnitsberegning efter danske dry vejrdata.
Beregning der viser energi anvendt på frostsikring kontra afisningsfunktionen
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
96
==PAGE:107==
Min. 
12,5 cm
Min. 60 cm
5
6
7
8
9
4
3
2
1
10
11
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
30
20
10
Umiddelbar ændring i % af RH
Gennemsnitlig RH (de sidste 24 timer)
Reduceret 
ventilaton
Forceret ventilaton
Normal ventilaton
Intelligent fugtstyring
Nilans fugtstyring tilpasser sig automatisk familiens eller 
bygningens behov.
I Nilans intelligente CTS 602-styring skal der ikke indsættes et 
fast niveau for luftfugtigheden (RH), som aggregatet skal styre 
luftskiftet efter. Ved hjælp af den indbyggede fugtføler, 
beregner styringen selv gennemsnitsniveauet for de seneste 
24 timer. Gennemsnitsniveauet danner grundlag for, om der 
skal ændres på luftskiftet ved udsving i luftfugtigheden.
På den måde kører aggregatet altid optimalt efter det reelle 
luftfugtighedsniveau og ikke et teoretisk niveau. 
Dermed spares der energi, da den automatisk tilpasser sig 
behovet i boligen. Det har stor indflydelse på fugtproduktionen, 
om det er en stor familie eller en enkelt beboer, der bor i boli-
gen. 
Aggregatet tilpasser sig også automatisk til sommer- og 
vinterniveau.
DRIFT
Ændrer luftfugtigheden sig mere end 5-10% i forhold til 
gennemsnitsniveauet, reagerer aggregatet med forceret luftskifte.
Ved en luftfugtighed under 30% aktiveres lavt ventilationstrin
(kan indstilles mellem 15 og 45%).
LEVERING OG HÅNDTERING
El-eftervarmeflade
El-forvarmeflade
med temperaturføler
Min. 32 cm
Min. 32 cm
Transport og opbevaring
Comfort 300LR er fra fabrikken pakket i emballage, der yder beskyttelse under transport og opbevaring. Indtil montage skal 
Comfort 300LR opbevares på et tørt sted under tag i sin originale emballage. Emballagen bør først fjernes umiddelbart inden 
montage.
Installationsforhold
Ved installationen bør der tages hensyn til fremtidig service 
og vedligehold. Der anbefales en minimum friplads foran ag-
gregatet på 60 cm. 
Aggregatet opstilles i vater af hensyn til kondensafløbet. 
Kondensafløbet kræver en frihøjde på min. 12,5 cm under 
afløbsstudsen.
Installation af el-varmeflader
El-varmefladen (tilbehør) monteres i kanalen. Varmefladen 
skal isoleres med et brandhæmmende isoleringsmateriale. 
Tilslutningen af el-varmefladen skal udføres af en autoriseret 
el-installatør. 
97
==PAGE:108==
COMFORT 300LR BY NILAN
CO2-føler 
Med en CO2-føler monteret kan ventilationshastigheden forprogrammeres med  
CTS 602 til at køre højere ventilationstrin ved et højt CO2-niveau i fraluften.  
CO2-niveau er programmerbart (optionsprint nødvendigt).
Vand-eftervarmeflade inkl. regulering 
Med en vand-eftervarmeflade kan tilluftstemperaturen hæves til det ønskede 
niveau. Vand-eftervarmefladen er til indbygning i aggregatet og skal tilsluttes 
den primære varmeforsyning. Leveres sammen med en to-vejs-reguleringsventil, 
temperaturføler og frosttermostat (optionsprint nødvendigt).
El-eftervarmeflade inkl. regulering  
Med en el-eftervarmeflade kan tilluftstemperaturen hæves til det ønskede niveau. 
El-eftervarmefladen bliver leveret til montage i tilluftskanalen, og er monteret med 
nødvendige følere.
El-forvarmeflade til frostsikring 
Med en el-forvarmeflade bliver udeluften opvarmet inden den kommer ind i 
aggregatet. Dermed undgås afrimning af aggregatet, hvilket giver et effekttab. 
Der medfølger temperaturføler til kanalmontage.
 
EM-box 
Med en EM-box er det muligt at varmegenvinde på udsugningsluften fra emhætten 
og dermed øge temperaturvirkningsgraden i de perioder, hvor der laves mad. 
EM-boxen er forsynet med et stålfilter, der effektivt renser emhætteluften for 
fedtpartikler og beskytter dermed aggregatet (optionsprint nødvendigt).
Optionsprint 
Med et optionsprint udvides funktionerne i CTS602-styringen, f.eks. til styring af 
tilbehør.
 Pollenfilter ISO ePM1 65-80% (F7)  
Comfort 300LR leveres med ISO Coarse >90% (G4) filter, men der er mulighed for at 
montere et pollenfilter klasse ISO ePM1 65-80% (F7) i aggregatet. Pollenfiltret mon-
teres sammen med det medleverede pladefilter ISO Coarse >90% (G4). 
Installationskit 
Installationskittet består af 4 stk. vibrationsdæmpere og en vandlås til kondens-
vandsafløbet. Vandlåsen kan bestilles seperat. 
Varmekabel 
Til frostsikring af kondensvandsafløbet kan der bestilles et 3 m langt  
selvregulerende varmekabel. 
 
Løftevogn til Comfort 300LR 
Løftevognen gør det muligt at hejse aggregatet op ad en standard loftstige via et 
hejsespil uden at foretage tunge, farlige og ulovlige løft.
TILBEHØR
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
98
==PAGE:109==
NILAIR
Gør det umulige muligt
Traditionelle luftfordelingssystemer bruger meget plads og 
umuliggør ofte specielle bygningskonstruktioner. NilAIR elimi-
nerer stort set denne problemstilling på grund af slangernes 
størrelse og fleksibilitet.
Fordele
• Fleksibel og pladsbesparende løsning
• Hurtig og enkel montage med kliksystem
• Formstabilt og korrosionsbestandigt kvalitetsmateriale
• Simpel regulering af tilført luftmængde
• Lav vægt
• Høj tæthed
• Rengøringsvenligt
• Let at håndtere og transportere
• Forhindrer lydoverførsel fra rum til rum
NilAIR er allerede monteret i tusindvis af europæiske hjem og 
har siden introduktionen for mere end 10 år siden vundet støt 
indpas på grund af den lette og hurtige installation uden brug af 
specialværktøj.
NilAIR installeres sammen med et ventilationsaggregat og 
består i al sin enkelthed af fordelerbokse, hvorfra der føres 
slanger ud til udsugnings- og indblæsningsbokse i de enkelte rum 
i boligen.
NilAIR kan installeres i loft, væg eller gulv. De lette slanger kan 
bruges til selv de mest komplicerede slangeføringer, og føres 
der, hvor det f.eks. ikke er muligt med traditionelle spirorør.
Installationseksempler
99
==PAGE:110==
PRINCIP
NILAIR BY NILAN
Fordelerboks indblæsning
(monteres i gulv eller loft)
Indblæsning
(monteres i gulv, væg eller loft)
Udsugning 
(monteres i væg eller loft)
Stue
Bryggers
Bad
Bad
Køkken
Værelse
Værelse
Alrum
Soveværelse
Fordelerboks udsugning
(monteres i gulv eller loft)
Ventilationsaggregat
Lydflex
Technical data for Nilan Comfort 300LR
100
==PAGE:111==
MONTAGEVEJLEDNING
CTS602 LIGHT BY NILAN
Comfort 252 / 302 Top / Polar
Version 3.00 - 26.11.2018
BRUGERVEJLEDNING
CTS602 LIGHT BY NILAN
Comfort 252 / 302 Top / Polar
Version 3.00 - 03.10.2018
INFORMATION FRA A TIL Z
Nilan udvikler og producerer energivenlige ventilations- og varmepumpeløsninger af højeste kvalitet,
der sikrer et godt indeklima og lavt energiforbrug under størst mulig hensyntagen til miljøet. For at gøre
alle byggeprocessens faser så nemme som muligt – fra løsningen vælges, til den projekteres, monteres og
vedligeholdes – har vi udarbejdet en række informationsmaterialer, der kan downloades fra www.nilan.dk.
Brochure
Generel information 
om løsningen og de 
fordele, der knytter 
sig til den.
Produktdata
Tekniske informa- 
tioner, der sikrer 
et korrekt valg af 
løsning.
Montagevejledning
Uddybende vejledning  
i installation og ind- 
regulering af løsningen. 
Brugervejledning
Uddybende vejledning 
i indstilling af løsningen 
for optimal daglig drift.
Tegningsmateriale
Udbudstekster samt 
3D tegninger kan 
downloades til rådig-
hed for projektering.
WWW.NILAN.DK
Besøg os på www.nilan.dk, hvor du kan læse
mere om vores virksomhed og løsninger,
downloade yderligere informationsmateriale
og finde den nærmeste forhandler.
Nilan A/S
Nilanvej 2
8722 Hedensted
Danmark
Tlf. 	+45 76 75 25 00
Fax 	+45 76 75 25 25
nilan@nilan.dk
www.nilan.dk
 136 
 340 
 254 
 296 
 560 
 508 
Ø 160 mm
101
==PAGE:112==
102
==PAGE:113==
Appendix H
Technical data for Exhausto
VEX35-2DV
103
==PAGE:114==
INDHOLD:
VEX35-2DV
VEX35-2DV
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
104
==PAGE:115==
VEX35-2DV
VEX35-2DV til decentral boligventilation. Lille, kompakt aggregat med modstrømsveksler. Alle kanaler udgår fra toppen af
aggregatet.
Tekniske data, VEX35-2DV
YDELSER
 
Min/max luftmængde - aggregat med motor M1
54 - 234 m³/h 
Min/max luftmængde - aggregat med motor M2
72 - 432 m³/h 
Luftmængde ved 90 Pa systemtryktab og max. SEL/SFP 1000 J/m³
 200 m³/h 
Boligareal: anbefales til boliger op til
(BR18 er opfyldt, forudsat at det eksterne tryktab ikke overstiger 90 Pa)
 160 m²
Filterklasse tilluft/fraluft, standard
(F7-filtre kan leveres som tilbehør)        
 ePM10 55% (M5)
Omgivende temperatur (installationssted)    
+5ºC til 40ºC 
Driftstemperaturområde uden forvarme
(Ved udetemperatur under ca. 0ºC anbefales forvarmeflade for at sikre balanceret drift)
0ºC til 40ºC 
Driftstemperaturområde med forvarme 
 -12ºC til 40ºC
17.06.2019 | 01/13
105
==PAGE:116==
KABINETTET
 
Højde
- incl. fødder og stilleskruer (tilbehør)
- excl. fødder og stilleskruer
943 mm
750 mm
Bredde
598 mm
Dybde inkl. ophæng 
 525 mm
Studsdimension, nippelmål
 Ø160 mm
Vægt inkl. emballage
59,5 kg
Vægt, aggregat
- vægt uden låge
- vægt uden låge, filtre og veksler
 54,0 kg
47,0 kg
41,5 kg
Dimensioner inkl. emballage (HxBxD)
975x625x570 mm
Yderkabinet, materiale
Varmegalvaniseret plade
Yderkabinet, overflade:
Låge
Resterende kabinet
Hvid (RAL9016)
Ulakeret*
Isolering af kabinet (mineraluld)
 30/50 mm
Elektrisk tæthedsklasse
 IP34
* Aggregatet kan leveres lakeret mod merpris og længere leveringstid i farverne RAL9005, 9016, 7035 og 7040
ELEKTRISKE DATA
 
Betjeningspanel
Stouch
Forsyningsspænding
 1x230V, 50 Hz
Max. strømforbrug:
- uden for- og eftervarme
- med for- og eftervarme
 
1,77 A
7,52 A
Max. effektforbrug:
- uden for- og eftervarme
- med for- og eftervarme
0,18 kW
1,47 kW
Se yderligere tekniske data i montagevejledning 3005929, side 8.
17.06.2019 | 02/13
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
106
==PAGE:117==
Tekniske data, el-varmeflade
El-varmeflade
Forvarmeflade
EKA NIS 1601000
 Eftervarmeflade
EKA 160300
Luftmængde 
200 m³/h
200 m³/h
Varmekapacitet
1,0 kW
0,3 kW
Temperaturstigning
14,7 K
4,4 K
Strømforbrug (1x230V) via VEX'en
4,3 A
1,3 A
Kanaltilslutning
 Ø 160 mm
Ø 160 mm
 Vægt
3,0 kg
3,0 kg
Da den elektriske varmeflade er uden lameller, er tryktabet ubetydeligt.
Der er indbygget termosikring og manuelt reset.
Målskitse:
Større forvarmeflade
Under særlige forudsætninger er det er muligt at tilslutte en forvarmeflade på mere end 1000 Watt. Se hvordan i vejledning
3005367.
17.06.2019 | 03/13
107
==PAGE:118==
Positionstegning med luftretninger
Tegningen viser aggregatets opbygning og dets komponenter (her vist som en Left udgave)
 
17.06.2019 | 04/13
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
108
==PAGE:119==
 Nr.
Del 
1
Afdækning af automatikprint
2
Temperatursensor, afkast (TE)
3
Temperatur- og fugtsensor, fraluft (DTJ100.1)
4
Temperatursensor, udeluft (TL)
5
Ventilator, afkast (IV)
6
Ventilator, tilluft (PV)
7
Modstrømsveksler (PR)
8
Filter, fraluft (IF)
9
Filter, tilluft (PF)
10
Bypassmotor (M1)
11
Temperatursensor, tilluft (TJ)
12
El-forsyningskabel med stik
13
Drypbakke/kondensafløb (minimumsafstand under VEX35: 150 mm)
14
Sokkel & stilleskruer (tilbehør for montage på gulv)
17.06.2019 | 05/13
109
==PAGE:120==
Betjeningspanel
Betjenings-panel:
STOUCHVEX3335
 
 
Beskrivelse
Enkel styring med de nødvendige indstillings-
muligheder
Tilbehør til VEX33-2DM
√
Tilbehør til VEX35-2DV
√
One Touch betjening
√
Børnesikring
√
Tastelyd
√
Kommunika-
tionsprotokol: Modbus
√
Standby mode, energispare-
funktion
√
Mål på panel
84x84x22
Visning af aktuel
tillufttemperatur
√
Visning af indstillet
tillufttemperatur
√
Visning af ventilator-
hastighed
√
17.06.2019 | 06/13
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
110
==PAGE:121==
Kapacitetskurve
VEX35-2DV, kapacitetskurve
Aggregat med motortype M1
 
Kapacitetskurve med ePM10 55% (M5) filtre
 
SEL/SFP-kurve (specifikt elforbrug til lufttransport for begge ventilatorer)
A
B
=
 = 
Tillægstryktab kunstofveksler (Pa)
Tillægstryktab ePM1 70% (F7) filter (Pa)
Ventilator toleranceklasse 3, iht. DIN24166
 
Aggregat med motortype M2
17.06.2019 | 07/13
111
==PAGE:122==
Kapacitetskurve med ePM10 55% (M5) filtre
SEL/SFP-kurve (specifikt elforbrug til lufttransport for begge ventilatorer)
A
B
=
=
Tillægstryktab kunstofveksler (Pa)
Tillægstryktab ePM1 70% (F7) filter (Pa)
Ventilator toleranceklasse 3, iht. DIN24166
17.06.2019 | 08/13
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
112
==PAGE:123==
Temperaturvirkningsgrad
VEX35-2DV
Temperaturvirkningsgraden og i mindre grad (SFP/SEL-værdier) for et specifikt aggregat er nært knyttet til selve
varmeveksleren og afhænger af fabrikatet. Da der fra tid til anden skiftes leverandør kan der forekomme mindre ændringer i
de tekniske data, hvorfor det altid anbefales at gennemføre en beregning på det givne projekt i vores beregningsprogram
EXselect.
Kurven er retningsgivende, men det anbefales at gennemføre en beregning med beregningsprogrammet EXselect til det
enkelte projekt
1: VEX35-2 med kunststofveksler
2: VEX35-2 med aluminiumsveksler
17.06.2019 | 09/13
113
==PAGE:124==
Lyddata
Lydtrykniveau
VEX monteret: 
Luftmængde
Lydtype
Total dB (A)
Frithængt på væg
126 m3/h 
og 65 Pa
Lpa, 1 m
 32
Lpa, 2 m
 26
180 m3/h 
og 85 Pa
Lpa, 1 m
 39
Lpa, 2 m
 33
Indbygget i køkkenskab 
bag lukket låge
126 m3/h 
og 65 Pa
Lpa, 1 m
 29
Lpa, 2 m
 23
180 m3/h 
og 85 Pa
Lpa, 1 m
 31
Lpa, 2 m
 25
17.06.2019 | 10/13
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
114
==PAGE:125==
Målskitse
VEX35DV, målskitser
Alle mål er i mm.
VEX35DV - Left:
17.06.2019 | 11/13
115
==PAGE:126==
VEX35DV - Right:
17.06.2019 | 12/13
Technical data for Exhausto VEX35-2DV
116
==PAGE:127==
EXHAUSTO A/S
Odensevej 76
DK-5550 Langeskov 
Tel. +45 65 66 12 34
Fax +45 65 66 11 10
salgdk@exhausto.dk
www exhausto dk
117
==PAGE:128==
118
==PAGE:129==
Appendix I
20 random number compositions
Composition of the 20 compositions of random numbers included in the window
opening control macro in the 20 detailed simulation models for each air handling
unit (Nilan and Exhausto). Each random number refers to one of the 19 sets of
numbers in the random number source ﬁle.
Figure I.1: 20 compositions randomly based on the 19 sets of the random
number source ﬁle.
119
==PAGE:130==
120
==PAGE:131==
Appendix J
Time use study and randomly based
occupancy schedule for living room
Figure J.1: Time use study based occupancy schedule.
121
==PAGE:132==
Time use study and randomly based occupancy schedule for living room
Figure J.2: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 1 for living room.
Figure J.3: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 2 for living room.
122
==PAGE:133==
Figure J.4: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 3 for living room.
Figure J.5: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 4 for living room.
123
==PAGE:134==
Time use study and randomly based occupancy schedule for living room
Figure J.6: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 5 for living room.
Figure J.7: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 6 for living room.
124
==PAGE:135==
Figure J.8: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 7 for living room.
Figure J.9: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 8 for living room.
125
==PAGE:136==
Time use study and randomly based occupancy schedule for living room
Figure J.10: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 9 for living room.
Figure J.11: Randomly generated occupancy schedule 10 for living room.
126
