==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
A safe and just space for humanity: Assessing environmental and
social impacts of policies on an absolute scale
Authors
Nicolas Louis Roger Desmoitier, s172173
Mathilde Clara Kolenda, s172170
June 28, 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Foreword
This master thesis was carried out by Mathilde Kolenda and Nicolas Desmoitier working in full collabo-
ration, the entire work being equally shared between the two students. The project was conducted within
a period of 5 months, from January, 28th 2019 to June, 28th 2019.
This project was written within the scope of a collaboration between the research group Quantitative
Sustainability Assessment (QSA - part of the Sustainability division) at the Technical University of
Denmark and the UNEP DTU Partnership. It fulﬁlls the requirements for graduating of a M.Sc. in
Environmental Engineering at DTU.
UNEP DTU Partnership is hosted by DTU Management but is also a UN Environment (UNEP) Collab-
orating Centre, which actively participates in both the planning and implementation of UNEP’s Climate
Change Strategy and Energy Programme.
We would like to thank our supervisors for a fruitful collaboration on this project. Speciﬁcally, we would
like to thank Morten Ryberg for his very close supervision of the project and his availability throughout
the whole process, Mirko Dal Maso for his constructive and insightful feedback and Karen Holm Olsen
for her different perspective from engineering, which led to very interesting discussions.
Finally, we are grateful for our families, roommates and friends for their support, with a special note to
the ’French maﬁa’ with which we have weekly shared well-deserved cake breaks.
i
==PAGE:4==
Opening statement
"To achieve the goals you have set [to keep global warming below 1.5 °C] you need to take urgent and
far-reaching action - an unprecedented transformation - in all aspects of society with many implications
for policy-making." states the IPCC Chair Hoesung Lee to the UN Heads of States at the opening of
the resumed High-Level Segment of COP 24 (IPCC 2018). The authors of this paper deeply agree with
the previous statement, which pinpoints at crucial points that urgently need to be addressed to embrace
the extent of the challenge modern societies are facing today. Motivations to pursue this project are
elaborated on in this opening statement.
First and foremost, far-reaching action needs to be guided by goals up to the task. As a matter of
fact, global warming has to be contained within 1.5 °C compared to pre-industrial levels if large-scale
consequences are to be avoided. But this is not the only key Earth-system process to be safeguarded.
Biodiversity and ecosystems must be protected, land-use pressures and particularly deforestation must
be dramatically reduced, water pollution with nutrients, old and new pollutants must be limited, and so
on.
Even though bottom-up actions initiated by citizens are proven to be efﬁcient to limit anthropogenic
pressures on the environment, top-down measures are mandatory and states have a key-role to play
to provoke systemic change. In that prospect, the Paris Agreement marked a historic turning point in
global action on climate change, committing all countries to play a part in limiting global temperature
rise, adapt to changes already occurring, and regularly increase efforts over time. To achieve this, ade-
quate and ambitious policies, or put differently ’good enough’ policies, are required. But what are ’good
enough’ policies?
’Good enough’ policies need to support ’true’ sustainable development. Sustainability was initially
coined at the Brundtland conference, when environmental awareness started to gain ground in the late
80s. It was then deﬁned as "meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs" (WCED 1987). Yet, this quite unspeciﬁc deﬁnition led to different
interpretations, failing to hamper the dramatic current situation. Therefore, this deﬁnition needs to be
strengthened to prevent economic growth from being achieved at the cost of environmental degradation.
ii
==PAGE:5==
An updated deﬁnition of sustainable development could be as suggested by Griggs (2013) "a develop-
ment that meets the needs of the present while safeguarding Earth’s life support system, on which the
welfare of current and future generations depends" (Griggs et al. 2013). The absolute vision for sus-
tainability is introduced in this deﬁnition, acknowledging the ﬁnite resources of the planet. The latter
deﬁnition of sustainable development is the vision supported in this work, which aims at reinforcing the
concept of absolute sustainability.
As "what gets measured gets managed" (Drucker 1954), better assessment methods for policies need
to be thought about and put in place. They should be supported by ’absolute sustainability’ to design
efﬁcient policies. The assessment also requires a holistic and trans-disciplinary vision, considering the 3
pillars of sustainability -environmental, social and economic- on an equal footing to avoid burden shift-
ing. To do so, the ’2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ represents a ﬁrst milestone framework.
It pledges common action through 17 Sustainable Development Goals and 169 targets (UN 2015) in
order to improve human lives and protect the environment. Even though aiming at increasing the focus
on the environmental pillar, the SDGs do not prevent in practice a weak interpretation of sustainable
development. Worse still, a practice called ’SDG washing’ emerged in 2017, which points at most often
businesses branding their positive contribution to some SDGs, while ignoring their negative impact on
others (OECD - Development Matters 2017).
To avoid any further washing and dangerous use due to the wide success of the term sustainability,
transparency is essential within the context of the burning need for global political action. The Initiative
for Climate Action Transparency (ICAT) was founded to provide policy-makers worldwide with tools
to measure and assess the impacts of policies or actions with a focus on climate change and to support
transparency. Accordingly, the ICAT modular series of guidance was built for countries to use. The
ICAT Transformational Change methodology aims at measuring the effects of policies and actions on
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, responding to sustainable development needs and driving systemic
change, further detailed in the ICAT Transformational Change Guidance. Tansformational Change to-
wards sustainable development qualiﬁes how much new established policies shift away from unsustain-
able practices. The Transformational Change (TC) guidance particularly deals with the transformational
potential of policies (ICAT 2018a).
iii
==PAGE:6==
All things considered, the main driver of this project is to contribute to moving in the right direction and
to supporting the design of transformational policies. The main objective is to develop an assessment
methodology, which facilitates the quantiﬁcation of both social and environmental impacts of policies
on an absolute scale. It hinges on the compass of the Safe and Just Operating Space (SJOS) to direct
decision-making, developed by the economist Raworth (Raworth 2012). The SJOS puts the landmark
Planetary Boundaries (PBs) framework (Rockström et al. 2009), acknowledging the ﬁnite supplying
capacities of the Earth System, together with the ’social foundation’, relying on humans’ deprivations.
Trying to meet this main objective results in a solid draft of a journal paper to convey the developed
assessment methodology framework.
Besides, transformational change deﬁned here in relation to the SJOS, is incorporated to this assessment
methodology to further interpret the results to answer the question: is the policy ’good enough’? In other
words, to qualify the transformational potential of policies to induce systemic change from a social and
environmental perspective. This conceptualisation is included in the journal paper. Furthermore, the
potential of transformational change applied to the SJOS is acknowledged in a preliminary draft of a
conference paper. It can be found after following the appendix section of the journal paper. The con-
ference paper looks at how to quantify the transformational potential of policies. This piece of work is
exploratory and the draft is not as consolidated as the journal paper.
Mathilde Kolenda
Signature
Nicolas Desmoitier
Signature
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
ES
Earth System. iv, 2, 3, 9, 21, 88
ICAT
Initiative for Climate Action Transparency. iii, 2, 10, 89, 90, 92
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment. 4, 10, 20, 46, 80
LCI
Life Cycle Inventory. 10
LCIA
Life Cycle Impact Assessment. 10, 81
PB-LCIA
Planetary Boundaries-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment. 4, 10, 20, 81
PBs
Planetary Boundaries. iv, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 14, 15, 20–22, 25, 27, 28, 32, 81, 85, 86,
88, 89, 92–94, 96
SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals. iii, 2, 4, 7, 8, 49, 51
SF
Social Foundation. 3, 6, 7, 14, 15, 17, 19, 21, 27–29, 47, 49, 64
SIA
Social Impact Assessment. 16, 44–46
SJOS
Safe and Just Operating Space. iv, 1, 3–7, 10–16, 20, 25, 27, 28, 30–32, 47, 88–90,
92–95, 98, 99, 105
SLCA
Social Life Cycle Assessment. 16, 44, 46
SOS
Safe Operating Space. 3, 9, 14, 20, 21, 24, 25, 28, 88, 97
TC
Transformational Change. iii, 2, 4, 10, 11, 31, 89–92
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Opening Statement
ii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Objectives of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Conceptual framework
5
2.1
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Social Foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Deﬁnition of the dimensions of the social foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Selection of endpoint indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Absolute thresholds deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Environmental ceiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Transformational potential of a policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Transformational change deﬁnition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
Direction of change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Rate of change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods: how to assess impacts of policies
13
3.1
Baseline scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Data inventory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
Downscaling PBs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3
Normalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Policy scenario: impact assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.1
Social impact assessment of the policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Environmental impact assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Visualisation of the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results: ex-ante assessment for the illustrative example
21
5
Discussion
25
5.1
Uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
Parameter uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2
Model uncertainties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.3
Trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Questioning the fundamentals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.1
Underlying principles of the Safe and Just Operating Space . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.2
Underlying principles of the methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
Purpose of the methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.1
Vision to support decision-making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3.2
Power of the assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3.3
Transformational change: vision for the future
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4
Recommendations for further work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Conclusion
32
References
33
Appendices
44
vi
==PAGE:9==
I
Social impact assessment frameworks : State of the art
44
II Deﬁning social sustainability through the Social Foundation
47
II.I
Selection of the dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
II.II Selecting endpoint indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
II.III Deﬁning absolute thresholds for the social foundation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
III Population projection
63
IV Social assessment : supporting information
63
IV.I Social assessment of the impacts of the Geothermal Energy Development in Uganda
. .
67
V Environmental assessment : supporting information
75
V.I
LCA study and PB-LCIA approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Conference paper: Transformational Change
88
Closing statement
106
vii
==PAGE:10==
A Safe and Just Space for Humanity: Assessing
environmental and social impacts of policies on an absolute
scale
[1]Mathilde Kolenda, [1]Nicolas Desmoitier
[1]Morten Ryberg, [2]Mirko Dal Maso, [2]Karen Holm Olsen
[1] Division for Quantitative Sustainability Assessment, Department of Management Engineering, Tech-
nical University of Denmark, Building 421, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
[2] UNEP DTU Partnership, Marmorvej 51, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.
Abstract
The Earth System and the Holocene epoch, particularly suitable for humans to prosper, are worry-
ingly jeopardized by increasing anthropogenic pressures. Thus, there is an urgent need for design-
ing truly sustainable policies, which enables a disruptive shift from unsustainable practices. This
systemic change was qualiﬁed by the Initiative for Climate Action and Transparency (ICAT) as
’transformational change’. The latter can be supported by a new vision for sustainable development
conveyed by the ’Safe and Just Operating Space (SJOS)’, concept coined by Raworth (2012). Rep-
resented as a doughnut, it puts the planetary boundaries framework developed by Rockström et al.
2009 together with the social foundation, based on humans’ deprivations. This project sought to de-
velop an integrated methodology to ﬁrst evaluate the absolute social and environmental performance
of systems targeted by policies, then to be able to assess the associated social and environmental
impacts on an absolute scale. Then, the deﬁnition of transformational change was further explored
in relation with the SJOS to qualify the transformational potential of policies. The Geothermal
Energy Development Policy in Uganda was taken as an illustrative example to demonstrate the
proof-of-concept. The results were visualised using the doughnut, which can be used as a pow-
erful communication tool. Conclusively, this methodology holds a certain potential as a powerful
trans-disciplinary support for designing truly sustainable policies, albeit some challenges remain.
Keywords
Assessment methodology development, Absolute sustainability performance, Safe and Just Oper-
ating Space, Planetary boundaries, Social foundation, Transformational change
1
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Since the Industrial Revolution, ever-increasing anthropogenic pressures on the Earth System (ES) have
been jeopardising the 10,000-year-long-stability of the Holocene-like state, so proﬁtable to humans to
prosper (Rockström et al. 2009). The world has entered a new epoch called the Anthropocene (Crutzen
2002), in which environmental conditions are very likely to be catastrophic for the resilience of human
societies and economies (Steffen et al. 2005). Based on robust and alarmist scientiﬁc evidence pinpoint-
ing at the responsibility of humans’ activities in this global crisis (among others Steffen et al. 2005,
Steffen et al. 2015, Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018), action needs to be urgently taken. To respond to the
extent of the challenge, a drastic systemic change within a decade is mandatory (IPCC 2018). To meet
this overarching goal, policy-making has a key-role to play to provide ’good enough’ solutions. Impor-
tantly, policies need to address the interdependence of environmental, economic and social issues and
need to be designed accordingly to avoid burden-shifting. Thus, it is important to build reliable tools,
that enable assessment of impacts of policies to determine the quality of the solutions they are likely to
entail (Sala et al. 2015).
In that prospect, the Initiative for Climate Action Transparency (ICAT) was founded to support improved
transparency and to provide policy-makers worldwide with tools to measure and assess the impacts of
their climate actions (Initiative for Climate Action Transparency 2019). A modular series of guidance
was built, including guidances for measuring the effects of policies and actions on reducing greenhouse
gas emissions, responding to sustainable development needs and driving systemic change. The need to
assess policies based on their ability to shift away from current unsustainable practices, is called need for
Transformational Change (TC) and is dealt with in the ICAT Transformational Change guidance (ICAT
2018b). Yet, this concept needs to be broadened to include all facets of the environmental crisis.
On the political side, the ’2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ represents a milestone framework
to support decision-making, that pledges common action through 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and 169 targets (UN 2015) in order to improve human lives and protect the environment. Even
though aiming at increasing the focus on the environmental pillar, the SDGs do not prevent in practice
a weak interpretation of sustainable development, since governments focus on realising socio-economic
beneﬁts and often minimise the associated environmental degradation (Kim & Bosselmann 2015).
2
==PAGE:12==
Acknowledging the interdependence of the socioeconomic and environmental issues, Raworth (2012)
coined the concept of the Safe and Just Operating Space (SJOS) for humanity to maneuver within, en-
suring that humans rights are respected while safeguarding environmental limits. On the one hand, the
ecological ceiling is depicted by the Planetary Boundaries (PBs) framework (Rockström et al. 2009,
Steffen et al. 2015). The latter was developed in an attempt to meet the challenge of maintaining the
Holocene state and is based on the planet’s biophysical subsystems or processes. It identiﬁes 9 bound-
aries for the ES not to be crossed in order to stay within the ’Safe Operating Space (SOS)’. On the
other hand, Raworth (2012) extends the concept of environmental thresholds to include a set of 11 social
dimensions, deﬁning altogether a ’Social Foundation (SF)’, below which exists unacceptable human de-
privation. The visual representation of the SJOS is shaped like a doughnut and can be seen in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: The SJOS framework is shaped like a doughnut: the outer circle represents the environmental
ceiling, not to be crossed in order to keep the Earth System in a stable state, while the inner circle
represents the social foundation that shall be guaranteed for all to respect humans’ rights.
Particularly, the PBs framework lays the foundation for Absolute Environmental Sustainability Assess-
3
==PAGE:13==
ment (AESA) and gains an increasing appeal as a supporting tool for decision-making within the po-
litical and business spheres (Bjørn et al. 2016, Nykvist et al. 2013) and for complementing the SDGs
framework (Kim & Bosselmann 2015). Conventional environmental impact assessment methods used to
support decision-making such as Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) mostly focus on giving relative conclu-
sions about the environmental performance of products, services or more generally systems. As for it,
the PBs framework gives absolute conclusions as relying on "absolute environmental references, based
on natural systems’ characteristics" (Bjørn et al. 2016). Ryberg et al. 2018a focused on operationalising
this framework to quantify human activities by developing the Planetary Boundaries-based Life Cycle
Impact Assessment (PB-LCIA) method, that allows to express LCA results in the metrics of the PBs.
These frameworks represent a step forward to address the environmental crisis from an integrated stand-
point. Yet, there is still a gap to be bridged between such assessment frameworks, like the SJOS that
relies on a holistic and absolute approach (combining e.g. the environmental and social perspectives),
and their use as a support for decision-making to assess impacts of policies. Importantly, they have not
achieved initiating the systemic change necessary to avoid large-scale consequences yet. Therefore, the
ambition is to pursue the deﬁnition of Transformational Change in the context of the SJOS, and to deﬁne
the transformational potential of policies accordingly.
1.1
Objectives of the study
The objectives of this study are to:
1. Operationalise the SJOS framework to assess the sustainability performance of systems with an
absolute perspective.
2. Develop an assessment methodology for social and environmental impacts of a policy based on
the SJOS.
3. Explore transformational change for a policy in the context of the SJOS.
The developed methodology is applied to an illustrative example, derived from a real policy case in
Uganda. It consists of a policy to develop geothermal energy on a national scale, notably in order to
meet the Paris agreements in terms of renewable energy development (Zakkour & Cook 2016). The am-
bition of the policy is to add 1,500 MW to the Ugandan grid by 2040, produced from geothermal energy
4
==PAGE:14==
(Government of Uganda 2015). As the policy is still discussed within the Ugandan government ham-
pering the progress of feasibility studies, the few data collected is of poor quality. Consequently, results
stemming from this paper are inadequate in terms of accuracy and should be provided with uncertainties
before being able to support decision-making. Yet, they are sufﬁcient to illustrate the concept developed
here. The supporting information was provided by the Climate Technology Center & Network (CTCN).
The paper has the following structure: section 2 brieﬂy presents the current state of research regarding
the SJOS and then elaborates on the conceptual framework of this study. The developed methodology
and particularly the assessment steps necessary to complete the two ﬁrst objectives are detailed in section
3. The visual representation of the doughnut is used in section 4 to depict the results of the methodol-
ogy applied to the illustrative example of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda. The
shortcomings along with the potential of the methodology are stressed out in section 5, which ends on
potential leads for further work. Section 6 concludes on the most important progress achieved in this
project.
2
Conceptual framework
2.1
Literature review
To map the current use of the Safe and Just Operating Space in the scientiﬁc sphere, a literature review
was carried out using the keywords ’Doughnut theory Raworth’, ’Safe and just space’, ’Safe and just
operating space for humanity’ on the search engines ’Google Scholar’ and ’Web of Science’. So far,
studies have tried to operationalise the global SJOS for humanity to sub-levels (national or regional
scales) to support and inﬂuence the decision-making process, notably because of its power as a commu-
nication tool (Dearing et al. 2014). Particularly, the SJOS was downscaled at the national level to adjust
to countries’ priorities to deﬁne the ’national safe and just spaces’ (Cole et al. 2014, Sayers & Trebeck
2015, Sayers et al. 2014). It was also used as a comparative tool to quantify the resource use associated
with meeting basic human needs across 150 countries (O’Neill et al. 2018b).
So far, methodologies were based on practical considerations rather than theoretical ones and conse-
quently showed little consistency (Häyhä et al. 2016). From an environmental standpoint, the plane-
5
==PAGE:15==
tary boundaries downscaling process entails translating global thresholds into thresholds at lower scales
(where decision-making happens) that are aligned with the associated relevant targets. Furthermore, the
structure of the social foundation can be challenged: are the sets of dimensions, indicators and thresholds
used so far relevant? Indeed, they show poor consistency, as no consensus exists among the literature.
Thus, a systematic approach is suggested to select dimensions and indicators. Besides, when trying to
set social thresholds (Raworth 2017, O’Neill et al. 2018a), numerous arbitrary and disputable decisions
were made. Keeping these weaknesses in mind, this part aims at reviewing the social framework and
implementing a more systematic approach to frame the social foundation. On the other hand, the PBs
framework is taken as it is and is not intended to be challenged, even though still incomplete in its oper-
ationalisation (Steffen et al. 2015).
2.2
Social Foundation
The Social Foundation (SF) of the SJOS (Raworth 2012) relies on the fundamental concept of ’depriva-
tion’, approach pioneered by Townsend (1987). Deprivation is deﬁned in relation to the multiple facets
of poverty : "Individuals, families and groups in the population can be said to be in poverty when they
lack the resources to obtain the types of diet, participate in the activities, and have the living conditions
and amenities which are customary, or at least widely encouraged or approved, in the societies to which
they belong." (Townsend 1987). In other words, deprivation is a state in which one or several basic
human needs are not met. In that respect, this study takes an individual perspective and has a focus on
individual well-being. Ensuring humans needs (represented by the dimensions of the SF) to be univer-
sally met and to live in decent conditions is therefore embodied in the deﬁnition of the ’just space’ of
the SJOS. Deprivation as a basis to deﬁne social sustainability is particularly relevant for ’low income
countries’ or ’lower-middle income countries’, that still remain in a so called highly socially unsustain-
able state. To update the social foundation framework in a more consistent way, three main steps were
performed : i) Deﬁning the dimensions of the SF, ii) Selecting in a systematic way suitable indicators,
later on referred as ’endpoint indicators’, to represent the dimensions, iii) Setting thresholds for these
indicators, introducing an absolute perspective.
6
==PAGE:16==
2.2.1
Deﬁnition of the dimensions of the social foundation
The dimensions of the Social Foundation were reviewed based on the literature of the SJOS framework
(see 2.1), the theory of basic needs (Doyal & Gough 1991) and the SDGs framework. The process of
deﬁning the dimensions is based upon literature consensus, along with the desire to be comprehensive
in the way essential needs are depicted. This process is detailed in appendix II.I. As a result, 15 dimen-
sions are constitutive of the SF, as depicted in ﬁgure 1: Food, Water, Sanitation, Housing, Health, Life
satisfaction, Education, Energy, Income, Safety and justice, Work, Networks, Democratic rights, Gender
equality, Social equity. All dimensions, thus needs, are considered equally important here.
2.2.2
Selection of endpoint indicators
In the literature, all dimensions constituting of the SF are represented by one or two indicators. The lat-
ter are chosen to depict as much as possible the entirety of the different mechanisms happening within
a dimension, and its possible different aspects. That is why they are referred as ’endpoint indicators’ in
the following. No temporal scale is captured in this term. Again, there is neither consensus nor recom-
mendations on which endpoint indicators to use. Thus, a systematic selection process was developed
in an attempt to strengthen and rationalise the choice. It was desired to have a ﬁxed list of endpoint
indicators, with one indicator per dimension. This is ﬁrst to ensure comparability across studies when
assessing policies. Second, it is a pragmatic choice and enhances the ease of use of the methodology,
when a lengthy list of indicators would limit its potential to be used in practice.
Firstly, the scope to select indicators was precised. Potential candidates merely originated from literature
sources using the concept of the SJOS in addition to the SDGs indicators, as the social SDGs can closely
be linked to the SF (Raworth 2017). Very country-speciﬁc studies were left out, since the selected
indicators were not deemed representative of other countries or more global issues (Dearing et al. 2014,
Cole et al. 2014, Sayers et al. 2014, Sayers & Trebeck 2015). As a result, the ﬁnal list of sources from
which indicators were extracted from is: Raworth 2012, Raworth 2017, O’Neill et al. 2018a, Randers
et al. 2018b and United Nations 2018. These indicators were classiﬁed into the different dimensions.
Secondly, all indicators of the dimension needed to be ranked in order to select the endpoint indicator,
i.e. the ’best representative of the dimension’ while focusing on individuals’ well-being. To do so, four
criteria were deﬁned and prioritised by order of importance (from most to least important).
7
==PAGE:17==
1. Relevance: Does the indicator measure what matters?
2. UN tiers: Takes into account the indicators’ level of methodological development and data avail-
ability
3. Frequency: Depicts the literature consensus
4. Alignment with the SDGs
More details are given in appendix II.II. Indicators were ranked accordingly within each dimension;
the full list can be found in the supporting material (SM1). The ﬁrst ranked indicators were selected
as endpoint indicators, gathered in table 2 (Column 2). More details about each endpoint indicator are
given in appendix II.III.
2.2.3
Absolute thresholds deﬁnition
To deﬁne social sustainability with an absolute perspective, it is envisioned that the sustainable state is
reached when ’no deprivation to humans’ is observed. In other words, when the identiﬁed needs are
met for all. However, deﬁning a threshold in order to quantify the absolutely social sustainable state
has not reached consensus and is undoubtedly inﬂuenced by values, cultural factors and appreciation of
what is deemed acceptable or enough. Accordingly, dimensions were divided into three tiers, depending
on the degree of certainty, credibility or scientiﬁc support with which the threshold for each endpoint
indicator can be deﬁned. Tier 1 gathers dimensions, whose representative indicators directly measure
deprivation or ’anti-deprivation’: the absolute threshold is then straightforwardly set. Tier-2-dimensions
rely on existing social and scientiﬁc studies, numerous enough to represent sound literature to deﬁne
the threshold. Lastly, tier 3 refers to dimensions, for which deﬁning absolute thresholds highly involves
ethical, social and cultural perspectives with little literature available, hence an uncertain and probably
biased choice. For this tier, absolute thresholds deﬁnition was based on empirical data and the Human
Development Index (HDI). Such choices are considerably detailed in appendix II.III. Absolute thresh-
olds for all dimensions are presented in table 2 (Column 3).
8
==PAGE:18==
Table 2: Social absolute thresholds (Column 3) for all the representative endpoint indicators (Column 2)
of the 15 dimensions of the social foundation, grouped by tier.
Tier
Dimension
Indicator
Absolute threshold
Tier 1
Food
Fraction of population undernourished (%)
0 %
Water
Fraction of population using safely managed
drinking water services (%)
100 %
Sanitation
Fraction of population with access to improved
sanitation (%)
100 %
Housing
Fraction of urban population living in slums, in-
formal settlements or inadequate housing (%)
0 %
Income
Fraction of population living below the national
poverty line (%)
0 %
Education
Children aged 12-15 out of school (%)
0 %
Energy
Fraction of population with access to electricity
(%)
100 %
Safety and Justice
Number of victims of intentional homicide per
100,000 people
0
Networks
National average of binary responses to the
question "If you were in trouble, do you have
relatives or friends you can count on to help you
whenever you need them, or not?"
100 % of ’yes’
Tier 2
Work
Unemployment rate by sex, age and persons
with disabilities (%)
5 %
Gender equality
Share of women in national parliaments (%)
50 %
Life Satisfaction
Cantril life ladder (from 0 to 10)
6.5
Tier 3
Health
Life expectancy at birth (years)
75 yr
Social equity
Palma ratio
1.2
Democratic rights
Voice and Accountability index
1.0
2.3
Environmental ceiling
Control variables and thresholds are deﬁned for each PB to represent the Earth System key-processes
(Rockström et al. 2009, updated by Steffen et al. 2015). They are mapping all together the Safe Oper-
ating Space (SOS). The global thresholds deﬁned for the Planetary Boundaries (PBs) need to be down-
scaled at sub-levels, to assess the impacts of the policy on the system’s assigned share of the safe op-
erating space. There are several ways to assign the share of the SOS to a system, based on how to
distribute beneﬁts and burdens within society. The egalitarian sharing principle (seeking equal distribu-
tion between people) is commonly applied for studies at country- and person-scales (Ryberg 2018) and
is thus chosen within this scope. However, it does not take into account the needs’ differences among
people, depending on the geographic situation or level of development for instance. This methodology
could be applied with other sharing principles, but discussing them is not part of the scope of this paper.
9
==PAGE:19==
Transparency is recommended when choosing a sharing principle (Ryberg 2018).
To express the environmental impacts of a policy in the metrics of the Planetary Boundaries (PBs), the
Planetary Boundaries-based Life Cycle Impact Assessment (PB-LCIA) method developed by Ryberg et
al. 2018a is used. It enables to quantify human activities by translating the metrics of the commonly used
environmental impact assessment method Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) (also called Environmental
LCA) into the metrics of the PBs. In short, LCA is a decision-support tool used for quantifying impacts
of human activities on environment, resources, and humans related to the full life cycle of a product,
service or system. (International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook (EC-JRC 2010).
A LCA study is conducted in four steps: deﬁnition of the goal and scope of the study, inventory analysis
Life Cycle Inventory (LCI), Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) and interpretation of results (ISO
2006a). Elementary ﬂows (i.e emissions and resources uses) related to the entire life cycle of the studied
system are listed in the LCI phase, then characterized into potential environmental impacts in the LCIA
phase. As LCA is based on holistic principles, it has been identiﬁed as a relevant method for quantifying
human activities relative to the safe operating space (Bjørn et al. 2015).
2.4
Transformational potential of a policy
2.4.1
Transformational change deﬁnition
Based on the ICAT TC guidance (ICAT 2018b) and in an attempt to deﬁne Transformational Change
(TC) in the context of the SJOS, a suggested deﬁnition is : "A fundamental, sustained change of a
system that disrupts established unsustainable practices and contributes to a sustainable society, i.e.
that remains within the Safe and Just Operating Space, notably in line with the Paris Agreement goals
and the UN Sustainable Development Goals." The word ’system’ refers to the part of society that is
targeted by the policy. The ’macro-transformation’ refers to the shift from the current state, in most
cases unsustainable as some PBs are exceeded, or not all dimensions of the social foundation are ensured
for the whole system, to an ideal sustainable state that would respect such conditions. Put in the words
of the SJOS, the ideal sustainable state remains within the doughnut. Thus, as the deﬁnition of TC
pinpoints, sustainability is only characterised in this study based on the SJOS. Such a shift needs to
be ’disruptive’, i.e. not incremental in time and that happens fast. Consequently, the goal needs to
be set and precised in time. To achieve this ’macro transformational change’, several characteristics
10
==PAGE:20==
need to be deﬁned to qualify to what extent policies contribute to this systemic change. Accordingly,
the transformational potential of policies is deﬁned by both the ’direction of change’ and the ’rate of
change’. Such characteristics are deﬁned in close relation with the Safe and Just Operating Space.
2.4.2
Direction of change
The question aimed at being answered is : How to deﬁne what is the ’good direction’? Since both
social and environmental impacts are taken into consideration, transformational change is actually two-
dimensional. To represent potential directions of TC, ﬁgure 2 shows the total deprivation as a function
of the total environmental budget. The adopted view here is chosen to deﬁne social beneﬁts or fallout as
an aggregate state of all dimensions. The same applies for the environmental perspective. It is looked
at whether the policy aims at going on average in the good direction (except if e.g. one PB happens
to be transgressed), which is deﬁned as a direction to follow to move towards the ideal sustainable
state. Graphically, the SJOS (represented by the green line on the abscissa axis) sketches the whole
set of sustainable states aimed at moving towards. The worst possible sustainable state is when no
environmental budget remains, while a zero-deprivation state is reached (represented by the origin of
the graph). This line represents the border between the set of ’good directions’ (green area) and ’wrong
directions’ (orange area). Any line drawn drawn in the green area is indicative of a good direction to
move towards. The line drawn between the points representing the baseline and policy scenarios can be
qualiﬁed as pointing in the ’good direction’, if below the border between the two domains.
11
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2: Deﬁnition of the direction of change to assess the transformational potential of a policy. The
dark green line represents the SJOS, i.e. all possible sustainable states. The green area represents all the
favorable directions for the policy to move towards to be have a transformational potential.
2.4.3
Rate of change
Once the wanted direction of change has been deﬁned, the rate of change can be looked at. The urgency
of the current global situation makes the direction of change an utmost condition, but it is not sufﬁcient.
It is important to move ’fast enough’ in the right direction to reach the goal. For example, global
warming needs to be limited at 1.5 °C by the year 2100, when it is likely to be met between 2030 and
2052 (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018) if unsustainable practices are pursued. Thus, time is an essential
constraint and the rate of change is relevant to include in the assessment. To measure the rate of change
and assess whether the transformation is fast enough, a target has to be deﬁned, which could be related
to national objectives for example.
12
==PAGE:22==
3
Methods: how to assess impacts of policies
The suggested framework (presented in ﬁgure 3) presents an overview of the different steps of the
methodology. Each layer focuses on answering one objective of this study (numbered according to 1).
To assess impacts of policies on an absolute scale, it is ﬁrst required to investigate the current system’s
social and environmental performance on an absolute scale (later on referred as ’baseline scenario’),
as shown in layer 1 and detailed in section 3.1. The sustainability performance refers in this study to
the capacity of a system to remain within the SJOS. Then, layer 2 of the methodology is dedicated to
assessing the impacts of policies. Added to the baseline results, they enable to draw the ’policy scenario’.
Layer 3 focuses on determining the transformational potential of the policy and is only partly covered in
this paper, as indicated in ﬁgure 3. Both environmental and social aspects were assessed in a relatively
independent way and no feedback loop between the two was included. The method is applied to the
illustrative example of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda. Therefore, the system
considered here is the country of Uganda (national scale).
Figure 3: Overview of the structure of the methodology, the underlying concepts and the different as-
sessment steps. Layer 3 is conceptualised in this paper but not included in the quantitative assessment.
13
==PAGE:23==
3.1
Baseline scenario
3.1.1
Data inventory
Firstly, a data inventory was conducted prior to the environmental and social assessment, serving as the
basis to evaluate the performance of the current system in regards to the SJOS. In the case of Uganda,
data for each metric (endpoint indicators for the dimensions of the SF and control variables of the PBs)
was collected from different sources presented in table 3 and 4. The ’baseline scenario’ represents the
state of Uganda for the year 2018, with the latest available data used as a proxy if no data was found for
2018. For the social assessment, all dimensions were assessed but Sanitation due to lack of data. For the
environmental assessment, three PBs were not assessed: Atmospheric aerosol loading and Introduction
of novel entities as no boundary has been deﬁned in these categories yet (Steffen et al. 2015), as well as
Change in biosphere integrity, as no downscaling method is fully developed yet (Nykvist et al. 2013).
3.1.2
Downscaling PBs
The global threshold for each PB has to be downscaled to the national level in the illustrative example of
the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda. The share of the Safe Operating Space is per-
formed according to the egalitarian sharing principle, i.e. assuming equal share per capita. Practically,
it boils down to multiplying the global boundary by the ratio of the Ugandan population and the world
population. To ensure comparability between the baseline and policy scenarios, the average population
between 2018 and 2040 were taken as references. The downscaling process and speciﬁcities for each
PBs can be found in appendix V.
3.1.3
Normalisation
Then, normalisation was carried out to put the baseline results into perspective, with respect to the
absolute thresholds set for the dimensions of the Social Foundation and to the downscaled planetary
boundaries at the system level. Both types of limits are further on called thresholds. Based on this, it
was possible to calculate the performance of the system. Normalisation principles are similar for both
environmental and social assessments and depend on the nature of the threshold, which is necessarily
a critical value. The value can either be an acceptable maximum not to be exceeded or an acceptable
minimum, not to fall below. For tier-1-dimensions (deﬁned in section 2.2.3), these acceptable extremum
are simply the theoretical extremum of the indicators (0 or 100%). For tier-2 and tier-3 dimensions,
14
==PAGE:24==
the indicators’ theoretical extremum can be different from these critical values. The latter were deﬁned
based on empirical extremum. For the PBs, the acceptable maximum (or minimum) value is deﬁned by
the thresholds not to be crossed and the acceptable minimum (or maximum) is the theoretical value. The
normalisation step is performed according to equation 1.
||S|| =





S−minacc
T−minacc if the threshold is a maximum
maxacc−S
maxacc−T if the threshold is a minimum
(1)
with S being the social (resp. environmental) score for a given state (e.g baseline or policy scenario)
and a given endpoint indicator (resp. control variable), ||S|| the normalised score associated to S, T the
threshold set for the chosen endpoint indicator (resp. for the given control variable), minacc the mini-
mum acceptable value of the indicator and maxacc its maximum acceptable value.
For the social assessment, 0 represents a full deprivation state and 1 represents the social foundation
of the SJOS (zero-deprivation state). For the environmental aspect, 0 represents a state without any en-
vironmental stress, while 1 represents the boundary not to be crossed.
3.2
Policy scenario: impact assessment
The policy scenario consists of primarily assessing the impacts associated to the implementation of the
policy. Then, adding the baseline scenario scores to the impacts of the policy results in the policy scores
(as shown in ﬁgure 3. Subsequently, the sustainability performance of the system in regards to the SJOS
is assessed, following the same normalisation principles as for the baseline scenario (see section 3.1).
A steady-state regime was assumed between the baseline and policy scenarios, meaning that the scores
for both PBs and dimensions of the SF were considered as remaining constant. Only one paramount
socioeconomic parameter is taken into account, namely demographic growth, as it has a large inﬂuence
on the absolute thresholds and downscaled planetary boundaries deﬁnition. Population projections were
used to downscale the PBs to the system level for the environmental assessment and to calculate the
policy scenario scores in the dimensions of the SJOS for the social assessment. All the impacts from
other sectors were disregarded in the policy scenario and the likelihood of change was assumed to be
certain in the scope of this paper.
15
==PAGE:25==
This part aims at quantifying the social and environmental impacts of a policy in the metrics of the
SJOS. Environmental impacts are driven by natural sciences and laws of physics, while social impacts
are characterised by speciﬁc, complex and sometimes irrational behaviors of humans. Consequently,
these two methodologies are at different stages in their development towards quantiﬁcation. This sec-
tion considers both assessments in an independent way, following a more exploratory approach for the
social assessment (see section 3.2.1) and following state-of-the-art methods for the environmental one
(see section 3.2.2).
3.2.1
Social impact assessment of the policy
Hitherto, no standardized method was established in order to assess social impacts in the context of the
conceptual framework of the SJOS (Raworth 2012). Several disciplines developed and gained ground
to answer speciﬁc needs, such as Social Life Cycle Assessment (SLCA) with a focus on assessing
social impacts from products or services (United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 2009) or
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) to analyse, monitor and manage the intended and unintended social
consequences of planned interventions (Esteves et al. 2012). Appendix I provides more information on
characteristics of each discipline. Particularly, some concepts and good practices from SIA were taken
on and adapted to support the quantitative assessment of social impacts of policies within the concept
of the SJOS. This section tries to do so through three steps: i) impacts identiﬁcation, ii) signiﬁcance
assessment and iii) quantiﬁcation of impacts.
3.2.1.1
Impacts identiﬁcation
Due to the early stage in the development of social assessment, a database for social impacts does not
exist yet, in opposition to environmental Life Cycle Inventory databases such as EcoInvent (Weidema
et al. 2013). Moreover, it might never be relevant to use such a tool as social behaviors also tend to vary
among people, cultural perspectives, external circumstances and are case speciﬁc. Thus, for a given
pressure in a given context, many different potential impacts -both positive or negative- can occur. The
ﬁrst step is to identify these speciﬁc impacts. To account for the speciﬁcity and complexity of social
behavior, a good practice in SIA is participatory (Esteves et al. 2012). Inspired by the method devel-
oped in Terrapon-Pfaff et al. 2017, a combined participatory-technical approach is suggested here. The
16
==PAGE:26==
empirical identiﬁcation process includes the following steps. i) Identify relevant stakeholder groups
impacted by the policy; ii) Build a diverse and comprehensive panel of people representing all groups;
iii) Conduct surveys among this panel to list potential impacts. In case i), ii), iii) cannot be performed,
an alternative can be to iv) Scan literature on similar implemented projects in similar conditions to list
impacts. Lastly, it is needed to v) Classify all identiﬁed impacts within the dimensions of the SF.
For the illustrative case Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda, i), ii) and iii) could not
be performed due to limited resources. Instead, the literature scan included reports from the African
Geothermal Inventory Database (AGID) in Uganda and neighbouring countries (Kenya and Rwanda).
The identiﬁed impacts along with their sources are listed in appendix IV.I, table 11. Similarly, the fol-
lowing steps of the social impact assessment, namely the signiﬁcance assessment and the quantiﬁcation
of impacts, were carried out by the authors, instead of experts in geothermal energy, as recommended
for the technical approach.
3.2.1.2
Signiﬁcance assessment
Once the impacts are identiﬁed by stakeholders, they need to be quantiﬁed in order to compare them to
the baseline scenario. With no standardised method or no reference database existing, each impact would
need to be assessed speciﬁcally. As recommended in the ICAT Sustainable Development Guidance
(ICAT 2018a), a signiﬁcance assessment was carried out in order to only screen signiﬁcant impacts. A
technical approach should be followed, involving a panel of expert, either active in the region or with an
expertise in the ﬁeld of the policy. In this context, the term expert is not limited to professional, but can
also refer to selected community members with important knowledge to evaluate local impacts (UNEP-
DDP 2007). This approach was adapted from Terrapon-Pfaff (Terrapon-Pfaff et al. 2017), in which
signiﬁcance is based on four criteria evaluated by experts: Likelihood, Intensity, Geographic extent,
Duration. They are further presented in appendix IV, tables 8 and 9. For all identiﬁed impacts, these
criteria should be evaluated by experts on a ﬁve-point scale and then aggregated to a ﬁnal signiﬁcance
score, following the following aggregation rule:
S(Ii) = L(Ii) ∗(In(Ii) + G(Ii) + D(Ii)), i ∈N
(2)
17
==PAGE:27==
with Ii being the impact i, S its signiﬁcance, L its likelihood, In its intensity, G its geographic extent and
D its duration.
The ﬁnal signiﬁcance score for one impact represents the average of the all signiﬁcance scores given
by experts. The ﬁnal score is eventually classiﬁed into a signiﬁcance level, from ’very low’ to ’very
high’. To quantify only signiﬁcant impacts, it was chosen to merely focus on impacts with ’moderate’,
’high’ or ’very high’ level of signiﬁcance. The associated risk is to overlook numerous insigniﬁcant
impacts within one dimension, that might altogether have a signiﬁcant impact. To address this risk,
signiﬁcance scores can be aggregated per dimension and converted into one signiﬁcance level per di-
mension. Dimensions with a ’moderate’ or higher level of signiﬁcance, for which no individual impacts
were found signiﬁcant, are also looked at during the quantiﬁcation step and are called ’relevant dimen-
sions’ in the following. Signiﬁcance aggregation rule and scales can be found in appendix IV, table 8.
As a result, 6 signiﬁcant impacts (4 in Energy, 1 in Income, 1 in Health) and 3 signiﬁcant impacts on
dimensions, i.e relevant dimensions, (positive impacts on Energy, positive impacts on Health, positive
impacts on Work) were identiﬁed. The average signiﬁcance scores can be found in appendix IV.I, table
11.
3.2.1.3
Impact quantiﬁcation
The objective of this section is to draw ’social impact pathways’ to quantify both signiﬁcant impacts
and overall impact on relevant dimensions. This term is derived from the LCA methodology and rep-
resenting a range of causal relationship between indicators until an area of protection (Jørgensen et al.
2009). In this context, the area of protection could be seen as the individual well-being depicted by
the 15 dimensions and the associated endpoint indicators. Due to the early stage in the development of
social impact assessment and the complexity of social behaviors, it is recommended to consult a panel
of experts to develop the impact pathways, similarly to the signiﬁcance assessment step.
To quantify signiﬁcant impacts, the ﬁrst attempt should be through ’social impact pathways’. It means
that causal links need to be established and quantiﬁed between the policy outcomes, the signiﬁcant im-
pact(s) of the dimension and the associated endpoint indicator. To deﬁne these links, it is recommended
18
==PAGE:28==
in this methodology to follow the DPSIR framework (drivers, pressures, state, impact and response
model of intervention), adopted by the European Environmental Agency, which is a causal framework
describing interactions between the society and the environment (EEA 2019). This framework can be
used as a tool to understand the causes, the consequences and the mechanisms resulting in given impacts.
It enables to deﬁne intermediate impacts and to draw an impact pathway between the policy outcomes
and endpoint indicators, as shown in ﬁgure 7 in appendix IV. The impact pathway can be enhanced
by a participatory approach to improve insights into the system’s behavior, structured by the DPSIR
framework. Therefore, it is highly recommended to adopt such a hybrid method.. For the quantiﬁcation
of causal links, characterisation factors express how much a change in one indicator contributes to a
change in another indicator. It is recommended to prioritize the policy documentation, then the experts
consultation and eventually the literature review on similar projects to deﬁne the causal links as well as
for their quantiﬁcation. It can happen that no impact pathway is possible to draw or quantify, due to
a lack of understanding of the system’s behavior, due to insufﬁcient data or resources. In that case, it
is recommended to report the associated dimension as ’relevant to quantify’ and another quantiﬁcation
tool can be tested out, as explained in the following paragraph.
In the case that resorting to impact pathways to quantify impacts of policies lead to too high uncer-
tainties and quantiﬁcation issues, another approach should be followed. The use of correlation can be
considered, looking at the relationship between two dimensions of the SF. It boils down to drawing a
cause-effect link between two endpoint indicators and calculate the associated characterisation factor
based on empirical data. One of these indicators (i.e the predictor) should be associated to a dimension
in which impact quantiﬁcation was already done. It is important to be aware that correlation does not
necessarily imply causality, hence the necessity to use this tool with a cautious and critical view. To
hamper that risk, validation conditions were set and need to be met to validate the correlation. They
are further presented in appendix IV. In case the correlation is rejected, it is recommended to report
the limitations and to continue the assessment. More details about impact pathway deﬁnition and the
correlation method can be found in appendix IV.
It was possible to draw and quantify impact pathways for the signiﬁcant impacts of the Energy dimension
and for the overall impact of Work, based on the policy documentation and available literature (AGID
19
==PAGE:29==
database). With no participatory approach as a basis to put into practice the DPSIR framework, its use
for the case study is limited. A correlation between the endpoint indicators of Electricity and Health was
performed and validated to quantify the overall impact of the policy within the dimension Health. For
the signiﬁcant impact of Income, it was not possible to quantify the characterisation factor through an
impact pathway due to lack of data. Instead, a correlation between the endpoint indicators of Energy and
Income was tested, but turned out to be too weak to be used, hence no achieved quantiﬁcation. Results of
the quantiﬁcation and detailed methods for the illustrative case of the Geothermal Energy Development
Policy in Uganda can be found in appendix IV.I.
3.2.2
Environmental impact assessment
The environmental impacts of the policy are assessed through a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) study.
As LCA is based on holistic principles, it was identiﬁed as a relevant method for quantifying in human
activities relative to the safe operating space (Bjørn et al. 2015). The LCA study is carried out using
the best-practice recommended by the ISO standards guidelines (ISO 2006a, ISO 2006b). In the case
of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda, the functional unit was deﬁned as "Annual
supply of 1,500 MW to the Ugandan grid". The modeled system includes the production, transportation
and supply of the electricity generated. The model was built using the software SimaPro v8.5.2.0, and
the impact assessment method was the PB-LCIA method as developed in Ryberg et al. 2018a. The
impact assessment method gives results for all the Planetary Boundaries apart from Biosphere integrity,
Atmospheric aerosol loading and Novel entities. The results of the LCA study expressed in the metrics
PBs framework were then added to the baseline results to get the policy scores. Further details on the
LCA study are given in appendix V.
3.3
Visualisation of the results
Results in their normalised form (||S|| as in equation 1) are visually represented on the so called Dough-
nut, illustration of the Safe and Just Operating Space, as shown in ﬁgure 1. It should be interpreted as
follows:
• Social foundation: the full-deprivation state is represented at the centre of the Doughnut (||S|| =
0), while the zero-deprivation state is represented by the inner circle of the doughnut (||S|| = 1).
• Environmental ceiling: the Safe Operating Space is represented by the ring of the doughnut.
20
==PAGE:30==
The zero-environmental stress is found at the upper limit of the SF (||S|| = 0) while planetary
boundaries are crossed when the environmental ceiling is reached. The system operates in an
uncertain state when ||S||>1, i.e. beyond the environmental ceiling.
Since each dimension or PB is represented by a different indicator, results in their respective metrics
cannot be compared across dimensions. However, normalisation allows to depict and compare the de-
privation state (resp. the environmental budget) common to the different dimensions (resp. PBs).
4
Results: ex-ante assessment for the illustrative example
Assessing the Ugandan current social (resp. environmental) performance, predicting the impacts of the
Geothermal Development Policy and ultimately estimating the potential national performance of Uganda
in 2040 lead to the results presented in table 3 (resp. table 4). Furthermore, normalised results for both
states are visually represented on the Doughnut in ﬁgure 4. It shows the state of Uganda in the baseline
scenario, as well as the social and environmental impacts of the assessed policy (grey areas) put into
perspective.
First, it can be seen that Uganda is currently manoeuvring in a high state of social deprivation (no
absolute social threshold is met), particularly within the Energy and Water dimensions. The policy is
expected to have signiﬁcant impacts in 4 dimensions of the SF: Energy, Health, Work, Income, depicted
in ﬁgure 4. However, the impacts for the latter dimension are not considered due to the impossibility
to quantify them (as explained in appendix IV.I. As for all the other dimensions, impacts were assessed
qualitatively as being not signiﬁcant. Therefore, based on this signiﬁcance assessment (section 3.2.1.3),
they have been neglected and the score in their respective dimensions for the baseline and policy scenar-
ios are equal. As for the environmental performance of Uganda expressed in the metrics of the PBs, one
key ES process out of the 6 assessed in this study is currently largely transgressed: Land-system change.
This is explained by the fact that Uganda’s large agriculture resulted in converting all available land into
arable land, entailing intense deforestation. All others PBs currently operate within the SOS. Based on
the visualisation of the results, it is predicted that the implementation of the Geothermal Energy Devel-
opment policy will only cause limited environmental impacts for the 3 PBs Ocean acidiﬁcation, Climate
change and Nitrogen Biogeochemical ﬂow and negligible impacts for the others.
21
==PAGE:31==
While merely taking into account the impacts of this policy, it is foreseen that Uganda will still -from
an environmental perspective- safely operate, albeit Land-system change. As a result and in qualitative
terms, this policy seems to facilitate the enhancement of some social standards in Uganda, while hav-
ing limited environmental impacts. To put these results into perspective, a comparative scenario was
assessed, modelling an hypothetical coal power plant with the same energy target as the Geothermal En-
ergy Development Policy, i.e supplying a sustained additional capacity of 1,500 MW over a year from
geothermal energy to the Ugandan grid. These additional results can be found in ﬁgure 10 of appendix
V.
Figure 4: Visualisation of the current national state of Uganda and in the policy scenario (2040), as a re-
sult of the predicted impacts of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda. The social (resp.
environmental) results are plotted in their normalised form for each social dimension (resp. planetary
boundary). In both scenarios, the assessment for the Sanitation dimension and 3 PBs is lacking.
22
==PAGE:32==
Table 3: Scores for Uganda for each dimension of the social foundation for both the baseline and policy scenarios. n.a. stands for ’non applicable’, norm.
score for ’normalised score’ (scores between 0 and 1).
Social foundation
Dimension
Indicator
Absolute
threshold
Baseline scenario
Policy scenario
Score
Norm. score
Year and Source
Score
Norm. score
Food
Fraction of population undernourished (%)
0 %
41.4 %
0.586
2016 (FAO n.d.)
41.4 %
0.586
Water
Fraction of population using safely managed
drinking water services (%)
100 %
6.44 %
0.0644
2015
(WHO/UNICEF
2017a)
6.44 %
0.0644
Sanitation
Fraction of population with access to im-
proved sanitation (%)
100 %
No data
n.a.
n.a.
No data
n.a.
Housing
Fraction of urban population living in slums,
informal settlements or inadequate housing
(%)
0 %
53.6 %
0.464
2014
(United
Na-
tions n.d.(a))
53.6 %
0.464
Health
Life expectancy at birth (years)
75 yr
57.0 yr
0.762
2012 (WHO n.d.)
66.1 yr
0.884
Income
Fraction of population living below the na-
tional poverty line (%)
0 %
19.7 %
0.665
2012
(World
Bank
n.d.(a))
19.7 %
0.665
Work
Unemployment rate, by sex, age and persons
with disabilities (%)
5.0 %
9.40 %
0.927
2017
(ILOSTAT
-
LFS n.d.)
9.33 %
0.928
Education
Children aged 12-15 out of school (%)
0 %
31.4 %
0.686
2008 (UNESCO - In-
stitute for Statistics
n.d.)
31.4 %
0.686
Energy
Fraction of population with access to elec-
tricity (%)
100 %
19.0 %
0.190
2016 (IEA 2017)
56.8 %
0.568
Safety and Justice
Number of victims of intentional homicide
per 100,000 people
0
11.5
0.890
2014
(United
Na-
tions n.d.(b))
11.5
0.890
Networks
National average of responses to the ques-
tion "If you were in trouble, do you have
relatives or friends you can count on to help
you whenever you need them, or not?"
100 % ’yes’
74 %
0.740
2014 (Helliwell et al.
2019)
74 %
0.740
Gender equality
Share of women in national parliaments (%)
50 %
34.3 %
0.686
2018
(Inter-
Parliamentary
Union (IPU) n.d.)
34.3 %
0.686
Social equity
Palma ratio
1.2
2.0
0.862
2010-2017
(UNDP
n.d.)
2.0
0.862
Democratic rights
Voice and Accountability index
1.0
- 0.6
0.518
2017
(World
Bank
n.d.(b))
- 0.6
0.518
Life Satisfaction
Cantril life ladder
6.5
4.3
0.665
2018 (Helliwell et al.
2019)
4.3
0.665
23
==PAGE:33==
Table 4: Scores for Uganda for each planetary boundary for both the baseline and policy scenarios. All scores for Uganda are expressed in the metric unit
(column 3). n.a. for not applicable or not quantiﬁed
Environmental ceiling
Earth-system
process
Control
variable (unit)
Metric
(unit)
Downscaled
PB (Uganda)
Baseline scenario
Policy scenario
Uganda
score
Share of
the SOS
Year, Source
Uganda
score
Share of
the SOS
Climate change
Atmospheric
CO2
concentration (ppm)
Annual CO2 emis-
sions (t CO2/yr)
2.31 E+07
9.09E+06
39.4 %
2015, (Eora Global
MRIO n.d.)
1.02E+07
44.0 %
Ocean acidiﬁcation
Carbonate ion con-
centration,
average
global surface ocean
saturation state with
respect to aragonite
(Ωarag)
Annual CO2 emis-
sions (t CO2/yr)
1.37E+07
9.09E+06
66.6 %
(Eora
Global
MRIO n.d.)
1.01E+07
74.2 %
Biogeochemical
ﬂows : P cycle
P ﬂow from freshwa-
ter systems into the
ocean (g P/yr)
(kg P/yr)
4.64E+07
3.29E+06
7.08 %
2014
(UN
FAO
2017)
3.30E+06
7.12 %
Biogeochemical
ﬂows : N cycle
Industrial and inten-
tional biological ﬁxa-
tion of N (g/yr)
kg N/yr
4.64E+08
5.99E+06
1.29 %
2014
(UN
FAO
2017)
1.16E+07
2.50 %
Land-system change
Area of forested land
(% of original forest
cover)
Area of forested land
(% of original forest
cover)
5.61E-01
1.80E-01
328 %
2016, (Obua et al.
2010)
1.80E-01
328 %
Freshwater use
Maximum
amount
of consumptive blue
water use (km3/yr)
m3/yr
2.99E+10
7.57E+08
2.53 %
1996-2005
(scaled)
(Hoekstra & Mekon-
nen 2012)
7.61E+08
2.54 %
Stratospheric
ozone
depletion
Stratospheric
O3
concentration (DU)
Stratospheric
O3
concentration (DU)
2.06E+00
0.00E+00
0.00 %
2013, (Ritchie &
Roser 2018)
3.83E-07
0.00 %
Change in biosphere
integrity
Biodiversity
Intact-
ness
Index
(BII),
Extinction
rate
(E/MSY)
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Atmospheric aerosol
loading
Aerosol
Optical
Depth (AOD)
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Introduction of novel
entities
No control variable
currently deﬁned
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
24
==PAGE:34==
5
Discussion
This study uses the SJOS framework as a basis to structure this novel methodology in order to assess
policies’ impacts. It seeks to ensure that raising standards of social conditions does not increase the like-
lihood of moving into dangerous operating spaces with respect to ecological boundaries. The results for
the illustrative example of Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda are subject to large uncer-
tainties due, in particular, to insufﬁcient data availability and quality. However, it demonstrates proof-
of-concept and usability of this assessment methodology, notably to support decision-making with its
powerful way of visualising results. Overall, due to the emergent need for trans-disciplinary approaches
(Sala et al. 2015) and the novelty of an holistic impact assessment framework with an absolute perspec-
tive, the vision supported here holds a certain potential. Yet, challenges associated the up-to-date version
of the methodology need be addressed before putting it into practice. First, the technical choices made
during the model development and the associated uncertainties are discussed. Then the fundamentals of
both the SJOS theory and the developed methodology are questioned. Eventually, the potential as a tool
dedicated to policy-makers and to expand the conceptualisation of transformational change for policies
is stressed.
5.1
Uncertainties
5.1.1
Parameter uncertainties
At the parameter level, data accuracy and representativeness have been recognized as major sources of
uncertainty (Bojacá & Schrevens 2010). For example in this study, parameter uncertainty for social
results may arise from the signiﬁcance levels deﬁned during the signiﬁcance assessment of impacts,
which can be a sensitive parameter. Indeed, the quantiﬁcation of impacts was merely carried out for
impacts, whose signiﬁcance was qualiﬁed as ’moderate’, ’high’ or ’very high’. How the signiﬁcance
levels were determined might signiﬁcantly affect the results and could be varied to assess the uncertain-
ties. Moreover, the downscaled PBs are also crucial in the modeling as they are used to deﬁne absolute
sustainability and the normalised environmental scores. The share of the Safe Operating Space depends
on sharing principles. In this paper, the egalitarian sharing principle was used, which highly depends on
demographic projections, thus potential sensitive parameter.
25
==PAGE:35==
5.1.2
Model uncertainties
To achieve quantiﬁcation of impacts predicted from the objectives of a policy, a fundamental assumption
is to consider cause-effect relationships as valid. As a consequence, it was made possible to quantify
social impacts in a similar way than environmental impacts with cause-effect relationships, which is
subject to a certain degree of uncertainty. First, the ﬁt of this causal-chain mechanisms to achieve the
purpose can be discussed: potential irrationality and unpredictability of human behavior can hamper
causality and make the assumption not valid. However, as this methodology and its absolute perspective
adopts a global and holistic vision, one could argue that this limitation is especially true when looking at
one speciﬁc individual, while large scale human behaviors are arguably fairly predictable, as suggested
by large scale economic models such as input-output analysis. Second, global correlations were used as
a proxy to assess overall impacts in some dimensions. Caution when using the results is recommended,
while uncertainties should be assessed and conditions of validity checked. Ultimately, the usability of the
results should be questioned when numerous assumptions and unﬁt data lead to too weak correlations.
Overall, to enhance reliability of the results for the deﬁnition and quantiﬁcation of the causal chains, it is
highly recommended to work in close relation with stakeholders and experts to target speciﬁc and local
impacts in a participatory approach.
Another modeling choice was to consider the assessed system in a steady-state, meaning that the in-
dicators scores for both environmental and social aspects were assumed constant between the baseline
and policy scenarios, only scaled based on demographic growth. The steady-state assumption does
not grasp the interdependence of social and ecological systems through feedback mechanisms. In the
same vein, the doughnut may overlook the interdependence with the third pillar of sustainability, i.e the
economical dimension. In fact, even though the social assessment considers the socioeconomic aspect
through the Work or Income dimensions, it does not evaluate the performance of the economy at the
system level. This simpliﬁcation hides important parameters that could inﬂuence the sustainability per-
formance of a system as well as the transformational potential of a policy, as no sustainable state can
be reached without changes in the economic playing ﬁeld (Biermann et al. 2012). It is deemed inter-
esting to include large-scale economic variables, such as GDP or income distribution, to represent the
response of the social and environmental states of a system to its economic evolution. A suggestion for
further work could be to take inspiration from the Earth3 model (Randers et al. 2018b), which includes
26
==PAGE:36==
the impacts of environmental pressures on social conditions as well as the impacts of socioeconomic
development on the PBs.
5.1.3
Trade-offs
A well-known trade-off is made in Environmental Life Cycle Assessment, when considering the use of
midpoint (representing more speciﬁc impacts in the middle of the causal chain) or endpoint indicators
(representing impacts at the end of the causal chain). While having lower certainty than midpoint in-
dicators, endpoint are considered to lead to more understandable results, to be more valuable in case
aggregation is sought and to have higher relevance for decision support Bare et al. 2000. Absolute
sustainability could be seen as the ultimate endpoint indicators, as its framework investigates what is
’enough’ or not. In that sense, this methodology can be associated with higher uncertainties but could
reach a higher relevance to support decision making at larger scales.
5.2
Questioning the fundamentals
5.2.1
Underlying principles of the Safe and Just Operating Space
A novel aspect of the SJOS is to bring an absolute perspective when assessing system’s social perfor-
mance by deﬁning thresholds for all endpoint indicators, assuming that such universal standards to be
met exist. However, most choices when deﬁning thresholds are normative, again inﬂuenced by values. It
is essential to be transparent in the deﬁnition of thresholds, in this regard the associated tier classiﬁcation
of dimensions gives insights on which absolute thresholds are more consensual than others. Moreover,
dimensions of the SF were deﬁned in a way which does not prevent from potential overlaps between
some of them, resulting in an over-representation of some issues (e.g. Housing with Water, Sanitation or
even Energy). They also were also considered as equally important, when it could be argued that some
(e.g Food, Water, Health) correspond to basic needs that have to be fulﬁlled in a ﬁrst place, while others
(e.g Democratic rights, Social equity, Networks) are higher psychological needs, based on Maslow’s
hierarchy of needs (Maslow 1943a).
Besides, the Planetary Boundary framework constitutes the state-of-the-art research regarding abso-
lute environmental sustainability and this framework still comes along with shortcomings. Speciﬁcally,
further research is necessary to estimate environmental boundaries for some PBs (e.g. introduction of
27
==PAGE:37==
novel entities and atmospheric aerosol loading, Steffen et al. 2015), to identify and address the overlaps
between the Earth system processes identiﬁed in the PBs (Ryberg et al. 2016) and to provide a consis-
tently applicable approach translating the planetary boundaries into national-level fair shares of Earth’s
SOS (Häyhä et al. 2016). Further progress on the PBs should be incorporated as updates are released.
5.2.2
Underlying principles of the methodology
The methodology was designed with the ambition to be holistic and generic. This approach increases
emphasis on transparency, comparability and on the absolute perspective of the assessment. However,
this might be at the cost of relevance to speciﬁc case-studies and representativeness of the system. To
that end, it was chosen to have a ﬁxed list of indicators to represent the Social Foundation, in order
to reduce risks of misinterpreting the results. However, this list of indicators does not represent the
whole picture and might not be relevant for all speciﬁc cases. Consequently, all impacts of the policy
might not be ultimately represented, even though known to be signiﬁcant. It can be argued that this
tool is more ﬁt to show how a policy alters the state of the system based on the SJOS framework than
to represent all impacts of a policy. To do this, an adjustable list of indicators could be a solution,
compromising with the comparability of results across studies. In addition, each of the 15 dimensions are
represented with a single indicator, which might not cover the complexity of dimension’s mechanisms
thoroughly. For example, the indicator representative of the dimension Safety and justice is the number
of intentional homicide, which misses to assess shortfalls in justice. Another example is for Housing,
which is represented by the part of urban population living in slums. Consequently, nothing about rural
populations is taken into account, which is particularly inadequate for low income countries like Uganda,
whose rural population accounts for approximately 77 % of the total population (data for 2017, World
Bank n.d.(a)). A potential answer could be to operate with several indicators (usually two) for some
dimensions, as suggested in the updated version of the SJOS (Raworth 2017).
5.3
Purpose of the methodology
5.3.1
Vision to support decision-making
It should be borne in mind that this methodology was developed with a focus on systems which have nei-
ther reached the social foundation yet nor overshot the environmental ceiling, for instance low-income
countries. This choice is reﬂected in the deﬁnition of indicators and the normalisation of social scores,
28
==PAGE:38==
aiming at enhancing social standards while safeguarding the Earth System. Practically, focusing on de-
picting the reduction of deprivations for all means overlooking what happens on the ’other side’ of the
social foundation. Therefore, it proves to be less adequate for systems that have high social standards
(beyond the social foundation) at the expense of planetary boundaries, some of which being transgressed.
Such trends are common patterns of ’high income countries’. Subsequently, other indicators would be
required in order to reveal ’the social standards surplus’ (what happens once beyond the SF). For ex-
ample, for the Food dimension the indicator "% of population undernourished" could be changed to
"obesity rate". This tool would then serve a different purpose, aiming at granting a ’social budget’,
i.e a maximum decrease or stagnation in social standards, for each positive environmental impact and
answer the question: How to bring ’high income countries’ closer to the social foundation in order to
reduce their environmental impacts? In that aspect, adapting this methodology to ﬁt other systems’ in-
terests and challenges could be done. Based on a similar methodology, ’high income countries’ policies
could be assessed, yet with a different purpose: how to maintain good living standards while drastically
decreasing anthropogenic environmental pressures ? Consequently, the various points discussed here
above would need to be taken into account and adjusted accordingly.
The latter focus point goes together with a western bias in the deﬁnition and assessment of individ-
ual well-being, which was notably deﬁned based on the theory of basic needs (Doyal & Gough 1991)
and countries priorities (Raworth 2012). Yet, some needs might differ from country to country and it can
be argued that some dimensions selected here, such as Gender equality or Life satisfaction depict more
speciﬁc concerns of high-income countries. Actually, they embody cultural perspectives and values that
are the fundamentals of what people imagine as an ideal world. In other words, a bias is introduced in
this approach by the western vision of human well-being. Consequently, this framework as it is might
not be completely suitable to represent all systems, that are driven by signiﬁcantly different values and
priorities. Again, a participatory approach, involving local stakeholders such as community members,
would allow to include speciﬁc needs in the model.
5.3.2
Power of the assessment
One purpose of the assessment is to support decision-making by combining social and environmental
impacts of policies, ideally any type of policy. Results are plotted using the doughnut, such tool showing
29
==PAGE:39==
powerful communication strengths to popularise outcomes of scientiﬁc studies (Cole et al. 2014, Dear-
ing et al. 2014), as shown in ﬁgure 4 for the national social and environmental performance of Uganda.
Yet, a rising concern might emerge due to the apparent simplicity of its interpretation. The performance
is measured by speciﬁc indicators that might not fully represent the real state of the dimension or PB,
and thus can be misinterpreted. As a consequence, the visual tool should always be communicated in
combination with the list of indicators or variables (in this case, tables 3 and 4).
The SJOS is bringing a novel trans-disciplinary perspective to the planetary boundaries concept (Dear-
ing et al. 2014), adopting a systemic approach required to address major interconnected challenges such
as climate change, social justice and economic growth (Daly et al. 2017). This perspective allows to
approach the policy from a holistic standpoint, including social and environmental impacts, and stresses
the potential of this tool. Indeed, it might be possible to use it to investigate feedback mechanisms as in
the Earth3 model(Randers et al. 2018a) or to estimate the level of resources use necessary to meet hu-
mans’ needs worldwide, for example with correlations between scores for social dimensions and some
planetary boundaries, as tried by O’Neill et al. 2018b.
While acknowledging limitations, this novel methodology shows a potential to support decision-making
and to help design efﬁcient and sustainable policies. Thinking in absolute terms could be a ﬁrst step to
think outside the box, while exploring disruptive and innovative solutions. Proposing such a methodol-
ogy questions the efﬁciency of already existing tools to trigger systemic change at the political level. It
could be used as a preliminary assessment to know where to allocate time and resources. This quick and
systematic ﬁrst overview would facilitate the ideation process, valuable at the very early stage of a policy
implementation. A second in-depth and more conventional assessment could be carried out afterwards
if transformational potential have been identiﬁed, with local and speciﬁc data and the involvement of
relevant stakeholders in a participatory approach to include feedback from the ground in the assessment.
As an example, the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda looks promising and would push
the need for more research and speciﬁc assessment.
30
==PAGE:40==
5.3.3
Transformational change: vision for the future
The ’promising’ characterisation of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda needs to be
further qualiﬁed. Indeed, an absolute sustainability assessment aims at answering the question: ’Is this
system, or this policy, good enough?’ rather than ’Is it better or worse than before?’. With respect to
policies, this ’good enough’ touches upon the concept of transformational change with the underlying
question of ’moving towards the good direction’. This methodology suggests a deﬁnition of TC and
parameters to assess the transformational potential of policies, concept initiated as part of the ICAT TC
Guidance. In comparison to this methodology, the deﬁnition suggested here overlooks the likelihood of
change, but includes a novel parameter in the assessment with the rate of change, i.e a temporal compo-
nent that takes into consideration the urgency of disruptive change in the global climate crisis. To include
these two parameters in one single integrated assessment, it could be interesting to add a third temporal
dimension in ﬁgure 2, to visualise and map a 3-dimensional SJOS. This SJOS would be associated with
a target over time, that could be for example reaching a sustainable society, i.e a society within the SJOS
by the end of this century.
5.4
Recommendations for further work
As highlighted in section 5.1, it is paramount to discuss the uncertainties of the methodology in order
to assess reliability of the results, particularly if it aims at being used as a tool for decision-making
(Heijungs & Huijbregts 2004). It is indeed common practice to provide policy-makers with scientiﬁc
results and their associated certainty or likelihood for decisions to be made accordingly (like the IPCC,
that provides conclusions with levels of conﬁdence on the likelihood to happen of climate scenarios
Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018). A lead for further work would consequently be to work on the quantiﬁ-
cation of the uncertainties raised in this methodology and include them into the transformational change
assessment. Therefore, based on sensitivity and uncertainty analyses, results could be communicated
and visualised (e.g. on the doughnut) with certainty levels.
This methodology is a ﬁrst attempt to bridge the gap between theoretical absolute sustainability frame-
work and decision-making tools for policy-makers to design truly sustainable policies. The illustrative
example of Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda demonstrates proof-of-concepts. How-
31
==PAGE:41==
ever, it is recommended to pursue this methodology development in an iterative process with different
types of policies, as done by Shortall (Shortall et al. 2015a, Shortall et al. 2015b), to detect dead-ends,
identify other possible improvements and thus enhance the robustness of the assessment. Likewise,
testing the methodology with a real and complete case-study rather than a mere illustrative example,
resorting to participatory approach involving both a panel of experts and stakeholders, would highly
contribute to the uplifting of the methodology, while addressing ground existing problems and receiving
feedback.
Eventually, this paper started to explore the concept of transformational change at a political level, deﬁn-
ing the transformational potential of a policy and pointing out the direction to take to reach a systemic
change towards sustainable development as well as the sufﬁcient rate to achieve it in time. To include
results and draw conclusion in regard to the transformational potential of a policy, these suggested con-
cepts need to be operationalised and quantiﬁed.
6
Conclusion
This paper focused on developing a methodology to ﬁrst assess the environmental and social perfor-
mance of a system on an absolute scale, within the context of the Safe and Just Operating Space frame-
work, and then the impacts of a given policy on this system. A preliminary work was to review and
update the concept of the SJOS, especially regarding the social foundation, its dimensions and absolute
thresholds. For the social impact assessment, a hybrid method was developed, bringing together partici-
patory and technical approaches. The environmental assessment was based on the Planetary Boundaries
framework which was operationalised to assess impacts of policies using the existing PB-LCIA method.
Ultimately, it was possible to pursue the deﬁnition of transformational change in the terms associated
to the SJOS through two characteristics, the direction and the rate of change. This methodology was
tested on the illustrative example of a Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda, estimating
the potential impacts on the SJOS in Uganda. The results were visualised using the Doughnut, which
proves to be a powerful communication tool. Conclusively, this holds a certain potential as a powerful
trans-disciplinary communication tool, despite further work on uncertainties evaluation is required be-
fore being used as support for decision-making for policy-makers to design truly sustainable policies. To
face the global crisis and to answer the urgency of the situation, such a tool could help moving towards
32
==PAGE:42==
a sustainable state and achieve the transformational change that is drastically required. To do so, further
work needs to be carried out in order to quantify the transformational potential of a policy.
33
==PAGE:43==
References
1.
Ahmadvand, M., Karami, E., Zamani, G. H. & Vanclay, F. Evaluating the use of Social Impact
Assessment in the context of agricultural development projects in Iran. Environmental Impact
Assessment Review 29, 399–407. ISSN: 0195-9255 (2009).
2.
Bahati, G. Geothermal energy development in Uganda - A country update tech. rep. (2016).
http://theargeo.org/presentations/countryupdates/Uganda.pdf.
3.
Bare, J. C., Hofstetter, P., Pennington, D. W. & Udo De Haes, H. A. State-of-the-Art: LCIA Life
Cycle Impact Assessment Workshop Summary: Midpoints versus Endpoints: The Sacriﬁces and
Beneﬁts tech. rep. (2000). https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%
7B%5C%%7D2FBF02978665.pdf.
4.
Bayer, P., Rybach, L., Blum, P. & Brauchler, R. Review on life cycle environmental effects of
geothermal power generation. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 26, 446–463. ISSN:
13640321 (Oct. 2013).
5.
Biermann, F. et al. Science and government. Navigating the anthropocene: improving Earth sys-
tem governance. Science (New York, N.Y.) 335, 1306–7. ISSN: 1095-9203 (2012).
6.
Binder, C. R., Hinkel, J., Bots, P. W. G. & Pahl-Wostl, C. Comparison of Frameworks for Ana-
lyzing Social-ecological Systems. Ecology and Society 18, art26. ISSN: 1708-3087 (2013).
7.
Bjørn, A., Diamond, M., Owsianiak, M., Verzat, B. & Hauschild, M. Z. Strengthening the Link
between Life Cycle Assessment and Indicators for Absolute Sustainability To Support Develop-
ment within Planetary Boundaries. doi:10.1021/acs.est.5b02106. https://pubs.
acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.5b02106. (2015).
8.
Bjørn, A., Margni, M., Roy, P.-O., Bulle, C. & Hauschild, M. Z. A proposal to measure abso-
lute environmental sustainability in life cycle assessment. Ecological Indicators 63, 1–13. ISSN:
1470160X (2016).
9.
Bojacá, C. R. & Schrevens, E. Parameter uncertainty in LCA: stochastic sampling under correla-
tion. International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 15, 238–246 (2010).
10.
Bw’obuya, N. M. The Socio-economic and environmental impact of Geothermal Energy on the
rural poor in Kenya tech. rep. (2002). www.afrepren.org.
34
==PAGE:44==
11.
Cantril, H. The pattern of human concerns. https://ia801900.us.archive.org/27/
items/in.ernet.dli.2015.139016/2015.139016.The-Pattern-Of-Human-
Concerns.pdf (Rutgers University Press. New Brunswick - New Jersey, 1965).
12.
Climate Technology Centre & Network (CTCN). Formulating Geothermal Energy Policy, Legal
and Regulatory Framework https://www.ctc-n.org/technical-assistance/
projects/formulating-geothermal-energy-policy-legal-and-regulatory-
framework (2019).
13.
Cobham, A., Schlögl, L. & Sumner, A. Inequality and the Tails: The Palma Proposition and Ratio.
Global Policy 7, 25–36. ISSN: 17585899 (2016).
14.
Cobham, A. et al. Putting the Gini back in the bottle? ‘The Palma ’ as a policy-relevant measure
of inequality. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.
1.365.4686 (2013).
15.
Cole, M. J., Bailey, R. M. & New, M. G. Tracking sustainable development with a national barom-
eter for South Africa using a downscaled “safe and just space” framework. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111, E4399–E4408. ISSN: 0027-8424 (2014).
16.
Crutzen, P. J. Geology of mankind. Nature 415, 23–23. ISSN: 0028-0836 (2002).
17.
Daly, H., Galtung, J. & Söderbaum, P. in Transformative Ecological Economics: Process Philos-
ophy, Ideology and Utopia 104–115 (Routledge, 2017). ISBN: 9781351794015. doi:10.4324/
9781315205434. https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9781351794015.
18.
Dearing, J. A. et al. Safe and just operating spaces for regional social-ecological systems. Global
Environmental Change 28, 227–238. ISSN: 09593780 (2014).
19.
Doyal, L. & Gough, I. in A Theory of Human Need 49–75 (Macmillan Education UK, London,
1991). doi:10.1007/978-1-349-21500-3_5.
20.
Drucker, P. F. ( F. The Practice of Management 404. ISBN: 9780060878979 (Harper & Row,
1954).
21.
EEA. DPSIR — European Environment Agency https://www.eea.europa.eu/help/
glossary/eea-glossary/dpsir (2019).
22.
Eora Global MRIO. Carbon Footprint of Nations https://worldmrio.com/footprints/
carbon/.
35
==PAGE:45==
23.
Esteves, A. M., Franks, D. & Vanclay, F. Social impact assessment: the state of the art. Impact
Assessment and Project Appraisal 30, 34–42. ISSN: 1461-5517 (2012).
24.
FAO. FAO - Sustainable Development Goals https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/
database/.
25.
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO). The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the world tech. rep. (2018). http://www.fao.org/3/I9553EN/i9553en.
pdf.
26.
Global Carbon Atlas. CO2 Emissions | Global Carbon Atlas 2016. http://www.globalcarbonatlas.
org/en/CO2-emissions (2019).
27.
Goodwin, N. et al. Macroeconomics in Context ISBN: 9781315702735. doi:10.4324/9781315702735.
https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/9781315702735 (Routledge, 2015).
28.
Government of Uganda. Uganda Vision 2040 tech. rep. (2015). http://npa.go.ug/wp-
content/themes/npatheme/documents/vision2040.pdf.
29.
Griggs, D. et al. Policy: Sustainable development goals for people and planet. Nature 495, 305–
307. ISSN: 00280836 (2013).
30.
Guinotte, J. M. & Fabry, V. J. Ocean Acidiﬁcation and its Potential Effects on Marine Ecosystems.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1134, 320–342. ISSN: 00778923 (2008).
31.
Hauschild, M. Z., Dreyer, L. C. & Jørgensen, A. Assessing social impacts in a life cycle perspective-
Lessons learned. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 57, 21–24. ISSN: 00078506 (2008).
32.
Häyhä, T., Lucas, P. L., van Vuuren, D. P., Cornell, S. E. & Hoff, H. From Planetary Boundaries to
national fair shares of the global safe operating space — How can the scales be bridged? Global
Environmental Change 40, 60–72. ISSN: 09593780 (2016).
33.
Heijungs, R. & Huijbregts, M. A. J. A Review of Approaches to Treat Uncertainty in LCA tech.
rep. (2004). http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=
7C4AC5FCE952E5C174C947E24EA76B96?doi=10.1.1.2.4743%7B%5C&%7Drep=
rep1%7B%5C&%7Dtype=pdf.
34.
Helgi Library. Number of Households in Uganda 2018. https://www.helgilibrary.
com/indicators/number-of-households/uganda/ (2019).
36
==PAGE:46==
35.
Helliwell, J. F., Layard, R. & Sachs, J. D. World Happiness Report tech. rep. (2019). https:
//ourworldindata.org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction.
36.
Hoekstra, A. & Mekonnen, M. The water footprint of humanity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 109 (9), 3232–3237 (2012).
37.
IAEG-SDGs. Tier Classiﬁcation for Global SDG Indicators tech. rep. (2018). https : / /
unstats . un . org / sdgs / files / Tier % 20Classification % 20of % 20SDG %
20Indicators%7B%5C_%7D11%20May%202018%7B%5C_%7Dweb.pdf.
38.
IAIA. Social Impact Assessment 2009. https://www.iaia.org/wiki-details.php?
ID=23 (2019).
39.
ICAT. Sustainable Development Guidance - Guidance for assessing the environmental, social and
economic impacts of policies and actions tech. rep. May (2018). https://climateactiontransparency
org/icat-guidance/.
40.
ICAT. Transformational Change Guidance - Guidance for assessing the transformational impacts
of policies and actions tech. rep. (2018). https : / / climateactiontransparency .
org/icat-guidance/.
41.
IEA. Energy Access Outlook 2017. https://www.iea.org/energyaccess/database/.
42.
ILOSTAT - LFS. Urban Labour Force Survey https : / / unstats . un . org / sdgs /
indicators/database/.
43.
Initiative for Climate Action Transparency https://climateactiontransparency.
org/about/ (2019).
44.
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). The database on Women in National Parliament https://
unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/.
45.
IPCC. High-level segment of COP24, Tuesday 11 December 2018, Statement by IPCC Chair
Hoesung Lee in (2018). https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/12/
181211%7B%5C_%7Dstatement%7B%5C_%7Dhigh%7B%5C_%7Dlevel.pdf.
46.
ISO. ISO 14040 - Environmental management - Life Cycle Assessment : Principles and frame-
work (2006).
47.
ISO. ISO 14044 - Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assessment: Requirements and guide-
lines (Geneva, 2006).
37
==PAGE:47==
48.
Jennejohn, D. Green Jobs Through Geothermal Energy tech. rep. 202 (Geothermal Energy Asso-
ciation (GEA), 2010), 454–5265. www.geo-energy.org.
49.
Jørgensen, A., Dreyer, L. C. & Wangel, A. Addressing the effect of social life cycle assessments.
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 17, 828–839. ISSN: 09483349 (2012).
50.
Jørgensen, A., H Lai, L. C. & Hauschild, M. Z. Assessing the validity of impact pathways for
child labour and well-being in social life cycle assessment. The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment 15, 5–16 (2009).
51.
Jørgensen, A., Lai, L. C. H. & Hauschild, M. Z. Assessing the validity of impact pathways for
child labour and well-being in social life cycle assessment. The International Journal of Life
Cycle Assessment 15, 5–16. ISSN: 0948-3349 (Jan. 2010).
52.
EC-JRC. ILCD Handbook - general guide for life cycle assessment - detailed guidance. (ed Joint
Research Centre - Institute for Environment and Sustainability) (Luxembourg, 2010).
53.
Kaufmann, D. & Kraay, A. WGI 2018 Interactive http : / / info . worldbank . org /
governance/wgi/%7B%5C#%7Dhome (2019).
54.
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A. & Mastruzzi, M. The Worldwide Governance Indicators: Methodology
and Analytical Issues tech. rep. (2010). https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract%7B%5C_%7Did=1682130.
55.
Kim, R. E. & Bosselmann, K. Operationalizing Sustainable Development: Ecological Integrity as
a Grundnorm of International Law. Review of European, Comparative & International Environ-
mental Law 24, 194–208 (2015).
56.
Maslow, A. H. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review 50, 370–396. ISSN: 0033-
295X (1943).
57.
Maslow, A. H. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review 50, 370–396. ISSN: 0033-
295X (1943).
58.
Masson-Delmotte, V. et al. IPCC, 2018: Summary for Policymakers tech. rep. (2018). https:
//www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/summary-for-policy-makers/.
59.
Meinshausen, M. et al. The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and their extensions from 1765
to 2300. Climatic Change 109, 213–241. ISSN: 0165-0009 (2011).
38
==PAGE:48==
60.
Mwangi-Gachau, E. Social Aspects of Geothermal Development - A case of Olkaria Geothermal
Project in Kenya tech. rep. (2011). https : / / orkustofnun . is / gogn / unu - gtp -
sc/UNU-GTP-SC-13-0806.pdf.
61.
Namugize, J. N. Preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment of Geothermal Exploration and
Development in Karisimbi, Rwanda tech. rep. (2011). https://orkustofnun.is/gogn/
unu-gtp-report/UNU-GTP-2011-28.pdf.
62.
Nykvist, B. et al. National Environmental Performance on Planetary Boundaries - A study for the
Swedish Environmental Protection Agency tech. rep. (2013). www.naturvardsverket.se.
63.
Obua, J., Agea, J. G. & Ogwal, J. J. Status of forests in Uganda. African Journal of Ecology 48,
853–859. ISSN: 01416707 (2010).
64.
Oduor, J. Environmental and Social Considerations in Geothermal Development tech. rep. (FIG
Congress 201, 2010), 11–16. https://orkustofnun.is/gogn/unu-gtp-sc/UNU-
GTP-SC-01-15.pdf.
65.
OECD. in OECD Factbook 2014: Economic, Environmental and Social Statistics, (OECD Pub-
lishing, Paris, 2014). http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/888933027627.
66.
OECD. Unemployment rate (indicator) 2019. doi:10.1787/997c8750- en. https://
data.oecd.org/unemp/unemployment-rate.htm.
67.
OECD - Development Matters. Ever heard of SDG washing? The urgency of SDG Due Diligence
2017. https://oecd-development-matters.org/2017/09/25/ever-heard-
of-sdg-washing-the-urgency-of-sdg-due-diligence/ (2019).
68.
O’Neill, D. W., Fanning, A. L., Lamb, W. F. & Steinberger, J. K. A good life for all within
planetary boundaries. Nature Sustainability 1, 88–95. ISSN: 23989629 (2018).
69.
O’Neill, D. W., Fanning, A. L., Lamb, W. F. & Steinberger, J. K. Supplementary Information: A
good life for all within planetary boundaries. Nature Sustainability 1, 88–95. ISSN: 2398-9629
(2018).
70.
Ortiz-Ospina, E. & Roser, M. Happiness and Life Satisfaction 2013. https://ourworldindata.
org/happiness-and-life-satisfaction.
71.
Randers, J. et al. Achieving the 17 sustainable development goals within 9 planetary boundaries.
EarthArXiv, 1–31 (2018).
39
==PAGE:49==
72.
Randers, J. et al. Transformation is feasible, 58 (2018).
73.
Raworth, K. A Doughnut for the Anthropocene: Appendix. Health, Lancet Planet. https://
ars.els-cdn.com/content/image/1-s2.0-S2542519617300281-mmc1.pdf
(2017).
74.
Raworth, K. A Safe and Just Space for Humanity: Can we live within the doughnut? Oxfam
Discussion Papers. Oxfam Discussion Papers, 26. ISSN: 1758-678X (2012).
75.
Ritchie, H. & Roser, M. Ozone Layer 2018. https://ourworldindata.org/ozone-
layer.
76.
Rockström, J. et al. A safe operating space for humanity. Nature 461, 472–475. ISSN: 00280836
(2009).
77.
Rowan, M. Reﬁning the attribution of signiﬁcance in social impact assessment. Impact Assess-
ment and Project Appraisal 27, 185–191. ISSN: 14615517 (2009).
78.
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Richardson, K. & Hauschild, M. Z. Challenges in implementing
a Planetary Boundaries based Life-Cycle Impact Assessment methodology. Journal of Cleaner
Production 139, 450–459. ISSN: 09596526 (Dec. 2016).
79.
Ryberg, M. W., Owsianiak, M., Richardson, K. & Hauschild, M. Z. Development of a life-cycle
impact assessment methodology linked to the Planetary Boundaries framework. Ecological Indi-
cators 88, 250–262. ISSN: 1470160X (2018).
80.
Ryberg, M. W. Putting life-cycle indicators on an absolute scale – Integrating Planetary Bound-
aries into Life- Cycle Assessment PhD thesis (2018).
81.
Ryberg, M. W. et al. How to bring absolute sustainability into decision-making: An industry case
study using a Planetary Boundary-based methodology. Science of the Total Environment 634,
1406–1416. ISSN: 18791026 (2018).
82.
Sala, S., Ciuffo, B. & Nijkamp, P. A systemic framework for sustainability assessment. Ecological
Economics 119, 314–325. ISSN: 09218009 (2015).
83.
Sayers, M. & Trebeck, K. THE UK DOUGHNUT: A framework for environmental sustainability
and social justice tech. rep. (Oxfam GB, 2015). www.oxfam.org.
84.
Sayers, M., Trebeck, K. & Stuart, F. The Scottish Doughnut: A safe and just operating space for
Scotland tech. rep. (2014). www.oxfam.org.uk.
40
==PAGE:50==
85.
Shortall, R., Davidsdottir, B. & Axelsson, G. A sustainability assessment framework for geother-
mal energy projects: Development in Iceland, New Zealand and Kenya. Renewable and Sustain-
able Energy Reviews 50, 372–407. ISSN: 1364-0321 (2015).
86.
Shortall, R., Davidsdottir, B. & Axelsson, G. Development of a sustainability assessment frame-
work for geothermal energy projects. Energy for Sustainable Development 27, 28–45. ISSN:
09730826 (2015).
87.
Steffen, W. et al. Global Change and the Earth System ISBN: 3-540-26594-5. doi:10.1007/
b137870. http : / / link . springer . com / 10 . 1007 / b137870 (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin/Heidelberg, 2005).
88.
Steffen, W. et al. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Sci-
ence 347. doi:10.1126/science.1259855. http://science.sciencemag.org/
(2015).
89.
Steffen, W. et al. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. doi:10.
1126/science.1259855. http://science.sciencemag.org/.
90.
Suopajärvi, L. Social impact assessment in mining projects in Northern Finland: Comparing
practice to theory. Environmental Impact Assessment Review 42, 25–30. ISSN: 0195-9255 (Sept.
2013).
91.
Sureau, S. et al. Social life-cycle assessment frameworks: a review of criteria and indicators
proposed to assess social and socioeconomic impacts. Societal LCA 23, 904–920 (2017).
92.
Terrapon-Pfaff, J., Fink, T., Viebahn, P. & Jamea, E. M. Determining signiﬁcance in social im-
pact assessments (SIA) by applying both technical and participatory approaches: Methodology
development and application in a case study of the concentrated solar power plant NOORO I in
Morocco. Environmental Impact Assessment Review 66, 138–150. ISSN: 01959255 (2017).
93.
Townsend, P. Deprivation. Journal of Social Policy 16, 125. ISSN: 0047-2794 (1987).
94.
UN. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda For Sustainable Development tech. rep. (2015).
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/21252030%
20Agenda%20for%20Sustainable%20Development%20web.pdf.
95.
UN FAO. Nitrogen Fertilizer Consumption 2017. https : / / ourworldindata . org /
fertilizer-and-pesticides%7B%5C#%7Dfertilizer-consumption.
41
==PAGE:51==
96.
Understanding How Gallup Uses the Cantril Scale https://news.gallup.com/poll/
122453/understanding-gallup-uses-cantril-scale.aspx (2019).
97.
UNDP. Human Development Report tech. rep. (). http://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/
IHDI.
98.
UNEP-DDP. A Compendium of Relevant Practices for improved decision-making on dams and
their alternatives tech. rep. (Nairobi, 2007). www.unep.org/dams.
99.
UNESCO - Institute for Statistics. UIS Data Centre http://data.uis.unesco.org/.
100.
United Nations. 2005 World Summit Outcome tech. rep. (New York, 2005). https://www.
who.int/hiv/universalaccess2010/worldsummit.pdf.
101.
United Nations. Global indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development tech. rep. (United Nations, 2018). https:
//unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/indicators-list/.
102.
United Nations. United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) https://
unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/.
103.
United Nations. United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice
System https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/.
104.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Human Development Indices and Indicators
tech. rep. (2018). http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2018%7B%
5C_%7Dhuman%7B%5C_%7Ddevelopment%7B%5C_%7Dstatistical%7B%5C_
%7Dupdate.pdf.
105.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Human Development Reports http : / /
hdr.undp.org/en/indicators/69206.
106.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Guidelines for Social Life Cycle Assessment
of Products tech. rep. (2009). http://www.unep.fr/shared/publications/pdf/
dtix1164xpa-guidelines%7B%5C_%7Dslca.pdf.
107.
U.S. Congressional Budget Ofﬁce. Natural Rate of Unemployment (Long-Term) Feb. 2019. https:
//fred.stlouisfed.org/series/NROU.
108.
WCED. Our Common Future - World Commission on Environment and Development. Third
World Planning Review (1987).
42
==PAGE:52==
109.
Weidema, B. P. et al. Overview and methodology: Data quality guideline for the ecoinvent database
version 3 tech. rep. (Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Geneva, 2013). doi:2389389526.
110.
WHO. Life expectancy 2018. https://www.who.int/gho/mortality%7B%5C_
%7Dburden%7B%5C_%7Ddisease/life%7B%5C_%7Dtables/situation%7B%5C_
%7Dtrends%7B%5C_%7Dtext/en/ (2019).
111.
WHO. UN Data http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.home.
112.
WHO/UNICEF. Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene 2017.
https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/database/.
113.
WHO/UNICEF. Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG
Baselines. tech. rep. (Geneva, 2017). doi:CCBY-NC-SA3.0IGO.. https://www.who.
int/mediacentre/news/releases/2017/launch- version- report- jmp-
water-sanitation-hygiene.pdf.
114.
World Bank. World Development Indicators database https://databank.worldbank.
org/data/.
115.
World Bank. Worldwide Governance Indicators project http://info.worldbank.org/
governance/wgi/%7B%5C#%7Dhome.
116.
World Economic Forum. The Global Gender Gap Report 2017 Insight Report tech. rep. (2017).
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF%7B%5C_%7DGGGR%7B%5C_%7D2017.
pdf.
117.
Zagorsky, J. L. What is full employment? An economist explains the latest jobs data https:
/ / theconversation . com / what - is - full - employment - an - economist -
explains-the-latest-jobs-data-95908 (2019).
118.
Zakkour, P. & Cook, G. Formulation of Geothermal Energy Policy, Legal and Regulatory Frame-
work in Uganda tech. rep. (Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN), 2016). https://
www.ctc-n.org/technical-assistance/projects/formulating-geothermal-
energy-policy-legal-and-regulatory-framework.
119.
Zhang, J. & Fujiwara, A. Development of the DPSIR+C Framework for Measuring the Social
Capacity of Environmental Management tech. rep. (2009). http : / / www . trip . t . u -
tokyo.ac.jp/eastsjwp/2009/0903/0903.pdf.
43
==PAGE:53==
Appendices
I
Social impact assessment frameworks : State of the art
In order to assess the impacts businesses, sectors, products and services, or even to a greater extent,
activities have on humans, several disciplines like Social Life Cycle Assessment (SLCA) or Social
Impact Assessment (SIA) have emerged. Both have different focuses and goals. Their characteristics
are detailed in the following paragraphs, as well as why they are potentially useful or not to serve the
purpose of this paper.
SLCA
The SLCA can in many regards be seen as a parallel to the Environmental Life Cycle Assessment
(ELCA), commonly referred as simply Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). But, rather than focusing on en-
vironmental impacts, the SLCA focuses on social impacts of products, processes, services or systems
(here simply termed ‘products’) in principle throughout their life cycle (Jørgensen et al. 2010). Even
though not completely consensual, the ultimate goal for conducting a SLCA is to "to promote improve-
ment of social conditions and of the overall socio-economic performance of a product throughout its life
cycle for all of its stakeholders" (United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 2009). The main
functionality of SLCA is to provide decision-support (Jørgensen et al. 2010), while focusing on protect-
ing ’Human Health’ and ’Human Dignity and Well-being’(areas of protection). Both represent the value
of a healthy, good and decent life enjoying respect and social membership and with fulﬁlment of the
basic needs (access to food, water, clothes, medical care...). More speciﬁc characteristics for SLCA are
presented in table 5, while drawing a parallel with ELCA.
Speciﬁcally, a large panel of frameworks exists (as much as 14 according to Sureau et al. 2017) within
the ﬁeld of Social Life Cycle Assessment (SLCA). Assessment frameworks can be classiﬁed in two
different types: type I and type II. Type I is related to the assessment of performances through a sys-
tematic identiﬁcation of stakeholders, while type II models use impact categories and impact pathways
(assessment framework presented in table 5). Even though guidelines were published in order to struc-
ture SLCA (United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 2009), assessment practices in SLCA are
44
==PAGE:54==
Table 5: Parallel between ELCA and SLCA adapted from Hauschild et al. 2008
ELCA
SLCA
Use
Product and services, company level, decision-support tool
Applications
Sustainability labelling of products or services.
Sustainability management in a life cycle perspective
Sustainability assessment of technology choices
Focus
Impact of individual processes and the
physical ﬂows on the environment
Impact of a company on its stakeholders
Area(s)
of
protection
1) Human health, 2) Ecosystems, 3) Re-
sources
1) Human health, 2) Human-Dignity and
Well-being
Impact
Different impact assessment methods,
with a ﬁxed list of indicators
Obligatory (based on the Universal Dec-
laration of Humans’ Rights) : Discrimi-
nation, Child Labor, Forced labor, free-
dom of association
categories
Optional (to be case-speciﬁc): Physical
working conditions, working hours, min-
imum wage and beneﬁts, training and ed-
ucation of employees, development sup-
port towards local society
Impacts
Negative on the environment
Can be socially positive or negative, both
taken into account
Indicators
Indicators that allow aggregation across
the entire life cycle in accordance with
the ISO standards
Indicators that allow aggregation across
the entire life cycle in accordance with
the ISO standards
Challenges
Negative impacts difﬁcult to prove and
measure (e.g. labor rights violation)
Elementary
ﬂows
Physical ﬂows to and from processes
The way a company treats the people, it
interacts with its stakeholders. Social im-
pacts are allocated to the products and the
different actors, the latter step being chal-
lenging
Fonctional
Unit
Process
Company
Speciﬁcity
Global
High local speciﬁcity
Framework
consistency
High
Poor
not consistent, which questions whether the development of SLCA is a fruitful approach for improving
social conditions in the product life cycle (Jørgensen et al. 2012).
SIA
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) is used to address the social aspects of sustainable development and
is capable of providing mechanisms in which human and social ecosystems are integrated into decision
45
==PAGE:55==
making (Ahmadvand et al. 2009). Particularly, SIA includes "the processes of analysing, monitoring
and managing the intended and unintended social consequences, both positive and negative, of planned
interventions (policies, programs, plans, projects) and any social change processes invoked by those
interventions. Its primary purpose is to bring about a more sustainable and equitable biophysical and
human environment." (IAIA 2009) As part of its theoretical and practical development, it has been
recognised that the SIA process should be designed as a non-prescriptive process that enables ﬂexibil-
ity in practical application (Suopajärvi 2013). Notably, ’good practice’ in SIA should be participatory,
enabling community discussions and a negotiated agreement for proposed interventions. Further, con-
sensus exists around the core values of SIA: it supports affected peoples, proponents and regulatory
agencies; it increases understanding of change and capacities to respond to change; it seeks to avoid and
mitigate negative impacts and to enhance positive beneﬁts across the life cycle of planned interventions;
and it emphasizes enhancing the lives of vulnerable and disadvantaged people (Esteves et al. 2012).
To be able to evaluate the impacts of planned interventions on people and communities, baseline data
must ﬁrst and foremost be collected (Rowan 2009). Importantly, the identiﬁcation of social receptors
and community resources is essential during baseline data collection to precisely identify who or what
is affected. It enables to attribute the signiﬁcance of impacts. Criteria taken into account to assess sig-
niﬁcance are magnitude, that encompasses aspects like extent, permanency, duration, reversibility and
intensity of impacts (Rowan 2009).
Approach
Both SLCA and SIA show interesting and important characteristics to support the social assessment
envisioned in this methodology. The focus of SLCA, trying to assess social impacts on stakeholders
arising along the life cycle of a product or a service and acting at the company level is not aligned with
the focus of this methodology, i.e. policies. Therefore, SLCA was not taken on. Yet, it was interesting to
draw and exploit a parallel between SLCA and LCA, which can be broadened to compare the structure
of the planetary boundaries framework and the social foundation. As a result, they can be compared as
shown below in table 6. Besides, SIA is a reliable method to assist the assessment of a policy’s impacts,
through the steps of impacts identiﬁcation and signiﬁcance assessment, and inspiration is taken from
this framework to quantify the social impacts of a policy.
46
==PAGE:56==
Table 6: Parallel between the structures of the social foundation and the planetary boundaries frame-
works
Level
Planetary boundaries
Social foundation
Category
Planetary boundaries
Dimensions
Indicator
Control variables
Endpoint indicators
Threshold
Downscaled planetary boundaries
Social absolute thresholds
II
Deﬁning social sustainability through the Social Foundation
II.I
Selection of the dimensions
In its initial version, the Social Foundation (SF) consisted of 11 dimensions, deﬁned in a top-down
approach by countries’ top priorities from the Rio+20 summit (Raworth 2012). Since then, literature
using the SJOS (Dearing et al. 2014, Cole et al. 2014, Raworth 2017, O’Neill et al. 2018a, Sayers &
Trebeck 2015, Sayers et al. 2014) reported differences or adaptations, depending on the end focus of the
studies (e.g. drawing a national agenda based on people’s priorities). The review of literature enabled to
compare the dimensions representative of the SF across sources, showed in ﬁgure 5.
47
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5: Cross-cutting of dimensions in the different sources of literature
48
==PAGE:58==
The social foundation of the SJOS (Raworth 2012) relies on the fundamental concept of ’deprivation’,
approach pioneered by P. Townsend (Townsend 1987). Deprivation focuses on ensuring to meet hu-
mans’ needs for all. Thus, the focus on the individual overall well-being is kept in mind while selecting
the dimensions. The ﬁnal list is to be composed of 10-15 categories, deemed an appropriate number
according to the screened literature. Selection of dimensions is supported by the SDGs framework as
well as the theory of basic needs (Doyal & Gough 1991). SDGs 12, 13, 14, 15 and 17 were not included
as potential dimensions of the SF as they do not represent social issues or goals.
The dimensions Income, Food, Health, Education, Sanitation, Energy and Voice, later referred as Demo-
cratic rights, seem consensual as all found in all literature sources, even though naming might differ.
Therefore, they were included as such in the ﬁnal list. The dimension Work, Sanitation and Life satis-
faction were found to often be coupled respectively with the dimensions Income, Water and Health. As
considered important according to the ’deprivation theory’ and to meet humans’ needs, it is important to
represent them. However, as dimensions are most often merely represented by one indicator, it is chosen
to represent them as self-standing dimensions. Speciﬁcally, Income is differentiated from Work, as it
former is deﬁned as a way to assess poverty, while the latter is one the means to reduce poverty. So far,
the SF is represented by 10 dimensions.
The dimension Housing was added since considered a basic need and as countries’ priorities (Rio+20
summit), supported by the SDGs framework. The dimensions Social equity and Gender equality could
be cross-cutting with other dimensions and could be assessed within all dimensions (O’Neill et al. 2018a,
Raworth 2017). Yet, it is difﬁcult to do so with very few indicators, so they were both kept as self-
standing dimensions. Social support, describing the ability of people to rely on relatives is included
within the broader dimension Networks, referring to all types of networks both material and immaterial.
Lastly, Peace and safety is a less-consensual category in the literature. Yet, it is included in the theory of
basic needs (Doyal & Gough 1991). Moreover, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies and provid-
ing access to justice for all are key elements of SDG 16. Thus, it was decided to keep it as a self-standing
dimension. Overall, the list is well aligned with the SDGs, as shown in ﬁgure 5: 9 dimensions are di-
rectly linked with one unique SDG and only one (SDG 9) is not really related to the set of dimensions.
49
==PAGE:59==
The ﬁnal 15 dimensions are presented in table 7. They can be classiﬁed in respect with Maslow’s
pyramid (Maslow 1943b): a need can be classiﬁed a ’basic need’ if corresponding to the 2 base layers of
the pyramid or a ’higher need’ if corresponding to the upper layers. In this methodology, equal weight
is assumed between all dimensions.
Table 7: Deﬁnition of the 15 dimensions constituting of the social foundation
Maslow’s
pyra-
mid
Dimension
Deﬁnition of the dimension
Physiological
needs
Food
End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutri-
tion
Water
Ensure access to safe drinking water for all
Sanitation
Ensure clean and adequate sanitation for all
Housing
Ensuring adequate (safe and affordable) housing and up-
grading slums
Health
Ensuring healthy lives for all
Safety
needs
Income
Ending income poverty for all
Work
Promote full, productive employment and decent work
for all
Education
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and
promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
Energy
Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and
modern energy for all
Safety and justice
Prevent all forms of violence and promote transparency
and justice to ensure safety for all
Love, belonging
Networks
Ensuring social inclusion (support and interaction) for
all through all kind of networks
Self-esteem
and
self-actualisation
Gender equality
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and
girls
Social equity
Reduce inequality within and among countries
Democratic rights
Protect fundamental freedoms for all (such as freedom of
speech, association, information) and ensure transparent
policy-making to enable inclusive social participation
Life satisfaction
Promoting well-being for all
II.II
Selecting endpoint indicators
Once the dimensions have been deﬁned, the endpoint indicators were also reviewed to rationalise the
process upon which they are selected. Ranking and ultimately selecting indicators entails assessing their
quality based on certain characteristics to ensure that the chosen indicators are good. Especially, having
only one indicator to represent a full dimension, i.e. the best available proxy, requires meeting the
highest standards in the deﬁned characteristics. Accordingly, the selection process involves 4 criteria of
different importance, presented here from the most to the least important: 1) Relevance, 2) Classiﬁcation
50
==PAGE:60==
of the indicator in the UN Tiers, 3) Frequency, 4) Alignment with the SDGs.
The process of selecting the indicators is supported by a decision-tree presented in ﬁgure 6. The ﬁnal
list of ranked indicators can be found in Supporting Material 1.
Criteria 1: relevance
Relevance targets the question of "Does the indicator measure what really matters as opposed to what
is easiest to measure?" (ICAT 2018b). Within this context, ’what matters’ refers to the measure of
a potential deprivation associated to ensuring humans’ needs for all. In speciﬁc terms, relevance of
indicators reﬂects two sub-aspects:
1. Comprehensiveness: Does the indicator entirely represent one dimension?
2. Representativeness: Does it directly measure the identiﬁed deprivation for the selected dimen-
sion?
To rank indicators according to their relevance, tiers are deﬁned based on the answers to the sub-
questions here above. Tiers 1 (highest relevance): Both ’Yes’; Tiers 2 (medium relevance): One ’Yes’
and one ’No’; Tiers 3 (lowest relevance): Both ’No’.
Criteria 2: UN tiers
Indicators within the SDGs framework are classiﬁed into 3 tiers based on their level of methodological
development and data availability (IAEG-SDGs 2018).
1. Tier 1: Indicator is conceptually clear, has an internationally established methodology and stan-
dards are available, and data are regularly produced by countries for at least 50 per cent of coun-
tries and of the population in every region where the indicator is relevant.
2. Tier 2: Indicator is conceptually clear, has an internationally established methodology and stan-
dards are available, but data are not regularly produced by countries.
3. Tier 3: No internationally established methodology or standards are yet available for the indicator,
but methodology/standards are being (or will be) developed or tested.
However, not all indicators were part of this classiﬁcation. So, further information about all not-yet clas-
siﬁed indicators was collected to be able to conclude on the tiers they should relate to. Information was
51
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6: Decision-tree tool to support the ranking of indicators within each dimension and select the
ﬁnal ’endpoint indicator’ for each one.
found on common indicator databases such as World Bank n.d.(a), IEA 2017 or WHO n.d. Ultimately,
all indicators could be associated to a speciﬁc tiers.
Criteria 3: Frequency in the list
This criteria accounts for the number of times one speciﬁc indicators has been used across literature
sources. This can be seen as a proxy for the indicator credibility and scientiﬁc consensus.
Criteria 4: SDG alignment
This last criteria (of relatively low importance) consists in a ﬁnal attempt to distinguish two equally
ranked indicators. Assuming that two indicators were found to be equally ranked for one dimension, if
one is in line with the corresponding SDG (only if stated in literature) and not the other one, the ﬁrst one
should be prevailing.
II.III
Deﬁning absolute thresholds for the social foundation
In this part, the endpoint indicators that were identiﬁed as proxies to represent the different dimensions
of the social foundation are detailed, in order to deﬁne their associated thresholds. The tier-classiﬁcation
52
==PAGE:62==
used to deﬁne thresholds is presented in this section.
Type 1
Food, Water, Sanitation, Housing, Income, Education, Energy, Safety and justice, Networks.
For these dimensions, indicators are scientiﬁcally sound and well deﬁned, and used by many interna-
tional institutions, particularly institutions of the United Nations. Dimensions are represented by indi-
cators that directly measure a deprivation (or respectively an "anti-deprivation"). Consequently, social
absolute thresholds can be easily and reliably deﬁned as 0% as no one should suffer from any depriva-
tion (or respectively 100 % if the indicator measures the "anti-deprivation"). Accordingly, 0% (or 100%)
represent the absolute social thresholds for the 9 dimensions listed here above.
Food
Ending hunger and achieving food security is the focus of SDG 2. The human deprivation related to
taking sustenance is represented by undernourishment, deﬁned as follows: “Undernourishment is de-
ﬁned as the condition in which an individual’s habitual food consumption is insufﬁcient to provide the
amount of dietary energy required to maintain a normal, active, healthy life.” (Food and Agriculture
Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) 2018). Undernourishment is reported by the FAO (Food and
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) 2018) through the indicator Prevalence of Under-
nourishment” (PoU), “which is a three-year average estimation of the percentage of individuals in the
total population that are in a condition of undernourishment.” Undernourishment is assessed in terms of
minimum calorie intake, which varies according to gender, age and physical activity primarily and is re-
ferred as MDER (Minimum Daily Energy Requirements expressed in kcal/cap/day). MDER typically
ranges between 2100 and 2900 kcal/day (O’Neill et al. 2018b).
From a rights-based approach, i.e based on the deprivation concept, 0 % of the population should remain
in a state of undernourishment. Therefore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’food
deprivation’ for the indicator "Fraction of the population being undernourished, based on the adequate
daily calorie intake depending on age or gender" is set at 0%.
Water
53
==PAGE:63==
Ensuring access to safe drinking water for all is one of the focuses of SDG 6. The indicator used is
"Fraction of population using safely managed drinking water services (%)". Safe water is provided
by "improved sources", including piped water, boreholes or tube wells, protected dug wells, protected
springs, and packaged or delivered water. Besides, safely managed drinking water sources should meet
3 criteria : i) it should be accessible on premises, ii) water should be available when needed, and iii) the
water supplied should be free from contamination (WHO/UNICEF 2017b). It corresponds to the most
stringent level of service (safely managed, basic, limited, unimproved, surface water).
From a rights-based approach, 100 % of the population should be granted access to safe drinking water.
Therefore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’safe water deprivation’ is set at 0%
of the population.
Sanitation
Ensuring access to safely managed sanitation services for all is one of the focuses of SDG 6. The
indicator used is "Fraction of population with access to improved sanitation (%)". Improved sanita-
tion facilities are designed to hygienically separate excreta from human contact. Such facilities include
ﬂush/pour ﬂush to piped sewer systems, septic tanks or pit latrines, ventilated improved pit latrines,
composting toilets or pit latrines with slabs. Access to improved sanitation includes 3 levels of service
(depending on whether sanitation facilities are shared between households or not): limited, basic and
safely managed. (WHO/UNICEF 2017b).
From a rights-based approach, 100 % of the population should be granted access to improved sanitation.
Therefore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’decent sanitation deprivation’ is set
at 0% of the population.
Housing
Ensuring access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing covered by SDG 11. The indicator
used here is "Proportion of urban population living in slums, informal settlements or inadequate hous-
ing (%)" and focuses on the adequacy of habitats (United Nations n.d.(a)). Such inadequate housing,
slums especially, are reported to be lacking in at least one of the following four characteristics: access
54
==PAGE:64==
to improved drinking water, access to improved sanitation, no overcrowding, dwellings made of durable
material (Raworth 2017).
From a rights-based approach, 0 % of the population should be living in inadequate housing. Therefore,
the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’inadequate housing deprivation’ is set at 0% of
the population.
Income
Eradicating income poverty is one aspect of ending poverty in the world and it is focused on by SDG
1. The indicator used here is "Fraction of population living below the national poverty line (%)", which
represents a relative measure of poverty. National poverty lines are often taken as "half the median
household income of the total population" (OECD 2014), yet some countries adopt different speciﬁc
methods. In other words, this indicator measures the fraction of population whose average household
income is inferior to half the median household income of the total population. Poverty data is provided
by administrative unit level 1 institutions (highest sub-national unit level, including e.g. ‘state’, ‘gover-
norate’, ‘province’ World Bank n.d.(a)).
From a rights-based approach, 0 % of the population should be living in a state of poverty. Therefore,
the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’income poverty’ is set at 0% of the population.
Education
Ensuring inclusive, equitable and quality education is the focus of SDG 4. The indicator used here is
"Children aged 12-15 out of school (%)".
From a rights-based approach, 100 % of the population should be granted access to primary and sec-
ondary education. Therefore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’education depri-
vation’ is set at 0% of the population.
Energy
Ensuring access to energy for all is the focus of SDG 7. The indicator used here is "Fraction of popula-
55
==PAGE:65==
tion with access to electricity (%)". Access to electricity is measured in terms of household possessing
a direct electricity supply, which is provided with a minimum of 250 and 500kWh/yr respectively for
rural and urban areas (Raworth 2017).
From a rights-based approach, 100 % of the population should be granted access to electricity. There-
fore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’energy deprivation’ is set at 0% of the
population.
Safety and Justice
Preventing all forms of violence, promoting transparency and justice to ensure safety for all is the focus
of SDG 16. The indicator used here is "Number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 people".
Intentional homicide refers to unlawful death purposefully inﬂicted on a person by someone. However,
killings in periods of war or conﬂicts are not included (Raworth 2017).
From a rights-based approach, 0 % of the population should be a victim of intentional homicide. There-
fore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’safety and justice deprivation’ is set at 0
homicide (per 100,000 people).
Networks
Ensuring social inclusion (support and interaction) for all through all kind of networks correspond to
targets 1.5 and 9.c within the SDG framework. The indicator used here is "National average of binary
responses to the question: If you were in trouble, do you have relatives or friends you can count on
to help you whenever you need them, or not?" and the answer is binary (yes or no). This indicator is
monitored by the Gallup World Poll and is part of the World Happiness Report (Helliwell et al. 2019).
From a rights-based approach, 100 % of the population should be included in social networks. There-
fore, the absolute threshold as regards to the objective of no ’social inclusion deprivation’ is set at 0% of
the population.
56
==PAGE:66==
Type 2
Work, Gender equality, Life satisfaction.
This type refers to dimensions for which there is no inherently absolute threshold deﬁned in the indica-
tor. However, social and scientiﬁc studies are numerous enough to represent sound literature to rely on
when deﬁning the threshold.
Work
Promoting full and productive employment for all, as part of the focus of SDG 8, is one of the key-
stones to reduce income poverty, entailing insecurity and instability (Raworth 2017). The indicator used
for this dimension is the unemployment rate, which is deﬁned as "the number of unemployed people
as a percentage of the labour force, where the latter consists of the unemployed plus those in paid or
self-employment. Unemployed people are those who report that they are without work, that they are
available for work and that they have taken active steps to ﬁnd work in the last four weeks", according
to OECD (OECD 2019).
Despite misconceptions, an unemployment rate of 0 % is not the target to aim for. Indeed, frictional
unemployment, which allows workers to transition between jobs is inevitable and even desirable for a
well-functioning economy. As opposed to it, structural and cyclical types of unemployment, that reﬂect
a mismatch between jobs and employees skills, or a fall in the aggregate demand for goods and services
(Goodwin et al. 2015). The objective is then to reach ’full-employment’, term that can be economically
deﬁned in many ways. The adopted deﬁnition here is to relate the optimal unemployment rate to the av-
erage Non-Accelerating Inﬂation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU): Full-employment is reached when
the unemployment rate is below the NAIRU (Zagorsky 2019). It is currently set at 4.6% by the U.S.
Congressional Budget Ofﬁce (CBO), but it can vary between 4.5 and 6 % (U.S. Congressional Budget
Ofﬁce 2019).
Consequently, the absolute threshold for the "Work" dimension is set as roughly equal to 5 %.
Gender equality
Seeking gender equality and empowering women is the focus of SDG 5. The indicator used here is
57
==PAGE:67==
"Share of women in national parliaments". For this indicator, parity is sought, as indicated in the Global
Gender Gap Report (World Economic Forum 2017).
For this indicator, the absolute threshold is set equal to 50 %, meaning that full deprivation (resp. zero
deprivation) is reached when women hold 0 % of seats (resp. 50 % of seats) in the national parliament.
Life Satisfaction
Ensuring life satisfaction and well-being for all is a part of the focus of SDG 3. To measure it, the Cantril
Self-Anchoring Scale (Cantril 1965), developed by pioneering social researcher Dr. Cantril, is used. It
is deﬁned as follows: "Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from zero at the bottom to 10 at the
top. The top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents
the worst possible life for you. On which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand
at this time? (ladder-present) On which step do you think you will stand about ﬁve years from now?
(ladder-future)". Accordingly, the score given as an answer ranges from 0 to 10. Analysing data from
hundreds of thousands of respondents to the Gallup World Poll in more than 150 different countries lead
to the deﬁnition of three meaningful categories, according to Gallup (Understanding How Gallup Uses
the Cantril Scale 2019):
• Suffering (0-4): well-being that is at high risk. These respondents have poor ratings of their
current life situation (4 and below) and negative views of the next ﬁve years (4 and below). They
are more likely to report lacking the basics of food and shelter, more likely to have physical pain,
a lot of stress, worry, sadness, and anger. They have less access to health insurance and care, and
more than double the disease burden, in comparison to "thriving" respondents.
• Struggling (4-7, both excluded): well-being that is moderate or inconsistent. These respondents
have moderate views of their present life situation or moderate or negative views of their future.
They are either struggling in the present, or expect to struggle in the future. They report more
daily stress and worry about money than the "thriving" respondents, and more than double the
amount of sick days. They are more likely to smoke, and are less likely to eat healthy.
• Thriving (7-10): well-being that is strong, consistent, and progressing. These respondents have
positive views of their present life situation and have positive views of the next ﬁve years. They
58
==PAGE:68==
report signiﬁcantly fewer health problems, fewer sick days, less worry, stress, sadness, anger, and
more happiness, enjoyment, interest, and respect.
Other approaches exist in order to measure subjective well-being and life satisfaction. Another widely
resorted to approach is the World Value Survey (Ortiz-Ospina & Roser 2013), that also provides cross-
country data (including around 100 countries) on self-reported life satisfaction. The question being
answered is: “Taking all things together, would you say you are (i) Very happy, (ii) Rather happy, (iii)
Not very happy or (iv) Not at all happy”. Even though the scores between the two approaches seem to
correlate well ( a bias seems to be consistently found in the results of the Cantril ladder, results being
lower of 0.5 point on average compared to other questions used to measure well-being.
A score of 7 (lower bound of the ’Thriving’ category) seems to be an appropriate and reliable threshold
to be reached to ensure that one is fulﬁlled with his/her life (O’Neill et al. 2018b). To take into account
the lower score given to the Cantril ladder of 0.5 point compared to other methods, the minimum value
is set to 6.5. This score corresponds to the answer of the ﬁrst question of the Cantril Self-Anchoring
Scale (ladder-present).
Type 3
Health, Social equity, Democratic rights.
Lastly, the third tier refers to dimensions, for which deﬁning thresholds can be disputable and involves
making “strong” decisions. Ethical, social and cultural perspectives are involved when it comes to an-
swering the question of “what is good enough?”. Besides, little literature is available to support such
choices. Both reasons make the deﬁnition of a threshold difﬁcult and largely uncertain.
To set thresholds for the dimensions ’Health’, ’Social equity’ and ’Democratic rights’, the Human De-
velopment Index developed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) (later on referred
as HDI, (United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2018)) was used as suggested by Raworth
(Raworth 2017). Most countries in the world are classiﬁed into the following categories: “Very high”,
“High”, “Medium” or “Low” human development, depending on the extent of their human develop-
ment based on several criteria (Long and healthy life, Knowledge and Decent standard of living (United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2018)). The threshold is deﬁned as the median of a certain
59
==PAGE:69==
group of countries; the choice of the latter differs from dimension to dimension. The choice of the tar-
geted group to set the threshold was made based on literature (Raworth 2017) and benchmarked based
on global performance.
Health
Ensuring healthy lives is part of the focus of SDG 3. The indicator used to represent the dimension
"Health" is Life Expectancy at Birth (years). The deﬁnition is: “The number of years a newborn infant
could expect to live if prevailing patterns of age-speciﬁc mortality rates at the time of birth stay the same
throughout the infant’s life.” (United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) n.d.) No international
benchmark has been deﬁned yet to set a minimum life expectancy. Raworth (Raworth 2017) suggests
to use the HDI, and uses 70 years as a threshold since it is "an outcome typically achieved by coun-
tries classiﬁed under medium human development according to UNDP’s HDI" (Raworth 2017). In other
words, "Health" is a dimension for which most countries "perform" relatively well.
As life expectancy keeps increasing in many countries, it is expected that most countries will reach this
threshold of 70 years in the coming years (WHO 2018). That is why it is found relevant to set a higher
threshold, corresponding to the median life expectancy at birth of countries classiﬁed under "High" hu-
man development, equals to 74.9 years (United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) n.d., data
from 2017). The threshold is accordingly set to 75 years. Being under that threshold reveals overall
worse health conditions than average (high infant mortality, limited access to essential cares etc), hence
measurement of health deprivation.
Social equity
Reducing inequality within and among countries is the focus of SDG 10, which is often measured in
terms of income inequality. The Palma ratio is used and is deﬁned as "a measure of income or con-
sumption concentration based and calculated as the Gross National Income capture of the richest 10
% divided by that of the poorest 40 % (Cobham et al. 2016). This indicator is easy to understand for
policy-makers and is a policy-relevant measure of inequality (Cobham et al. 2013). Indeed, it focuses
on capturing relative changes at the extremes of the income distribution, since "changes in income or
consumption inequality are (almost) exclusively due to changes in the share of the richest 10 % and
60
==PAGE:70==
poorest 40 % because the ‘middle’ group between the richest and poorest tend to capture approximately
50 % of gross national income." (Cobham et al. 2016).
Setting an absolute threshold for the Palma ratio, i.e. questioning it ’being normal or not’ inevitably
involves making a normative choice. A benchmark was set at a Palma ratio of 2 by Raworth (Raworth
2017), which occurs when the richest 10 % earn twice the annual income of the poorest 40 %. No clear
rationale supports this choice. Instead, the threshold was set as the median of the Palma ratio scores
for countries classiﬁed under the group "Very high" human development. The group "Very high" was
chosen since "High" and "Medium" human development groups showed high income inequalities. The
calculated numeric value for this threshold is 1.2 (Kaufmann & Kraay 2019, data representative of years
2010-2017).
Democratic rights
As deﬁned in this paper (see table 7), the dimension "democratic rights" aims at safeguarding funda-
mental freedoms while ensuring transparent policy-making to enable inclusive social participation. This
dimension is related to one of the focus of SDG 16. The indicator used to represent this dimension is the
"Voice and Accountability index", the latter indicator being part of the six indicators used in the World-
wide Governance Indicators (WGI) project (Kaufmann et al. 2010). The Voice and Accountability index
captures "perceptions of the extent to which a country’s citizens are able to participate in selecting their
government, as well as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media." Estimates give
the countries’ scores in units of a standard normal distribution, i.e. ranging from approximately -2.5 to
2.5. (Kaufmann & Kraay 2019)
It is difﬁcult to benchmark an absolute threshold for this indicator, as it represents a normative choice.
As an example, O’Neill (O’Neill et al. 2018a) takes 0.8 as a threshold, because of it being the score for
Great-Britain and the United-States (that are "two democratic systems that are by no means the highest
performing, but are nonetheless well-knowns in terms of their strengths and weaknesses" O’Neill et al.
2018b). This approach is deemed too arbitrary, so the threshold is set based on the HDI. The threshold for
this indicator was deﬁned as the median of the Voice and Accountability scores for countries classiﬁed
under the group "Very high" human development. The group "Very high" was chosen since countries
61
==PAGE:71==
overall do not perform very well as regards "democratic rights", the current state being away from the
ideal state of 2.5 (normal distribution between -2.5 and 2.5, centered on 0). The calculated numeric
value for this threshold is 1.0 (Kaufmann & Kraay 2019, data from year 2017).
62
==PAGE:72==
III
Population projection
To predict the policy scenario (2040), the ’medium fertility’ population projection was used for both
the World and Ugandan populations. Accordingly, Uganda is expected to have a national population
of 8.36E+07 inhabitants in 2040, while the global population would account for as many as 9.21E+09
people (UN DESA). Based on the same source, the population for the baseline scenario was taken for
2018 as 4.43E+07 inhabitants in Uganda and 7.63E+09 inhabitants globally.
IV
Social assessment : supporting information
Signiﬁcance assessment
The methodology adopted here to assess the signiﬁcance of impacts was adapted from Terrapon-Pfaff
et al. 2017. Assessing signiﬁcance is based on 4 criteria (Likelihood, Intensity, Geographic extent,
Duration), further detailed in table 8. These criteria are evaluated by experts with different levels of
conﬁdence on a 5-point scale, as can be seen in table 9. The impacts signiﬁcance can then be classiﬁed
according to their scores into 5 different signiﬁcance levels: ’Very Low’, ’Low’, ’Moderate’, ’High’,
’Very High’ as shown in table 10.
63
==PAGE:73==
Table 8: Deﬁnition of signiﬁcance criteria.
Criteria
Scale
Deﬁnition
Intensity
None
No impacts on individual well-being
Low
Low impact on individual well-being
Medium
Moderate impact on individual well-being
High
High impact on individual well-being
Very high
Very high impact on individual well-being
Geographic extent
Punctual
Communitie(s) around the geothermal energy power plant
Urban
Citie(s) around the geothermal energy power plant
District
District(s) around the geothermal energy power plant
Regional
Region(s) around the geothermal energy power plant
National
Uganda
Duration
Momentary
less than one year
Short term
1–5 years
Medium term
5–10 years, less than the project lifespan
Long term
10–20 years, lifespan of the project
Irreversible
Permanent
Likelihood
None
Impact will not occur
Unlikely
Impact is unlikely to occur
Likely
Impact is likely to occur
Most likely
Impact is most likely to occur
Deﬁnite
Impact will deﬁnitely occur
Conﬁdence level
High
Very conﬁdent
Medium
Conﬁdent
Low
Not conﬁdent
Table 9: Rating scales for the different criteria of the signiﬁcance assessment
Intensity (In)
Conﬁdence level
Geographic extent
Conﬁdence level
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
None
0
2
2
Punctual
1
0.5
0.5
Low
2
1.5
1
Urban
2
1.5
0
Medium
3
2.5
2
District
3
2.5
2
High
4
3.5
3
Regional
4
3.5
3
Very high
5
4.5
4
National
5
4.5
4
Duration (D)
Conﬁdence level
Likelihood
Conﬁdence level
High
Medium
Low
High
Medium
Low
Momentary
1
0.5
0.5
Punctual
0
1
1
Short term
2
1.5
1
Unlikely
2
1.5
1
Medium term
3
2.5
2
Likely
3
2.5
2
Long term
4
3.5
3
Most likely
4
3.5
3
Irreversible
5
4.5
4
Deﬁnite
5
4.5
4
Aggregated signiﬁcance
To identify relevant dimension of the SF be quantiﬁed, all impacts are classiﬁed per ’direction’, i.e
as positive or negative. Indeed, this preliminary step prior to quantifying signiﬁcant impacts aims at
simplifying the quantiﬁcation process. At the dimension level, the quantiﬁcation needs to be done for
64
==PAGE:74==
Table 10: Signiﬁcance levels and scores for individual impacts and dimensions
Signiﬁcance
Scores for individual signiﬁcance
Score for aggregated signiﬁcance
Very high
61-75
>213
High
46-60
160-212
Moderate
31-45
107-159
Low
16-30
54-106
Very low
0-15
0-53
one ’direction’, i.e positive or negative impact. If both positive and negative impacts of a dimension are
identiﬁed as signiﬁcant, they need to be quantiﬁed separately and the ﬁnal impact within this dimension
is the sum of them. The aggregated signiﬁcance score (S) of the overall impacts for one given dimension
D with n identiﬁed impacts and one given sign S (positive or negative) is given by:
S(D, S) =
n
X
i=1
S1(Ii)
(3)
with Ii being the impact i of the social dimension D and of sign S, S1 its signiﬁcance score and S2 the
aggregated signiﬁcance score of the impacts of sign S on the relevant dimension D.
A new scale of aggregated signiﬁcance levels was deﬁned for the aggregated signiﬁcance. As for the
signiﬁcance levels of a single impact, aggregated signiﬁcance levels for relevant dimensions consist of
5 intervals from ’very low’ to ’very high’ signiﬁcance. The interval size is deﬁned by the interval size
for the signiﬁcance levels of a single impact (i.e. 15) multiplied by the average number of impact per
dimension ( N
15, with N being the number of identiﬁed impacts), hence an interval size equal to N (50
for the illustrative case in Uganda). All dimensions with a moderate or higher aggregated signiﬁcance
are classiﬁed as relevant dimensions in which an impact quantiﬁcation has to be performed. Table 11
presents the list of identiﬁed impacts, their average scores in the different criteria, their signiﬁcance
scores as well as aggregated signiﬁcance scores for dimensions. Yellow cases represent impacts for
which quantiﬁcation has been identiﬁed as relevant based on the signiﬁcance assessment.
Impacts quantiﬁcation
Signiﬁcant impact quantiﬁcation: impact pathway based on the DPSIR framework
The DPSIR framework conceptualizes the interactions and dynamics of a social-ecological system
through causal chains, and is relevant to use in the context of this study due to its holistic vision (based
65
==PAGE:75==
on systems science) and its policy orientation (Binder et al. 2013). It aims at categorizing a problem
domain or in the case of this study, an impact pathway between a policy and a social impact. In the
context of policy, the ’DPSI’ could be seen as the baseline scenario and the Response (R) as the policy
(Zhang & Fujiwara 2009), as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. There are several types of responses, corresponding
to different policies or different focuses of policies. For example, policies aiming at restructuring social
systems or controlling generation are response to drivers, policies enforcing laws and regulations are
responses to pressures. The DPSIR facilitates the process to understand the behavior of the system and
to draw causal links. It is recommended to use the DPSIR framework at the system and policy levels
ﬁrst to have an understanding of the system, and then to add speciﬁc impacts. Details on processes and
causal links are driven by the speciﬁc problem domain under consideration (Binder et al. 2013), hence
more details on methods can be found in the following section for the deﬁnition of impact pathway in
the case of the illustrative example of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda.
Figure 7: The DPSIR framework adapted to the context of policies
66
==PAGE:76==
Impacts at the dimension level with the use of correlations
Using correlations comes back to quantifying how much the change of an endpoint indicator of a dimen-
sion inﬂuences the change of to the endpoint indicator in another dimension, based on empirical data for
the current situation. As a proxy for the current year, it is recommended to use the most recent year in
which data is available for both indicators.
The validation conditions amount to 5 and are described below. It is important to note that these pro-
posed conditions are deﬁned as necessary to validate the correlation, but do not claim to be necessarily
sufﬁcient, hence a critical mind is crucial regarding the use of this tool.
1. An impact exists within another dimension (the ’reference’ dimension) and it was possible to
quantify it.
2. The impact in the assessed dimension calculated with the correlation is going in the same direction
(i.e positive or negative impact) as the overall impact in the assessed dimension level, assessed in
the signiﬁcance assessment step.
3. An apparent correlation can be observed when plotted.
4. The coefﬁcient of determination has to be r2> 0.5.
5. The correlation coefﬁcient is statistically signiﬁcant, i.e p-value < 0.05.
IV.I
Social assessment of the impacts of the Geothermal Energy Development in Uganda
Impact identiﬁcation
Table 11 presents all the potential social impacts (column 2) identiﬁed for the illustrative case of the
Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda and the literature (column 3) used for their identiﬁ-
cation.
Signiﬁcance assessment
Table 11 gathers the scores for each criteria and the average impacts signiﬁcance scores.
67
==PAGE:77==
Table 11: List of identiﬁed impact and their signiﬁcance scores for the illustrative case of Geother-
mal Energy Development Policy in Uganda. Yellow color indicates signiﬁcant impacts or relevant di-
mensions. L=Likelihood, I=Intensity, GE=Geographic extent, D=Duration, S=Signiﬁcance, Agg. S =
Aggregated Signiﬁcance. References : [1] Shortall et al. 2015b, [2] Zakkour & Cook 2016, [3] Mwangi-
Gachau 2011 , [4] Namugize 2011, [5] Bw’obuya 2002, [6] Oduor 2010
Dimension
Impacts
Sources
Sign
L
I
GE
D
S
Agg. S
Health
Increase in miscarriages
or children being born
with deformities or re-
tarded
[5]
1
4
1
2.5
7.5
Exposure to toxic gases
(H2S)
[1], [6]
2.5
2
1
2.25
13
A rise in respiratory dis-
eases (asthma), eye prob-
lems, colds and ﬂu’s
[5]
2.5
2.5
1
1.75
12.75
Increase
in
sexually
transmissible
diseases
and HIV/AIDS
[4]
1.5
3.5
1
3.5
11.5
Diseases from contami-
nation with polluted wa-
ter
[1]
2
3.75
2.25
2.25
16.5
Spread
of
contagious
diseases
(indigenous
peoples)
[1] , [3]
-
2
3.75
1.75
2
15
76
Reduced cases of water-
borne diseases (cholera,
typhoid)
[5]
3
2.5
1.75
2.5
20.25
Refrigeration of essential
medicines
[1]
3
2.75
3
3
26.25
Therapeutic properties of
geothermal waters
[1], [2]
3
1.5
1.25
3
17.5
Improved access to es-
sential services
[6]
3
3.75
2.5
3
27.75
Sterelisation
[1]
3.25
3.75
3
2
28.375
Reduced
indoor
emis-
sions
from
fossil-fuel
systems
to
produce
energy
[1]
4
2.5
1.25
2
23
Decentralization
of
health
centers
(decen-
tralized energy systems)
[1]
+
3.5
3
3.5
3.5
35
178
Loss of local culture:
population displacement,
land acquisition and re-
settlement of evacuated
people
[3], [4],
[5]
3
3
1
3
21.75
Increased risk for build-
ings and infrastructures
due
to
increased
in
ground instability
[1]
-
2
1
1
3
6.75
28.5
Housing
Improved infrastructure
for development within
the area
[1], [2],
[4]
+
3
2
1
3
19.5
19.5
68
==PAGE:78==
Table 11 (continued)
Dimension
Impacts
Sources
Sign
L
I
GE
D
S
Agg. S
Decreased levelised cost of energy,
electricity cost
[2], [4]
4
3
5
4
42
Increased energy security (national in-
dependence and stabilisation)
[1], [4]
4
3
5
4
48
Increased access to energy (house-
holds, public infrastructures etc)
[1]
5
3
5
4
52
Energy
Increased
share
of
clean
energy
(low greenhouse gas emitting energy
source)
[2], [4]
+
5
3
5
4
50
192
Life
Improved living conditions
[1]
2
1
3
3
20.5
Children freed from chores
[1]
3
1
3
3
24
Increased socio-economic wellbeing
of local communities
[2]
+
2
1
3
3
14
59.5
satis-
Loss of cultural values (eroded by out-
siders)
[3], [5]
3
2
2
3
21
faction
Decreased wellbeing due to discom-
fort from noise or gas emissions
[1], [5]
-
4
1
1
3
11.5
32.5
Better water access for agriculture
when droughts (pumping)
[1]
2
2
3
3
22.5
Heat for food processing e.g drying,
pasteurisation
[2]
3
2
3
3
21
Longevity of agricultural and ﬁshery
products
[2]
3
2
3
3
21
Offering access to more remote mar-
kets for sale of locally produced food
products
[2]
+
3
2
3
3
21
85.5
Food
Land use change:
decreased land
availability for agriculture and for
grazing land for life stock
[1], [5]
-
3
2
3
3
22.5
22.5
Increased salaries for directly or indi-
rectly involved employees
[1]
4
3
2
3
32
New economic opportunities for local
people e.g sell of agricultural products
[2]
3
2
2
3
19.5
Creation of shopping center and cul-
tural center for tourists resulting in in-
creased income levels
[5]
2
1
2
3
11
Income
Income from rent and transport ser-
vices)
[6]
+
2
2
2
3
12
75.5
Increased access to the internet
[1]
4
3
3
3
25
Networks
Improved
transportation
infrastruc-
tures (roads)
[1], [2],
[4], [6]
+
2
2
3
4
18
43
Decreased quality of transportation in-
frastructure (pressure on existing one)
[6]
-
2
2
2
1
11
11
69
==PAGE:79==
Table 11 (continued)
Dimension
Impacts
Sources
Sign
L
I
GE
D
S
Agg. S
Children freed from chores can
go to school, (relevant in devel-
oping countries)
[1]
3
2
2
4
24
Construction of schools
[6]
2
3
2
3
15
Building of higher education like
engineering or geothermal sci-
ences)
[4]
3
2
2
3
21
Education
Increased quality of education
(time to study, more qualiﬁed
teachers, access to information,
e-learning etc)
[1], [4]
+
3
2
2
4
18
78
Job creation (direct but limited
impacts and indirect large im-
pacts)
[1], [3],
[4], [6]
4
3
3
2
26.5
Direct and long-term ob creation
[1], [6]
4
3
3
2
26.5
Direct and short-term job cre-
ation
[1], [4],
[6]
4
2
1
1
15.5
Hire local employees
[4]
2
2
1
2
14
Work
Indirect job creation
46
+
4
3
3
2
26.5
109
Water
Improved water supply puriﬁca-
tion and sanitation
[1]
+
3.5
3.5
2.5
3
23.75
23.75
and
Decreased water quality through
freshwater pollution (geothermal
efﬂuent mismanaged from the
geothermal ﬂuid)
[1], [6]
2
3
2
1
18
sanitation
Increased water stress (competi-
tion between needs for geother-
mal activities and other needs)
[1]
-
3
2
2
3
22.5
40.5
Social eq-
uity
Increased employment inequali-
ties (low employment of local
community)
[5], [6]
-
3
2
1
2
18
18
Peace
and
Justice
Increased crime levels (ex: re-
moval of aluminium insulating
pipes)
[1]
-
3
2
2
1
14.25
14.25
Impact quantiﬁcation
Quantiﬁcation of signiﬁcant impacts through impact pathways
Energy
This impact pathway is depicted in green in ﬁgure 8. 4 signiﬁcant impacts were identiﬁed within the
dimension Energy and should be quantiﬁed: ’decreased levelised cost of energy’, ’increased energy se-
curity’, ’increased share of clean energy’, ’increased access to energy (households)’. The latter appears
70
==PAGE:80==
to be at the very end of the causal chain, i.e close to the endpoint indicator of Energy (’Fraction of
population with access to electricity’). In general, it is recommended to include all the identiﬁed-as-
signiﬁcant impacts in the impact pathway. Indeed, this enhances the understanding of the entire causal
chain and facilitates the quantiﬁcation, through intermediate causal links. Moreover, it enables to ex-
press the change in one indicator directly as a function of the prior indicators in the causal chain. Yet,
in the Ugandan case, the policy documentation directly expressed the characterisation factor between
the policy outcome, i.e the construction and distribution of electricity from a geothermal power plant
and the endpoint indicator. The development of 100 MW of geothermal energy production is assumed
to provide electricity for over 500,000 households, giving a CF of 5,000 household per megawatt of
geothermal capacity added to the grid (Zakkour & Cook 2016). As a consequence, it was not necessary
to include other prior impacts in the causal chain.
The intermediate impact ’increased number of people with access to electricity’ was quantiﬁed based
on the average number of people per households, assumed to remain constant over time (steady-state
assumption), the total Ugandan population and the total number of households, amounting to 8.49E+06
(data for 2018, Helgi Library 2018). Eventually, the percentage of people with access to electricity is
given by dividing the previous factor by the Ugandan population in 2040. Multiplying this by 1,500 MW
gives the impact score for the dimension Energy. In order to have the policy score, the baseline score
was scaled with the population growth, i.e multiplied by the ratio between the Ugandan population in
2018 and the one in 2040.
Work
The Work dimension was identiﬁed as a relevant dimension to assess, meaning that the sum of all the
positive impacts of the policy on the dimension Work gave a signiﬁcant score. Thus, it was attempted to
draw an impact pathway between the outcome of the policy and the endpoint indicator ’Unemployment
rate’. The objective of this impact pathway is to deﬁne a CF giving the change in the unemployment
rate per additional MW of geothermal energy distributed. The identiﬁed impacts were linked as shown
in blue in ﬁgure 8. The geothermal power plant led to the creation of different types of jobs (Jennejohn
2010).
• Direct jobs : created by the construction and maintenance of the power plant
• Indirect jobs : created by the fall-outs to other industries (e.g. providing good and services to the
71
==PAGE:81==
geothermal ﬁeld)
• Induced jobs : created to serve the workers that are directly or indirectly employed
The direct job creation could be further detailed according to several occupational groups, based on a
similar project in Kenya (Bw’obuya 2002). This study quantiﬁed the number of jobs created for each
of these groups associated to the creation of the 53 MW geothermal power plant. These number were
divided by 53 MW to obtain the characterisation factors for each of these groups. As for the indirect
and induced job creation, they were expressed in ’number of full-time jobs created per megawatt of
geothermal capacity added’, as done in Jennejohn 2010. This study investigating the geothermal energy
development in the United States provided with data that was used as a proxy for Uganda. Even though
both countries are far from being comparable in terms of socio-economic mechanisms, no data was
available for similar projects in similar countries. Jennejohn 2010 assumes a multiplier of 2.5 between
direct job creation and total job creation, hence a ratio of 1.5 between indirect and induced jobs per
direct jobs. As a result, approx. 14.0 indirect and induced full-time jobs are created per megawatt of
geothermal capacity added.
Putting all types of jobs creation together, the caracterisation factor (total amounts of jobs created) was
estimated at 23.3 jobs per megawatt of geothermal capacity added. Eventually, the unemployment rate
(endpoint indicator) was given by dividing the CF by the Ugandan population in 2040 and taking its
opposite, as the unemployment rate is decreasing.
Quantiﬁcation of overall impact on relevant dimensions
Health
One signiﬁcant impact was identiﬁed within the dimension Health and should be quantiﬁed: ’Decentral-
ization of health centers’, but no impact pathway was possible to draw. Similarly, at the dimension level,
no impact pathway could be built between the policy outcome and the endpoint indicator of Health, ’Life
expectancy at birth’, due to the mechanisms diversity and complexity ruling this dimension. Therefore,
it was attempted to quantify it in another way using correlations. The correlation was made between the
Health endpoint indicator and the endpoint indicator of a dimension for which impacts have successfully
been quantiﬁed, as for Energy. The correlation between ’Life expectancy at birth’ and ’Percentage of
population with access to electricity’ is depicted in ﬁgure 8. An apparent linear correlation between
the two endpoint indicators can be observed. It fulﬁlls the validation conditions, with the determination
72
==PAGE:82==
Figure 8: Impact pathways developed for signiﬁcant impacts of Energy (depicted in green) and for
the relevant dimension Work (depicted in blue). The characterisation factors are represented above
their associated impact, linking the latter to the outcome of the policy (Construction of power plant
of capacity MW). * represents the characterisation factors that have been calculated. ’Additional MW
refers to ’Megawatt of geothermal capacity added’ As for references: [1] Zakkour & Cook 2016, [2]
Bahati 2016, [3] Bw’obuya 2002, [4] Jennejohn 2010
73
==PAGE:83==
coefﬁcient R2=0.675 > 0.5 and p=1.60E-04 < 0.05. Therefore, the impacts of the policy on the Health
dimension can be calculated as follows:
S(P, Health) = S(B, Health) + 0.240 · (S(P, Energy) −S(B, Energy))
(4)
with S(X,D) the score for the state X in the dimension D, 0.240 the slope of the regression, B (resp. P)
the baseline (resp. policy) scenario.
Figure 9: Correlation between Health and Energy endpoint indicators, based on data for 182 countries
in 2012 (as a proxy for current state). The red and yellow crosses indicate respectively the baseline and
predicted policy scenario for Uganda.
Income
One signiﬁcant impact was identiﬁed within the dimension Income and should be quantiﬁed: ’Increased
salary for directly or indirectly involved employees’. An impact pathway was developed, but no data
was available to quantify the characterisation factor. Besides, limited information was available in the
policy documentation to deﬁne the causal chain. Thus, it was attempted to quantify the overall impact
using a correlation between the endpoint indicators of the dimensions Income and Energy. However, the
conditions to validate the correlation deﬁned in Appendix IV were not met. Particularly, data points were
scattered and no visible correlation was observed when the ’Proportion of population living below the
national poverty line’ was plotted as a function of the ’Fraction of population with access to electricity’.
74
==PAGE:84==
Consequently, the correlation was rejected and the impacts of the policy on the dimension Income were
considered as ’not quantiﬁed’.
V
Environmental assessment : supporting information
Downscaling Planetary Boundaries: global control variables
For a given PB, the absolute threshold, expressed in the metrics a control variable deﬁned by Steffen
(Steffen et al. 2015) is called in the following PBtheory. Some Planetary Boundaries cannot be directly
downscaled and thus their control variable has to be converted to a control variable in which country
performance can be measured. For example, Climate change is measured with the CO2 atmospheric
concentration or with the radiative forcing, two global variables. To measure it at a lower scale (e.g.
national), CO2 emissions can be used. Then, the Planetary Boundary associated with this new control
variable is noted PBoperational and the characterisation factor is deﬁned as CF(PBtheory) given by:
PBoperational = PBtheory · CF(PBtheory)
(5)
This new deﬁnition of the Planetary Boundary allows to downscale them at a regional scale. Characteri-
sation factor had to be deﬁne for Climate Change and Ocean Acidiﬁcation, more details can be found in
their respective section.
Downscaling Planetary Boundaries: egalitarian sharing principle
The downscaling of the Planetary Boundaries to the policy level is done in this report using an egalitarian
sharing principle. To downscale a given planetary boundary to the individual level, it is divided by the
global population for a reference year (Yref) and that represents the environmental budget per capita,
divided equally among everybody on Earth, as assumed by the egalitarian sharing principle:
PBper capita(Yref) =
PBoperational
Populationglobal(Yref)
(6)
To bring it back to the policy level, this per capita Planetary Boundary has to be multiplied by the
population of the system targeted by the policy (e.g. country). Consequently, instead of calculating the
Planetary Boundary with a ﬁxed reference year Yref, it is calculated as a moving boundary depending
75
==PAGE:85==
of the year in order to include demographic dynamics:
PBpolicy level(Yref) = PBoperational ∗Populationpolicy level(Yref)
Populationglobal(Yref)
(7)
The main limitation of a moving boundary in the context of this project is for the comparison of dif-
ferent scenarios at different time. Indeed, between the baseline scenario (which is based on the current
situation) and the policy scenario (which depicts a hypothetical system in the future), the boundaries
might be relatively different, depending on the demographic growth. As the results will be normalized
based on these boundaries, they might not be comparable. For example, this would be the case for a
certain Planetary Boundary, if the impact of a national policy was insigniﬁcant, but the change in the
share of a country population compared to the global population was signiﬁcant. This could bring a bias
in the results as the reader could conclude that the impact of the policy is signiﬁcant. This is why it
has be chosen to use a ﬁxed Planetary Boundary to be able to visualize the impact of the policy. The
approach applied in this methodology adds a temporal dimension to the equal share per capita approach
and thus should be used with a reference period for the assessment, with Y0 and Yn its beginning and
end, respectively. In practice, Y0 would refer to the year of the baseline scenario and Yn to the year
of the policy scenario. Then, the Planetary Boundary downscaled to the policy level is scaled with the
average population of the system during the assessment period:
PBpolicy level(Y0; Yn) = PBoperational ∗
Pn
i=0 Populationpolicy level(Yi)
Pn
i=0 Populationglobal(Yi)
(8)
Method: speciﬁcities and details for the different Planetary Boundaries
This section gives speciﬁc details regarding the downscaling process for each Planetary Boundary. When
no additional information on downscaling is given for a Planetary Boundary, the general method de-
scribed in the previous section can be applied directly. The assessment was not performed for Atm-
nospheric aerosol loading and Introduction of novel entities as no boundary has been deﬁned in these
categories yet (Steffen et al. 2015), as well as for Change in biosphere integrity, as no meaningful down-
scaling can be performed for this category (Nykvist et al. 2013).
Climate change
Anthropogenic climate change is a scientiﬁc fact and lead to many international discussions on climate
76
==PAGE:86==
mitigation objectives (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018). Crossing the environmental ceiling for climate
change might cause irreversible changes, such as the loss of major ice sheets, accelerated sea level rise
and drastic shifts in forests and agricultural systems (Rockström et al. 2009).
The control variable and boundary proposed by Rockström et al. 2009 are an atmospheric CO2 con-
centration of 350 parts per million (ppm) and an increase in top-of-atmosphere radiative forcing of 1.0
W m2.
To assess the baseline scenario and evaluate the current performance of Uganda regarding this Planetary
Boundary, the control variable has to be downscaled at the regional level. Therefore, the atmospheric
CO2 concentration is a global variable cannot have different values for different countries, thus a new
control variable has to be deﬁned. At the national scale, CO2 emissions can be used as a control vari-
able (Nykvist et al. 2013). Hence, a characterisation factor from CO2 atmospheric concentration to CO2
emissions have to be deﬁned. Under RCP2.6 scenario, the cumulative CO2 emission between 2000 and
2300 are of 925 Gt CO2 and the CO2 atmospheric concentration would be 361 ppm (Meinshausen et al.
2011), which is 81 ppm above pre-industrial levels. The characterisation factor is then given by:
CF(Climate change) =
361 −81 [ppm CO2]
925 ∗1012 [kg CO2] ∗300 [year] = 2, 63∗10−11 ppm CO2.year.kg CO−1
2
(9)
Compared to other scenario and the current trend, 361 ppm is relatively close to the Planetary Bound-
ary of 350 ppm and thus this is taken as a reference to set the threshold. The cumulative global CO2
emissions from 2000 to 2019 are not taken into consideration in this study, meaning that the global
CO2 emissions budget per year is calculated based on the 2000-2300 period, rather than the 2019-
2300 period. So, the 925 Gt CO2 budget is divided by 300 years to obtain a yearly global budget of
3.08 · 109 t CO2.year−1. This boils down to apply the method described by equation 5, i.e to multiply
the characterisation factor deﬁned above by the full safe operating space of 81 ppm as deﬁned in Ryberg
et al. 2018a.
Ocean acidiﬁcation
This planetary boundary is set in response to the increase of H+ ions concentration in the surface ocean
(30% over the past 200 years (Royal society 2005 ), due to the increase in the atmospheric CO2 concen-
77
==PAGE:87==
tration and its uptake by ocean (currently removing roughly 25% of human emissions (Rockström et al.
2009). This leads to the conversion of coral reefs to algal-dominated systems and thus threaten marine
diversity (Rockström et al. 2009).
The control variable deﬁned by Rockström et al. 2009 for this planetary boundary is the saturation
state of aragonite Ωarag, a calcium carbonate formed by marine organism. The threshold is approxi-
mately equal to 80% of the pre-industrial value which is 2.75 ωarag (Guinotte & Fabry 2008).
Similarly to Climate Change, this global control variable cannot be downscaled directly and CO2 emis-
sions is used as a regional control variable. A characterisation factor calculated by Ryberg et al. 2018a
of 8.22 ∗10−14 mol.yr.kg−1 has been used. The current global state regarding Ocean Acidiﬁcation is
84% of the preindustrial value, i.e. 2,90 ΩArag (Rockström et al. 2009). By subtracting the boundary,
a safe operating space of 0.15 ΩArag is calculated. Then, to have the yearly budget in CO2 emissions,
we divide this 0.15 by the characterisation factor introduced before and it gives a global yearly budget
of 1,82 Gt CO2.yr−1.
Biogeological ﬂows
Nitrogen and phosphorous are essential nutrients for ecosystems and plants. Their excess anthropogenic
release in the environment, mainly due to manufacture of fertilizer for food production, threaten the
balance of their global cycles, lead to eutrophication and has a harmful potential for marine ecosystems
(Rockström et al. 2009).
Indicators used here are the consumption of P and N fertilisers, which are driving forces but do not
represent the impacts. It is used as proxy for the indicators recommended by Steffen et al. n.d., i.e the
P ﬂow from freshwater systems into the ocean as well as the P ﬂow from fertilisers to erodible soils
for phosphorous and the industrial and intentional biological ﬁxation of N for nitrogen (Steffen et al.
2015). The latters are not available on a national basis and using ’fertilisers consumption’ as a proxy is
a conservative choice as the ﬂow from fertilisers to the environment is necessarily inferior to the amount
of fertilisers being consumed.
78
==PAGE:88==
Land system change
Driven mainly by the expansion and intensiﬁcation of agriculture, land system change inﬂuence global
environmental change: in fact, between 2000 and 2009, it contributed to 12.5% of the total carbon emis-
sions (Friedlingstein et al., 2010).
This control variable has been updated by Steffen from the amount of cropland to the amount of forest
cover remaining, as the three major forest biomes (tropical, temperate and boreal) play a stronger role in
land surface–climate coupling than other biomes (Steffen et al. 2015). The associated control variable
is deﬁned as the area of forested land as a percentage of the original forest cover, with a global threshold
set at 75% and different thresholds for the three different biomes (tropical, temperate and boreal).
Freshwater use
Anthropegenic activities are now the main driver altering global scale river ﬂow and thus has pushed the
global freshwater cycle in the Anthropocene (Rockström et al. 2009). The global changes in this cycle
have impacts on biodiversity, ecosystem services as well as on food and health security.
The control variable for Freshwater use has been deﬁned in the Planetary Boundary framework as the
consumptive use of blue water from rivers, lakes, reservoirs and renewable groundwater stores with a
boundary at 4000 km3.year−1 (Steffen et al. 2015).
Stratospheric ozone depletion
Stratospheric ozone ﬁlters ultraviolet radiation from the sun and the appearance of the Antarctic ozone
hole was a concrete example of a threshold in the Earth System being crossed (Rockström et al. 2009).
This thinning of the Austral polar stratospheric ozone layer has negative impacts on marine organisms
(Smith et al. 1992) and poses risks to human health. (Rockström et al. 2009).
The control variable deﬁned in the Planetary Boundary framework is the O3 concentration in DU (Dob-
son units), which expresses the total ozone concentration as the columnar density of the ozone molecules
in the atmosphere. The boundary is set at a 5% decrease in column ozone levels for any particular latitude
with respect to 1964–1980 values, which represents 275 DU (Rockström et al. 2009). The minimum O3
79
==PAGE:89==
concentration has been stable for the last 15 years and is still expected to rise over the coming years with
the phase out of Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS). This global state of a 5% reduction in the thickness
of the global ozone layer cannot easily be translated into national variables on emissions (Nykvist et al.
2013). The control variable chosen in this context is the use of ODS in kg/year−1. The characterisation
factors (in DU.yr.kg−1), used here have been calculated by Ryberg et al. 2018b for 16 different ODS.
V.I
LCA study and PB-LCIA approach
Context
This Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) study comes within the scope of assessing the environmental im-
pacts of a policy on an absolute scale. It is a direct application of the developed methodology and
investigates the illustrative example of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy, formulated in 2016
and supported by the Climate Technology Centre & Network (Climate Technology Centre & Network
(CTCN) 2019). Its goal is to largely develop geothermal energy on a national scale without resorting to
carbon-based sources of energy, in particular to enhance access to electricity (in 2017, only 19 % of the
Ugandan population had access to electricity, IEA 2017).
The ambitious objective of the policy is to exploit up to 1,500 MW of geothermal energy by 2040 (Gov-
ernment of Uganda 2015), notably to meet the commitments made at the Paris Agreement (Zakkour
& Cook 2016). This ambitious policy is still being discussed within the Ugandan executive, hence its
implementation to seem be pending. Besides, it is worth highlighting that neither the CTCN nor any
Ugandan actor commissioned this study or are involved in any step of the process. The available litera-
ture was provided by the CTCN.
Geothermal energy in LCA
LCA studies on geothermal electricity production are scarce and typically country or site-speciﬁc. In
fact a general assessment is challenging due to the dissimilar nature and maturity of currently applied
geothermal power plants, the inﬂuence of site-speciﬁc characteristics (notably on the choice of geother-
mal energy production technologies), and uncertainty in long-term productivity (Bayer et al. 2013).
80
==PAGE:90==
Goal and scope of the LCA study
This LCA study aims at ex-ante assessing the environmental impacts associated to the hypothetical im-
plementation of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda, whose goal is to provide the
Ugandan electricity grid with additional 1,500 MW by 2040, originating from geothermal sources (Za-
kkour & Cook 2016). Subsequently, the Functional Unit (FU) was set as "Annual supply of 1,500 MW to
the Ugandan grid". The LCA was carried out in accordance with the requirements of the International
Reference Cycle Data System (ILCA) handbook (EC-JRC 2010, ISO 2006b). The outcome of this
LCA study is illustrative and informative and is not meant to inﬂuence the Ugandan decision-making
process. Bearing this in mind, the decision-making context was identiﬁed as ’accounting for environ-
mental impacts’, hence situation C1 in the ILCD handbook. Accordingly, the attributional approach was
adopted in the modeling steps. No speciﬁc data could be collected. Consequently, the background data
was based on Ecoinvent v3.4 (Weidema et al. 2013) and the product system was modelled in SimaPro
version 8.5.2.0. The system boundaries include production, transportation and supply of the generated
electricity. The unit processes used for modelling the foreground system can be found in the supplemen-
tary information.
Basis for Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA)
The environmental impact scores were calculated using the PB-LCIA method as described by Ryberg
et al. 2018a. Only one impact category per Planetary Boundary was used, to be in line with the choice
of having only one indicator per dimension of the Social Foundation and per control variable of the
PBs. For Climate Change, CO2 atmospheric concentration was used and global scale was chosen for
Freshwater use and Land-System change. 3 planetary boundaries were left out, as not included during
the baseline scenario assessment: Atmospheric aerosol loading, Change in biosphere integrity and In-
troduction of novel entities. Since there may be overlap between some PBs (Ryberg et al. 2016), each
PB has to be interpreted independently, i.e for each PB, the interpretation is based on whether the PB
has been transgressed and how far from the boundary the current state is. As an outcome, results are
expressed in metric of the PB per year.
Downscaled planetary boundaries
The planetary boundaries were downscaled at the national level for Uganda using the methods detailed in
81
==PAGE:91==
section V. Accordingly, the egalitarian sharing principle was used.The downscaling was performed us-
ing the average population between 2018 (baseline) and 2040 (policy) to ensure comparability between
the scenarios. The deﬁnition of the boundaries and their downscaling highly inﬂuences the normalised
results and might be a signiﬁcant source of uncertainties. Thus, an uncertainty analysis on the down-
scaling Planetary Boundary for Climate Change was conducted.
System description
The system boundaries include production, transportation and supply of the electricity generated. The
supply system refers to the production system, i.e the power plant. The transmission system and the
distribution system cover the electricity distribution from the production to the distribution to individual
consumers, i.e to the low voltage network. A cradle-to-grave analysis was performed: processes required
for fulﬁlling the FU from extraction and supply of raw materials necessary for the construction of the
power plants, transmission lines, power stations etc. to the end-of-life of the power plants are included,
and the lifetime is expected to be 30 years (Bayer et al. 2013). The electricity generation was assumed
from deep geothermal energy only. The high voltage processes based on the EcoInvent database (Wei-
dema et al. 2013) were adjusted accordingly. The ’Rest-of-the-World’ electricity processes were taken
as proxies to model the Ugandan grid.
Method limitations
Since the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda is still at a very early stage, many im-
portant assumptions needed to be made in order to build the model. First, the capacity 1,500 MW was
modelled assuming that the electricity was produced by a unique type of power plants of 5.5 MW capac-
ity, resorting to the same technology regardless of the geological conditions. All technical assumptions
on the electricity production, distribution and supply systems were taken by default from the EcoInvent
database modelled for ’rest-of-the-world’ (Weidema et al. 2013), since no speciﬁc data was available.
The generic data used in the model therefore shows a low representativeness, even more since geother-
mal projects’ characteristics are highly case-speciﬁc. All in all, the accuracy of the results is limited. As
this study is performed to serve the purpose of proof-of-concept of the methodology developed on this
paper, this only has limited consequences.
82
==PAGE:92==
Scenario analysis
Two modeling choices were investigated through a scenario analysis. First, geothermal energy was
compared to coal energy, to investigate the environmental savings or supplementary burdens from im-
plementing renewable-energy compared to carbon-based sources of energy like coal. This analysis com-
pares the two scenarios presented in line 1 and 2 in table 12. Then, the inﬂuence of the geothermal power
plant capacity was investigated, known as the scaling effect. It means comparing two different numbers
of identical power plant with an aggregated capacity of 1,500 MW. This analysis compares the two
scenarios presented in line 1 and 3 in table 12. For both scenario analysis, for each of the 3 different
scenarios, the same assumption was made: the total capacity of 1,500 MW was provided by duplicating
the same power plant (same technology and same capacity).
Table 12: Characteristics of the 2 scenario tested in the scenario analysis.
Initial scenario
Geothermal (deep) energy, power plant of 5.5 MW capacity
Coal scenario
Hard coal, mix of power plant of 100 MW and 500 MW
Geothermal 2 scenario
Geothermal (deep), power plant of 30 MW capacity
Results
The characterised results for the planetary boundaries Climate change, Ocean Acidiﬁcation, Biogeo-
chemical ﬂows (N and P), Land-system change, Freshwater use and Stratospheric ozone depletion ex-
pressed in the associated metrics are shown in table 13 (geothermal). They are also shown on the
doughnut in ﬁgure 10b.
Table 13: Characterised results for the initial scenario (geothermal) and the coal scenario
Impact category
Unit
Geothermal
Coal
Climate change - CO2 concentration
ppm/yr
2.79E-02
3.95E-01
Ocean acidiﬁcation
ΩAragon/yr
8.52E-05
1.21E-03
Biogeochemical ﬂows - Regional P
Tg P/yr
1.79E-05
2.58E-05
Biogeochemical ﬂows - N
Tg N/yr
5.60E-03
9.28E-02
Land-system change - Global
%/yr
1.42E-07
4.96E-08
Freshwater use - Global
km3/yr
3.64E-03
3.60E-02
Stratospheric ozone depletion
DU/yr
3.83E-07
7.42E-07
Change in biosphere integrity
Not quantiﬁed
Atmospheric aerosol loading
Not quantiﬁed
Introduction of novel entities
Not quantiﬁed
Scenario analysis
83
==PAGE:93==
(a) Coal results
(b) Initial scenario (geothermal) results
Figure 10: Visualisation of the current national state of Uganda and the policy scenario (2040), in both
the coal and geothermal scenarios. The normalised results (with reference to the downscaled PBs) are
depicted by the grey areas. It should be noted that social impacts were not evaluated in the coal scenario.
Coal scenario
The characterised results are presented in table 13. An internal normalisation based on the maximum
84
==PAGE:94==
value was performed and the results are plotted on ﬁgure 10. It can be seen that most impacts are signif-
icantly higher in the coal scenario than in the geothermal scenario. Speciﬁcally, the coal scenario shows
impacts that are on average 10 times higher than the geothermal scenario for the PBs Climate change,
Ocean Acidiﬁcation, Biogeochemical ﬂows - N and Freshwater use. As for Biogeochemical ﬂows - P,
impacts due to coal seem to be higher but no sound conclusion can be afﬁrmed due to uncertainties.
The only PB for which geothermal scenario shows signiﬁcantly higher impacts is Land-system change.
These results are put into perspective in ﬁgure 11, that shows the state of national state of Uganda, and
then compared to the downscaled PBs. It can be seen that one PB is largely transgressed, unsurprisingly
Climate change due to the emission of CO2 subsequently to the incineration of coal. As for Ocean
acidiﬁcation, it is on the verge of being exceeded as well. As for other PBs, Uganda is still maneuvering
within the safe operating space.
Figure 11: Internal normalisation using maximum value as a reference for 6 planetary boundaries
Scaling scenario
An internal normalisation based on the maximum value was performed and the results are plotted on
ﬁgure 12. Which scenario presents the least impacts varies from PB to PB. The initial scenario (called
’geothermal’ in ﬁgure 12) shows signiﬁcantly higher impacts (more than twice as much) for the PBs
Climate change and Ocean Acidiﬁcation, Nitrogen ﬂows and Freshwater use. For the other PBs, it
is not possible to conclude on which scenario performs better due to uncertainties, even though the
’Geothermal 2’ scenario seems to perform worse (higher impacts). Overall, it can be concluded for the
PBs that show a signiﬁcant difference that the lower the capacity of the power plant, the higher impacts.
85
==PAGE:95==
This entails a probable over-estimation of the results, which makes the initial scenario conservative.
Figure 12: Internal normalisation using maximum value as a reference for 6 planetary boundaries for
the scaling scenario, comparing the effect of two different power plants’ sizes (geothermal = 5.5 MW;
geothermal 2 = 30 MW).
Uncertainty analysis on downscaling PBs
Absolute results highly depend on the Planetary Boundary deﬁnition. Table 14 shows the results for the
baseline scenario in Uganda with these different Planetary Boundaries. To convert the 350 ppm in CO2
atmospheric concentration to a global budget in term of CO2 emissions, several methods can be applied.
For example, O’Neill et al. 2018b is taking a budget of 1000 Gt from 2011 to 2100 (line 2 of table 14).
Nykvist et al. 2013 associates the limit of 350 ppm CO2 atmospheric concentration to a 2°C warming
above pre-industrial levels and to a budget for the 21st century of 1453 Gt CO2 (line 5 of table 14). The
emissions from 2000 to the current situation (2016 used as a proxy), i.e 474 Gt CO2 (Global Carbon
Atlas 2016) can also be removed from the 925 Gt CO2 budget, giving a PB with the current situation as a
reference (line 4 of table 14). The current state in Uganda regarding Climate Change ranges from 8.36%
using Nykvist et al. 2013 method to 75.7 % taking into account the emissions from 2000 to 2016, which
is a signiﬁcant variation. Therefore, transparency on the methods and on the assumptions to deﬁne the
PBs is recommended.
86
==PAGE:96==
Table 14: Operational Planetary Boundary for Climate Change based on different deﬁnitions of the
boundary. * depicts the method used in this methodology
Global
opera-
tional
PB
for
Climate Change
Unit
Source
Ugandan operational PB
for Climate Change
Baseline
nor-
malised score
1.12E+10
t CO2/yr
O’Neill
et
al.
2018b
8.41E+07
10.8%
3.08E+09
t CO2/yr
Calculated from
Ryberg
et
al.
2018b
2.31E+07
39.4%
1.61E+09
t CO2/yr
Calculated from
Ryberg
et
al.
2018b*
1.20E+07
75.7%
1.45E+10
t CO2/yr
Nykvist
et
al.
2013
1.09E+08
8.36%
87
==PAGE:97==
Conference Paper about Transformational Change (draft ver-
sion)
Introduction
Ever-increasing anthropogenic pressures have threatened the stability and resilience of the Earth Sys-
tem (ES) (Rockström et al. 2009). The Planetary Boundaries (PBs) framework (9 boundaries) depicts
the levels of human intervention the critical processes of the ES can bear, without signiﬁcantly altering
their well-functioning and entering the uncertainty zone. In other words, without pushing the ES out of
the "Safe Operating Space (SOS)". So far, 4 PBs have been transgressed - Climate Change, Biosphere
Integrity, Land-system change and Biochemical ﬂows and are now operating at high risks. Two of them
are "core planetary boundaries", considered their fundamental importance in the well-functioning of the
ES : Climate Change and Biosphere Integrity. Speciﬁcally, global warming is likely to reach 1.5 °C
compared to pre-industrial levels between 2030 and 2052 if it continues to increase at the current rate
(Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018). Beyond this limit, an increase in global temperature will signiﬁcantly
worsen future climate related risks, such as an increase in extreme climate events, in rise in sea levels or
in impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems. (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018)
To lower the risks associated with this climate crisis and limit global warming to 1.5 °C by the end of the
century, the current system requires a fundamental transition in energy, land, urban, infrastructure and
industrial systems, unprecedented in terms of scale (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018). These transforma-
tions are supported, and often enabled, by sustainable development. Thus, a new paradigm is urgently
needed to shift modern unsustainable practices to truly sustainable ones and safeguard the Holocene
state of the ES, so proﬁtable to human societies to prosper. One vision for sustainable development,
developed by the economist Raworth (Raworth 2012), is to maneuver within the Safe and Just Operat-
ing Space (SJOS) for humanity. It is depicted in ﬁgure 13. Staying within the SJOS means ensuring
human rights for all, based on the theory of human deprivations (Townsend 1987), while safeguarding
the Holocene-like ES state. Human deprivations are depicted by the 15 dimensions representative of the
social foundation.
88
==PAGE:98==
Climate and development policies have a crucial role to play in the transformation to reach a sus-
Figure 13: The Safe and Just Operating Space for humanity is shaped like a doughnut: the outer circle
represents the environmental ceiling, not to be crossed in order to keep the Earth System in a stable state,
while the inner circle represents the social foundation that shall be guaranteed to respect humans’ rights
for all. The framework includes the 9 PBs and 15 dimensions representative of the social foundation.
tainable state, as previously deﬁned. The landmark Paris Agreement conference (2015) paved the way
to build global action, notably against climate change. Subsequently, the Initiative for Climate Ac-
tion Transparency (ICAT) was founded to support improved transparency and to provide policy-makers
worldwide with tools - namely the ICAT modular series of guidances - to measure and assess the im-
pacts of their climate actions (Initiative for Climate Action Transparency 2019). Also, it is necessary
to assess how new established policies shift away from unsustainable practices. This shift in systems
can be referred as Transformational Change (TC) towards sustainable development. As a result, the
concept of transformational potential of policies or actions was developed and presented in the module
TC guidance (ICAT 2018b) of the ICAT.
However, the ICAT TC guidance deﬁnes the concept of TC in close relation to climate change and
carbon emissions. This is deemed a restrictive view of what actions are needed to be taken to achieve
true sustainable development, as depicted in the PBs framework. Besides, sustainable development by
89
==PAGE:99==
essence cannot only be represented by environmental sustainability. It also needs to include the social
and economic dimensions. Indeed, United Nations sustainability paradigm highlights the high inter-
dependence between economic development, social development and environmental protection (United
Nations 2005). Accordingly, the ICAT vision aims at assessing the policy in the three dimensions of
sustainability, in a case-speciﬁc approach. This choice ensures the relevance of the assessment, but
jeopardizes comparability across studies. Lastly, the ICAT TC guidance enables the assessment of the
transformational potential of a policy, but has a limited focus on tackling the issue of ’how fast’ the
transformation is achieved, with reference to an established target.
It is tried to broaden the concept of TC applied to policies, while combining the social and environmental
dimensions of sustainable development within the SJOS framework. The economic performance at
national level is not considered in this methodology, yet the social assessment, focusing on individual
well-being, includes socio-economic aspects, notably with the Work and Income dimensions. Plus, a
quantitative method to assess the extent of the transformational potential of given policy is suggested.
Methods
How to deﬁne Tranformational Change
This section aims at explaining the rationale behind the deﬁnition of transformational change as well as
its characteristics.
Scope deﬁnition
The ICAT Transformational Change Guidance (ICAT 2018b) lays the foundation of deﬁning TC. It is
deﬁned as "A fundamental, sustained change of a system that disrupts established high-carbon practices
and contributes to a zero-carbon society in line with the Paris Agreement goals to limit global warming
to 1.5 - 2°C and the UN Sustainable Development Goals", where the word ’system’ refers to the part of
society that is targeted by the policy. This guideline practically deﬁnes ’GHG mitigation’ as the means
and a ’zero-carbon society’ as the ﬁnal state of the transformation, i.e. the ultimate objective to reach.
Consequently, the desired direction of change is moving towards a "zero-carbon society"(ICAT 2018b).
Achieving it can be referred as achieving the desired ’macro transformational change’.
90
==PAGE:100==
Policies are tools necessary to undertake the shift of trend. They can be powerful, even though a single
policy cannot realistically achieve systemic change on its own. That is why the potential of a policy
to contribute to TC is scaled down to the system it targets. To put attributes on the transformational
potential of policies, it is necessary to look at how it contributes to move towards the "right" direction.
In this guidance, the view for transformational potential of policies is described both in terms of i) out-
comes, answering the question of "To what extent is the transformation achieved?", and ii) processes
(drivers of change) to document the likelihood of the transformation, i.e. answering the question "How
is the transformation facilitated and enabled?". While acknowledging the necessity of both to fully de-
ﬁne the transformational potential of policies, the focus on this study is on the impacts of the policy
assuming that its objectives are fulﬁlled, i.e the focus is on outcomes. Restraining the scope to mere
outcomes means overlooking the different phases of transformation (pre-development, take-off, accel-
eration and stabilisation, ICAT 2018b) and assuming that the stabilisation phase is reached. Using the
ICAT terminology, it boils down to setting the likelihood of the transformation at 100%, and assessing
hypothetical outcomes of the policy once implemented.
Under this assumption, the transformational potential of a policy is assessed based on its ex-ante eval-
uated impacts, between the starting situation (also referred as ’baseline scenario’, i.e. before the policy
begins) and the ending situation, when the policy is assumed to be fully implemented (also referred as
’policy scenario’). Furthermore, this assessment has been developed with a speciﬁc interest on systems
who have not reached the social foundation neither overshot the environmental ceiling, which could be
associated to a focus on developing countries for the national scale.
Deﬁnition and characteristics of Tranformational Change
In an attempt to be more comprehensive in deﬁning TC, a new deﬁnition is suggested as follows: ”A
fundamental, sustained change of a system that disrupts established unsustainable practices and con-
tributes to a sustainable society, i.e. that remains within the Safe and Just Operating Space, in line with
the Paris Agreement goals and the UN Sustainable Development Goals.” The word ’system’ also refers
91
==PAGE:101==
to the part of society that is targeted by the policy. The "macro-transformation" refers to the shift from
the current state, in most cases unsustainable as some PBs are exceeded or not all dimensions of the
social foundation are ensured for the whole system, to an ideal sustainable state that would respect such
conditions. Such a shift needs to be "disruptive", i.e. not incremental in time, thus has happen fast.
Consequently, the goal needs to be set and precised in time. The ideal sustainable state, deﬁned with
reference to the Safe and Just Operating Space, is illustrated in ﬁgure 14.
Figure 14: Representation of the sustainability axis, at the end of which is located the ideal sustain-
able society (that remains within the SJOS), which is aimed at moving towards. In this situation, no
environmental stress is caused (no transgressed PBs) and no human deprivation is observed (the social
foundation is reached for all social dimension). The representation of change is simpliﬁed (only in one
dimension) for the ease of comprehensibility. The ’policy scenario’ refers to the forecast state that is
reached once the impacts of the policy have all occured.
To achieve this ’macro transformational change’ (from the current situation to the sustainable state),
several characteristics (only focusing on outcomes) need to be deﬁned to qualify the transformational
potential of policies. First, i) the direction of change: How to deﬁne what is the ’good direction’? Is the
policy helping moving in the ’good direction’?. Then, ii) the rate of change : is the policy facilitating
change quickly enough to reach the established goal for the system? This last characteristic is crucial to
respond to the urgency of the situation and largely overlooked in the ICAT TC guidance. These charac-
92
==PAGE:102==
teristics are intended to be deﬁned in close relation with the Safe and Just Operating Space, using this
framework to operationalise their deﬁnition.
Direction of change
The questions aimed at being answered are : How to deﬁne what is the ’good direction’? Is the policy
helping moving in the ’good direction’? As can be seen on ﬁgure 14, the sustainable state sketches the
direction to move towards. Since both social and environmental impacts are taken into consideration,
the direction of change is actually two-dimensional. It is thus paramount to precisely deﬁne what is a
’good’ or ’wrong’ direction. For example, social gains might cause ecological losses and vice versa.
As mentioned previously, an unsustainable state from both social and environmental perspectives is de-
ﬁned by human deprivations and environmental budget. From such a situation (current situation on
ﬁgure 14), the challenge is to design policies that enable social standards enhancement to reach a zero-
deprivation state, while limiting the environmental impacts and ensuring that no PBs is crossed. In other
words, it means granting an ’environmental budget’ for each positive social change.
Within the framework of the SJOS, human deprivations can be expressed in 15 different dimensions
and environmental budget in 9 different planetary boundaries (see ﬁgure 13). The adopted view here is
chosen to be holistic and to deﬁne social beneﬁts or fallout as an aggregate state of all dimensions. The
same applies for the environmental perspective. In other words, it is looked at whether the policy aims
at going on average in the good direction (except if one PB happens to be transgressed).
Rate of change
Once the wanted direction of change has been deﬁned, the rate of change can be looked at. The urgency
of the current global situation makes the direction of change an utmost condition, but it is not sufﬁ-
cient. It is important to move ’fast enough’ in the right direction to reach the goal. For example, global
warming needs to be limited at 1.5 °C by the year 2100, when it is likely to be met between 2030 and
2052 (Masson-Delmotte et al. 2018) if unsustainable practices are pursued. Thus, time is an essential
constraint and the rate of change is relevant to include the assessment.
93
==PAGE:103==
To measure the rate of change and assess whether the transformation is fast enough, a target has to be
deﬁned, which could be related to national objectives for example. Moreover, this target needs to be
adapted to ﬁt the SJOS framework to perform quantiﬁcation.
Quantifying Transformational Change
The objective of this section is to quantitatively assess the transformational potential of a policy in re-
lation with the SJOS. The assessment is carried out between the ’baseline scenario’ (current situation
in which the system is) and the ’policy scenario’ (ex-ante assessment of impacts of the policy). It is
assumed that no priorities are set across dimensions and across planetary boundaries. The scores in the
’baseline scenario’ and in the ’policy scenario’ are compared with the sustainable state (deﬁned when
the system operates within the SJOS as illustrated in the right part of ﬁgure 14).
Deﬁnition of variables
In order to quantitatively assess the transformational potential of a policy, variables need to be deﬁned.
They are represented in ﬁgure 15 and deﬁned in table 15. X represents a state of the system, which can
either be the baseline scenario or the policy scenario.
Variable
Meaning
i
Social dimension i
j
Planetary boundary j
B
Baseline state of the system (baseline scenario)
P
Policy state of the system (policy scenario)
sSi(B), sSi(P)
Normalised scores in social dimension i for the baseline or policy scenario
dSi(B), dSi(P)
Distance representative of the deprivation in the social dimension i for the baseline
or policy scenario
sEj(B), sEj(P)
Normalised scores in the PBs j for the baseline or policy scenario
dEj(B), dEj(P)
Distance representative of the remaining environmental budget in the PB j for the
baseline or policy scenario
Table 15: Summary of all the necessary variables for the quantitative assessment of the transformational
potential of policies, that are presented in ﬁgure 15.
Social assessment
The social foundation relies on the theory of humans’ deprivations. It is depicted on the doughnut and
for one given dimension by the distance between the score of system in a speciﬁc state (baseline or
policy scenario) and the ideal state for this dimension. The distance is visually represented in ﬁgure 15
94
==PAGE:104==
Figure 15: Representation of a small section of the whole Doughnut to deﬁne the necessary variables
to quantitatively assess the transformational potential of a policy. The two green lines frame the SJOS
(the inner demarcation represents the social foundation to be reached and the outer one represents the
environmental ceiling not to be trangressed). The blue color (resp. black) refers to variables that concern
the social (resp. environmental) assessment.
by the variables dSi(B) (baseline) or dSi(P) (policy).
Since the scores are normalised with all dimensions being equally weighted, it is possible to look at the
’average deprivation score’ (variable DS(X) deﬁned in equation 10) It corresponds to averaging all the
distances representative of the deprivations in the 15 different dimensions up into one number. In other
words, were all dimensions in a zero-deprivation state, the ’average deprivation score’ would be equal
to 0.
The distance from the current state to a socially sustainable state is deﬁned as the average of the distance
95
==PAGE:105==
for all the dimension of the social foundation.
DS(X) =
P15
i=1 dSi(X)
15
with dSi(X) = 1 −sSi(X)
(10)
sSi(X) being the normalized score in social dimension i for the state X and dSi(X) the distance to the
threshold for social dimension i for the state X.
A counter CS(X) is deﬁned as in equation 11 to quantify the number of dimensions that are in a zero-
deprivation (i.e sustainable) state. CS(X) values range from 0 to 15. The higher CS(X), the better, with
15 being the target value associated to the sustainable state.
CS(X) =
15
X
i=1
cEi(X) with cSi(X) =





1
if dSi ≤0
0
if not
(11)
Environmental assessment
On the other hand, the concept of ’environmental budget’ is used for environmental impacts. In ﬁgure
15, it is depicted by the distance between the state of the system (baseline or policy scenario) and the
ideal state, which is achieved when no impacts are caused within one planetary boundary. The point is to
remain the furthest away from the environmental ceiling in all PBs.The distance is visually represented
in ﬁgure 15 by the variables dSi(B) (baseline) or dSi(P) (policy).
Similarly to the social assessment, it is possible to look at the ’average environmental budget score’
DE(X) (equation 12). It corresponds to average all the distances representative of the environmental
impacts in the 9 different planetary boundaries up into one number. In other words, the fewer impacts in
all PBs (or the closer to the sustainable state), the lower the score.
DE(X) =
P9
j=1 dEj(X)
9
with dEj(X) = 1 −sEj(X)
(12)
sEi(X) being the normalized score in Planetary Boundary i for the state X and dEi(X) the distance to
the threshold for planetary boundary i for the state X.
A counter CE(X) is deﬁned as in equation 11 to quantify the number of PBs that are in a safe state
96
==PAGE:106==
(operating in the SOS). CE(X) values range from 0 to 9. The higher CE(X), the better, with 9 being
the target value associated to the sustainable state.
CE(X) =
9
X
j=1
cEj(X) with cEj(X) =





1
if dEi ≥0
0
if not
(13)
Direction of change
In the context of this study, as explained when deﬁning the direction of change, policies should aim at
maximising positive social impacts while limiting environmental degradation, which is depicted by the
ratio DS(X)
DE(X).
As both social and environmental impacts of a policy are looked at, the direction of change is two di-
mensional. Figure 16 tries to illustrate what it means for a policy to induce change that goes in the ’good
direction’.
For a given state X, social sustainability is fulﬁlled when the social foundation is reached for all social
dimensions:
∀i ∈[1; 15], dSi(X) = 0 or DS(X) = 0 or CS(X) = 15
Similarly, environmental sustainability is fulﬁlled when no planetary boundary is crossed (all are safe-
guarded):
∀j ∈[1; 9], dEi > 0 or CE(X) = 9
The condition DE(X) > 0 is not sufﬁcient to reach environmental sustainability as a remaining budget
for one PB might compensate the excess for another PB. However, an average environmental sustainabil-
ity can be deﬁned if this condition is fulﬁlled. This average environmental sustainability is used in the
following. The aim of the transformation is to reach a sustainable state, i.e any state that would remain
within the doughnut. As it is a bold goal, a ﬁrst target state can be deﬁned as the ’worst’ sustainable
state, in which all dimensions of the social foundation are reached when all the PBs are exactly on the
boundaries. This target is represented by the origin point O in ﬁgure 16. The vector −−→
OB represents the
linear way to reach the sustainable target. The good direction is represented as the green part starting
from point B while the ’wrong’ direction is the red part. The conditions to assess the direction of the
97
==PAGE:107==
Figure 16: Representation of the 2-dimension-characteristic of the direction of change (DS as a function
of DE): the social and environmental dimensions of sustainability. The respective variables of interest
are the ’average deprivation score’ and the ’average environmental budget score’. Points B and P respec-
tively represent the baseline and the policy scenarios. Both points are characterised by their respective
distance to reach the social foundation (DS(X)) and their distance before overreaching the environmen-
tal ceiling (DE(X)). Point O represents a potential target for the sustainable state. The thick green line
on the positive side of the abscissa axis represents the SJOS.
change are given by:
|∆DS|
|∆DE| ≥DS(B)
DE(B)
(14)
and ∆DS ≤0
(15)
and; ∀i ∈[1; 9], ∆cEi ≥0
(16)
Equation 14 represents the slope of the line (BP) and together with equation 15, these conditions assess
whether the vector −−→
BP is going in the green part of the graph in ﬁgure 16. Equation 16 is a condition to
overcome the limitation of the average environmental budget score, i.e to avoid that a good performance
in one PB compensates for a bad performance in another one. This condition is true if no new PB is
98
==PAGE:108==
transgressed during the transformation from the baseline state to the policy state.
Rate of change
Let alone that the transformation between the baseline and the policy scenario is going in the good
direction. Then, based on the direction of change quantiﬁcation and with a deﬁnition of a target over
time, the question ’Is the transformation fast enough?’ can be answered. To ease the rate quantiﬁcation,
it is assumed that ’fast enough’ refers to a linear pace between the year of the baseline state and the year
of the target state. A transformation is qualiﬁed as fast enough if it is on the trajectory to reach the target
by a speciﬁc year. For example, an imaginary target is set as reaching a sustainable state, i.e reaching a
state within the SJOS by the year Y, with Y ≥t(P), t(P) being the year in which the policy objectives
have been reached. As the focus is on systems which have neither reached the social foundation yet nor
overshot the environmental ceiling, only the social rate of change needs to be checked, as the change is
going in the good direction. Then, the condition for the transformation to be fast enough is given by the
following equation:
|∆DS
∆t | ≥| DS(B)
Y −t(B)|
(17)
Results
The methodology described in the previous section is applied to the illustrative example of the Geother-
mal Energy Development Policy in Uganda, described in the previous journal article. Table 16 presents
the distances to the thresholds and the counters for the social aspect. Table 17 presents the distances
to the PBs and the counters for the environmental aspect. Table 18 presents the average distance to the
SJOS for both environmental and social aspects, their respective aggregated counters and further results.
In order to assess whether the rate of change is sufﬁcient, a target over time has to be deﬁned. For
example, adapted from the Paris Agreement, the target ’reaching a society that would remain within the
Safe and Just Operating Space by the end of the century’ is deﬁned. With this target, the rate of change
can be calculated and compared to the rate by this target:
∆DS
∆t
=
−0.036
2040−2018 = 1.64 · 10−3 unit of average social deprivation per year.
99
==PAGE:109==
and the ideal rate of change:
DS(B)
Y −t(B) =
0.368
2100−2018 = 4.49 · 10−3 unit of average social deprivation per year.
Table 16: Distance to the absolute thresholds and counters for both baseline and policy scenario for
the illustrative example of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy in regards to transformational
change
Social assessment
Dimensions
Normalized
absolute
score baseline
Normalized
absolute
score policy
dsi baseline
dsi policy
cS baseline
cS policy
Food
0,586
0.586
0.414
0.414
0
0
Water
0.064
0.064
0.936
0.936
0
0
Sanitation
No data
No data
No data
No data
no data
No data
Housing
0.464
0.464
0.536
0.536
0
0
Health
0.760
0.884
0.240
0.116
0
0
Life satisfaction
0.665
0.665
0.335
0.335
0
0
Education
0.686
0.686
0.314
0.314
0
0
Energy
0.190
0.568
0.810
0.432
0
0
Income
0.803
0.803
0.197
0.197
0
0
Safety and Justice
0.890
0.890
0.110
0.110
0
0
Work
0.927
0.927
0.073
0.073
0
0
Networks
0.740
0.740
0.260
0.260
0
0
Democratic rights
0.518
0.518
0.482
0.482
0
0
Gender equality
0.686
0.686
0.314
0.314
0
0
Social equity
0.862
0.862
0.138
0.138
0
0
100
==PAGE:110==
Table 17: Distance to the Planetary Boundary and counters in regards to transformational change for
both baseline and policy scenario for the illustrative example of the Geothermal Energy Development
Policy in regards to transformational change
Environmental assessment
PB
Normalized
absolute
score baseline
Normalized
absolute
score policy
dej baseline
dej policy
cE baseline
cE policy
Climate
change
0.39
0.44
0.61
0.56
1
1
Biogeochemical
ﬂows: P cycle
0.07
0.07
0.93
0.93
1
1
Biogeochemical
ﬂows: N cycle
0.01
0.02
0.99
0.98
1
1
Freshwater
use
0.03
0.03
0.97
0.97
1
1
Land-system
change
3.28
3.28
-2.28
-2.28
0
0
Ocean
acidiﬁcation
0.67
0.74
0.33
0.26
1
1
Stratospheric
ozone depletion
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1
1
Change in
biosphere integrity
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Atmospheric
aerosol loading
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Introduction
of novel entities
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Table 18: Average distance to the Safe and Just Operating Space. aggregated counters and other results
for both social and environmental aspects and for both baseline and policy scenarios
Baseline
Policy
DS
0.37
0.33
DE
0.43
0.40
CS
0.00
0.00
CE
6.00
6.00
|∆DS|
|∆DE|
1.60
DS(B)
DE(P)
0.87
101
==PAGE:111==
Figure 17: Representation of the 2-dimension-characteristic of the direction of change (DS as a function
of DE): the social and environmental dimensions of sustainability for the illustrative example of the
Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda. The respective variables of interest are the ’average
deprivation score’ and the ’average environmental budget score’. Points B and P respectively represent
the baseline and the policy scenarios.
102
==PAGE:112==
Discussion
Transgression of PB and social achievement
For both baseline and policy scenarios, out of 7 PBs assessed, 6 of them are not transgressed and 0
dimension have reached the social foundation.
Direction of change
∆DS
∆DE > ∆S(B)
DE(P), ∆Ds = −0.036 < 0 and for all PBs i, ∆CEi > 0, thus it can be stated that the policy is
going in the ’good direction’ in term of transformational change as deﬁned in this paper. It is also seen
graphically on ﬁgure 17, as the policy scenario is within the green space, which could be seen as a Safe
And Just Operating Space for policies, given this baseline scenario.
Rate of change
The rate of change of the policy (1.64E-03 unit of average social deprivation per year) is inferior to the
necessary rate of change to achieve the target (4.49E-03 unit of average social deprivation per year).
Therefore, the policy is going in the good direction, but not fast enough to reach the target. However,
it seems unrealistic to imagine that a single policy could go by itself ’fast enough’ and thus, this def-
inition of the rate of change would be more appropriate to test development scenarios with a holistic
vision of society, for example a set of policies that would aim at achieving a low carbon transition in
Latin America. To overcome this issue for a single policy, an approach focusing on certain dimension
could be considered. For example, in the case of the Geothermal Energy Development Policy, it could
be interesting to set a sustainable target associated to the energy sector (and potentially other dimen-
sions based on stakeholders priorities). This could be an interesting to tackle "greenwashing", and more
recently, "SDG washing", which is a practice where companies tend to highlight their positive contri-
bution to some SDGs while hiding their negative contribution in others. Indeed, setting a speciﬁc goal
and focusing only on some dimensions would be totally suitable if the ’good direction’ condition is
fulﬁlled, ensuring that the environmental degradation caused by the policy is limited enough compared
to its social beneﬁts. This deﬁnition of transformational change and its operationalisation hold a certain
potential as a decision-making tool for policy-makers, even though several challenges need to be ad-
dressed, as stated in the journal article here above. One of the main limitation might be the underlying
103
==PAGE:113==
assumption that the Safe and Just Operating Space is operational and representative of modern societies.
However, even though this methodology rely on a conceptual framework that could be questioned, it
provides food for thought, notably on the notions of direction and rate of change, as well as on combin-
ing a holistic vision (with the good direction) with a speciﬁc target (speciﬁc objective to deﬁne a ’good’
rate of change) in order to avoid burden shifting.
104
==PAGE:114==
Closing statement
What does ’sustainability’ mean ? Can policy-makers make a difference to achieve a fundamental sys-
temic change towards a truly sustainable world? If so, how to deﬁne ’good enough’ policies?
Nowadays, these questions are crucial within modern societies, overwhelming both the technosphere
and the ecosphere. The variety of interpretations to answer them undermined the very own meaning of
’sustainability’. In that sense, riding the ’sustainability’ trend paradoxically also led to unsustainable
policies and actions. In a world of business opportunities, unrestrained consumerism, different types of
’washing’, such as ’greenwashing’ or ’SDGs washing’ are becoming the common practices. The con-
cept of absolute sustainability, notably the Safe and Just Operating Space, emerged in the last decade to
overcome the dramatic loss of meaning in the powerful yet dangerous term ’sustainability’. This study
aimed at pushing this concept to the political sphere as a guidance to move in the right direction and to
support the design of so-called transformational policies. In this direction, three objectives were tried to
be answered. First, the concept of the SJOS was operationalised to assess the sustainability performance
of any given system on an absolute scale. Then, an assessment methodology was developed for both so-
cial and environmental impacts of a policy, still on an absolute scale. Eventually, it was questioned how
this methodology can help measure the transformational potential of policies. The methodology was
tested on an illustrative example of a Geothermal Energy Development Policy in Uganda, serving as a
proof-of-concept. Based on this ﬁrst study, further exploratory work was conducted in order to quantify
the transformational potential of policy to eventually propose a systematic answer to the question: is a
policy ’good enough’? In other words, does a policy contribute to a transformational change towards
sustainable development?
The application of the methodology to an illustrative policy highlighted its limitations and helped iden-
tify solutions. For example, it now seems unrealistic to carry out an entire social impact assessment with
a mere interaction with concepts and models. Humans, especially stakeholders, need to be placed at the
heart of the impact assessment through a participatory approach. Further thoughts could also question
the extent to which developing complex conceptual assessment frameworks and adopting high levels of
abstraction and generalisation help having a real impact on both the people and the planet. Yet, the ex-
105
==PAGE:115==
ploratory nature of innovation is fundamental to identify disruptive solutions and to achieve the required
transformational change.
Considered the extent of ever-increasing anthropogenic pressures, the need for urgent action is reﬂected
in the broadened deﬁnition of transformational change. Indeed, a novel aspect in the assessment of the
transformational potential of a policy is to take into consideration its rate of change. Let alone that the
policy helps go in the right direction, it still needs to be looked at how fast change is happening. This
can suggest a paradigm shift. Imposed by the urgence of the global situation, the temporal dimension
could be seen as the 4th pillar of sustainable development. Furthermore, this methodology overlooks
the macro-economic performance, suggesting that the economic pillar could serve as an enabler of sus-
tainable development rather than a goal in itself. Yet, time was actually already embedded in the ﬁrst
deﬁnition of sustainable development itself (WCED 1987), while referring to future generations.
Also, this methodology reminds the necessity and power of trans-disciplinary approaches. There is the
need to integrate within a sustainability performance assessment all the interdependent pillars of sustain-
able development, i.e social, environmental and economical in order to ﬁnd relevant systemic solutions.
In the same line, it points out the strength of diversity. Indeed, integrated solutions need to embrace
different standpoints. Technical choices must meet ethical consideration, sometimes bringing the dis-
cussion at a philosophical level in which no ’good answer’ exists, e.g. when chosing sharing principles
to assign the share of the safe operating space.
Last but not least, the developed methodology seems to hold a great potential to serve as a decision-
making tool to design efﬁcient and truly sustainable policies, especially when interpreted with the capital
notion of transformational change. Even though it might suffer from the shortcomings of the conceptual
framework of the Safe and Just Operating Space, it deﬁnitely provides food for thought and opens several
discussions and opportunities for further development towards absolute sustainability, integrated policy
design and transformational change for example. The approach adopted in this study was an attempt to
assess on an absolute scale the solutions developed by policy-makers to tackle the global climate crisis.
On a higher level, it explored the complexity of a good enough, safe and just world for all, which might
eventually ﬁnd its roots in the simplicity of a doughnut.
106
