==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Photonics Engineering
Tip-Enhanced Photoluminescence in
Low-Dimensional Materials
Author:
Laura N.N.F. Casses
Supervisors:
Assoc. Prof. Nicolas Stenger
Dr. Korbinian Kaltenecker
A thesis submitted for the degree of
MSc Physics and Nanotechnology
July 7, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
In the last decades, the two dimensional materials have attracted a great interest in the
scientiﬁc community. The study of the these materials with a resolution smaller than the
diﬀraction limit has been made possible with the newly developed scattering-scanning near
ﬁeld optical microscopy (s-SNOM) technique. In this thesis, we aim to understand how to
adapt an existing commercial s-SNOM for tip-enhanced photoluminescence on 2D materi-
als. To reach this goal, the luminescence processes in two dimensional (2D) materials and
their interaction with surrounding materials, as well as the principles near-ﬁeld microscopy
are studied and implemented. A model describing the tip-sample interaction and the re-
sulting scattered ﬁeld is developed. Several factors adding diﬃculty to the detection of the
photoluminescence have been found, and suggestion of improvement have been made.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisors Assoc. Prof. Nicolas Stenger and Dr. Korbinian
Kaltenecker, DTU Fotonik, for their supervision and support, even in the most critical
moments.
I would also like to thank to the Structured Electromagnetic Materials group at DTU
Fotonik for general discussions and advice concerning my project.
My thanks also goes to PhD students P. André Dias Goncalves for helping me with the nu-
merical calculations, and Mathias Geisler and Moritz Fisher for their help and explanations
about the far ﬁeld setup.
Finally, I thank my family and my friends for their support. A special thanks to Kirstine
A. Stampe for her everyday encouragements.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Photoluminescence in 2D materials and coupling to metal particles
5
2.1
Photoluminescence in direct gap materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Excitons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Quantum wells and 2D materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Quantum conﬁnement eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.2
Transition metal dichalcogenides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Metals and plasmons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
The Drude model and bulk plasmons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.2
Surface plasmon polaritons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Localized surface plasmons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Coupling between gold nanoparticles and 2D materials . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Working principle of a s-SNOM
13
3.1
Basics of atomic force microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Far ﬁeld detection of the near ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Tip-sample interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Background removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
Tip-enhanced photoluminescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.6
Simulation of the tip-sample interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Experimental methods
26
4.1
Near ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Far ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Experimental results
33
5.1
Tungsten Disulﬁde . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Gold nanodisks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.1
Solving the dipole problem with deposition of gold nanodisks
. . . .
36
5.2.2
Dipole moment of gold nanodisks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.3
Inﬂuence of the incoming light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Quantum wells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.1
Inherent limitations of the near ﬁeld setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.2
Far ﬁeld measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.3
Near ﬁeld measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Molybdenum disulﬁde
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
ii
==PAGE:5==
6
Conclusion
55
A Matlab Code for the Simulation of the Tip-Sample Interaction
56
A.1 Main Program for the plot of Figure 3.16
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.2 Function TransmissionMatrixP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.3 Function PropagationMatrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
B Near Field Measurements of Three Gold Nanodisks
62
B.1
Approach curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.2
Particle 33 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
B.3
Particle 31 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B.4
Particle B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Bibliography
70
1
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Understanding materials properties and their interaction with light is at the cornerstone
of modern research. It is essential to taylor light emission and absorption for the improve-
ment of a wide range of technological applications such as energy harvesting, information
transport using optical ﬁbers, and nanofabrication.
The beginning of this century has seen the emergence of a new research ﬁeld initiated by
the discovery of graphene [1]. Graphene is a monolayer of carbon atoms, that was previ-
ously used as a theoretical model for graphite and carbon nanotubes. This discovery led to
the investigation of materials having the same properties as graphite, i.e. being composed
of layers having strong in-plane bounds, with the layers bound together by Van der Waals
forces. Nowadays, more than a thousands materials have been predicted to exist in a two-
dimensional (2D) phase [2]. These materials have been found to have unique properties
compared to their bulk equivalent [3]. Among them, the transition metal dichalchogenides
(TMDCs) have been found to be promising for various technological applications. The
TMDCs have indeed the particularity to combine strong absorption properties and a di-
rect bandgap. Since they are naturally passivated, it is easy to integrate them in photonic
structures such as waveguides and cavities, and optoelectronic devices. In addition, the
reduced screening in these materials lead to formation of excitons and trions at room tem-
perature [4]. This makes them advantageous for eﬃcient photodetection [5] and energy
harvesting [6, 7], with very little material. The properties of their direct bandpag makes
them also interesting for applications such as light-emitting devices. Cavities in particular
are an interesting way to enhance and taylor the light-matter interaction [8, 9]. Recent
works have shown that it was possible to do so using eﬀective plasmonic cavities [9, 10],
which have the properties to conﬁne the light at a subwavelength scale. The optical prop-
erties of these materials are also inﬂuenced by size impurities, defects, grain boundaries
and crystal strain [11]. All these structures have typically a subwavelength size, which
makes them diﬃcult to observe, and therefore study, with classical optical devices. There-
fore, a nanoscale spectroscopy approach, such as tip-enhanced photolulinescence (TEPL),
is essential for the the study of low dimensional materials.
For about three centuries, the resolution in microscopy has been limited by a fundamental
limit: the diﬀraction limit. This limit comes from two eﬀects. First, during propagation
in an optical system from the light source to the image, the high frequency components
of the source, corresponding to the evanescent waves, are ﬁltered out. This eﬀect sets the
resolution limit in the best conditions to half of the wavelength λ. Second, an optical
system collects light in an angle determined by its numerical aperture (NA). Consequently,
in Abbe’s formulation [12], the resolution is deﬁned as the radius of the Airy disk:
rAiry = 0, 6098λ
NA
(1.1)
2
==PAGE:7==
In 1928, Synge suggested a method to obtain optical images beyond the diﬀraction limit
[13]. His idea was based on the detection of the evanescent waves using a subwavelength
size aperture, as is sketched in Figure 1.1(a). For practical reasons , the implementations
of this method, reported in 1972 by Ash and Nicholls [14], used a tapered ﬁber to get
close to the sample, as represented in Figure 1.1(b). This method has been called near
ﬁeld scanning optical microscopy (NSOM). However, this technique was limited by small
amount of light transmitted through the probe aperture [15]. In the 1990s, the apertureless
or scattering scanning near ﬁeld microscopy (s-SNOM) technique was invented, giving rise
to even smaller resolutions [15]. The principle of this technique, using an atomic force
microscope (AFM) probe as a secondary light source, is sketched in ﬁgure 1.1(c). The
near-ﬁeld technique that will be used in this thesis is the s-SNOM technique.
Figure 1.1: (a) Sketch of Synge’s original proposal for near-ﬁeld imaging based on a sub-
wavelength size aperture.
(b) Sketch of the general experimental implementations for
aperture-based NSOM based on an optical ﬁber.
(c) Sketch of the scattering-based s-
SNOM near-ﬁeld microscopy. From reference [15].
Near-ﬁeld optical microscopy has since then been proven to be useful for the nanoscale
investigation of a wide range of materials such as biological matter, 2D materials, and
plasmonic structures. Notably, recent works have shown that it was possible to do TEPL
with low dimensional materials [16, 17].
The main objective of this thesis is to understand how to adapt the existing commercial
s-SNOM from NeaSpec in order to do TEPL on 2D materials.
For this purpose, the
luminescence processes in 2D materials and their interaction with surrounding materials,
as well as the principles near-ﬁeld microscopy, ought to be understood and implemented
in the experiments. The results of the experiments will then be evaluated with regards to
the theory and suggestions of improvements will be presented.
The thesis is divided in six chapters, including the introduction in Chapter 1 and the
conclusion in Chapter 6:
In Chapter 2: the principles of photoluminescence in direct gap materials is presented,
and the particular case of TMDCs and generally conﬁned structures is presented, including
the excitons.
Because the photoluminescence of these 2D materials is enhanced using
metallic particles, the concepts of surface and localized plasmons are introduced.
In Chapter 3: the working principle of a s-SNOM is presented. Since the s-SNOM that
has been used is AFM-based, the principle of AFM is introduced. Our system enables to
detect the near-ﬁeld (NF), but the detector itself is located in the far ﬁeld. Therefore,
3
==PAGE:8==
the process of conversion of the near ﬁeld signal into the far ﬁeld (FF) is derived.
A
model of the probe sample interaction is then treated and used for explaining the way the
background is removed. Finally, a simulation that has been developed during this thesis
to understand the tip-sample interaction in the particular case of our setup is presented.
In Chapter 4: the two experimental setups that have been used during the thesis are
described, as well as the methods that were used to extract the relevant signals from the
measurements. The ﬁrst setup is the s-SNOM that has enabled the NF measurements, and
the second is a confocal microscope that was used for the FF measurements.
In Chapter 5: the experimental results will be presented. First the diﬃculty of imple-
menting the photoluminescence detection using a tungsten disulﬁde monolayer is described,
which led to the idea of increasing the dipole interaction between the tip and the excitons
in 2D materials with the help of gold nanodisks. The results of the study of these nanodisks
are then presented. Because some inherent limitations in the setup have been supposed,
photoluminescence experiments on quantum wells have been tried. Finally, the photolu-
minescence of molybdenum disulﬁde obtained with the NF setup has been compared with
the one of quantum wells.
4
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Photoluminescence in 2D materials
and coupling to metal particles
One of the goals of the thesis is to study the photoluminescence properties of 2D materials.
Therefore, in this chapter, the principles of photoluminescence in direct gap materials
and the concept of excitons are presented.
Since I worked with the particular case of
transition metal dichalcogenides and quantum wells, a description of these materials is
given. Furthermore, since the photoluminescence of these 2D materials is enhanced using
metallic particles, the concepts of surface and localized plasmons are introduced.
2.1
Photoluminescence in direct gap materials
The optical properties of materials like semi-conductor crystals, and by extension 2 dimen-
sional semi-conductor, are typically described with the help of their band energy diagram.
A simpliﬁed representation of the band energies is presented in ﬁgure 2.1 for the case of a
direct gap material, in the parabolic band approximation. At the Γ point of the Brillouin
zone, the diﬀerence between the minimum of the conduction band (CB) and the valence
band (VB) corresponds to the bandgap energy Eg.
Figure 2.1: Sketch of the photoluminescence process in a simpliﬁed two bands model
with four processes. (1) Absorption of a photon and creation of electron-hole pair. (2)
Non-radiative relaxation through phonons. (3) Quasi-equilibrium of e−and h+. (4) Re-
combination by emission of a photon.
5
==PAGE:10==
Photoluminescence is the process of emission of light by recombination of an electron-hole
pair, this pair having been created by absorption of a photon. It is a dynamical process
that contains four main steps, each step having a characteristic time [18].
The ﬁrst step is the creation of an electron (e−) and a hole (h+) by excitation of an electron
from the valence band into the conduction band. In the case of photoluminescence, the
excitation comes from a photon having an energy ¯hω1 > Eg. The electron and the hole then
relax non-radiatively respectively to the bottom of the conduction band and the top of the
valence band by emission of phonons. This second process has typically a duration of 10
to 100 fs [18]. The electron and the hole stay in this quasi-equilibrium for a characteristic
time τ of about a nanosecond, and then recombine by emission of a photon. This emitted
photon has consequently about the same energy as Eg, which is lower then the excitation
energy.
2.2
Excitons
The band energy diagram in ﬁgure 2.1 doesn’t take into account a type of interaction that
takes place between two charged particles, in this case a hole and an electron, which is
the Coulomb interaction. The reason for it is that usually in a bulk material, the energy
associated with this interaction, of about 4-5 meV in GaAs [18] for example, is too low to
overcome the ﬂuctuations due thermal energy (about 25 meV). In a conﬁned environment
however, the electrons and the holes are spatially closer than in a bulk material and the
Coulomb screening due to the environment is lower, as will be seen in Figure 2.3 (right).
One has therefore to take the Coulomb interaction into account.
Due to the Coulomb interaction between an electron and a hole, a bound electron-hole pair
can be formed. This additional interaction has the eﬀect of lowering the energy between
the electron and the hole. The energy diﬀerence between an electron and a hole without
Coulomb interaction (energy Eg) and the exciton energy Eexc is called the binding energy
Eb = Eg −Eexc. The energy level of the exciton is sketched in the band energy diagram
Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Excitonic states in the 2 level model.
6
==PAGE:11==
2.3
Quantum wells and 2D materials
This work investigates 2D materials and quantum wells, the common characteristic of these
materials being the conﬁnement of the electrons in one given direction.
2.3.1
Quantum conﬁnement eﬀects
One dimensional quantum conﬁnement eﬀects arise when a very thin layer of material is
sandwiched between two other materials having a bigger bandgap energy, the layer being
so thin that the particles inside are restricted in their position uncertainty ∆z. z is here
direction of the conﬁnement.
According to the Heisenberg uncertainty, this restriction
induces an additional kinetic energy for these particles. To be noticeable, this additional
energy must be higher than the thermal motion. As a result, the conﬁnements eﬀects have
to be taken into account if:
∆z ≤
s
¯h2
m∗kBT
(2.1)
with m∗the eﬀective mass of the particle in the material, kB the Boltzmann’s constant,
T the temperature, and ¯h the reduced Planck’s constant. For a typical semi-conductor at
room temperature, this corresponds to ∆z ≈5 nm.
Figure 2.3: Left: Quantum Well - Example of the structure AlGaAs and GaAs and its
energy band diagram. Right: Environment of the exciton in a bulk material, compared
to a conﬁned structure.
Figure 2.3 sketches the structure and the energy bands of a AlGaAs/GaAs quantum well.
As required, the bandgap of the thin layer of GaAs, is smaller than the AlGaAs one, leading
to an additional conﬁnement energy that shifts the absorption and photoluminescence
energies.
It has also the advantage of enhancing the excitonic binding energies, which
hence overcome the thermal energies/ﬂuctuations at room temperature, as will be depicted
in section 2.2.
2.3.2
Transition metal dichalcogenides
The transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) is a group of layered materials discovered
a few years after the isolation of graphene in 2004 [1]. Like in graphite, the diﬀerent layers
7
==PAGE:12==
are bound by Van der Waals forces and can be exfoliated with the Scotch tape method.
They take typically the form MX2, with M a transition metal, such as Mo or W, and X
a chalcogen (S,Se). Their atomic structure, presented in ﬁgures 2.4 and 2.5, is trigonal
prismatic: the M atom is sandwiched between 2 sheets of X atoms, with the X atoms
being one above each other. In the framework of this project, tungsten disulﬁde WS2 and
molybdenum disulﬁde MoS2 are the materials under study.
Figure 2.4:
Atomic structure of MX2
in the trigonal prismatic crystal phase
viewed from above
Figure 2.5: Atomic structure of MX2 in the
trigonal prismatic crystal phase viewed from
the side
Due to the lowering of the screening eﬀects seen previously, the excitons play an important
role in the luminescence properties of the TMDCs. The binding energy for these is about
hundreds of meV [2], which makes them very stable at room temperature and facilitates
radiative recombinations in the monolayers which have a direct bandgap. The radiative
recombinations are however drastically decreased in the multilayers. Indeed, the bandgap
becomes indirect already from the bilayer case.
In a monolayer, the spin-orbit coupling aﬀects the K-points of the band diagram: an
energy splitting occurs between the two valence bands, this splitting being the reason for
the existence of two types of excitons, called A and B excitons. A second layer is added by
rotating in-plane the second layer and place it on top of the ﬁrst one with the metal on top
of a chalcogene. This conﬁguration opens the path for interlayer hopping, which induces a
splitting of the valence bands at the Γ-points of the TMDC. Because of this splitting, the
bandgap becomes indirect.
2.4
Metals and plasmons
2.4.1
The Drude model and bulk plasmons
Contrary to semi-conductors, metals have one or several electrons in the conduction band,
called free electrons. These free electrons are not bound to the atoms: they can move freely
in the crystal lattice, that can be considered as ﬁxed since the nucleus’ mass is 3 orders of
magnitude bigger than the free electron’s one.
8
==PAGE:13==
The Drude model, described for the ﬁrst time in 1900, is a good ﬁrst approximation to
understand the optical properties of metals.
It is a classical model that doesn’t take
into account the interband transitions and the electron-electron interactions. It applies
Newton’s second law to the electron of mass me and at a position x(t) in the lattice,
driven by an electric ﬁeld E(t) = E0eiωt and subject to a damping γ = 1/τd, where τ is
the the relaxation time of the free electron gas (typically of the order of 10−14 s at room
temperature):
me
d2x
dt + meγ dx
dt = −eE0eiωt
(2.2)
With the form of the electric ﬁeld, it is known that a particular solution of this equation
is of the same form: x(t) = x0e−iωt. Using a few more relations between the polarization
of the material, the position x(t) and the dielectric permittivity ϵr, one can ﬁnd [18]:
ϵr(ω) = 1 −
ωp
ω2 + iγω,
ωp = Ne2
ϵ0me
(2.3)
with ωp the plasma frequency, N the number of electron per unit volume, e the electronic
charge and ϵ0 the electric permittivity of free space.
The reﬂectivity R is then deﬁned as:
R =

√ϵr −1
√ϵr + 1

2
(2.4)
Figure 2.6 plots the reﬂectivity of gold deduced from the Drude model. One can clearly see
a total reﬂection when the damping is not taken into account for the frequencies lower than
ωp, and a quick drop after ωp. This behaviour explains the general properties of metals,
which are highly reﬂective in the visible part of the spectrum, but transparent in the UV.
Taking into account the damping keeps the general behaviour, while slightly lowering the
reﬂectivity in the visible.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 / 
p
0
0.5
1
Reflectivity
No damping
 Damping
Figure 2.6: Reﬂectivity of gold in the Drude model, as a function of the angular frequency
ω normalized to the plasma frequency ωp = 1, 37 .1016 Hz.
If we neglect the damping induced by γ in equation 2.3, for ω = ωp, it can be shown that:
ϵr(ωp) = 0. This particular frequency corresponds to the frequency of the bulk plasmons,
that are collective longitudinal oscillations of the electron gas. This means that they cannot
be excited by light, which is a transverse wave. They are therefore not taken into account
when considering light-matter interaction.
9
==PAGE:14==
2.4.2
Surface plasmon polaritons
At the interface betweeen a dielectric and a metal, however, collective oscillations can have
a transverse component.
This means that a transverse wave like light can excite it in
certain conditions. These propagative oscillations, called surface plasmons polaritons, take
the forma of a TM polarized wave, bound to the surface, as described in ﬁgure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Sketch of a propagating surface plasmon polariton at the interface between two
half planes: a dielectric (d) and a conductor (m). The surface conﬁnement is indicated by
the exponential decay of transverse component of the ﬁeld amplitudes. The direction of
propagation is along the x-axis.
Their existence arises from the boundary conditions, and using the Maxwell’s equation in
matter [19], one can derive the existence condition and the dispersion relation for SPPs:
kd
z
km
z
= −ϵd
r
ϵm
r
(2.5)
and:
β = kx = ω
c
s
ϵm
r (ω)ϵdr
ϵm
r (ω) + ϵdr
(2.6)
The dispersion relation is plotted in ﬁgure 2.8 using equation 2.6 for gold, in the ideal case
where the losses are neglected or small. One can observe an anti-crossing characteristic
of strongly coupled systems. Light and plasmons are strongly coupled, hence the name
surface plasmon polariton (SPP).
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Wavevector Re( ) [m-1]
108
2
4
6
8
10
12
Energy [eV]
No damping
 Damping
Light line
Figure 2.8: Dispersion relation of SPPs at
the interface between a metal and air, with
and without losses.
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
 Wavevector | | [m-1]
107
1.5
2
2.5
3
Energy [eV]
SPP from J&C
SPP from Norris
Light line
Figure 2.9: Dispersion relation of SPPs in
gold, with data from [20] (blue) and [21]
(black).
10
==PAGE:15==
The bound part on the dispersion curve is the lower part of the curve, while the upper part
corresponds to the normal propagation of light in a metal. This lower part asymptotically
approaches the surface plasmon frequency:
ωsp =
ωp
√1 + ϵ2
(2.7)
At this frequency, β −→∞and the group velocity vg −→0. This is the reason for the
strong subwavelength conﬁnement represented in the sketch of the SPP in ﬁgure 2.7, and
is also the reason why the SPPs are diﬃcult to excite: there needs to be an additional
wavevector added to the one of the light, in order to reach the SPP dispersion curve. This
can be done using diﬀerent methods, such as a grating or a tip approached very close to
the surface.
However, this strong conﬁnement is also associated with high losses, due to free electrons
and interband damping, that are not taken into account in the previous model.
This
damping is characterized by the attenuation length:
L =
1
2Im(β)
(2.8)
which has typically values between 10 and 100 µm in the visible range.
Figure 2.9 shows the real dispersion relation of SPPs in gold, deduced from the experi-
mental data measured by Johnson and Christy in reference [20] and reference [21]. When
comparing with ﬁgure 2.8, the damping is clearly visible. At 633nm laser excitation, the
attenuation length has a value of 7 µm. This limits the conﬁnement of the SPP wave-
length λ = 2π/Re(β) and the mode conﬁnement. There is an inherent trade-oﬀbetween
obtaining a better conﬁnement and a longer propagation length.
2.4.3
Localized surface plasmons
For the localized surface plasmons (LSP), the propagation length is not a problem, and
the full potential of the conﬁnement can therefore be used.
Localized surface plasmons (LSP) are non-propagative standing waves, because of the small
size of the particles that host them. These nanoparticles can be nanorods, nanodisks, or
other kinds of nanoparticles, that are in this case considered to be metallic. Due to the
curved surface of the particle, direct excitation with light is possible.
In order to study the interaction of these particles with an electric ﬁeld, let’s consider the
simpliﬁed case represented in ﬁgure 2.10. A spherical metal particle of dielectric permit-
tivity ϵm and radius a is considered. The particle is in a ﬁeld that is considered to be
static, because the size of the particle is supposed to be small compared to its wavelength:
λ >> a. This approximation is called the quasi-static approximation.
Figure 2.10: Sketch of a homogeneous metal sphere placed into an electrostatic ﬁeld
11
==PAGE:16==
By performing the calculation on the electric potential [19], one ﬁnds that the ﬁeld outside
the particle can be interpreted as a superposition of the applied ﬁeld and an induced dipole
located at the center of the particle, this dipole having a polarizability:
α = 4πa3 ϵm −ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd
(2.9)
A resonance is clearly recognizable for Re(ϵm) = −2ϵd (Frölich condition). For a Drude
metal in a dielectric, this resonance appears for:
ω0 =
ωp
√1 + 2ϵd
(2.10)
This means that the resonance red-shift as ϵd is increased, which makes these particles
sensitive to changes in their environment, thus good candidates for sensor applications.
Another consequence of the resonant behaviour of these metallic nanoparticles is the en-
hancement of the scattering and absorption of the light. This eﬀect is described through
the scattering and absorption cross-sections, Csca and Cabs, that can be expressed in the
framework of the Mie theory in the Rayleigh limit as:
Csca = k4
6π|α|2 = 8π
3 k4a6

ϵm −ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd

2
(2.11)
Cabs = kIm(α) = 4πka3Im
 ϵm −ϵd
ϵm + 2ϵd

(2.12)
with k the wavevector of the incoming light [CHECK]. In the case of the nanoparticles:
a << λ, so Cabs >> Csca. This is why it is diﬃcult to distinguish small particles from a
background reﬂecting or scattering more light, and justiﬁes the necessity to detect them
using the dark ﬁeld methods presented in section 4.2.2.
Furthermore, the smaller the
particle, the more diﬃcult it is to detect it.
2.5
Coupling between gold nanoparticles and 2D materials
In 1946, E.M. Purcell predicted that the spontaneous transition rate of a nuclear magnetic
moment coupled to a resonant device can be enhanced compared to transition rate in free
space [22]. This was the ﬁrst step towards the investigation of emiters’ radiative properties
modiﬁcations by its environment, this environment being notably resonant nanocavities.
Various environments have been studied, as for example optical nanoantennas [23].
When considering atom-ﬁeld interactions, two regimes have to be distinguished, depending
on the atom-ﬁeld coupling constant gc. If gc >> κ, with κ the losses of the cavity, the
system is said to be in the strong coupling regime, and in the opposite, the system is in
the weak coupling regime.
In the weak coupling regime, the light from an emitter, typically modeled as a 2-level sys-
tem, in a cavity can be enhanced or quenched, depending on the experimental conditions.
The enhancement or quenching can be described through the Purcell factor:
FP = γe,cav
γe,free
(2.13)
with γe,cav the decay rate of the emitter in the cavity, and γe,free the decay rate of the
emitter in free space. Considering a metal nanoparticle as a plasmonic cavity and the
excitons in a 2D materials as the emitters, it follows the bringing nanoparticles in contact
with a monolayer should lead to coupling, thus enhancement of the light in the case of the
week coupling regime.
12
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Working principle of a s-SNOM
From a general point of view, a scattering-type Scanning Near-ﬁeld Optical Microscope
(s-SNOM) is an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM), with a monochromatic and coherent
light beam from a laser focused on an oscillating tip apex of the instrument (oscillating
mode of the AFM). Like an AFM, the tip probe is pointing down toward the sample at the
extremity of a cantilever and scans the sample surface, enabling to record the topography
of the sample.
However, the tip apexes are usually larger than the AFM ones, partly
because of the metal coating that is used around some of the probes, and partly because
the scattering cross-section of the probes must be higher to be able to scatter a suﬃcient
amount of light.
In our system’s conﬁguration, the far-ﬁeld light issued by a laser is scattered by the tip,
enhanced and spatially localized on the sample. Once this light reaches the sample, part of
it is scattered back towards the tip. Then, part of this scattered light is again re-scattered
by the tip and directed towards a detector. Thus, we are in a reﬂection conﬁguration.
The spatial resolution of the s-SNOM is scaling linearly with the tip apex radius, as will
be shown in section 3.2 [24, 15].
The light that arrives at the detector is composed of the near-ﬁeld scattered by the tip, as
well as the far-ﬁeld reﬂected by the sample and the probe shaft [25, 26]. Therefore, once
the light is detected, data processing needs to be performed in order to select the near-ﬁeld
signal.
3.1
Basics of atomic force microscopy
An atomic force microscope (AFM) uses the Van der Waals forces to enable to record the
topography of it. There is two main modes for recording the topography of a sample [27].
The ﬁrst one is the contact mode, where the probe - pointing down from a cantilever - is
kept at a constant distance from the sample. Figure 3.1 gives a representation of the set
point in contact mode, in terms of the force-distance curve. Typically, the Van der Waals
forces are set at 0 at inﬁnite distance (no attraction nor repulsion). When approaching
the sample very close, the tip experiences ﬁrstly an attractive force that has the eﬀect to
bend the cantilever towards the sample. But when coming even closer to the surface, the
repulsive Van der Waals force takes over. The setpoint in contact mode is in this repulsive
region, that has the advantage that the force varies a lot for small tip-sample variations.
The second one is the oscillating mode, where the probe is in addition modulated around
a constant set point, that is diﬀerent from the ﬁrst set point, as can be seen on ﬁgure
3.2. The detection of the tip-sample distance is then based on the distance dependence of
the oscillations amplitude. Even though the detection of the topography is not direct like
in the contact mode, since the signal has to be demodulated in order to obtain the ﬁnal
image, this mode has the advantage to give a better signal-to-noise ratio.
13
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Simpliﬁed force-distance curve
showing contact scanning regime, in the re-
pulsive region. Adapted from [27].
Figure
3.2:
Simpliﬁed
force-distance
curve showing oscillating scanning regime.
Adapted from [27].
In order to detect the slight variations in the deﬂection of the tip, a deﬂection laser is used.
This deﬂection laser is generally pointing at the end of the cantilever, just above the tip, as
described in ﬁgure 3.3. The reﬂection of it by the detector is sent to a photodetector, that
is usually separated in four regions in order to detect vertical and lateral changes in the
deﬂection. In our system, the detection of the topography is done with a laser at 790 nm ±
10 nm, and the detection is a knife edge type of system, which means that the movement
of the tip relative to the sample topography is recorded only in the vertical direction.
Figure 3.3: Sketch of an AFM setup operating in oscillating mode. A oscillating signal
is applied to the cantilever and makes it vibrate. The actual movement of the probe is
slightly modiﬁed due to the tip-sample interactions. The resulting oscillation is measured
with the help of a deﬂection laser and a photodiode, and the ﬁnal oscillation is compared
with the input one. Adapted from [27].
14
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Far ﬁeld detection of the near ﬁeld
A question that one could ask him/herself is: how does the presence of the tip allow the
near-ﬁeld to be detected, ie how is the near-ﬁeld sent into the far-ﬁeld, due to the presence
of the tip?
To answer this question, let’s consider the
following system, presented in ﬁgure 3.4, in-
spired from [24] : a tip is scattering the light
from a laser, at a distance −z0 of the sam-
ple surface, which is at z = 0. The detector
is positioned at an inﬁnite distance z∞af-
ter the sample surface. This situation corre-
sponds then to a transmission measurement,
the sample being here characterized by its
transmission T(x, y). The detector could also
be on the same side of the sample as the
probe, which would then correspond to a re-
ﬂection measurement. The proof would then
be similar, with R(x, y) instead of T(x, y),
and a few angle consideration. For simplicity,
it has been decided to treat only the transmis-
sion case.
To simplify the picture, the sample is sup-
posed to be inﬁnitely thin, and only the eﬀect
of the tip on the surface is considered (the in-
ﬂuence of the sample surface on the probe is
neglected). The refractive indices are: n1, n2
and n3 for the 3 media, respectively.
Figure 3.4: Probe (P) next to the sample
surface (S), with the detector (D) at an
inﬁnite distance from the sample.
Since the end of the tip is acting as an antenna, it can be viewed as a light source. In
the angular spectrum representation, the electric ﬁeld at the tip apex can be written as:
Esource(x, y, −z0) =
ZZ +∞
−∞
ˆEsource(kx, ky; −z0)ei(kxx+kyy)dkxdky
(3.1)
where
ˆEsource
is the Fourier transform of Esource,
(kx,ky)
are the x and y components of the wavevector k.
Using the propagator ˆH(kx, ky; z) = eikzz, at the surface of the sample, before inter-
acting with the sample, this ﬁeld takes the form:
Esource(x, y, 0) =
ZZ +∞
−∞
ˆEsource(kx, ky; −z0)ei(kxx+kyy+kz1z)dkxdky
(3.2)
where
ˆEsource(kx, ky; 0) = ˆEsource(kx, ky; −z0)eikz1z.
One has to keep in mind that by summing (kx,ky) from −∞to +∞, the far-ﬁeld and
near-ﬁeld components of Esource are taken into account. However, because of the propa-
gation to the sample, the magnitude of the evanescent waves decreases as the transverse
wavenumber increases, as shown qualitatively in Fig 3.5.
The interaction for each plane or evanescent wave can then be determined as through
T:
Esample(x, y, 0) = T(x, y)Esource(x, y, 0)
(3.3)
15
==PAGE:20==
In the Fourier domain, this product becomes a convolution:
Esample(κx, κy, 0) =
ZZ +∞
−∞
ˆT(κx −kx, κy −ky)ˆEsource(kx, ky; 0)dkxdky
(3.4)
Which means that, using the expression 3.2:
Esample(κx, κy; 0) =
ZZ +∞
−∞
ˆT(κx −kx, κy −ky)ˆEsource(kx, ky; −z0)eik1z0dkxdky
(3.5)
Then, by propagating once more this resulting electric ﬁeld to the detector, on obtains:
Edetect(κx, κy; z∞) =
ZZ +∞
−∞
ˆEsample(κx, κy; 0)ei(κxx+κyy)eik3z∞dκxdκy
(3.6)
Since the detector is supposed to be at an inﬁnite distance from the sample compared
to the laser wavelength, the condition
q
κ2x + κ2y = |κ||| ≤k3 = ω
c n3 has to be fulﬁlled.
This condition means that only the plane waves reach the detector (not the evanescent
ones).
It must be noted that the plane waves that arrive on the detector are also focused
on it by a lens. Since this lens can only collect the plane waves that are contained in
its collection angle deﬁned through its numerical aperture (NA), this condition should be
rewritten as:
|κ||| ≤k3NA.
(3.7)
To simplify the interpretation of this results, one can discretize the expression of the source
ﬁeld as:
ˆEsource(kx, ky; 0) =
ZZ +∞
−∞
ˆEsource(˜kx, ˜ky; 0)δ(˜kx −kx)δ(˜ky −ky)d˜kxd˜ky
(3.8)
The source can then be seen as consisting of an inﬁnite number of partial sources, each
one of them having a discrete pair of spatial frequencies ±(˜kx, ˜ky). The interaction of each
partial source with the sample and its resulting far-ﬁeld signal at the detector can then be
considered separately, and the sum of all the pairs gives the total ﬁeld at the detector.
As seen through the convolution in expression 3.5, the spectrum ˆT(k′
x, k′
y) = ˆT(κx −
˜kx, κy −˜ky) is shifted due to the interaction with the source ﬁeld. This means that the
transverse wavevector of the sample k’|| = ±(k′
x, k′
y) is shifted by the spatial frequencies of
the partial source ˜k|| = ±(˜kx, ˜ky), resulting in the ﬁeld scattered from the sample Esample
having a wavevector κ|| = ±(κx, κy) such as:
κ|| = ˜k|| ± k’||
(3.9)
Generalizing this expression to the entire source gives the condition:
|κ||| = |k|| ± k’||| ≤k3NA
(3.10)
The reachable spectrum is then translated by ±k||, ie, depending on the size of the tip,
part of the evanescent waves from the sample can "become" propagative, as is sketched in
ﬁg. 3.5:
16
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.5: Representation of the shifting in the k-space: the convolution of the trans-
mission ˆT with the ﬁeld from the source ˆEsource(kx, ky; 0) induce a shift in the spatial
spectrum of the ﬁeld scattered by the sample. The solid circle represents the boundary
between propagating and evanescent waves. Adapted for [24]
The highest detectable spatial frequency using a speciﬁc probe with a characteristic
lateral dimension a can be deduced from the condition in eq. 3.10:
k′
||,max =

π
a ± 2π NA
λ

(3.11)
Knowing that, in our case, the tip apex has a radius a such as a << λ, we ﬁnd that the
maximum detectable wavevector is inversely proportional to the radius of the tip apex:
k′
||,max = π
a
(3.12)
3.3
Tip-sample interaction
A relatively simple model of the scattering process is to approximate the tip apex as a
polarizable sphere of radius a and polarizability α = 4πa3(ϵsph−1)/(ϵsph+2), at a distance
z from the sample surface. For the case of a gold coated probe that will be considered in the
following, the model is equivalent to the model of the metallic nanoparticle sphere discussed
in section 2.4.3, with the diﬀerence that a dielectric or metallic sample surface is interacting
with it. (As such, the tip apex is used as an optical antenna: it conﬁnes the incident light
and converts it into a localized ﬁeld through scattering [24].) For simpliﬁcation, the sample
is considered to be semi-inﬁnite and have a relative permittivity ϵsurf. A representation
of the model is presented in Figure 3.6.
17
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.6: Coupled diplole model, the tip being approximated as a sphere, with the electric
ﬁeld orthogonal to the sample.
Let’s consider an incident ﬁeld Einc polarized along z. The system composed of the ﬁeld
and the surface charges distribution at the surface can be equivalently described by a
hypothetical image dipole of relative strength β = (ϵsurf −1)/(ϵsurf + 1) [15, 25], at a
distance -r under the surface, hence at a distance 2r from the initial dipole.
The eﬀective polarizability, taking into account the eﬀect of the probe dipole, modiﬁed by
the image dipole, and of the image dipole becomes [25]:
αeff
ortho = α(1 + β)

1 −
αβ
16πr3
−1
(3.13)
and in the case of the electric ﬁeld polarized parallel to the sample, this expression changes
into:
αeff
para = α(1 −β)

1 −
αβ
32πr3
−1
(3.14)
The scattering of light will therefore be higher with the electric ﬁeld polarized in the
orthogonal direction than the parallel direction. This enhancement along the tip direction
orthogonal to the sample is even more pronounced when considering the longitudinal shape
of the tip. In this case, the polarizability of the tip αortho in the orthogonal and case and
αpara in the parallel case are diﬀerent, leading to enhancement of the ﬁeld in the orthogonal
case.
Using the expressions for the scattering and absorption cross-section seen in section 2.4.3
with this model, one can ﬁnd the corresponding cross-section in the present situation.
Figures 3.7 and 3.8, present the plots of these cross-sections as a function of the normalized
hight z/a, for λ=633 nm.
One can clearly see an enhancement of the scattering at a
distance lower than z = a, which goes together with a nearly 20 times higher absorption
cross-section.
This prevalence of the absorption over scattering is consistent with the
qualitatively predictions from section 2.4.3. Furthermore, the scattering and absorption is
lower when the sample made of silicon than when the sample is made of gold.
18
==PAGE:23==
0
1
2
3
z / a
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Csca [nm2]
tip Au - surface Si
tip Au - surface Au
Figure 3.7: Scattering cross-section of the
coupled tip-sample system, with a gold tip
of radius a = 10nm.
0
1
2
3
z / a
0
10
20
30
40
50
Cabs [nm2]
tip Au - surface Si
tip Au - surface Au
Figure 3.8: Absorption cross-section of the
coupled tip-sample system, with a gold tip
of radius a = 10nm.
For a distance d = 2r, both cros-sections reach a constant value that corresponds to the
value far away from the sample. Consequently, one can consider there is almost no inter-
action with the sample anymore. This short distance tip-sample interaction eﬀect is the
basis of the removal of the background.
3.4
Background removal
Because of the way the tip is illuminated, direct scattering of the laser on the tip and
the sample occur [25], and as a consequence the near-ﬁeld signal is hidden behind a large
background. To remove this background, modulation of the probe-sample distance at the
resonant frequency of the probe Ω= 1/T, which corresponds to operate the AFM in
oscillating mode, is performed. To understand better how the background is removed in
the particular case of our setup, the graphs simulated in [25] have been reproduced and
adapted to our wavelength of λ = 633 nm and our tip apex radius of a = 10 nm. The
dielectric constants values used for these graphs are from [20] for gold and from [28] for
silicon.
As seen in the precedent section, the scattered near-ﬁeld shows an an-harmonic behavior,
induced by the r−3 dependence in the eﬀective polarizability’s denominator. Thus, mod-
ulating at the frequency Ωwill induce an an-harmonic optical response of the scattered
ﬁeld, contrary to the far-ﬁeld signal signal the exhibits a harmonic behavior. The sinusoidal
modulation and the response of the scattered ﬁeld Csca to this modulation are shown in
ﬁgures 3.9 and 3.10 respectively. The modulation has an amplitude of 50 nm, which is 5
times the tip apex radius. The an-harmonic behaviour of Csca is clear on ﬁgure 3.10, and
the lower scattering for a silicon surface compared to a gold surface is visible once again.
19
==PAGE:24==
0
1
2
3
time t [2 T]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Distance r [nm]
Figure 3.9:
Sinusoidal modulation of the
gold tip of radius a = 10nm, as a function of
time expressed in units of 2πT, with T the
period of modulation.
0
1
2
3
time t [2 T]
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Csca [normalized]
tip Au - surface Si
tip Au - surface Au
Figure 3.10: Modulated normalized scatter-
ing cross-section of the coupled tip-sample
system as a function of time, with a gold tip
of radius a = 10nm.
Demodulating at higher harmonics of Ωallows then to ﬁlter out the far-ﬁeld signal. Figures
3.11 and 3.12 present the Fourier components (at the ﬁrst order O1A, the second order
O2A etc.) of the scattered amplitude, which correspond to the demodulated signal that
can be obtained with a lock-in ampliﬁer. In both ﬁgures, it can be seen that the higher
the order, the more near-ﬁeld like (exponential-like) the scattered signal is, but also the
lower the scattering amplitude at z=0 is. This phenomenon is more pronounced for smaller
amplitude of the oscillations, as one can see by comparing the two ﬁgures. In addition,
for the same order, the signal will be more near-ﬁeld like for lower oscillation amplitudes,
but will have higher intensity of the signal for higher oscillation amplitudes. This means
that there is a inherent trade-oﬀbetween having a high intensity of the signal and a good
near-ﬁeld signal. Higher oscillation amplitude means that higher orders need to be picked
to obtain the near-ﬁeld signal. In reality, there is oscillations in he approach curves, as
will be seen later. This is because the interference between the tip and the sample are not
taken into account here.
0
1
2
3
z/a
0
50
100
150
Fourier components of Csca [a.u.]
O1A
O2A
O3A
O4A
Figure 3.11: Fourier components of the scat-
tered signal as a function of the normalized
distance z/a, in the case where the ampli-
tude of the oscillations is 5a.
0
1
2
3
z/a
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Fourier components of Csca [a.u.]
O1A
O2A
O3A
O4A
Figure 3.12: Fourier components of the scat-
tered signal as a function of the normalized
distance z/a, in the case where the ampli-
tude of the oscillations is 0,5a.
20
==PAGE:25==
By using this method, only the amplitude variations of the scattered ﬁeld are taken into
account. The phase variations are lost in the process. Other setup use interferometric
methods in order to get the phase of the near-ﬁeld at the same time as the amplitude
[29, 26, 30].
3.5
Tip-enhanced photoluminescence
As mentioned in section 3.3, the close conﬁguration of the tip and sample induce charges in
the sample surface, and this distribution of charges act as if an image dipole was present in
the material and eﬀectively changes the scattered light through polarizability. The eﬀective
tip dipole-image dipole system can be seen as a nanocavity, as described in [16]. This eﬀect
is sketched in ﬁgure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Eﬀective cavity induced by the tip dipole and image dipole interaction. The
excitons inside the TMDC WSe2 can experience Purcell enhancement when inside the
cavity. Figure from [16].
If the sample between the tip dipole and the image dipole contains emitters, then this
emitter can couple with the cavity when being inside it, as has been explained in section
2.5. Thus, in this conﬁguration, Purcell enhancement (or quenching) can be achieved in
the right conditions.
3.6
Simulation of the tip-sample interaction
As mentioned in section 3.4, the model developed in sections 3.3 and 3.4 doesn’t take
into account the interference eﬀects between the light scattered by the tip and the light
directly reﬂected. In addition, eﬀects of TEPL are not taken into account in the previous
model. In order to describe better the ﬁeld arriving at the detector, a model of the tip-
sample interaction using the Green’s function formalism [24] has been developed during this
thesis. The model is based on reference [31], and the code is written in Matlab. A sketch of
the system described through the model is presented in Figure 3.14. It corresponds to our
system’s conﬁguration. The incident electric ﬁeld E0 has a TM polarization for maximum
enhancement. Its incidence angle is θinc = 60◦. As in section 3.3, the tip is approximated
with a sphere of eﬀective radius a = 10 nm, at a distance rtip = (0, 0, +z) of the sample.
In the quasi-static approximation, as described in section 2.4.3, it has a polarizability:
α = 4πa3 ϵtip −ϵ1
ϵtip + 2ϵ1
(3.15)
with ϵtip and ϵ1 respectively the dielectric constants of the tip and vacuum.
21
==PAGE:26==
The considered sample is a material with a conductivity σ, on a substrate composed of a
thin layer of silicon dioxyde SiO2 of thickness d on a layer of silicon supposed to be inﬁnite.
Their dielectric constants are respectively ϵ2 and ϵ3. The incident ﬁeld is interacting with
the tip directly, but also through its reﬂection on the sample surface (red arrows in Figure
3.14). The electric ﬁeld arriving at the detector is composed of the ﬁeld coming from the
tip and the ﬁeld reﬂected on the sample surface (blue arrows in Figure 3.14).
Figure 3.14: Sketch of the system described in the tip-sample coupling model. Figure from
the supplementary information in [31].
The essence of the model is the following. The excitation of the tip dipole occurs either
directly or via the reﬂection from the sample surface. The external ﬁeld at the tip Einc is
therefore [32]:
Einc = E0 + rp(θinc)E0
(3.16)
where rp(θinc) is the reﬂection coeﬃcient of of the multilayer system. This coeﬃcient has
been determined using the transfer matrix method [33].
The dipole moment of the tip p in the external ﬁeld Einc, along the z direction, is then
[32, 31]:
pz = αEinc,z(rtip) + αGr,zz(rtip, rtip)pz
(3.17)
where Gr,zz(rtip, rtip) is the (z,z) component of the dyadic Green function for the reﬂected
ﬁeld at the dipole position [24]. It corresponds to the dipole interaction with the multilay-
ered system at the dipole position, produced by the dipole itself.
Equation 3.17 then implies:
pz =
αEinc,z(rtip)
1 −αGr,zz(rtip, rtip)
(3.18)
The Green function component Gr,zz(rtip, rtip) can be expressed as:
Gr,zz(rtip, rtip) = i
4π
Z ∞
0
dq rp(q) q3
k1z
ei2k1zz
(3.19)
22
==PAGE:27==
where q is the in-plane wavevector and k1z is the vertical component of the wavevector in
vacuum: q =
p
k2
1 −q2.
The integrand of equation 3.19 determines the range of in-plane dipoles that are sampled
by the s-SNOM. It is referred as the weight function:
W(q, z) = rp(q)
q3
p
k2
1 −q2 ei2√
k2
1−q2z
(3.20)
In order to verify the numerical calculations until this point, the absolute value of the
reﬂection coeﬃcient |rp(q)| and the weight function has been plotted, in the case of the
graphene sample used in reference [31]. The results have then been compared with the
ﬁgure from this same referenced paper. Figure 3.15 displays the ﬁgure from the paper.
Four diﬀerent systems are represented on this ﬁgure. First a single interface with an inﬁnite
thickness of SiO2. Second, a multilayer graphene/SiO2 (inﬁnite thickness of SiO2). Third,
SiO2(d=285 nm)/Si (inﬁnite thickness), and ﬁnally graphene/SiO2(d=285 nm)/Si (inﬁnite
thickness). The graphene is supposed to be inﬁnitely thin and have a conductivity σ = 3σ0,
with σ0 = e2/(4¯h). The wavelength of the incoming light is λ = 3, 369µm. The height of
the center of the tip is z = 15 nm. Figure 3.16 represents the results from the numerical
calculations that have been made. The Matlab code can be found in the Appendix A The
behaviour of the graph from the paper and our numerical calculations are the same, except
for one region. Indeed, for a region around q = ω/c, the reﬂection coeﬃcient becomes
higher than one in our numerical calculations. This feature is in contradiction with the
principle of energy conservation. Therefore, this peak higher than one shouldn’t exist.
After a thorough veriﬁcation, it was supposed that it was coming from an artefact of the
numerical calculations. Since this region is not included in the range of q’s sampled by
the s-SNOM (the work function is indeed equal to zero around q = ω/c), the numerical
calculation were continued.
23
==PAGE:28==
Figure 3.15: Figure from reference [31]. Absolute value of the reﬂection coeﬃcient (upper
panel) and norm of the work function (lower panel) in the case of diﬀerent interfaces or
multilayers.
Figure 3.16: Result from the numerical calculations.
Absolute value of the reﬂection
coeﬃcient (upper panel) and norm of the work function (lower panel) in the case of diﬀerent
interfaces or multilayers.
24
==PAGE:29==
In order to obtain the demodulated signal at diﬀerent orders, the far ﬁeld scattered from the
tip dipole and the sample surface, at the detector position has to be calculated. Considering
that in our setup, the detection angle θdet is the same as θinc, the scattered ﬁeld at the
detector is [32, 31]:
Esca,z = pz
k2
1eik1(Rdet−z cos θinc) sin θinc
Rdet
(1 + rpei2k1z cos θinc)
(3.21)
with Rdet the distance from the tip to the detector.
The demodulated signal at the nth order sn is then:
sn = 1
2π
Z ∞
0
dψ Esca,z(z + δz cos ψ)einψ
(3.22)
with δz the amplitude of the oscillation along the z direction.
The Matlab code for this part has been written, but failed to reproduce the results in the
paper from reference [32]. Due to a lack of time, this study has not been pushed further.
25
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Experimental methods
During this experimental project, I have used a s-SNOM in the reﬂection conﬁguration that
has been described in Chapter 3. In order to benchmark my results, I have also used a
confocal microscope, linked to a spectrometer. It has enabled me to obtain far ﬁeld spectra
of the samples I have studied. In this chapter, the two experimental setups that have been
used during the thesis are described, as well as the methods to extract the relevant signals
from the measurements.
4.1
Near ﬁeld
The near ﬁeld (NF) setup is the s-SNOM described in Chapter 3. It is this setup that is
meant to be adapted for tip-enhanced photoluminescence (TEPL). The following sections
describe the NF setup and how it has been used.
4.1.1
Setup
The s-SNOM system used during this project is presented in Figure 4.1. It is built so that a
He-Ne laser at a wavelength of 633 nm (1,96 eV) and a green diode laser at 522 nm (2,38 eV)
can be focused on the sample. This is done with ﬂip mirrors, represented by a curved arrow
around the two mirrors concerned. First, the laser beam goes through a beam expander.
Then the beam can be directed to the right or the left entry of the NF setup. On the right
and on the left side, a beam splitter (BS) enables to direct the incoming light towards the
sample, and output light towards the detector. The BS on the right side of the setup is a
50/50 BS. It has a low and noisy transmittivity at 522 nm. Therefore, the measurements
with the green laser are always performed with the beam entering through the left side.
In order to maximize the amount of near-ﬁeld light collected, the beam splitter on the
left side has a reﬂection/transmission ratio of 70/30. The beam is then focused on the tip
with a parabolic mirror, that has a numerical aperture (NA) of 0,37. As showed on Figure
4.1, the angle between the two possible input beams is 90◦. The s-SNOM tips used are
platinum iridium5 coated Arrow-NCPt from Nanoworld, with less than 25 nm curvature.
The light is then rescattered from the sample to the parabolic mirror, and reﬂected from
the parabolic mirror to the detector. The detector used for the demodulation is a 2051 10
MHz adjustable photoreceiver from Newport. The same detector is used on both sides of
the setup.
26
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: Sketch of the setup. BS: beam splitter; PD: photodiode.
4.1.2
Methods
As discussed in section 3.4, the demodulation orders are a mix between the NF signal and
the far ﬁeld (FF) background. The higher the order, the more NF there is in the signal. In
order to verify which order gives the near ﬁeld signal, an approach curve (AC) is performed
after each realignment. This means that the oscillating tip is gradually lifted up in the
z direction, and the corresponding optical signal is recorded. A NF signal should have a
decaying exponential shape such as in Figure 3.7. Figure 4.2 shows an example of AC.
This AC has been made on a monocrystalline gold ﬂake. In the ﬁrst (O1A) to the third
(O3A) demodulation orders, periodic oscillations can be seen. These correspond to the
interference between the light scattered by the tip and the light scattered by the sample,
as explained in section 3.4.
27
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.2: Approach curve showing the optical amplitude of the signal demodulated at
diﬀerent orders (O1A is the ﬁrst order, O2A the second, etc), as a function of the tip to
sample distance.
Once the AC has been made, the s-SNOM has been used in diﬀerent conﬁgurations.
s-SNOM conﬁguration
In the s-SNOM conﬁguration, the light from the sample is the scattered light. The wave-
length of this light is therefore the same as the one of the incident laser. Figure 4.3 gives
a representation of this conﬁguration. The light arrives on the sample with an angle of
60◦with regards to the vertical axis. On this ﬁgure, the scattered light is collected on the
same side as the incident light.
Figure 4.3: s-SNOM conﬁguration
28
==PAGE:33==
Photoluminescence conﬁguration
In the photoluminescence (PL) conﬁguration, a part of the incident light is scattered by
the sample and the tip, but this light is not the signal of interest. Here, the signal of
interest is the PL from the excitons in the material that is studied. In this project, the
material is a 2D material (TMDC) or quantum wells. As explained in section 2.1, the PL
wavelength is longer than the excitation wavelength. A longpass ﬁlter is therefore used to
select only the light from the PL. This conﬁguration is sketched in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: PL conﬁguration
Setup modiﬁcations for the TEPL measurements
In order to be able to obtain a spectrum of the near-ﬁeld signal from this setup, the idea
was to use a spectrometer instead of the current detector from Newport. The spectrometer
that has been tried is the USB4000 spectrometer from Ocean Optics.
29
==PAGE:34==
4.2
Far ﬁeld
To benchmark the measurements obtained with the s-SNOM, as well as to check if the
materials of interest are photoluminescent, FF measurements have been performed.
4.2.1
Setup
The setup used for these FF measurements, sketched in Figure 4.5, is composed of a
confocal Nikon Ti-U Inverted Microscope, used in a reﬂection geometry, a Shamrock 303i
Spectrometer connected at one output and an electronically cooled Newton 970 EMCCD.
The confocal microscope is equipped with a high precision XYZ stage. Several lasers are
coupled at the entry of the microscope, but only the green diode laser with a wavelength of
523 nm (2,37 eV) has been used for all the PL measurements. The connection between the
microscope and the spectrometer is made with the help of a connector arm focusing the
output light on a slit, enabling an high precision of the area collected. In the spectrometer,
the light is focused on a grating, that diﬀracts the diﬀerent spectral components of the
light on the two dimensional CCD camera (1600x200 pixels, the spectral components being
distributed over the 1600 pixels).
Figure 4.5: Top-down sketch of the microscope set up. DM: Dichroic mirror; P: polariser;
λ/2: Half-waveplate; ND: Neutral density ﬁlter; SP: Shortpass ﬁlter; LP: Longpass ﬁlter;
BS: Beamsplitter. Figure from [34].
30
==PAGE:35==
4.2.2
Methods
The FF setup has been used in two conﬁgurations. In the ﬁrst conﬁguration, photolumines-
cence spectra have been measured. In the second one, dark ﬁeld scattering measurements
have been done.
Photoluminescence measurements
Figure 4.6: Sketch of the PL measurement conﬁguration
In order to measure the photoluminescence (PL) in a material, light at a higher energy
than the band gap of the material is directed to the sample. This excitation light is a
continuous wave diode laser. The optical conﬁguration in which the microscope is used in
this case is called bright ﬁeld conﬁguration, as opposed to the dark ﬁeld conﬁguration that
will be presented in the next section. The sketch of this conﬁguration is displayed in ﬁgure
4.6. The light is directed to a beam splitter (BS), and the reﬂected part is focused on the
sample. The light coming from the sample is then transmitted trough the BS, and directed
to the spectrometer. This conﬁguration is diﬀraction limited, which means that the beam
spot of the laser has a size that covers around nine pixels of the CCD camera. The total
spectrum is obtained by summing over the spectra from those relevant CCD lines on the
camera.
Since the incident light is typically more intense than the PL of the measured material, it
has to be blocked before being detected by the CCD. A longpass ﬁlter is therefore placed
just before the spectrometer to block the excitation light.
The spectrum Iraw obtained in this way contains light from the material of interest and
other contributions. Once the measurement is done, one has to discriminate between the
31
==PAGE:36==
PL and the rest of the contributions. In the case of the PL measurement, the contribution
to remove is the noise coming from the dark counts Idark. The dark counts come from the
excitation of carriers in the CCD due to the thermal energy. When a carrier in the CCD
is thermally excited, a signal that doesn’t come from the PL is recorded. Because of their
nature, the dark counts do not depend on the wavelength. They can be removed directly
by the spectrometer with the help of a dark counts measurement performed before the PL
measurement. The resulting desired spectrum is then:
Ispec(λ) = Iraw(λ) −Idark
(4.1)
Dark ﬁeld measurements
Figure 4.7: Sketch of the dark ﬁeld conﬁguration
Dark-ﬁeld microscopy is a technique that consists in blocking the center part of the incom-
ing beam, so that the outer part impinges on the sample with a high angle. The incoming
light is in this case white light. The light scattered by the sample is then collected through
the center part of the objective. Since the incoming light arrives at high angle, the re-
ﬂected light from the incoming beam is not collected. Hence, only the light scattered by
the sample is detected. This technique is very useful to remove the light reﬂected by the
background of the sample. With this technique, the spectrum of resonant gold nanodisks
can be distinguished from the reﬂection spectrum of a silicon/silicon dioxyde background.
When doing white light spectroscopy, one has ﬁrst to take into account the scattered
background light from other objects around the particle Ibg(λ). Second, the spectrum of
the white light source is not ﬂat. Its spectrum is black-body spectrum. This needs to
be taken into account when processing the data. A reference spectrum Iref(λ) has thus
been taken for each set of data, with a polymer sample from Ocean Optics that has a
ﬂat reﬂectivity. The reference spectrum is normalized to its maximum, and the scattering
spectrum of the object of interest is obtained via:
Ispec(λ) = Iraw(λ) −Ibg(λ) −Idark
Iref(λ) −Idark
(4.2)
32
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
Experimental results
The results presented here are the main experimental results that highlight the diﬃculties
and the progress towards the detection of the PL with the near ﬁeld (NF) setup. The
far ﬁeal (FF) setup was used to verify and compare with the results obtained in the NF.
The main purpose was to observe photoluminescence (PL) in 2D materials. Therefore,
as a ﬁrst test, it has been tried to detect a PL signal coming from tungsten disulﬁde
(WS2). Since the PL has not been detected, it has been supposed that the dipoles of the
tip and the excitons were not or weakly interacting. It has been assumed that using the
vertical components of gold nanodisks’ dipole would solve this issue. In order to verify
this assumption, the dipole resonance of gold nanodisks has been investigated and their
interaction with the tip depending on the incidence the incoming light has been studied.
In the meantime, inherent limitations of the optical near ﬁeld detection system have been
highlighted.
Therefore, PL experiments on quantum wells (QWs), that typically emit
more light, have been tried. Finally, encouraged by the success of the QWs’ PL detection,
PL measurement of molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2) with the NF setup has been tried and
compared to QWs’ PL.
5.1
Tungsten Disulﬁde
Before implementing a PL system, it seemed worth checking that the sensor used for the
NF system can detect the light coming from the PL. A ﬁrst test seemed therefore to be
important to do before installing a spectrometer at the output of the NF setup. This test
has been done as follow: a longpass ﬁlter that blocks the light from the laser has been
placed between the output of the s-SNOM and the detector, as described in section 4.1.2.
The output light from a luminescent 2D material has then been measured and compared
to a non-luminescent one.
The samples used for this test are monolayers of tungsten disulﬁde (WS2). The monolayers
have been exfoliated by Bjarke Jessen and Lene Gammelgaard, from the NanoCarbon group
at DTU Nanotech, on a silicon chip with a 300 nm thick silicon dioxyde layer on top of
it. Figure 5.1 presents the optical image of one of the two monolayers that have been
measured. The position of the monolayer is highlighted with a red circle. The topology of
the WS2 monolayer, obtained at the same time as the near ﬁeld measurement, is displayed
in ﬁgure 5.2, with 50 nm lateral resolution.
33
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.1: Optical image of WS2
Figure 5.2: WS2 Topology.
In order to verify that the sample was luminescent, a PL measurement with the FF setup
has been performed. The spectrum obtained is displayed in Figure 5.3. Since the PL of
WS2 is supposed to be around 630 nm [10, 35], a green diode laser at a wavelength of 523
nm has been used for the excitation, and a longpass ﬁlter with 550 nm cutoﬀwavelength has
been put before the spectrometer to block the excitation light. A peak at 1,972 eV (628,7
nm) is clearly observed, showing evidence of the existence of the PL. For this particular
measuremment, the laser power was 0,2 mW, but the PL was clearly visible even at the
lowest laser power (0,004 mW).
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
Energy (eV)
-2
104
0
100
2
104
4
104
6
104
8
104
Counts  [a.u.]
800 750 700
650
600
550
500
   
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.3: WS2 spectrum measured with the far ﬁeld setup.
The existence of the PL having been proved, the PL measurement with the NF setup has
been performed, in the PL conﬁguration explained in section 4.1.2. A green diode laser at
522 nm has been used for the excitation of the monolayer PL. The input light was coming
from the left side of the setup, and the output light was also collected on this side (see
Figure 4.1). A high extinction ratio long pass ﬁlter at 550 nm has been used to block the
laser signal just before the detector. Several maps of the optical signal were made, on the
monolayer presented and on another one, with diﬀerent incident laser powers and diﬀerent
integration times. Because the metal coating of the tips would begin to melt if the laser
34
==PAGE:39==
power was higher than 0,04 mW, the experiments have been performed 0,045 mW at the
highest. The polarization of the laser was transverse magnetic (TM). Figures 5.4 and 5.5
present the maps of the optical signal detected for one of these scans at the ﬁrst (O1A)
and the fourth (O4A) demodulation orders. The area presented is the same as the one in
the topology ﬁgure 5.2. It is quite clear that, even at the ﬁrst order that contains the most
far ﬁeld signal and has the highest amplitude, it is impossible to distinguish between the
monolayer area and the silicon substrate, that is not luminescent. The signal detected is
noise, probably coming from the dark counts in the detector or the deﬂection laser, and
the PL is not visible.
Figure 5.4: O1A of monolayer WS2.
Figure 5.5: O4A of monolayer WS2.
From this negative result, we tried with my supervisors to ﬁnd the reasons why the PL
could not be detected. the non-existence of the PL for these particular monolayers has
been discarded because of the preliminary veriﬁcation in the far ﬁeld setup.
The ﬁrst hypothesis was that this eﬀect could come from a dipole coupling problem. Indeed,
the dipole moment of the excitons in the 2D materials are in plane, while the one of the tip
is mainly vertical [24], and the green laser is vertically polarized in order to have maximum
enhancement of the ﬁeld scattered by the tip. Therefore, there could be a coupling problem
between the tip dipole and the excitons, leading to a lower PL power.
Figure 5.6: Sketch of the dipole moment of the excitons in the monolayer (red horizontal
arrow), compared to the dipole moment of the tip (red vertical arrow), under illumination
with TM polarization.
35
==PAGE:40==
To solve this issue, one could use a tilted tip, change the polarization of the light, or change
the form of the tip. For example, reshaping the tip to form an in plane nanoantenna has
been done in the work in reference [36]. Tilted tips have been bought, and PL measurements
have been tried with it, without success. Changing the shape of the tip requires photon
ion beam milling, which would take time and add complexity. This option was therefore
not pursued. Instead, the idea of exciting the PL with the mediation of gold nanodisks
was found, as will be explained in the following section.
5.2
Gold nanodisks
5.2.1
Solving the dipole problem with deposition of gold nanodisks
Another option that seemed interesting to us was to use the dipole moment of gold nan-
odisks, deposited on the 2D material, to couple the light. As seen in sections 2.4.3 and
2.5, gold nanodisks exhibit a dipolar behaviour that can be used to couple the light to
the excitons in the 2D material. Coupling of nanodisks with excitons has successfully be
achieved in a recent work [10]. The way the coupling would work is presented in Figure 5.7.
The TM polarized incident light excites the tip dipole. This dipole couples to the nanodisk
through the side, where its ﬁeld lines have a small vertical component. The nanodisk can
then couple to the excitons, hence induce PL.
Figure 5.7: Sketch of the dipole moment of the nanodisks (red horizontal arrow), compared
to the dipole moment of the tip (red vertical arrow), with the tip next to the nanodisk.
The illumination is TM polarized.
36
==PAGE:41==
As mentioned in the previous section, the green laser doesn’t allow to use high excitation
powers. The He-Ne laser is more stable and doesn’t melt the tip even at 2,2 mW, which is
the maximum excitation power that can arrive at the sample. In addition, the size of the
nanodisks used to couple with the WS2 monolayers are at the limit of what can be detected
with the FF setup. Using nanodisks with a larger diameter would ease their detection in
the FF setup. These larger nanodisks would then have a lower resonance frequency. Using
a 2D material luminescing at longer wavelength would allow to combine the advantage of
using the He-Ne laser and larger nanodisks. Therefore, it has been decided to use a 2D
material that has a longer resonance wavelength than the He-Ne laser wavelength (633
nm). For this purpose, molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2), that has a resonance around 660
nm [37, 38], has been chosen.
However, before making the sample of MoS2 coupled to nanodisks with corresponding
resonance frequency, it is worth verifying if the tip can eﬃciently excite the dipole resonance
of these nanodisks. Therefore, the excitation of the dipole moment of gold nanodisks is
studied in this section. The gold nanodisks under study are ultrathin single-crystalline
gold nanodisks, made by Ximin Cui, PhD in the group of Prof. Jianfang Wang at the
Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong [39]. Figures 5.8 and 5.9
present the topography and the fourth order demodulation (O4A) of the optical signal
coming from these nanodisks. They have a radius of about 60-70 nm, and a thickness of
around 10 nm, measured respectively by SEM and AFM. Their resonance, which is around
650 nm, is excited via the red He-Ne laser.
Figure 5.8: Topography of gold nanodisks.
Figure 5.9: O4A of gold nanodisks.
The NF setup has been used to obtain the topography (Figure 5.8) and map the NF
scattered signal (Figure 5.9) of the single-crystalline gold nanodisks. The measurement has
been performed in the s-SNOM conﬁguration explained in section 4.1.2. The input light is
the He-Ne laser, at a power of 1,27 mW on the sample. The laser was coming from the left
side of the setup, and the output light was also collected on this side (see Figure 4.1). On
Figure 5.8, the three brightest nanodisks have a height of around 40 nm. They probably
correspond to several nanodisks glued together. They are therefore not the particles of
interest and the height scale on the topography has been reduced to distinguish the other
particle. On Figure 5.9, rings that sometimes look more like half-moons are clearly visible
around the thinner nanodisks. These rings could come from the coupling of the dipole
moment of the tip with the in-plan dipole moment of the nanodisks. This coupling would
occur when the tip is next to the particle, where the response is supposed to be the highest,
as has been sketched in Figure 5.7. The coupling would be lower when the tip is at the
37
==PAGE:42==
center of the particle, as can be seen on Figure 5.10. This would corroborate the dipole
hypothesis presented earlier. However, this eﬀect could also come from gap plasmons that
can form when the tip is close to the edge of the particle [19]. In order to have an idea
of which one of these eﬀects is predominant, a study of the intensity of the resonance
depending on the size of the particles has been made. Furthermore, for this measurement,
the light is coming with an angle of -45◦with regards to the vertical axis Y. This angle
corresponds to the orientation of the half-moons: the half-moons seem aligned with the
light direction. To verify this eﬀect, a study of the inﬂuence of light orientation on the
nanodisks has also been done.
Figure 5.10: Sketch of the dipole moment of the nanodisks (red horizontal arrow), compared
to the dipole moment of the tip (red vertical arrow), with the tip next to the nanodisk.
The illumination is TM polarized.
5.2.2
Dipole moment of gold nanodisks
As explained in section 2.4.3, the localized plasmon polaritons have a dipole behaviour. In
our case, since we have gold nanodisks and not spherical nanoparticles, the polarizability
α will be changed.
For the study of the dipole resonance, the resonance frequency of
the nanodisks through a dark ﬁeld scattering measurement with the FF setup has been
determined experimentally. Three nanodisks have been chosen for the measurements. The
ﬁrst criterion of selection was to have a height lower than 19 nm to diﬀerentiate single
disks with double disks glued together. The second criterion was to have a surface as ﬂat
as possible, since the presence of defects would tend to induce additional scattering, hiding
the wanted eﬀect. The measured spectra are displayed on Figure 5.11. Except for a slight
lowering in the number of counts for Particle 33, the smaller the particle (ie the shorter the
resonance wavelength), the lower the signal to noise ratio, and the smaller the resonance
peak. This conﬁrms the remark at the end of section 2.4.3: the smaller the radius of the
nanodisk, the smaller the scattering cross-section Csca is. The exception of Particle 33
could be explained by a slight shift out of focus of the sample when the measurement has
been done.
38
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.11: Scattering far ﬁeld spectra of three nanodisks, from the longer wavelength
resonances to the shorter. (a) Particle 33. (b) Particle 31. (c) Particle C.
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
Energy [eV]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Counts [a.u.]
Particle 31
Particle 33
Particle B
633 nm
700
650
600
550
500
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.12: Normalized ﬁtted far ﬁeld spectra of the three gold nanodisks. The excitation
wavelength at 633 nm is shown by the vertical line.
39
==PAGE:44==
For a better comparison of the resonances, the spectra have been normalized and plotted
together in ﬁgure 5.12. The maxima are at 1,94 eV (639,8 nm) for Particle 33, 2,05 eV
(605 nm) for Particle 31 and 2,10 eV (590 nm) for Particle B. It can be noted that none of
these particles is exactly on the laser resonance, which might make the interpretation of
the results more diﬃcult.
If the reason for the formation of the rings and half moons in Figure 5.9 is linked with the
dipole of the nanodisks, then in the NF, the intensity of the scattered light (O4A) from the
gold nanodisks should vary depending on the overlap with the excitation wavelength. The
scattering intensity should be lower for a nanodisk that has a resonance not corresponding
exactly to the laser wavelength, than for a nanodisk that has the same resonance as the
laser. To verify this assumption, a NF measurement has been made on the three nanodisks
that have been previously characterized in the FF. For a meaningful comparison, the
measurement was performed with the same tip, the same laser power, the same polarization
of the laser, the same direction of the incoming light and the same tapping amplitude.
Before the NF measurement of the nanodisks, an approach curve (AC) has been made to
check that the fourth demodulation order (O4A) corresponds to the near ﬁeld. This AC
has been made on monocrystalline gold ﬂakes to avoid any possible inﬂuence of the edges
of the NPs and their own characteristics. It is plotted in ﬁgure 5.13. The shape of O4A is
an exponential decay, even if some small bumps are still visible. These bumps being less
than 5% of the maximum of O4A, it has been concluded that it shouldn’t inﬂuence the
results.
Figure 5.13: Approach curve for the three studied particles. It can be seen that O4A
decays exponentially, giving us conﬁdence that the near ﬁeld is measured.
The following ﬁgures present the topology and the fourth demodulation order (O4A) of
the three nanodisks of interest. The other optical demodulation orders can be found in
Appendix B. The nanodisks have been ordered from the longest to the shortest resonance
wavelength (from top to bottom).
40
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.14: Topography and O4A of the three chosen nanodisks, from the longer to the
shorter resonance wavelength.
(a) Topography of Particle 33 - Maximum height: 19,0
nm. (b) O4A of particle 33 - Maximum: 0,54. (c) Topography of Particle 31 - Maximum
height: 13,3 nm. (d) O4A of particle 31 - Maximum: 1,32. (e) Topography of Particle B -
Maximum height: 11,6 nm. (f) O4A of Particle B - Maximum: 0,76. The incidence angle
of the light is represented by the red arrows.
41
==PAGE:46==
As mentioned previously, if the half-moons come from a dipole eﬀect, the intensity of the
NF should be the highest for the particle that is the closest to the red laser wavelength.
However, on the NF measurements Figure 5.14, it is seen that the particle that is the
closest to resonance actually has the lowest maximum. This result seems to go against
the idea of dipole resonance. Nevertheless, the number of particles compared is not high
enough to be able to have a clear conculsion. The results of the NF measurements on the
nanodisks depend a lot on the tip that is used, on the alignment on the tip, the shape of
the nanodisk and its scattering properties. The enhanced response of Particle 31 could be
due to its slightly elongated shape, or some defects in the structure that scatter more light.
Furthermore, there is an inherent variation in the nanodisks’ thickness (as can be seen on
Figure 5.14), that could also have inﬂuenced the results. In brief, a more thorough study
of the intensity of the resonance, with a higher number of nanodisks, is needed to be able
to conclude.
5.2.3
Inﬂuence of the incoming light
As observed on Figure 5.9, the direction of the half-moon shapes observed seemed to be
linked with the direction of the light. In order to study the inﬂuence of the direction of
the incoming light, the particles have been illuminated through one entrance of the near
ﬁeld setup, and then the other. The maps obtained for each illumination have then been
compared. When the incidence was changed, the laser was realigned on a gold ﬂake before
scanning the nanodisks. Particle B, studied in the precedent section, has been chosen for
this study. Indeed, it is the nanodisk that has the roundest shape, as can be seen on its
topography in Figure 5.15. In addition, it shows one of the best half-moon shape in the
NF maps of the optical signal, as will be seen on Figure 5.18.
Figure 5.15: Topology of Particle B.
Since the incident beam was realigned when changing the incidence angle of the input
light, an AC has been made to verify that the alignment was correct. The AC has been
made on the same monocrystalline gold ﬂake as in the previous experiment. The AC of
the measurements in the situation were the laser is coming from the left side of the setup
is presented in Figure 5.16. The AC of the measurements with the laser coming from the
right side of the setup is presented in Figure 5.17. The shape of O4A is an exponential
decay, so the NF measurement can be trusted.
42
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.16: Approach curve - Laser
from the left.
Figure 5.17: Approach curve - Laser
from the right.
Figure 5.18: First (O1A) and fourth (O4A) orders of demodulation for Particle B. Inﬂuence
of the direction of the light. The incident light is represented by a red arrow. (a) O1A of
Particle B - Laser from the the left. (b) O1A of Particle B - Laser from the right. (c) O4A
of Particle B - Laser from the left. (d) O4A of particle B - Laser from the right.
The NF measurement has been done with the same laser power, but as mentioned in section
4.1.2 the beam splitters at the two entry of the setup don’t have the same transmission/re-
ﬂection ratios. Therefore, the laser power arriving on the sample is 1,1 mW when the light
arrives on the left side of the setup, and 2,2 mW when it arrives on the right side. This
diﬀerence in incident powers could explain the diﬀerences in the maxima of the AC and the
43
==PAGE:48==
in the maxima of O1A in Figures 5.18(a) and 5.18(b). The angle between the two incident
beam directions is 90◦, as is represented in Figure 4.1. The direction of the incoming light
is showed on the maps by the arrows. On the maps, it has an angle of ± 45◦with the
Y axis. The inﬂuence of the light incidence is clearly visible in O1A as well as in O4A
(Figures 5.18(c) and 5.18(d)). For O4A, the maximum of signal is at the near edge of the
nanodisk with respect to the direction of the incoming light, and the minimum at the far
edge. The same eﬀect appears in Figure 5.18(a) for O1A, but the opposite eﬀect is seen in
Figure 5.18(b). The last eﬀect could be due to a slight misalignement in the O1A signal.
Indeed, when looking at the AC in Figure 5.17, one can see that the maximum of O1A
is not exactly at the lowest distance from the sample. The demodulation could then not
have been done properly.
In order to understand these results, I compared them to the experimental results from
reference [40]. Indeed, in this paper, the inﬂuence of the tip on gold nanodisks is analyzed
using an AFM-based s-SNOM in the same reﬂection conﬁguration as in our NF setup. The
sketch of the setup used in the paper is presented in ﬁgure 5.19. As in our setup, the laser
used is a TM polarized He-Ne laser, the measurement is done in tapping mode at approx-
imately the same frequency and the tip has an apex radius of 20-30 nm. The thickness of
the nanodisks, fabricated by colloidal lithography, is not speciﬁed. The nanodisks lay on
a glass substrate, contrary to our nanodisks that are on a Si/SiO2 substrate.
In the study presented in the paper, the inﬂuence of a silicon tip on the nanodisks is
compared with the inﬂuence of a metallic Pt-coated tip. It has been found that the silicon
tip interacts weakly with the nanodisks, thus recreating a dipole shape in the NF signal,
as can be seen in Figure 5.20 (c). In the case of the metallic tip, which corresponds to our
case, a strong plasmonic coupling occurs between the tip and the sample, forming a gap
plasmon. The experimental results corresponding o this last case are displayed in Figure
5.20 (d). The incident light is coming from the left (horizontally). In their experiment, the
maximum of signal is at the far edge of the nanodisk with respect to the direction of the
incoming light, and the minimum at the near edge. It corresponds to the opposite eﬀect
of my experimental results.
Figure 5.19: Setup used in the experiments in ref-
erence [40]. Figure from [40].
Figure 5.20: O4A of the gold nan-
odisks measured in reference [40].
Figure from [40].
44
==PAGE:49==
The explanation for the results in reference [40] is sketched in Figure 5.21 in the case of the
strong coupling. When the tip is located at the far edge of the gold nanodisk, the dipoles
of the tip and the sample couple longitudinally. This conﬁguration enhances the emission
of light. When the tip is located at the near edge of a nanodisk, transversal coupling is
generated. Thus, the light emission is quenched.
Figure 5.21: Inﬂuence of a Pt coated tip on a gold nanodisk. Figure from [40].
The diﬀerence between our results and the results in this study could come from several
eﬀects. First, the nanodisk Particle B is very thin (11,3 nm). The dipole moment of the
nanodisk (pdisk on Figure 5.21) could then have been less tilted in our case than in their
case. Thus the eﬀect described could have been less strong and have been hidden behing
another stronger eﬀect. Second, the substrate is not the same in our case and in their case.
This could maybe play a role. Third, some defects on the surface could also have inﬂuence
the maxima and minima of light emission. All these eﬀects could have been combined, or
not, to generate a diﬀerent result.
In order to ﬁnd which one of these eﬀects inﬂuences our results, further studies have to be
done, with more particles. To check the inﬂuence of the thickness, one could try the same
experiment on thicker particles. To check the inﬂuence of the substrate, one could do the
experiment with our nanodisks on a glass substrate. To check the inﬂuence of the surface
defects, one could measure the nanodisks under study with a more performant AFM. These
experiments have however not been done because of time issues.
Another point that has been noticed is that Particle 33, which is the thickest nanodisk
under study in the previous section, shows the eﬀect described in the article reference
[40]. This could corroborate the hypothesis of the inﬂuence of the thickness. However, as
mentioned previously, a further study with more particles is necessary.
One could also notice that when looking at Figures 5.8 and 5.9, the smaller particles
correspond to the eﬀect that we described, while the particles that are a little bit bigger,
show the eﬀect described in the article. There could therefore be a size dependence of this
eﬀect. Furthermore, the size and the thickness are parameters that aﬀect the resonance
of nanodisks. Therefore, It could be that this eﬀect is linked with the resonance of the
nanodisks with regards to the excitation light. It could be for example due to a π phase
shift of the nanodisk’s dipole. The nanodisk’s dipole resonance would then be out of phase
with regards to the excitation light, and the situation at the near and far edge would be
inverted. However, the phase information is needed in order to refute or to conﬁrm this
hypothesis, as well as a study on more particles.
45
==PAGE:50==
To conclude, there seems to be an eﬀect of the light incidence as well as an interaction
between the tip dipole and the dipole of the nanodisk. How these inﬂuences work is however
not very clear, and further experiments need to be done, with more particles, in order to
conﬁrm or refute the mentioned hypotheses. To reduce the eﬀect of the light incidence,
one could also modify the NF setup so that the illumination comes from the bottom of the
sample.
5.3
Quantum wells
During the study of the nanodisks, we considered a second possible explanation for the
non-detection of the PL signal with the s-SNOM setup. In order to verify if the explanation
was correct, quantum wells (QWs) were studied.
5.3.1
Inherent limitations of the near ﬁeld setup
The detection conﬁguration is diﬀerent on the FF setup, compared to the NF one: the
FF setup uses confocal microscopy, with an objective having a high numerical aperture
(NA), and a cooled detector that can in principle detect single photons. The NF setup
uses a parabolic mirror with a low NA to collect the light, and a silicon detector at room
temperature that can demodulate the signal, with lower sensitivity.
Furthermore, the PL from 2D materials is typically very low, invisible for a human eye at
the excitation powers that are used (this last fact has been checked experimentally).
These elements combined give rise to possible detection issues, characterized by the light
collection angle in the NF setup and the sensitivity of the detector. If the amount of light
hitting the detector of the NF setup is lower than the noise level of the detector, then the
signal would be hidden by the noise.
Light Collection
The amount of light from the PL arriving at the detector changes with the collection
capacity of the optical setup in question. This means that it depends on the numerical
aperture (NA) of the objective for the FF setup, and the NA of the mirror for the NF
setup. The NA of the 100X objective that is used in the FF setup is 0,9, while the NA of
the mirror in the NF setup is 0,37. Considering that the PL is emitted homogeneously in
all direction from its excitation point, there is 8 times more light collected in the far ﬁeld
setup than in the near ﬁeld setup. Thus, the fraction of total PL light arriving at the near
ﬁeld detector is 8 times lower.
The possibility that the collection could be an issue is corroborated by the fact that exper-
imental setups used to achieve TEPL measurements found in the literature use objectives
with high numerical apertures to collect the light [16, 17, 11].
Sensor responsivity
Second, there is a diﬀerence in the two sensor performances, at the particular wavelength
of interest. Figures 5.22 (a) and 5.22 (b) present the responsivities of the NF and FF
photodiodes, respectively, as the function of the wavelength. The responsivity of the FF
photodiode is higher than the NF photodiode at all wavelength. At 630 nm, which is the
wavelength of interest for WS2, it is around 7,5 times higher, and the result is similar for
the MoS2 wavelength.
46
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.22: Responsivity of the detectors. The PL wavelength of WS2 is highlighted with
a green line, the one of MoS2 with a red line and the one af the QWs with a red band.
(a)Responsivity of the NF setup’s photodiode (Model 2051). From the model’s user guide.
(b) Responsivity of the FF setup’s photodiode. Values deduced from the QE values in the
user guide.
From these two observations, we can suppose that the detector performance is not good
enough for the amount of light power collected by the s-SNOM, at the particular wavelength
of interest. An idea to overcome this issue was to use quantum wells (QWs). Indeed, a
QW being thicker than a 2D material, it should in principle have a higher PL intensity
for the same amount of excitation power. In addition, the excitons in the quantum wells
can have a vertical component, as shown in ﬁgure 5.23. It was therefore decided to work
with InGaAs QWs surrounded by GaAs. The sample under study has been made in the
cleanroom at DTU by the Nanophotonic Devices group. It is composed of three quantum
wells having 3 diﬀerent sizes, hence should have 3 peaks.
Figure 5.23: Quantum wells under study. Light is coming from the left side along the z
direction. EGaAs
g
is the gap energy of GaAs and EInGaAs
g
is the gap energy of InGaAs
47
==PAGE:52==
5.3.2
Far ﬁeld measurements
Figure 5.24 presents the far ﬁeld PL spectrum of the QWs, at an excitation wavelength of
523 nm and an excitation power of 633 µW. Multiple lines can be seen on this spectrum,
probably coming from the diﬀerent quantized energy levels due to the conﬁnement in the
z direction. These levels have been sketched in Figure 2.3. Being able to see these lines
conﬁrms that the FF detector has a good sensitivity. The spectrum having a large peak
centered around 930 nm, the responsivity of the NF detector should be better than 650
nm, as can be seen on ﬁgure 5.22 (a).
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
Energy (eV)
0
100
2
106
4
106
6
106
8
106
Counts [a.u.]
1000  950  900
 850
 800
 750
 700    
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.24: Quantum well spectrum.
When comparing the maxima values of the quantum well’s PL and the PL from WS2, it
is clear that the PL power from the QWs is higher. An explicit veriﬁcation of this has
been made through a study of the PL power as a function of the input power, for the WS2
(ﬁgure 5.25) and for the QWs (ﬁgure 5.26). The ﬁgures display the plot of the discrete
integral of the powers at all wavelength, as a function of the input power. The input power
was measured with a powermeter. Several measures have been taken for one excitation
power, at diﬀerent positions on the samples, giving the uncertainty on the vertical axis.
First and as expected, for a same value of the input power, the PL power is at least one
order of magnitude higher for the QWs than for the WS2, the diﬀerence reaching 2 orders
of magnitude at higher powers. This eﬀect occurs despite the fact that the responsivity of
the FF detector is higher at the WS2 (630 nm) PL wavelength than at the QWs one (850 -
950 nm). Second, one can notice that towards the higher input powers, the PL from WS2
seems to saturate, while the one of the QWs seems to continue growing.
48
==PAGE:53==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Power (µW)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Integral of Spectra Counts [a.u.]
104
Figure 5.25:
WS2 dependence on laser
power.
0
200
400
600
800
Power (µW)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Integral of Spectra Counts [a.u.]
105
Figure 5.26: Quantum well dependence on
laser power.
This mentioned eﬀect could come from the higher depth of the QWs: according to Beer-
Lambert’s law, the intensity of the input light I(z) is decaying exponentially, with a char-
acteristic length depending on the absorbance of the material A:
I(z) = I0e−Az
(5.1)
with I0 the initial input intensity. Consequently, for a higher input intensity, the length L
for which I(L) = 0 is longer. 2D materials being very thin, it could be that all the incident
light in the material is not absorbed after a certain value of the input power. The QWs
being thicker, more light can be absorbed.
5.3.3
Near ﬁeld measurements
From the study of the FF signal, it is now known that for the same intensity of the excitation
power, the PL intensity is higher for the QWs. In addition, the responsivity of the NF
detector is higher around 850-950 nm, which corresponds to the QWs’ PL. Therefore, a
NF measurement of the QWs has been done.
49
==PAGE:54==
Approach curve
Before trying to ﬁnd the PL signal, in order to check the alignment, an AC has been made
on a gold monocrystalline sample. The AC is displayed ﬁgure 5.27. The tip used was
giving an exceptionally good intensity of the signal at all orders, together with a NF-like
curves at the fourth (O4A) and third (O3A) of the optical signal.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Relative Distance (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized Amplitude (a.u.)
O1A - max = 191.0177
O2A - max = 36.5076
O3A - max = 20.8518
O4A - max = 13.2936
Figure 5.27: Approach curve on a gold ﬂake.
Photoluminescence measurement
The modiﬁcations on the NF setup used to detect PL from the QWs was the same as the
one for the WS2: a longpass ﬁlter was put between the detector and the output of the
s-SNOM. Since the PL wavelength is in the range of 950 nm, the ﬁlter used had a cutoﬀ
wavelength of 750 nm, and the excitation laser was the He-Ne, at a power of 2,2 mW on
the sample. The laser was entering through the right side of the setup, and the output
light was going out also through the right side (see Figure 4.1).
Since the QWs don’t lie on a substrate, it is not possible to make a scan that compares
directly a substrate that doesn’t emit PL with the QWs. Therefore, it has been chosen to
record ACs on the QWs, from the minimum distance to 1 µm upper. Two diﬀerent ACs,
made at 2 diﬀerent positions of the QW, are displayed in ﬁgure 5.28 and 5.29. Only the
ﬁrst order of demodulation (O1A) was showing a signal. Therefore it is the only one that
is displayed.
Figure 5.28 presents one of the two ACs that was decreasing when increasing the distance
between the QW and the tip. From this graph, one could think that there is enhancement
of the light by the tip, which could then come from Purcell enhancement. However, all
the other ACs showed a behaviour like in ﬁgure 5.29: optical amplitude going up when
increasing the tip-sample distance. The same behaviour was observed when the tip was
changed for a tilted tip, that should couple more easily with the excitons.
50
==PAGE:55==
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Relative Distance (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized Amplitude (a.u.)
O1A - max = 0.021395
Figure 5.28: Approach curve on a gold ﬂake
at one position.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Relative Distance (nm)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized Amplitude (a.u.)
O1A - max = 0.026923
Figure 5.29: Approach curve on a gold ﬂake
at another position.
In addition to the O1A signal increasing when the tip-sample distance increases, oscillations
of about 200 nm period are observed. These oscillations could maybe correspond to the
Fabry-Perot oscillations induced by the tip-sample interaction that form a cavity. However,
the period of the oscillations does not correspond to the half of the He-Ne wavelength,
or half of the QWs wavelength. Another explanation would be that it comes from the
interferences between the PL scattered by the tip and the PL coming directly from the
sample.
To be sure that the signal that has been seen was coming from PL, the lock-in detector
was replaced with a spectrometer from Ocean Optics. The spectra obtained are displayed
in Figure 5.30 for the tip down, and in Figure 5.31 for the tip up. The tip up position
corresponds to a distance of 1 µm from the sample. The integration time used to obtain
these plots is 100ms, accumulated 50 times, and the dark counts have been subtracted. A
large peak with 3 lobes is observed, conﬁrming the presence of the PL. However, the PL
signal that is displayed here is not coming from the near ﬁeld, but is a mix between far
ﬁeld and near ﬁeld. The signal is lower when the tip is down than when the tip is up,
conﬁrming the behaviour seen in ﬁgure 5.29.
The thin peak at 788 nm corresponds to the deﬂection laser. This means that part of the
light from the deﬂection laser is scattered towards the detector.
This behaviour of increasing signal with tip-sample distance could maybe come from
quenching of the PL. Indeed, as has been seen in section 2.5, a tip coming next to a
surface can enhance the light emitted, but also quench it. Furthermore, the tip was still
oscillating while the measure has been done. This means that the light emitted is the
average of the light emitted for all the positions of the oscillating tip. It is therefore diﬃ-
cult to know if the PL is enhanced or quenched of PL at a speciﬁc position. In order to
know the intensity of the PL as a function of the position, the same measurement with a
non-oscillating tip should be done.
51
==PAGE:56==
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Energy (eV)
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Signal (a.u.)
950
850800 750 700
650
600
550
500
   
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.30: Spectrum of the quantum well,
the tip being down.
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Energy (eV)
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Signal (a.u.)
950
850800 750 700
650
600
550
500
   
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.31: Spectrum of the quantum well,
the tip being up.
5.4
Molybdenum disulﬁde
Lastly, once the MoS2 samples were made, a PL signal has been investigated on the mono-
layers. Figure 5.32 presents the optical image of the monolayer that has been measured.
As for the WS2, the monolayers have been exfoliated by Bjarke Jessen and Lene Gam-
melgaard, on a silicon chip with a 100 nm thick silicon dioxyde layer on top of it. The
topology of the right side of the monolayer, is displayed in Figure 5.33, with a 50 nm lateral
resolution.
Figure 5.32:
Optical image of the MoS2
monolayer.
Figure 5.33: Topology of the right side of the
MoS2 monolayer.
As for the WS2, a FF PL measurement has been done to verify the existence of the PL.
The result of the FF measurement is displayed in Figure 5.34. The green diode laser at a
wavelength of 523 nm has been used for the excitation, and a longpass ﬁlter with 550 nm
cutoﬀwavelength has been put before the spectrometer to block the excitation light. A
peak at 1,864 eV (665,2 nm) is observed, proving the existence of the PL. The high peak
corresponds to the A exciton. Another small peak on the side is present around 2 eV, and
corresponds to the B exciton.
52
==PAGE:57==
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
Energy (eV)
-2
104
0
100
2
104
4
104
6
104
8
104
1
105
1
105
Counts  [a.u.]
800 750 700
650
600
550
500
   
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.34: MoS2 spectrum.
For the near ﬁeld PL measurement, the red He-Ne laser has been used for the excitation
of the monolayer PL. The laser is TM polarized and the power on the sample is 2,2 mW.
A premium long pass ﬁlter at 650 nm is used to remove the laser signal just in front of the
detector. In order to have a better signal, the incident light was coming from the right side,
and the output light was detected on the left side of the setup (see Figure 4.1). Figures
5.35 and 5.36 present the maps of the optical signal detected for one of these scans at the
ﬁrst (O1A) and the fourth (O4A) demodulation orders. The area presented is the same
as in the topology ﬁgure 5.33. As for the WS2, it is impossible to distinguish between the
monolayer area and the non-luminescent silicon substrate.
Figure 5.35: O1A of the MoS2.
Figure 5.36: O4A of the MoS2.
As for the QWs, the spectrometer from Ocean optics has been used to record an eventual
spectrum coming from the MoS2 monolayer. The integration time is also 100 ms, integrated
50 times, and the dark counts have been removed.
53
==PAGE:58==
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Energy (eV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Signal (a.u.)
950
850800 750 700
650
600
550
500
   
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.37: Spectrum of the MoS2, the tip
being down.
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
Energy (eV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Signal (a.u.)
950
850800 750 700
650
600
550
500
   
Wavelength (nm)
Figure 5.38: Spectrum of the MoS2, the tip
being up.
Figures 5.37 and 5.38 give the result of this measurement, when the tip is down and when
the tip is up, respectively. Apart from the deﬂection laser, a small signal has been detected,
not when the tip was down, but when the tip was up. This eﬀect corroborate the idea of
quenching when the tip is down, seen for the quantum wells. However, this measurement
has been tried in the conﬁguration where the excitation light comes from the right, and the
light detected is at the left output. There could be a shadowing eﬀect of the tip that we
use. Indeed, these tip are not cylindrical, but have a tetrahedral form. The light scattered
from the tip is anisotropic, as has been highlighted in reference [41]. It could therefore be
that the PL is scattered by the tip preferentially in the direction of the incoming light.
In addition, as for the QWs, the tip is oscillating when recording these spectra. The results
of this experiment in terms of enhancement or quenching are therefore diﬃcult to interpret.
Other experiments with a non-oscillating tip have to be done. This would correspond to
use the contact mode of the s-SNOM. Therefore, new tips designed for contact mode should
be bought, and the means to use the contact mode with the s-SNOM from NeaSpec should
be investigated.
To conclude on this experimental chapter, the photoluminescence has been observed with
a 2D material: MoS2. However, the signal measured is very low and seems to be quenched,
instead of enhanced, by the tip. This eﬀect could come from one or several of the issues
identiﬁed during this project. First, the dipole moment of the vertical tip probably couples
weakly with the dipole moment of the excitons in the 2D materials. A tilted tip or the
dipole moment of gold nanodisks could maybe solve this issue.
The deposition of the
nanodisks on the MoS2 however still needs to be done, in order to verify the last point.
Second, the collection angle of the parabolic mirror is low compared to usual PL setups.
This limitation is inherent to the system and diﬃcult to change. Third, the modulation
might actually be an issue for the detection of tip-enhanced photoluminescence (TEPL).
Experiments using contact mode, where the height of the tip with respect to the sample is
known, should be tried to conﬁrm this hypothesis. Finally, a more sensitive detector could
be used. This last modiﬁcation would be easy to implement, especially if the demodulation
is not necessary for TEPL.
54
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The aim of this work was to understand how to adapt the existing commercial s-SNOM
from NeaSpec in order to measure tip-enhanced photoluminescence spectra of 2D materials.
Although this goal has not been achieved within the period of the project, important steps
have been realized towards the realization of this purpose.
The principles of photoluminescence in direct gap materials have been presented. The
particular case of transition metal dichalcogenides and quantum wells has been described.
In order to understand the enhancement between the tip and excitons in conﬁned materials,
the concepts of surface and localized plasmons have been introduced. In addition, the
working principle of a s-SNOM has been understood, and a numerical calculation has been
developed to understand the tip-sample interaction in the particular case of our setup. The
numerical calculation is however not ﬁnished.
Two setups have been used, one for the far ﬁeld detection and one for the near ﬁeld
detection. These setups helped to identify some issues probably preventing the detection
of photoluminescence, as has been presented at the end of Chapter 5: the weak interaction
between dipole of the tip and the dipole of the excitons in 2D materials, the low numerical
aperture of the parabolic mirror and the sensitivity of the detector. The modulation of the
tip could also inﬂuence the enhancement or quenching of the photoluminescence.
In order to verify these hypotheses, more experiments should be done. The next step would
be to try the photoluminescence measurements on MoS2 in contact mode. The inﬂuence
of the modulation on the enhancement process could be clariﬁed in this way. Furthermore,
the nanodisks that have been characterized should be deposited on the MoS2 monolayer
in order to study the coupling between the MoS2 and the nanodisks. The study of the
interaction between the tip and the nanodisks alone should also be continued. A higher
number of nanodisks should be selected to conﬁrm the tendencies highlighted in section
5.2. In addition, the measured spectrum of the MoS2 monolayer should be compared with
the same measurement using a tilted tip. Finally, the numerical calculation should be
ﬁnished and compared with the experimental results.
55
==PAGE:60==
Appendix A
Matlab Code for the Simulation of
the Tip-Sample Interaction
A.1
Main Program for the plot of Figure 3.16
1 clear
al l
2 close
a l l
3 clc
4
5 %Default
parameters
6 set (0 , ’ defaultAxeslinewidth ’ ,1.5) ;
7 set (0 , ’ defaultLinelinewidth ’ ,1.5) ;
8 set (0 , ’ defaultLineMarkerSize ’ ,6) ;
9 set (0 , ’ defaultAxesFontSize ’ ,17) ;
10 set (0 , ’ defaultTextFontSize ’ ,17) ;
11 set (0 , ’ defaultAxesbox ’ , ’ on ’ ) ;
12
13 %% Universal
constants
14
15 e = 1.6∗10^ −19;
16 epsilon_0 = 8.85∗10^ −12;
17 c= 3∗10^8;
18 hbar = 1.05∗10^ −34;
19
20 %% Other
constants
21
22 z=15E−9; %hight
to
center
of
t i p
23
24 lambda = 3.369∗10^ −6;
25 % lambda = 0.633∗10^ −6;
for HeNe l a s e r
case
26 k_0 = 2∗pi/lambda ;
27 omega = k_0∗c ;
28
29 %Sellmeier
eq
to
have eps2 and eps3 ,
from Stacking Supp Info
30 lambdaS = lambda ∗10^6;
31 eps2 = 1+0.6961663∗lambdaS .^2./( lambdaS.^2 −0.0684043^2)
+0.4079426∗lambdaS .^2./( lambdaS.^2 −0.1162414^2) +0.8974794∗
lambdaS .^2./( lambdaS.^2 −9.896161^2) ;
32 eps3 = 1+10.6684293∗lambdaS .^2./( lambdaS.^2 −0.301516485^2)
56
==PAGE:61==
+0.003043475∗lambdaS .^2./( lambdaS.^2 −1.13475115^2) +1.54133408∗
lambdaS .^2./( lambdaS.^2−1104^2) ;
33
34 eps1 = 1; % vacuum
35 % eps2 = 2.20;
for HeNe l a s e r
case
36 % eps3 = 13.491+0.036730∗1 i ;
for HeNe l a s e r
case
37
38 sigma_0 = e ^2/(4∗hbar ) ;
39
40 % Nlayer = 3;
41 % sigma = Nlayer ∗sigma_0 ;
42
43 d=285E−9; % SiO2 thickness
44
45 %% Common to
both methods ,
for
p l o t
46 q = logspace (6 ,9 ,100) ;
47 k1z_W = sqrt ( eps1∗omega^2/c^2−q .^2) ;
48 k2z_W = sqrt ( eps2∗omega^2/c^2−q .^2) ;
49 k3z_W = sqrt ( eps3∗omega^2/c^2−q .^2) ;
50
51 %% Reflection and Transmission
Calculations
with
Direct Method ,
one boundary ( i n f i n i t e
layer
of SiO2)
52
53 % With 3 l a y e r s
of
graphene
54 Nlayer = 3;
55 sigma = Nlayer ∗sigma_0 ;
56
57 r_pGSiO2 = ( eps2 .∗k1z_W−eps1 .∗k2z_W+sigma . / ( omega .∗epsilon_0 ) .∗
k1z_W.∗k2z_W) . / ( eps2 .∗k1z_W+eps1 .∗k2z_W+sigma . / ( omega .∗
epsilon_0 ) .∗k1z_W.∗k2z_W) ;
58
59 Wr_zzGSiO2 = r_pGSiO2 .∗q .^3./k1z_W.∗exp(1 i ∗2∗k1z_W.∗z ) ;
60
61 % With 0 layer
of
graphene
62 Nlayer = 0;
63 sigma = Nlayer ∗sigma_0 ;
64
65 r_pSiO2 = ( eps2 .∗k1z_W−eps1 .∗k2z_W+sigma . / ( omega .∗epsilon_0 ) .∗
k1z_W.∗k2z_W) . / ( eps2 .∗k1z_W+eps1 .∗k2z_W+sigma . / ( omega .∗
epsilon_0 ) .∗k1z_W.∗k2z_W) ;
66
67 Wr_zzSiO2 = r_pSiO2 .∗q .^3./k1z_W.∗exp(1 i ∗2∗k1z_W.∗z ) ;
68
69 %% Reflection and Transmission
Calculations
with
Transfert
Matrix
Method ,
ie
add Si
70
71 % With 0 l a y e r s
of
graphene
72 D12p_W = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps1 , eps2 , sigma ) ;
73
74 P2_W = PropagationMatrix (q , omega , eps2 , d) ;
75
57
==PAGE:62==
76 D23p_W = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps2 , eps3 , 0 ) ;
77
78 M_W = zeros (2 ,2 , length (q) ) ;
79 r_pSiO2Si = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
80 Wr_zzSiO2Si = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
81
82 for
i
=1:length (q)
83 M_W( : , : , i ) = D12p_W( : , : , i ) ∗P2_W( : , : , i ) ∗D23p_W( : , : , i ) ; % Total
t r a n s f e r
matrix
84 r_pSiO2Si ( i ) = M_W(2 ,1 , i ) ./M_W(1 ,1 , i ) ;
85 Wr_zzSiO2Si ( i ) = r_pSiO2Si ( i ) .∗q( i ) .^3./k1z_W( i ) .∗exp(1 i ∗2∗k1z_W(
i ) .∗z ) ;
86 end
87
88 % With 3 l a y e r s
of
graphene
89 Nlayer = 3;
90 sigma = Nlayer ∗sigma_0 ;
91
92 D12p_W = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps1 , eps2 , sigma ) ;
93
94 P2_W = PropagationMatrix (q , omega , eps2 , d) ;
95
96 D23p_W = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps2 , eps3 , 0 ) ;
97
98 M_W = zeros (2 ,2 , length (q) ) ;
99 r_pGSiO2Si = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
100 Wr_zzGSiO2Si = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
101
102 for
i
=1:length (q)
103 M_W( : , : , i ) = D12p_W( : , : , i ) ∗P2_W( : , : , i ) ∗D23p_W( : , : , i ) ; % Total
t r a n s f e r
matrix
104 r_pGSiO2Si ( i ) = M_W(2 ,1 , i ) ./M_W(1 ,1 , i ) ;
105 Wr_zzGSiO2Si( i ) = r_pGSiO2Si ( i ) .∗q( i ) .^3./k1z_W( i ) .∗exp(1 i ∗2∗
k1z_W( i ) .∗z ) ;
106 end
107
108 %% Reflection and Transmission
Calculations
with
Transfert
Matrix
Method ,
but
without
Si
109
110 % With 0 l a y e r s
of
graphene
111 Nlayer = 0;
112 sigma = Nlayer ∗sigma_0 ;
113
114 D12p_W = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps1 , eps2 , sigma ) ;
115
116 M_W = zeros (2 ,2 , length (q) ) ;
117 r_pSiO2Tmm = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
118 Wr_zzSiO2Tmm = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
119
120 for
i
=1:length (q)
121 M_W( : , : , i ) = D12p_W( : , : , i ) ; % Total
t r a n s f e r
matrix
58
==PAGE:63==
122 r_pSiO2Tmm( i ) = M_W(2 ,1 , i ) ./M_W(1 ,1 , i ) ;
123 Wr_zzSiO2Tmm( i ) = r_pSiO2Tmm( i ) .∗q( i ) .^3./k1z_W( i ) .∗exp(1 i ∗2∗
k1z_W( i ) .∗z ) ;
124 end
125
126 % With 3 l a y e r s
of
graphene
127 Nlayer = 3;
128 sigma = Nlayer ∗sigma_0 ;
129
130 D12p_W = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps1 , eps2 , sigma ) ;
131
132 M_W = zeros (2 ,2 , length (q) ) ;
133 r_pGSiO2Tmm = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
134 Wr_zzGSiO2Tmm = zeros ( length (q) ,1) ;
135
136 for
i
=1:length (q)
137 M_W( : , : , i ) = D12p_W( : , : , i ) ; % Total
t r a n s f e r
matrix
138 r_pGSiO2Tmm( i ) = M_W(2 ,1 , i ) ./M_W(1 ,1 , i ) ;
139 Wr_zzGSiO2Tmm( i ) = r_pGSiO2Tmm( i ) .∗q( i ) .^3./k1z_W( i ) .∗exp(1 i ∗2∗
k1z_W( i ) .∗z ) ;
140 end
141
142 %% With Si ,
d i r e c t
method on SiO2
143
144 r_p12 = ( eps2 .∗k1z_W−eps1 .∗k2z_W) . / ( eps2 .∗k1z_W+eps1 .∗k2z_W) ;
145 r_p23 = ( eps3 .∗k2z_W−eps2 .∗k3z_W) . / ( eps3 .∗k2z_W+eps2 .∗k3z_W) ;
146
147 r_p13 = ( r_p12+r_p23 .∗exp(1 i ∗2∗k2z_W∗d) ) ./(1+r_p12 .∗r_p23 .∗exp(1 i
∗2∗k2z_W∗d) ) ;
148
149 %% Plot same graphs
as paper
150
151 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs( r_pSiO2) )
152 xlabel ( ’q (\omega/c ) ’ )
153 ylabel ( ’ | r_p | ’ )
154
155 hold on
156 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs(r_pGSiO2) )
157
158 hold on
159 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs( r_pSiO2Si ) , ’−−g ’ )
160
161 hold on
162 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs( r_pGSiO2Si ) , ’−−y ’ )
163
164 legend ( ’ | r_p( SiO2 ) | ’ , ’ | r_p(G/SiO2 ) | ’ , ’ | r_p( SiO2/ Si ) | ’ , ’ | r_p(G/
SiO2/ Si ) | ’ )
165 axis ( [ 0 . 9E−1 1.1E3 0
2 ] )
166
167 figure ;
168
59
==PAGE:64==
169 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs(Wr_zzSiO2) )
170 xlabel ( ’q (\omega/c ) ’ )
171 ylabel ( ’ |Wr_zz| ’ )
172
173 hold on
174 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs(Wr_zzGSiO2) , ’+’ )
175
176 hold on
177 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs( Wr_zzSiO2Si ) , ’−−g ’ )
178
179 hold on
180 semilogx (q∗c/omega , abs(Wr_zzGSiO2Si) , ’−−y ’ )
181
182 legend ( ’ |Wr_zz( SiO2 ) | ’ , ’ |Wr_zz(G/SiO2 ) | ’ , ’ |Wr_zz( SiO2/ Si ) | ’ , ’ |
Wr_zz(G/SiO2/ Si ) | ’ )
183 % axis ( [ 0 . 9E−1 1.1E3 0 1])
A.2
Function TransmissionMatrixP
1 function Dp = TransmissionMatrixP (q , omega , eps1 , eps2 , sigma )
2 % TransmissionMatrix :
Calculates
the
transmission
matrix
through
an interface ,
3 %
from medum 1 to medium 2 ,
with 2D
material
in
between −or not .
4 % INPUT:
5 %
−q :
in
plane
wavevector
( re al
vector )
6 %
−eps1 ,
eps2 :
d i e l e c t r i c
of media 1 and 2 ,
r e s p e c t i v e l y
(
number)
7 %
−sigma :
conductivity
at
the
i n t e r f a c e
(number)
8 % OUTPUT:
Calculated
transmission
matrix Dp,
for p p o l a r i z a t i o n
9
10 %% Universal
constants
11 %e = 1.6∗10^ −19;
12 epsilon_0 = 8.85∗10^ −12;
13 c= 3∗10^8;
14 %hbar = 1.05∗10^ −34;
15
16 %% Other
constants
17 k1z = sqrt ( eps1∗omega^2/c^2−q .^2) ;
18 k2z = sqrt ( eps2∗omega^2/c^2−q .^2) ;
19
20 xi_p = sigma∗k2z /( epsilon_0 ∗eps2 ∗omega) ;
21 eta_p = eps1 ∗k2z . / ( eps2∗k1z ) ;
22
23 %% Matrix
24 Dp = zeros (2 ,2 , length (q) ) ;
25
26 Dp( 1 , 1 , : )=(1+eta_p+xi_p ) /2;
27 Dp( 1 , 2 , : ) =(1−eta_p−xi_p ) /2;
28 Dp( 2 , 1 , : ) =(1−eta_p+xi_p ) /2;
29 Dp( 2 , 2 , : )=(1+eta_p−xi_p ) /2;
30
60
==PAGE:65==
31 end
A.3
Function PropagationMatrix
1 function P = PropagationMatrix (q , omega , eps , d)
2 % TransmissionMatrix :
Calculates
the
propagation
matrix
in a
medium ,
3 % INPUT:
4 %
−q :
in
plane
wavevector
( re al
vector )
5 %
−eps :
d i e l e c t r i c
of media 1 and 2 ,
r e s p e c t i v e l y
(number)
)
6 % OUTPUT:
Calculated
propagation
matrix P,
for any
p o l a r i z a t i o n
7
8 %% Universal
constants
9 %e = 1.6∗10^ −19;
10 %epsilon_0 = 8.85∗10^ −12;
11 c= 3∗10^8;
12 %hbar = 1.05∗10^ −34;
13
14 %% Other
constants
15 kz = sqrt ( eps∗omega^2/c^2−q .^2) ;
16
17 %% Matrix
18 P = zeros (2 ,2 , length (q) ) ;
19
20 for
i =1:length (q)
21 P(1 ,1 , i ) = exp(−1 i ∗kz ( i ) ∗d) ;
22 P(2 ,2 , i ) = exp(1 i ∗kz ( i ) ∗d) ;
23 end
24
25 end
61
==PAGE:66==
Appendix B
Near Field Measurements of Three
Gold Nanodisks
B.1
Approach curves
Figure B.1: Approach Curve - Laser from
the left
Figure B.2: Approach Curve - Laser from
the right
B.2
Particle 33
Figure B.3:
Topology Particle 33 - Laser
from the left
Figure B.4:
Topology Particle 33 - Laser
from the right
62
==PAGE:67==
Figure B.5: O1A Particle 33 - Laser from the
left
Figure B.6: O1A Particle 33 - Laser from the
right
Figure B.7: O2A Particle 33 - Laser from the
left
Figure B.8: O2A Particle 33 - Laser from the
right
Figure B.9: O3A Particle 33 - Laser from the
left
Figure B.10: O3A Particle 33 - Laser from
the right
63
==PAGE:68==
Figure B.11: O4A Particle 33 - Laser from
the left
Figure B.12: O4A Particle 33 - Laser from
the right
B.3
Particle 31
Figure B.13: Topology Particle 31 - Laser
from the left
Figure B.14: Topology Particle 31 - Laser
from the right
Figure B.15: O1A Particle 31 - Laser from
the left
Figure B.16: O1A Particle 31 - Laser from
the right
64
==PAGE:69==
Figure B.17: O2A Particle 31 - Laser from
the left
Figure B.18: O2A Particle 31 - Laser from
the right
Figure B.19: O3A Particle 31 - Laser from
the left
Figure B.20: O3A Particle 31 - Laser from
the right
Figure B.21: O4A Particle 31 - Laser from
the left
Figure B.22: O4A Particle 31 - Laser from
the right
65
==PAGE:70==
B.4
Particle B
Figure B.23: Topology Particle B - Laser
from the left
Figure B.24: Topology Particle B - Laser
from the right
Figure B.25: O1A Particle B - Laser from
the left
Figure B.26: O1A Particle B - Laser from
the right
66
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.27: O2A Particle B - Laser from
the left
Figure B.28: O2A Particle B - Laser from
the right
Figure B.29: O3A Particle B - Laser from
the left
Figure B.30: O3A Particle B - Laser from
the right
Figure B.31: O4A Particle B - Laser from
the left
Figure B.32: O4A Particle B - Laser from
the right
67
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V.
Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov, “Electric ﬁeld eﬀect in atomically thin carbon ﬁlms,”
Science, vol. 306, no. 5696, pp. 666–669, 2004.
[2] S. Haastrup, M. Strange, M. Pandey, T. Deilmann, P. Schmidt, N. Hinsche, M. Gjerd-
ing, D. Torelli, P. Larsen, A. Riis-Jensen, J. Gath, K. Jacobsen, J. Mortensen,
T. Olsen, and K. Thygesen, “The computational 2d materials database:
high-
throughput modeling and discovery of atomically thin crystals,” 2D materials, vol. 5,
no. 4, 2018. Original content from this work may be used under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must
maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and
DOI.
[3] D. X. Fengnian Xia, Han Wang and A. Ramasubramaniam, “Two-dimensional material
nanophotonics,” Nature Photonics, vol. 8, p. 899, Nov. 2014.
[4] C. L. G. H. L. J. H. T. F. H. Kin Fai Mak, Keliang He and J. Shan., “Tightly bound
trions in monolayer mos2,” Nature Material, vol. 12, Dec 2012.
[5] H. Z. A. Y. Z. L. Y. H. Woo Jong Yu, Yuan Liu and X. Duan., “Highly eﬃcient gate-
tunable photocurrent generation in vertical heterostructures of layered materials,”
Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 8, Oct 2013.
[6] A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi, and T. Mueller, “Solar-energy conversion and light emis-
sion in an atomic monolayer p–n diode,” Nature Nanotechnology, vol. 9, no. 257,
pp. 257–261, 2014.
[7] L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J.
Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim,
C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto, and K. S. Novoselov, “Strong light-matter interactions in
heterostructures of atomically thin ﬁlms,” Science, vol. 340, no. 6138, pp. 1311–1314,
2013.
[8] X. Gan, Y. Gao, K. Fai Mak, X. Yao, R.-J. Shiue, A. van der Zande, M. E. Trusheim,
F. Hatami, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone, and D. Englund, “Controlling the spontaneous
emission rate of monolayer mos2 in a photonic crystal nanocavity,” Applied Physics
Letters, vol. 103, no. 18, p. 181119, 2013.
[9] A. Sobhani, A. Lauchner, S. Najmaei, C. Ayala-Orozco, F. Wen, J. Lou, and N. J. Ha-
las, “Enhancing the photocurrent and photoluminescence of single crystal monolayer
mos2 with resonant plasmonic nanoshells,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 104, no. 3,
p. 031112, 2014.
[10] M. Geisler, X. Cui, J. Wang, T. Rindzevicius, L. Gammelgaard, B. S. Jessen, P. A. D.
Gonçalves, F. Todisco, P. Bøggild, A. Boisen, M. Wubs, N. A. Mortensen, S. Xiao,
68
==PAGE:73==
and N. Stenger, “Single-crystalline gold nanodisks on ws2 mono- and multilayers for
strong coupling at room temperature,” ACS Photonics, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 994–1001,
2019.
[11] K.-D. Park, O. Khatib, V. Kravtsov, G. Clark, X. Xu, and M. B. Raschke, “Hybrid
tip-enhanced nanospectroscopy and nanoimaging of monolayer wse2 with local strain
control,” Nano Letters, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2621–2627, 2016. PMID: 26937992.
[12] E.
Abbe,
“Beiträge
zur
theorie
des
mikroskops
und
der
mikroskopischen
wahrnehmung,” Archiv für mikroskopische Anatomie, vol. 9, pp. 413–418, Dec 1873.
[13] E. Synge, “Xxxviii. a suggested method for extending microscopic resolution into the
ultra-microscopic region,” The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine
and Journal of Science, vol. 6, no. 35, pp. 356–362, 1928.
[14] N. G. Ash, E. A., “Super-resolution aperture scanning microscope,” Nature, vol. 237,
Jun 1972.
[15] J. M. Atkin, S. Berweger, A. C. Jones, and M. B. Raschke, “Nano-optical imaging and
spectroscopy of order, phases, and domains in complex solids,” Advances in Physics,
vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 745–842, 2012.
[16] G. C. X. X. Kyoung-Duck Park, Tao Jiang and M. B. Raschke, “Radiative control of
dark excitons at room temperature by nano-optical antenna-tip purcell eﬀect,” Nature
Nanotechnology, vol. 13, pp. 59–64, 2018.
[17] N. Mauser, D. Piatkowski, T. Mancabelli, M. Nyk, S. Mackowski, and A. Hartschuh,
“Tip enhancement of upconversion photoluminescence from rare earth ion doped
nanocrystals,” ACS Nano, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 3617–3626, 2015. PMID: 25772145.
[18] M. Fox, Optical Properties of Solids. Oxford University Press, 2 ed., 2010.
[19] S. Maier, Plasmonics - Fundamentals and Applications. Springer, 2007.
[20] P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, “Optical constants of the noble metals,” Phys. Rev.
B, vol. 6, pp. 4370–4379, Dec 1972.
[21] K. M. McPeak, S. V. Jayanti, S. J. P. Kress, S. Meyer, S. Iotti, A. Rossinelli, and
D. J. Norris, “Plasmonic ﬁlms can easily be better: Rules and recipes,” ACS Photonics,
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 326–333, 2015. PMID: 25950012.
[22] E. M. Purcell, “Spontaneous emission probabilities at radio frequencies,” Phys.Rev.,
vol. 69, p. 681, 1946.
[23] S. Kühn, U. Håkanson, L. Rogobete, and V. Sandoghdar, “Enhancement of single-
molecule ﬂuorescence using a gold nanoparticle as an optical nanoantenna,” Phys.
Rev. Lett., vol. 97, p. 017402, Jul 2006.
[24] L. Novotny and B. Hecht, Principles of Nano-Optics. Cambridge University Press,
2 ed., 2012.
[25] B. Knoll and F. Keilmann, “Enhanced dielectric contrast in scattering-type scanning
near-ﬁeld optical microscopy,” Optics Communications, vol. 182, no. 4, pp. 321 – 328,
2000.
69
==PAGE:74==
[26] L. Gomez, R. Bachelot, A. Bouhelier, G. P. Wiederrecht, S. hui Chang, S. K. Gray,
F. Hua, S. Jeon, J. A. Rogers, M. E. Castro, S. Blaize, I. Stefanon, G. Lerondel, and
P. Royer, “Apertureless scanning near-ﬁeld optical microscopy: a comparison between
homodyne and heterodyne approaches,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, vol. 23, pp. 823–833,
May 2006.
[27] P. Eaton and P. West, Atomic Force Microscopy. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[28] P. C. P. e. a. Carsten Schinke, “Uncertainty analysis for the coeﬃcient of band-to-band
absorption of crystalline silicon,” AIP Advances, vol. 5, pp. 067168–1, 2015.
[29] R. Hillenbrand and F. Keilmann, “Complex optical constants on a subwavelength
scale,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 85, pp. 3029–3032, Oct 2000.
[30] M. e. a. Schnell, “Synthetic optical holography for rapid nanoimaging.,” Nature com-
munications, vol. 5, p. 3499, 2014.
[31] D.-S. Kim, H. Kwon, A. Y. Nikitin, S. Ahn, L. Martín-Moreno, F. J. García-Vidal,
S. Ryu, H. Min, and Z. H. Kim, “Stacking structures of few-layer graphene revealed
by phase-sensitive infrared nanoscopy,” ACS Nano, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 6765–6773, 2015.
PMID: 26050795.
[32] J. Aizpurua, T. Taubner, F. J. G. de Abajo, M. Brehm, and R. Hillenbrand,
“Substrate-enhanced infrared near-ﬁeld spectroscopy,” Opt. Express, vol. 16, pp. 1529–
1545, Feb 2008.
[33] T. Zhan, X. Shi, Y. Dai, X. Liu, and J. Zi, “Transfer matrix method for optics in
graphene layers,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 25, p. 215301, apr 2013.
[34] M. Geisler, Light-Matter Interactions in Low-Dimensional Materials.
PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, Mar. 2019.
[35] Y. Li, A. Chernikov, X. Zhang, A. Rigosi, H. M. Hill, A. M. van der Zande, D. A.
Chenet, E.-M. Shih, J. Hone, and T. F. Heinz, “Measurement of the optical dielec-
tric function of monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides: mos2, MoSe2, ws2, and
WSe2,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 90, p. 205422, Nov 2014.
[36] T. T. O. H. Heiko Groß, Joachim M. Hamm and B. Hecht, “Near-ﬁeld strong coupling
of single quantum dots,” Science Advances, vol. 4, no. 3, p. eaar4906, 2018.
[37] L. Meng and M. Sun, “Tip-enhanced photoluminescence spectroscopy of monolayer
mos2,” Photon. Res., vol. 5, pp. 745–749, Dec 2017.
[38] G. Eda and S. A. Maier, “Two-dimensional crystals: Managing light for optoelectron-
ics,” ACS Nano, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 5660–5665, 2013. PMID: 23834654.
[39] X. Cui, F. Qin, Q. Ruan, X. Zhuo, and J. Wang, “Circular gold nanodisks with syn-
thetically tunable diameters and thicknesses,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 28,
no. 11, p. 1705516, 2018.
[40] A. García-Etxarri, I. Romero, F. J. García de Abajo, R. Hillenbrand, and J. Aizpurua,
“Inﬂuence of the tip in near-ﬁeld imaging of nanoparticle plasmonic modes: Weak and
strong coupling regimes,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 79, p. 125439, Mar 2009.
[41] N. M. S. B. F. K. M. D. T. H. G. R. Frederik Walla, Matthias M. Wiecha, “Anisotropic
excitation of surface plasmon polaritons on a metal ﬁlm by a scattering-type scanning
near-ﬁeld microscope with a non-rotationally-symmetric probe tip,” Nanoph., vol. 7,
p. 269, April 2018.
70
