==PAGE:1==
Brynjar Sævarsson
Implementation and demonstration
of early-warning and early-prevention
system to avoid power system
blackouts
M.Sc.Thesis, June 2019
==PAGE:2==
Brynjar Sævarsson
Implementation and demonstration
of early-warning and early-prevention
system to avoid power system
blackouts
M.Sc.Thesis, June 2019
==PAGE:3==
Implementation and demonstration of early-warning and early-prevention
system to avoid power system blackouts,
Author(s):
Brynjar Sævarsson
Supervisor(s):
Hjörtur Jóhannsson, Senior Scientiﬁc Consultant, Department of Electrical Engineering,
DTU
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
28.06.2019
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve an MSc degree
in Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The report represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Brynjar Sævarsson, 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
The work presented in this thesis was conducted at the Technical University of Denmark
as a requirement for achieving an MSc degree in Electrical Engineering. It was carried out
over a 5 month period in the ﬁrst half of 2019 and corresponds to 30 ECTS points.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
In the upcoming years, there will be major changes in the electrical power system as global
agreements to combat climate change push for increasing amounts of renewable energy.
The future power system will therefore be largely based on uncontrollable ﬂuctuating
renewable energy sources. This brings a number of challenges, one of which is the stability
of the power system. As traditional stability assessments are not very suitable for highly
ﬂuctuating systems, research is now focusing on the development of real-time assessment
methods. Applications are currently being created where these newly developed methods
are combined into systems that are able to provide both instability warnings and preventive
measures in real-time.
This thesis describes the implementation of one such system and demonstrates its
capabilities to prevent power system blackouts.
The main focus of the implemented
system is to prevent the ASSRA instability of a generator. The system is interfaced with an
RTDS simulator where real-time blackout simulations are executed while the implemented
Early-Warning and Early-Prevention system monitors the simulated power system and
applies control actions to prevent imminent ASSRA instability.
Additionally, a simple control application is developed. This application allows for remotely
controlling power setpoints in a running RTDS simulation and for applying faults in real-
time. This is used to cause unstable system conditions in the RTDS simulation where the
implemented Early-Warning and Early-Prevention system detects and prevents blackouts.
ii
==PAGE:7==
GLOSSARY
ASSRA aperiodic small signal rotor angle.
ASSRAS aperiodic small signal rotor angle stability.
AVR automatic voltage regulator.
DNP Distributed Network Protocol.
EWEP Early-Warning and Early-Prevention.
GUI graphical user interface.
HYGOV hydrolic governor.
OEL over excitation limiter.
PDC phasor data consentrator.
PMU phasor measurement unit.
PSS/E power system simulator for engineering.
QSS quasi steady state.
RES renewable energy sources.
RTDS real time digital simulator.
RTGM real-time-grid-module.
RTU remote terminal unit.
SARP Security Assessment of Renewable Power Systems.
SOSPO Secure Operation of Sustainable Power Systems.
TSO transmission system operator.
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
WAC wide-area control.
WARTApp Wide-Area-Real-Time-Application.
iii
==PAGE:8==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Glossary
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
3
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Python implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Visualization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
13
3.1
Grid modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
PMU measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Data exchange using DNP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Model additions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5
MySQL Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Application for controlling a running RTDS simulation
23
4.1
Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Blackout simulations
28
5.1
Distributed test setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2
Starting up the EWEP system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Results
32
6.1
Case 1: Single machine instability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2
Case 2: Multi-machine instability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Performance analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7
Discussion
41
8
Conclusion
43
References
44
A RSCAD model details
46
iv
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
B Message structures
56
C Python code
58
C.1
RTDS PDC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
C.2
ASSRAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
C.3
ASSAS CM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C.4
RTDS Control Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C.5
Complex voltage plot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
C.6
Test snapshot stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
C.7
DB reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
The availability of a stable and secure supply of electrical energy is essential for any modern
society and it is the responsibility of the transmission system operator (TSO) to ensure
that the electrical system is always operated with a high level of security. Power production
has for a long time been mostly based on fossil fuels, where production could be predicted
several hours ahead of operation. Consumption patterns are also well known and have not
changed much over the years. With this high predictability of system operating points,
time consuming oﬄine security assessments could be performed several hours in advance.
However, with the deregulation of power systems and the continuing increase of ﬂuctuating
renewable energy sources (RES), the operational complexity of the power system increases,
making security assessments more challenging as both production and consumption become
harder to predict ahead of time.
With the Paris agreement, countries of the world have committed to combating climate
change with the long term goal of limiting global temperature rise this century well below
2°C above pre-industrial levels [1]. As of now, 185 of the 197 parties of the UNFCCC
have ratiﬁed the agreement, making it legally binding [2]. In order to have a reasonably
good chance of achieving the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement, 50% of global energy
must be produced by renewable energy sources in 2060 [3]. The targets set by the Nordic
countries are even more ambitious than is required, going as far as 100% renewable energy
by 2050 [4]. This means a very large share of electric power production will be based on
ﬂuctuating renewable sources (wind and solar) in the coming years. The operating point
of the power system will be highly dependent on weather conditions and ﬂuctuations will
be diﬃcult to predict. This will therefore introduce increased stability problems where the
traditional oﬄine security assessments will not be suﬃcient to guarantee secure operation
or prevent system blackouts.
An alternative to the time consuming oﬄine security assessments is to assess the system
stability in real time. Research and development of real-time applications for wide-area
control, protection and monitoring based on phasor measurement technology [5] has in-
creased in recent years with advances in both communication and computational resources.
The Danish research project Secure Operation of Sustainable Power Systems (SOSPO)
[6] focused on developing methods for real-time stability and security assessment and on
methods for applying countermeasures to maintain stability in case of disturbances. An
outcome of the SOSPO project is a software platform where the developed approaches are
implemented and tested [7]. This SW-platform can be interfaced with a real time digital
simulator (RTDS) where real-time power system scenarios can be simulated.
1
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
The goal of this project is to implement an Early-Warning and Early-Prevention (EWEP)
system using this SW-platform and to set up the interface with the RTDS using programs
developed in python. Several blackout scenarios are then simulated in order to demonstrate
the capabilities of the implemented EWEP system to avoid power system blackouts.
Additionally, a python application with a graphical user interface (GUI) is developed
for controlling system variables of the RTDS simulation in real time. This allows for
tripping transmission lines, applying short-circuits at buses and changing generator and
load setpoints in real time, which makes the demonstration more ﬂexible.
The main project objectives are listed as follows:
• Update and setup the interface between RTDS and Python to receive PMU-snapshots
• Simulate several blackout scenarios on the RTDS that will be used to demonstrate
the capabilities of the EWEP system
• Write a Python program for applying disturbances to a running simulation (tripping
lines, apply short circuits etc.)
• Demonstrate the closed-loop performance of the EWEP system in PowerLabDK
2
==PAGE:13==
2
EARLY-WARNING & EARLY-PREVENTION
SYSTEM
2.1
Background
Figure 2.1: Envisioned approach for the early-warning & early-prevention system [6]
The purpose of the EWEP system is to assess the state and security of the power system
in real-time in order to detect if it is headed towards unstable operation. The system
provides the operator with an early warning and identiﬁes eﬀective countermeasures to
prevent wide scale blackouts. Using PMU technology, it is possible to get time synchronized
measurements from a wide geographic area with an accuracy of < 1µs, which is much
faster than existing SCADA technologies [8]. This, along with the development of fast
algorithms and advances in both communication and computational resources, is what
makes it possible to perform real-time security assessments of large power systems.
The approach for the EWEP system is shown in ﬁgure 2.1. The future power system, highly
based on RES, is interfaced with the EWEP system through GPS synchronized PMU
measurements and wide-area control (WAC) actions. Since the assessment methods require
full observability of the system in an actual operating condition, measurements initially
need to be validated and faulty or missing data identiﬁed and replaced with realistic
estimates. Using the validated data, a range of diﬀerent stability and security assessment
methods can be executed individually, each focusing on a speciﬁc stability mechanism. If
stability problems are detected, appropriate control actions are computed according to
the assessments and the results presented to the system operator. The operator can then
verify the results and decide if countermeasures should be applied, either automatically or
manually.
3
==PAGE:14==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
Figure 2.2: Structure of the SW-platform [7]
The EWEP system is implemented on a state-of-the-art software platform named Wide-
Area-Real-Time-Application (WARTApp). The structure of the platform, shown in ﬁgure
2.2, is spit into four main parts. The ﬁrst is the power system representation, shown here
as the RTDS simulator. The platform is structured so this part can be replaced with
diﬀerent simulators without many changes to the platform and, in the future, this part
will be an actual power system.
Next is the Data Management Platform. This is the central part of the platform. It
connects to the power system via a PDC server, which collects PMU measurements from
the power system, and a DNP3 master for WAC actions. It also contains a common
MySQL database where static information on the power system model can be accessed by
all of the modules on the platform. Finally, it contains the snapshot server, which is the
main element of the WARTApp. The snapshot server provides the platform with real-time
access to the PMU measurements and RTU data. All of the methods used in the EWEP
system get their inputs by subscribing to various types of snapshots from the snapshot
server. The assessments or control action results are then published back to the snapshot
server, where they are made available to the rest of the platform.
The third part is the High-Performance Platform where the various assessment and control
methods are implemented. The SOSPO project focused highly on the performance of the
developed algorithms by means of optimization and parallelization. Therefore, each method
can be executed as an individual program on a separate machine where it communicates
with the platform through the snapshot server. This means that multiple machines can be
used in a distributed setup to increase the computational performance of the platform,
compared to having one large program on a single machine. This structure also makes
development of new methods more ﬂexible since they do not need to be implemented as a
4
==PAGE:15==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
part of an existing program or even in the same programming language.
The last part of the platform is the Smartvision Platform.
This part contains the
visualization of the results from the Early-Warning and Early-Prevention system along
with control applications. Here the results from the various methods need to be analysed
in order to identify the most crucial issues and provide informative decision support to the
system operator.
2.2
Methods
Several methods have been developed and implemented on the WARTApp platform during
the SOSPO project (and the ongoing SARP project which followed SOSPO) for both
assessment and control related to diﬀerent types of instability mechanisms [7]. However,
for this demonstration, only methods concerning aperiodic small signal rotor angle stability
(ASSRAS) will be considered.
2.2.1
The ASSRAS assessment method
This method, which is described in [9], is used to quickly determine how far each generator
is from the ASSRAS boundary. The boundary is deﬁned as the maximum power a generator
can inject into the system while in steady state. If a generator crosses this margin there will
be a mismatch between between the electrical and mechanical power of the machine which
causes it to start accelerating until it loses synchronism. Using the complex Thevenin
impedance, ¯Zth = Zth∠φ, and the complex injection impedance, ¯Zinj = Zinj∠θ, for each
generator at its node of constant voltage, ASSRA stability can be assessed. The node of
constant voltage can either be internal or external and depends on the excitation of the
machine. If the generator has an active AVR then the external node can be assumed to
have constant voltage but if the machine is manually excited or its OEL is active then the
internal node behind the machine’s synchronous resistance is assumed to have constant
voltage. If every generator fulﬁlls the condition given in equation 2.1, then the system is
considered ASSRA stable [9].
Zinj ≥−Zthsinθ
sinφ
(2.1)
To provide an early warning for ASSRA instability, a power margin is deﬁned to indicate
how far a generator is from the stability boundary. This margin indicates in percent how
much a generators active power injection can increase before crossing the boundary. This
percentage margin is calculated according to equation 2.2 [9].
%∆Pinj =
cos(δ + φth) + 1
1 + |
Zinj
Zth+Zinj | ∗cos(φth)
∗100%
(2.2)
Where δ = arg(
¯Zinj
¯Zinj+ ¯Zth ). This margin is however always positive. Equation 2.3, which is
derived from 2.1 is therefore used to indicate if the stability boundary has been crossed [9].
5
==PAGE:16==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System

¯Zinj ∗(2sinφ) + j ∗Zth
Zth








> 1
stable,
= 1
on boundary,
< 1
unstable
(2.3)
2.2.2
The ASSRAS countermeasure method
The countermeasure method, described in [10], works by calculating new active power
setpoints for generators in order to prevent ASSRA instability. This is done by deﬁning
three margins, a safety margin, a trigger margin and a security margin. If the ASSRAS
margin of a generator goes below the safety margin, a new setpoint for that generator
is computed in order to bring it above the security margin, thereby keeping it in secure
operation. The new setpoint is not applied at this time but the computed countermeasure
is displayed for the operator as an early warning that the margin has been crossed. If the
generator then hits the trigger margin, the calculated countermeasure is automatically
applied and the generator’s setpoint is changed. The new secure setpoint of the generator
is calculated by ﬁrst ﬁnding the voltage angle δ∗when operating at the security margin
msec. The new angle is found using equation 2.4.
δ∗= arccos
 msec
100%

1 + V
Eth
cosφth

−1

−φth
(2.4)
Where V is the voltage at the generator’s node of constant voltage and:
Eth = V ∗| ¯Zinj + ¯Zth|
Zinj
(2.5)
The required change in the active power of the critical machine, ∆Pcr, is then found using
equation 2.6.
∆Pcr =
EthV
Zth

∗(cos(δ + φth) −cos(δ∗+ φth))
(2.6)
The calculated power change indicates how much the critical generator must reduce its
active power output to reach the security margin. To maintain balance in the system,
this reduction in generation must then be supplied by other generators. This is done by
ﬁrst ranking the remaining generators by their relative electrical distance to the critical
generator. Then available power reserves of the generators are computed. These power
reserves represent the amount of extra power the generators can provide without crossing
the security margin. If the required reserves are available then they are dispatched as close
to the critical machine as possible. If not enough power is available then the output of the
critical machine should be decreased as much as possible without jeopardizing the stability
of other generators.
The countermeasure method prioritizes redispatches close to the critical machine. This
way the changes in the overall powerﬂow of the system are minimized which reduces the
risk of overloading transmission lines or introducing additional stability issues.
6
==PAGE:17==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
2.3
Python implementation
In the SOSPO project, an EWEP system was implemented using both C++ and Matlab
programs. These programs relied on a common Matlab ﬁle, called Busgenmapper, for
mapping of the data taken from the MySQL database. This ﬁle is generated by the
early-warning program and needs to be accessible to both programs. For the python
implementation however, instead of using the Busgenmapper ﬁle, it was decided to use a
python module called real-time-grid-module (RTGM), which has been developed for the
WARTApp. This module provides convenient mapping of the system components along
with other useful functions. The python programs also use another module called snapshot
receiver to communicate with the snapshot server.
2.3.1
Early warning
A C++ program for calculating and publishing the ASSRAS margins had previously been
implemented and tested for PSS/E simulations. Initially, this program was supposed to
be used for this project as it worked well during the PSS/E simulations. However, when
using the C++ calculated margins together with the RTGM for an RTDS simulation,
there was a mismatch with the generator indexes. This mismatch resulted in incorrect
visualization and countermeasures could not be computed correctly. The cause of this
mismatch was that the Busgenmapper used by the C++ program and RTGM didn’t use
the same ordering when retrieving data from the MySQL database.
Since the required modiﬁcations to the C++ program could not be easily identiﬁed,
two additional functions were implemented in the RTGM program. One function was
made to calculate the ASSRAS margins using the indexing of the RTGM and another to
create a snapshot for publishing. The two functions were kept separate since some testing
applications that were created during this project only needed the margins and not the
whole snapshot. Using these functions, the ASSRAS early warning program was fully
implemented in python in order to replace the C++ version.
The main steps of the implemented ASSRAS program are shown in ﬁgure 2.3. The RTGM
module is created for retrieving the model structure from the database. Then a snapshot
receiver is used to subscribe to a PSSE1 type (Appendix B) snapshot, which provides the
PMU measurements, at a rate of 10 snapshots/second. The snapshot receiver is made
to run in a separate thread for a more eﬃcient execution of the program. This way a
continuous stream snapshots can be received independently of the state of the main thread.
When a snapshot has been received, the admittance matrix of the system is updated
according to the PMU measurements using the functions provided by the RTGM. Injection
impedance for each generator is calculated by taking the ratio of its voltage and current.
The Thevenin impedances of the generators are quicly computed using algorithms from [11].
With the impedances found, the ASSRAS margins are computed according to equations
2.2 and 2.3. As the impedances must be at the generators node of constant voltage, the
calculation must take into account the excitation of the generator. That is, if the constant
voltage node is internal or external.
With the calculated margins and impedances, the results are placed into a snapshot of the
type ARAS1 (Appendix B). This snapshot is then published to the snapshot server using
7
==PAGE:18==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
the snapshot receiver module. The python code can be found in appendix C.2.
Figure 2.3: Python implementation of the ASSRAS assessment method
8
==PAGE:19==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
2.3.2
Early prevention
The early prevention program was implemented according to [10] while using the existing
Matlab program for inspiration. Before using the RTDS, the program was fully implemented
for PSS/E simulations while using the C++ early warning program for providing the
ASSRAS margins. Once the countermeasure program was fully functional for the PSS/E
simulations, the transition to RTDS could begin. The overall functionality of the program
would remain the same but some challenges, like the indexing mentioned before, were
discovered when moving to a diﬀerent simulation platform. These challenges are described
throughout the report.
The ﬁnal structure of the early prevention program is shown in ﬁgure 2.4. It starts the same
way as the assessment program by creating an RTGM and starting a snapshot receiver. It
subscribes to both the PSSE1 and ARAS1 type snapshots. When both snapshots have
been received with the same ID, the need for countermeasures can be assessed. For the
countermeasure method to work it must be assumed that the generator nodes have a
constant voltage magnitude. It can therefore not be applied if the generators are not in
quasi steady state (QSS). The generators are assumed to be in QSS when the variations in
the injection voltage over a certain period are within given limits (1% is used in this project).
If a generator crosses the safety or trigger margin while in QSS, then countermeasures will
be computed. The power reduction is found for the critical machine(s) using equation 2.6
and the available power reserves of every other machine are calculated and sorted according
to their electrical distance to the critical machine. The countermeasures are stored in a
list so if a countermeasure for a machine has been computed previously then the old one is
updated to avoid sending multiple countermeasures for the same machine. The program
then tries to ﬁnd a solution using up to 4 generators to compensate for the missing power.
First it tries to ﬁnd countermeasures that do not use more than 15% of each generator’s
MVA rating, then 20% and ﬁnally 100%. This way, solutions where multiple machines
close to the critical generator are preferred over a single machine far away.
If a solution is found, a snapshot of the type assras_cm (Appendix B) is created and
published to the snapshot server. In the current implementation, this snapshot is only used
for visualization of the countermeasures whereas in the future, a control application should
evaluate solutions from various methods before applying the appropriate countermeasures.
Now the countermeasures are applied automatically whenever a generator ﬁrst crosses the
trigger margin. A message with the calculated generator setpoints is sent to the DNP3
master which applies them in the running RTDS simulation.
9
==PAGE:20==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
Figure 2.4: Python implementation of the ASSRAS countermeasure method
10
==PAGE:21==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
2.4
Visualization
The visualization of the EWEP system uses a program which was developed in the SOSPO
project called Network Viewer. Here the ASSRAS margins are displayed in a normalized
injection impedance plane as shown in ﬁgure 2.5. The stability boundary is shown as a
green circle and the generators are placed according to their operating point. The points
shown in the ﬁgure are the internal points of the generators. External nodes are also
shown but their margins are usually much larger and therefore out of frame in this ﬁgure.
The control mode of the generators is also indicated here where a triangle shows that a
generator is manually excited or its OEL is active. If such a generator crosses the green
circle then the circle turns red to indicate that the generator has crossed the boundary.
The squares shown are generators who have an active AVR and are therefore capable of
voltage regulation. If such a point crosses the circle, it will turn yellow as the generator
doesn’t become unstable unless its OEL becomes active. All nodes should however be kept
at a safe margin from the boundary in order to keep the system secure.
Figure 2.5: Visualization of the ASSRAS margins
When countermeasures have been computed, they are displayed as shown in ﬁgure 2.6.
In the ﬁrst line it displays which generator at which bus has crossed the safety margin.
The generator’s current margin is shown along with the margin it should be at after the
countermeasure is applied. This also displays how far the countermeasure is from being
executed and how long ago it was last computed. Below, each generator involved in the
countermeasure is listed along with the required change in power for each machine and
their margins after execution. When the countermeasure has been applied, it will be
displayed as grey.
11
==PAGE:22==
2. Early-Warning & Early-Prevention System
Figure 2.6: Visualization of the ASSRAS countermeasures
The Network viewer also provides a graphic overview of the system layout and the option
of making various real-time plots of the PMU measurements, such as bus voltages, which
will be used in the demonstration of the results of the EWEP system. The Network viewer
worked perfectly with the PSS/E simulations. However, when transitioning to the RTDS it
did not. After some debugging it was discovered that the problem was with the addition of
three-way transformers for the PSS/E simulations. Three-way transformers are currently
not available in RTDS simulations and this caused an issue with the visualization. The
problem was temporarily solved by commenting out the part of the Network viewer code
that dealt with three-way transformers.
12
==PAGE:23==
3
INTERFACING RTDS AND EWEP SYSTEM
The real time digital simulator (RTDS) simulates a power grid in real-time. To use the
RTDS with the EWEP system, a power system model is required where PMU measurements
and RTU data are implemented.
3.1
Grid modeling
The power system model used for this demonstration is the Nordic32 system. This system
is based on the 400kV power grid in Sweden and eastern Denmark and is commonly used
for stability studies. It consists of 46 buses which are interconnected via 52 transmission
lines and 22 transformers. There are 22 power plants in the model where 9 are thermal
power plants located in the southern part, 12 hydro power plants in the north and one
synchronous condenser. 22 load points are used where most are located in the central and
southern part. An overview of the system layout can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The Nordic32 system. Red:400kV, Yellow:220kV, Green:130kV
The Nordic32 model used in this project had previously been implemented with the RSCAD
simulation software for the RTDS. However, for this demonstration, some analysis of the
model and a number of modiﬁcations were required to fully interface the RTDS with the
EWEP system. Due to the size of the system, it is split into four subsystems where each
one uses a separate rack in the RTDS.
13
==PAGE:24==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
3.2
PMU measurements
The RTDS is equipped with two GTNET-PMU24 cards for each of the four racks used
for the model. Each of these cards is capable of providing 24 independent PMUs who
each contain a measurement of voltage, current, frequency and rate-of-change-of-frequency.
Each card has a unique ip address where each individual PMU is given a port number
and a frame ID. In this project, a total of 170 PMUs are used to provide measurements
for every line and transformer at both ends and for each generator in the system. These
PMUs able to provide the full overview of the system required for the assessment methods.
Information on the PMUs can be found in tables A.5 and A.6 in appendix A.
3.2.1
Siguard PDP
The Siguard PDP is a phasor data consentrator (PDC) developed by Siemens [12]. It is
tasked with collecting all the individual PMU measurements from the RTDS and combining
them into a single package, which is then made available to the snapshot server. The
Siguard PDP should quickly processes and align the PMUs by their timestamp before
sending the combined snapshot to the snapshot server. However, during the implementation
of this project the Siguard PDP proved to be very problematic. It compares the timestamp
of the received PMUs with its own clock in order to synchronize the data. The Siguard and
the RTDS are however not connected to the same time server. The RTDS synchronizes
its clock via GPS signal while the Siguard is uses an internet time server. These two
time signals were for some reason not completely in sync and therefore the Siguard would
not provide any data to the snapshot server. By manually adjusting the clock used by
the Siguard, it was possible to get the time diﬀerence small enough for the it to start
transmitting the PMU data.
However, now a second problem was discovered. The time from when an event occurs in
the RTDS until the measurements are made available on the snapshot server is around
7-10 seconds. This large time delay is very problematic for the EWEP system since the
time between a generator crossing a margin and it becoming unstable can be very short.
This time delay meant that generators could actually be unstable by the time the EWEP
system could identify any stability problems.
To investigate the cause of this delay, a small python program was created to connect
directly to the PMU cards on the RTDS. The received measurements were then plotted in
real time to see if there was any visible delay like with the Siguard PDP. This program
showed no signiﬁcant delay from the outputs of the RTDS and it seemed very unlikely
that the delay is caused by the snapshot server itself as it had been tested multiple times
during the PSS/E simulations.
Therefore, the delay must be caused by the Siguard
PDP. The reason for the delay could however not be identiﬁed as the Siguard PDP is
not an open-source program and the service agreement with Siemens has expired. It has
therefore been decided that the Siguard PDP will be replaced with a diﬀerent, most likely
open-source, PDC in the future.
14
==PAGE:25==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
3.2.2
Alternative PDC
Since the Siguard PDP would not be replaced by a commercial PDC before the end of
this project, an alternative is implemented to replace it temporarily. The python program
previously used to connect directly to the RTDS was expanded to function as a PDC. This
python program uses the PyMU library[13] which provides conﬁguration and data frames
for PMU data according to the C37.118 IEEE Standard for Synchrophasor Measurements.
The same standard is used by the GTNET-PMU24 cards [14]. A separate TCP socket is
connected to each of the 170 PMUs used in the RTDS simulation and the program then
loops through the sockets every 100ms to collect measurements. The received data is then
combined into a single snapshot which is published on the snapshot server. The PMUs
don’t always have the same timestamp when they are received every loop. Often the PMUs
at the end of the loop have a timestamp which is one timestep ahead of the ﬁrst PMUs.
They must therefore be stored and aligned before publishing the snapshot. This is done
in a very simple manner. The measurements from the previous loop are saved and if any
PMUs are ahead of the ﬁrst one, then the previous value is placed in the snapshot. Most
of the time this is suﬃcient to correctly align the PMUs but, as will be shown later in the
results, a diﬀerent issue sometimes caused a problem with this PDC.
The PDC program relies on the naming convention used in the RSCAD model and the
component order in the MySQL database to correctly structure the snapshots according to
the type PSSE1 (Appendix B). Each PMU only contains one identifying variable when it is
received from the RTDS. This variable indicates the component type and bus number. It
does not indicate which end is "To" or "From" for the transmission lines and transformers.
It must therefore be hardcoded for the nordic32 case.
When this alternative PDC is used instead of the Siguard PDP, there are no noticeable
problems with delays and events in the RTDS can immediately be observed via the
snapshot server. The program code can be found in Appendix C.1. This PDC publishes
the measurements to the snapshot server under the same case name, "nordic32_rtds_1",
as the Siguard did before. However it does not publish the snapshots in the same manner.
The snapshot server needs to have a certain PMU subject as an input as was shown in
ﬁgure 2.2. Without this, not all the required modules on the snapshot server will start.
The alternative PDC publishes the snapshots the same way as the assessment methods
do. The Siguard case must therefore still be used as the input subject for the snapshot
server but the case name is changed. Figure 3.2 shows a snip from the subjects ﬁle used
by the snapshot server to deﬁne the available simulation cases. Here the case name of the
Siguard PDP must be changed so it doesn’t interfere with the alternative PDC. The name
of database which is used must however remain the same in the subjects ﬁle.
15
==PAGE:26==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
Figure 3.2: Simulation subjects for the snapshot server
3.3
Data exchange using DNP
The RTDS is equipped with GTNET-DNP3 cards which allow data to be exchanged
between the RTDS and the WARTApp platform using a Distributed Network Protocol
(DNP). DNP is also commonly used in SCADA systems and as a communication protocol
between control centers and substations [15]. Using DNP communication it is possible
to modify variables in a running simulation in the RTDS. This allows the calculated
countermeasures to be applied in real-time by changing generator setpoints in the running
simulation.
3.3.1
Limitations
Each of the 4 racks used for the model is equipped with only one GTNET-DNP3 card.
This means that there is a limited amount of variables that can be used for monitoring and
control. For each card, there are four variable types available and the maximum number
of each type is shown in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: GTNET-DNP card maximum number of binary and analogue signals[15]
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the number of available variables is suﬃciently high for the
implemented grid model since the number of components in each subsystem is well below
these limits.
16
==PAGE:27==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
3.3.2
Point mapping ﬁle
The DNP data points are deﬁned using a points mapping text ﬁle for each GTNET-DNP3
card. In this ﬁle the DNP variables must be deﬁned in the following manner:
• AI: 0 LB101101 1%
Type, index, variable name, accuracy
• AO: 0 PO101101 200.0
Type, index, variable name, initial value
• BO: 0 A40114012 LBRK11 3 1
Type, index, label, variable name, bit number, initial value
Where AI is an analog status variable, AO is an analog control variable and BO is a binary
control variable. Currently, the binary status variables are not included. This is because
the implemented program for transferring them to the database and the DNP3 master
program used don’t fully support these at this time. This means that binary variables can
not be monitored by the control application at the moment. This must be ﬁxed in the
future as it limits the capabilities of the DNP communication.
The naming of the variables in the points ﬁle determines how they are classiﬁed when
placed in the database tables. It is therefore important to keep the naming convention
which can be better seen in ﬁgure A.1 in appendix A. The indexing of the variables must
also start from zero for each variable type and the sequence be kept uninterrupted or else
the DNP variables cannot be transferred to the database.
3.3.3
Generator setpoints
The two diﬀerent types of generators used in the model are thermal and hydro. The
diﬀerence between them is that the hydro generators are equipped with a hydrolic governor
(HYGOV). This makes the response time of hydro generators much slower when changing
the power setpoints. The maximum valve position of all the hydro generators is also set at
0.95pu which means the maximum power output is slightly lower than the rated power of
the machine and this must be considered when implementing the EWEP system. A model
of a hydro generator is shown in ﬁgure 3.4. Thermal generators are modeled the same
except without the HYGOV model shown on the bottom. When changing the setpoint of
the thermal generators, the output power changes instantaneously.
17
==PAGE:28==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
Figure 3.4: Hydro generator model
The diﬀerent types must be considered when setting the generator’s setpoints. For the
hydro generators the input variable for the HYGOV, LRF, is calculated according to
equation 3.1 for an active power value Psetp. The hydro generators have droop control for
providing primary response for frequency deviations. The magnitude of the droop factor
has an eﬀect on the generator’s setpoint. In the model, the droop is 4% for all hydro
generators except for the 2 external ones who have 8%. The droop factor and the machine’s
maximum output are currently not transferred to the database and must therefore be
hardcoded in the EWEP programs.
LRF =
 Psetp
GMV A

∗%Droop
100
+ 0.0011
(3.1)
For the thermal generators the setpoint variable TM is calculated according to equation
3.2.
TM = Psetp
GMV A
+ 0.005
(3.2)
It is important that the initial values of the setpoint variables are calculated according
to the initial outputs of the generators and placed into the points ﬁle. Otherwise the
system will not remain in the operating state given by the load ﬂow calculation. The
values given by equations 3.1 and 3.2 are also not 100% accurate. The constant oﬀsets in
these equations are approximations found through experiments as actual values were not
found in the RSCAD documentation.
18
==PAGE:29==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
3.4
Model additions
To be able to use the control application, which is described in the next chapter, a number
of changes had to be made to the RSCAD model. First of all, line breakers were added for
every transmission line where it was possible. Very short lines with more than 3 phases
(double lines) can not be equipped with a breaker in RSCAD so those lines had to be
skipped. Breakers were also added to each generator and short circuits to every bus. The
line and generator models in RSCAD have an option for enabling breakers (shown in
appendix A) while the short circuits objects had to be added to the RSCAD model at
every bus as shown in ﬁgure 3.6(a). Since the system spreads over multiple subsystems, the
line breaker variables must be transferred between the subsystems, using import/export
signals, whenever a transmission line connects two subsystems.
Each of the DNP additions can then be controlled using binary control variables. As
was shown in ﬁgure 3.3, each subsystem has a limit of only 16 binary control words with
32 bits and the way the program for transferring the RSCAD model to the database is
made, each breaker should use one control word. This would however, extremely limit the
number of possible control actions as subsystem 1 for example has 15 transmission lines
and 8 generators. To get around this, one control word is instead used for all line breakers,
another for the generator breakers and a third for short circuits. A single bit of the word is
then used for each line, generator or bus. This requires some control modeling in RSCAD
as shown in ﬁgure 3.5 for the line breakers in subsystem 1. As of now, each breaker trips
all phases on both ends of the line at the same time by multiplying the bit by 7 which is
111 in binary and therefore acts on each phase. This could easily be modiﬁed to give the
option of tripping every single phase individually. The method shown in ﬁgure 3.5 also
breaks double lines using a single bit and multiplying by 63 (111111). Since this is usually
not desirable, these have been changed to the one shown in ﬁgure 3.6(b) where two bits
are used, one for each of the two lines.
19
==PAGE:30==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
Figure 3.5: Line breaker DNP3 variable
20
==PAGE:31==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
(a) Short circuit at a bus
(b) Double line breaker with DNP
Figure 3.6:
Using the binary control words as shown in ﬁgure 3.5 gives much more ﬂexibility since 512
breakers could theoretically be used in every subsystem instead of 16. However, the DNP3
points currently get classiﬁed as unknown in the MySQL database since they don’t follow
the naming convention implemented in the program that makes the database. This can
limit the functionality since some hardcoding might be required.
21
==PAGE:32==
3. Interfacing RTDS and EWEP system
3.5
MySQL Database
The components used in the RSCAD model need to be listed in the MySQL database in
order to be accessible to the EWEP system. This is done by using a program that reads
the various model ﬁles and places the relevant information into tables in the database.
These tables however, do not have exactly the same names or structure as the ones created
for PSS/E simulations. This meant that all the database queries made by the RTGM
module had to be updated to account for the RTDS database structure. The queries are
added to the python script db_reader_raw which can be found in appendix C.7.
The main addition to the database for this project is the addition of the DNP points.
These are taken from the points ﬁle and placed in a database table. An example is shown
in ﬁgure 3.7. Here it can be seen how the newly added binary variables for line breakers,
short circuits and generator breakers get classiﬁed as undeﬁned (3.7(a)) while an example
breaker, using the appropriate naming, gets classiﬁed as a breaker. To indicate which
component the breaker/short circuit is connected to, the bitName (3.7(c)) is given exactly
the same name as that component. This way the database queries used by the EWEP
system can join the tables on this common value to ﬁnd which DNP point belongs to which
component. A good classiﬁcation of the variables would make it much simpler to utilize
the them in the control program as separate breakers could be more easily used on both
ends of transmission lines or for double lines as this could reduce the need for hardcoding.
In all there are 142 control and 22 status DNP3 variables implemented for the system and
are available for the implemented control application.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.7: DNP3Points database table
22
==PAGE:33==
4
APPLICATION FOR CONTROLLING A
RUNNING RTDS SIMULATION
The purpose of this control application is to provides additional ﬂexibility for testing the
capabilities of the EWEP system as faults can be applied remotely and without much
experience of the RSCAD software. By utilizing the DNP communication described in the
previous chapter it is possible to control and monitor a wide range of system variables as
long as they are within the limits given in ﬁgure 3.3.
4.1
Speciﬁcations
A list of speciﬁcations was made before starting the implementation of the application.
These speciﬁcations are initial requirements for what the application should be capable of.
The application should provide the user with a graphical user interface (GUI) where control
actions can be intuitively applied and information is presented in a readable manner.
Through the GUI of the control application it must be possible to do the following:
• Control generator and load setpoints.
• Open/close breakers for both transmission lines and generators.
• Apply short-circuits at buses.
• View information and real-time measurements for the selected component.
• View if the simulation is running
The ﬁrst version of this application should focus more on achieving the speciﬁed functionality
than having an elegant GUI. It should allow the user to select a component from a list
and then enter a value and/or press a button to apply the desired control action. Initial
sketch of the GUI is shown in ﬁgure 4.1.
4.2
Implementation
The GUI is implemented using the Tkinter package which is Python’s de-facto standard
GUI. Tkinter has all the options, such as dropdown menus, buttons and entry boxes, that
are required to make the GUI in a similar manner as shown in the initial sketches.
Static information about the model components is retrieved from the MySQL database
and a snapshot receiver is used receive real-time measurements. Two snapshots are used,
one for PMU measurements and one for DNP status variables. A new class is created for
keeping the measurement data. This class runs in a separate thread and contains both
the RTGM and the snapshot receiver. This way, measurements can be kept for a certain
23
==PAGE:34==
4. Application for controlling a running RTDS simulation
(a) Generator menu
(b) Line menu
(c) Load menu
(d) Bus menu
Figure 4.1: Initial sketches of the GUI
period of time which makes plotting more convenient if it were to be added later. The
main thread then runs the Tkinter GUI.
Multiple functions are deﬁned for displaying the correct information according to the
selected component in the dropdown menu. The displayed component names are taken
directly from the MySQL database and the selected name is used to ﬁnd the correct index
of the measurements. Functions are also deﬁned for each of the buttons and entry boxes
to apply the appropriate actions according to the selected component. The GUI is set to
updated the displayed variables every 100ms which is the same rate as the PMU snapshots.
If no snapshots are received for more than 3 seconds then it is indicated in the GUI that
there is a problem.
4.3
Results
The following ﬁgures show the implemented control application. Figure 4.2 shows the
application at startup and how a speciﬁc generator can be selected via the two dropdown
menus. In ﬁgure 4.2(d), the generator menu is shown where a new active power setpoint
can be applied or the generator breaker tripped. Static information about the machine
is shown on the left and real-time measurements on the right. The maximum power of
the machine is indicated in the static information and the entered setpoint can not be
higher than this value. The small green dot in the bottom left corner indicates that the
application is receiving snapshots from the snapshot server. This indicates that everything
is running as it should. If the program stops receiving just one of the snapshot types this
dot will become yellow (usually if the PDC stops) and if no snapshots are received, the
dot will become red. This happens if either the RTDS simulation or the snapshot server
crashes.
24
==PAGE:35==
4. Application for controlling a running RTDS simulation
(a) Initial menu
(b) Selection of component type
(c) Selection of generator
(d) Generator menu
Figure 4.2: Implemented GUI
The menus for the other component types are shown in ﬁgure 4.3. Each menu has the
same layout as shown for the generator before where the available control actions are
placed on the bottom right. It can be seen from the menus in ﬁgures 4.2 and 4.3 that the
speciﬁcations listed above are all implemented in the GUI. The bus menu (4.3(a)) shows
the bus number and rated voltage along with voltage and frequency measurements at the
bus. It gives the option of applying a three phase short circuit at the bus for 100ms. If the
DNP variable is not implemented then this is reﬂected in the menu. As of now, the short
circuit time is ﬁxed but could be made adjustable in the future.
In the line menu (4.3(b)) voltage and power measurements are shown for both ends of the
line. In this menu it is possible to open or close the line breaker. If the line is a double
line, then it is possible to choose for which line the breaker should operate. The line menu
also has the added option of applying a short circuit at either end of the line if a short
circuit variable is available. Doing so will trigger a 100ms fault which is followed by the
disconnection of the selected line. Since the short circuits could not be placed on the lines,
this is done to simulate a line fault which is cleared by tripping the line.
In the load menu (4.3(c)), the power measurements are not calculated like in the other
menus but received via the RTU snapshot from the DNP3 Master. It is possible to change
both the active and reactive power of the loads through the two entry boxes. As with the
generator menu, it is not possible to enter values outside of the limits shown on the left.
The last menu is the transformer menu (4.3(d)). Here the measurements are displayed
25
==PAGE:36==
4. Application for controlling a running RTDS simulation
in the same way as for the lines, at both ends. This menu is not fully implemented as it
was not included in the original speciﬁcations but here it should be possible to adjust the
tap changers of the transformers. The menu therefore displays that the tap changer is not
available.
(a) Bus menu
(b) Line menu
(c) Load menu
(d) Transformer menu
Figure 4.3: Additional GUI menus
To illustrate that the control actions function as they should, a bus voltage plot from
RSCAD is shown in ﬁgure 4.4 when various actions are applied. First, a three phase short
circuit is applied for 100ms seconds at the bus (a) and the voltage plot clearly shows a
typical short circuit response. Next, one of the lines connected to the bus is tripped (b).
This causes visible voltage oscillations. Finally the generator at the bus is tripped (c)
causing a sharp drop in the voltage.
In each case the simulation response can be seen immediately after pressing a button on
the GUI, both in RSCAD and in the real-time measurements in the GUI.
26
==PAGE:37==
4. Application for controlling a running RTDS simulation
(a) Applying a three phase short circuit at a bus
(b) Tripping a transmission line
(c) Tripping a generator
Figure 4.4: Control actions applied
27
==PAGE:38==
5
BLACKOUT SIMULATIONS
5.1
Distributed test setup
As described in chapter 2, the sw-platform consists of multiple modules which can operate
in a distributed setup while connected to the same network. For the following simulations,
the setup is as shown in ﬁgure 5.1. The setup consists of ﬁve diﬀerent machines which are
connected via the DTU staﬀnetwork.
• The RTDS simulator in PowerLabDK
• The RSCAD computer used for starting the RTDS simulation and the Siguard PDP.
• A container installation where the snapshot server, DNP3 server and database are
located.
• The video wall in the power system control room in PowerLabDK for the visualization.
• The demonstration computer where the various applications implemented in this
project are executed.
Figure 5.1: Distribution of the test setup
28
==PAGE:39==
5. Blackout simulations
5.2
Starting up the EWEP system
For the system to be functional it must be started up correctly. Due to the way that the
WARTApp platform is made, the snapshot server needs to get PMU measurements as an
input. The Siguard PDP will not be used in the simulations because of its delay but the
temporary alternative PDC can still not fully replace the way the Siguard is implemented
in the system. Therefore, the Siguard must initially be started and, since only one PDC
can connect to the RTDS at a time, later be stopped to get the system running correctly.
The startup order of the applications is therefore:
1. Start RTDS simulation in RSCAD
2. Start Siguard PDP
3. Restart the snapshot server
4. Stop Siguard PDP
5. Start alternative PDC
6. Start ASSRAS
7. Start ASSRAS_CM
8. Start RTDS_Control
If the simulation in the RTDS becomes unstable, then the RTDS will crash. This can cause
the running application to become stuck or stop improperly without closing the connection
with the snapshot server. The snapshot server must be restarted if this happens, which
means that the whole startup sequence shown above must be executed.
29
==PAGE:40==
5. Blackout simulations
5.3
Scenarios
Two blackout scenarios are deﬁned in order to demonstrate the capabilities of the
implemented EWEP system. These scenarios are chosen to demonstrate where the system
succeeds and where it fails.
5.3.1
Case 1: Single machine instability
In this scenario the nordic32 system is in a slightly modiﬁed operating condition. Generator
g11, at bus 2032, is manually excited and one of the lines between buses 2031 and 2032 is
out of order. Additionally, generator g13, at bus 1021, is oﬄine and the missing production
is compensated using nearby generators. Most of the generation is located in the northern
part of the system while most of the load is in the southern part. This results in high power
ﬂow from north to south but the system is in stable condition. The event that eventually
leads to ASSRA instability is the tripping of the line between buses 4021 and 4042. This
reduces the transmission capacity between north and south and causes the OELs of some
generators to become activated. This aﬀects the maximum injectable power of some of the
generators in the north and eventually results in generator g11 becoming unstable. Figure
5.2 shows the system for case 1. Generator and load values can be found in appendix A.
Figure 5.2: Nordic32 power system for case 1
30
==PAGE:41==
5. Blackout simulations
5.3.2
Case 2: Multi machine instability
In this scenario all lines and generators are operational and, as in the ﬁrst case, generator
g11 is manually excited. However, in this case the generation is shifted. The total generation
in the north is slightly decreased while the generation in the south is increased by the
same amount. The load remains the same as in the ﬁrst case. This causes lower power
ﬂow initially from north to south compared to the ﬁrst case and the system is initially in
stable operating condition. In this case tripping the same line as before does not cause any
generators to become ASSRA unstable. Instability is instead caused by tripping the line
between buses 4011 and 4021. This fault severely reduces the transmission capacity from
north to south and eventually causes a blackout. Figure 5.3 shows the system for case 2.
Generator and load values can be found in appendix A.
Figure 5.3: Nordic32 power system for case 2
31
==PAGE:42==
6
RESULTS
6.1
Case 1: Single machine instability
6.1.1
Without countermeasures
The following ﬁgures show the result of the ﬁrst scenario when no countermeasures are
applied. System bus voltages throughout this scenario are shown in ﬁgure 6.1 along with
a timeline in table 6.1. When line 4021-4042 is tripped, there are large but damped
electromechanical oscillations. The voltage stabilizes but shortly after the OELs of two
generators are activated. The voltage settles again for almost one minute. Then more
OELs start activating, each time pushing generator g11 closer to the stability boundary. 140
seconds after the line is tripped, the generator crosses the boundary and starts accelerating
out of control which is followed by a sharp collapse in the system voltage.
Figure 6.1: Case 1 bus voltages
Table 6.1: Case 1 timeline
Time (mm:ss)
Event
00:00
Line 4021-4042 is tripped
00:26
G12 OEL activated
00:29
G14 OEL activated
01:21
G9 OEL activated
01:36
G10 and G8 OEL activated
02:10
G15 OEL activated
02:20
G11 Crosses the stability boundary
02:32
Voltage collapse
32
==PAGE:43==
6. Results
Figure 6.2 shows the generator margins at the times indicated in ﬁgure 6.1. The critical
generator initially has 7.13% margin (a). As the line is tripped, there are oscillations in
the system and multiple machines are shown as grey, which indicates that they are not
in QSS (b). When the oscillations stop, the margin of g11 has decreased. When the ﬁrst
OELs are activated (c) the margin is decreased even further and continues to decreases
slowly until the machine ﬁnally hits the boundary and becomes unstable. At this point
the machine accelerates and the system voltage collapses (d).
(a) Initial state
(b) Line tripped
(c) OELs triggered
(d) Generator crosses the stability boundary
Figure 6.2: Case 1 ASSRAS margins
By looking at the internal and external voltages of the generators in a complex plane,
it can be seen that it is a single generator that becomes unstable. This can be seen in
ﬁgure 6.3. The blue dots show the generator’s external bus voltages while the red show
the internal nodes of the machines. The angle diﬀerence between the generators is initially
not too large and it can be seen that the bus voltages are distributed according to their
geographical location (a). The buses in the north are the ones at the top while the ones in
the south are at the bottom. When the line is tripped (b), the angle separation between
the groups in the north and the south increases. As generator g11 approaches the ASSRAS
boundary, its voltage point starts pulling away from the other generators (c) until it crosses
the boundary and the system voltage collapses (d). It can also be seen that the rest of the
northern generators are pulling away as a group. This indicates that this scenario is very
close to being a multi-machine case.
33
==PAGE:44==
6. Results
(a) Initial state
(b) Line tripped
(c) Generator becoming unstable
(d) System voltage collapses
Figure 6.3: Case 1: Complex generator voltages
34
==PAGE:45==
6. Results
6.1.2
With countermeasures applied
Here, the previous simulation is repeated with the countermeasure program running. The
safety margin is set at 3.5%, the trigger at 2.5% and the security margin at 5%. Figure 6.4
shows the generator margins when countermeasures are applied. As before, when the line
is tripped, generator g11 at bus 2032 starts approaching the boundary. When it crosses the
safety margin (b), a countermeasure is computed as shown in ﬁgure 6.5. When the trigger
margin is crossed (c), the countermeasure is applied as shown in ﬁgure 6.6. The active
power output of generator g11 is reduced by 22.1 MW and the missing power is provided
by g8 at bus 1043. With the changed setpoint the margin of g11 begins to increase and
settles above the security margin (d). The system now remains in stable operation as the
countermeasure was successful in preventing ASSRA instability.
(a) Initial state
(b) Safety margin crossed
(c) Trigger margin crossed
(d) Final state
Figure 6.4: Case 1 ASSRA margins with countermeasures
Figure 6.5: Countermeasure computed as a generator crosses the safety margin
Figure 6.6: Countermeasure applied as a generator crosses the trigger margin
35
==PAGE:46==
6. Results
Figure 6.7 shows bus voltages with the countermeasures applied. The safety margin is
crossed right after the ﬁrst OELs are activated. After a few seconds the countermeasure is
applied and the voltage remains stable with no more OELs being activated. This gives a
much better outcome compared to ﬁgure 6.1 and the new timeline is summarized in table
6.2.
Figure 6.7: Case 1 bus voltages with countermeasures
Table 6.2: Case 1 with countermesures timeline
Time (mm:ss)
Event
00:00
Line 4021-4042 is tripped
00:26
G12 OEL activated
00:27
Safety margin crossed
00:29
G14 OEL activated
00:32
G8 OEL activated
00:32
Trigger margin crossed and countermeasures applied
01:15
Security margin crossed
This result shows that the countermeasure method is capable of preventing ASSRA
instability by slightly changing the generator’s setpoints. The margins for this case had to
be kept much higher that the ones from [16] since the response time of the hydro generators
in the RTDS are quite slow and due to the fact that this scenario is very close to being a
multi-macine case like the one shown in the next scenario.
36
==PAGE:47==
6. Results
6.2
Case 2: Multi-machine instability
Figure 6.8 shows the ASSRAS margins during this scenario. The countermeasure is running
but, as can be seen in the ﬁgure, is unable to prevent instability. Initially, one generator is
manually excited and another has an active OEL but they have a fairly large margin (a).
After the line is tripped, a couple of OELs are activated and the generator at bus 1042
crosses the trigger margin while not in QSS (b). When it enters QSS, the countermeasure
is immediately applied and it moves to a safe margin. The system doesn’t stabilize and
a couple more OELs are soon activated. Two more generators cross the trigger margin
shortly after and countermesures are applied (c). These are however not suﬃcient to
prevent the sytem from becoming unstable and the system voltage collapses a couple of
seconds later (d). The three countermesures attempted are shown in ﬁgure 6.9. In the
previous case, the unstable generator slowly approached the boundary before starting to
accelerate. In this case however, the generators begin to accelerate before crossing the
boundary. This is an indication that there are diﬀerent stability mechanisms at play.
(a) Initial state
(b) First countermeasure applied
(c) Additional countermeasures applied
(d) Voltage collapses
Figure 6.8: Case 2 ASSRAS margins
37
==PAGE:48==
6. Results
Figure 6.9: Countermeasures applied in case 2
The bus voltages during the scenario are shown in ﬁgure 6.10. When the line trips, there are
large electromechanical oscillations and two OELs are immediately activated. Shortly after,
additional OELs are activated and the generators begin crossing the trigger margin. At this
point, the generators have already began accelerating and the computed countermeasures
have little to no eﬀect.
Figure 6.10
The timeline for this case is summed up in table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Case 2 with countermesures timeline
Time (mm:ss)
Event
00:00
Line 4011-4021 is tripped
00:02
Two OELs activated
00:13
G7 crosses the trigger margin and cm is applied
00:25
OEL is activated
00:32
OEL is activated
00:52
G13 and G11 cross the safety margin
01:03
G11 crosses the trigger margin and cm is applied
01:12
G13 crosses the trigger margin and cm is applied
01:13
G11 crosses boundary
01:14
Voltage collapses
To better see why the countermeasures had no eﬀect and the system collapsed, the complex
system voltages are plotted as before. It can be seen in ﬁgure 6.11 that, like before, when
38
==PAGE:49==
6. Results
the line is tripped the group of generators in the north start pulling away from the ones
in the south (b). However, now there is not a single generator that pulls away from the
group but the whole group that pulls away. This explains why the countermeasures were
not eﬀective. As can be seen from 6.9, the calculated redispatches are all within the same
group of generators and therefore have no eﬀect on the inter-area mode which causes the
system instability.
(a) Initial state
(b) Line tripped
(c) Generator becomes unstable
(d) System voltage collapses
Figure 6.11:
39
==PAGE:50==
6. Results
6.3
Performance analysis
During the simulations some performance issues were noticed with the stream of data. This
sometimes resulted in choppy visualization and could cause problems with the assessment
methods. A simple program was made to test the snapshot stream using both the Siguard
PDP and the alternative PDC during a simulation. This program subscribes to the PMU,
ASSRAS and countermeasure snapshots and counts how many snapshots it receives every
10 seconds. At the end of the simulation results are plotted as a bar plot as is shown in
ﬁgure 6.12. Using the Siguard PDP, there is no issue with the snapshot stream as it remains
constant at 10 snapshots/second. However, with the alternative PDC the stream is not
constant. This is most likely due to the fact that multiple python scripts were running in
parallel on the same laptop and the performance would decrease as the number of running
applications on the machine increased. This introduces a problem for the alternative
PDC. As mentioned before, it uses a very simple method for aligning the PMUs by their
timestamps and is currently not capable of properly handling this drop in the streaming
rate. This can cause the measurements to become misaligned which gives an inaccurate
picture of the system state. This did not usually cause problems with the EWEP system
during the simulations. However, the margins could jump around slightly and occasionally
an external node would suddenly jump from above 80% margin to below -80% which could
cause incorrect and unnecessary countermesures to be computed.
(a) Using Siguard PDP
(b) Using the alternative PDC
Figure 6.12: Snapshot stream comparison
40
==PAGE:51==
7
DISCUSSION
Several challenges were encountered when implementing the EWEP system and interfacing
it with the RTDS simulator. The Siguard PDP proved to be very problematic due to
both the time synchronization and the extensive delay it caused with the measurements.
Having an eﬃcient PDC is crucial for the performance of the EWEP system. Because of
this problem, an alternative PDC had to be implemented from scratch to successfully test
the EWEP system. The developed PDC program could successfully replace the Siguard
but, as indicated by the results, it faced some performance problems due to insuﬃcient
hardware. It is therefore clear that adequate hardware must be used for the EWEP system
or to further utilize the distributed setup.
Given the distributed structure of the WARTApp platform and the possibility of using
multiple programming languages, it is important to coordinate the indexing of the
model components. The indexing mismatches discovered when transitioning from PSS/E
simulations to the RTDS showed this and resulted in the ASSRAS program havin to
be recreated in python to get the appropriate indexing.
In the future the required
indexing should be included in the snapshots to properly coordinate between the diﬀerent
applications.
When developing applications for the WARTApp platform, the diﬀerences between the
PSS/E and RTDS simulators need to be accounted for as some components, like three-
way transformers, may not be available in both simulators. It could also simplify the
applications if the database structure were to be standardized.
In future implementations of the EWEP system, more of the RTDS model data should
be included in the database, such as the generator’s droop factor, since it is required
for adjusting the power setpoints. These values should be accessible in order to avoid
hardcoding.
The control application functions as intended but still has a lot of room for improvement.
To better utilize the DNP communication, the way that the variables are placed in the
database could be improved to better utilize the number of available variables. The addition
of the binary status variables would also greatly improve the application as the actual
state of the breakers could be displayed. The application could also be extended to show a
graphic layout of the system like the one implemented in the Network Viewer program.
The results of the simulations showed that the implemented EWEP system is capable
of preventing system blackouts in the case of a single machine. This is exactly what the
implemented method is designed to do. This method is however not useful if the instability
is caused by a group of generators. A diﬀerent assessment method has been developed
at DTU which can be used to detect and compute countermeasures against this type of
instability but it has not yet been implemented.
41
==PAGE:52==
7. Discussion
When implementing the blackout scenarios in the RTDS, it proved to be a bit of a challenge
to get the initial system conditions right for the single machine scenario. This was due to
the a fact that the initial generator setpoints were not 100% accurate when placed in the
points ﬁles, as was mentioned in chapter 3. Because of this, the system kept gravitating
toward multi machine instability. This is why the second scenario was chosen to be
included in the results. This shows that even though the implemented method might work
perfectly for some cases, there is clearly a need for implementing additional assessment
and prevention methods to have a fully functioning EWEP system.
42
==PAGE:53==
8
CONCLUSION
The Early-Warning and Early-Prevention system has been successfully implemented and
is capable of adjusting generator outputs in order to prevent ASSRA instability. The
interface with the RTDS has been set up so the various python applications can receive
PMU snapshots in real-time and preventive measures applied to the running simulation.
The simulated blackout scenarios have demonstrated in which cases the EWEP system is
capable of preventing instability and where it fails. Power system stability is not a simple
subject and diﬀerent stability problems can occur at the same time. As the results indicate,
additional assessment methods need to be implemented before the EWEP system can be
said to be fully functional.
A control application has been created for controlling the RTDS simulation and applying
various disturbances in real time. This application has been implemented with a simple
graphical user interface which displays real-time measurements along with the available
control actions. This program could be expanded in the future or used as inspiration for a
control program with a more elaborate GUI similar to the Network Viewer.
The EWEP system has been implemented using a distributed setup where its performance
was demonstrated using the facilities in PowerLabDK.
All of the main project objectives have been completed and the various problems described
in the report have been solved as they occurred. Future work with the EWEP system and
the RTDS would mainly require the implementation of a new phasor data consentrator and
additional assessment methods. Once these have been implemented and tested, interfacing
the WARTApp platform with a real power system should be a realistic possibility.
43
==PAGE:54==
REFERENCES
[1]
United Nations Climate Change. What is the paris agreement?, . URL
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/
what-is-the-paris-agreement.
[2]
United Nations Climate Change. Paris agreement - status of ratiﬁcation, . URL
https://unfccc.int/process/the-paris-agreement/status-of-ratification.
[3]
Ross J Salawitch and Timothy P Canty. Paris climate agreement: Beacon of hope.
Springer, 2017.
[4]
The Danish Government. Vores energi. URL
http://www.stm.dk/multimedia/Vores_energi.pdf.
[5]
A. Phadke et al. A new measurement technique for tracking voltage phasors, local
system frequency, and rate of change of frequency. IEEE Trans. Power App. Syst,
PAS-102(5):1025–1038, 1983.
[6]
SOSPO project homepage. URL http://www.sospo.droppages.com/.
[7]
H. et al. Jóhannsson. Sw-platform for r&d in applications of synchrophasor
measurements for wide-area assessment. Cigre 2014 Grid of the Future Symposium,
Houston,Texas, 2014.
[8]
HA Gabbar. Smart energy grid infrastructures and interconnected micro energy grids.
In Smart Energy Grid Engineering, pages 23–45. Elsevier, 2017.
[9]
Nielsen A. H. Jóhannsson, H. and J. Østergaard. Wide-area assessment of aperiodic
small signal rotor angle stability in real-time. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
28(4):4545–4557, 2014.
[10] Jóhannsson H. & Østergaard J. Weckesser, J.T.G. Real-time remedial action against
aperiodic small signal rotor angle instability. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
31(1):387–396, 2016.
[11] S. Sommer and H. Jóhannsson. Real-time thevenin impedance computations. Proc.
2013 IEEE ISGT Washington Conf, 2013.
[12] Siemens. Siguard pdp. URL https://new.siemens.com/global/en/products/
energy/energy-automation-and-smart-grid/power-quality-measurement/
grid-monitoring-using-synchrophasors-siguard-pdp.html.
[13] Chris Drew. Pymu documentation. URL https://pythonhosted.org/PyMU/.
[14] RSCAD component documentation. Gtnet-pmu24 card, .
[15] RSCAD component documentation. Gtnet-dnp card, .
44
==PAGE:55==
References
[16] H. Jóhannsson. Real-time early warning and early prevention system to avoid system
blackouts. 018 IEEE PES General Meeting, Portland, US,, 2018.
45
==PAGE:56==
A
RSCAD MODEL DETAILS
Table A.1: Generator information. T: Thermal, H: Hydro, SC: Synchronous condenser
Name
Bus nr.
MVA
Max output
Initial power (MW)
Type
Droop
Location
(MW)
Case 1
Case 2
(%)
G1
4062
600
600
530
530
T
-
SW
G2
4063
600
600
525
530
T
-
SW
G3
4063
600
600
550
530
T
-
SW
G4
4051
700
700
590
600
T
-
C
G5
4047
600
600
520
540
T
-
C
G6
4047
600
600
530
540
T
-
C
G7
1042
400
400
360
375
T
-
C
G8
1043
200
200
174
190
T
-
C
G9
4041
300
300
0
0
SC
-
C
G10
4042
700
700
630
655
T
-
C
G11
2032
850
807.5
796
785
H
4
N
G12
4031
350
332.5
310
305
H
4
N
G13
1021
600
570
0
386
H
4
N
G14
1022
250
237.5
200
195
H
4
N
G15
4021
300
285
275
270
H
4
N
G16
1012
800
760
600
590
H
4
N
G17
1014
700
665
550
540
H
4
N
G18
1013
600
570
300
290
H
4
N
G19
4011
1000
950
924.2
655
H
4
N
G20
4012
800
760
600
590
H
4
N
G21
4072
4500
4275
2100
2070
H
8
EX
G22
4071
500
475
375
370
H
8
EX
46
==PAGE:57==
A. RSCAD model details
Figure A.1: Example of a point mapping ﬁle
47
==PAGE:58==
A. RSCAD model details
Figure A.2: Generator model menu
48
==PAGE:59==
A. RSCAD model details
Figure A.3: Line model menu
49
==PAGE:60==
A. RSCAD model details
Figure A.4: Load model menu
50
==PAGE:61==
A. RSCAD model details
Table A.2: Bus information
Bus nr.
Voltage (kV)
Type
Location
41
130
PQ
C
42
130
PQ
C
43
130
PQ
C
46
130
PQ
C
47
130
PQ
C
51
130
PQ
C
61
130
PQ
SW
62
130
PQ
SW
63
130
PQ
SW
141
130
PQ
C
142
130
PQ
C
143
130
PQ
C
144
130
PQ
C
145
130
PQ
C
1011
130
PQ
N
1012
130
PV
N
1013
130
PV
N
1014
130
PV
N
1021
130
PV
N
1022
130
PV
N
1041
130
PQ
C
1042
130
PV
C
1043
130
PV
C
1044
130
PQ
C
1045
130
PQ
C
2031
220
PQ
N
2032
220
PV
N
4011
400
Slack
N
4012
400
PV
N
4021
400
PV
N
4022
400
PQ
N
4031
400
PV
N
4032
400
PQ
N
4041
400
PV
C
4042
400
PV
C
4043
400
PQ
C
4044
400
PQ
C
4045
400
PQ
C
4046
400
PQ
C
4047
400
PV
C
4051
400
PV
C
4061
400
PQ
SW
4062
400
PV
SW
4063
400
PV
SW
4071
400
PV
EX
4072
400
PV
EX
51
==PAGE:62==
A. RSCAD model details
Table A.3: Line information
Name
From bus
To bus
Conductors
Breaker
Location
T1
1011
1013
6
N
N
T2
1014
1012
6
N
N
T3
1014
1013
6
N
N
T4
1021
1022
6
Y
N
T5
1041
1043
6
N
C
T6
1041
1045
6
Y
C
T7
1042
1044
6
Y
C
T8
1042
1045
3
Y
C
T9
1043
1044
6
N
C
T10
2032
2031
6
Y
N
T11
4011
4012
3
Y
N
T12
4011
4021
3
Y
N
T13
4011
4022
3
Y
N
T14
4011
4071
3
Y
N-EX
T15
4012
4022
3
Y
N
T16
4012
4071
3
Y
N-EX
T17
4021
4032
3
Y
N
T18
4021
4042
3
Y
N-C
T19
4022
4031
6
Y
N
T20
4031
4032
3
Y
N
T21
4031
4041
6
Y
N-C
T22
4032
4042
3
Y
N-C
T23
4032
4044
3
Y
N-C
T24
4041
4044
3
Y
N
T25
4041
4061
3
Y
C-SW
T26
4042
4043
3
Y
C
T27
4042
4044
3
Y
C
T28
4043
4044
3
Y
C
T29
4043
4046
3
Y
C
T30
4043
4047
3
Y
C
T31
4044
4045
6
Y
C
T32
4045
4051
6
Y
C
T33
4045
4062
3
Y
C-SW
T34
4046
4047
3
Y
C
T35
4061
4062
3
Y
SW
T36
4062
4063
6
Y
SW
T37
4071
4072
6
Y
EX
52
==PAGE:63==
A. RSCAD model details
Table A.4: Load information
Name
Bus nr.
P (MW)
Q (MVAr)
Location
D004101
41
560
128.28
C
D004101
42
400
300
C
D004301
43
900
238.83
C
D004601
46
700
193.72
C
D004701
47
100
45.19
C
D005101
51
800
253.22
C
D006101
61
500
112.31
SW
D006201
62
300
80.02
SW
D006301
63
590
256.19
SW
D014101
141
600
200
C
D014201
142
300
80
C
D014301
143
230
100
C
D014401
144
800
300
C
D014501
145
700
250
C
D101101
1011
200
80
N
D101201
1012
300
100
N
D101301
1013
100
40
N
D102201
1022
280
95
N
D203101
2031
100
30
N
D203201
2032
200
50
N
D407101
4071
400
100
EX
D407201
4072
1910
500
EX
53
==PAGE:64==
A. RSCAD model details
Table A.5: PMU data 1/2
Rack 1
Rack 2
GTNET
Card nr.
1
2
1
2
IP
’10.59.19.16’
’10.59.19.17’
’10.59.19.19’
’10.59.19.20’
PMU nr.
Port
ID
Port
ID
Port
ID
Port
ID
1
4712
1101
4712
1101
4712
1101
4712
1101
2
4722
1102
4722
1102
4722
1102
4722
1102
3
4732
1103
4732
1103
4732
1103
4732
1103
4
4742
1104
4742
1104
4742
1104
4742
1104
5
4752
1105
4752
1105
4752
1105
4752
1105
6
4762
1106
4762
1106
4762
1106
4762
1106
7
4772
1107
4772
1107
4772
1107
4772
1107
8
4782
1108
4782
1108
4782
1108
4782
1108
9
4792
1109
4792
1109
4792
1109
4792
1109
10
4812
1110
4812
1110
4812
1110
4812
1110
11
4822
1111
4822
1111
4822
1111
4822
1111
12
4832
1112
4832
1112
4832
1112
4832
1112
13
4842
1113
4842
1113
4842
1113
4842
1113
14
4852
1114
4852
1114
4852
1114
4852
1114
15
4862
1115
4862
1115
4862
1115
4862
1115
16
4872
1116
4872
1116
4872
1116
4872
1116
17
4882
1117
4882
1117
4882
1117
4882
1117
18
4892
1118
4892
1118
4892
1118
4892
1118
19
4912
1119
4912
1119
4912
1119
4912
1119
20
4922
1120
4922
1120
4922
1120
4922
1120
21
4932
1121
4932
1121
4932
1121
4932
1121
22
4942
1122
4942
1122
4942
1122
4942
1122
23
4952
1123
4952
1123
4952
1123
4952
1123
24
4962
1124
4962
1124
4962
1124
4962
1124
54
==PAGE:65==
A. RSCAD model details
Table A.6: PMU data 2/2
Rack 3
Rack 2
GTNET
Card nr.
1
2
1
2
IP
’10.59.19.22’
’10.59.19.25’
’10.59.19.19’
’10.59.19.20’
PMU nr.
Port
ID
Port
ID
Port
ID
Port
ID
1
4712
1101
4712
1101
4712
1101
4712
1101
2
4722
1102
4722
1102
4722
1102
4722
1102
3
4732
1103
4732
1103
4732
1103
4732
1103
4
4742
1104
4742
1104
4742
1104
4742
1104
5
4752
1105
4752
1105
4752
1105
4752
1105
6
4762
1106
4762
1106
4762
1106
4762
1106
7
4772
1107
4772
1107
4772
1107
-
-
8
4782
1108
4782
1108
4782
1108
-
-
9
4792
1109
4792
1109
4792
1109
-
-
10
4812
1110
4812
1110
4812
1110
-
-
11
4822
1111
4822
1111
4822
1111
-
-
12
4832
1112
4832
1112
4832
1112
-
-
13
4842
1113
-
-
4842
1113
-
-
14
4852
1114
-
-
4852
1114
-
-
15
4862
1115
-
-
4862
1115
-
-
16
4872
1116
-
-
4872
1116
-
-
17
4882
1117
-
-
4882
1117
-
-
18
4892
1118
-
-
4892
1118
-
-
19
4912
1119
-
-
4912
1119
-
-
20
4922
1120
-
-
4922
1120
-
-
21
4932
1121
-
-
4932
1121
-
-
22
4942
1122
-
-
4942
1122
-
-
23
4952
1123
-
-
4952
1123
-
-
24
4962
1124
-
-
4962
1124
-
-
55
==PAGE:66==
B MESSAGE STRUCTURES
Figure B.1: PSSE1 message structure
Figure B.2: ARAS1 message structure
56
==PAGE:67==
B. Message structures
Figure B.3: ASSRASCMmessagestructure
Figure B.4: DNP3READ message structure
57
==PAGE:68==
C PYTHON CODE
C.1
RTDS PDC
import sys, os
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’gpb_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’db_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’assessment_examples’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’real_time_grid_model−master’, ’
RealTimeGridModel’))
import time
import socket
from pymu.server import Server
from pymu.client import Client
from pymu.pmuDataFrame import DataFrame
from pymu.pmuLib import ∗
import pymu.tools as tools
import mysql.connector
import messages_pb2
import messages_extra
import numpy as np
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_generators,
db_reader_raw_buses, \
db_reader_raw_lines, db_reader_raw_transformers, db_reader_raw_loads
###############################################
# Server Conﬁguration details
#
##############################################
# Conﬁguration: which snapshot server and which snapshot simulation server
k_snapshot_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’#’localhost’#’192.168.56.101’#
k_snapshot_server_port = 55606
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607
################################################
# Details about snapshots to subscribe
#
################################################
# 1st type of snapshots psse1:
k1_subject_id = ’nordic32_1’
58
==PAGE:69==
C. Python code
k1_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k1_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k1_snapshot_type_tag = ’psse1’
# −−−Network Model (Database) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
# Open database connection:
# Conﬁguration: which network model is used (which database):
k_db_schema = ’nordic32_rtds_1’
k_db_host = k_snapshot_server_name#’10.59.17.231’#’localhost’
k_db_user = ’sospo’
k_db_password = ’EpuwE13’
# Conﬁguration: which subject/topic is published (the calculated assessments):
k_publication_subject_id = ’nordic32_rtds_1’
k_publication_subject_sub_id = k1_subject_sub_id
k_publication_type_tag = ’psse1’
RUNNING = True
def RTDS_PDC(ip, tcpPort, frameId, udpPort, index=−1, printInfo = True):
global RUNNING, CH1_V1,CH2_I1, p, pmu_bus_voltages_re, pmu_bus_voltages_im,
bus_names_Full,dataRcvr, \
dFrame, bus_numbers_Full,pmu_generator_currents_re,pmu_generator_currents_im,
pmu_branch_currents_from_re, \
pmu_branch_currents_to_re,pmu_branch_currents_from_im,pmu_branch_currents_to_im,
Tlist,nL,nT,nG,prev_dframes,prev_dframes2,t_sync,tmp
message = messages_pb2.GenericMessage()
message.type = messages_pb2.PSSE1
dbcon = mysql.connector.connect(user=k_db_user, password=k_db_password, host=k_db_host,
database=k_db_schema)
cursor = dbcon.cursor()
lines = db_reader_raw_lines(cursor, k_db_schema)
transformers = db_reader_raw_transformers(cursor, k_db_schema)
generators = db_reader_raw_generators(cursor, k_db_schema)
busses = db_reader_raw_buses(cursor, k_db_schema)
bus_indices_Full = np.array(busses[’pb_voltage_indexes’])
bus_numbers_Full = np.array(busses[’bus_numbers’])
bus_names_Full = np.array(busses[’bus_names’])
gen_names_Full = np.array(generators[’generator_names’])
gen_bus_indices_Full = np.array(generators[’pb_voltage_indexes’])
line_names_Full = np.array(lines[’branch_names’])
line_from_bus_numbers_Full = np.array(lines[’from_bus_numbers’])
line_to_bus_numbers_Full = np.array(lines[’to_bus_numbers’])
line_pb_current_index_from = np.array(lines[’pb_current_from_indexes’])
line_pb_current_index_to = np.array(lines[’pb_current_to_indexes’])
transformer_names_Full = np.array(transformers[’branch_names’])
transformer_from_bus_numbers_Full = np.array(transformers[’bus_number_froms’])
59
==PAGE:70==
C. Python code
transformer_to_bus_numbers_Full = np.array(transformers[’bus_number_tos’])
transformer_pb_current_index_from = np.array(transformers[’pb_current_index_froms’])
transformer_pb_current_index_to = np.array(transformers[’pb_current_index_tos’])
dbcon.close()
print("#{}# Creating Connection\n\t{:<10} {}\n\t{:<10} {}\n\t{:<10} {}".format(index, "IP:",
ip[0], "Port:", tcpPort[0], "ID Code:", frameId[0]))
Snap_Receiver = sr.SnapshotReceiver() # create the snapshots objects (starts in a thread on its
own)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyServerConﬁguration(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port,
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name, k_snapshot_simulation_server_port)
# SnapshotReceiver requires at least one subscription case to run !!!
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyPublishCase(k_publication_subject_id, k_publication_subject_sub_id,
k1_rate, k_publication_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.AllignDataset = False # Should the snapshots be aligned before made available or
imedially provided ..
Snap_Receiver.start() # starts the run method
Snap_Receiver._init.wait()
if udpPort[0] > −1:
print("\t{:<10} {}".format("UDP Port:", udpPort[0]))
print("−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−")
confFrame = []
dataRcvr = []
Vdata = []
t = []
prev_dframes = []
prev_dframes2 = []
print(’Connecting to PMU cards’)
for n in range(len(ip)):
try:
confFrame.append(tools.startDataCapture(frameId[n], ip[n], tcpPort[n])) # IP address of
openPDC
except Exception as e:
print("#{}# Exception: {}".format(index, e))
print("#{}# Conﬁg Frame not received...Exiting".format(index))
sys. exit()
dataRcvr.append(None)
if udpPort[n] == −1:
dataRcvr[n] = Client(ip[n], tcpPort[n], "TCP")
tools .turnDataOn(dataRcvr[n], frameId[n])
else :
dataRcvr[n] = Server(udpPort[n], "UDP")
dataRcvr[n].setTimeout(10)
60
==PAGE:71==
C. Python code
Vdata.append([])
t.append([])
prev_dframes.append([])
prev_dframes2.append([])
print(’Connected’)
milliStart = int(round(time.time() ∗1000))
p = 0
S_base = 100000000
Id = 0
nL = 0
nT = 0
nG = 0
print(’Data capture started’)
try:
while RUNNING:
nbus = len(bus_names_Full)
pmu_bus_voltages_re = np.zeros(nbus)
pmu_bus_voltages_im = np.zeros(nbus)
pmu_bus_frequencies = np.zeros(nbus)
nbranch = len(line_names_Full)+len(transformer_names_Full)
pmu_branch_currents_from_re = np.zeros(nbranch)
pmu_branch_currents_from_im = np.zeros(nbranch)
pmu_branch_currents_to_re = np.zeros(nbranch)
pmu_branch_currents_to_im = np.zeros(nbranch)
ngen = len(gen_names_Full)
pmu_generator_currents_re = np.zeros(ngen)
pmu_generator_currents_im = np.zeros(ngen)
pmu_generator_oel_status_signals = np.zeros(ngen)
pmu_branch_currents_three_re = []
pmu_branch_currents_three_im = []
angref = 0
Tlist = []
t_sync = 0
e = False
for n in range(len(ip)):
try:
d = tools.getDataSample(dataRcvr[n])
dFrame = DataFrame(d, confFrame[n]) # Create dataFrame
if n == 0:
t_sync = dFrame.soc.utcSec
#
print (’T ’,t_sync)
#
print(dFrame.soc.utcSec)
if dFrame.soc.utcSec != t_sync and p > 1:
if prev_dframes[n].soc.utcSec == t_sync:
tmp = prev_dframes[n]
prev_dframes2[n] = prev_dframes[n]
prev_dframes[n] = dFrame
61
==PAGE:72==
C. Python code
dFrame = tmp
elif prev_dframes2[n].soc.utcSec == t_sync:
print(’p2’)
tmp = prev_dframes2[n]
prev_dframes2[n] = prev_dframes[n]
prev_dframes[n] = dFrame
dFrame = tmp
else :
print(’ error ’)
print(’T ’,t_sync)
print(’d ’ ,dFrame.soc.utcSec)
print(’p ’ ,prev_dframes[n].soc.utcSec)
print(’p2 ’ ,prev_dframes2[n].soc.utcSec)
prev_dframes2[n] = prev_dframes[n]
prev_dframes[n] = dFrame
e = True
else :
prev_dframes2[n] = prev_dframes[n]
prev_dframes[n] = dFrame
#
print(dFrame.soc.utcSec)
except socket.timeout:
print("#{}# Data not available right now...Exiting".format(index))
except Exception as e:
print("#{}# Exception: {}".format(index, e))
RUNNING = False
break
PMUs = dFrame.pmus[0]
CH1_V1 = PMUs.phasors[0]
CH2_I1 = PMUs.phasors[1]
freq = PMUs.freq
Name = CH1_V1.stationFrame.stn
busname = Name[Name.ﬁnd(’B’):Name.ﬁnd(’B’)+5]
busnumber = int(busname[1:])
obj_type = Name[0:Name.ﬁnd(’B’)]
if n == 0:
angref = CH1_V1.rad
if ’B40’ in busname:
V_base = 400000
elif
’B20’ in busname:
V_base = 220000
else :
V_base = 130000
I_base = S_base/V_base
try:
busVind = np.where(bus_numbers_Full==busnumber)[0][0]
if ’G’ in obj_type:
pmu_bus_voltages_re[busVind] = (CH1_V1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/V_base)∗np.cos(
CH1_V1.rad−angref)
pmu_bus_voltages_im[busVind] = (CH1_V1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/V_base)∗np.sin(
CH1_V1.rad−angref)
pmu_bus_frequencies[busVind] = freq
elif round(pmu_bus_voltages_re[busVind],3) == 0:
pmu_bus_voltages_re[busVind] = (CH1_V1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/V_base)∗np.cos(
CH1_V1.rad−angref)
62
==PAGE:73==
C. Python code
pmu_bus_voltages_im[busVind] = (CH1_V1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/V_base)∗np.sin(
CH1_V1.rad−angref)
pmu_bus_frequencies[busVind] = freq
except:
print(’ invalid bus name’)
RUNNING = False
break
try:
if ’G’ in obj_type:
nG += 1
genbusind = np.where(bus_numbers_Full==busnumber)[0][0]
genind = np.where(gen_bus_indices_Full==genbusind)[0][0]
if pmu_generator_currents_re[genind]!=0:
genind = np.where(gen_bus_indices_Full==genbusind)[0][1]
pmu_generator_currents_re[genind] = (−CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/I_base)∗np.
cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_generator_currents_im[genind] = (−CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/I_base)∗np.
sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_generator_oel_status_signals[genind] = PMUs.analogs[0][1]
except:
print(’ invalid generator’)
RUNNING = False
break
try:
if (’L’ in obj_type):
nL += 1
linenr = int(obj_type[1:])−1
if (busnumber == line_from_bus_numbers_Full[linenr]):
branch_ind = line_pb_current_index_from[linenr]
pmu_branch_currents_from_re[branch_ind] += (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)
/I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_from_im[branch_ind] += (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)
/I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
elif busnumber == line_to_bus_numbers_Full[linenr]:
branch_ind = line_pb_current_index_to[linenr]
pmu_branch_currents_to_re[branch_ind] += (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/
I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_to_im[branch_ind] += (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/
I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
else :
print(’wrong line number ’, Name)
except:
print(’ invalid line ’ , Name)
try:
if (’T’ in obj_type):
nT += 1
ind_from = [i for i , s in enumerate(transformer_names_Full) if ’T’+str(
busnumber).zﬁll(4) in s]
ind_to = [i for i , s in enumerate(transformer_names_Full) if (s[0]==’T’ and
str(busnumber).zﬁll(4) in s[5:]) ]
63
==PAGE:74==
C. Python code
Other = False
if (len(ind_to)>0) and (not obj_type in Tlist):
branch_ind = transformer_pb_current_index_to[ind_to][0]
if pmu_branch_currents_to_re[branch_ind] == 0:
pmu_branch_currents_to_re[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)/
I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_to_im[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt(3)
/I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
Tlist .append(obj_type)
else :
ind_to = [i for i , s in enumerate(transformer_names_Full) if (s
[0]==’U’ and str(busnumber).zﬁll(4) in s[5:]) ]
branch_ind = transformer_pb_current_index_to[ind_to][0]
if pmu_branch_currents_to_re[branch_ind] == 0:
pmu_branch_currents_to_re[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.
sqrt(3)/I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_to_im[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.
sqrt(3)/I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
Tlist .append(obj_type)
else :
Other = True
elif len(ind_from)>0:
branch_ind = transformer_pb_current_index_from[ind_from][0]
if pmu_branch_currents_from_re[branch_ind] == 0: #
pmu_branch_currents_from_re[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt
(3)/I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_from_im[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt
(3)/I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
else :
ind_from = [i for i , s in enumerate(transformer_names_Full) if ’U’+
str(busnumber).zﬁll(4) in s]
branch_ind = transformer_pb_current_index_from[ind_from][0]
if pmu_branch_currents_to_re[branch_ind] == 0:
pmu_branch_currents_from_re[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.
sqrt(3)/I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_from_im[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.
sqrt(3)/I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
else :
print(’wrong T branch number ’, Name)
if Other and len(ind_from)>0:
branch_ind = transformer_pb_current_index_from[ind_from][0]
if pmu_branch_currents_from_re[branch_ind] == 0: #
pmu_branch_currents_from_re[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt
(3)/I_base)∗np.cos(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
pmu_branch_currents_from_im[branch_ind] = (CH2_I1.mag∗np.sqrt
(3)/I_base)∗np.sin(CH2_I1.rad−angref)
except:
print(’ invalid trans ’ , Name)
RUNNING = False
break
p += 1
64
==PAGE:75==
C. Python code
seconds_of_century = int(np.ﬂoor(time.time()))
milliseconds_of_second = int(np.ﬂoor((time.time()−seconds_of_century)∗1000))
#
if not e:
message = messages_pb2.GenericMessage()
message.type = messages_pb2.PSSE1
message.psse1.id = Id
message.psse1.seconds_of_century = seconds_of_century
message.psse1.milliseconds_of_second = milliseconds_of_second
message.psse1.no_of_buses = len(pmu_bus_voltages_re)
message.psse1.no_of_branches = len(pmu_branch_currents_from_re)
message.psse1.no_of_generators = len(pmu_generator_currents_re)
message.psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re.extend(pmu_bus_voltages_re)
message.psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im.extend(pmu_bus_voltages_im)
message.psse1.pmu_bus_frequencies.extend(pmu_bus_frequencies)
message.psse1.pmu_branch_currents_from_re.extend(pmu_branch_currents_from_re)
message.psse1.pmu_branch_currents_from_im.extend(pmu_branch_currents_from_im)
message.psse1.pmu_branch_currents_to_re.extend(pmu_branch_currents_to_re)
message.psse1.pmu_branch_currents_to_im.extend(pmu_branch_currents_to_im)
message.psse1.pmu_generator_currents_re.extend(pmu_generator_currents_re)
message.psse1.pmu_generator_currents_im.extend(pmu_generator_currents_im)
message.psse1.pmu_generator_oel_status_signals.extend(
pmu_generator_oel_status_signals)
message.psse1.pmu_branch_currents_three_re.extend(pmu_branch_currents_three_re)
message.psse1.pmu_branch_currents_three_im.extend(pmu_branch_currents_three_im)
Id += 10
print(’Id: ’ ,Id)
with Snap_Receiver.NewPulishData_cv: # condition variable used to both lock and to
notify threads
Snap_Receiver.PublishMessage = message
Snap_Receiver.NewPublication_Ready = True
Snap_Receiver.NewPulishData_cv.notify()
except:
# Print statistics about processing speed
milliEnd = int(round(time.time() ∗1000))
if printInfo :
print("")
print("##### ##### #####")
print("Python Stats")
print("−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−")
print("Duration: ", (milliEnd −milliStart)/1000, "s")
print("Total Pkts:", p)
print("Pkts/Sec: ", p/((milliEnd −milliStart)/1000))
print("##### ##### #####")
for n in range(len(ip)):
tools .turnDataOﬀ(dataRcvr[n], frameId[n])
dataRcvr[n].stop()
Snap_Receiver.dismiss()
for n in range(len(ip)):
tools .turnDataOﬀ(dataRcvr[n], frameId[n])
dataRcvr[n].stop()
65
==PAGE:76==
C. Python code
if __name__ == "__main__":
RUNNING = True
ip = []
tcpPort = []
frameId = []
udpPort = []
#rack1−1
k = 0
for i in range(24):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.16’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(1101+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
#
#rack1−2
k = 0
for i in range(24):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.17’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(1201+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
###
#rack2−1
k = 0
for i in range(24):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.19’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(2101+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
#rack2−2
k = 0
for i in range(24):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.20’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(2201+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
#rack3−1
k = 0
for i in range(24):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.22’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(3101+i)
66
==PAGE:77==
C. Python code
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
#rack3−2
k = 0
for i in range(16):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.23’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(3201+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
#rack4−1
k = 0
for i in range(24):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.25’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(4101+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
#rack4−2
k = 0
for i in range(10):
if k%10==0:
k += 1
ip.append(’10.59.19.26’)
tcpPort.append(4702+k∗10)
frameId.append(4201+i)
udpPort.append(−1)# not used
k += 1
RTDS_PDC(ip, tcpPort, frameId, udpPort, "")
C.2
ASSRAS
import sys, os
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’gpb_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’db_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’assessment_examples’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’real_time_grid_model−master’, ’
RealTimeGridModel’))
import pickle
import threading
import mysql.connector
import sys, traceback # debugging information
67
==PAGE:78==
C. Python code
import copy
#from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_generators,
db_reader_raw_buses, db_reader_raw_lines, db_reader_raw_transformers
from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_generators,
db_reader_raw_buses, \
db_reader_raw_lines, db_reader_raw_transformers, db_reader_raw_loads
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.animation as animation
import numpy as np
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
#from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_generators
import time
import messages_pb2
import messages_extra
from RealTimeGridModel import RTGridModel
#from scipy.sparse import csc_matrix, linalg as sla
#from scipy import linalg
import datetime
import timeit
import socket
#import matplotlib
#matplotlib.use(’TkAgg’)
###############################################
# Server Conﬁguration details
#
##############################################
# Conﬁguration: which snapshot server and which snapshot simulation server
k_snapshot_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’#’192.168.56.101’#
k_snapshot_server_port = 55606
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607
################################################
# Details about snapshots to subscribe
#
################################################
# 1st type of snapshots psse1:
k1_subject_id = ’nordic32_rtds_1’#’nordic32_1’#
k1_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k1_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k1_snapshot_type_tag = ’psse1’
# −−−Network Model (Database) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
# Open database connection:
# Conﬁguration: which network model is used (which database):
k_db_schema = ’nordic32_rtds_1’#k1_subject_id
k_db_host = k_snapshot_server_name
k_db_user = ’sospo’
k_db_password = ’EpuwE13’
# Conﬁguration: which subject/topic is published (the calculated assessments):
68
==PAGE:79==
C. Python code
k_publication_subject_id = ’assras_v082’
k_publication_subject_sub_id = k1_subject_id+ ’_’ + k1_subject_sub_id
k_publication_type_tag = ’aras1’
Snap_Receiver = sr.SnapshotReceiver() # create the snapshots objects (starts in a thread on its own)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyServerConﬁguration(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port,
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name, k_snapshot_simulation_server_port)
# Load the receive cases 0.001
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyPublishCase(k_publication_subject_id, k_publication_subject_sub_id, k1_rate
, k_publication_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.AllignDataset = False # Should the snapshots be aligned before made available or
imedially provided ..
Snap_Receiver.start() # starts the run method
Snap_Receiver._init.wait() # init event waits until connection has been established
# some implementtaion speciﬁc variables
k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive = 1500000
no_of_received_snapshots = 0
last_snapshot_received = 0
k = 0
Snap_Receiver.LogTime = False
snapshot = None
dbcon = mysql.connector.connect(user=k_db_user, password=k_db_password, host=k_db_host,
database=k_db_schema)
cursor = dbcon.cursor()
# Initiate the real−time grid model
RTGM = RTGridModel(cursor, k_db_schema)
RTGM.Y_ﬁll_C = False
dbcon.close()
try:
while last_snapshot_received == 0 and not Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit:
# Locking mechanism: condidtion variable
with Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv:
start = time.time()
while not Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready:
# print(’k−>’, k)
Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv.wait() # waits until data is ready
if Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit: # if the thread has exited, this exception stops the
program
raise Exception(’[application] The snap_receiver object has been terminated (end
main())’)
k += 1
end = time.time()
if Snap_Receiver.LogTime:
print(’ [application] time waiting for condition variable to release : {:3.6 f}ms’.
format(
(end −start) ∗1000.0))
# The snapshots are stored in a tuple ( if the aligned option is chosen)
69
==PAGE:80==
C. Python code
# psse1 = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[0]
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] is True:
snapshot = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[0] # the ﬁrst snapshot is the psse1 snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] = False # The snapshot has been collected
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready = False # set the status boolean to False
if snapshot is not None:
if no_of_received_snapshots > 0:
try:
assras = RTGM.create_aras_snapshot(snapshot)
print(’Id ’ ,snapshot.id)
# Publish the data
with Snap_Receiver.NewPulishData_cv: # condition variable used to both lock
and to notify threads
Snap_Receiver.PublishMessage = assras
Snap_Receiver.NewPublication_Ready = True
Snap_Receiver.NewPulishData_cv.notify()
except:
print(’ error ’)
no_of_received_snapshots += 1
if no_of_received_snapshots >= k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive:
last_snapshot_received = 1
except:
# pdb.set_trace()
print("[application] −−> Exception raised in main():", sys.exc_info()[1], sys.exc_info()[0])
print("Exception in user code:")
print(’−’ ∗60)
traceback.print_exc( ﬁle =sys.stdout)
print(’−’ ∗60)
ﬁnally :
Snap_Receiver.dismiss()
print(’ [application] python example assessment has ﬁnished’)
C.3
ASSAS CM
# −∗−coding: utf−8 −∗−
#!/usr/bin/python3
import sys, os
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’gpb_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’db_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’assessment_examples’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’real_time_grid_model−master’, ’
RealTimeGridModel’))
import mysql.connector
import sys, traceback # debugging information
import numpy as np
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
70
==PAGE:81==
C. Python code
import time
import messages_pb2
import messages_extra
from RealTimeGridModel import RTGridModel
import datetime
import socket
###############################################
# Server Conﬁguration details
#
##############################################
# Conﬁguration: which snapshot server and which snapshot simulation server
k_snapshot_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’#’localhost’#’192.168.56.101’#
k_snapshot_server_port = 55606
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607
################################################
# Details about snapshots to subscribe
#
################################################
# 1st type of snapshots psse1:
k1_subject_id = ’nordic32_rtds_1’#’nordic32_rtds_1’
k1_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k1_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k1_snapshot_type_tag = ’psse1’
# 2nd type of snapshots assras:
k2_subject_id = ’assras_v082’
k2_subject_sub_id = k1_subject_id+’_’+k1_subject_sub_id
k2_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k2_snapshot_type_tag = ’aras1’
# −−−Network Model (Database) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
# Open database connection:
# Conﬁguration: which network model is used (which database):
k_db_schema = ’nordic32_rtds_1’#k1_subject_id
k_db_host = k_snapshot_server_name#’10.59.17.231’#’localhost’
k_db_user = ’sospo’
k_db_password = ’EpuwE13’
# Conﬁguration: which subject/topic is published (the calculated assessments):
k_publication_subject_id = ’demonstrator_matlab_31’
k_publication_subject_sub_id = k1_subject_id+’_’+k1_subject_sub_id
k_publication_type_tag = ’assras_cm’
# DNP3 server
k_dnp3_master_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’
k_dnp3_master_server_port_str = 55608
################################################
#
Margin deﬁnitions
#
################################################
## Determines when the countermeasures are applied to the system
trigger_margin = 3.0 # Percent
71
==PAGE:82==
C. Python code
## Determines when countermeasure information is computed
safety_margin = 4.5 # Percent
security_margin = 5.0 # Percent
################################################
#
Debug settings
#
################################################
debug_power_reserves_HJ = False
debug_power_reduction_HJ = False
printid = False
################################################
#
Countermeasure function
#
################################################
class ASSAS_CM():
def __init__(self, ∗∗kwds):
#
threading.Thread.__init__(self, ∗∗kwds)
#
self .setDaemon(1)
# check!!! dies if main thread dies (I think)
#
self ._init = threading.Event() # event that makes sure that the initialization completes
#
self ._dismissed = threading.Event()
# event that can kill the thread ...
#
self .ThreadExit = False
# boolan used to exit the main loop
self .time_vector = []
self .remedial_ﬂag = 0
self .update_of_previous_cm = True
self .vc_abs = []
self .steady = 0
self .start_simulation = False
self .cm_solution_ID_count = 0
self .snap_ps = []
self .snap_as = []
self .cm_list = list ([messages_pb2.GenericMessage().assras_cm])
self .RTDS = ’rtds’ in k1_subject_id+k1_subject_sub_id
self .no_of_received_snapshots = 0
self .cm_solution_ID_count = 0
self .no_of_snapshots_to_store = 10
self .use_aras_snapshot = True
self .cm_time = 0
self .dT = 30
dbcon = mysql.connector.connect(user=k_db_user, password=k_db_password, host=
k_db_host, database=k_db_schema)
cursor = dbcon.cursor()
# Initiate the real−time grid model
self .RTGM = RTGridModel(cursor, k_db_schema)
self .RTGM.Y_ﬁll_C = False
dbcon.close()
# close the database connection
if
self .RTDS:
# Open the dnp3 socket in the local end and setup the destination:
72
==PAGE:83==
C. Python code
dnp3dest = (k_dnp3_master_server_name, k_dnp3_master_server_port_str)
try:
self .dnp3sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
except socket. error :
print(’ [Receiver thread]
Error when creating socket for dnp3!’)
try:
self .dnp3sock.connect(dnp3dest)
print("connected socket(tcp)")
except socket. error :
str = ’’’
[Receiver thread] ...
######################################
Error while establising connection to dnp3 server.
Likely causes:
−the destination (ip address and port) not correct?
call : dnp3sock.connect(dnp3dest)
data used: {}
###############################################
....
closing sockets
’’’ .format(dnp3dest)
print(str)
self .dnp3sock.close()
self .dnp3sock = None
#
def dismiss( self ):
#
self ._dismissed.set()
def assess( self ,psse1,aras1=[]):
########
self .psse = psse1
self .aras = aras1
#
psse1 = self .psse
#
aras1 = self .aras
self .RTGM.update_Ymat(psse1)
#
message = messages_pb2.GenericMessage()
t1 = ﬂoat(psse1.seconds_of_century)
t1_ms = ﬂoat(psse1.milliseconds_of_second)
t1 = t1 + t1_ms/1000
# check if the time of the CM is greater than PMU time(means that stop has been pressed)
for k_cm in range(len(self.cm_list)):
if ( self .cm_list[k_cm].time_tag_pmu_snapshot_used > t1):
self .cm_list[k_cm]= messages_pb2.GenericMessage().assras_cm
gen_pb_indices = self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G
gen_to_bus_pb_indices = self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full
gen_to_genbus_indices = self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Genbus
#
## if c++ ASSRAS snapshot is used
#
## Generator indexes are incorrect in the RTDS case
#
p = np.ones(self.RTGM.ngen_Red)∗−100
#
p_inv = np.ones(self.RTGM.ngen_Red)∗−100
73
==PAGE:84==
C. Python code
#
for k,i in enumerate(np.array
([7,0,1,21,18,10,8,19,2,6,3,17,20,16,12,15,9,13,14,11,4,5])
): #
hardcoded for nordic32 case
#
p[k] = i
#
p_inv[i] = k
p_inv = np.arange(22)
internal_ind_cpp = np.array(p_inv,dtype=np.int)
ind_cpp = np.concatenate((np.arange(self.RTGM.size_genbus_Red),self.RTGM.
size_genbus_Red+internal_ind_cpp))
if
self .use_aras_snapshot:
id = aras1.id
bus_pb_indices_aras1 = self.RTGM.Red_Genbus#
bus_control_types = np.asarray(aras1.bus_control_types) # bus control types; one pr. bus
; ordered by bus pb indices
bus_types = np.asarray(aras1.bus_types) # bus types; one pr. bus; ordered by bus pb
indices
bus_margins = np.asarray(aras1.bus_margins) # bus margins; one pr. bus; orders by bus
pb indices
bus_z_th_re = np.asarray(aras1.bus_z_th_re) # bus thevenin impedance real parts;
ordered by bus pb indices (?)
bus_z_th_im = np.asarray(aras1.bus_z_th_im) # bus thevenin impedance imag parts;
ordered by bus pb indices (?)
Z_th = bus_z_th_re+1j∗bus_z_th_im
bus_z_in_re = np.asarray(aras1.bus_z_in_re) # bus injection impedance real parts;
ordered by bus pb indices (?)
bus_z_in_im = np.asarray(aras1.bus_z_in_im) # bus injection impedance imag parts;
ordered by bus pb indices (?)
Z_inj = bus_z_in_re+1j∗bus_z_in_im
internal_bus_control_types = np.asarray(aras1.internal_bus_control_types) # intended
for internal generator buses control types (may have been moved to the ’bus_control_types’)
internal_bus_control_types = internal_bus_control_types[internal_ind_cpp]
internal_bus_types = np.asarray(aras1.internal_bus_types) # intended for internal
generator bus types (may have been included in the ’bus_types’)
internal_bus_types = internal_bus_types[internal_ind_cpp]
OP_types = np.concatenate((bus_types[0:self.RTGM.size_genbus_Red],
internal_bus_types))
Z_inj = Z_inj[ind_cpp]
Z_th = Z_th[ind_cpp]
bus_margins = bus_margins[ind_cpp]
else :
bus_margins, Z_th, Z_inj, OP_types = self.RTGM.ASSRAS_margins()
# OBS HJ
if (psse1.pmu_generator_oel_status_signals):
pmu_generator_oel_status_signals = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_generator_oel_status_signals
)[self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Full_G] #generator oel status signals; one for each generator ordered
according to the sospo/snapshot pb generator indices
else :
print(’no pmu_generator_oel_status_signals..’)
74
==PAGE:85==
C. Python code
pmu_generator_oel_status_signals = np.zeros(self.RTGM.ngen_Red,1)
if ( self .RTDS):
# Generators with active OEL
generator_oel_indices = np.where(pmu_generator_oel_status_signals<100)[0]
# Generators with inactive OEL
nc_inactive = np.where(pmu_generator_oel_status_signals == 100)[0]
else : #PSS/E case
# Generators with active OEL
generator_oel_indices = np.where(pmu_generator_oel_status_signals<0)[0]
# Generators with inactive OEL
nc_inactive = np.where(pmu_generator_oel_status_signals == 0)[0]
Gen_ind_Full = self.RTGM.generator_indices_Full
generator_current = 1j∗np.array(psse1.pmu_generator_currents_im)[Gen_ind_Full]+np.array
(psse1.pmu_generator_currents_re)[Gen_ind_Full]
Xd = np.array([l[0] for l in self .RTGM.Red_G_Xd_Xdp])
generator_voltage = (1j∗np.array(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.
gen_bus_indices_Full]+np.array(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full])
−1j∗Xd∗generator_current
#
# Ybus with line, transformer and load contribution
Ybus = self.calc_Ybus(psse1,Xd)
bus_voltage = 1j∗np.array(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.Red_to_Full_node[self.
RTGM.Red_Genbus]]+np.array(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.Red_to_Full_node[self.
RTGM.Red_Genbus]]
gen_OEL_status = self.RTGM.pmu_generator_oel_status_signals[self.RTGM.
Red_G_to_Full_G]
volt_vec = np.concatenate((bus_voltage,generator_voltage))
# Margin norm
active_power_margin, P_inj, S_inj, phi_th, Eth = self.margin_norm(Z_th,Z_inj,volt_vec)
margin_for_auto_apply = trigger_margin∗np.ones(self.RTGM.ngen_Red)
if ( self .no_of_received_snapshots <= 1): #initialize the voltage snapshot storaga
self .volt_vec_prev = np.zeros([len(volt_vec),self.no_of_snapshots_to_store])
#insert the lates snapshot as the ﬁrst column, shift the old ones..
self .volt_vec_prev = np.concatenate((abs(np.expand_dims(volt_vec,axis=1)),self.
volt_vec_prev[:,0:−1]),axis=1)
steady, steady_vec = self.quasi_steady_state(volt_vec, Z_inj, Z_th,OP_types)
if ( self .no_of_received_snapshots > self.no_of_snapshots_to_store):
# Countermeasures
# When system is in quasi steady state and the minimum margin of the vc/nc
# nodes is below the chosen safety margin
margin_crossover_ind = np.where(bus_margins<safety_margin)[0] #ﬁnd all indices where
margin is crossed TO exluded (NaN)
margin_trigger_crossover_ind = np.where(bus_margins<trigger_margin)[0] #ﬁnd all
indices where trigger is crossed TO exluded (NaN)
75
==PAGE:86==
C. Python code
ind_t0 = np.where(OP_types[margin_crossover_ind]==0)[0]
margin_crossover_ind = np.delete(margin_crossover_ind,[ind_t0])
ind_t0 = np.where(OP_types[margin_trigger_crossover_ind]==0)[0]
margin_trigger_crossover_ind = np.delete(margin_trigger_crossover_ind,[ind_t0])
steady_vec=steady_vec[margin_crossover_ind] #use this one to determine wether a
solution should be recomputed...
#only steadyness vector for the critical gens..
P_available, P_available_rel, Pinj = self .power_reserves( volt_vec, Eth, Z_th, Z_inj, Xd,
OP_types, bus_margins,ind_cpp)
if (sum(steady_vec)): # alternative option that evaluates steadyness of the critical gens..
self .cm_time = time.time()
#if (steady && (0<length(margin_crossover_ind))) %ﬁrst solution steady = all
generators below 2%
# Maximum active generator output given in base values
maximum_generator_output = self.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full/self.RTGM.mvabase #
generators.active_power_output_maximum
# Generator MVA base
generator_base = self.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full
# Power reduction
missing_power, Zinj_u_node, P_u_node, Q_u_node = self.power_reduction(
margin_crossover_ind, volt_vec, Eth, Z_th, Z_inj, Xd, OP_types)
# Power reserves
P_available, P_available_rel, Pinj = self .power_reserves( volt_vec, Eth, Z_th, Z_inj,
Xd, OP_types, bus_margins,ind_cpp)
# Countermeasures continued
# Calculation of countermeasure solutions
self .Countermeasures(margin_crossover_ind,margin_trigger_crossover_ind,
missing_power, Pinj, P_available,P_available_rel,Ybus, OP_types, gen_OEL_status,t1,
margin_for_auto_apply,volt_vec, Eth, Z_th,Xd,steady_vec)
if time.time()−self.cm_time>self.dT:# reset the cm list if no
self .cm_list=list([messages_pb2.GenericMessage().assras_cm])
# Create countermeasure messages to be published
message = []
for ll in range(len( self .cm_list)):
message.append(messages_pb2.GenericMessage())
message[ll ]. type = messages_pb2.ASSRAS_CM # assrascm snapshot has enumeration
value 14 in MessageType
message[ll ]. assras_cm.critical_generator_pb_index = self.cm_list[ll].
critical_generator_pb_index
message[ll ]. assras_cm.solution_type = self.cm_list[ll ]. solution_type
message[ll ]. assras_cm.margin_for_auto_apply.extend(self.cm_list[ll].
margin_for_auto_apply)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.time_tag_cm_solution_sent = self.cm_list[ll].
time_tag_cm_solution_sent
76
==PAGE:87==
C. Python code
message[ll ]. assras_cm.time_tag_pmu_snapshot_used = self.cm_list[ll].
time_tag_pmu_snapshot_used
message[ll ]. assras_cm.has_been_applied = self.cm_list[ll].has_been_applied
message[ll ]. assras_cm.time_of_cm_applied = self.cm_list[ll].time_of_cm_applied
message[ll ]. assras_cm.update_of_previous_cm = self.cm_list[ll].update_of_previous_cm
message[ll ]. assras_cm.no_of_cm_generators = self.cm_list[ll].no_of_cm_generators
message[ll ]. assras_cm.cm_generator_pb_indices.extend(self.cm_list[ll].
cm_generator_pb_indices)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.delta_p.extend(self.cm_list[ll ]. delta_p)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.p_new_setpoint.extend(self.cm_list[ll].p_new_setpoint)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.z_th_new_re.extend(self.cm_list[ll].z_th_new_re)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.z_th_new_im.extend(self.cm_list[ll].z_th_new_im)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.z_inj_new_re.extend(self.cm_list[ll].z_inj_new_re)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.z_inj_new_im.extend(self.cm_list[ll].z_inj_new_im)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.p_margins_new.extend(self.cm_list[ll].p_margins_new)
message[ll ]. assras_cm.cm_solution_id = self.cm_list[ll].cm_solution_id
return message
def margin_norm(self, Zth, Zinj, voltage):
# Angle of Thevenin impedance
phi_th = np.angle(Zth)
# phase angle/voltage angle
delta_angle = np.divide(Zinj,Zinj + Zth, where=(Zinj + Zth)!=0+0j)
# Voltage magnitude of Thevenin equivalent voltage source
Eth = voltage∗np.divide(Zinj + Zth,Zinj, where=Zinj!=0+0j)
Eth_m = abs(Eth)
# Power Injection: Solely a function of delta_angle when the voltage
# magnitudes at both ends and the impedance Zth are ﬁxed.
P_inj = np.divide(Eth_m∗abs(voltage),abs(Zth), where=(abs(Zth))!=0+0j)∗np.cos(np.angle(
delta_angle)+phi_th)−np.divide(abs(voltage)∗∗2,abs(Zth), where=abs(Zth)!=0+0j)∗np.cos(phi_th
)
# (5.43)
S_inj = np.conj(np.divide(np.divide(voltage∗(Zinj + Zth),Zinj, where=Zinj!=0+0j)−voltage,
Zth, where=Zth!=0+0j))∗voltage
# Maximum power injection at delta_angle = 180 −phi_th
P_max = −np.divide(Eth_m∗abs(voltage),abs(Zth), where=abs(Zth)!=0+0j)−np.divide(abs(
voltage)∗∗2,abs(Zth), where=abs(Zth)!=0+0j)∗np.cos(phi_th)
# Diﬀerence in maximum and actual power injection
delta_P = P_max −P_inj
# Percentage active power margin: How much active power injection can be
# increased as delta_angle is increased to its
critical value of
active_power_margin = np.divide(delta_P,P_max, out=np.zeros_like(P_max),where=P_max
!=0)∗100
return active_power_margin, P_inj, S_inj, phi_th, Eth
def quasi_steady_state(self, vc_voltage, Zinj_vc, Zth_vc, OP_types):
77
==PAGE:88==
C. Python code
# Maximum and minimum voltages of the vc generator nodes
V_max = np.max(self.volt_vec_prev,axis=1)
V_min = np.min(self.volt_vec_prev,axis=1)
if (0): #original method, based on P variations
# (6.36)
# Determine Thevenin voltages using the actual voltage
E_th = abs(vc_voltage∗(Zinj_vc + Zth_vc)/Zinj_vc)
# (6.37)
# using Vmax, Vmin and Eth determine the extreme values of the maximum
# power injection
P_max = −(E_th∗V_max)/abs(Zth_vc)−V_max∗∗2/abs(Zth_vc)∗np.cos(np.angle(
Zth_vc))
P_min = −(E_th∗V_min)/abs(Zth_vc)−V_min∗∗2/abs(Zth_vc)∗np.cos(np.angle(
Zth_vc))
# (6.38)
# determin greatest deviation
delta_P = P_max −P_min
# (6.37)
# calculate maximum power injection with actual voltage magnitudes
P_0 = −(E_th∗abs(vc_voltage))/abs(Zth_vc) −abs(vc_voltage)∗∗2/abs(Zth_vc)∗np.cos(
np.angle(Zth_vc))
# (6.39)
# determine error with respect to the actual maximum power injection
active_ind = np.where(OP_types >0)[0] #neglect all T0, as they result in NaN...
error = delta_P/P_0 ∗100
steady_vec = (error < 1)
# error = error(active_ind);
# System is steady if error of maximum power injection calculation is
# smaller than 0.5%
#
if (error < 0.5)
if all (error < 2):
steady = True
else :
steady = False
else : #alternative, based on variations in injection voltage ...
error = (V_max−V_min)/abs(vc_voltage)∗100
steady_vec = (error < 1)
if all (error < 2):
steady = True
else :
steady = False
return steady, steady_vec
def power_reduction(self, u_nodes, voltage, Eth, Zth, Zinj, Xd, OP_types):
missing_power = np.zeros(len(u_nodes))
Zinj_u_node = 1j∗np.zeros(len(u_nodes))
78
==PAGE:89==
C. Python code
P_limit = np.zeros(len(u_nodes))
# Description of needed input:
#
# security margin that applies to each node...
# unode = vector of the nodes that have crossed the security boundary ()
# Zth, Zinj: impednces from the assras snapshot [[ext nodes][intern nodes]]
# voltage: vector containing the voltage at the nodes corresponding to Zth..
# Eth: thevenin voltage seen from the nodes corresponding to Zth vector
phi_th = np.angle(Zth)
# (6.1)
# Calculation of the new voltage angle and assuming V/Eth is constant and
# the security margin is known
delta_u = np.arccos((security_margin/100)∗(1+(abs(voltage[u_nodes])/abs(Eth[u_nodes])∗np.
cos(phi_th[u_nodes])))−1)−phi_th[u_nodes]
# (6.2)
# Calculation of the new active power injection into the node
P_u_node = ((abs(voltage[u_nodes]))∗∗2)/abs(Zth[u_nodes])∗(abs(Eth[u_nodes])/abs(voltage[
u_nodes])∗np.cos(delta_u+phi_th[u_nodes])−np.cos(phi_th[u_nodes]))
# (6.3)
# Calculation of the new reactive power injection into the node
Q_u_node = ((abs(voltage[u_nodes]))∗∗2)/abs(Zth[u_nodes])∗(abs(Eth[u_nodes])/abs(voltage
[u_nodes])∗np.sin(delta_u+phi_th[u_nodes])−np.sin(phi_th[u_nodes]))
# vector for reduced power generation
S_inj = (abs(voltage[u_nodes]))∗∗2/np.conj(Zinj[u_nodes])
P_inj = np.real(S_inj)
#
print(P_inj)
for k in range(len(u_nodes)):
u_node = u_nodes[k]
#
Type 0: NC node (used when terminal becomes NC, or when G is oﬄine)
#
Type 1: Internal node behind Xd (active) but external connection node is not voltage
controlled (manually excited)
#
Type 2: Internal node behind Xd but external connection node is voltage
#
controlled (with AVR) (N−1 point)
#
Type 3: AVR controlled VC node (terminal node the active node)
#
Type 4: internal node of manually excited or OEL limeted machine when other
generator at same node has active AVR
### The critical node is a nc node (not a n−1 node...)
# if unode is T2 (AVR active... do this)
if (OP_types[u_node] == 2):
# case: terminal voltage controlled
# 1) Apply (6.9) which represents the curve of constant voltage angle
#
representing the security boundary of the internal node (not active node)
# 2) Apply (6.6) which represents curve of constant voltage magnitude for
# the vc node (external) transferred to the nc ( internal nc) node
79
==PAGE:90==
C. Python code
# 3) The intersection between (6.6) and (6.9) ﬁnds the injection impedance
# that maintains the security margin of the intrtnal node while maintaining
# constant voltage at the vc node.
# 4) Zinj_vc is found and by adding jXd to Zinj_nc
# Zinj = Zinj_internal + j Xd
#OBS! looking for the genbus index, not this one ...
u_node_ext = self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Genbus[u_node −(len(Zth) −len(Xd))] # the
index of the terminal node % u_node −(length(Zth) −length(Xd)) gives gen index
# Injection impedance at the unstable nc node (internal)
Zinj_u_node[k] = np.conj((abs(voltage[u_node])∗∗2)/(P_u_node[k] + 1j∗Q_u_node[
k]))
#
(6.9)
# Radius of circle representing the constant voltage angle of the nc node with
# respect to the security margin
r1 = abs(abs(Zth[u_node])/(2∗np.sin(delta_u[k])))
# The security boundary of the nc node in thimpedance planee injection
m1 = r1∗np.exp(1j∗(delta_u[k] + np.angle(Zth[u_node])+np.pi/2))
#
(6.4)
# Radius of circle representing constant voltage
r = abs(abs(Eth[u_node])∗abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗abs(Zth[u_node]−1j∗Xd[u_node
−(len(Zth)−len(Xd))]))/(abs(Eth[u_node])∗∗2−abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2)
# Vector representing origin to center of the circle
r0 = abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2∗abs(Zth[u_node]−1j∗Xd[u_node −(len(Zth) −len(
Xd))])/(abs(Eth[u_node])∗∗2 −abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2)
# Representing the curve of constant voltage magnitude in the injection
# impedance plane
C0 = r0∗np.exp(1j∗(np.angle(Zth[u_node]−1j∗Xd[u_node −(len(Zth) −len(Xd))])))
#
(6.6)
# Circle of constant voltage magnitude of the vc node transferred to
# the nc node: Zinj, internal = Zinj −jXd
m2 = C0 −1j∗Xd[u_node −(len(Zth) −len(Xd))] #Xd has one value per generator,
hence subtract the number of genbusses to ﬁnd the right index
r2 = r
# function to ﬁnd interception between two circles
#IS = intersection2circles ( m1, r1, m2, r2);
# Intersections between the two circles
crossingPoints = self . CircleIntersection ([m1], [r1 ], [m2], [r2]) [0]
# ﬁnd right solution
pos = np.argmin(abs(crossingPoints −Zinj_u_node[k]))
# new injection impedance for the inactive nc node
Zinj_u_node[k] = crossingPoints[pos]
P_limit[k] = np.real(abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2/np.conj(Zinj_u_node[k] + 1j∗Xd[
u_node −(len(Zth) −len(Xd))]))
# Missing power due to reduction
80
==PAGE:91==
C. Python code
missing_power[k] = (P_inj[k] −P_limit[k])
elif (OP_types[u_node] == 1) or (OP_types[u_node] == 4) or (OP_types[u_node] ==
3): # not sure if T4 should be treated here!
# Injection impedance at the unstable nc node (internal)
Zinj_u_node[k] = np.conj((abs(voltage[u_node])∗∗2)/(P_u_node[k] + 1j∗Q_u_node[
k]))
# Determine missing active power, due to power reduction of instable generator
P_limit[k] = P_u_node[k]
missing_power[k] = (P_inj[k] −P_u_node[k])
if (debug_power_reduction_HJ):
print(’∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗’)
print(’∗
Debug printout
∗’)
print(’∗
Power reduction
∗’)
print(’∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗’)
max_m = max([len(missing_power), len(Zinj_u_node), len(P_u_node), len(Q_u_node)])
print(’ind {:13s}
{:15s}
{:10s}
{:10s}
{:25s}\n’.format(’missing_power’,’
Zinj_u_node’,’P_u_node’,’Q_u_node’,’gen_bus_number’))
for m in range(max_m):
if (m>len(missing_power)):
a = ’’
else :
a = str(’% +9.3f’%missing_power[m])
if (m>len(Zinj_u_node)):
b = ’’ ;
else :
b = str(’(%+3.2f,%+3.2f)’ %(np.real(Zinj_u_node[m]),np.imag(Zinj_u_node[m])))
if (m>len(P_u_node)):
c = ’’ ;
else :
c = str(’%+6.3f’%P_u_node[m])
if (m>len(Q_u_node)):
d = ’’ ;
else :
d = str(’%+6.3f’%Q_u_node[m])
if (m>self.RTGM.ngen_Red):
e = ’’ ;
else :
e = str(’%15d’%self.RTGM.bus_numbers_Full[self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[
u_nodes[m] −(len(Zth) −len(Xd))]])
print(’{:3d} {:13s}
{:15s}
{:10s}
{:10s}
{:25s}\n’.format(m,a,b,c,d,e))
print(’∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗\n’)
return missing_power, Zinj_u_node, P_u_node, Q_u_node
def CircleIntersection ( self , m1, r1, m2, r2):
81
==PAGE:92==
C. Python code
crossingPoints = 1j∗np.zeros([len(m1),2])
for k in range(len(m1)):
x1 = np.real(m1[k])
y1 = np.imag(m1[k])
x2 = np.real(m2[k])
y2 = np.imag(m2[k])
# Distance between two circle centers
d = np.sqrt((x2−x1)∗∗2+(y2−y1)∗∗2)
a = (r1[k]∗∗2 −r2[k]∗∗2 + d∗∗2)/(2∗d)
h = np.sqrt(r1[k]∗∗2−a∗∗2)
m3 = m1[k] + a∗(m2[k]−m1[k])/d
# Coordinates of one of the two intersections
x3 = np.real(m3) + h∗(y2 −y1)/d
y3 = np.imag(m3) −h∗(x2 −x1)/d
crossingPoints[k,1] = x3 + 1j∗y3
# Coordinates of the second intersection
x3 = np.real(m3) −h∗(y2 −y1)/d
y3 = np.imag(m3) + h∗(x2 −x1)/d
crossingPoints[k,0] = x3 + 1j∗y3
return crossingPoints
def power_reserves(self, voltage, Eth, Zth, Zinj, Xd, OP_types, bus_margins,ind_cpp):
Pinj = np.real(abs(voltage)∗∗2/np.conj(Zinj))
phi_th = np.angle(Zth)
# (6.1)
# Calculation of the new voltage angle and assuming V/Eth is constant and
# the security margin is known
delta_u = np.arccos((security_margin/100)∗(1 + (abs(voltage)/abs(Eth)∗np.cos(phi_th))) −1)
−phi_th
# (6.2)
# Calculation of the new active power injection into the node
P_u_node = ((abs(voltage))∗∗2)/abs(Zth)∗(abs(Eth)/abs(voltage)∗np.cos(delta_u + phi_th)
−np.cos(phi_th))
# (6.3)
#Calculation of the new reactive power injection into the node
Q_u_node = ((abs(voltage))∗∗2)/abs(Zth)∗(abs(Eth)/abs(voltage)∗np.sin(delta_u + phi_th)
−np.sin(phi_th))
# The voltage controlled nodes need to be updated −−−
# Injection impedance at the nodes (ﬁrst guess to be close to excact solution)
Zinj_u_node = np.conj((abs(voltage)∗∗2)/(P_u_node + 1j∗Q_u_node)) #is the exact
solution for T1 (manually excited internal op)
82
==PAGE:93==
C. Python code
# ﬁnd the solution for the internal OPs that have active AVR control...
ind_int_avr = np.where((OP_types==2) | (OP_types==4))[0] #ﬁnd internal points where
terminal is vc [genbus][gen] ordering
gen_ind_int_avr = ind_int_avr −(len(Zth) −len(Xd)) #same index in the gen vector
#update only internal points coresponding to ind_int_avr
#
(6.9)
# Radius of circle representing the constant voltage angle of the nc node with
# respect to the security margin
r1 = abs(abs(Zth[ind_int_avr])/(2∗np.sin(delta_u[ind_int_avr])))
# The security boundary of the nc node in thimpedance planee injection
m1 = r1∗np.exp(1j∗(delta_u[ind_int_avr] + np.angle(Zth[ind_int_avr])+np.pi/2))
#
(6.4) −> use the Z_th_internal −jXd as Z_th to better deal with the
#
double gens ...
# Radius of circle representing constant voltage
u_node_ext = self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Genbus[gen_ind_int_avr] # the index of the terminal
node % ind_int_avr −(length(Zth) −length(Xd)) gives gen index
r = abs(abs(Eth[ind_int_avr]∗abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗abs(Zth[ind_int_avr]−1j∗Xd[
gen_ind_int_avr])/(abs(Eth[ind_int_avr])∗∗2 −abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2)))
# Vector representing origin to center of the circle
r0 = abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2∗abs(Zth[ind_int_avr]−1j∗Xd[gen_ind_int_avr])/(abs(Eth[
ind_int_avr])∗∗2 −abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2)
# Representing the curve of constant voltage magnitude in the injection
# impedance plane
C0 = r0∗np.exp(1j∗(np.angle(Zth[ind_int_avr]−1j∗Xd[gen_ind_int_avr])))
#
(6.6)
# Circle of constant voltage magnitude of the vc node transferred to
# the nc node: Zinj, internal = Zinj −jXd
m2 = C0 −1j∗Xd[gen_ind_int_avr] #Xd has one value per generator, hence subtract the
number of genbusses to ﬁnd the right index
r2 = r;
# Intersections between the two circles
crossingPoints = self . CircleIntersection (m1, r1, m2, r2)
# ﬁnd right solution
a = abs(crossingPoints [:,0] −Zinj_u_node[ind_int_avr])
b = abs(crossingPoints [:,1] −Zinj_u_node[ind_int_avr])
pos = np.argmin([a,b], axis=0)
# new injection impedance for the inactive nc node
for k in range(len(ind_int_avr)):
Zinj_u_node[ind_int_avr[k]] = crossingPoints[k,pos[k]]
# structure: [genbusses][internal_gen nodes] we only use the internal nodes
# to determine the P_inj at security limit , we can use p_u_node to T2,
# but have to compute the injection at the terminal of the T1/T4 nodes
# as it is the terminal voltage that is kept constant
P_limit = P_u_node #copy all original injections at the secboundary
83
==PAGE:94==
C. Python code
P_limit[ind_int_avr] = np.real(abs(voltage[u_node_ext])∗∗2/np.conj(Zinj_u_node[
ind_int_avr] + 1j∗Xd[gen_ind_int_avr]))
P_limit = P_limit[(len(Zth)−len(Xd)):len(Zth)]
P_limit_gens = −(np.min([self.RTGM.gen_active_power_output_maximum_Full[self.RTGM.
Red_G_to_Full_G],self.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Full_G]],axis=0)/self.
RTGM.mvabase)
P_limit = np.max([P_limit,P_limit_gens],axis=0)
P_available = −P_limit + Pinj[(len(Zth)−len(Xd)):len(Zth)] #according to stability margin....
+ because Pinj is negative
P_available_rel = −P_available/P_limit_gens
if (debug_power_reserves_HJ):
print(’
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗’)
print(’∗
Debug printout
∗’)
print(’∗
Power reserves
∗’)
print(’
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗’)
max_m = max([len(P_available), len(P_limit), len(P_limit_gens)])
print(’ind
%+13s %+10s %+10s
%+10s %+16s %+16s\n’ %(’P_available’,’P_limit’,’
P_limit_gens’,’bus_number’,’bus_margins(ext)’,’bus_margins(int)’))
for m in range(max_m):
if (m>len(P_available)):
a = ’’
else :
a = str(’% +9.3f’ %P_available[m])
if (m>len(P_limit)):
c = ’’
else :
c = str(’%+6.3f’%P_limit[m])
if (m>len(P_limit_gens)):
d = ’’
else :
d = str(’%+6.3f’%P_limit_gens[m])
if (m>self.RTGM.ngen_Red):
e = ’’
else :
e = str(’%10d’%self.RTGM.bus_numbers_Full[self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[
self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G[m]]])
if (m>self.RTGM.ngen_Red):
f = ’’
f0 = ’’
else :
gen_ind_in_vec_int = m+len(Zth)−len(Xd)
gen_ind_in_vec_ext = self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Genbus[m]
if (OP_types[gen_ind_in_vec_ext]==3):
f0 = ’∗’
f=’’
84
==PAGE:95==
C. Python code
elif (OP_types[gen_ind_in_vec_int]==1):
f = ’∗’
f0=’’
else :
f = ’’
f0 =’’
if (OP_types[gen_ind_in_vec_ext]==0):
f0 = str(’ −−−−−−−’);
else :
f0 = str(’%1s%+3.3f %%’ %(f0,bus_margins[gen_ind_in_vec_ext]))
if (OP_types[gen_ind_in_vec_int]==0):
f = str(’ −−−−−−−’)
else :
f = str(’%1s%+3.3f %%’ %(f,bus_margins[gen_ind_in_vec_int]))
print(’%3d %+13s %+10s %+10s %+10s %+16s %+16s’ %(m,a,c,d,e,f0,f))
print(’
∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗\
n’)
return P_available, P_available_rel, Pinj
def Countermeasures(self, margin_crossover_ind, margin_trigger_crossover_ind, missing_power,
Pinj, P_available,P_available_rel,\
Ybus, OP_types, gen_OEL_status,t1,margin_for_auto_apply,\
voltages, Eth, Zth, Xd, steady_vec):
#
#######################################################
#
Begin inner functions
#
#
#######################################################
def update_existing(cm1,missing_power): # Not used
still_valid = False
u_node = cm1.cm_generator_pb_indices[0]
cm_nodes = cm1.cm_generator_pb_indices[1:]
for x_percent in [0.1,
0.2]: #try to ﬁnd countermeasures that do not use more than 10%
of G’s MVA size, then 20% and if that does not work, exploit 100% if needed
bool_x_percent = (P_available_rel>x_percent); # ﬁnd gens that have available P
that is larger that x% of their MVA size
bool_x_percent_less = ((P_available_rel<=x_percent) and (P_available_rel>0.0))
#gens having total reserve less than x% of the maximum MVA
P_available_rel_constrained = P_available/P_available_rel∗x_percent∗
bool_x_percent+P_available∗bool_x_percent_less # the available P given the above constrains..
if (sum(P_available_rel_constrained(cm_nodes)>−missing_power)):
l = np.where(np.cumsum(P_available_rel_constrained[cm_nodes])>=−
missing_power)[0,0] #ﬁnd the last gen needed to cover the solution
P_xg[0:l] = P_available_rel_constrained[cm_nodes[0:l]]
P_xg[l] = P_xg[l] −(sum(P_available_rel_constrained[cm_nodes[0:l]]) −(−
missing_power))
if (l<len(cm_nodes)):
85
==PAGE:96==
C. Python code
P_xg[(l+1):len(cm_nodes)] = 0
still_valid = True;
break #break for loop
if ( still_valid ): #upate margins and snapshot
P_available[cm_nodes] = P_available[cm_nodes] −P_xg[cm_nodes]
P_limit_gens = −(np.min([self.RTGM.gen_active_power_output_maximum_Full[self.
RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G],self.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G]],axis
=0)/self.RTGM.mvabase)
P_available_rel = −P_available.P_limit_gens
delta_p = [−missing_power, P_xg]
ind_pinj = self.RTGM.size_genbus_Red+cm1.cm_generator_pb_indices
p_new_setpoint = −Pinj[ind_pinj] + delta_p
update_of_previous_cm = True
cm1.time_tag_pmu_snapshot_used.extend(t1)
cm1.delta_p.extend(delta_p∗self.RTGM.mvabase)
cm1.p_new_setpoint.extend(p_new_setpoint∗self.RTGM.mvabase) # 1st: critical, 2nd:
contributing
cm1.update_of_previous_cm.extend(update_of_previous_cm)
#
else %indicate that new solution is needed
#
%additional code comes here...
return cm1, still_valid
def calc_p_margins_new(Zth,Zinj_cm, phi_cm):
VoE = 1/(1+(Zth/Zinj_cm))
a = abs(VoE)∗np.cos(phi_cm)
# Percentage active power margins
# margin
# (5.48)
p_margins_new = −(np.cos(np.angle(VoE)+phi_cm)−a)/(1+a)
for i in range(len(VoE)):
if (np.sin(np.angle(VoE[i])+phi_cm[i])>0):
p_margins_new[i] = (1−p_margins_new[i])∗100
else :
p_margins_new[i] =(p_margins_new[i]−1)∗100
return p_margins_new
def calc_Zinj_cm(Z_th,p_new_setpoint,V_vec,Eth_vec,Xd_,OP_types_):
# compute the new injection imp..
col_ind= ((OP_types_==2) | (OP_types_==4))∗2 + (OP_types_==1) #used to decide
which column to use manual=1|vc=2
Zth_cm = np.asarray(Z_th)[0,:] −1j∗Xd_∗(col_ind==2) # if VC node, use Zth from
terminal to ﬁnd delta..
V = np.zeros(len(col_ind),dtype=complex)
E = np.zeros(len(col_ind),dtype=complex)
for km in range(len(col_ind)):
V[km] = np.asarray(V_vec)[col_ind[km]−1,km]
86
==PAGE:97==
C. Python code
E[km] = np.asarray(Eth_vec)[0,km]
phi_cm = np.angle(Zth_cm)
delta_cm = np.arccos(−p_new_setpoint∗abs(Zth_cm)/(abs(V∗E)) + abs(V/E)∗np.cos(
phi_cm))−phi_cm
Eth_cm = abs(E)
V_cm = abs(V)∗np.exp(1j∗delta_cm)
Zinj_cm = −V_cm/(V_cm−Eth_cm)∗Zth_cm −1j∗Xd_∗(col_ind==2)
#update correct phi (for the internal node) for return
phi_cm = np.angle(np.asarray(Z_th)[0,:])
return Zinj_cm, phi_cm
#
#######################################################
#
End of inner functions
#
#
#######################################################
sol_count = 0 #solution counter
apply_cm = False
# 1. analyze the content of cm_list to ﬁnd if countermesure has previously
#
been found.
self .cm_list_old = self.cm_list[:]
crit_gens_in_old_sol = np.array([g.critical_generator_pb_index for g in self.cm_list_old]) #
the critical generators in the existing CM
self .cm_list = []
# 2. check if previous solution can still be used, and update them.
# 3. compute the missing solutions..
# ﬁnd the relative
electrical distance between generators...
relative_dist = self .rel_elec_dist(Ybus)
# ﬁnd the generators that will be considered for countermesures (manually excited T1 and
AVR T2..)
if
self .RTDS:
vec_manual_gen = (OP_types[(−self.RTGM.ngen_Red):]==1) & ~(gen_OEL_status
<100) #ﬁnd T1 which are manually excited (not OEL limited)
else :
vec_manual_gen = (OP_types[(−self.RTGM.ngen_Red):]==1) & ~(gen_OEL_status<0)
#ﬁnd T1 which are manually excited (not OEL limited)
vec_avr_gen = (OP_types[(−self.RTGM.ngen_Red):]==2)
avalable_gen = vec_manual_gen | vec_avr_gen #ﬁnds the gens that are T2 or T1 that are
manually excited
#
Pset = copy.deepcopy(−Pinj)
for k in range(len(missing_power)): # for each case to treat ..
87
==PAGE:98==
C. Python code
# to deal with terminal point that crossess the boundary, convert it to
# corresponding generator
if (margin_crossover_ind[k]>= self.RTGM.size_genbus_Red):
u_gen_node = margin_crossover_ind[k] −self.RTGM.size_genbus_Red
u_gen_internal = True
print(’u gen node internal’ ,u_gen_node)
else :
u_gen_node = np.where(margin_crossover_ind[k]==self.RTGM.Red_G_to_Genbus)
[0][0] #OBS!!! this implementation needs to be checked (if VC terminal crosses)
u_gen_internal = False # the u_gen_node is at terminal...
#
Would only ﬁnd the index of one generator connected to the VC bus
print(’u gen node external’,u_gen_node)
# get the pb_index for the critical generator
critical_generator_pb_index = np.asarray([self.RTGM.generator_indices_Full[self.RTGM.
Red_G_to_Full_G[u_gen_node]]])
# check exsisting solutions ...
ind_cr_old = np.where(critical_generator_pb_index==crit_gens_in_old_sol)[0]
if (steady_vec[k]): # if the critical generator is in QSS, update
OBS<−This part
needs carfull treatment....
if (ind_cr_old.size>0): #previously solution for cr_gen existing ...
#check if it can be used
has_been_applied
= self.cm_list_old[ind_cr_old[0]].has_been_applied
time_of_cm_applied
= self.cm_list_old[ind_cr_old[0]].time_of_cm_applied
self .cm_solution_ID
= self.cm_list_old[ind_cr_old[0]].cm_solution_id
if (has_been_applied and (t1−time_of_cm_applied) > self.dT ): #make new
snapshot if this has been applied and 30s elapsed...
update_of_previous_cm = False
has_been_applied = False
time_of_cm_applied = 0
self .cm_solution_ID_count += 1
self .cm_solution_ID = self.cm_solution_ID_count
else :
update_of_previous_cm = True
else :
update_of_previous_cm = False
has_been_applied = False
time_of_cm_applied = 0
self .cm_solution_ID_count += 1
self .cm_solution_ID = self.cm_solution_ID_count
if (margin_trigger_crossover_ind.size>0):
if (any(margin_crossover_ind[k]==margin_trigger_crossover_ind)): # send apply
message (might need and improvement...)
if (has_been_applied == False): # if not marked before... apply
has_been_applied = True
time_of_cm_applied = t1
apply_cm = True
I = np.array(sorted(range(len(relative_dist [u_gen_node])), key=lambda i:
relative_dist[u_gen_node][i]))
88
==PAGE:99==
C. Python code
for x_percent in [0.15, 0.2,
1.0]: #try to ﬁnd countermeasures that do not use more
than 15% of G’s MVA size, then 20% and if that does not work, exploit 100% if needed
bool_x_percent = P_available_rel>x_percent # ﬁnd gens that have available P
that is larger that x% of their MVA size
bool_x_percent_less = ((P_available_rel<=x_percent) & (P_available_rel>0.0))
#gens having total reserve less than x% of the maximum MVA
P_available_rel_constrained = P_available/P_available_rel∗x_percent∗
bool_x_percent+P_available∗bool_x_percent_less # the available P given the above constrains..
# for each case (unstable/insecure generator) compute how many % the
# P_available will cover of the needed increase in P (the size of the
countermesure)system_information
Percent_coverage = P_available_rel_constrained/−missing_power[k]
# matrix, where colums show which generators cover [100%, 50% 33% 25%] of
# the size of the counter measure
coverage_matrix = np.array([Percent_coverage>=1,Percent_coverage>=(1/2),
Percent_coverage>=(1/3),Percent_coverage>=(1/4)])
#
print (’Evaluation of the results (distance for 1, 2, 3 and 4)’)
I_1g = np.where(coverage_matrix[0,I])[0]
if (len(I_1g)>=1): bool_1g_sol = True
else : bool_1g_sol = False
I_2g = np.where(coverage_matrix[1,I])[0]
if (len(I_2g)>=2): bool_2g_sol = True
else : bool_2g_sol = False
I_3g = np.where(coverage_matrix[2,I])[0]
if (len(I_3g)>=3): bool_3g_sol = True
else : bool_3g_sol = False
I_4g = np.where(coverage_matrix[3,I])[0]
if (len(I_4g)>=4): bool_4g_sol = True
else : bool_4g_sol = False
I_xg_mat = np.zeros([4,4],dtype=int)
if (bool_1g_sol): I_xg_mat[0,0]
= I[I_1g[0:1]]
if (bool_2g_sol): I_xg_mat[1,0:2] = I[I_2g[0:2]]
if (bool_3g_sol): I_xg_mat[2,0:3] = I[I_3g[0:3]]
if (bool_4g_sol): I_xg_mat[3,0:4] = I[I_4g[0:4]]
N_Gen_in_sol = np.zeros([4],dtype=int)
bool_xg_vec = [bool_1g_sol,bool_2g_sol,bool_3g_sol,bool_4g_sol]
P_xg_mat = np.zeros([4,4])
for kk in range(4):
if (bool_xg_vec[kk]): # kk gen solution possible?
P_xg = np.zeros([4])
for l in range(kk+1): #determine contribution from each gen
if (sum(P_available_rel_constrained[I_xg_mat[kk,0:l+1]])>−
missing_power[k]):
P_xg[0:l+1] = P_available_rel_constrained[I_xg_mat[kk,0:l+1]]
P_xg[l] = P_available_rel_constrained[I_xg_mat[kk,l]] −(sum(
P_available_rel_constrained[I_xg_mat[kk,0:l+1]]) −(−missing_power[k]))
if (l<kk):
P_xg[(l+1):kk] = 0
break
P_xg_mat[kk,:] = P_xg
N_Gen_in_sol[kk] = sum(P_xg != 0)
89
==PAGE:100==
C. Python code
if (any(bool_xg_vec)): # sum to ’or’ the vector (solution exists )
weighted_solutions = np.inf∗np.ones(4)
if (bool_1g_sol): weighted_solutions[0] = (P_xg_mat[0,0]∗relative_dist[I[I_1g
][0],u_gen_node])/P_xg_mat[0,0]
else : weighted_solutions[0] = np.inf
if (bool_2g_sol): weighted_solutions[1] = (P_xg_mat[1,0:2]@relative_dist[I[
I_2g[0:2]],u_gen_node])/sum(P_xg_mat[1,0:2])
else : weighted_solutions[1] = np.inf
if (bool_3g_sol): weighted_solutions[2] = (P_xg_mat[2,0:3]@relative_dist[I[
I_3g[0:3]],u_gen_node])/sum(P_xg_mat[2,0:3])
else : weighted_solutions[2] = np.inf
if (bool_4g_sol): weighted_solutions[3] = (P_xg_mat[3,0:4]@relative_dist[I[
I_4g[0:4]],u_gen_node])/sum(P_xg_mat[3,0:4])
else : weighted_solutions[3] = np.inf
ind = np.argmin(weighted_solutions)
print(’T: %s, CM: %d generator solution (actual:%d), max %d %% of MVA
size, \n’ %(datetime.timedelta(seconds=t1),ind+1,N_Gen_in_sol[ind],x_percent∗100))
print(’Gens: %s, dP:%s\n’ %(str(np.concatenate((np.asarray([self.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G[u_gen_node
]]]]),\
self .RTGM.bus_numbers_Full[self.
RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G[I_xg_mat[ind,0:N_Gen_in_sol[ind
]]]]]))),\
str(np.concatenate((np.asarray([
missing_power[k]]),P_xg_mat[ind,0:N_Gen_in_sol[ind]])))))
P_available[I_xg_mat[ind,0:N_Gen_in_sol[ind]]] = P_available[I_xg_mat[
ind,0:N_Gen_in_sol[ind]]] −P_xg_mat[ind,0:N_Gen_in_sol[ind]]
P_limit_gens = −(np.min([self.RTGM.
gen_active_power_output_maximum_Full[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G],self.RTGM.
gen_mvasizes_Full[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G]],axis=0)/self.RTGM.mvabase)
P_available_rel = −P_available/P_limit_gens
# ﬁll in the snapshot..
#
cm_generator_indices = np.array([u_gen_node, I_xg_mat[ind,0:
N_Gen_in_sol[ind]][0]]) #countermeasure gens
cm_generator_indices = np.concatenate(([u_gen_node], I_xg_mat[ind,0:
N_Gen_in_sol[ind]])) #countermeasure gens
no_of_cm_generators = N_Gen_in_sol[ind]+1
delta_p = np.concatenate([[missing_power[k]], P_xg_mat[ind,0:
N_Gen_in_sol[ind]]])
ind_pinj = cm_generator_indices+self.RTGM.size_genbus_Red
try:
p_new_setpoint = −Pinj[ind_pinj] + delta_p
cm_generator_pb_indices = self.RTGM.generator_indices_Full[self.
RTGM.Red_G_to_Full_G[cm_generator_indices]]
self .cm_list.append(messages_pb2.GenericMessage().assras_cm)
self .cm_list[sol_count]=messages_pb2.GenericMessage().assras_cm
90
==PAGE:101==
C. Python code
self .cm_list[sol_count].critical_generator_pb_index=
critical_generator_pb_index # pb_generator_index for critical generator
self .cm_list[sol_count].solution_type=1 # 1 = electrically closest
generator
self .cm_list[sol_count].margin_for_auto_apply.extend(
margin_for_auto_apply[critical_generator_pb_index]) # Trigger margin for each generators,
which is the same in this case
self .cm_list[sol_count].time_tag_pmu_snapshot_used=t1
self .cm_list[sol_count].has_been_applied=has_been_applied
self .cm_list[sol_count].time_of_cm_applied=time_of_cm_applied #
seconds
self .cm_list[sol_count].update_of_previous_cm=
update_of_previous_cm
self .cm_list[sol_count].no_of_cm_generators=no_of_cm_generators
self .cm_list[sol_count].cm_generator_pb_indices.extend(
cm_generator_pb_indices)
self .cm_list[sol_count].delta_p.extend(delta_p∗self.RTGM.mvabase)
self .cm_list[sol_count].p_new_setpoint.extend(p_new_setpoint∗self.
RTGM.mvabase) # 1st: critical, 2nd: contributing
# ID the solution ...
self .cm_list[sol_count].cm_solution_id=self.cm_solution_ID
print(’cm_solution_id:%d\n’ %self.cm_solution_ID)
# Needs a counter ensuring unique number of solution
ind_cm_genbus = self.RTGM.generator_indices_Full[self.RTGM.
Red_G_to_Full_G[cm_generator_pb_indices]]
Zinj_cm, phi_cm = calc_Zinj_cm([Zth[ind_pinj],Zth[ind_cm_genbus]],
p_new_setpoint,[voltages[ind_pinj],voltages[ind_cm_genbus]],[Eth[ind_pinj],Eth[ind_cm_genbus
]],Xd[cm_generator_pb_indices],OP_types[ind_pinj])
self .cm_list[sol_count].z_th_new_re.extend(np.real(Zth[ind_pinj]))
self .cm_list[sol_count].z_th_new_im.extend(np.imag(Zth[ind_pinj]))
self .cm_list[sol_count].z_inj_new_re.extend(np.real(Zinj_cm))
self .cm_list[sol_count].z_inj_new_im.extend(np.imag(Zinj_cm))
p_margins_new = calc_p_margins_new(Zth[ind_pinj],Zinj_cm, phi_cm)
self .cm_list[sol_count].p_margins_new.extend(p_margins_new)
sol_count += 1 #increment solution counter..
if
self .RTDS and has_been_applied and apply_cm: # Apply
countermeasures
self .apply_rtds_cm()
apply_cm = False
break; #solution found, break loop
except:
print(’Setpoint error ’)
elif (ind_cr_old.size>0): #not QSS, check if previous exists, copy old solution ....
self .cm_list.append(messages_pb2.GenericMessage().assras_cm)
self .cm_list[sol_count] = self .cm_list_old[ind_cr_old[0]]
update_of_previous_cm = True
self .cm_list[sol_count].update_of_previous_cm=update_of_previous_cm
91
==PAGE:102==
C. Python code
sol_count += 1
print(’sol_count=%d\n’ %sol_count)
def apply_rtds_cm(self):
print(’applying RTDS cm’)
def generate_set_request(items):
set_request = messages_pb2.SetRequest()
set_request.no_of_items = len(items)
set_request.items.extend(items)
generic_request = messages_pb2.GenericRequest()
generic_request.id = 412
generic_request.type = messages_pb2.set
generic_request.set.CopyFrom(set_request)
message = messages_pb2.GenericMessage()
message.type = messages_pb2.GENERICREQUEST
message.request.CopyFrom(generic_request)
return message
def add_item(items, dnp3_card_id, dnp3_data_type, dnp3_index, analog_value):
set_request_item = messages_pb2.SetRequestItem()
set_request_item.dnp3_card_id = dnp3_card_id
set_request_item.dnp3_data_type = messages_pb2.Dnp3DataType.Value(
dnp3_data_type.lower())
set_request_item.dnp3_index = dnp3_index
set_request_item.analog_value = analog_value
items.append(set_request_item)
return items
DeltaW = 0#self.psse.pmu_bus_frequencies[1]/50 −1
oﬀset = 0
# ﬁnd the current countermeasure in the cm_list
cm_ind = np.where(self.cm_solution_ID==np.array([cm.cm_solution_id for cm in self.cm_list
]))[0][0]
hygov_droop = 100/np.array ([4,4,4,4,8,8,4,4,100,100,100,100,100,100,100,100,100,4,4,4,1,4])
#
Hardcoded for the nordic32 case. Should be added to the database!
dnp3_items = []
for i , cm_gen in enumerate(self.cm_list[cm_ind].cm_generator_pb_indices):
# If the contributing generator is a SalR
if ( self .RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_variable_types_Full[cm_gen] == ’CONTROL’):
oﬀset = 0.025∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[cm_gen]
dnp3_items = add_item(dnp3_items, self.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_card_ids_Full[
cm_gen], self.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_data_types_Full[cm_gen], self.RTGM.
gen_lrf_dnp3_indexes_Full[cm_gen], (self.cm_list[cm_ind].p_new_setpoint[i]+oﬀset)/(self.
RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[cm_gen]∗hygov_droop[cm_gen])+DeltaW)
92
==PAGE:103==
C. Python code
# If the contributing generator is a RouR
else :
oﬀset = 0.005∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[cm_gen]
dnp3_items = add_item(dnp3_items, self.RTGM.gen_tm_dnp3_card_ids_Full[
cm_gen], self.RTGM.gen_tm_dnp3_data_types_Full[cm_gen], self.RTGM.
gen_tm_dnp3_indexes_Full[cm_gen], (self.cm_list[cm_ind].p_new_setpoint[i]+oﬀset)/(self.
RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[cm_gen]))
message = generate_set_request(dnp3_items)
# Send the set request to the dnp3 master:
request_len = messages_extra.write_message_tcp(self.dnp3sock, message)
print("dnp3 master client has sent set request (to socket at least ) with bytes_transferred=%
d" %request_len)
# Read reply to the set request:
try:
messages_extra.read_message_tcp(self.dnp3sock)
except:
print("dnp3 master client received exception on read of set reply")
def rel_elec_dist( self , Ybus):
# (6.40)
# Determine sub matrices
# admittance matrix of the original system
Yll = Ybus[0:self.RTGM.nbus_Red, 0:self.RTGM.nbus_Red]
# admittance matrix of the nodes behind Xd and connection to original
# system
Ylg = Ybus[0:self.RTGM.nbus_Red, self.RTGM.nbus_Red:]
# (6.42)
# matrix gives relation between load bus and source bus voltage
Flg = −np.linalg.solve(Yll,Ylg)
# (6.42)
# calculation of relative
electrical distance
# The number of columns correspond to the number of terminal nodes in the
# system and the number of rows correspond to the number of internal
# machine nodes
Rlg = (1−abs(Flg))
# relative
electrical distance reduced to generator buses
Rgg = Rlg[self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full,:]
Rggn = []
for n in range(Ybus.shape[0]−(self.RTGM.nbus_Red)):
# substract the distance to node at terminals
Rggn.append(Rgg[:,n] −Rgg[n,n])
relative_dist = np.asarray(Rggn).T
return relative_dist
def calc_Ybus(self,psse1,Xd):
93
==PAGE:104==
C. Python code
# The Ybus consists of the busses in the system and the internal nodes seen
# behind Xd of the generators
disable_load = 1; #include load? put this then to 0;
## start by reading the snapshot values...
## Generators
# Generator current
generator_current = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_generator_currents_re)[self.RTGM.
generator_indices_Full] + 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_generator_currents_im)[self.RTGM.
generator_indices_Full]
# Generator voltage
generator_voltage = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.
generator_indices_Full] + 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.
generator_indices_Full]
## Line
# Line voltage
v_f_line = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,0]]
+ 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,0]]
v_t_line = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,1]]
+ 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,1]]
# Line current
i_f_line = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_from_re)[self.RTGM.
Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,2]] + 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_from_im)[self.RTGM.
Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,2]]
i_t_line = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_to_re)[self.RTGM.
Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,3]] + 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_to_im)[self.RTGM.
Red_line_to_Red_nodes[:,3]]
## Transformer
# Transformer voltage
v_f_tf = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,0]]
+ 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,0]]
v_t_tf = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,1]]
+ 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,1]]
# Transformer current
i_f_tf = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_from_re)[self.RTGM.
Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,3]] + 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_from_im)[self.
RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,3]]
i_t_tf = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_to_re)[self.RTGM.
Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,4]] + 1j∗np.asarray(psse1.pmu_branch_currents_to_im)[self.RTGM.
Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[:,4]]
## Bus
# Bus voltage
bus_voltage = np.asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_re)[self.RTGM.bus_indices_Red] + 1j∗np.
asarray(psse1.pmu_bus_voltages_im)[self.RTGM.bus_indices_Red]
## Load
full_nodes = self .RTGM.nbus_Red + self.RTGM.ngen_Red
Ybus = np.zeros([full_nodes,full_nodes],dtype=’complex’)
## Lines
94
==PAGE:105==
C. Python code
line_ft = []
for q in range(len(v_f_line)):
# Based on pi−equivalent of transmission lines (Kundur)
den = v_f_line[q] ∗v_f_line[q] −v_t_line[q] ∗v_t_line[q]
if (abs(den)>1E−6):
yft = (v_t_line[q] ∗i_f_line[q] −v_f_line[q] ∗i_t_line[q]) / den
else :
yft = 0+0∗1j
ys = (i_f_line[q] + i_t_line[q]) / (v_f_line[q] + v_t_line[q])
yd = yft+ys
yf_ld = −i_f_line[q]/v_f_line[q] #load admittance contribution from end
yt_ld = −i_t_line[q]/v_t_line[q] #load admittance contribution to end
if (np.isnan(yft)):
yft=0.0
if (np.isnan(ys)):
ys=0.0;
if (np.isnan(yd)):
yd=0.0
if (np.isnan(yf_ld)):
yf_ld=0.0
if (np.isnan(yt_ld)):
yt_ld=0.0
if (np. isinf (yft+ys+yd+yf_ld+yt_ld)):
f=0
if (disable_load):
yf_ld = 0.000001∗(1+1j)
yt_ld =0.000001∗(1+1j) #to avoid singularity problems,,
#
line_ft = [line_ft, yft ]
# Yii
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0]]
= Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0]] + yd
+ yf_ld
# Ykk
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1]]
= Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1]] + yd
+ yt_ld
# Yik
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1]]
= Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1]] −yft
# Yki
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0]]
= Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_line_to_Red_nodes[q,0]] −yft
## Transformer
# check these calculations ...
# Transformer admittance
tf_leak = []
95
==PAGE:106==
C. Python code
tf_leak_j = []
c_ratio = []
for q in range(len(v_f_tf)):
# Based on pi−equivalent of transformers (Kundur)
# 1/n
if (abs(i_t_tf[q]) < 1E−10):
c = 1
c_ratio = np.append(c_ratio,c)
# Leakage admittance
y = 0+0∗1j
yf_ld = 0+0∗1j
yt_ld = 0+0∗1j
else :
c = abs(i_f_tf[q]) / abs(i_t_tf[q])
c_ratio = np.append(c_ratio,c)
# Leakage admittance
y = i_f_tf[q] / ( c ∗c ∗v_f_tf[q] −c ∗v_t_tf[q])
yf_ld = −i_f_tf[q]/v_f_tf[q] #load admittance contribution from end
yt_ld = −i_t_tf[q]/v_t_tf[q] #load admittance contribution to end
if (np.isnan(y)):
y=0
c=1
if (np.isnan(yf_ld)):
yf_ld = 0;
if (np.isnan(yt_ld)):
yt_ld=0
if (disable_load):
yf_ld =0.000001∗(1+1j)
yt_ld =0.000001∗(1+1j)
if (np. isinf (y+yf_ld+yt_ld)):
f=0
# Yii
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q
,0]] = Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,0]]
+ c ∗c ∗y+yf_ld
# Ykk
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q
,1]] = Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,1]]
+ y +yt_ld
# Yik
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q
,1]] = Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,0],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,1]]
−c∗y
# Yki
Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q
,0]] = Ybus[self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,1],self.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Red_nodes[q,0]]
−c∗y
96
==PAGE:107==
C. Python code
## add synchronous reactances..
## OBS!! change to using the asras generator vector later on!!
for l in range(len( self .RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G)):
# external nodes are in the range 1..length(buses.pb_voltage_index)
# internal nodes range from length(buses.pb_voltage_index)+1
# ..length(buses.pb_voltage_index)+no_gens
ind_int = self.RTGM.nbus_Red+l # internal node behind xD
ind_ext = self.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[l]
#external node (terminal)
y_xd = 1/(1j∗Xd[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G[l]])
#y_xd = 1./(1j∗4);
# generators load contribution (only on terminal ..) cancells out by
# contributions from other lines ..
yld = −generator_current[self.RTGM.Full_G_to_Red_G[l]]/generator_voltage[self.RTGM.
Full_G_to_Red_G[l]]
if (disable_load):
yld = 0
#add to diagonals...
Ybus[ind_ext,ind_ext] = Ybus[ind_ext,ind_ext] + y_xd + yld
Ybus[ind_int,ind_int] = Ybus[ind_int,ind_int] + y_xd
#add the oﬀdiagonals..
Ybus[ind_int,ind_ext] = Ybus[ind_int,ind_ext] −y_xd
Ybus[ind_ext,ind_int] = Ybus[ind_ext,ind_int] −y_xd
return Ybus
if __name__ == "__main__":
ASSAS = ASSAS_CM()
#############################################
# Create the snapshot receiver object
#
############################################
Snap_Receiver = sr.SnapshotReceiver() # create the snapshots objects (starts in a thread on its
own)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyServerConﬁguration(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port,
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name, k_snapshot_simulation_server_port)
# Subscribe to PSSE case
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
if ASSAS.use_aras_snapshot:
# Subscribe to ASSRAS case
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k2_subject_id, k2_subject_sub_id, k2_rate,
k2_snapshot_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyPublishCase(k_publication_subject_id, k_publication_subject_sub_id,
k1_rate, k_publication_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.AllignDataset = True # PSSE and ARAS snapshots must be aligned
Snap_Receiver.start() # starts the run method
Snap_Receiver._init.wait() # init event waits until connection has been established
#
self .SR = Snap_Receiver # reference to the object (so it kan be killed ..)
# some implementtaion speciﬁc variables
k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive = 1000000
ASSAS.no_of_received_snapshots = 0
97
==PAGE:108==
C. Python code
last_snapshot_received = 0
k = 0
Snap_Receiver.LogTime = False
snapshot_psse1 = None
snapshot_aras1 = None
print(’ASSAS_CM started’)
try:
while last_snapshot_received == 0 and not Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit:
# Locking mechanism: condidtion variable
has_aras1 = False #check is both snapshots have been received
has_psse1 = False
ID_match = False #true if both snapshots come from same ID
while ((last_snapshot_received == 0) and not ID_match): # continue until both
snapshots have been received.
#while loop to obtain both snapshots
with Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv:
start = time.time()
while not Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready:
Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv.wait() # waits until data is ready
if Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit: # if the thread has exited, this exception stops
the program
raise Exception(’[application] The snap_receiver object has been
terminated (end main())’)
k += 1
end = time.time()
if Snap_Receiver.LogTime:
print(’ [application] time waiting for condition variable to release : {:3.6 f}
ms’.format(
(end −start) ∗1000.0))
# The snapshots are stored in a tuple ( if the aligned option is chosen)
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] is True:
snapshot_psse1 = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[0] # the ﬁrst snapshot is the
psse1 snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
if snapshot_psse1 is not None:
has_psse1 = True
ASSAS.snap_ps = snapshot_psse1
if printid :
print(’IDpsse: %d ’%snapshot_psse1.id)
if ASSAS.use_aras_snapshot:
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[1] is True:
snapshot_aras1 = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[1] # the second snapshot is
the aras1 snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[1] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
if snapshot_aras1 is not None:
has_aras1 = True
ASSAS.snap_as = snapshot_aras1
if printid :
print(’IDaras: %d ’%snapshot_aras1.id)
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready = False # set the status boolean to False
if ASSAS.use_aras_snapshot:
#check is both snapshots have been received
98
==PAGE:109==
C. Python code
# if both snapshot have same ID, terminate while loop and continue to assessment
if (has_aras1 and has_psse1):
if (snapshot_aras1.id == snapshot_psse1.id):
ID_match = True
ASSAS.no_of_received_snapshots += 1
#
print (’ID OK. GO!’)
else :
print(’>>>ID does not macth, though both types have been received..
wait for next snapshot’)
else :
if has_psse1:
ID_match = True
ASSAS.no_of_received_snapshots += 1
#
print (’ID OK. GO!’)
if ASSAS.no_of_received_snapshots >= k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive:
last_snapshot_received = 1
# Assessment
message = ASSAS.assess(snapshot_psse1,snapshot_aras1)
for k in range(len(message)):
with Snap_Receiver.NewPulishData_cv: # condition variable used to both lock and to
notify threads
Snap_Receiver.PublishMessage = message[k]
Snap_Receiver.NewPublication_Ready = True
Snap_Receiver.NewPulishData_cv.notify()
except:
print("[application] −−> Exception raised in main():", sys.exc_info()[1], sys.exc_info()[0])
print("Exception in user code:")
print(’−’ ∗60)
traceback.print_exc( ﬁle =sys.stdout)
print(’−’ ∗60)
ﬁnally :
Snap_Receiver.dismiss()
if ASSAS.RTDS:
ASSAS.dnp3sock.close()
print(’ [application] python example assessment has ﬁnished’)
C.4
RTDS Control Application
import sys, os
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’gpb_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’db_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’assessment_examples’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’real_time_grid_model−master’, ’
RealTimeGridModel’))
99
==PAGE:110==
C. Python code
import threading
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
import mysql.connector
from RealTimeGridModel import RTGridModel
import numpy as np
import time
import socket
import messages_pb2
import messages_extra
#from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_generators,
db_reader_raw_buses, \
#
db_reader_raw_lines, db_reader_raw_transformers, db_reader_raw_loads
#
###############################################
# Server Conﬁguration details
#
##############################################
# Conﬁguration: which snapshot server and which snapshot simulation server
k_snapshot_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’#’localhost’#’192.168.56.101’#
k_snapshot_server_port = 55606
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607
################################################
# Details about snapshots to subscribe
#
################################################
# 1st type of snapshots psse1:
k1_subject_id = ’nordic32_rtds_1’#’nordic32_1’
k1_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k1_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k1_snapshot_type_tag = ’psse1’
k2_subject_id = ’rtu_nordic32_rtds_1’
k2_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k2_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_4
k2_snapshot_type_tag = ’dnp3read1’
# −−−Network Model (Database) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
# Open database connection:
# Conﬁguration: which network model is used (which database):
k_db_schema = ’nordic32_rtds_1’
k_db_host = k_snapshot_server_name#’10.59.17.231’#’localhost’
k_db_user = ’sospo’
k_db_password = ’EpuwE13’
# DNP3 server
k_dnp3_master_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’
k_dnp3_master_server_port_str = 55608
#from tkinter import ∗#Tk, Label, Button, Entry, IntVar, END, W, E
import tkinter as tk
from tkinter import Tk, ttk, Frame, Button, Label, Entry, Text, Checkbutton, \
100
==PAGE:111==
C. Python code
Scale, Listbox, Menu, BOTH, RIGHT, RAISED, N, E, S, W, font, \
HORIZONTAL, END, FALSE, IntVar, StringVar, messagebox as box
class DataKeeper(threading.Thread):
def __init__(self, ∗∗kwds):
threading.Thread.__init__(self, ∗∗kwds)
self .setDaemon(1)
# check!!! dies if main thread dies (I think)
self ._init = threading.Event() # event that makes sure that the initialization completes
self ._dismissed = threading.Event()
# event that can kill the thread ...
self .ThreadExit = False
# boolan used to exit the main loop
self .psse_receive_time = time.time()
self .dnp3_receive_time = time.time()
def dismiss( self ):
"""Sets a ﬂag to tell the thread to exit when done with current job."""
self ._dismissed.set()
def run(self ): # Add your own code here!
""" The main loop for the PlotDataKeeper thread"""
# 1: create the SnapshotReceiver object and start the SR thread
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
dbcon = mysql.connector.connect(user=k_db_user, password=k_db_password, host=
k_db_host, database=k_db_schema)
cursor = dbcon.cursor()
# Initiate the real−time grid model
self .RTGM = RTGridModel(cursor, k_db_schema)
self .P_margin = np.ones(self.RTGM.ngen_Red)∗100
self .RTGM.Y_ﬁll_C = False # use the pyhthon ﬁll function, not cpp
dbcon.close()
# close the database connection
self .LoadsP = []
self .LoadsQ = []
#############################################
# Create the snapshot receiver object
#
############################################
Snap_Receiver = sr.SnapshotReceiver() # create the snapshots objects (starts in a thread on
its own)
# Load the server conﬁgureations
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyServerConﬁguration(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port
,
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name,
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port)
# Load the receive cases 0.001
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k2_subject_id, k2_subject_sub_id, k2_rate,
k2_snapshot_type_tag)
# additonal conﬁgurations of variables should be done here, before start ()
Snap_Receiver.AllignDataset = False # Should the snapshots be aligned before made available
or imedially provided ..
Snap_Receiver.start() # starts the run method
101
==PAGE:112==
C. Python code
Snap_Receiver._init.wait() # init event waits until connection has been established
# some implementtaion speciﬁc variables
k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive = 1000
no_of_received_snapshots = 0
last_snapshot_received = 0
k = 0
snapshot = None
dnp3snapshot = None
try:
while last_snapshot_received == 0 and not Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit and not self.
_dismissed.isSet():
# Locking mechanism: condidtion variable
with Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv:
while not Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready:
Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv.wait() # waits until data is ready
if Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit: # if the thread has exited, this exception stops
the program
raise Exception(’[application] The snap_receiver object has been
terminated (end main())’)
k += 1
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] is True:
snapshot = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[0] # the ﬁrst snapshot is the psse1
snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[1] is True:
dnp3snapshot = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[1] # the ﬁrst snapshot is the
psse1 snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[1] = False
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready = False # set the status boolean to False
if dnp3snapshot is not None:
self .dnp3_receive_time = time.time()
self .LoadsP = dnp3snapshot.load_porder
self .LoadsQ = dnp3snapshot.load_qorder
dnp3snapshot = None
if snapshot is not None:
self .psse_receive_time = time.time()
self .RTGM.update_Ymat(snapshot)
snapshot = None
if not self ._init. isSet () :
self ._init. set()
#
no_of_received_snapshots += 1
if no_of_received_snapshots >= k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive:
last_snapshot_received = 1
except:
print("[application] −−> Exception raised in main():", sys.exc_info()[1], sys.exc_info()
[0])
print("Exception in user code:")
print(’−’∗60)
print(’−’∗60)
102
==PAGE:113==
C. Python code
ﬁnally :
Snap_Receiver.dismiss()
print(’ [application] python example assessment has ﬁnished’)
class RTDS_Control(Frame):
def __init__(self, parent):
# Start data keeper
self .dataKeeper = DataKeeper()
self .dataKeeper.start()
# starts in a thread on its own (inherits threading.Thread)
self .dataKeeper._init.wait() # wait until at least one snapshot has been received
self .connect_dnp3()
self .nL = 0
self .sc_time = 0.1
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.RTDS:
self .bus_names = list(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_names_Full)
self .gen_names = list(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_names_Full)
self .line_names = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.lines[’branch_names’]
self .load_names = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.loads[’load_names’]
self .transformer_names = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.transformers[’branch_names’]
self .nordic32_rtds_gen_ids = np.array([’G18’,’G17’,’G19’,’G15’,’G22’,’G21’,’G20’,’G16’,’
G8’,’G4’,’G7’,’G2’,’G6’,’G1’,’G3’,’G5’,’G10’,’G12’,’G14’,’G11’,’G9’,’G13’])
else :
self .bus_names = []
self .gen_names = []
self .line_names = []
self .load_names = []
self .transformer_names = []
for i in range( self .dataKeeper.RTGM.ngen_Red):
self .gen_names.append(’G’+np.str(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.generators[’bus_numbers’][i
]).zﬁll(4)+np.str(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.generators[’generator_ids’][i]).zﬁll(2))
for i in range(len( self .dataKeeper.RTGM.lines[’branch_names’])):
self .line_names.append(’A’+np.str(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.lines[’from_bus_numbers’][
i]).zﬁll(4)+np.str(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.lines[’to_bus_numbers’][i]).zﬁll(4)+np.str(self.dataKeeper.
RTGM.lines[’branch_ids’][i]).zﬁll (2))
# Set up tkinter GUI
Frame.__init__(self, parent, width=1000, height = 400, background="white")
Frame.grid(self ,row=0, column=0, sticky=N+S+W+E)
rightFrame = tk.Frame(parent, width=1000, height = 100, background="white")
rightFrame.grid(row=1, column=0, sticky=N+S+W+E)
self .circleCanvas = tk.Canvas(rightFrame, width=40, height=40, bg=’white’,
highlightthickness=0)
self .circleCanvas.grid(row=0, column=0, sticky=N+S+W+E)
self .statusLED = self.circleCanvas.create_oval(10, 10, 30, 30, width=0, ﬁll =’green’)
self .parent = parent
self .parent. title ("RTDS Controller: "+k1_subject_id)
self . style = ttk.Style()
self . style .theme_use("default")
#
self .centreWindow()
#
self .pack( ﬁll =BOTH, expand=1)
103
==PAGE:114==
C. Python code
menubar = Menu(self.parent)
self .parent.conﬁg(menu=menubar)
ﬁleMenu = Menu(menubar,tearoﬀ=False)
ﬁleMenu.add_command(label="Exit", command=self.onExit)
menubar.add_cascade(label="File", menu=ﬁleMenu)
self .Pvar = −1
self .Qvar = −1
# Font
Font = ’Consolas’
Fontsize = 10
#
# Labels
#
# Measurements
self .M1_text = StringVar()
self .M1 = Label(self, textvariable=self.M1_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .M2_text = StringVar()
self .M2 = Label(self, textvariable=self.M2_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .M3_text = StringVar()
self .M3 = Label(self, textvariable=self.M3_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .M4_text = StringVar()
self .M4 = Label(self, textvariable=self.M4_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .M5_text = StringVar()
self .M5 = Label(self, textvariable=self.M5_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .M1.grid(row=2, column=3, sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
self .M2.grid(row=3, column=3, sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
self .M3.grid(row=4, column=3, sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
self .M4.grid(row=5, column=3, sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
self .M5.grid(row=6, column=3, sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
#
# Component Desctiptions
self .D1_text = StringVar()
self .D1 = Label(self, textvariable=self.D1_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .D2_text = StringVar()
self .D2 = Label(self, textvariable=self.D2_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .D3_text = StringVar()
self .D3 = Label(self, textvariable=self.D3_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .D4_text = StringVar()
self .D4 = Label(self, textvariable=self.D4_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .D5_text = StringVar()
self .D5 = Label(self, textvariable=self.D5_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
self .D6_text = StringVar()
self .D6 = Label(self, textvariable=self.D6_text, bg="white", anchor="w", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
104
==PAGE:115==
C. Python code
self .D1.grid(row=5, column=0, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .D2.grid(row=6, column=0, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .D3.grid(row=7, column=0, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .D4.grid(row=8, column=0, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .D5.grid(row=9, column=0, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .D6.grid(row=10, column=0, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
#
# Additional labels
self .L1 = Label(self, text="", bg="white", font=(Font, Fontsize))
self .L1.grid(row=8, column=3, sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
#
# Fixed lables
self .BlankLabel = Label(self, text=’{: <1}’.format(’’), bg="white", font=(Font, Fontsize))
self .BlankLabel.grid(row=0, column=2, sticky=W+E, columnspan=1, padx=50)
self .MeasLabel = Label(self, text=’{: ^40}’.format(’Measurements’), bg="white", font=(Font,
Fontsize))
f = font.Font(self .MeasLabel, self.MeasLabel.cget("font"))
f .conﬁgure(underline = True)
self .MeasLabel.conﬁgure(font=f)
self .MeasLabel.grid(row=0, column=3, sticky=W, columnspan=3)
self .ULLabel = Label(self, text=’{: ^40}’.format(’’), bg="white", font=f)
self .ULLabel.grid(row=7, column=3, sticky=W, columnspan=3)
self .plus = Label(self, text=’+’, bg="white", font=(Font, Fontsize))
self .plus.grid(row=9, column=4, columnspan=1, sticky=W+E)
self .FromTo = Label(self, text=’{: <10} {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’’, ’From’,’To’), bg="white"
, anchor="w", font=(Font, Fontsize))
self .FromTo.grid(row=1, column=3, sticky=W, columnspan=3)
#
# Entries
vcmd1 = self.register ( self .validateP) # we have to wrap the command
vcmd2 = self.register ( self .validateQ) # we have to wrap the command
self .E1 = Entry(self, validate="key", validatecommand=(vcmd1, ’%P’))
self .E2 = Entry(self, validate="key", validatecommand=(vcmd1, ’%P’))
self .E3 = Entry(self, validate="key", validatecommand=(vcmd2, ’%P’))
self .E1.grid(row=9, column=3, columnspan=3, sticky=W+E)
self .E2.grid(row=9, column=3, columnspan=1, sticky=W+E)
self .E3.grid(row=9, column=5, columnspan=1, sticky=W+E)
#
# Buttons
self .B1 = Button(self, text="Apply setpoint", command=lambda: self.update_btn("Btn1"))
self .B2 = Button(self, text="Open breaker", command=lambda: self.update_btn("Btn2"))
self .B3 = Button(self, text="Close breaker", command=lambda: self.update_btn("Btn3"))
self .B4 = Button(self, text="SC at from bus", command=lambda: self.update_btn("Btn4"))
self .B5 = Button(self, text="SC at to bus", command=lambda: self.update_btn("Btn5"))
self .B1.grid(row=10, column=3,sticky=W+E, columnspan=3)
self .B2.grid(row=9, column=3,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B3.grid(row=9, column=5,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B4.grid(row=10, column=3,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1,pady=2)
self .B5.grid(row=10, column=5,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1,pady=2)
105
==PAGE:116==
C. Python code
#
# Dropdown menus
# Create a Tkinter variable for the dropdown menu
self .tkvar1 = StringVar(self.parent)
self .tkvar2 = StringVar(self.parent)
TypeChoices = [’Bus’,’Generator’,’Line’, ’Load’,’Transformer’]
self . default = ’−
select
−’
self .CompChoices = {self.default}
self .tkvar1.set( self . default) # set the default option
self .tkvar2.set( self . default)
self .TypeMenu = ttk.Combobox(self, textvariable=self.tkvar1, values=TypeChoices)
Label(self , text=’{: ^25}’.format(’Component Type’), bg="white", font=(Font, Fontsize)).grid
(row = 0,columnspan=1, column = 0,sticky=W+E)
self .TypeMenu.grid(row = 1, column = 0,columnspan=1,sticky=W+E, padx=10)
self .CompMenu = ttk.Combobox(self, textvariable=self.tkvar2, values=self.CompChoices)
Label(self , text=’{: ^25}’.format(’Component Name’), bg="white", font=(Font, Fontsize)).grid
(row = 2,columnspan=1, column = 0,sticky=W+E)
self .CompMenu.grid(row = 3, column = 0,columnspan=1,sticky=W+E, padx=10)
self .check1 = tk.BooleanVar()
self .check2 = tk.BooleanVar()
self .check1.set(False)
self .check2.set(False)
self .C1 = tk.Checkbutton(self, text=’Line 1’, variable=self.check1, bg="white", onvalue=True,
command=self.cb)
self .C2 = tk.Checkbutton(self, text=’Line 2’, variable=self.check2, bg="white", onvalue=True,
command=self.cb)
self .C1.grid(row=8, column=3)
self .C2.grid(row=8, column=5)
# Initial available options
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .TypeMenu[’state’] = ’normal’
self .CompMenu[’state’] = ’disabled’
# Initial layout
self .B1.grid_remove()
self .B2.grid_remove()
self .B3.grid_remove()
self .B4.grid_remove()
self .B5.grid_remove()
self .E1.grid_remove()
self .E2.grid_remove()
106
==PAGE:117==
C. Python code
self .E3.grid_remove()
self .plus.grid_remove()
self .FromTo.grid_remove()
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .tkvar1.trace(’w’, self .change_dropdown_type)
self .tkvar2.trace(’w’, self .change_dropdown_comp)
self .parent.after (1, self .update_status)
def centreWindow(self):
w = 600
h = 300
sw = self.parent.winfo_screenwidth()
sh = self .parent.winfo_screenheight()
x = (sw −w)/2
y = (sh −h)/2
self .parent.geometry(’%dx%d+%d+%d’ % (w, h, x, y))
def onExit(self):
self .parent.destroy()
self .quit()
def onConﬁrm(self):
box.showinfo("Information", "Thank you!")
################################
def connect_dnp3(self):
# Open the dnp3 socket in the local end and setup the destination:
dnp3dest = (k_dnp3_master_server_name, k_dnp3_master_server_port_str)
try:
self .dnp3sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
except socket. error :
print(’ [Receiver thread]
Error when creating socket for dnp3!’)
try:
self .dnp3sock.connect(dnp3dest)
print("connected socket(tcp)")
self .dnp3_connected = True
except socket. error :
str = ’’’
[Receiver thread] ...
######################################
Error while establising connection to dnp3 server.
Likely causes:
−Simulation not running?
−the destination (ip address and port) not correct?
call : dnp3sock.connect(dnp3dest)
data used: {}
107
==PAGE:118==
C. Python code
###############################################
....
closing sockets
’’’ .format(dnp3dest)
print(str)
self .dnp3sock.close()
self .dnp3sock = None
self .dnp3_connected = False
def send_dnp3_request(self, items, sock):
set_request = messages_pb2.SetRequest()
set_request.no_of_items = len(items)
set_request.items.extend(items)
generic_request = messages_pb2.GenericRequest()
generic_request.id = 412
generic_request.type = messages_pb2.set
generic_request.set.CopyFrom(set_request)
message = messages_pb2.GenericMessage()
message.type = messages_pb2.GENERICREQUEST
message.request.CopyFrom(generic_request)
# Send the set request to the dnp3 master:
request_len = messages_extra.write_message_tcp(sock, message)
print("dnp3 master client has sent set request (to socket at least ) with bytes_transferred=%
d" %request_len)
print(message)
# Read reply to the set request:
try:
messages_extra.read_message_tcp(sock)
except:
print("dnp3 master client received exception on read of set reply")
def add_item(self, items, dnp3_card_id, dnp3_data_type, dnp3_index, value):
set_request_item = messages_pb2.SetRequestItem()
set_request_item.dnp3_card_id = dnp3_card_id
set_request_item.dnp3_data_type = messages_pb2.Dnp3DataType.Value(str.lower(
dnp3_data_type))
set_request_item.dnp3_index = dnp3_index
if set_request_item.dnp3_data_type == 2:
set_request_item.analog_value = value
else :
set_request_item.binary_value = value
items.append(set_request_item)
return items
def change_dropdown_type(self,∗args):
self .tkvar2.set( self . default)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == self.default :
self .TypeMenu[’state’] = ’normal’
self .CompMenu[’state’] = ’disabled’
self .B1.grid_remove()
self .B2.grid_remove()
108
==PAGE:119==
C. Python code
self .E1.grid_remove()
self .E2.grid_remove()
self .E3.grid_remove()
self .plus.grid_remove()
self .FromTo.grid_remove()
self .M1_text.set(’’)
self .M2_text.set(’’)
self .M3_text.set(’’)
self .M4_text.set(’’)
self .M5_text.set(’’)
self .D1_text.set(’’)
self .D2_text.set(’’)
self .D3_text.set(’’)
self .D4_text.set(’’)
self .D5_text.set(’’)
self .D6_text.set(’’)
else :
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .TypeMenu[’state’] = ’normal’
self .CompMenu[’state’] = ’normal’
self .FromTo.grid_remove()
self .M1_text.set(’’)
self .M2_text.set(’’)
self .M3_text.set(’’)
self .M4_text.set(’’)
self .M5_text.set(’’)
self .D1_text.set(’’)
self .D2_text.set(’’)
self .D3_text.set(’’)
self .D4_text.set(’’)
self .D5_text.set(’’)
self .D6_text.set(’’)
new_choices = self.CompChoices
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Bus’:
new_choices =tuple(sorted(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_names_Full))
self .B1.grid()
self .B2.grid_remove()
self .B3.grid_remove()
self .B4.grid_remove()
self .B5.grid_remove()
self .E1.grid_remove()
109
==PAGE:120==
C. Python code
self .E2.grid_remove()
self .E3.grid_remove()
self .plus.grid_remove()
self .FromTo.grid_remove()
self .L1.grid_remove()
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .B1.conﬁg(text="Apply SC")
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’:
new_choices =tuple(sorted(self.gen_names))
self .B1.grid()
self .B2.grid(row=11, column=3,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B3.grid(row=11, column=5,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B4.grid_remove()
self .B5.grid_remove()
self .E1.grid()
self .E2.grid_remove()
self .E3.grid_remove()
self .plus.grid_remove()
self .FromTo.grid_remove()
self .L1.grid()
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .B1.conﬁg(text=’Apply Setpoint’)
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^40}’.format(’New P Setpoint’))
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’:
new_choices =tuple(sorted(self.line_names))
self .B1.grid_remove()
self .B2.grid(row=9, column=3,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B3.grid(row=9, column=5,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B4.grid()
self .B5.grid()
self .E1.grid_remove()
self .E2.grid_remove()
self .E3.grid_remove()
self .plus.grid_remove()
self .L1.grid_remove()
self .B2.conﬁg(text=’Open breaker’)
self .B3.conﬁg(text=’Close breaker’)
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Load’:
new_choices =tuple(sorted(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.loads[’load_names’]))
self .B1.grid()
self .B2.grid_remove()
self .B3.grid_remove()
110
==PAGE:121==
C. Python code
self .B4.grid_remove()
self .B5.grid_remove()
self .E1.grid_remove()
self .E2.grid()
self .E3.grid()
self .plus.grid()
self .FromTo.grid_remove()
self .L1.grid()
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .B1.conﬁg(text=’Apply Setpoint’)
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’New P+Q Setpoint’))
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Transformer’:
new_choices =tuple(sorted(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.transformers[’branch_names’]))
self .B1.grid_remove()
self .B2.grid(row=9, column=3,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B3.grid(row=9, column=5,sticky=W+E, columnspan=1)
self .B4.grid()
self .B5.grid()
self .E1.grid_remove()
self .E2.grid_remove()
self .E3.grid_remove()
self .plus.grid_remove()
self .L1.grid_remove()
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .B2.conﬁg(text=’Tap +’)
self .B3.conﬁg(text=’Tap −’)
self .CompMenu.conﬁg(values=new_choices)
print( self .tkvar1.get() )
def change_dropdown_comp(self,∗args):
self .M1_text.set(’’)
self .M2_text.set(’’)
self .M3_text.set(’’)
self .M4_text.set(’’)
self .M5_text.set(’’)
self .E1.delete(0, END)
self .E2.delete(0, END)
self .E3.delete(0, END)
self .E1.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D1.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D2.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D3.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D4.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D5.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
111
==PAGE:122==
C. Python code
self .D6.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
if
self .tkvar2.get() != self . default :
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Bus’:
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[self.bus_names.index(self.
tkvar2.get())] != −1:
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .L1.grid_remove()
else :
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’Short circuit not available ’))
self .L1.grid()
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
if ’B40’ in self .tkvar2.get() :
V_nom = 400
elif
’B20’ in self .tkvar2.get() :
V_nom = 220
else :
V_nom = 130
self .D1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Bus nr’, self .dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[bus_ind]))
self .D2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Vnom (kV)’,V_nom))
self .D3_text.set(’’)
self .D4_text.set(’’)
self .D5_text.set(’’)
self .D6_text.set(’’)
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’:
self .B2.conﬁg(text=’Open breaker’)
self .B3.conﬁg(text=’Close breaker’)
gen_ind = self.gen_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
genbus_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[gen_ind]
Busname = self.bus_names[genbus_ind]
bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(Busname)
if ’B40’ in Busname:
V_nom = 400
elif
’B20’ in Busname:
V_nom = 220
else :
V_nom = 130
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_active_power_output_maximum_Full[gen_ind] == 0:
gentype = ’Condenser’
elif
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_variable_types_Full[gen_ind] == ’
CONTROL’:
gentype = ’Hydro’
elif
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_tm_dnp3_variable_types_Full[gen_ind] == ’
CONTROL’:
gentype = ’Thermal’
else :
gentype = ’Unknown’
112
==PAGE:123==
C. Python code
self .D1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Bus nr.’, self .dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[bus_ind]))
self .D2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Vnom(kV)’,V_nom))
self .D3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’MVA’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
gen_mvasizes_Full[gen_ind]))
self .D4_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Max P(MW)’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
gen_active_power_output_maximum_Full[gen_ind]))
self .D5_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Type’,gentype))
self .D6_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Id’, self .nordic32_rtds_gen_ids[gen_ind])
)
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_card_ids_Full[gen_ind] != −1 or self.
dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_tm_dnp3_card_ids_Full[gen_ind] != −1:
if gentype == ’Condenser’:
self .E1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
else :
self .E1[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_brk_dnp3_card_ids_Full[gen_ind] != −1:
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
else :
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’Setpoint not available ’))
self .E1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’:
self .B2.conﬁg(text=’Open breaker’)
self .B3.conﬁg(text=’Close breaker’)
line_ind = self .line_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
from_bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[1:5])
to_bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[5:])
from_Busname = self.bus_names[from_bus_ind]
to_Busname = self.bus_names[to_bus_ind]
self .check1.set(False)
self .check2.set(False)
self .nL = int(self .dataKeeper.RTGM.lines[’numc’][line_ind]/3)
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.line_brk_dnp3_card_ids_Full[line_ind] != −1:
if
self .nL == 2:
self .C1.grid()
self .C2.grid()
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
else :
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
113
==PAGE:124==
C. Python code
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[self.bus_names.index
(from_Busname)] != −1:
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[self.bus_names.index
(to_Busname)] != −1:
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .L1.grid_remove()
else :
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’Breaker not available ’))
self .L1.grid()
self .C1.grid_remove()
self .C2.grid_remove()
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
if ’B40’ in from_Busname:
V_nom = 400
elif
’B20’ in from_Busname:
V_nom = 220
else :
V_nom = 130
self .D1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’From Bus’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[from_bus_ind]))
self .D2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’To Bus’,self .dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[to_bus_ind]))
self .D3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Vnom(kV)’,V_nom))
self .D4_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’N lines’ , self .nL))
self .D5_text.set(’’)
self .D6_text.set(’’)
self .FromTo.grid()
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Load’:
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.load_po_dnp3_card_ids_Full[self.load_names.index(self.
tkvar2.get())] != −1:
self .B1.conﬁg(text=’Apply Setpoint’)
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’New P+Q Setpoint’))
self .E2[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .E3[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B1.conﬁg(text=’Apply Setpoint’)
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’Setpoint not available ’))
self .E2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .E3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
114
==PAGE:125==
C. Python code
load_ind = self.load_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
Busname = ’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[1:5]
bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(Busname)
if ’B40’ in Busname:
V_nom = 400
elif
’B20’ in Busname:
V_nom = 220
else :
V_nom = 130
self .D1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Bus nr.’, self .dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[bus_ind]))
self .D2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Vnom(kV)’,V_nom))
self .D3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Pmax (MW)’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_pmax_Full[load_ind]))
self .D4_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Pmin (MW)’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_pmin_Full[load_ind]))
self .D5_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Qmax (MVAr)’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_qmax_Full[load_ind]))
self .D6_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’Qmin (MVAr)’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_qmin_Full[load_ind]))
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Transformer’:
trafo_ind = self.transformer_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
#
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’Tap not available ’) )
self .B2.conﬁg(text=’Tap +’)
self .B3.conﬁg(text=’Tap −’)
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
from_bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[1:5])
to_bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[5:])
from_Busname = self.bus_names[from_bus_ind]
to_Busname = self.bus_names[to_bus_ind]
if ’B40’ in from_Busname:
V_nom_from = 400
elif
’B20’ in from_Busname:
V_nom_from = 220
else :
V_nom_from = 130
if ’B40’ in to_Busname:
V_nom_to = 400
elif
’B20’ in to_Busname:
V_nom_to = 220
else :
115
==PAGE:126==
C. Python code
V_nom_to = 130
self .D1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’From Bus’,self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[from_bus_ind]))
self .D2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’To Bus’,self .dataKeeper.RTGM.
bus_numbers_Full[to_bus_ind]))
self .D3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’V from (kV)’,V_nom_from))
self .D4_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}’.format(’V to (kV)’,V_nom_to))
self .D5_text.set(’’)
self .FromTo.grid()
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.trafo_tap_dnp3_card_ids_Full[trafo_ind] != −1:
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .L1.grid_remove()
else :
self .L1.conﬁg(text=’{: ^35}’.format(’Tap not available’))
self .L1.grid()
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
print( self .tkvar2.get())
def validateP( self , new_text):
if not new_text: # the ﬁeld is being cleared
self .Pvar = −1
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
return True
try:
self .Pvar = ﬂoat(new_text)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Load’:
load_ind = self.load_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
minP = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.load_pmin_Full[load_ind]
maxP = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.load_pmax_Full[load_ind]
if
self .Pvar < minP or self.Pvar > maxP:
self .E2.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
if
self .Pvar > maxP:
self .D3.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
elif
self .Pvar < minP:
self .D4.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .Pvar = −1
else :
self .E2.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D3.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D4.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
if
self .Qvar != −1:
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
elif
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’:
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
gen_ind = self.gen_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
minP = 0
maxP = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_active_power_output_maximum_Full[gen_ind]
116
==PAGE:127==
C. Python code
if
self .Pvar > maxP:
self .E1.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
self .D4.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .Pvar = −1
else :
self .E1.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D4.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
return True
except ValueError:
return False
def validateQ( self , new_text):
if not new_text: # the ﬁeld is being cleared
self .Qvar = −1
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
return True
try:
self .Qvar = ﬂoat(new_text)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Load’:
load_ind = self.load_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
minQ = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.load_qmin_Full[load_ind]
maxQ = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.load_qmax_Full[load_ind]
if
self .Qvar < minQ or self.Qvar > maxQ:
self .E3.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
if
self .Qvar > maxQ:
self .D5.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
elif
self .Qvar < minQ:
self .D6.conﬁg(fg=’red’)
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .Qvar = −1
else :
self .E3.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D5.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
self .D6.conﬁg(fg=’black’)
if
self .Pvar != −1:
self .B1[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
return True
except ValueError:
return False
def update_btn(self, method):
if method == "Btn1": # Apply setpoint
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
setpoint = self .Pvar
if setpoint != −1:
print(setpoint)
gen_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_G_to_Full_G[self.gen_names.index(self.
tkvar2.get())]
self .gen_setpoint(gen_ind, setpoint)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Load’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
setP = self .Pvar
setQ = self.Qvar
117
==PAGE:128==
C. Python code
if setP != −1 and setQ != −1:
load_ind = self.load_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
self .load_setpoint(load_ind, setP, setQ)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Bus’:
bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
self .bus_short_circuit(bus_ind, 1)
time.sleep( self .sc_time)
self .bus_short_circuit(bus_ind, 0)
elif method == "Btn2":
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
line_ind = self .line_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
self .line_breaker(line_ind, 0)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
gen_ind = self.gen_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
self .gen_breaker(gen_ind, 0)
elif method == "Btn3":
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
line_ind = self .line_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
self .line_breaker(line_ind, 1)
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
gen_ind = self.gen_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
self .gen_breaker(gen_ind, 1)
elif method == ’Btn4’:
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
line_ind = self .line_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[1:5])
self .bus_short_circuit(bus_ind, 1)
time.sleep( self .sc_time)
self .bus_short_circuit(bus_ind, 0)
self .line_breaker(line_ind, 0)
elif method == ’Btn5’:
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
line_ind = self .line_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[5:])
self .bus_short_circuit(bus_ind, 1)
time.sleep( self .sc_time)
self .bus_short_circuit(bus_ind, 0)
self .line_breaker(line_ind, 0)
self .E1.delete(0, END)
self .E2.delete(0, END)
self .E3.delete(0, END)
def update_status(self):
if
self .tkvar2.get() == self.default :
self .M1_text.set(’{: <30}’.format(’’))
self .M2_text.set(’{: <30}’.format(’’))
118
==PAGE:129==
C. Python code
self .M3_text.set(’{: <30}’.format(’’))
self .M4_text.set(’{: <30}’.format(’’))
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Generator’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
gen_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_G_to_Full_G[self.gen_names.index(self.tkvar2.get
())]
genbus_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_bus_indices_Full[gen_ind]
busV = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[genbus_ind]
BusV = str(round(abs(busV),2))
I_inj_g = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_generator_currents[gen_ind]
P = str(round(np.real(−busV∗np.conj(I_inj_g))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2))
Q = str(round(np.imag(−busV∗np.conj(I_inj_g))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2))
if my_gui.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_G_OEL_status[gen_ind]:
OEL = ’ON’
else :
OEL = ’OFF’
self .M1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’V (pu)’,BusV,’’))
self .M2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’P (MW)’,P,’’))
self .M3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’Q (MVAr)’,Q,’’))
self .M4_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’OEL’,OEL,’’))
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Bus’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
bus_ind = np.where(self.tkvar2.get()==self.dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_names_Full)[0][0]
busV = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[bus_ind]
BusV = str(round(abs(busV),2))
f = round(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_frequencies[bus_ind],2)
self .M1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’V (pu)’,BusV,’’))
self .M2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’f (hz)’ , f , ’ ’))
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Line’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
line_ind = self .line_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
V_from_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_line_to_Full_line[line_ind,0]
V_to_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_line_to_Full_line[line_ind,1]
I_from_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_line_to_Full_line[line_ind,2]
I_to_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_line_to_Full_line[line_ind,3]
busVfrom = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[V_from_ind]
busVto = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[V_to_ind]
BusVfrom = str(round(abs(busVfrom),2))
BusVto = str(round(abs(busVto),2))
I_from = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_branch_currents_from[I_from_ind]
I_to = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_branch_currents_to[I_to_ind]
119
==PAGE:130==
C. Python code
P_from = (round(np.real(−busVfrom∗np.conj(I_from))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2)
)
Q_from = (round(np.imag(−busVfrom∗np.conj(I_from))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase
,2))
P_to = (round(np.real(−busVto∗np.conj(I_to))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2))
Q_to = (round(np.imag(−busVto∗np.conj(I_to))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2))
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.line_brk_dnp3_card_ids_Full[line_ind] != −1:
if (abs(P_from)<1 or abs(P_to)<1):
if
self .nL == 1:
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
else :
if
self .nL == 1:
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[V_from_ind] != −1:
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[V_to_ind] != −1:
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .M1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’V (pu)’,BusVfrom,BusVto))
self .M2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’P (MW)’,P_from,P_to))
self .M3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’Q (MVAr)’,Q_from,Q_to))
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Load’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
load_ind = self.load_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
bus_ind = np.where(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.loads[’bus_numbers’][load_ind]==self.
dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_numbers_Full)[0][0]
busV = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[bus_ind]
BusV = round(abs(busV),2)
P = round(self.dataKeeper.LoadsP[load_ind],2)
Q = round(self.dataKeeper.LoadsQ[load_ind],2)
self .M1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’V (pu)’,BusV,’’))
self .M2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’P (MW)’,P,’’))
self .M3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10} {: <10}’.format(’Q (MVAr)’,Q,’’))
if
self .tkvar1.get() == ’Transformer’ and self.tkvar2.get() != self . default :
trafo_ind = self.transformer_names.index(self.tkvar2.get())
120
==PAGE:131==
C. Python code
V_from_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Full_trans[trafo_ind,0]
V_to_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Full_trans[trafo_ind,1]
I_from_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Full_trans[trafo_ind,3]
I_to_ind = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.Red_trans_to_Full_trans[trafo_ind,4]
busVfrom = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[V_from_ind]
busVto = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_voltages[V_to_ind]
BusVfrom = str(round(abs(busVfrom),2))
BusVto = str(round(abs(busVto),2))
####### WRONG INDEX ##########
I_from = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_branch_currents_from[I_from_ind]
I_to = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_branch_currents_to[I_to_ind]
P_from = str(round(np.real(−busVfrom∗np.conj(I_from))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase
,2))
Q_from = str(round(np.imag(−busVfrom∗np.conj(I_from))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
mvabase,2))
P_to = str(round(np.real(−busVto∗np.conj(I_to))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2))
Q_to = str(round(np.imag(−busVto∗np.conj(I_to))∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.mvabase,2))
self .M1_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’V (pu)’,BusVfrom,BusVto))
self .M2_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’P (MW)’,P_from,P_to))
self .M3_text.set(’{: <10}: {: <10}, {: <10}’.format(’Q (MVAr)’,Q_from,Q_to))
psse_active = time.time()−self.dataKeeper.psse_receive_time > 3
dnp3_active = time.time()−self.dataKeeper.dnp3_receive_time > 3
if psse_active and dnp3_active:
self .circleCanvas.itemconﬁg( self .statusLED, ﬁll =’red’)
elif psse_active or dnp3_active:
self .circleCanvas.itemconﬁg( self .statusLED, ﬁll =’yellow’)
else :
self .circleCanvas.itemconﬁg( self .statusLED, ﬁll =’green’)
root. after (100, self .update_status)
def gen_setpoint(self, gen_index, setpoint):
DeltaW = 0#self.dataKeeper.RTGM.pmu_bus_frequencies[self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
gen_bus_indices_Full[gen_index]]/50 −1
oﬀset = 0.025∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[gen_index]
hygov_droop = 100/np.array ([4,4,4,4,8,8,4,4,100,100,100,100,100,100,100,100,100,4,4,4,1,4])
# Hardcoded for Nordic32 case
dnp3_items = []
# If the generator is a SalR
if ( self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_variable_types_Full[gen_index] == ’CONTROL’):
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
gen_lrf_dnp3_card_ids_Full[gen_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_data_types_Full
[gen_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_lrf_dnp3_indexes_Full[gen_index], (setpoint+oﬀset)/(
self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[gen_index]∗hygov_droop[gen_index])+DeltaW)
# If the generator is a RouR
else :
121
==PAGE:132==
C. Python code
oﬀset = 0.005∗self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[gen_index]
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
gen_tm_dnp3_card_ids_Full[gen_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
gen_tm_dnp3_data_types_Full[gen_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_tm_dnp3_indexes_Full[
gen_index], (setpoint+oﬀset)/(self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_mvasizes_Full[gen_index]))
self .send_dnp3_request(dnp3_items,self.dnp3sock)
def load_setpoint(self , load_index, P, Q):
dnp3_items = []
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_po_dnp3_card_ids_Full[load_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_po_dnp3_data_types_Full[load_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_po_dnp3_indexes_Full[load_index], P)
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_qo_dnp3_card_ids_Full[load_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_qo_dnp3_data_types_Full[load_index], self.dataKeeper.RTGM.
load_qo_dnp3_indexes_Full[load_index], Q)
self .send_dnp3_request(dnp3_items,self.dnp3sock)
def line_breaker( self , ind, state):
card_id = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.line_brk_dnp3_card_ids_Full[ind]
data_type = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.line_brk_dnp3_data_types_Full[ind]
index = self .dataKeeper.RTGM.line_brk_dnp3_indexes_Full[ind]
dnp3_items = []
if
self .nL == 2:
if
self .check1.get() :
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, card_id, data_type, index, state)
if
self .check2.get() :
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, card_id, data_type, index+1, state)
else :
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, card_id, data_type, index, state)
self .send_dnp3_request(dnp3_items,self.dnp3sock)
def gen_breaker(self, ind, state):
card_id = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_brk_dnp3_card_ids_Full[ind]
data_type = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_brk_dnp3_data_types_Full[ind]
index = self .dataKeeper.RTGM.gen_brk_dnp3_indexes_Full[ind]
dnp3_items = []
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, card_id, data_type, index, state)
self .send_dnp3_request(dnp3_items,self.dnp3sock)
def bus_short_circuit(self, ind, state):
card_id = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[ind]
data_type = self.dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_data_types_Full[ind]
index = self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_indexes_Full[ind]
122
==PAGE:133==
C. Python code
dnp3_items = []
dnp3_items = self.add_item(dnp3_items, card_id, data_type, index, state)
self .send_dnp3_request(dnp3_items,self.dnp3sock)
def cb( self ):
from_bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[1:5])
to_bus_ind = self.bus_names.index(’B’+self.tkvar2.get()[5:])
from_Busname = self.bus_names[from_bus_ind]
to_Busname = self.bus_names[to_bus_ind]
if
self .check1.get() or self .check2.get() :
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[self.bus_names.index(
from_Busname)] != −1:
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
if
self .dataKeeper.RTGM.bus_sc_dnp3_card_ids_Full[self.bus_names.index(
to_Busname)] != −1:
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’normal’
else :
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
else :
self .B2[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B3[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B4[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
self .B5[’state ’ ] = ’disabled’
root = Tk()
root. resizable (width=FALSE, height=FALSE)
my_gui = RTDS_Control(root)
root.mainloop()
my_gui.dataKeeper.dismiss()
my_gui.dnp3sock.close()
C.5
Complex voltage plot
# −∗−coding: utf−8 −∗−
import sys, os
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’gpb_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’db_utils’))
123
==PAGE:134==
C. Python code
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’assessment_examples’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’real_time_grid_model−master’, ’
RealTimeGridModel’))
import threading
import mysql.connector
import sys, traceback # debugging information
from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_buses,
db_reader_raw_lines, db_reader_raw_transformers,db_reader_raw_generators
#from db_reader_get_generator_details import db_reader_get_generators_details
from RealTimeGridModel import RTGridModel
db_reader_get_generators_details=RTGridModel.db_reader_get_generators_details
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.animation as animation
from matplotlib import style
style .use(’ ﬁvethirtyeight ’)
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
import time
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib
#matplotlib.use(’TkAgg’)
###############################################
# Server Conﬁguration details
#
##############################################
# Conﬁguration: which snapshot server and which snapshot simulation server
k_snapshot_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’#’10.59.17.218’#’192.168.56.101’#
k_snapshot_server_port = 55606
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607
################################################
# Details about snapshots to subscribe
#
################################################
# 1st type of snapshots psse1:
k1_subject_id = ’nordic32_rtds_1’
k1_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k1_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k1_snapshot_type_tag = ’psse1’
# −−−Network Model (Database) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
# Open database connection:
# Conﬁguration: which network model is used (which database):
k_db_schema = ’nordic32_rtds_1’
k_db_host = k_snapshot_server_name
k_db_user = ’sospo’
k_db_password = ’EpuwE13’
###################################################
class PlotDataKeeper(threading.Thread):
def __init__(self, ∗∗kwds):
124
==PAGE:135==
C. Python code
threading.Thread.__init__(self, ∗∗kwds)
self .setDaemon(1)
# check!!! dies if main thread dies (I think)
self ._init = threading.Event() # event that makes sure that the initialization completes
self ._dismissed = threading.Event()
# event that can kill the thread ...
self .ThreadExit = False
# boolan used to exit the main loop
self .angle_ref = 0 # ﬁrst bus as angle reference ...
# establish DB connection and initalize varables
dbcon = mysql.connector.connect(user=k_db_user, password=k_db_password, host=
k_db_host, database=k_db_schema)
cursor = dbcon.cursor()
self .initalize_data_arrays(cursor) #initalize the data arrays needed for the visualisation
dbcon.close()
# close the database connection
def set_ang_ref(self,angle_ref):
self .angle_ref = angle_ref
def dismiss( self ):
"""Sets a ﬂag to tell the thread to exit when done with current job."""
self ._dismissed.set()
def initalize_data_arrays( self , cursor): # Add your own code here!
""" declare and initalize the arrays used for plotting , store pb_indices"""
# todo 1: determine the size of the arrays needed to store the data (use the mysql database)
lines = db_reader_raw_lines(cursor, k_db_schema)
transformers = db_reader_raw_transformers(cursor, k_db_schema)
busses = db_reader_raw_buses(cursor, k_db_schema)
gen = db_reader_raw_generators(cursor, k_db_schema)
#
np.array(gen[’pb_generator_indexes’])
# additional data to obtain overview of AVR controlled generators etc.
Gen_DataFrame = db_reader_get_generators_details(’’,cursor, k_db_schema)
# merge the generator data frames (pandas)
generators = pd.DataFrame(gen)
generators = generators.set_index(’pb_generator_indexes’).join(Gen_DataFrame)
#
generators = db_reader_get_generators_details(’’,cursor, k_db_schema)
Nbus = len(busses[’bus_names’]) # get the number of busses
Ngen = len(generators[’generatorName’]) # get the number of gens
Xd_vec = np.asarray(generators[’Xd’]) # get the values of the generators’ Xd
systeminfo = db_reader_raw_system_information(cursor, k_db_schema)
# todo 2: create the arrays needed
self .N = 1000 # window size..
self .tdata = [0]
self .t = 0
self .V_bus = 1j∗np.zeros(Nbus) # array storing the complex bus voltages
self .V_gen_internal = 1j∗np.zeros(Ngen) # array storing the generators internal complex
voltages
self .Xd = Xd_vec∗systeminfo[’mva_bases’]/np.asarray(generators[’mva_sizes’])
self .Branch_From = lines[’from_pb_voltage_indexes’]+transformers[’
pb_voltage_index_froms’]
self .Branch_To = lines[’to_pb_voltage_indexes’]+transformers[’pb_voltage_index_tos’]
self .ind_I_G = np.asarray(generators[’pbgeneratorindex’],dtype=int)
self .ind_V_G = np.asarray(generators[’pb_voltage_indexes’],dtype=int)
self .genlabels = [[]]∗Ngen
self .lock = threading.RLock()
125
==PAGE:136==
C. Python code
# ... and so on (also store labels and etc. here)
def store_snapshot(self,snapshot): # Add your own code here!
""" update the arrays using the latest measurement snapshot"""
t = snapshot.seconds_of_century + snapshot.milliseconds_of_second / 1000.0
self .t = t
with self .lock:
# Time
if len( self .tdata)>0: #clear data if reset
if
self .tdata[−1] > t: #reset
self .tdata.clear ()
self .tdata.append(t)
if len( self .tdata) > self .N: # pop data...
self .tdata.pop(0)
# Bus voltages
y_B = []
if snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im[self.angle_ref] is None or snapshot.
pmu_bus_voltages_re[self.angle_ref] is None:
Vref = 1 #invalid ref
else :
Vref = snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im[self.angle_ref] ∗1j + snapshot.
pmu_bus_voltages_re[self.angle_ref]
for i in range(len(snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im)):
V = snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im[i]∗1j + snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_re[i]
y_B.append([V/Vref])
self .V_bus = y_B
#Generator voltages
y_G = []
for i in
range(len(snapshot.pmu_generator_currents_im)):
ind_I_G = int(self.ind_I_G[i])
ind_V_G = int(self.ind_V_G[i])
Ig = snapshot.pmu_generator_currents_im[ind_I_G] ∗1j + snapshot.
pmu_generator_currents_re[ind_I_G]
Vg = snapshot.pmu_bus_voltages_im[ind_V_G] ∗1j + snapshot.
pmu_bus_voltages_re[ind_V_G]
Eg = Vg −Ig∗self.Xd[i]∗1j
y_G.append([Eg/Vref])
#
self .genlabels[ i ] = ’G{:02d}’.format(i) # Generator labels
self .genlabels=np.array([’G18’,’G17’,’G19’,’G15’,’G22’,’G21’,’G20’,’G16’,’G8’,’G4’,’G7’,’
G2’,’G6’,’G1’,’G3’,’G5’,’G10’,’G12’,’G14’,’G11’,’G9’,’G13’])
self .V_gen_internal = y_G
def run(self ): # Add your own code here!
""" The main loop for the PlotDataKeeper thread"""
# 1: create the SnapshotReceiver object and start the SR thread
# 2: consruct the while loop which calls the store_snapshot() for every snapshot received
Snap_Receiver = sr.SnapshotReceiver() # create the snapshots objects (starts in a thread on
its own)
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyServerConﬁguration(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port
, k_snapshot_simulation_server_name, k_snapshot_simulation_server_port)
# Load the receive cases 0.001
126
==PAGE:137==
C. Python code
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.AllignDataset = False # Should the snapshots be aligned before made available
or imedially provided ..
Snap_Receiver.start() # starts the run method
Snap_Receiver._init.wait() # init event waits until connection has been established
self .SR = Snap_Receiver # reference to the object (so it kan be killed ..)
# some implementtaion speciﬁc variables
k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive = 1500
no_of_received_snapshots = 0
last_snapshot_received = 0
k = 0
Snap_Receiver.LogTime = False
snapshot = None
try:
while last_snapshot_received == 0 and not Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit and not self.
_dismissed.isSet():
# Locking mechanism: condidtion variable
with Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv:
start = time.time()
while not Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready:
# print(’k−>’, k)
Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv.wait() # waits until data is ready
if Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit: # if the thread has exited, this exception stops
the program
raise Exception(’[application] The snap_receiver object has been
terminated (end main())’)
k += 1
end = time.time()
if Snap_Receiver.LogTime:
print(’ [application] time waiting for condition variable to release : {:3.6 f}
ms’.format(
(end −start) ∗1000.0))
# The snapshots are stored in a tuple ( if the aligned option is chosen)
# psse1 = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[0]
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] is True:
snapshot = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[0] # the ﬁrst snapshot is the psse1
snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[0] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready = False # set the status boolean to False
if snapshot is not None:
#
self .snapshot = snapshot
self .store_snapshot(snapshot)
time.sleep(0.05)
#
no_of_received_snapshots += 1
if no_of_received_snapshots >= k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive:
last_snapshot_received = 1
except:
# pdb.set_trace()
print("[application] −−> Exception raised in main():", sys.exc_info()[1], sys.exc_info()
[0])
print("Exception in user code:")
print(’−’ ∗60)
127
==PAGE:138==
C. Python code
traceback.print_exc( ﬁle =sys.stdout)
print(’−’ ∗60)
ﬁnally :
Snap_Receiver.dismiss()
print(’ [application] python example assessment has ﬁnished’)
###########
if __name__ == "__main__":
pd_keeper = PlotDataKeeper()
# PlotDataKeeper initated
pd_keeper.start()
# starts in a thread on its own (inherits threading.Thread)
pd_keeper.set_ang_ref(10) # Change reference bus
ﬁg = plt. ﬁgure ()
ax = ﬁg.add_subplot(111, aspect=’equal’, autoscale_on=False,
xlim=(−4, 4), ylim=(−2, 4))
ax. set_title (k1_subject_id)
ax.set_xlabel(’Voltages Real Part’)
ax.set_ylabel(’Voltages Imaginary Part’)
BV, = ax.plot([],
[],
’bo’, ms=5)
GV, = ax.plot([],
[],
’ro’ , ms=5)
Bus_V = pd_keeper.V_bus
Gen_V = pd_keeper.V_gen_internal
B_lines = []
for n in range(len(pd_keeper.Branch_From)):
lobj = ax.plot ([],[], ’k−−’, lw=1)[0]
B_lines.append(lobj)
G_lines = []
G_text = []
for n in range(len(pd_keeper.ind_V_G)):
lobj = ax.plot ([],[], ’r−−’, lw=1)[0]
tobj = ax.text(0,0,pd_keeper.genlabels[n])
G_text.append(tobj)
G_lines.append(lobj)
circle1 = plt.Circle ((0, 0), 0.95, color=’r’,
ﬁll =False)
circle2 = plt.Circle ((0, 0), 0.97, color=’b’,
ﬁll =False)
circle3 = plt.Circle ((0, 0), 1, color=’g’,
ﬁll =False)
circle4 = plt.Circle ((0, 0), 1.03, color=’b’,
ﬁll =False)
circle5 = plt.Circle ((0, 0), 1.05, color=’r’,
ﬁll =False)
ax.add_patch(circle1)
ax.add_patch(circle2)
ax.add_patch(circle3)
ax.add_patch(circle4)
ax.add_patch(circle5)
t = ax.text(0,−1.5,’Time = 0’)
def init () :
""" initialize
animation"""
global ax, ﬁg
128
==PAGE:139==
C. Python code
BV.set_data([], [])
GV.set_data([], [])
for line in B_lines:
line .set_data ([],[])
for line in G_lines:
line .set_data ([],[])
for label in G_text:
label .set_position((0,0))
t.set_text(’Time = 0’)
return (BV,) +(GV,) + tuple(B_lines) + tuple(G_lines) + tuple(G_text)+(t,)
def animate(i):
"""perform animation step"""
global ax, ﬁg
Bus_V = pd_keeper.V_bus
Gen_V = pd_keeper.V_gen_internal
# update pieces of the animation
t.set_text(’Time = {0}’.format(time.strftime(’%H:%M:%S’, time.gmtime(pd_keeper.t))))
BV.set_data(np.real(Bus_V),np.imag(Bus_V))
GV.set_data(np.real(Gen_V),np.imag(Gen_V))
for lnum,line in enumerate(B_lines):
x = [[np.real(Bus_V[pd_keeper.Branch_From[lnum]])],[np.real(Bus_V[pd_keeper.
Branch_To[lnum]])]]
y = [[np.imag(Bus_V[pd_keeper.Branch_From[lnum]])],[np.imag(Bus_V[pd_keeper.
Branch_To[lnum]])]]
line .set_data(x,y)
for lnum,line in enumerate(G_lines):
x = [[np.real(pd_keeper.V_gen_internal[lnum][0])],[np.real(pd_keeper.V_bus[pd_keeper.
ind_V_G[lnum]][0])]]
y = [[np.imag(pd_keeper.V_gen_internal[lnum][0])],[np.imag(pd_keeper.V_bus[pd_keeper.
ind_V_G[lnum]][0])]]
line .set_data(x,y)
G_text[lnum].set_position((np.real(pd_keeper.V_gen_internal[lnum][0]), np.imag(
pd_keeper.V_gen_internal[lnum][0])))
return (BV,) + (GV,) + tuple(B_lines) + tuple(G_lines) + tuple(G_text) + (t,)
ani = animation.FuncAnimation(ﬁg, animate, frames=600,
interval =10, blit=True, init_func=init)
plt .show(block=True)
# the execution does not continue until plot window is closed
pd_keeper.dismiss()
# close the two external threads (pd_keeper and SnapshotReceiver)
time.sleep(2)
# wait while threads close
129
==PAGE:140==
C. Python code
C.6
Test snapshot stream
import sys, os
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’gpb_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’db_utils’))
sys.path.append(os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__ﬁle__), ’..’, ’ .. ’ , ’
wp7_snapshots_network_database_py−master’, ’assessment_examples’))
import mysql.connector
from db_reader_raw import db_reader_raw_system_information, db_reader_raw_generators
import numpy as np
import SnapshotReceiver as sr
import time
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import matplotlib.animation as animation
from matplotlib import style
style .use(’ ﬁvethirtyeight ’)
use_psse = True
use_aras = True
use_cm = True
###############################################
# Server Conﬁguration details
#
##############################################
# Conﬁguration: which snapshot server and which snapshot simulation server
k_snapshot_server_name = ’10.59.17.218’#’192.168.56.101’#
k_snapshot_server_port = 55606
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name = k_snapshot_server_name
k_snapshot_simulation_server_port = 55607
################################################
# Details about snapshots to subscribe
#
################################################
# 1st type of snapshots psse1:
k1_subject_id = ’nordic32_rtds_1’
k1_subject_sub_id = ’<<<none>>>’
k1_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k1_snapshot_type_tag = ’psse1’
# 2nd type of snapshots assras:
k2_subject_id = ’assras_v082’
k2_subject_sub_id = k1_subject_id+’_’+k1_subject_sub_id
k2_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k2_snapshot_type_tag = ’aras1’
k3_subject_id = ’demonstrator_matlab_31’
k3_subject_sub_id = k1_subject_id+’_’+k1_subject_sub_id
k3_rate = sr.messages_pb2.fps_10
k3_snapshot_type_tag = ’assras_cm’
130
==PAGE:141==
C. Python code
# −−−Network Model (Database) −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
# Open database connection:
# Conﬁguration: which network model is used (which database):
k_db_schema = ’nordic32_1’
k_db_host = k_snapshot_server_name
k_db_user = ’sospo’
k_db_password = ’EpuwE13’
p=use_psse−1
a=use_psse+use_aras−1
c=use_psse+use_aras+use_cm−1
try:
dbcon = mysql.connector.connect(user=k_db_user, password=k_db_password, host=k_db_host,
database=k_db_schema)
except Exception:
print(’ [application] python example assessment: database connection failed’)
raise
try:
cursor = dbcon.cursor()
# Read data from system information table and extra the mvabase as a scalar:
system_information = db_reader_raw_system_information(cursor, k_db_schema)
mvabases = system_information[’mva_bases’]
mvabase = mvabases[0]
# Read data on the generators from the database and extract needed data into lists:
generators = db_reader_raw_generators(cursor, k_db_schema)
generator_indices = generators[’pb_generator_indexes’]
active_power_maximums = generators[’active_power_output_maximums’]
reactive_power_maximums = generators[’power_output_reactive_maximums’]
mvasizes = generators[’mva_sizes’]
bus_indices = generators[’pb_voltage_indexes’]
# Close database connection:
ﬁnally :
dbcon.close()
#############################################
# Create the snapshot receiver object
#
############################################
Snap_Receiver = sr.SnapshotReceiver() # create the snapshots objects (starts in a thread on its own)
# Load the server conﬁgureations
Snap_Receiver.SpecifyServerConﬁguration(k_snapshot_server_name, k_snapshot_server_port,
k_snapshot_simulation_server_name, k_snapshot_simulation_server_port)
# Load the receive cases 0.001
#Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
if use_psse:
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k1_subject_id, k1_subject_sub_id, k1_rate,
k1_snapshot_type_tag)
if use_aras:
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k2_subject_id, k2_subject_sub_id, k2_rate,
k2_snapshot_type_tag)
131
==PAGE:142==
C. Python code
if use_cm:
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k3_subject_id, k3_subject_sub_id, k3_rate,
k3_snapshot_type_tag)
# additonal conﬁgurations of variables should be done here, before start ()
# test: add aras snapshot as well (check if avaliable ?)
#
Snap_Receiver.SpecifySubscribeCase(k2_subject_id, k2_subject_sub_id, k2_rate,
k2_snapshot_type_tag)
# additonal conﬁgurations of variables should be done here, before start ()
#Snap_Receiver.SpecifyPublishCase(k_publication_subject_id, k_publication_subject_sub_id,
k1_rate, k_publication_type_tag)
Snap_Receiver.AllignDataset = False # Should the snapshots be aligned before made available or
imedially provided ..
Snap_Receiver.start()
# starts the run method
Snap_Receiver._init.wait() # init event waits until connection has been established
Snap_Receiver.LogTime = False
# some implementtaion speciﬁc variables
k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive = 35000
no_of_received_snapshots = 0
last_snapshot_received = 0
k = 0
snapshot_psse = None
snapshot_aras = None
snapshot_cm = None
t = time.time()
n_psse = [0]
n_aras = [0]
n_cm = [0]
dT = 10
try:
while last_snapshot_received == 0 and not Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit:
# Locking mechanism: condidtion variable
with Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv:
#
print (’New data’)
start = time.time()
while not Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready:
# print(’k−>’, k)
Snap_Receiver.NewData_cv.wait() # waits until data is ready
if Snap_Receiver.ThreadExit: # if the thread has exited, this exception stops the
program
raise Exception(’[application] The snap_receiver object has been terminated (end
main())’)
k += 1
end = time.time()
if Snap_Receiver.LogTime:
print(’ [application] time waiting for condition variable to release : {:3.6 f}ms’.
format((end −start) ∗1000.0))
start = time.time()
if use_psse:
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[p] is True:
132
==PAGE:143==
C. Python code
snapshot_psse = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[p] # the ﬁrst snapshot is the psse1
snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[p] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
if use_aras:
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[a] is True:
snapshot_aras = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[a] # the second snapshot is the
aras1 snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[a] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
if use_cm:
if Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[c] is True:
snapshot_cm = Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet[c] # the third snapshot is the
assras_cm snapshot
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_updated[c] = False # The snapshot has been
collected
Snap_Receiver.NewDataSet_Ready = False # set the status boolean to False
end = time.time()
if Snap_Receiver.LogTime:
print(’ [application] time for copying dataset: {:3.6 f}ms’.format((end −start) ∗
1000.0))
start = time.time()
dt = int(np.ﬂoor ((time.time() −t)/dT))
while dt >= len(n_psse):
n_psse.append(0)
n_aras.append(0)
n_cm.append(0)
if snapshot_psse is not None:
n_psse[dt] +=1
snapshot_psse = None
if snapshot_aras is not None:
n_aras[dt] +=1
snapshot_aras = None
if snapshot_cm is not None:
n_cm[dt] +=1
snapshot_cm = None
start = time.time()
no_of_received_snapshots = no_of_received_snapshots + 1
print(no_of_received_snapshots)
if no_of_received_snapshots >= k_no_of_snapshots_to_receive:
last_snapshot_received = 1
except:
print( "[application] −−> Exception raised in main():", sys.exc_info()[1],
sys.exc_info()[0])
ﬁnally :
Snap_Receiver.dismiss()
print(’ [application] python example assessment has ﬁnished’)
ﬁg , ax = plt.subplots()
index = np.arange(len(n_psse)−1)∗dT#range(0.5 len(n_psse)+0.5)
bar_width = 0.3∗dT
133
==PAGE:144==
C. Python code
opacity = 0.8
rects1 = plt.bar(index, n_psse[0:−1], bar_width,
alpha=opacity,
color=’r’,
label=’PSSE’)
rects2 = plt.bar(index+bar_width, n_aras[0:−1], bar_width,
alpha=opacity,
color=’g’,
label=’ARAS’)
rects3 = plt.bar(index+2∗bar_width, n_cm[0:−1], bar_width,
alpha=opacity,
color=’b’,
label=’CM’)
plt .xlabel(’Time (s)’)
plt .ylabel(’snapshots / %d seconds’ %dT)
plt .legend()
plt .tight_layout()
plt .show()
C.7
DB reader
def db_reader_raw_system_information(cursor, db_schema):
stmt = (’select systemNumber, systemTitle, simulationSystem, rev, MVAbase, xfrrat, nxfrat,
baseFrequency ’ +
’from ’ + db_schema + ’.SystemInformation ’ +
’where systemNumber > 0’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
system_numbers = []
system_titles = []
simulation_systems = []
revs = []
mva_bases = []
xfrrats = []
nxfrats = []
base_frequencies = []
for (system_number, system_title, simulation_system, rev, mva_base, xfrrat, nxfrat,
base_frequency, ) in cursor:
system_numbers.append(system_number)
system_titles.append(system_title)
simulation_systems.append(simulation_system)
revs.append(rev)
if mva_base == 0:
mva_bases.append(100)
else :
mva_bases.append(mva_base)
xfrrats .append(xfrrat)
nxfrats.append(nxfrat)
134
==PAGE:145==
C. Python code
base_frequencies.append(base_frequency)
system_information = {’system_numbers’: system_numbers,
’system_titles’: system_titles,
’simulation_systems’: simulation_systems,
’revs’ : revs,
’mva_bases’: mva_bases,
’ xfrrats ’ : xfrrats ,
’nxfrats’ : nxfrats,
’base_frequencies’: base_frequencies,
}
return system_information
def db_reader_raw_buses(cursor, db_schema):
if ’rtds’ in db_schema:
stmt = (’select B.busnumber, B.busname, B.basevoltagelevel, B.typecode, B.pbvoltageindex, B.
pbfrequencyindex, B.busvoltagemagnitude, B.busvoltagephaseangle, B.name_va, B.name_vb, B.
name_vc, ’ +
"coalesce(sc_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(sc_pts.controlsProcessor, 0)
∗65536 + coalesce(sc_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(sc_pts.cardNumber, −1) as
sc_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(sc_pts.dnp3DataType, ’BINARY’) as sc_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(sc_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as sc_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(sc_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
sc_dnp3_index " +
’from ’ + db_schema + ’.Bus B ’ +
’ left join DNP3Points sc_pts on B.busname = sc_pts.bitName ’ +
’where B.busnumber > 0 ’ +
’order by pbVoltageIndex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
bus_names = []
base_voltage_levels = []
type_codes = []
pb_voltage_indexes = []
pb_frequency_indexes = []
bus_voltage_magnitudes = []
bus_voltage_phase_angles = []
names_va = []
names_vb = []
names_vc = []
sc_dnp3_card_ids = []
sc_dnp3_data_types = []
sc_dnp3_variable_types = []
sc_dnp3_indexes = []
for (bus_number, bus_name, base_voltage_level, type_code, pb_voltage_index,
pb_frequency_index, bus_voltage_magnitude, bus_voltage_phase_angle, name_va, name_vb,
name_vc,
sc_dnp3_card_id, sc_dnp3_data_type,sc_dnp3_variable_type,sc_dnp3_index) in
cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
bus_names.append(bus_name)
base_voltage_levels.append(base_voltage_level)
type_codes.append(type_code)
pb_voltage_indexes.append(pb_voltage_index)
135
==PAGE:146==
C. Python code
pb_frequency_indexes.append(pb_frequency_index)
bus_voltage_magnitudes.append(bus_voltage_magnitude)
bus_voltage_phase_angles.append(bus_voltage_phase_angle)
names_va.append(name_va)
names_vb.append(name_vb)
names_vc.append(name_vb)
sc_dnp3_card_ids.append(sc_dnp3_card_id)
sc_dnp3_data_types.append(sc_dnp3_data_type)
sc_dnp3_variable_types.append(sc_dnp3_variable_type)
sc_dnp3_indexes.append(sc_dnp3_index)
buses = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’bus_names’: bus_names,
’base_voltage_levels’: base_voltage_levels,
’type_codes’: type_codes,
’pb_voltage_indexes’: pb_voltage_indexes,
’pb_frequency_indexes’: pb_frequency_indexes,
’bus_voltage_magnitudes’: bus_voltage_magnitudes,
’bus_voltage_phase_angles’: bus_voltage_phase_angles,
’names_va’: names_va,
’names_vb’: names_vb,
’names_vc’: names_vc,
’sc_dnp3_card_ids’: sc_dnp3_card_ids,
’sc_dnp3_data_types’: sc_dnp3_data_types,
’sc_dnp3_variable_types’: sc_dnp3_variable_types,
’sc_dnp3_indexes’: sc_dnp3_indexes
}
else :
stmt = (’select
busNumber, busName, baseVoltageLevel, typeCode, pbVoltageIndex,
pbFrequencyIndex, shuntAdmittanceActiveComponent, ’ +
’shuntAdmittanceReactiveComponent, areaNumber, zoneNumber, ownerNumber,
busvoltagemagnitude, busvoltagephaseangle, nvhi, nvlo, evhi, evlo ’ +
’from ’ + db_schema + ’.Bus ’ +
’where busNumber > 0 ’ +
’order by pbVoltageIndex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
bus_names = []
base_voltage_levels = []
type_codes = []
pb_voltage_indexes = []
pb_frequency_indexes = []
shunt_admittance_active_components = []
shunt_admittance_reactive_components = []
area_numbers = []
zone_numbers = []
owner_numbers = []
bus_voltage_magnitudes = []
bus_voltage_phase_angles = []
nvhis = []
nvlos = []
evhis = []
evlos = []
for (bus_number, bus_name, base_voltage_level, type_code, pb_voltage_index,
pb_frequency_index, shunt_admittance_active_component,
136
==PAGE:147==
C. Python code
shunt_admittance_reactive_component, area_number, zone_number, owner_number,
bus_voltage_magnitude, bus_voltage_phase_angle,
nvhi, nvlo, evhi, evlo, ) in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
bus_names.append(bus_name)
base_voltage_levels.append(base_voltage_level)
type_codes.append(type_code)
pb_voltage_indexes.append(pb_voltage_index)
pb_frequency_indexes.append(pb_frequency_index)
shunt_admittance_active_components.append(shunt_admittance_active_component)
shunt_admittance_reactive_components.append(shunt_admittance_reactive_component)
area_numbers.append(area_number)
zone_numbers.append(zone_number)
owner_numbers.append(owner_number)
bus_voltage_magnitudes.append(bus_voltage_magnitude)
bus_voltage_phase_angles.append(bus_voltage_phase_angle)
nvhis.append(nvhi)
nvlos.append(nvlo)
evhis.append(evhi)
evlos.append(evlo)
buses = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’bus_names’: bus_names,
’base_voltage_levels’: base_voltage_levels,
’type_codes’: type_codes,
’pb_voltage_indexes’: pb_voltage_indexes,
’pb_frequency_indexes’: pb_frequency_indexes,
’shunt_admittance_active_components’: shunt_admittance_active_components,
’shunt_admittance_reactive_components’: shunt_admittance_reactive_components,
’area_numbers’: area_numbers,
’zone_numbers’: zone_numbers,
’owner_numbers’: owner_numbers,
’bus_voltage_magnitudes’: bus_voltage_magnitudes,
’bus_voltage_phase_angles’: bus_voltage_phase_angles,
’nvhis’ : nvhis,
’nvlos’ : nvlos,
’evhis’ : evhis,
’evlos’ : evlos,
}
return buses
def db_reader_raw_loads(cursor, db_schema):
if ’rtds’ in db_schema:
stmt= ("select Load.busnumber, Load.loadid, Load.loadname, Load.type, Load.btype, Load.cc,
Load.vbus, " +
"Load.vmin, Load.pinit, Load.pmin, Load.pmax, Load.qinit, Load.qmin, Load.qmax, Load.
pbloadindex, " +
"coalesce(po_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(po_pts.controlsProcessor, 0) ∗65536 +
coalesce(po_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(po_pts.cardNumber, −1) as po_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(po_pts.dnp3DataType, ’ANALOG’) as po_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(po_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as po_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(po_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
po_dnp3_index, " +
"coalesce(qo_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(qo_pts.controlsProcessor, 0) ∗65536 +
coalesce(qo_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(qo_pts.cardNumber, −1) as qo_dnp3_card_id, " +
137
==PAGE:148==
C. Python code
"coalesce(qo_pts.dnp3DataType, ’ANALOG’) as qo_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(qo_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as qo_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(qo_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
qo_dnp3_index " +
" from " + db_schema + ".Load " +
" left join " + db_schema + ".DNP3Points as po_pts on Load.busNumber = po_pts.
loadBusNumber and Load.loadName = po_pts.loadName and po_pts.loadSignalType = ’
PowerOrder’ " +
" left join " + db_schema + ".DNP3Points as qo_pts on Load.busNumber = qo_pts.
loadBusNumber and Load.loadName = qo_pts.loadName and qo_pts.loadSignalType = ’
ReactivePowerOrder’ " +
"where Load.busnumber > 0 " +
’order by Load.pbloadindex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
load_ids = []
load_names = []
load_types = []
load_btypes = []
cc_ = []
vbus_ = []
vmin_ = []
pinit_ = []
pmin_ = []
pmax_ = []
qinit_ = []
qmin_ = []
qmax_ = []
pb_load_indexes = []
po_dnp3_card_id_ = []
po_dnp3_data_type_ = []
po_dnp3_variable_type_ = []
po_dnp3_index_ = []
qo_dnp3_card_id_ = []
qo_dnp3_data_type_ = []
qo_dnp3_variable_type_ = []
qo_dnp3_index_ = []
for (bus_number, load_id, load_name, load_type, load_btype, cc, vbus, vmin, pinit, pmin,
pmax,
qinit , qmin, qmax, pb_load_index,
po_dnp3_card_id, po_dnp3_data_type, po_dnp3_variable_type, po_dnp3_index,
qo_dnp3_card_id,
qo_dnp3_data_type, qo_dnp3_variable_type, qo_dnp3_index, ) in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
load_ids.append(load_id)
load_names.append(load_name)
load_types.append(load_type)
load_btypes.append(load_btype)
cc_.append(cc)
vbus_.append(vbus)
vmin_.append(vmin)
pinit_.append(pinit)
pmin_.append(pmin)
pmax_.append(pmax)
qinit_.append(qinit)
138
==PAGE:149==
C. Python code
qmin_.append(qmin)
qmax_.append(qmax)
pb_load_indexes.append(pb_load_index)
po_dnp3_card_id_.append(po_dnp3_card_id)
po_dnp3_data_type_.append(po_dnp3_data_type)
po_dnp3_variable_type_.append(po_dnp3_variable_type)
po_dnp3_index_.append(po_dnp3_index)
qo_dnp3_card_id_.append(qo_dnp3_card_id)
qo_dnp3_data_type_.append(qo_dnp3_data_type)
qo_dnp3_variable_type_.append(qo_dnp3_variable_type)
qo_dnp3_index_.append(qo_dnp3_index)
loads = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’load_ids’: load_ids,
’load_names’: load_names,
’load_types’: load_types,
’load_btypes’: load_btypes,
’cc_’: cc_,
’vbus_’: vbus_,
’vmin_’: vmin_,
’pinit_’: pinit_,
’pmin_’: pmin_,
’pmax_’: pmax_,
’qinit_’: qinit_,
’qmin_’: qmin_,
’qmax_’: qmax_,
’pb_load_indexes’: pb_load_indexes,
’po_dnp3_card_id_’: po_dnp3_card_id_,
’po_dnp3_data_type_’: po_dnp3_data_type_,
’po_dnp3_variable_type_’: po_dnp3_variable_type_,
’po_dnp3_index_’: po_dnp3_index_,
’qo_dnp3_card_id_’: qo_dnp3_card_id_,
’qo_dnp3_data_type_’: qo_dnp3_data_type_,
’qo_dnp3_variable_type_’: qo_dnp3_variable_type_,
’qo_dnp3_index_’: qo_dnp3_index_,
}
else :
stmt= (’select busNumber, loadId, loadName, loadStatus, areaNumber, zoneNumber,
constantLoadActivePower, constantLoadReactivePower, ’ +
’constantCurrentLoadActivePower, constantCurrentLoadReactivePower,
constantAdmittanceLoadActivepower, constantAdmittanceLoadReactivepower, ownerNumber, ’ +
’ scale , intrpt , pbloadindex ’ +
’from ’ + db_schema + ’.Load ’ +
’where busNumber > 0 ’ +
’order by pbloadindex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
load_ids = []
load_names = []
load_statuses = []
area_numbers = []
zone_numbers = []
constant_load_active_powers = []
constant_load_reactive_powers = []
constant_current_load_active_powers = []
139
==PAGE:150==
C. Python code
constant_current_load_reactive_powers = []
constant_admittance_load_active_powers = []
constant_admittance_load_reactive_powers = []
owner_numbers = []
scales = []
intrpts = []
pb_load_indexes = []
for (bus_number, load_id, load_name, load_status, area_number, zone_number,
constant_load_active_power, constant_load_reactive_power,
constant_current_load_active_power, constant_current_load_reactive_power,
constant_admittance_load_active_power, constant_admittance_load_reactive_power,
owner_number, scale, intrpt, pb_load_index, ) in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
load_ids.append(load_id)
load_names.append(load_name)
load_statuses.append(load_status)
area_numbers.append(area_number)
zone_numbers.append(zone_number)
constant_load_active_powers.append(constant_load_active_power)
constant_load_reactive_powers.append(constant_load_reactive_power)
constant_current_load_active_powers.append(constant_current_load_active_power)
constant_current_load_reactive_powers.append(constant_current_load_reactive_power)
constant_admittance_load_active_powers.append(
constant_admittance_load_active_power)
constant_admittance_load_reactive_powers.append(
constant_admittance_load_reactive_power)
owner_numbers.append(owner_number)
scales .append(scale)
intrpts .append(intrpt)
pb_load_indexes.append(pb_load_index)
loads = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’load_ids’: load_ids,
’load_names’: load_names,
’load_statuses’: load_statuses,
’area_numbers’: area_numbers,
’zone_numbers’: zone_numbers,
’constant_load_active_powers’: constant_load_active_powers,
’constant_load_reactive_powers’: constant_load_reactive_powers,
’constant_current_load_active_powers’: constant_current_load_active_powers,
’constant_current_load_reactive_powers’: constant_current_load_reactive_powers,
’constant_admittance_load_active_powers’: constant_admittance_load_active_powers,
’constant_admittance_load_reactive_powers’:
constant_admittance_load_reactive_powers,
’owner_numbers’: owner_numbers,
’ scales ’ : scales ,
’ intrpts ’ : intrpts ,
’pb_load_indexes’: pb_load_indexes,
}
return loads
def db_reader_raw_shunts(cursor, db_schema):
if ’rtds’ in db_schema:
stmt= (’select busNumber, shuntname, shuntid, name_ia, name_ib, name_ic ’ +
140
==PAGE:151==
C. Python code
’ from ’ + db_schema + ’.Shunt where busnumber > 0’ +
’ order by busNumber, shuntName’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
shunt_names = []
shunt_ids = []
names_ia = []
names_ib = []
names_ic = []
for (bus_number, shunt_name, shunt_id, name_ia, name_ib, name_ic, ) in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
shunt_names.append(shunt_name)
shunt_ids.append(shunt_id)
names_ia.append(name_ia)
names_ib.append(name_ib)
names_ic.append(name_ic)
shunts = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’shunt_names’: shunt_names,
’shunt_ids’: shunt_ids,
’names_ia’: names_ia,
’names_ib’: names_ib,
’names_ic’: names_ic,
}
else :
stmt= (’select busNumber, shuntname, shuntid, status, gl, bl from ’ + db_schema + ’.Shunt
where busNumber > 0 order by busNumber, shuntName’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
shunt_names = []
shunt_ids = []
statuses = []
gls = []
bls = []
for (bus_number, shunt_name, shunt_id, status, gl, bl, ) in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
shunt_names.append(shunt_name)
shunt_ids.append(shunt_id)
statuses .append(status)
gls .append(gl)
bls .append(bl)
shunts = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’shunt_names’: shunt_names,
’shunt_ids’: shunt_ids,
’ statuses ’ : statuses ,
’ gls ’ : gls ,
’ bls ’ : bls ,
}
return shunts
def db_reader_raw_generators(cursor, db_schema):
if ’rtds’ in db_schema:
141
==PAGE:152==
C. Python code
stmt = ("select G.busnumber, G.generatorname, G.generatorid, G.poweroutputactive, G.
poweroutputreactive, " +
"G.regulatedvoltagesetpoint, G.mvasize, G.machineimpedancereal, G.machineimpedanceimaginary
, G.xd, G.name_ia, G.name_ib, G.name_ic, G.pbgeneratorindex, B.pbvoltageindex, " +
"coalesce(tm_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(tm_pts.controlsProcessor, 0) ∗
65536 + coalesce(tm_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(tm_pts.cardNumber, −1) as
tm_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(tm_pts.dnp3DataType, ’ANALOG’) as tm_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(tm_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as tm_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(tm_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
tm_dnp3_index, " +
"coalesce(lrf_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(lrf_pts.controlsProcessor, 0) ∗
65536 + coalesce(lrf_pts.ﬁberPort ,0) ∗256 + coalesce(lrf_pts.cardNumber, −1) as
lrf_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(lrf_pts.dnp3DataType, ’ANALOG’) as lrf_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(lrf_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as lrf_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(lrf_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
lrf_dnp3_index, " +
"coalesce(brk_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(brk_pts.controlsProcessor, 0) ∗
65536 + coalesce(brk_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(brk_pts.cardNumber, −1) as
brk_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(brk_pts.dnp3DataType, ’BINARY’) as brk_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(brk_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as brk_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(brk_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
brk_dnp3_index " +
"from Generator G " +
’ left join Bus B on G.busNumber = B.busNumber ’ +
" left join DNP3Points tm_pts on G.busNumber = tm_pts.generatorBusNumber and G.
generatorName = tm_pts.generatorName and tm_pts.generatorSignalType = ’TM’ " +
" left join DNP3Points lrf_pts on G.busNumber = lrf_pts.generatorBusNumber and G.
generatorName = lrf_pts.generatorName and lrf_pts.generatorSignalType = ’LRF’ " +
’ left join DNP3Points brk_pts on G.generatorName = brk_pts.bitName ’ +
"where G.busNumber > 0 and G.busNumber = B.busNumber " +
"order by G.pbgeneratorindex")
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
generator_names = []
generator_ids = []
power_output_actives = []
power_output_reactives = []
regulated_voltage_set_points = []
mva_sizes = []
active_power_output_maximums = []
machine_impedance_reals = []
machine_impedance_imaginaries = []
xds = []
names_ia = []
names_ib = []
names_ic = []
pb_generator_indexes = []
pb_voltage_indexes = []
tm_dnp3_card_ids = []
tm_dnp3_data_types = []
tm_dnp3_variable_types = []
142
==PAGE:153==
C. Python code
tm_dnp3_indexes = []
lrf_dnp3_card_ids = []
lrf_dnp3_data_types = []
lrf_dnp3_variable_types = []
lrf_dnp3_indexes = []
brk_dnp3_card_ids = []
brk_dnp3_data_types = []
brk_dnp3_variable_types = []
brk_dnp3_indexes = []
for (bus_number, generator_name, generator_id, power_output_active,
power_output_reactive,
regulated_voltage_set_point, mva_size, machine_impedance_real,
machine_impedance_imaginary,
xd, name_ia, name_ib, name_ic, pbgeneratorindex, pbvoltageindex,
tm_dnp3_card_id, tm_dnp3_data_type, tm_dnp3_variable_type, tm_dnp3_index,
lrf_dnp3_card_id, lrf_dnp3_data_type, lrf_dnp3_variable_type, lrf_dnp3_index,
brk_dnp3_card_id, brk_dnp3_data_type, brk_dnp3_variable_type, brk_dnp3_index)
in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
generator_names.append(generator_name)
generator_ids.append(generator_id)
power_output_actives.append(power_output_active)
power_output_reactives.append(power_output_reactive)
regulated_voltage_set_points.append(regulated_voltage_set_point)
mva_sizes.append(mva_size)
machine_impedance_reals.append(machine_impedance_real)
machine_impedance_imaginaries.append(machine_impedance_imaginary)
xds.append(xd)
names_ia.append(name_ia)
names_ib.append(name_ib)
names_ic.append(name_ic)
pb_generator_indexes.append(pbgeneratorindex)
pb_voltage_indexes.append(pbvoltageindex)
tm_dnp3_card_ids.append(tm_dnp3_card_id)
tm_dnp3_data_types.append(tm_dnp3_data_type)
tm_dnp3_variable_types.append(tm_dnp3_variable_type)
tm_dnp3_indexes.append(tm_dnp3_index)
lrf_dnp3_card_ids.append(lrf_dnp3_card_id)
lrf_dnp3_data_types.append(lrf_dnp3_data_type)
lrf_dnp3_variable_types.append(lrf_dnp3_variable_type)
lrf_dnp3_indexes.append(lrf_dnp3_index)
brk_dnp3_card_ids.append(brk_dnp3_card_id)
brk_dnp3_data_types.append(brk_dnp3_data_type)
brk_dnp3_variable_types.append(brk_dnp3_variable_type)
brk_dnp3_indexes.append(brk_dnp3_index)
### Probably need to ﬁnd a diﬀerent solution for this
###
if power_output_active == 0.0 and power_output_reactive != 0.0: # Synchronous
condenser
active_power_output_maximums.append(0.0)
elif lrf_dnp3_variable_type == ’CONTROL’: # Hydro generators
active_power_output_maximums.append(mva_size∗0.95)
else :
active_power_output_maximums.append(mva_size)
143
==PAGE:154==
C. Python code
generators = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’generator_names’: generator_names,
’generator_ids’: generator_ids,
’power_output_actives’: power_output_actives,
’power_output_reactives’: power_output_reactives,
’regulated_voltage_set_points’: regulated_voltage_set_points,
’mva_sizes’: mva_sizes,
’active_power_output_maximums’:active_power_output_maximums,
’machine_impedance_reals’: machine_impedance_reals,
’machine_impedance_imaginaries’: machine_impedance_imaginaries,
’xds’:xds,
’names_ia’:names_ia,
’names_ib’:names_ib,
’names_ic’:names_ic,
’pb_generator_indexes’: pb_generator_indexes,
’pb_voltage_indexes’: pb_voltage_indexes,
’tm_dnp3_card_ids’: tm_dnp3_card_ids,
’tm_dnp3_data_types’: tm_dnp3_data_types,
’tm_dnp3_variable_types’: tm_dnp3_variable_types,
’tm_dnp3_indexes’: tm_dnp3_indexes,
’lrf_dnp3_card_ids’: lrf_dnp3_card_ids,
’lrf_dnp3_data_types’: lrf_dnp3_data_types,
’lrf_dnp3_variable_types’: lrf_dnp3_variable_types,
’lrf_dnp3_indexes’: lrf_dnp3_indexes,
’brk_dnp3_card_ids’: brk_dnp3_card_ids,
’brk_dnp3_data_types’: brk_dnp3_data_types,
’brk_dnp3_variable_types’: brk_dnp3_variable_types,
’brk_dnp3_indexes’: brk_dnp3_indexes,
}
else :
stmt = (’select Generator.busNumber, generatorName, generatorId, powerOutputActive,
powerOutputReactive, ’ +
’powerOutputReactiveMaximum, powerOutputReactiveMinimum,
regulatedVoltageSetpoint, busNumberRegulatedVoltage, mvasize, ’ +
’machineImpedanceReal, machineImpedanceImaginary,
stepupTransformerImpedanceReal, stepupTransformerImpedanceImaginary, ’ +
’stepupTransformerOﬀNominalTurnsRatio, initialMachineStatus, RMPCT,
activePowerOutputMaximum, activePowerOutputMinimum, ’ +
’owner1Number, ownershipFraction1, wmod, wpf, pbgeneratorindex, Bus.
pbvoltageindex ’ +
’from ’ + db_schema + ’.Generator, ’ + db_schema + ’.Bus ’ +
’where Generator.busNumber > 0 and Generator.busNumber = Bus.busNumber ’ +
’order by pbgeneratorindex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_numbers = []
generator_names = []
generator_ids = []
power_output_actives = []
power_output_reactives = []
power_output_reactive_maximums = []
power_output_reactive_minimums = []
regulated_voltage_set_points = []
bus_number_regulated_voltages = []
mva_sizes = []
machine_impedance_reals = []
144
==PAGE:155==
C. Python code
machine_impedance_imaginaries = []
stepup_transformer_impedance_reals = []
stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginaries = []
stepup_transformer_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios = []
initial_machine_statuses = []
rmpcts = []
active_power_output_maximums = []
active_power_output_minimums = []
owner_1_numbers = []
ownership_fraction_1s = []
wmods = []
wpfs = []
pb_generator_indexes = []
pb_voltage_indexes = []
for (bus_number, generator_name, generator_id, power_output_active,
power_output_reactive, power_output_reactive_maximum, power_output_reactive_minimum,
regulated_voltage_set_point, bus_number_regulated_voltage, mva_size,
machine_impedance_real, machine_impedance_imaginary, stepup_transformer_impedance_real,
stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginary,
stepup_transformer_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio, initial_machine_status, rmpct,
active_power_output_maximum,
active_power_output_minimum, owner_1_number, ownership_fraction_1, wmod, wpf,
pbgeneratorindex, pbvoltageindex, ) in cursor:
bus_numbers.append(bus_number)
generator_names.append(generator_name)
generator_ids.append(generator_id)
power_output_actives.append(power_output_active)
power_output_reactives.append(power_output_reactive)
power_output_reactive_maximums.append(power_output_reactive_maximum)
power_output_reactive_minimums.append(power_output_reactive_minimum)
regulated_voltage_set_points.append(regulated_voltage_set_point)
bus_number_regulated_voltages.append(bus_number_regulated_voltage)
mva_sizes.append(mva_size)
machine_impedance_reals.append(machine_impedance_real)
machine_impedance_imaginaries.append(machine_impedance_imaginary)
stepup_transformer_impedance_reals.append(stepup_transformer_impedance_real)
stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginaries.append(
stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginary)
stepup_transformer_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios.append(
stepup_transformer_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio)
initial_machine_statuses.append(initial_machine_status)
rmpcts.append(rmpct)
active_power_output_maximums.append(active_power_output_maximum)
active_power_output_minimums.append(active_power_output_minimum)
owner_1_numbers.append(owner_1_number)
ownership_fraction_1s.append(ownership_fraction_1)
wmods.append(wmod)
wpfs.append(wpf)
pb_generator_indexes.append(pbgeneratorindex)
pb_voltage_indexes.append(pbvoltageindex)
generators = {
’bus_numbers’: bus_numbers,
’generator_names’: generator_names,
’generator_ids’: generator_ids,
’power_output_actives’: power_output_actives,
’power_output_reactives’: power_output_reactives,
145
==PAGE:156==
C. Python code
’power_output_reactive_maximums’: power_output_reactive_maximums,
’power_output_reactive_minimums’: power_output_reactive_minimums,
’regulated_voltage_set_points’: regulated_voltage_set_points,
’bus_number_regulated_voltages’: bus_number_regulated_voltages,
’mva_sizes’: mva_sizes,
’machine_impedance_reals’: machine_impedance_reals,
’machine_impedance_imaginaries’: machine_impedance_imaginaries,
’stepup_transformer_impedance_reals’: stepup_transformer_impedance_reals,
’stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginaries’:
stepup_transformer_impedance_imaginaries,
’stepup_transformer_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios’:
stepup_transformer_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios,
’initial_machine_statuses’: initial_machine_statuses,
’rmpcts’: rmpcts,
’active_power_output_maximums’: active_power_output_maximums,
’active_power_output_minimums’: active_power_output_minimums,
’owner_1_numbers’: owner_1_numbers,
’ownership_fraction_1s’: ownership_fraction_1s,
’wmods’: wmods,
’wpfs’: wpfs,
’pb_generator_indexes’: pb_generator_indexes,
’pb_voltage_indexes’: pb_voltage_indexes,
}
return generators
def db_reader_raw_lines(cursor, db_schema):
if ’rtds’ in db_schema:
stmt = (’select BR.busNumberFrom, BR.busNumberTo, BR.branchName, BR.branchId, BR.
pbCurrentFromIndex, BR.pbCurrentToIndex, ’ +
’BR.name_ila_from, BR.name_ilb_from, BR.name_ilc_from, BR.name_ila_to, BR.
name_ilb_to, BR.name_ilc_to, TL.numc, ’ +
’BusFrom.pbVoltageIndex, BusTo.pbVoltageIndex, BR.busNumberThree, BR.
pbCurrentThreeIndex, ’ +
"coalesce(brk_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(brk_pts.controlsProcessor,
0) ∗65536 + coalesce(brk_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(brk_pts.cardNumber, −1) as
brk_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(brk_pts.dnp3DataType, ’BINARY’) as brk_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(brk_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as brk_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(brk_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
brk_dnp3_index " +
’from TLine TL ’ +
’ left join Branch BR on BR.busNumberFrom = TL.busNumberFrom and BR.
busNumberTo = TL.busNumberTo and BR.branchName = TL.branchName ’ +
’ left join Bus BusFrom on TL.busNumberFrom = BusFrom.busNumber ’ +
’ left join Bus BusTo on TL.busNumberTo = BusTo.busNumber ’ +
’ left join DNP3Points brk_pts on BR.branchName = brk_pts.bitName ’ +
’where BR.busNumberFrom > 0 ’ +
’order by BR.pbCurrentFromIndex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
from_bus_numbers = []
to_bus_numbers = []
branch_names = []
branch_ids = []
pb_current_from_indexes = []
pb_current_to_indexes = []
names_ila_from = []
146
==PAGE:157==
C. Python code
names_ilb_from = []
names_ilc_from = []
names_ila_to = []
names_ilb_to = []
names_ilc_to = []
numc_ = []
from_pb_voltage_indexes = []
to_pb_voltage_indexes = []
bus_number_threes = []
pb_current_three_indexes = []
brk_dnp3_card_ids = []
brk_dnp3_data_types = []
brk_dnp3_variable_types = []
brk_dnp3_indexes = []
for (from_bus_number, to_bus_number, branch_name, branch_id, pb_current_from_index,
pb_current_to_index,
name_ila_from, name_ilb_from, name_ilc_from, name_ila_to, name_ilb_to,
name_ilc_to, numc,
from_pb_voltage_index, to_pb_voltage_index, bus_number_three,
pb_current_three_index,
brk_dnp3_card_id, brk_dnp3_data_type, brk_dnp3_variable_type, brk_dnp3_index, )
in cursor:
from_bus_numbers.append(from_bus_number)
to_bus_numbers.append(to_bus_number)
branch_names.append(branch_name)
branch_ids.append(branch_id)
pb_current_from_indexes.append(pb_current_from_index)
pb_current_to_indexes.append(pb_current_to_index)
names_ila_from.append(name_ila_from)
names_ilb_from.append(name_ilb_from)
names_ilc_from.append(name_ilc_from)
names_ila_to.append(name_ila_to)
names_ilb_to.append(name_ilb_to)
names_ilc_to.append(name_ilc_to)
numc_.append(numc)
from_pb_voltage_indexes.append(from_pb_voltage_index)
to_pb_voltage_indexes.append(to_pb_voltage_index)
bus_number_threes.append(bus_number_three)
pb_current_three_indexes.append(pb_current_three_index)
brk_dnp3_card_ids.append(brk_dnp3_card_id)
brk_dnp3_data_types.append(brk_dnp3_data_type)
brk_dnp3_variable_types.append(brk_dnp3_variable_type)
brk_dnp3_indexes.append(brk_dnp3_index)
lines = {
’from_bus_numbers’: from_bus_numbers,
’to_bus_numbers’: to_bus_numbers,
’branch_names’: branch_names,
’branch_ids’: branch_ids,
’pb_current_from_indexes’: pb_current_from_indexes,
’pb_current_to_indexes’: pb_current_to_indexes,
’names_ila_from’: names_ila_from,
’names_ilb_from’: names_ilb_from,
’names_ilc_from’: names_ilc_from,
147
==PAGE:158==
C. Python code
’names_ila_to’: names_ila_to,
’names_ilb_to’: names_ilb_to,
’names_ilc_to’: names_ilc_to,
’numc’: numc_,
’from_pb_voltage_indexes’: from_pb_voltage_indexes,
’to_pb_voltage_indexes’: to_pb_voltage_indexes,
’bus_number_threes’: bus_number_threes,
’pb_current_three_indexes’: pb_current_three_indexes,
’brk_dnp3_card_ids’: brk_dnp3_card_ids,
’brk_dnp3_data_types’: brk_dnp3_data_types,
’brk_dnp3_variable_types’: brk_dnp3_variable_types,
’brk_dnp3_indexes’: brk_dnp3_indexes,
}
else :
stmt = (’select Branch.busNumberFrom, Branch.busNumberTo, Branch.branchName, Branch.
branchId, Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex, Branch.pbCurrentToIndex, ’ +
’Line. resistance , Line.reactance, Line.susceptance, Line.currentRatingA, Line.
currentRatingB, Line.currentRatingC, Line.lineShuntAdmittanceFromReal, ’ +
’Line.lineShuntAdmittanceFromImaginary, Line.lineShuntAdmittanceToReal, Line.
lineShuntAdmittanceToImaginary, Line.initialBranchStatus, Line.met, Line.lineLength, ’ +
’Line.owner1Number, Line.ownershipFraction1, BusFrom.pbVoltageIndex, BusTo.
pbVoltageIndex, ’ +
’Branch.busNumberThree, Branch.pbCurrentThreeIndex ’ +
’from Branch, Line, Bus as BusFrom, Bus as BusTo ’ +
’where Branch.busNumberFrom = Line.busNumberFrom and Branch.busNumberTo =
Line.busNumberTo and Branch.branchName = Line.branchName and Branch.busNumberThree =
Line.busNumberThree ’ +
’and Line.busNumberFrom = BusFrom.busNumber and Line.busNumberTo = BusTo.
busNumber ’ +
’and Branch.busNumberFrom > 0 ’ +
’order by Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
from_bus_numbers = []
to_bus_numbers = []
branch_names = []
branch_ids = []
pb_current_from_indexes = []
pb_current_to_indexes = []
resistances = []
reactances = []
susceptances = []
current_rating_as = []
current_rating_bs = []
current_rating_cs = []
line_shunt_admittance_from_reals = []
line_shunt_admittances_from_imaginaries = []
line_shunt_admittance_to_reals = []
line_shunt_admittances_to_imaginaries = []
initial_branch_statuses = []
mets = []
line_lengths = []
owner_1_numbers = []
ownership_1_fractions = []
from_pb_voltage_indexes = []
to_pb_voltage_indexes = []
bus_number_threes = []
pb_current_three_indexes = []
148
==PAGE:159==
C. Python code
for (from_bus_number, to_bus_number, branch_name, branch_id, pb_current_from_index,
pb_current_to_index, resistance, reactance, susceptance,
current_rating_a, current_rating_b, current_rating_c,
line_shunt_admittance_from_real,
line_shunt_admittances_from_imaginary, line_shunt_admittance_to_real,
line_shunt_admittances_to_imaginary,
initial_branch_status, met, line_length, owner_1_number, ownership_1_fraction,
from_pb_voltage_index, to_pb_voltage_index, bus_number_three,
pb_current_three_index, ) in cursor:
from_bus_numbers.append(from_bus_number)
to_bus_numbers.append(to_bus_number)
branch_names.append(branch_name)
branch_ids.append(branch_id)
pb_current_from_indexes.append(pb_current_from_index)
pb_current_to_indexes.append(pb_current_to_index)
resistances .append(resistance)
reactances.append(reactance)
susceptances.append(susceptance)
current_rating_as.append(current_rating_a)
current_rating_bs.append(current_rating_b)
current_rating_cs.append(current_rating_c)
line_shunt_admittance_from_reals.append(line_shunt_admittance_from_real)
line_shunt_admittances_from_imaginaries.append(
line_shunt_admittances_from_imaginary)
line_shunt_admittance_to_reals.append(line_shunt_admittance_to_real)
line_shunt_admittances_to_imaginaries.append(line_shunt_admittances_to_imaginary)
initial_branch_statuses.append(initial_branch_status)
mets.append(met)
line_lengths.append(line_length)
owner_1_numbers.append(owner_1_number)
ownership_1_fractions.append(ownership_1_fraction)
from_pb_voltage_indexes.append(from_pb_voltage_index)
to_pb_voltage_indexes.append(to_pb_voltage_index)
bus_number_threes.append(bus_number_three)
pb_current_three_indexes.append(pb_current_three_index)
lines = {
’from_bus_numbers’: from_bus_numbers,
’to_bus_numbers’: to_bus_numbers,
’branch_names’: branch_names,
’branch_ids’: branch_ids,
’pb_current_from_indexes’: pb_current_from_indexes,
’pb_current_to_indexes’: pb_current_to_indexes,
’ resistances ’ : resistances ,
’reactances’ : reactances,
’susceptances’: susceptances,
’current_rating_as’: current_rating_as,
’current_rating_bs’: current_rating_bs,
’current_rating_cs’: current_rating_cs,
’line_shunt_admittance_from_reals’: line_shunt_admittance_from_reals,
’line_shunt_admittances_from_imaginaries’: line_shunt_admittances_from_imaginaries,
’line_shunt_admittance_to_reals’: line_shunt_admittance_to_reals,
’line_shunt_admittances_to_imaginaries’: line_shunt_admittances_to_imaginaries,
’initial_branch_statuses’: initial_branch_statuses,
’mets’: mets,
’line_lengths’ : line_lengths,
’owner_1_numbers’: owner_1_numbers,
149
==PAGE:160==
C. Python code
’ownership_1_fractions’: ownership_1_fractions,
’from_pb_voltage_indexes’: from_pb_voltage_indexes,
’to_pb_voltage_indexes’: to_pb_voltage_indexes,
’bus_number_threes’: bus_number_threes,
’pb_current_three_indexes’: pb_current_three_indexes,
}
return lines
def db_reader_raw_transformers(cursor, db_schema):
if ’rtds’ in db_schema:
stmt = (’select B.busNumberFrom, B.busNumberTo, B.branchName, B.branchId, B.
pbCurrentFromIndex, B.pbCurrentToIndex, ’ +
’B.name_ila_from, B.name_ilb_from, B.name_ilc_from, B.name_ila_to, B.
name_ilb_to, B.name_ilc_to, ’ +
’T.winding1ImpedanceReal, T.winding1ImpedanceImaginary, T.
winding_1_to_2_basemva, ’ +
’BusFrom.pbVoltageIndex, BusTo.pbVoltageIndex, BusThree.pbVoltageIndex, ’ +
’B.busNumberThree, B.pbCurrentThreeIndex, ’ +
"coalesce(tap_pts.subsystem_no, 0) ∗16777216 + coalesce(tap_pts.controlsProcessor,
0) ∗65536 + coalesce(tap_pts.ﬁberPort,0) ∗256 + coalesce(tap_pts.cardNumber, −1) as
tap_dnp3_card_id, " +
"coalesce(tap_pts.dnp3DataType, ’BINARY’) as tap_dnp3_data_type, coalesce(tap_pts.
dnp3VariableType, ’STATUS’) as tap_dnp3_variable_type, coalesce(tap_pts.dnp3Index, −1) as
tap_dnp3_index " +
’from Transformer T ’ +
’ left join Branch B on B.busNumberFrom = T.busNumberFrom and B.busNumberTo
= T.busNumberTo and B.branchName = T.branchName and B.busNumberFrom > 0 ’ +
’ left join Bus BusFrom on T.busNumberFrom = BusFrom.busNumber ’ +
’ left join Bus BusTo on T.busNumberTo = BusTo.busNumber ’ +
’ left join Bus BusThree on T.busNumberThree = BusThree.busNumber ’ +
’ left join DNP3Points tap_pts on B.branchName = tap_pts.bitName ’ +
’order by B.pbCurrentFromIndex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_number_froms = []
bus_number_tos = []
branch_names = []
branch_ids = []
pb_current_index_froms = []
pb_current_index_tos = []
names_ila_from = []
names_ilb_from = []
names_ilc_from = []
names_ila_to = []
names_ilb_to = []
names_ilc_to = []
winding_1_impedance_reals = []
winding_1_impedance_imaginaries = []
winding_1_to_2_basemvas = []
pb_voltage_index_froms = []
pb_voltage_index_tos = []
pb_voltage_index_threes = []
bus_number_threes = []
pb_current_index_threes = []
tap_dnp3_card_ids = []
150
==PAGE:161==
C. Python code
tap_dnp3_data_types = []
tap_dnp3_variable_types = []
tap_dnp3_indexes = []
for (bus_number_from, bus_number_to, branch_name, branch_id, pb_current_index_from,
pb_current_index_to,
name_ila_from, name_ilb_from, name_ilc_from, name_ila_to, name_ilb_to,
name_ilc_to,
winding_1_impedance_real, winding_1_impedance_imaginary,
winding_1_to_2_basemva, pb_voltage_index_from, pb_voltage_index_to,
pb_voltage_index_three, bus_number_three, pb_current_index_three,
tap_dnp3_card_id, tap_dnp3_data_type, tap_dnp3_variable_type, tap_dnp3_index,)
in cursor:
bus_number_froms.append(bus_number_from)
bus_number_tos.append(bus_number_to)
branch_names.append(branch_name)
branch_ids.append(branch_id)
pb_current_index_froms.append(pb_current_index_from)
pb_current_index_tos.append(pb_current_index_to)
names_ila_from.append(name_ila_from)
names_ilb_from.append(name_ilb_from)
names_ilc_from.append(name_ilc_from)
names_ila_to.append(name_ila_to)
names_ilb_to.append(name_ilb_to)
names_ilc_to.append(name_ilc_to)
winding_1_impedance_reals.append(winding_1_impedance_real)
winding_1_impedance_imaginaries.append(winding_1_impedance_imaginary)
winding_1_to_2_basemvas.append(winding_1_to_2_basemva)
pb_voltage_index_froms.append(pb_voltage_index_from)
pb_voltage_index_tos.append(pb_voltage_index_to)
bus_number_threes.append(bus_number_three)
pb_current_index_threes.append(pb_current_index_three)
pb_voltage_index_threes.append(pb_voltage_index_three)
tap_dnp3_card_ids.append(tap_dnp3_card_id)
tap_dnp3_data_types.append(tap_dnp3_data_type)
tap_dnp3_variable_types.append(tap_dnp3_variable_type)
tap_dnp3_indexes.append(tap_dnp3_index)
transformers = {
’bus_number_froms’: bus_number_froms,
’bus_number_tos’: bus_number_tos,
’branch_names’: branch_names,
’branch_ids’: branch_ids,
’pb_current_index_froms’: pb_current_index_froms,
’pb_current_index_tos’: pb_current_index_tos,
’names_ila_from’:names_ila_from,
’names_ilb_from’:names_ilb_from,
’names_ilc_from’:names_ilc_from,
’names_ila_to’:names_ila_to,
’names_ilb_to’:names_ilb_to,
’names_ilc_to’:names_ilc_to,
’winding_1_impedance_reals’: winding_1_impedance_reals,
’winding_1_impedance_imaginaries’: winding_1_impedance_imaginaries,
’winding_1_to_2_basemvas’: winding_1_to_2_basemvas,
’pb_voltage_index_froms’: pb_voltage_index_froms,
’pb_voltage_index_tos’: pb_voltage_index_tos,
151
==PAGE:162==
C. Python code
’bus_number_threes’: bus_number_threes,
’pb_current_index_threes’: pb_current_index_threes,
’pb_voltage_index_threes’: pb_voltage_index_threes,
’tap_dnp3_card_ids’: tap_dnp3_card_ids,
’tap_dnp3_data_types’: tap_dnp3_data_types,
’tap_dnp3_variable_types’: tap_dnp3_variable_types,
’tap_dnp3_indexes’: tap_dnp3_indexes,
}
else :
stmt = (’select Branch.busNumberFrom, Branch.busNumberTo, Branch.branchName, Branch.
branchId, Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex, Branch.pbCurrentToIndex, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1ControlMode, Transformer.windingDataIOCode, Transformer.
impedanceDataIOCode, ’ +
’Transformer.magnetizingAdmittanceIOCode, Transformer.magnetizingConductance,
Transformer.magnetizingSusceptance, ’ +
’Transformer.nonMeteredEndCode, Transformer.transformerName, ’ +
’Transformer.initialTransformerStatus, Transformer.owner1Number, Transformer.
ownershipFraction1, Transformer.vecgrp, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1ImpedanceReal, Transformer.winding1ImpedanceImaginary,
Transformer.winding_1_to_2_basemva, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1OﬀNominalTurnsRatio, Transformer.winding1NominalVoltage,
Transformer.winding1PhaseShiftAngle, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1RatingA, Transformer.winding1RatingB, Transformer.
winding1RatingC, Transformer.winding1ControlledBusNumber, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1Limit1Upper, Transformer.winding1Limit1Lower, Transformer.
winding1Limit2Upper, Transformer.winding1Limit2Lower, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1NumberOfTapPositions, Transformer.
winding1ImpedanceCorrectionTableNumber, ’ +
’Transformer.winding1LoadDropCompensationImpedanceReal, Transformer.
winding1LoadDropCompensationImpedanceImaginary, Transformer.cnxa1, ’ +
’Transformer.winding2OﬀNominalTurnsRatio, Transformer.winding2NominalVoltage,
BusFrom.pbVoltageIndex, BusTo.pbVoltageIndex, ’ +
’Branch.busNumberThree, Branch.pbCurrentThreeIndex, ’ +
’Transformer.winding2ImpedanceReal, Transformer.winding2ImpedanceImaginary,
Transformer.winding_2_to_3_basemva, ’ +
’Transformer.winding3ImpedanceReal, Transformer.winding3ImpedanceImaginary,
Transformer.winding_3_to_1_basemva, ’ +
’Transformer.vmstar, Transformer.anstar, Transformer.winding1ControlMode, ’ +
’Transformer.winding2OﬀNominalTurnsRatio, Transformer.winding2NominalVoltage,
Transformer.winding2PhaseShiftAngle, ’ +
’Transformer.winding2RatingA, Transformer.winding2RatingB, Transformer.
winding2RatingC, Transformer.winding2ControlMode, Transformer.winding2ControlledBusNumber,
’ +
’Transformer.winding2Limit1Upper, Transformer.winding2Limit1Lower, Transformer.
winding2Limit2Upper, Transformer.winding2Limit2Lower, ’ +
’Transformer.winding2NumberOfTapPositions, Transformer.
winding2ImpedanceCorrectionTableNumber, ’ +
’Transformer.winding2LoadDropCompensationImpedanceReal, Transformer.
winding2LoadDropCompensationImpedanceImaginary, Transformer.cnxa2, ’ +
’Transformer.winding3OﬀNominalTurnsRatio, Transformer.winding3NominalVoltage,
Transformer.winding3PhaseShiftAngle, ’ +
’Transformer.winding3RatingA, Transformer.winding3RatingB, Transformer.
winding3RatingC, Transformer.winding3ControlMode, Transformer.winding3ControlledBusNumber,
’ +
’Transformer.winding3Limit1Upper, Transformer.winding3Limit1Lower, Transformer.
winding3Limit2Upper, Transformer.winding3Limit2Lower, ’ +
152
==PAGE:163==
C. Python code
’Transformer.winding3NumberOfTapPositions, Transformer.
winding3ImpedanceCorrectionTableNumber, ’ +
’Transformer.winding3LoadDropCompensationImpedanceReal, Transformer.
winding3LoadDropCompensationImpedanceImaginary, Transformer.cnxa3, BusThree.
pbVoltageIndex ’ +
’from Branch, Transformer, Bus as BusFrom, Bus as BusTo, Bus as BusThree ’
’where Branch.busNumberFrom = Transformer.busNumberFrom and Branch.
busNumberTo = Transformer.busNumberTo and Branch.branchName = Transformer.branchName
and Branch.busNumberThree = Transformer.busNumberThree ’ +
’and Transformer.busNumberFrom = BusFrom.busNumber and Transformer.
busNumberTo = BusTo.busNumber and Transformer.busNumberThree = BusThree.busNumber ’
’and Branch.busNumberFrom > 0 ’
’order by Branch.pbCurrentFromIndex’)
cursor.execute(stmt)
bus_number_froms = []
bus_number_tos = []
branch_names = []
branch_ids = []
pb_current_index_froms = []
pb_current_index_tos = []
winding_1_control_modes = []
winding_data_io_codes = []
impedance_data_io_codes = []
magnetizing_admittance_io_codes = []
magnetizing_conductances = []
magnetizing_susceptances = []
non_metered_end_codes = []
transformer_names = []
initial_transformer_statuses = []
owner_1_numbers = []
ownership_fraction_1s = []
vecgrps = []
winding_1_impedance_reals = []
winding_1_impedance_imaginaries = []
winding_1_to_2_basemvas = []
winding_1_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios = []
winding_1_nominal_voltages = []
winding_1_phase_shift_angles = []
winding_1_rating_as = []
winding_1_rating_bs = []
winding_1_rating_cs = []
winding_1_controlled_bus_numbers = []
winding_1_limit_1_uppers = []
winding_1_limit_1_lowers = []
winding_1_limit_2_uppers = []
winding_1_limit_2_lowers = []
winding_1_number_of_tap_positions = []
winding_1_impedance_correction_table_numbers = []
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals = []
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries = []
cnxa1s = []
winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios = []
winding_2_nominal_voltages = []
pb_voltage_index_froms = []
pb_voltage_index_tos = []
bus_number_threes = []
pb_current_index_threes = []
153
==PAGE:164==
C. Python code
winding_2_impedance_reals = []
winding_2_impedance_imaginaries = []
winding_2_to_3_basemvas = []
winding_3_impedance_reals = []
winding_3_impedance_imaginaries = []
winding_3_to_1_basemvas = []
vmstars = []
anstars = []
winding_1_control_modes = []
winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios = []
winding_2_nominal_voltages = []
winding_2_phase_shift_angles = []
winding_2_rating_as = []
winding_2_rating_bs = []
winding_2_rating_cs = []
winding_2_control_modes = []
winding_2_controlled_bus_numbers = []
winding_2_limit_1_uppers = []
winding_2_limit_1_lowers = []
winding_2_limit_2_uppers = []
winding_2_limit_2_lowers = []
winding_2_number_of_tap_positions = []
winding_2_impedance_correction_table_numbers = []
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals = []
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries = []
cnxa2s = []
winding_3_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios = []
winding_3_nominal_voltages = []
winding_3_phase_shift_angles = []
winding_3_rating_as = []
winding_3_rating_bs = []
winding_3_rating_cs = []
winding_3_control_modes = []
winding_3_controlled_bus_numbers = []
winding_3_limit_1_uppers = []
winding_3_limit_1_lowers = []
winding_3_limit_2_uppers = []
winding_3_limit_2_lowers = []
winding_3_number_of_tap_positions = []
winding_3_impedance_correction_table_numbers = []
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals = []
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries = []
cnxa3s = []
pb_voltage_index_threes = []
for (bus_number_from, bus_number_to, branch_name, branch_id, pb_current_index_from,
pb_current_index_to, winding_1_control_mode, winding_data_io_code,
impedance_data_io_code,
magnetizing_admittance_io_code, magnetizing_conductance, magnetizing_susceptance,
non_metered_end_code, transformer_name, initial_transformer_status, owner_1_number,
ownership_fraction_1, vecgrp, winding_1_impedance_real,
winding_1_impedance_imaginary, winding_1_to_2_basemva,
winding_1_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio, winding_1_nominal_voltage,
winding_1_phase_shift_angle, winding_1_rating_a, winding_1_rating_b,
winding_1_rating_c, winding_1_controlled_bus_number, winding_1_limit_1_upper,
winding_1_limit_1_lower,
winding_1_limit_2_upper, winding_1_limit_2_lower,
winding_1_number_of_tap_position, winding_1_impedance_correction_table_number,
154
==PAGE:165==
C. Python code
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real,
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary, cnxa1,
winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio, winding_2_nominal_voltage, pb_voltage_index_from,
pb_voltage_index_to,
bus_number_three, pb_current_index_three, winding_2_impedance_real,
winding_2_impedance_imaginary, winding_2_to_3_basemva, winding_3_impedance_real,
winding_3_impedance_imaginary,
winding_3_to_1_basemva, vmstar, anstar, winding_1_control_mode,
winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio, winding_2_nominal_voltage,
winding_2_phase_shift_angle, winding_2_rating_a, winding_2_rating_b, winding_2_rating_c,
winding_2_control_mode, winding_2_controlled_bus_number,
winding_2_limit_1_upper, winding_2_limit_1_lower, winding_2_limit_2_upper,
winding_2_limit_2_lower,
winding_2_number_of_tap_position, winding_2_impedance_correction_table_number,
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real,
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary, cnxa2,
winding_3_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio, winding_3_nominal_voltage,
winding_3_phase_shift_angle, winding_3_rating_a, winding_3_rating_b, winding_3_rating_c,
winding_3_control_mode, winding_3_controlled_bus_number,
winding_3_limit_1_upper, winding_3_limit_1_lower, winding_3_limit_2_upper,
winding_3_limit_2_lower,
winding_3_number_of_tap_position, winding_3_impedance_correction_table_number,
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real,
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary, cnxa3,
pb_voltage_index_three, ) in cursor:
bus_number_froms.append(bus_number_from)
bus_number_tos.append(bus_number_to)
branch_names.append(branch_name)
branch_ids.append(branch_id)
pb_current_index_froms.append(pb_current_index_from)
pb_current_index_tos.append(pb_current_index_to)
winding_1_control_modes.append(winding_1_control_mode)
winding_data_io_codes.append(winding_data_io_code)
impedance_data_io_codes.append(impedance_data_io_code)
magnetizing_admittance_io_codes.append(magnetizing_admittance_io_code)
magnetizing_conductances.append(magnetizing_conductance)
magnetizing_susceptances.append(magnetizing_susceptance)
non_metered_end_codes.append(non_metered_end_code)
transformer_names.append(transformer_name)
initial_transformer_statuses.append(initial_transformer_status)
owner_1_numbers.append(owner_1_number)
ownership_fraction_1s.append(ownership_fraction_1)
vecgrps.append(vecgrp)
winding_1_impedance_reals.append(winding_1_impedance_real)
winding_1_impedance_imaginaries.append(winding_1_impedance_imaginary)
winding_1_to_2_basemvas.append(winding_1_to_2_basemva)
winding_1_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios.append(winding_1_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio)
winding_1_nominal_voltages.append(winding_1_nominal_voltage)
winding_1_phase_shift_angles.append(winding_1_phase_shift_angle)
winding_1_rating_as.append(winding_1_rating_a)
winding_1_rating_bs.append(winding_1_rating_b)
winding_1_rating_cs.append(winding_1_rating_c)
winding_1_controlled_bus_numbers.append(winding_1_controlled_bus_number)
winding_1_limit_1_uppers.append(winding_1_limit_1_upper)
winding_1_limit_1_lowers.append(winding_1_limit_1_lower)
winding_1_limit_2_uppers.append(winding_1_limit_2_upper)
winding_1_limit_2_lowers.append(winding_1_limit_2_lower)
155
==PAGE:166==
C. Python code
winding_1_number_of_tap_positions.append(winding_1_number_of_tap_position)
winding_1_impedance_correction_table_numbers.append(
winding_1_impedance_correction_table_number)
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals.append(
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real)
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries.append(
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary)
cnxa1s.append(cnxa1)
pb_voltage_index_froms.append(pb_voltage_index_from)
pb_voltage_index_tos.append(pb_voltage_index_to)
bus_number_threes.append(bus_number_three)
pb_current_index_threes.append(pb_current_index_three)
winding_2_impedance_reals.append(winding_2_impedance_real)
winding_2_impedance_imaginaries.append(winding_2_impedance_imaginary)
winding_2_to_3_basemvas.append(winding_2_to_3_basemva)
winding_3_impedance_reals.append(winding_3_impedance_real)
winding_3_impedance_imaginaries.append(winding_3_impedance_imaginary)
winding_3_to_1_basemvas.append(winding_3_to_1_basemva)
vmstars.append(vmstar)
anstars.append(anstar)
winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios.append(winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio)
winding_2_nominal_voltages.append(winding_2_nominal_voltage)
winding_2_phase_shift_angles.append(winding_2_phase_shift_angle)
winding_2_rating_as.append(winding_2_rating_a)
winding_2_rating_bs.append(winding_2_rating_b)
winding_2_rating_cs.append(winding_2_rating_c)
winding_2_control_modes.append(winding_2_control_mode)
winding_2_controlled_bus_numbers.append(winding_2_controlled_bus_number)
winding_2_limit_1_uppers.append(winding_2_limit_1_upper)
winding_2_limit_1_lowers.append(winding_2_limit_1_lower)
winding_2_limit_2_uppers.append(winding_2_limit_2_upper)
winding_2_limit_2_lowers.append(winding_2_limit_2_lower)
winding_2_number_of_tap_positions.append(winding_2_number_of_tap_position)
winding_2_impedance_correction_table_numbers.append(
winding_2_impedance_correction_table_number)
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals.append(
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real)
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries.append(
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary)
cnxa2s.append(cnxa2)
winding_3_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios.append(winding_3_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratio)
winding_3_nominal_voltages.append(winding_3_nominal_voltage)
winding_3_phase_shift_angles.append(winding_3_phase_shift_angle)
winding_3_rating_as.append(winding_3_rating_a)
winding_3_rating_bs.append(winding_3_rating_b)
winding_3_rating_cs.append(winding_3_rating_c)
winding_3_control_modes.append(winding_3_control_mode)
winding_3_controlled_bus_numbers.append(winding_3_controlled_bus_number)
winding_3_limit_1_uppers.append(winding_3_limit_1_upper)
winding_3_limit_1_lowers.append(winding_3_limit_1_lower)
winding_3_limit_2_uppers.append(winding_3_limit_2_upper)
winding_3_limit_2_lowers.append(winding_3_limit_2_lower)
winding_3_number_of_tap_positions.append(winding_3_number_of_tap_position)
winding_3_impedance_correction_table_numbers.append(
winding_3_impedance_correction_table_number)
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals.append(
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_real)
156
==PAGE:167==
C. Python code
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries.append(
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginary)
cnxa3s.append(cnxa3)
pb_voltage_index_threes.append(pb_voltage_index_three)
transformers = {
’bus_number_froms’: bus_number_froms,
’bus_number_tos’: bus_number_tos,
’branch_names’: branch_names,
’branch_ids’: branch_ids,
’pb_current_index_froms’: pb_current_index_froms,
’pb_current_index_tos’: pb_current_index_tos,
’winding_1_control_modes’: winding_1_control_modes,
’winding_data_io_codes’: winding_data_io_codes,
’impedance_data_io_codes’: impedance_data_io_codes,
’magnetizing_admittance_io_codes’: magnetizing_admittance_io_codes,
’magnetizing_conductances’: magnetizing_conductances,
’magnetizing_susceptances’: magnetizing_susceptances,
’non_metered_end_codes’: non_metered_end_codes,
’transformer_names’: transformer_names,
’initial_transformer_statuses’ : initial_transformer_statuses,
’owner_1_numbers’: owner_1_numbers,
’ownership_fraction_1s’: ownership_fraction_1s,
’vecgrps’: vecgrps,
’winding_1_impedance_reals’: winding_1_impedance_reals,
’winding_1_impedance_imaginaries’: winding_1_impedance_imaginaries,
’winding_1_to_2_basemvas’: winding_1_to_2_basemvas,
’winding_1_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios’: winding_1_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios,
’winding_1_nominal_voltages’: winding_1_nominal_voltages,
’winding_1_phase_shift_angles’: winding_1_phase_shift_angles,
’winding_1_rating_as’: winding_1_rating_as,
’winding_1_rating_bs’: winding_1_rating_bs,
’winding_1_rating_cs’: winding_1_rating_cs,
’winding_1_controlled_bus_numbers’: winding_1_controlled_bus_numbers,
’winding_1_limit_1_uppers’: winding_1_limit_1_uppers,
’winding_1_limit_1_lowers’: winding_1_limit_1_lowers,
’winding_1_limit_2_uppers’: winding_1_limit_2_uppers,
’winding_1_limit_2_lowers’: winding_1_limit_2_lowers,
’winding_1_number_of_tap_positions’: winding_1_number_of_tap_positions,
’winding_1_impedance_correction_table_numbers’:
winding_1_impedance_correction_table_numbers,
’winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals’:
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals,
’winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries’:
winding_1_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries,
’cnxa1s’: cnxa1s,
’winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios’: winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios,
’winding_2_nominal_voltages’: winding_2_nominal_voltages,
’pb_voltage_index_froms’: pb_voltage_index_froms,
’pb_voltage_index_tos’: pb_voltage_index_tos,
’bus_number_threes’: bus_number_threes,
’pb_current_index_threes’: pb_current_index_threes,
’winding_2_impedance_reals’: winding_2_impedance_reals,
’winding_2_impedance_imaginaries’: winding_2_impedance_imaginaries,
’winding_2_to_3_basemvas’: winding_2_to_3_basemvas,
’winding_3_impedance_reals’: winding_3_impedance_reals,
’winding_3_impedance_imaginaries’: winding_3_impedance_imaginaries,
157
==PAGE:168==
C. Python code
’winding_3_to_1_basemvas’: winding_3_to_1_basemvas,
’vmstars’: vmstars,
’anstars’ : anstars,
’winding_1_control_modes’: winding_1_control_modes,
’winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios’: winding_2_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios,
’winding_2_nominal_voltages’: winding_2_nominal_voltages,
’winding_2_phase_shift_angles’: winding_2_phase_shift_angles,
’winding_2_rating_as’: winding_2_rating_as,
’winding_2_rating_bs’: winding_2_rating_bs,
’winding_2_rating_cs’: winding_2_rating_cs,
’winding_2_control_modes’: winding_2_control_modes,
’winding_2_controlled_bus_numbers’: winding_2_controlled_bus_numbers,
’winding_2_limit_1_uppers’: winding_2_limit_1_uppers,
’winding_2_limit_1_lowers’: winding_2_limit_1_lowers,
’winding_2_limit_2_uppers’: winding_2_limit_2_uppers,
’winding_2_limit_2_lowers’: winding_2_limit_2_lowers,
’winding_2_number_of_tap_positions’: winding_2_number_of_tap_positions,
’winding_2_impedance_correction_table_numbers’:
winding_2_impedance_correction_table_numbers,
’winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals’:
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals,
’winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries’:
winding_2_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries,
’cnxa2s’: cnxa2s,
’winding_3_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios’: winding_3_oﬀ_nominal_turns_ratios,
’winding_3_nominal_voltages’: winding_3_nominal_voltages,
’winding_3_phase_shift_angles’: winding_3_phase_shift_angles,
’winding_3_rating_as’: winding_3_rating_as,
’winding_3_rating_bs’: winding_3_rating_bs,
’winding_3_rating_cs’: winding_3_rating_cs,
’winding_3_control_modes’: winding_3_control_modes,
’winding_3_controlled_bus_numbers’: winding_3_controlled_bus_numbers,
’winding_3_limit_1_uppers’: winding_3_limit_1_uppers,
’winding_3_limit_1_lowers’: winding_3_limit_1_lowers,
’winding_3_limit_2_uppers’: winding_3_limit_2_uppers,
’winding_3_limit_2_lowers’: winding_3_limit_2_lowers,
’winding_3_number_of_tap_positions’: winding_3_number_of_tap_positions,
’winding_3_impedance_correction_table_numbers’:
winding_3_impedance_correction_table_numbers,
’winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals’:
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_reals,
’winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries’:
winding_3_load_drop_compensation_impedance_imaginaries,
’cnxa3s’: cnxa3s,
’pb_voltage_index_threes’: pb_voltage_index_threes,
}
return transformers
158
==PAGE:169==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
