==PAGE:1==
Mixed Halide Hybrid Perovskite
Solar Cells
Written by
Tor Alexander Elmelund (s134723)
Supervisors
Brian Seger, Associate professor, DTU Physics
Prashant V. Kamat, Professor, UND Radiation Laboratory
M.Sc. Thesis
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
7th of July 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
This work has been carried out in collaboration with:
Radiation Laboratory
University of Notre Dame
102 Radiation Research Building
Notre Dame
Indiana, IN 46556
United States of America
Tlf: 574 631 6117
Web: www.rad.nd.edu
And
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 307
DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Tlf: + 45 45 25 33 44
Web: www.fysik.dtu.dk
Additional information:
Danish Title: Blandede Halid Hybrid Perovskit Solceller
Project Period: 7th of January 2019 - 7th of July 2019
Project Level: Master (M.Sc.)
Workload: 35 ECTS points
Authors Email: tale@dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
i
Preface
This Master’s (M.Sc) thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for obtaining
a degree in Master of Science in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). The project has been carried out within the approved project
period (7th of January 2019 - 7th of July 2019) with an accredited workload of 35 ECTS points.
This work has been carried out at the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory, University of Notre
Dame, Indiana, USA, with additional use of imaging and characterisation equipment at the
Notre Dame Integrated Imaging Facility (NDIIF) and the Materials Characterisation Facility
(MCF) to fulﬁl the thesis objectives.
Technical University of Denmark, 7th of July 2019
Tor Alexander Elmelund
M.Sc Student at DTU Physics and Nanotechnology
==PAGE:5==
ii
Abstract
The ﬁeld of photovoltaics has in recent years seen a rapid development of new emerging solar cell
technologies such as quantum dot solar cells, perovskite solar cells, quaternary inorganic cells
(CZTS) and organic solar cells. Most notably is the advance of organic-inorganic lead halide
perovskite solar cells (PSCs), oﬀering comparable high-eﬃciency photovoltaics to conventional
silicon based, while doing so at a much more competitive levelized cost of electricity.
From
the initial reported perovskite solar cell in 20012 with a 9.7% eﬃciency, the energy conversion
eﬃciencies have surged to record breaking eﬃciencies above 24%. With high-eﬃciency PSCs
shown to be achievable, the research community has now shifted its focus to understanding the
more fundamental processes in order to optimise long-term stability and performance.
MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 ﬁlms cast onto glass slides and physically paired together undergo halide
exchange to form mixed halide ﬁlms. The change in halide composition in these two ∼130 nm
thick ﬁlms occurs concurrently with Br diﬀusing towards the MAPbI3 ﬁlm, and I diﬀusing
towards the MAPbBr3 ﬁlm.
The diﬀusion of these halide species, which is tracked through
changes in the absorption, oﬀers a direct measurement of thermally activated halide diﬀusion in
perovskite ﬁlms. The increase in the rate constant of halide diﬀusion with increasing temperature
(from 5 × 10−5 s−1 at 23 ◦C to 2.2 × 10−3 s−1 at 140 ◦C) follows an Arrhenius relationship with
activation energy of 51 kJ mol−1. The thermally activated halide exchange shows the challenges
of employing layers of diﬀerent metal halide perovskites in stable tandem solar cells.
The halide ion mobility in mixed halide perovskite exhibits two opposite trends in response to
photo and thermal activation. While halides prefer to remain as Br-rich and I-rich domains under
steady state light irradiation of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlms, they prefer to remain in mixed composition
in dark. The activation energies as determined from the temperature dependent rate constants
were 29 kJ mol−1 for segregation and 53 kJ mol−1 for dark recovery. This lower activation energy
of the photoactivated segregation assists to overcome the dark (thermally activated) mixing and
exists as Br-rich and I-rich regions as long as the mixed halide ﬁlm is irradiated continuously
with visible light. The excitation intensity threshold below which no segregation occurs follows
a linear temperature dependence, such that no phase separation occurs below 30 µW/cm2 at
23◦C, while at 100 µW/cm2 segregation can be suppressed at 90◦C.
The results found in this thesis are being published in two ﬁrst author papers. The ﬁrst one,
is at the time of thesis submission being reviewed in the journal ACS Energy Letters, while the
second one, is still being written and will be submitted to an undecided journal.
==PAGE:6==
iii
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my gratitude to Professor Prashant V. Kamat for giving me the
opportunity to conduct my research at the University of Notre Dame, while furthermore provid-
ing his profound knowledge and advisory throughout the entire project. Second, I would like to
express my gratitude to Associate Professor Brian Seger for his continuous advise and support
on matters related to both the thesis work and more generally throughout my visit in the US,
as well as providing me with this unique opportunity of visiting University of Notre Dame. Fur-
thermore, I would like to thank Rebecca A. Scheidt and Jeﬀrey DuBose, both graduate students
in the Prashant Kamat laboratory, for their continuous feedback and guidance throughout the
entire project, help with imaging-equipment that I have not been trained on, together with their
demonstrations of unfamiliar synthesis techniques and laboratory equipment. I would also like
to express my gratitude toward graduate student Preethi S. Mathew and Postdoc Junsang Cho
for their continuous advice throughout the project and putting up with my endless use of equip-
ment in the laboratory. Lastly, I would like to thank Dr. Tatyana Orlova of the Notre Dame
Integrated Imaging Facility for her helpful discussion on cross-sectional SEM, and Ian Lightcap
of the Notre Dame Center for Sustainable Energy (ND Energy) for his equipment training and
help with various diﬃculties. I would also like to acknowledge the support from Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, with the fellowship for conducting collaborative research at University of
Notre Dame, Indiana, USA.
Figure 0.1: Group photo. From left to right: Jun, Preethi, Tor, Prashant, Jake (undergradu-
ate), Jeﬀ. Rebecca could not be present.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
General Theory of Solar Cells
3
2.1
Light Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Energy Band Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Charge-Carrier Recombination in Halide Perovskites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Single p-n Junction Solar Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Single Junction Solar Cells with an Intrinsic Layer (p-i-n) . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Characterisation of Solar Cells
8
3.1
Measuring Electrical Properties (I-V Characteristics) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Parasitic Resistances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Fill Factor & Power Conversion Eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Perovskite Solar Cells
12
4.1
Perovskite Cell Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
The Emergence of Perovskite Solar Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Morphological Evolution of Perovskite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
Compositional Advances in Perovskite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
19
5.1
Preparation of Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Results and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskites
24
6.1
Fabrication of a Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
27
7.1
Preparation of Perovskite Films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.2
Homogenisation of Paired perovskite Films
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.3
Characterisation of Morphology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.4
Tracking Halide Ion Mobility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.5
Thermally Activation of Halide Ion Mobility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:8==
7.6
Compositional Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.7
Characterisation of Excited State Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.8
Halide Ion Mobility of Mixed Halide Perovskite Films
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.9
Suppression of Halide Diﬀusion with Interface Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.10 Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
43
8.1
Fighting ﬁlm degradation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
8.2
Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
9
Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
49
9.1
Preparation of Mixed Halide Perovskite Films . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.2
Photoactivated Mobility of Halide Ions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.3
Thermally Activated Mobility of Halide Ions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.4
Combined Photo and Thermal Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.5
Thermal Suppression of Segregation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
9.6
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
10 Summary and Conclusion
58
11 Future Prospect
60
Appendix A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
66
Appendix B Preparation of Caesium Lead Halide Perovskite Films
74
Appendix C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
77
Appendix D Experimental Setup and Theory on Femtosecond TAS
83
Appendix E SI Figures for Photo versus Thermal Activated Mobility Project
85
Appendix F Paper 1 - Submitted
88
Appendix G Paper 2 - Draft
117
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
1
1
Introduction
Earth’s climate has changed several times throughout its lifetime due to the naturally occurring
climate cycles that have been historically recorded. However, for the last century, changes in the
climate have accelerated to a point which has not previously been documented in the history of
modern civilisation and cannot be explained by the cyclical variations in the Earth’s climate.
Several studies have conﬁrmed [1, 2, 3], that this is primarily a result of human activities,
technological developments and the industrial era. All of these advances are closely linked to
the use of fossil fuels, and thus the emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) when these are burned.
According to the latest Global Energy and CO2 Status Report by the International Energy
Agency (IEA)[4], the 2018 the worldwide electricity demand grew by 4% to more than 23000
TWh, such that electricity now accounts for 20% of the total ﬁnal energy consumption. This
rapid growth contributes to CO2 emissions, which increased by 1.7% to a staggering 33 Gigatons
(Gt) in 2018. Oil and coal combined, accounted for a quarter of the global energy demand growth,
while renewables, which grew by more than 4%, also accounted for a quarter of the growth in total
primary energy demand.[4] Several diﬀerent renewable energy technologies are being developed
to transition towards a carbon neutral energy society. The most promising of these technologies
include photovoltaics (PV), wind, geothermal and hydroelectric. By looking at the Levelized
Cost of Energy (LCOE) [5], it is evident, that as these technologies improve, a continued decline
in the cost of generating renewable electricity can be achieved. Most prominently is the cost
of unsubsidized utility-scale solar and wind, that have declined to a point, where they are now
cost competitive compared to fossil fuels, which shows the maturity of these alternative energy
generation technologies. Figure 1.1 shows the historical LCOE comparison between wind and
solar, from which it is evident, that the percentage decrease in LCOE is 69% and 88% for
wind and solar, respectively. Furthermore, both solar photovoltaics (PV) and wind allow for
decentralised energy generation, making them ideal for remote areas in developing countries,
where access to electricity is a growing necessity.
Figure 1.1:
Figure showing historical development of levelized cost of energy between (a)
unsubsidized Wind, and (b) unsubsidized Solar PV.[5]
According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), the projected share of coal gen-
erated electricity will decrease from a 28% share in 2018 to 17% of total generation by 2050.[6,
2019] Meanwhile, the share of electricity generated by renewable energy sources is projected
to increase from 18% in 2018 to 31% by 2050. Even as the government subsidies for solar is
decreased, the EIA projects, that the electricity generated from solar will continue to increase,
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
2
primarily due to the cost of solar generated electric decreasing at a faster rate than other tech-
nologies. The share of solar PV of combined electricity generated from renewables is therefore
projected to increase from 13% in 2018 to incredible 48% by 2050.
However, one of the major challenges of photovoltaics and wind is that they are both inter-
mittent energy sources, and thus the energy output relies crucially on the weather conditions
and seasonal variations. To make a full transition to carbon neutral energy technologies and
guarantee energy security, large scale energy storage is required to contribute to this transition.
Several technological advances therefore have to be realised before a full transition to renewable
energy technologies can be achieved.
Perovskite solar cells have since their introduction in 2012 with a power conversion eﬃciency of
9.7% [7], been the fastest advancing photovoltaic technology to date. With a record eﬃciency
of 24.2%[8] set in early 2019, this emerging technology is now competing with more established
photovoltaic technologies, while doing so at a much lower cost. Perovskite materials provide
excellent light absorption, charge-carrier mobilities, and lifetimes making them suitable for high
eﬃciency devices. However, perovskite materials are plagued by thermal-, moisture-, structural
phase- and photo-stability, which perovskite solar cells inherently face when exposed to operat-
ing conditions. Although encapsulation methods have been developed to address the moisture
stability, this does not address the remaining issues. To advance towards potential commer-
cialisation of this technology, the perovskite community has therefore moved from increasing
the eﬃciency, to focusing on addressing and improving stability issues. One of the promising
approaches is the use of mixed halide perovskites, which apart from the ability to continuous
tune the band gap, show signs of improved stability under operational conditions.
1.1
Thesis Objectives
The objective of this thesis is to initially produce high eﬃciency MAPbI3 perovskite based solar
cells with high reproducibility and characterise them to gain an understanding of the physics
behind these devices, as well as practising the diﬀerent deposition techniques used. Following
this, a gradient absorption layer will be fabricated to facilitate an accelerated hole extraction
to increase the short circuit current of the solar cell, while eﬃciently separating the generated
charge carriers to minimise recombination.
Further work will branch into producing mixed
halide perovskite structures. The aim is here to establish a fundamental understanding of the
thermally activated halide movement of halide ions in metal halide perovskites, as well as photo
induced phase segregation in mixed halide perovskites. Techniques such as Ultraviolet–visible
absorbance spectroscopy (UV-Vis), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), and Transient
Absorption Spectroscopy (TAS) will be employed to analyse the cells.
In short, the thesis will be structured around multiple projects serving to elucidate parts of
the combined project. The goal of the project is to relate diﬀerences in material, processing,
and irradiation conditions to variations in the photophysics of the photovoltaics and use this to
further the knowledge of the perovskite solar cell (PSC) ﬁeld.
==PAGE:11==
2 General Theory of Solar Cells
3
2
General Theory of Solar Cells
This section serves to provide a general understanding of the theory behind photovoltaic devices,
the processes involved, and their ability to eﬀectively convert sunlight into electricity.
2.1
Light Absorption
Photovoltaic (PV) cells and optoelectronic devices utilise the ability to absorb light. The amount
of light that is being absorbed, can be increased by lowering the surface reﬂectance and tailoring
the absorption spectrum, so that it matches the radiated spectrum from the sun or a light source
simulating this. Looking at the radiated spectrum of the sun, known as the black-body radiation
spectrum (shown in Figure 2.1), it is evident that the spectral irradiance heavily depends on
the wavelength. It is therefore decisive when designing highly eﬃcient optoelectronic devices to
tailor the device absorption spectrum to the high incident power area of the black-body radiation
spectrum.
Figure 2.1: Radiation spectrum for Black body (5762 K), AM0 and AM1.5g spectra [9, p. 63].
The radiation spectrum for a black body at 5762 K imitates the Sun’s surface temperature and
its radiated spectrum. However, due to the Sun’s physical distance from earth, only radiation
emitted straight towards earth contribute to the received radiation. This correction is included
in the spectral distribution deﬁned as the air mass zero (AM0) radiation spectrum. It deﬁnes,
that the radiation intensity just outside Earth’s atmosphere is 1353 kW/m2 [9], as shown in
Figure 2.1. However, as the irradiance is further reduced before reaching Earth’s surface due
to absorption, reﬂection and scattering in Earth’s atmosphere, further corrections need to be
included. Depending on the incident angle of radiation with respect to the atmosphere, the air
mass is deﬁned as:
Air Mass (AM) =
1
cos θ
(1)
where θ is the angle between angle of incidence and the angle perpendicular (θ = 0) to the atmo-
sphere. However, the implies that the AM spectrum changes with daily and seasonal variations,
as well as the point of observation, caused by the change in angle of incident light. To account
for these variations, and the fact that 20% of the incident light reaching an object on earth’s
surface comes from an indirect component, further correction must be included. The adapted
standardised comparison method for photoelectrical devices is the AM1.5 spectrum. This spec-
trum consists of both the AM1.5g (global) spectrum and the AM1.5d (direct) spectrum, with
==PAGE:12==
2 General Theory of Solar Cells
4
the diﬀerence being that the global spectrum includes the indirect radiation component. For a
more correct simulation environment for a solar cell under operational conditions, the AM1.5g
spectrum is widely adapted, and will hereafter be referred to as AM1.5. This spectrum has been
normalised to a total power density of 1 kW/m2 (100 mW/cm2), corresponding to the integrated
area under the AM1.5g graph, as shown in Figure 2.1.
When light is radiated as described above, this fundamentally consists of photons with varying
energies corresponding to diﬀerent wavelengths as known from a light spectrum. The Planck–
Einstein relation states that the photon energy, Eλ, is inversely related to the wavelength λ, by
Eλ = hν = hc
λ
(2)
where h is Plank’s constant, ν describes the photon frequency, c is the speed of light in vacuum
and λ is the photon’s wavelength. This relation deﬁnes how low energy photons correspond to
short wavelengths (i.e. red light), while high energy photons correspond to long wavelength (i.e.
blue light). When designing a solar cell, it is therefore decisive to tailor its absorption spectrum,
so that it matches the radiated spectrum from the Sun.
Incident photons, that impact the surface of a photovoltaic device, can go through three pro-
cesses; they are reﬂected, absorbed in the semiconductor material, or transmitted through. The
ability to absorb incident photons in the material is what makes photovoltaic devices able to
convert sunlight into electricity. When photons with energy equal to or adequate energy above
the band gap energy (hν ≥Eg) are absorbed, their energy is transferred to electrons creating
electron-hole pairs, which contribute to the electrical current. It is therefore incredibly impor-
tant to carefully select a material with an appropriate band gap when designing the solar cell,
as this greatly eﬀects the power conversion eﬃciency of the cell. Ideally, the band gap of the
semiconductor (photon absorbing layer) should be chosen, such that photons from the high in-
tensity area of the black body radiation spectrum is eﬃciently absorbed by the cell to generate
electrical current. Photons with signiﬁcantly higher energy than the band gap (hν ≫Eg) will
have the excess energy converted into a thermal loss in the cell.
2.2
Energy Band Structure
Materials used for electronic grade semiconductors are materials with a high crystallinity and,
thus have atoms that are aligned with a high periodicity. By coupling this periodicity with the
atomic properties of materials, that have been carefully selected, semiconductor materials with
desired electronic properties are chosen for solar cell applications.
When atoms are brought in close contact with each other to form crystals, which makes up the
very crystalline materials, a splitting of their allowed electron energies takes place. This splitting
is described by the band gap of a semiconductor material, which deﬁnes the forbidden electron
energies between two energy bands.
The band gap is material dependent and to determine
the dynamic behaviour of the electron, it is necessary to solves the time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation. This arises from the fact that an electron in a semiconductor material can be modelled
as a particle conﬁned to a three-dimensional box. However, this is beyond the scope of this
thesis. It is suﬃcient to say, that the solution to the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation yields
the material dependent band structures. These provide information about the allowed electron
energies as well as the relation between an electron’s energy and momentum.
As mentioned, the material dependent band gap is what distinguishes eﬃcient semiconductor
materials for photovoltaic applications from lesser eﬃcient materials, or in the case of tandem
solar cells; the high and low band gap material. The band gap is deﬁned by the highest ﬁlled band
(deﬁned as the valence band, EV ) and the lowest unoccupied band (deﬁned as the conduction
band, EC). The minimum photon energy required to excite a bound valence-electron into a
higher energy state, i.e. the conduction band, is therefore dictated by the band gap. When the
electron is excited into the EV it can contribute as a charge carrier to conduct electrical current,
==PAGE:13==
2 General Theory of Solar Cells
5
Semiconductor materials are categorised into two main categories depending on their band gap,
namely; direct and indirect band gap materials. The former being preferred, as will be explained
in the following. In the case where the maximum of the valence band edge is located at the same
crystal momentum as the minimum of the conduction band edge, the band gap is deﬁned as a
direct band gap. Materials such as perovskite and Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) are known to have
direct band gaps. A schematic illustration of a direct band gap material is shown in Figure
2.2a, with the absorption of a photon with adequate energy above the required band gap energy
(hν = E2 −E1 > Eg).
In the case where the maximum and minimum of the valence and
conduction band, respectively, occurs at diﬀerent crystal momentum values corresponding to a
misalignment of the edges, the band gap is deﬁned as an indirect band gap. Materials such as
the widely used Silicon (Si) and Germanium (Ge) are known to have indirect band gaps. The
case of an indirect band gap material is shown in Figure 2.2b.
Here the photon absorption
process is slightly more complicated, as conservation of electron momentum dictates that a
two-particle process is required. The additional momentum is provided by phonons i.e. lattice
vibrations, which are low energy but provide the necessary momentum. The phonon assisted
absorption of a photon shown in Figure 2.2b, shows the two cases where the incident photon
energy is hν < E2 −E1 and hν > E2 −E1.
In the former case, a phonon is absorbed to
supply the additional momentum, while the latter case shows the emission of a phonon with
the excess energy. For both processes the energy and momentum of the system is conserved.
However, what this two-particle process eﬀectively means, is that compared to direct transitions,
the absorption coeﬃcient for indirect transitions is signiﬁcantly lower. For this reason, indirect
band gap semiconductors absorb photons less eﬀectively, and hence a thicker photon absorbing
layer is required to accommodate the deeper light penetration in the material.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Figure showing a semiconductor with (a) a direct band gap and (b) an indirect
band gap [9, p. 71].
2.3
Charge-Carrier Recombination in Halide Perovskites
The process of recombination occurs, when an electron in its meta-stable excited state in the
conduction band relaxes back down to the valence band and recombines with the valence band
hole, before the charge carrier is extracted at the device terminals. For solar cells this occurs
when they are operated outside their thermal equilibrium, i.e. when illuminated under opera-
tion conditions. The recombination process aﬀects the device performance, as the recombination
process directly limits the generation of electrical current as well as the injected forward bias
current. For semiconductors in general (direct and indirect) there are three recombination types;
Shockley-Read-Hall Recombination, Auger recombination and radiative (band-to-band) recom-
bination.
As these recombination processes are not the main focus of this thesis, it will be
==PAGE:14==
2 General Theory of Solar Cells
6
suﬃcient to say that they should all be taken into consideration and limited as much as possible,
when designing and optimising any type of photovoltaic device.
2.4
Single p-n Junction Solar Cells
A p-n junction is formed, when an n-type material with excess electrons is combined with a p-type
material with excess holes. The concentration diﬀerence in charge carriers (i.e. electrons and
holes) causes excess holes to diﬀuse from the p-type material into the n-type region. Conversely,
excess electrons diﬀuse from the n-type material into the p-type region.
This movement of
carriers into the opposite type material causes positive and negative ion cores in the n-type and
p-type side, respectively, to be exposed, as these are bound in the crystal lattice. As charged
carriers continue to move across to the opposite region, positively charged donors in the n-type
region and negatively charged acceptors in the p-type region build up. Thus, this build-up of
charged donors and acceptors on either side of the boundary creates an electrostatic potential
diﬀerence (i.e. an electric ﬁeld) at the junction. This limits further diﬀusion of charge carriers
across the junction.
The formed junction between the n-type and p-type material is called
the space charge region or depletion region, as generated free carriers are eﬀectively depleted
from the region by the electric ﬁeld.
As a result of the electric ﬁeld generated by exposed
charged impurities in the depletion region, an electrostatic potential diﬀerence from the junction
formation arises, called the built-in voltage (Vbi).
At thermal equilibrium the diﬀusion and drift current for each charge carrier type have equal
magnitude and opposite sign, resulting in a zero net current ﬂow in the device.
Figure 2.3
illustrates the p-n junction with the depletion region and electric ﬁeld, as well as the diﬀusion
force and force from the electric ﬁeld acting on the charge carriers.
Figure 2.3: Schematic illustration of the p-n junction at thermal equilibrium with zero-bias
voltage applied.[10, p. 242]
When solar cells are operated with external input similar to operation conditions, such as il-
lumination or with an applied voltage, the cell is no longer in equilibrium. When a voltage is
applied, the electric ﬁeld generated by the p-n junction is either decreased or increased.
The increase in electrical ﬁeld in the space charge region under reverse bias limits the probability
of charge carriers diﬀusing across the depletion region, hence decreasing the diﬀusion current.
As this is not the case for solar cells, this will therefore not be further described.
Under illumination, the device is operated in forward bias, such that a positive voltage is applied
to the p-side and a negative to the n-side. This decreases the electrical ﬁeld, thus facilitating
charge carrier diﬀusion across the depletion region, which results in an increased diﬀusion cur-
rent. Charge carriers are injected by photons that excite the electrons into the conduction band
==PAGE:15==
2 General Theory of Solar Cells
7
in the vicinity of the depletion zone on the n-side, as described in 2.2. As the majority carrier
electrons diﬀuse across the space charge region, they will become minority carriers on the in the
p-region. Due to the excess of electrons at the edge of the depletion region, the minority carriers
will diﬀuse away from the junction boundary, and eventually recombine with holes. As this re-
combination occurs, a continuous injection of electrons from the n-side into the p-side becomes
possible. In other words, the diﬀusion current ﬂowing in forward bias, is actually a recombination
current. What this eﬀectively means is, that an increase in recombination corresponds to an in-
crease in the current ﬂowing across the junction, described by the reverse saturation current (I0).
Thus, simply put a p-n junction is two quasi-neutral regions separated by the space charge region
with electrical contacts on either side of the quasi-neutral region.
2.5
Single Junction Solar Cells with an Intrinsic Layer (p-i-n)
Contrary to p-n single junction solar cells described above, perovskite solar cells utilise a p-i-n
junction. For this junction an undoped intrinsic layer (i) is incorporated between the p-type
and n-type material. When this is done, the space charge region becomes the most signiﬁcant
fraction of the combined solar cell thickness. The undoped region utilises that electron-hole pairs
are created in the top surface-region in direct band gap semiconductors (i.e. large absorption
coeﬃcient materials). As the intrinsic region possess an equal amount of charge carriers (i.e.
electrons and holes) in the conduction band and valence band, respectively, the internal electric
ﬁeld in the depletion region serves to assist the charge collection in the device. Hence, by utilising
an intrinsic layer, a more eﬀective charge separation is achieved, thus lowering the recombination
of holes and electrons.
==PAGE:16==
3 Characterisation of Solar Cells
8
3
Characterisation of Solar Cells
This section serves to provide a general understanding of the most commonly used characterisa-
tion method of solar cells, namely current-voltage characterisation. Furthermore, the non-ideal
behaviour of solar cells caused by parasitic resistances, will be explained to provide an under-
standing of which parameters that need to be addressed to design highly eﬃcient devices. The
section based on [9].
3.1
Measuring Electrical Properties (I-V Characteristics)
Current-voltage (I-V) measurements of solar cells is the most widely used method for measur-
ing the performance of the produced cells. As most laboratory produced solar cells are small
scale with active areas <1 cm2 for research purposes, the current-voltage outputs are normally
normalised to 1 cm2 and expressed in terms of the current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics.
By analysing the electrical properties of a solar cell, information about the short-circuit current
(ISC), open circuit voltage (VOC), ﬁll factor (FF) and power conversion eﬃciency (PCE) can be
obtained. All of these parameters make it possible to compare solar cells of diﬀerent structures
and composition. Furthermore, the J-V curve gives an insight into where the diﬀerent fabrication
steps should be optimised to reduce the eﬃciency limiting parasitic (series- and shunt-) resis-
tances.
Figure 3.1: Ideal electrical circuit diagram of
a current source (J) with short-circuit current
(JSC) in parallel with a diode with reverse sat-
uration current (Jdark).
For the ideal case where no internal eﬃciency
limiting resistances are present in the solar
cell, the solar cell without illumination shares
the same electrical characteristics as a diode.
From an electrical circuit perspective the so-
lar cell can therefore be modelled as an ideal
current source (J) with short-circuit current
(JSC) placed in parallel to a diode with a re-
verse saturation current (Jdark), as shown in
Figure 3.1. What is worth noting is, that the
current generated by the source (solar cell) is
opposed to the current ﬂow of the diode, thus
ensuring that the diode is operated under for-
ward bias. For simplicity the recombination
current for the quasi-neutral regions and for the depletion region is combined in one diode, as
will be elaborated on in Section 3.2. For a solar cell operated under illumination (i.e. an AM1.5
light source for standardisation) current is generated and extracted at the two terminals. An
expression for the ideal diode equation, neglecting resistive eﬀects, then becomes:
J = J0

exp
 qV
nkBT

−1

(3)
where J is the measured current, J0 is the reverse saturation current, q is the electron charge,
V is the applied voltage across the diode terminals, n is the ideality factor, kB is Boltzmann’s
constant and T is the operation temperature. The reverse saturation current is a measure of
’leakage’ or diﬀusion of minority carriers from the quasi neutral regions to the depletion region
(i.e. across the p-n junction).
The short-circuit current (ISC or JSC) is when no or only negligible voltage is applied to the
system, which is evident from setting the voltage equal to zero in Equation 3. The ISC is often
the largest generated current by the cell, since the current is reduced as the applied voltage
is increased to the point where the recombination current becomes signiﬁcant, as illustrated in
Figure 3.2. As previously mentioned, the generated current depends on the active area of the
cell, and thus in order to compare cells with diﬀerent active areas, the current is commonly ex-
pressed in terms of the short-circuit current density (JSC (mA/cm2)) to allow for a standardised
==PAGE:17==
3 Characterisation of Solar Cells
9
comparison value. However, the ISC is also aﬀected by the used light intensity, as described in
Section 2.1. It is therefore widely adapted to use a white light source corrected to the AM1.5
spectrum (1000 W/m2 or 100 mW/cm2), to allow for comparison of diﬀerent measurements.
Figure 3.2:
J-V curve with the square grey
area showing the largest power density (FF).
The VOC is where the current through the cell
is zero, while the JSC is found where the volt-
age across the cell is zero. The maximum power
(PMP ) of the cell is found at the intersection of
the maximum current, Jmp, and maximum volt-
age, Vmp.[9, p. 93]
Reﬂection and absorption in especially the
front contact layer can further reduce the eﬃ-
ciency of a cell, as incident photons are lost be-
fore they interact with the photon absorbing
layer to generate charge carriers. As a result
of this, it is important to include this in the
device design of the solar cell. The perovskite
solar cell architecture used in this thesis, uses
a transparent conductive oxide as the front
contact, which will be elaborated in Section
4.1. The contact has been deposited onto the
substrate where the solar cell is built up. By
using this approach, only negligible photons
are lost to reﬂection, and by using an opti-
mised cell architecture, the number of photons
absorbed in layers before the perovskite layer
is minimised.
The open-circuit voltage (VOC) is, opposite
of the ISC, the case where the net current
through the cell is zero, and can thus be found
from Equation 3. From Figure 3.2 it is evident
that the VOC is the maximum voltage available from the cell. The electrical circuit in the ideal
case (Figure 3.1) showed, that the direction of the current generating source was opposed to
the current ﬂow of the diode, hence ensuring that the diode is operated at forward-bias. What
this eﬀectively means is, that the VOC corresponds to the forward bias of the system and is
thus the applied voltage that is required to turn on the diode. The VOC depends on the reverse
saturation current (J0) and the light generated short circuit current (JSC), where JSC ≫J0,
and is calculated as:
VOC = kT
q ln
JSC
J0

(4)
3.2
Parasitic Resistances
Until now an ideal diode assumption has been made. However, for solar cells this is generally
not true. It is therefore necessary to account for the non-ideal behaviour of diodes by including
the most common types of parasitic resistances. These resistances are the primary eﬃciency
limiting causes, neglecting the band gap, that needs to be overcome when fabricating solar cells.
For high eﬃciency photovoltaic devices it is desired to have a low Rs and a high Rsh, as the
opposite case where Rs increases and Rsh decreases facilitates the generated power to be dissi-
pated in these resistances. A schematic illustration of the electrical circuit where the Rs and Rsh
are included, is shown in Figure 3.3. To account for voltage losses due to recombination eﬀects,
it is necessary to include a diode ideality factor, which is a measure of where in the device the
recombination dominates. As shown in Figure 3.3, a second diode (n2) is placed in parallel with
the p-n junction diode (n1) from the ideal electrical circuit (Figure 3.1). At high voltage the
ideality factor of n1 →1, which is its limiting value, as recombination in the cell is dominated
by surface and bulk quasi neutral regions without an electric ﬁeld. Oppositely, recombination
dominates in the depletion region at low voltages, represented by the ideality factor of n2 →2.
==PAGE:18==
3 Characterisation of Solar Cells
10
Figure 3.3: Schematic illustration of the electrical circuit diagram for a solar cell, including
the parasitic resistances Rs and Rsh.
Diode n1 represents the recombination current in the
quasi-neutral regions (∝exp (qV/kT)), whereas diode n2 represents the recombination in the
depletion region (∝exp (qV/2kT)).[9, p. 119]
When accounting for the losses in power output from the solar cell, caused by the parasitic
resistances, it is necessary to rewrite the ideal diode equation (Equation 3), such that the diode
equation now becomes:
J = JSC −J0

exp
q(V + JRs)
nkBT

−1

−V + JRs
Rsh
(5)
where q is the charge, n is the diode ideality factor between 1 and 2, while Rs and Rsh are the
series and shunt resistance, respectively. For simplicity, the equation is stated under the single
diode approximate, which assumes that the ideality factors n1 and n2 are equal and constant,
and thus expressed in terms of a single ideality factor n.
Looking at Equation 5 is becomes clear that in order to obtain a photovoltaic device with a high
current, which provides a good indication for the eﬃciency of the cell, it is critical that the Rsh
is maximised, while the Rs is minimised.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: I-V curves displaying the eﬀect of (a) the series resistance, Rs, where the shunt
resistance is neglected (Rsh →∞) [9, p. 103], and (b) the shunt resistance, Rsh, where the
series resistance is neglected (Rs = 0) [9, p. 104].
The series resistance, Rs, reduces the short-circuit current, while it does not have an eﬀect
on the open-circuit voltage as the overall current ﬂow remains the same. This means that the
Rs can be estimated from the slope of the I-V curve at the VOC. The eﬀect of the Rs is shown
in Figure 3.4a for the case of a moderate and high series resistance, while the shunt resistance
==PAGE:19==
3 Characterisation of Solar Cells
11
has been neglected for illustrative purposes. It is evident that as Rs increases, the ﬁll factor (i.e.
the squareness of the I-V curve) decreases. At excessively high Rs the short-circuit current is
decreased. Sources of series resistance can include bad contact between active layers and metal
contacts, bad interlayer contact in the device stack causing increased resistance, or resistance
in materials used for contacts. Hence, to obtain highly eﬃcient solar cells it is necessary to
minimise the series resistance.
The shunt resistance, Rsh, reduces the open-circuit voltage, while the short-circuit current
is unaﬀected. For highly eﬃcient solar cells it is desired to have a high Rsh, as can be seen
from Figure 3.4b. A low shunt resistance is most likely caused by manufacturing defects, thus
providing an alternative current path for the generated current, resulting in a reduced power
output. Looking at Figure 3.3 is it evident that defects lowering the Rsh will cause current to
ﬂow through the shunt resistance rather than solar cell junction, thus reducing the generated
voltage. The eﬀect of a low Rsh becomes especially apparent at low light intensity levels, as
the current generated under these conditions is already lower, such that the eﬀect of the Rsh
becomes more predominant. Since a low Rsh does not decrease the JSC, it is possible to estimate
the Rsh from the slope of the I-V curve at the JSC.
3.3
Fill Factor & Power Conversion Eﬃciency
The ﬁll factor (FF) provides a measure of the largest power density that the solar cell can
produce, and is graphically shown in Figure 3.2 as the largest rectangle that can be ﬁtted within
the I-V curve. The FF is a measure of the ’squareness’ of the I-V curve, and hence will always be
< 1 (or 100%), which only in the ideal case of a completely square I-V curve can be 1. The FF
relates the two primary values, the VOC and JSC, in such a way that both need to be suﬃciently
optimised to obtain a high FF. This means that it is not suﬃcient to only optimise either VOC or
JSC while the other is neglected, as this will result in a reduced FF. The ﬁll factor is calculated
as:
FF =
PMP
VOCJSC
= JMP VMP
VOCJSC
(6)
where the maximum power point (PMP ) is determined as the intersection between the maximum
current point (JMP ) and the maximum voltage point (VMP ), as shown in Figure 3.2.
The power conversion eﬃciency (PCE) is the most commonly used comparison method
for solar cells, as it describes a PV device’s ability to convert incident power into electricity.
Hence, by extracting the key values from the J-V curve (i.e. JSC, VOC and FF), the PCE (η)
is calculated as:
η = PMP
Pin
= JMP VMP
Pin
= JSCVOCFF
Pin
(7)
where Pin =1 kW/m2 (100 mW/cm2) corresponding to the the standardised AM1.5 spectrum.
From Equation 7 it is evident that highly eﬃcient solar cells should have a high JSC and
VOC, while the FF should approach its limiting value of 1.
As only photons with energy
hν = E2 −E1 > Eg contribute to the generation of charge carrier, it is decisive for the so-
lar cell performance, that the photon absorbing material has a band gap corresponding to the
high incident power area of the black-body radiation spectrum, shown in Figure 2.1.
To design highly eﬃcient solar cells, it is therefore important to address parameters such as:
1. Utilising a photon absorbing material with an appropriate band gap.
2. Reducing reﬂection and absorption to minimise optical losses.
3. Reducing the charge-carrier recombination processes that aﬀect device performance.
4. Reducing the series resistance Rs and maximising the shunt resistance Rsh.
==PAGE:20==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
12
4
Perovskite Solar Cells
Perovskite refers to compounds that have an ABX3 crystal structure, as shown in Figure 4.1a.
They are named after a naturally occurring calcium titanium oxide mineral composed of calcium
titanate (CaTiO3). Due to perovskites desired physical and chemical properties, this is currently
a highly studied compound, that is suitable for many energy related applications (e.g. solar cells,
water-splitting devices, catalysts, lasers and fuel cells).
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown to be the most promising emerging technology within
photovoltaics. For photovoltaic applications which are based on mixed organic-inorganic halide
perovskite materials, A (e.g. Cs+, MA+ and FA+) and B (e.g. Pb2+, Sn2+ and Ge2+) in the
ABX3 conﬁguration denotes cations of diﬀerent sizes, with A > B, while X (e.g. F−, Cl−, Br−
and I−) is an anion. The crystallographic stability of various perovskites is dictated by the
Goldschmidt tolerance factor t and the octahedral factor µ. The tolerance factor describes the
ratio of distance between the A cation and X anion, to the distance between the B cation and
X anion, modelled through an idealised solid-sphere model, and is given by:
t =
RA + RX
√
2(RB + RX)
(8)
where RA, RB and RX are the ionic radii of the corresponding cations and anions.
Halide
perovskites are typically formed in range 0.81 ≤t ≤1.0, while the octahedral factor given
as µ = RB/RX is generally is the range of 0.44 ≤µ ≤0.9 [11] and is a measure of compound
stability. Both the tolerance factor and octahedral factor are therefore used to model the stability
and distortion of a crystal structure, and hence how likely a compound with a certain ABX3
stoichiometry is to form. The formability of commonly used halide perovskites are shown in
Figure 4.1b as a function of A-site cation radii and X-site halide anion radii.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) Figure showing the cubic perovskite crystal structure, with illustrations of
the large cation A, the smaller cation B, and the anion X. Figure reproduced from [12]. (b)
Formability of 3D halide perovskites employing lead Pb (red) and tin, Sn (blue) as the B-side
cation shown as function of A-site cation (Cs, MA, FA, EA) radii and X-site halide anion (I,
Br, Cl, F) radii. The solid vertical lines mark bounds of the tolerance factor, while the dashed
horizontal lines mark the bounds of the octahedral factor. Figure reproduced from [11].
Favourably for perovskite semiconductor materials are their band structure with a direct band
gap. The direct band gap results in a stronger optical absorption, thus providing eﬃcient light
collection with minimal material. Furthermore, and most notably, perovskite provides a >1µm
carrier diﬀusion length and a long carrier lifetime (ca. 273 ns) which is extraordinary for solution-
processed materials that inevitably have a high defect density.[13, 14]
==PAGE:21==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
13
The archetypal ABX3 compound is methylammonium lead triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or denoted
MAPbI3), and by using a mixed halide form of perovskite (e.g. MAPbI3−xBrx) it is possible
to tune the band gap and improve stability. The morphological and compositional advances for
perovskite solar cells will be thoroughly discussed in Section 4.3 and 4.4.
4.1
Perovskite Cell Structure
The conventional single-junction perovskite solar cell structure is shown in Figure 4.2a. As seen
from the perspective from which the sample is illuminated, a glass substrate is used as the base of
the structure. The glass acts as a non-conductive transparent material, onto which a transparent
conducting ﬂuorine doped tin oxide (FTO) layer is deposited. This layer has a double function,
as it both serves as an optically transparent and electrically conductive layer, through which the
photons pass before reaching the active materials, while also functioning as an ohmic contact
facilitating electron transport to the front contact.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.2: (a) Archetypal structure of a perovskite solar cell. [12] (b) Eﬃciency chart showing
the development in power conversion eﬃciency of Perovskite compared to other photovoltaic
technologies.[15]
4.1.1
Electron Transporting Layer
When choosing the electron transporting layer (ETL) several criteria related to the ETL con-
duction band and conductivity must be satisﬁed to enable highly eﬃcient perovskite solar cells.
The ETL must have preferential band alignment with the perovskite layer. Excited electrons
should be shuttled to the ETL and therefore, the ETL should have a more negative laying con-
duction band than the perovskite. This is to ensure that the loss of generated charge carriers is
minimised by the otherwise created energy barrier at the interface that will signiﬁcantly reduce
the carrier extraction. Additionally, to inhibit hole transport to the ETL, the valence band of
the ETL should also be more low laying than the valence band of the perovskite. Furthermore,
it must have a negligible absorbance in the UV-VIS region to allow for incident photons to pass
through and be absorbed by the underlying perovskite layer. Additionally, the ETL should be
a layer with high electron mobility to provide quick selective extraction of generated electrons.
The quality and continuity across the surface of the ﬁlm is crucial for the eﬃciency of the cell,
as it needs to be electrically continuous to reduce the series resistance. Commonly a metal oxide
layer is used such as TiO2, SiO2 or ZnO, with the speciﬁc material ultimately being chosen
based on the perovskite composition used. For this project, TiO2 is used for both the compact
==PAGE:22==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
14
blocking layer and the mesoporous charge-collecting scaﬀold layer which servers to increase the
electron diﬀusion length. The conductive FTO layer and the ETL together make up the anode
of the perovskite solar cell.
4.1.2
Perovskite
The perovskite layer is the absorption layer where photons are absorbed to create charged carriers
in the form of electrons and holes. As mentioned previously, the optimisation of this layer is
crucial for the overall performance of the solar cell. Luckily, one of the advantages of perovskite
is the vast variety of deposition techniques used for obtaining high quality ﬁlms such as spin
coating, vapour deposition and layer-by-layer deposition. Perovskite has a variety of desirable
characteristics for photovoltaic applications such as high optical absorption, long charge carrier
diﬀusion lengths and lifetime, together with the band gap tunability based on the composition.
After generation of the charge carriers, the generated electrons and holes are separated and
transported to the electron transporting layer and hole transporting layer before they recombine.
4.1.3
Hole Transporting Layer
The hole transporting layer (HTL) has much the same function and criteria as the electron ETL,
although this layer serves to selectively extract the generated holes. Properties, such as high
hole mobility to reduce the recombination rate and appropriate energy band alignment with the
perovskite is therefore decisive, when choosing a material for the hole transporting layer, similar
to the ETL. Oppositely to the ETL, the HTL should have a valence band slightly higher than
that of the perovskite, to accommodate eﬃcient hole carrier transport and block the transport of
electrons. The HTL together with the rear gold contact serves as the cathode of the perovskite
solar cell.
4.2
The Emergence of Perovskite Solar Cells
The ﬁrst photophysical properties of organic-inorganic perovskite solar cells were reported in
2009 by Miyasaka et al., who introduced a liquid-junction design utilising methylammonium
lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3) yielding a power conversion eﬃciency (PCE) of 3.8%
[16]. Following this discovery, the interest soared and in 2012 Nam-Gyu Park et al. documented
the ﬁrst solid-state perovskite solar cell utilising the same MAPbI3 device structure with a PCE
of 9.7% [7].
Power conversion eﬃciencies of perovskite solar cells have now surpassed other
emerging photovoltaic technologies, such as dye-sensitized cells, organic and inorganic cells, and
quantum dot cells, as it is evident from the Best Research-Cell Eﬃciency Chart maintained by
NREL [8] and Figure 4.2b. Perovskite solar cells have, since their introduction in 2009, been
the fastest-advancing photovoltaic (PV) technology to date. It is now competing with more
established technologies such as CIGS, CdTE and amorphous silicon solar cells, making it one
of the most promising photovoltaic technologies of the future. Currently, the power conversion
eﬃciency record of a single junction perovskite solar cell is 24.2 % [8] obtained by researchers at
KRICT/MIT in 2019, while Oxford PV have successfully obtained 28%[8] eﬃcient monolithic
perovskite/silicon tandem cells. In comparison, conventional crystalline silicon solar cells have
a record eﬃciency of 26.1% for single junction, while monolithic two-junction tandem cells have
a recorded eﬃciency of 32.8% [8].
Although the progress of improving the power conversion eﬃciency will undoubtedly continue
with the implementation of new material compositions and deposition techniques, the rate at
which new records are being set also slows down, as the PCE is getting closer to the theoretical
Shockley-Quisser eﬃciency limit. The theoretical maximum PCE for direct band gap single-
junction solar cells with a band gap of 1.34 eV is ∼33% under 1 sun illumination (AM1.5).
However, when intrinsic recombination is included, the theoretical eﬃciency decreases to 30.5%
==PAGE:23==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
15
[17]. It is this eﬃciency limit which makes tandem solar cells interesting, as an eﬃciency of
45.1% can be achieved for a perovskite-silicon tandem device.[18]
The progress in power conversion eﬃciency for single-junction MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells is
shown in Table 1.
Year
PCE (%)
VOC [V]
JSC [mA cm−2]
FF (%)
Ref.
2009
3.8
0.61
11.0
57
[16]
2012
9.7
0.89
17.6
62
[7]
2013
12.0
1.0
16.5
73
[19]
2013
15.0
0.99
20.0
73
[20]
2014
16.2
1.04
21.3
73
[21]
2014
16.7
1.02
21.2
78
[22]
2015
19.7
1.09
23.8
76
[23]
2016
20.7
1.11
24.0
78
[24]
Table 1: Advances in eﬃciency for single junction MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells, showing the
Open-circuit voltage (VOC), Short-circuit voltage (JSC), Fill Factor (FF), and power conversion
eﬃciency (PCE) for certiﬁed record cells.
4.3
Morphological Evolution of Perovskite
Since the ﬁrst reported perovskite solar cells, there has been a continuous development in the
morphology of perovskite, as new and improved deposition techniques have been developed to
facilitate improved photo-electrical properties. The initial technique for depositing perovskite
thin ﬁlms was a one-step solution based spin-coating technique, shown as the top process in
Figure 4.3a, which yielded dot-like morphology. Subsequently, a sequential two-step technique
was developed (bottom process in Figure 4.3a), where the perovskite layer is deposited with
an anti-solvent to induce crystallisation. This technique signiﬁcantly improved the ﬁlm quality,
yielding a cuboidal morphology.
Other techniques such as a two-step low-pressure vapour-
assisted solution process (LP-VASP) or ink-jet printing have also been tried to provide more
scaleable deposition methods.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Schematic illustration of the developed deposition techniques for perovskite solar
cells with (a) showing conventional one-step and two-step methods for fabrication of MAPbI3
and (b) showing the conventional one-step method (top) and the anti-solvent method where an
anti-solvent is introduced during spin-coating (bottom). Figure is reproduced from [14].
==PAGE:24==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
16
However, the currently preferred method for depositing bulk perovskite thin ﬁlms providing
highly eﬃcient solar cells is through the use of either one-step or by adduct methods.
The
implementation of an anti-solvent, that is introduced during the spin-coating, facilitates a fast
crystallisation to create a homogeneous layer. The perovskite solution is evenly spread across
the surface of the substrate during the ﬁrst stage of spin coating. The anti-solvent is then sub-
sequently introduced to rapidly decrease the solubility, resulting in highly uniform and dense
perovskite ﬁlms. The eﬀect of an anti-solvent is shown in Figure 4.3b, where the top shows
the conventional one-step process, while the bottom shows the anti-solvent method and im-
proved morphology yielding a highly planar surface after annealing. Several anti-solvents such
as chlorobenze, toluene and diethyl ether can be used depending on the speciﬁc procedure used
and taking the miscibility into consideration.
4.4
Compositional Advances in Perovskite
Through compositional engineering the band gap of perovskite solar cells can be tuned such
that it matches the solar spectrum desired for either single or multi junction solar cell applica-
tions, while furthermore allowing for improvement of stability. Stability issues include; thermal-,
moisture-, structural phase- and photo-stability which perovskite solar cells inherently face when
exposed to operating conditions. In terms of band gap tunability, the range was initially limited
to changing out a single anion, as e.g. MAPbI3 to MAPbBr3 which would change the band
gap from ∼1.6 eV to ∼2.3 eV, respectively. However, by varying the composition of iodide to
bromide (x = 0–3), improved stability was achieved as well as a band gap tunability between
∼1.6 eV-2.3 eV for MAPbI3−xBrx.[25]
In recent years perovskite materials utilising Cs+ and FA+ as the monovalent cation (A) in the
ABX3 structure have emerged as strong candidates. The lattice symmetry is improved using
the cubic phase of CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 compared to the cubic phase of MAPbI3, which has
otherwise been the predominantly researched perovskite material due to its well aligned band
gap.
However, both CsPbI3 and FAPbI3 suﬀer from detrimental instability, with the cubic
phase returning to its non-perovskite orthorhombic phase, when exposed to humid conditions.
To address these instability issues, researchers are now adopting mixed-cation and mixed-anion
perovskite layers, which have also shown to improve both the optical absorption and the carrier
lifetime [26].
As previously mentioned, the main limitation for compositional engineering is the Goldschmidt
tolerance factor and the octahedral factor, that are used to describe the stability and formability
of the 3D crystal structures. The favourable cubic perovskite structure forms when 0.81 ≤t ≤1,
while a tolerance factor outside this range usually results in a non-perovskite structure. Mixed
halide perovskites allow for this tolerance factor to be tuned and hence the stability of the pho-
toactive cubic phase to be improved. For example, it has been shown that by alloying FAPbI3
with CsPbI3 to form FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3, improved stability under high-humidity conditions was
achieved compared to their pure counterparts.[26]
The main focus is therefore no longer to increase the power conversion eﬃciency, as this has
already been shown comparable to most established photovoltaic technologies. Instead the com-
munity is now focusing on addressing and improving stability issues under operational conditions,
to advance towards potential commercialisation of this technology.
Even though mixed halide perovskites have many properties that can yield eﬃcient and stable de-
vices, they have their own downfalls. Mixed halide perovskites exhibit phase segregation, where
iodide-rich and bromide-rich domains are created when subjected to visible irradiation. This ef-
fect causes a signiﬁcant decrease in the power conversion eﬃciency of the mixed halide perovskite
photovoltaics. Due to charge trapping in the diﬀerent halide regimes it is necessary to develop
methods or materials to suppress this ionic migration by making it less favourable for the ions to
form these domains. Several models for this ion migration in mixed halide perovskites under op-
eration conditions have been proposed. However, none of these explanations are widely accepted,
and some explanations are contradictory. The proposed models for explaining the photoinduced
==PAGE:25==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
17
segregation of halides include: two state model in the excited state [27], polaron induced lattice
strain [28], defect driven halide ion movement [29, 30], carrier trapping and charge accumulation
at perovskite surfaces [31], band gap reduction of iodide-rich phase [32] and overcoming the ther-
mal activation of mixing with band gap excitation [33]. Hence, while mixed halide perovskites
solve many issues earlier single anion perovskites possessed, they have their own set of issues
that currently stand in the way of commercialisation. One of the newest compositional advances
in perovskite is the reported triple-cation Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3, which has
shown superior thermal stability by retaining 85.5% of its initial 21.1% stabilised power conver-
sion eﬃciency under 250 hours of operational conditions.[34]
4.4.1
Ion Transport in Halide Perovskite Photovoltaics
The favourable low temperature and solution-processed material fabrication conditions are in-
evitably accompanied by a high density of available lattice defects and a low activation energy
for halide ion diﬀusion. The results of this is ion transportation facilitated by both internal fac-
tors, such as lattice defects, activation energy and diﬀusion pathways, and stimulated by optical,
thermal and electrical external factors.
Ion transport is supported by the corner-sharing metal halide octahedra crystal structure of
perovskites (Figure 4.1a), and the point defect concentration in this structure therefore has a
crucial eﬀect on this mobility. However, there is strong evidence that all sublattices (A and B
cation sites, and X anion sites) in the perovskite structure are mobile [35, 36, 37], with halide
ions (X) being the most mobile. This vacancy mediated anion diﬀusion in MAPbI3 at room
temperature is consistent with the calculated activation energies for vacancies of <0.6 eV for I−,
0.8 eV for MA+ and 2.3 eV for Pb2+ [38]. Additionally, grain boundaries have been shown to
reduce the eﬀective activation energy, further contributing to the ion mobility under operating
conditions [39].
Photoinduced phase separation in mixed halide perovskites when subjected to visible irradia-
tion is a widely studied eﬀect, although it is not yet fully understood. Halide ion migration
in MAPbBr3−xIx is evident from iodide-rich and bromide-rich domains being created under
photoirradiation [27], following Equation 9:
nMAPbBrxI3−x + hν −→
(n −2m)MAPbBrxI3−x + mMAPbBrx−yI3−x+y + mMAPbBrx+yI3−x−y
(9)
where n and m refer to the fraction of unsegregated and segregated phases, respectively, when
the mixed halide perovskite is subjected to irradiation. The terms x-y and x+y correspond to
the changes in the individual iodide (I−) and (Br−) halide concentrations. Thus, as the fraction
of iodide-rich and bromide-rich segregated phases increase, the change in individual halide con-
centration corresponds to the loss of I and Br in the unsegregated phase.
As previously mentioned, there is no consensus about a single model describing the photoinduced
phase separation in mixed halide perovskites. However, the research community continues to
utilise a wide range of in-situ characterisation techniques such as UV-Vis absorbance and emis-
sion spectroscopy to track the segregation and understand the excited-state behaviour. The
intriguing aspect of the halide ion movement in mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms is that immedi-
ately after these ﬁlms have been exposed to illumination intensities <1mW/cm2 [27], which is
a factor 100 less than operating conditions, the ﬁlms start undergoing segregation. Even at
such a low intensity, the illumination provides enough external energy to overcome the under-
lying energetic barriers. When the illumination is then removed and the ﬁlms are kept in the
dark, the process of segregation is fully reversible such that the ﬁlms undergo full recovery to
their initial mixed halide perovskite state. This process occurs on an hour timescale at room
temperature.[27] Section 9.3 explores the eﬀect of temperature on this process.
Even though an exact model still needs to be developed to explain the process of segregation,
it is widely acknowledged that the mobility of halide ions can have detrimental implications for
==PAGE:26==
4 Perovskite Solar Cells
18
such mixed halide perovskite devices under operating conditions. Figure 4.4 shows the impact
on the charge separation in the device before and after segregation. This highlights the fact that
when (I−) and (Br−) rich domains are created, the I-rich regions act as sinks for photogener-
ated charge carriers because of their band structure. This signiﬁcantly limits the charge carrier
extraction and hence device performance.
Figure 4.4: Schematic illustration of charge separation before and after phase segregation of
mixed halide perovskites.
4.4.2
Suppressing Ion Transport in Perovskite Films
Compositional engineering of the perovskite layer in an attempt to reduce ion migration has
been shown to be an eﬀective way of mitigating this process. Utilising alloyed conﬁgurations
with multiple-cations, such as (Cs0.05FA0.80MA0.15)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 [38], anion migration can be
prevented. The anion migration is inhibited by a combination of kinetic barriers, stabilised crys-
tal structure, higher activation energy for movement, and reduced lattice defect concentration.
Similarly, the incorporation of K and Rb in multiple-cation conﬁgurations has shown to reduce
the photoinduced ion transport. [40] These studies show that ’A’ site engineering of the cation
can eﬀectively suppress ’X’ site anion migration.
==PAGE:27==
5 Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
19
5
Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
In order to study mixed halide perovskites, it is necessary to practice the basic fabrication
techniques on MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells. The ﬁrst project was therefore to fabricate high
eﬃciency cells with high reproducibility. The fabrication procedure for the MAPbI3 perovskite
cells is based on the procedure developed by Nam-Gyu Park et al.[23]
5.1
Preparation of Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
The fabrication procedure of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells includes 5 major steps shown in
Figure 5.1. The full fabrication description can be found in Appendix A.
(a) Colour codes
.
(b) Step 1: Deposition of compact TiO2 on
FTO coated glass.
(c) Step 2: Deposition of mesoporous TiO2.
.
(d) Step 3:
Deposition of Perovskite using
drop casting.
(e) Step 4: Deposition of Spiro-OMETAD act-
ing as electron transporting layer
(f) Step 5: Deposition of 100nm Au rear con-
tact layer.
Figure 5.1: Process ﬂow showing the fabrication steps of the MAPbI3 p-i-n perovskite solar
cell.
Similar to the archetypal structure for perovskite solar cells presented in Section 4.1, the structure
here uses a 0.5 µm ﬂuorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrate on which the cell is
constructed.
2.5 x 2.5 cm FTO coated glass substrates were used for the solar cell device
fabrication. Firstly, a deﬁned area of FTO was etched away using Zinc-powder and 3M HCl
solution. This is done to deﬁne the area in which the ﬁnal Au back contacts are placed. It is
therefore necessary to remove the FTO to avoid short-circuiting the cell. The substrates were
then washed with soapy water, rinsed with DI water and placed directly into an absolute ethanol
bath. The FTO slides were left to sonicate for 20 minutes before being rinsed with isopropanol
and dried with an air stream. To remove any remaining organics the substrates were plasma
cleaned for 10 minutes, after which a 7mm wide Kapton tape was placed at either side of the
substrate to deﬁne the area in which the front contact will be placed.
The electron transporting layer (ETL) is composed of a compact- and a mesoporous TiO2 layer.
The compact layer serves to provide superior electron mobility to enable quick selective extraction
of generated electrons, as discussed in Section 4.1.1.
A blocking TiO2 solution is prepared,
as explained in the full fabrication description, and a layer (Figure 5.1b) is obtained through
==PAGE:28==
5 Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
20
dynamic drop casting followed by annealing at 125 ◦C for 5 minutes. Subsequently, a mesoporous
charge-collecting scaﬀold TiO2 layer, that servers to increase the electron diﬀusion length, is
fabricated.
Again, a solution is prepared by diluting TiO2 paste in anhydrous ethanol and
the mesoporous layer (Figure 5.1c) is obtained by using static drop casting. The ETL is then
annealed in a furnace at 550 ◦C for 1 hour. Following this annealing process, the substrates
undergo a TiCl4 treatment, which has been found to increase the ETL quality and reduce
charge recombination. The treatment is carried out by submerging the substrates in the heated
TiCl4 aqueous solution for 10 minutes before removing the substrates, carefully cleaning them
with DI water, and annealing the ﬁlms in a preheated 500◦C oven for 30 minutes.
In highly eﬃcient devices, MAPbI3 is used as the light absorbing layer. However, MAPbBr3
can also be used and is utilized later in Section 7. Both are prepared in similar fashion and
are described below.
The two perovskite solutions (MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3) were prepared
by dissolving all precursors in dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). For
both MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, a solution was prepared from PbI2 and MAI for MAPbI3, while
the MAPbBr3 was made using PbBr2 and MABr. The solutions were left to stir 1 hour at room
temperature and subsequently ﬁltered through an inorganic 0.2 µm membrane ﬁlter before use.
The MAPbI3 ﬁlms were obtained using static drop casting of 50µL of precursor solution and
subsequently spin coating at 4000rpm for 25s with an acceleration of 1200 rpm. An antisolvent
treatment step with diethyl-ether was used to induce crystallisation, with 0.5 mL being rapidly
injected after 10 seconds. The ﬁlms were immediately transferred to a preheated hotplate for
1 minutes at 65◦C, and then transferred to a 100◦C hotplate for 2 minutes. After annealing
the ﬁlms were left to cool down before use. The MAPbBr3 ﬁlms were obtained using static
drop casting of 50µL of MAPbBr3 and subsequently spin coating at 1000 rpm for 10s with an
acceleration of 1200 rpm, then at 4000 rpm for 35 s with an acceleration of 1200 rpm. Here 0.1mL
toluene was used for the antisolvent treatment step and was rapidly injected after 20 seconds.
The ﬁlms were immediately transferred to a preheated hotplate for 10 minutes at 100◦C. After
annealing the ﬁlms were removed from the hotplate and left to cool.
After cooling, the hole transport layer was applied. The commonly used Spiro-OMETAD was
employed. The solution is prepared as explained in the full fabrication description, with the
layer (Figure 5.1e) being deposited using a dynamic drop casting on a spin coater.
Next, the thermal evaporation of the back Au contact (Figure 5.1f) was completed. The cell is
masked oﬀso that multiple contacts are deposited on the surface. This enables more data points
to be obtained from one sample, in case some areas are not viable. Finally, indium is soldered
on to the masked-oﬀFTO side to create the front contact, as well as on to ends of the Au
contacts to improve contact with alligator clips when performing current-voltage measurements.
Following this, the cells are now ready to be measured.
5.2
Results and Discussion
As previously mentioned, the perovskite layer acts as the photon absorbing layer, and thus
the layer where charge carriers are generated.
It is therefore important to characterise the
absorbance at speciﬁc wavelengths in the visible spectrum to simulate operating conditions.
Figure 5.2 shows the absorbance of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, with the former being used in the
solar cell conﬁguration and the latter being used for later projects. The inserts show a Tauc
plot used to determine the band gap position of both compounds. MAPbI3 (Figure 5.2a), which
is widely used for solar cell applications due to it well aligned band gap, starts absorbing light
around 800 nm corresponding to a band gap of ∼1.6 eV.This corresponds well with what has
been found elsewhere.[41, 42] This means that MAPbI3 has a wide absorption over the visible
spectrum, and thus is very favourable for single-junction solar cells. Oppositely, MAPbBr3 has
a much more blue shifted band gap which is evident from Figure 5.2b. Here it is seen that
MAPbBr3 has a steep absorbance onset around 550 nm, with a prominent excitonic peak at its
band edge. From the Tauc plot insert, the optical band gap is experimentally found to be ∼2.32
eV, which matches well with other reported values.[42] For this reason, MAPbBr3 is favoured in
==PAGE:29==
5 Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
21
a tandem conﬁguration, where the layer can act as the absorbing layer for high-energy photons.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2: Absorption graphs acquired with UV-VIS for (a) MAPbI3 and (b) MAPbBr3,
respectively, showing the absorbance across the visible spectrum. The insert shows the Tauc
plot used to determine the band gap of both materials.
Using the fabrication procedure described in Section 5.1, perovskite solar cells with MAPbI3 as
the photon absorbing layer were fabricated. The cells where characterised using current-voltage
(I-V) measurements, and quantum eﬃciency (EQE) to provide a spectral response measurement
of the incident photon to charge carrier eﬃciency of the fabricated solar cells. Figure 5.3a shows
the current density vs voltage for one of the fabricated solar cells, with the theory behind this
having been explained in Section 3. The champion cell was chosen as it only exhibits a small
hysteretic J-V behaviour, seen as the discrepancy between the forward and reverse scan. Hys-
teresis is one of the challenges with perovskite solar cells and is aﬀected by the voltage scan
direction/rate/range, voltage conditioning history, and device conﬁguration. Hysteresis compli-
cates the characterisation of the solar cell as it greatly aﬀects the power conversion eﬃciency
(PCE). For this reason, it is also good practice to report the obtained values for both the forward
and reverse scan, as well as the conditions under which the scan was acquired, in order to give
the most complete information on how the device actually operates. For the characterisation
performed in this work, all scans were performed with a 50 mV/s scan rate, a scanning range
of -0.1V to 1.1V and an illumination of 100 mW/cm2 corresponding to AM1.5. From the J-V
curve shown in Figure 5.3a the hysteresis is still present, but not to the same extent of what
was recorded for the cells showing higher power conversion eﬃciencies. For this speciﬁc cell, the
forward PCE is found to be 14.71% while the reverse scan showing minimal hysteresis has a
power conversion eﬃciency of 16.60%.
To verify the eﬃciency recorded using current-voltage characterisation, IPCE is used to charac-
terise the external quantum eﬃciency (EQE) which can be correlated to the short circuit current
(JSC). The EQE is given as the ratio of charge carriers generated and collected at the terminals
of the solar cell, compared to the incident photons at every wavelength. Hence, it provides a
measure of how eﬃcient a solar cell is at converting incident photons into current. By correcting
the incident photons generated by a monochromator to the spectral irradiance (W×m−2×nm−1)
under AM1.5 atmospheric conditions, and converting this into the photon ﬂux, a measure of the
JSC is obtained by the equation:
JSC = q
Z
φ(λ) × EQE(λ) dλ
(10)
where q is the electron charge, and φ is the photon ﬂux.
==PAGE:30==
5 Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
22
Figure 5.3b shows the recorded incident photon to charge carrier eﬃciency and integrated JSC
for the same cell as the J-V characterisation was performed on. From the ﬁgure it is evident that
the absorption across the visible spectrum corresponds to what was recorded for the MAPbI3
photon absorbing layer in Figure 5.2a. Thus, the solar cell is able to convert photons into charge
carriers when incident photons have an energy of hν ≥Eg. However, the JSC obtained from
EQE is less than the one measured from the J-V characteristics. A possible explanation for this
could be that the photon absorbance of the calibration detector is diﬀerent from the solar cell,
mainly due to incident photons being reﬂected on the front contact surface. A slight variation
in the spectral response between monochromatic illumination and AM1.5 illumination, together
with possible diﬀerences in charge carrier dynamics since EQE measurements are performed
well below 100 mW/cm2, might further contribute to this decreased JSC. Furthermore, it is a
common phenomenon for MAPbI3 and other thin ﬁlm solar cells to have a lower integrated JSC
determined from the IPCE measurements compared to J-V characteristics. [23]
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.3: Performance of solar cell characterised by (a) current-voltage curve (J-V) and (b)
external quantum eﬃciency (EQE) spectrum together with integrated JSC for cell showing min-
imal amount of hysteresis. J-V data were collected for both forward and reverse scans performed
with 50 mV/s scan rate, a scanning range of -0.1V to 1.1V and 100 mW/cm2 corresponding to
AM1.5.
As current-voltage characterisation was performed on multiple cells, Figure 5.4 shows the distri-
bution of the open circuit voltage (VOC), short circuit current (JSC), ﬁll factor (FF) and power
conversion eﬃciency (PCE). Here the number of measured points correspond to the 5 points per
cell, as shown in Appendix A. The average performance values measured with current-voltage
characterisation yielded; VOC of 0.969 ± 0.045 V, JSC of 23.64 ± 1.33 mA/cm2, FF of 0.699
± 0.055, and PCE of 16.02 ± 1.53%. It should be mentioned that the values reported in these
distributions are only for the reverse scan that evidently show better performance due to a little
J-V hysteresis commonly found in MAPbI3 solar cells. The found standard deviation shows the
reproducibility and reliability of the fabricated cells.
==PAGE:31==
5 Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells
23
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: Histograms with Gaussian distributions of fabricated MAPbI3 solar cells showing
(a) short-circuit current density (JSC), (b) open-circuit voltage (VOC), (c) ﬁll factor (FF) and
(d) power conversion eﬃciency (PCE).
5.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, high eﬃciency and highly reproducible MAPbI3 solar cells have been successfully
fabricated based on the procedure reported by Nam-Gyu Park et al.[23], which is considered the
standard procedure for MAPbI3 solar cells. Several modiﬁcations were implemented as evident
from the fabrication procedure presented in Appendix A, to improve ﬁlm morphology and in-
house device performance. The performance of the devices was examined with current-voltage
(J-V) characterisation and IPCE, showing a high reproducibility of the cells with an average
power conversion eﬃciency of 16.02%, while the best performing cell had a PCE of 18.4%.
However, a slight J-V hysteresis was found in the majority of the performed scans, which is a
common phenomenon especially MAPbI3 solar cells.
==PAGE:32==
6 Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskites
24
6
Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskites
Having successfully fabricated eﬃcient MAPbI3 solar cells with high reproducibility, the next step
was to fabricate gradient mixed halide perovskites. As discussed in section 2, it is advantageous
to minimise above band gap photon losses in order to boost the eﬃciency of solar cells. To
achieve this, tandem solar cells with two diﬀerent light absorbing layers with varying band gaps
have been devised. However, gradient mixed halide perovskites show promise as a light absorbing
layer since they have a built-in tandem structure.
In these structures, an iodide-rich region of the ﬁlm lies at one interface while a bromide-rich
region lies at the opposite. Connecting these two regions is a mixed halide perovskite gradient.
So, in the case of methylammonium as the ’A’ cation, the composition of the ﬁlms changes
from MAPbBr3−xIx with x = 3 at one side of the ﬁlms and gradually changes to x = 0 at
the opposite side. This gradient structure facilitates an accelerated hole extraction to increase
the short circuit current, JSC.
Additionally, it serves to eﬃciently transport the generated
charge carriers to opposite sides of the ﬁlm due to the band alignment of the diﬀerent species,
hence eﬀectively reducing recombination. In this project the aim is to synthesize gradient halide
perovskites with the formula APbX3 where the ’A’ cation is MA or Cs, and the ’X’ anion is I or
Br.
6.1
Fabrication of a Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskite
Preliminary experiments using the deposition methods for the MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 layers
described in Section 5.1 were used, where either of the two layers were initially formed and the
second was deposited on top. The full device conﬁguration is shown in Figure 6.1, where the
gradient layer would be built by depositing subsequent layers of diﬀerent halide compositions. A
MAPbBr3 layer would initially be formed to function as the wide band gap material to absorb
the short wavelengths (high energy photons), while the MAPbI3 would function as the narrow
band gap material absorbing the longer wavelengths (low energy photons).
Figure 6.1: Schematic illustration showing the construction of the gradient solar cell with the
associated energy band edges of each layer.
This method unfortunately did not yield the desired results. Currently the standard fabrica-
tion procedure for both MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 requires that both precursors are dissolved in
N,N-dimethyformamide (DMF) and N,N-dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Due to this, as the second
perovskite layer is deposited on top of the initial, the initial layer is immediately dissolved even
though the layer has been annealed to complete crystallisation.
Figure 6.2 shows the absorbance spectrum of the resulting ﬁlms. By comparing the absorbance
==PAGE:33==
6 Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskites
25
spectra to the pristine samples of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 previously shown in Figure 5.2, it is
evident that (a) shows an increased absorbance at the band gap of MAPbBr3 corresponding
to the formation of a mixed halide perovskite ﬁlm (MAPbI3−xBrx). Oppositely, for (b) there
is a signiﬁcant decrease in absorbance with a less profound excitonic peak corresponding to a
decrease in ﬁlm thickness, while no absorbance contribution from MAPbI3 is seen.
In both cases the ﬁlms visually look much less specular compared to the pristine samples indi-
cating a less crystalline surface. From (b) it can be seen, that the ﬁlm has a red discoloration,
which is distinctive for mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms (MAPbBr3−xIx), although this does not
correspond to the recorded absorbance of the corresponding ﬁlm. This indicates that the ﬁlms
are not maintaining their separation and are dissolving the underlying layer.
Figure 6.2: Absorbance spectrum of (a) MAPBI3 that has been deposited on top of MAPbBr3
and (b) MAPBBr3 that has been deposited on top of MAPbI3. Insert show images of ﬁnal
perovskite ﬁlms corresponding to (a) and (b).
Another aspect of this project was to fabricate similar gradient perovskite layers using CsPbI3
and CsPbBr3 as the two photon absorbing perovskite layers. CsPbBr3 nanocrystals were synthe-
sised according a modiﬁed version of the synthesis procedure developed by Kovalenko et al.[43],
as presented in Appendix B. Following the synthesis of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystals, these were
then spin-casted on FTO coated glass substrates and annealed into a bulk ﬁlm based on the
procedure developed by our group (see Appendix B). A schematic illustration of the process is
shown in Figure 6.3a, showing that the CsPbBr3 ﬁlm is gradually build up until the desired
thickness of the ﬁlm is achieved. The annealing step is required to remove excess ligand and
induce bulk crystal growth.
To obtain the CsPbI3 ﬁlms, as no direct synthesis of bulk CsPbI3 had been reported at the time
of the experiment, the CsPbBr3 ﬁlms were immersed in a PbI2 solution. By dipping the ﬁlms
into a PbI2 solution the ﬁlms would undergo halide ion exchange, where Br is substituted from I
in the ﬁlm. This process is governed by the anion in the exchange solution having a much higher
concentration than the anion in the ﬁlm. Hence, the driving force is the diﬀerence in chemical
potential between the concentration in the ﬁlm and solution. This technique was developed in
our group by Hoﬀman et al. [44, 45]
==PAGE:34==
6 Gradient Mixed Halide Perovskites
26
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.3: (a) Schematic illustration showing the layer-by-layer deposition of CsPbBr3 to
obtain the bulk thin ﬁlm.[44] (b) Absorbance spectrum of the halide ion exchange of a CsPbBr3
ﬁlm immersed in a PbI2 solution recorded at diﬀerent time points throughout the exchange.
Figure 6.3b shows how the Br−anions in CsPbBr3 are gradually exchanged with I−, which
can be tracked by the change in absorbance. As more iodide is incorporated into the ﬁlm, the
absorbance gradually red-shifts until full halide exchange is completed after an hour at 90◦C,
when the ﬁlm is all CsPbI3. However, as CsPbI3 in its cubic phase is highly unstable, care
must be taken such that is does not turn into its non-optically orthorhombic phase if exposed to
elevated temperature or humidity levels. The instability of CsPbI3 proved to be a great challenge
as several attempts of depositing CsPbBr3 on top of the halide exchanged CsPbI3 were carried
out. The CsPbI3 immediately turned to its non-optically orthorhombic phase due to the elevated
fabricated temperatures required for the layer-by-layer deposition of CsPbBr3.
However, a new direct fabrication procedure of stable CsPbI3 perovskite ﬁlms was recently
published by Wang et al. who achieved 17% eﬃciency in a device structure.[46] Hence, by using
this new fabrication procedure yielding stable CsPbI3 ﬁlms fabricated under similar elevated
temperatures, this could be a possible way forward for this project.
6.2
Conclusion
In conclusion, the fabrication of a gradient perovskite absorption layer was attempted in order to
facilitate an accelerated hole extraction to increase the short circuit current, JSC, while eﬀectively
separating electrons and holes to reduce recombination. For this purpose, two diﬀerent perovskite
conﬁgurations were fabricated; MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, together with CsPbI3 and CsPbBr3,
such that a gradational energy band gap with appropriate band alignment could be achieved.
However, as has been presented above, this was a more complex challenge than expected, due
to solvent compatibility issues and stability challenges. A new approach to this project could
be to use the newly developed fabrication procedure for CsPbI3 developed by Wang et al.[46],
who also tested the performance of solar cells containing this stabilised CsPbI3 perovskite layer.
This would most likely enable the deposition of CsPbBr3 on top of CsPbI3 to achieve the desired
gradient mixed halide perovskite layer.
==PAGE:35==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
27
7
Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
As previously mentioned, mixed halide perovskites enables the ability to continuously tune the
band gap by varying the composition of halide ions with respect to each other, i.e. MAPbI3−xBrx.
Furthermore, fabrication procedures have been developed to facilitate the exchange of halide ions
in perovskite ﬁlms, where it is otherwise not possible to obtain bulk ﬁlms.[47, 45] Commonly,
a ﬁlm of a stable compound (e.g. CsPbBr3) is submerged into a heated solution of the desired
halide (e.g.
PbI2), as described in Section 6.1.
However, the halide ion exchange in mixed
halide perovskites during photoirradiation is still not fully understood. The mystery lies in the
reasoning behind the fact that when illuminated, the mixed halide ﬁlms segregate forming io-
dide and bromide rich regions, as explained in Section 4.4.1. However, when the light is turned
oﬀand the ﬁlms are left in the dark, a full recovery of the ﬁlms to their initial mixed state occurs.
The purpose of this project is to establish thermally activated halide movement of halide ions
in metal halide perovskite ﬁlms by spectroscopically probing the evolution of mixed halide com-
position at diﬀerent temperatures. Furthermore, the mechanistic and kinetic details of bromide
and iodide movement between physically paired ﬁlms are discussed. To the best of our knowl-
edge bidirectional halide exchange between mechanically paired perovskite thin ﬁlms have not
previously been reported, and thus serves as an entirely new approach to understanding the
halide ion mobility.
The halide exchange between the two paired ﬁlms is an entropically driven process, much like
halide substitution of CsPbBr3 into CsPbI3 occurring when the ﬁlm is submerged into a solution
containing another halide anion (see Section 6.1). The ground state valence band positions of
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 (Figure 4.4,[32]) are located higher and lower, respectively, compared to
that of the ﬁnal MAPbI1.5Br1.5 state. This diﬀerence in valence band edge provides an entrop-
ically favoured driving force towards the mixed halide MAPbI1.5Br1.5 when external heating
is applied.
As the heating provides enough energy to overcome the relatively low energy of
activation barrier for perovskite halide anions, as presented in Section 4.4.1, the mixed halide
MAPbI1.5Br1.5-phase forms.
7.1
Preparation of Perovskite Films
Figure 7.1: Schematic illustration of setup used for halide ion homogenisation of MAPbI3
and MAPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms. The ﬁlms are cast onto FTO coated glass substrates, paired
together using binder clips and then heated at elevated temperatures until either fully or partially
homogenised as indicated by MAPbI3−xBrx and MAPbBr3−xIx, respectively.
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms were fabricated similar to the perovskite layers described
in Section 5.1. For the purpose of this experiment 0.3M equimolar concentration solutions were
used to stay below the saturation threshold of the used characterisation techniques. The prepared
==PAGE:36==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
28
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 substrates were transferred from the glovebox to a hotplate located next
to the spectrophotometer for halide ion exchange of the ﬁlms. The Kapton tape was removed,
and the ﬁlms were placed in contact with each other and clamped with binder clips at either
ends of the ﬁlms, as shown from the illustration in Figure 7.1. The clamped ﬁlms were then
placed on a brass plate with the MAPbBr3 ﬁlm facing downwards to allow for direct heating of
the ﬁlms. The temperature of the brass plate was monitored and controlled by adjusting the
temperature of the hotplate.
7.2
Homogenisation of Paired perovskite Films
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms (0.3M) were prepared as described in Section 5.1. Figure
7.2 shows the halide homogenisation of two paired MAPbI3/MAPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms, with
7.2a showing images of pre-homogenised (0 min) and post-homogenised ﬁlms (1260 min, 21
hours) homogenised at 100◦C.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.2:
(a) Photographs of the two separate MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms
deposited on FTO glass before (a, b) and after (c, d) homogenisation. The two ﬁlms facing each
other were clamped and kept at 100◦C for 1260 min to achieve homogenisation (b) Absorbance
spectra of the ﬁlms in A, recorded pre and post thermal treatment.
Here it is seen that the dark brown and yellow coloured MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 ﬁlms, respec-
tively, homogenise in to identical colours indicating the formation of mixed halide perovskite
ﬁlms. The annealed ﬁlms were paired together, such that the ﬁlms are physically in contact with
each other. The slides were clamped with binder clips and placed on a temperature-controlled
hot plate. Care was taken to maintain the temperature around the glass slide assembly at con-
stant temperature. The clamped slides were periodically transferred to a Carry-50 UV-visible
spectrophotometer to record the absorption spectra at diﬀerent times and monitor changes in
the absorbance associated with variations in the halide composition leading to homogenisation
of the ﬁlms. Figure 7.2b shows UV-VIS absorbance spectrum for pre- and post-homogenised
ﬁlms, where pre-homogenized MAPbI3 is shown in black, MAPbBr3 in red, while the post-
homogenized MAPbI3 ﬁlm (labelled MAPbI3−xBrx) is shown in blue and the MAPbBr3 ﬁlm
(labelled MAPbBr3−xIx) is shown in green. At time 0 minutes the characteristic absorption
peaks for MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 are seen at 750nm and 523nm, respectively. At time 1260
minutes following full homogenisation, a red shift of the MAPbBr3 and a blue shift of the
MAPbI3 absorption peak is seen, corresponding to a mixed halide perovskite forming. For the
fully homogenised ﬁlms the band edge position is the same, indicating equal halide composition.
==PAGE:37==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
29
7.3
Characterisation of Morphology
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used to image the surface topography of the samples
together with obtaining a cross-sectional analysis to determine the thickness of the perovskite
layer. SEM[48] is a microscopy technique where a beam of high-energy electrons is focused onto
the sample using magnetic lenses and the Lorentz force. By varying the voltage at which the
electrons are accelerated, normally 0-30 kV, the depth from which electrons will have interacted
with the sample and thus contain information about it, can be varied. This is known as the
interaction volume.
When the beam of electrons interacts with the sample mainly two processes of interest occur;
the electrons that are in-elastically scattered and the electrons that are elastically scattered,
known as the secondary (SE) and back-scattered electrons (BSE), respectively. However, as
only secondary electrons were used for this project, the emphasis will put on this process that
enables imaging of the surface topography rather than the material dependent Z-contrast that
back-scattered electrons provide.
Secondary electrons (SE) are low energy electrons generated when incident (primary) electrons
interact with the atomic electrons surrounding each nucleus of the material through the Coulomb
interaction. To satisfy the condition of energy conservation, the incident primary electron trans-
fers some of its energy to inner- and outer-shell electrons when interacting with these, causing
them to undergo a series of excitation and de-excitation processes before excess energy is emit-
ted. Secondary electrons are the low energy outer-shell electrons involved in this process which
are excited only slightly above the solid’s vacuum level. For this reason, only low energy sec-
ondary electrons generated near the surface are able escape the surface and be detected. The
advantage of secondary electrons generated near the surface, by the cascade eﬀect of incident
primary electrons undergoing multiple scattering processes, is that the SE interact strongly with
the surface. By collecting the large number of secondary electrons generated with a low energy
electron detector, high resolution imaging of the surface is possible, thus providing information
about the sample’s topography.
Figure 7.3 shows top down SEM images of the two ﬁlms employed in the illustration of Figure
7.2. The diﬀerence in the grain shape and size is due to the diﬀerent synthesis processes used
to obtain the ﬁlms. The overall morphology of the two ﬁlms remains unaﬀected following the
halide exchange between the two ﬁlms at 100 ◦C after 1260 min. The SEM images of intermediate
samples recorded after 600 min and 900 min are shown in Figure C.1 and cross sectional SEM
images are shown in Figure C.2.
However, the slight increase in grain size seen in Figures
7.3c and 7.3d, is likely to arise from to the eﬀect of extended thermal annealing during the
homogenisation step. The average MAPbI3 grain size increases from 120 to 155 nm following
homogenisation at 100 ◦C (Figure C.3). Based on these images it is possible to conclude that
there is no major change in morphology following the halide exchange process. All images were
acquired at 100 000X magniﬁcation.
==PAGE:38==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
30
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.3: Top down SEM images of as prepared (a) MAPbI3 and (b) MAPbBr3 ﬁlms (pre
(0 min) homogenisation) (c) and (d) same ﬁlms following homogenisation at 100◦C (1260 min).
All images were acquired using 2kV and 13 pA at 100 000X magniﬁcation.
7.4
Tracking Halide Ion Mobility
Ultraviolet-Visible Spectroscopy (UV-VIS) was used to probe the optical properties of the ﬁlms.
The spectrophotometer uses a light source (a full spectrum Xe pulse lamp in this case) and
a monochromator that makes it possible to scan across the 190–1100 nm wavelength range,
thus not only the visible spectrum. By operating the spectrophotometer in absorption mode,
an absorbance spectrum can be acquired by looking at the change in light intensity of the light
beam that has passed through the sample (I). Hence, by looking at I relative to I0, with the two
intensities being equal in the case where the sample doesn’t absorb any light, the absorbance
can be calculated as A = log(I0/I).
For semiconductors with a band gap, UV-VIS can be
used to quantify the wavelength region in which they absorb, when incident photons have an
energy greater than their band gap hν > Eg.
Using the spectrophotometer, the band edge
position can therefore be determined quite precisely, as the monochromator scans through the
wavelength spectrum. For this reason, the changes in absorbance can be probed using UV-VIS
and therefore provide valuable information about the halide ion exchange process between the
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 ﬁlm.
Figure 7.4 shows the collective absorption changes of the paired ﬁlms at intermediate time
==PAGE:39==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
31
points of annealing (100 ◦C). The changes in absorption was probed by rapidly transferring the
clamped slides to the spectrophotometer at diﬀerent time points, acquiring a spectrum, and
returning the clamped system to the hotplate. The constant temperature maintained during
the homogenisation process allowed exchange of Br and I to proceed between the two ﬁlms
continuously.
The diﬀerential absorbance spectrum recorded in Figure 7.4b further highlights the changes in
the absorbance of the ﬁlms during annealing. The dominant MAPbBr3 peak at 523nm shows
continuous decrease in its absorption over time.
During the same period the loss of iodide
absorption is represented by the change in the band edge with a blue shift in the peak. Once
no further shift in the absorbance spectra is seen, and when the two ﬁlms were taken apart and
measured separately, the band positions were the same (Figure 7.2b). With the exchange of
Br and I between the ﬁlms, the increased absorption at 580 nm becomes a dominant feature of
the paired ﬁlm. The experimental results presented in Figures 7.2 and 7.4 show that the halide
ions are mobile and cross the physical barrier when the two ﬁlms are kept in contact with each
other. The ability to undergo complete Br/I exchange between the two physically paired ﬁlm
highlights, that the most favoured phase consists of a mixed halide composition.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.4: (a) Absorption spectra of paired MAPbI3/MAPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms recorded at
diﬀerent times of homogenisation (100 ◦C). (b) Diﬀerence absorbance spectra obtained from
spectra b-j in (a) with 0 minute spectrum (a) being used as a reference.
Figure 7.5 shows data extracted from Figure 7.4. Figure 7.5a shows the band edge absorbance
graphed versus time to track the homogenisation of the paired ﬁlms. The changes in the Br/I
composition during the homogenisation process is seen from the red-shift of the MAPbBr3 ex-
citonic peak (523 nm) and simultaneous blue-shift of the MAPbI3 band edge (750 nm) with
increasing time.
At the end of homogenisation period (1260 min) the two absorption peaks
merge, exhibiting a maximum at 589 nm. This excitonic peak, which lies between the absorp-
tion edge of the original MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 ﬁlms corresponds to the absorption of a mixed
halide ﬁlm conﬁrming the homogenisation of both perovskite ﬁlms. The position of the peak at
589 nm is also indicative of 1:1 distribution of Br and I in the homogenized ﬁlm. At the end of
the homogenisation process these peaks become indistinguishable thus conﬁrming that the two
ﬁlms contain an identical Br:I ratio. The kinetic traces have been ﬁtted with a monoexponential
ﬁt to guide the eye. Figure 7.5b shows the tracked absorbance change of the dominant MAPbBr3
peak at 523nm over time as the homogenisation process evolves. The kinetics have been ﬁtted
with a monoexponential ﬁt to determine the rate constant at which the homogenisation occurs
at this speciﬁc temperature.
==PAGE:40==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
32
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.5: (a) Gradual change in absorbance of paired ﬁlms during 100 ◦C homogenisation
process is tracked through the shift in excitonic peak in terms of wavelength and energy. The
kinetic traces have been ﬁtted with a monoexponential ﬁt to guide the eye. (b) Change in
absorbance of MAPbBr3 excitonic peak (523 nm) with time during the homogenisation process.
7.5
Thermally Activation of Halide Ion Mobility
Thus far, only ﬁlms annealed at 100 ◦C have been studied. If the exchange of Br/I is induced
by thermal activation, a strong dependence on temperature for the rate of diﬀusion should be
seen. The experiment described in Figure 7.4 was therefore repeated by maintaining diﬀerent
temperatures for homogenisation. The halide ion exchange rates as measured from the changes
in the absorption of MAPbBr3 excitonic peak at 523 nm with time at diﬀerent temperatures,
are shown in Figure 7.6. The examined temperatures are 23◦C (purple), 60◦C (black), 80◦C
(red), 100◦C (green), 120◦C (blue), and 140◦C (turquoise). The individual absorption spectra
corresponding to these experiments are shown in Appendix Figure C.4. The halide ion exchange
rate was negligibly slow at room temperature but becomes more prominent, as the paired ﬁlms
are subjected to elevated temperature. At temperatures greater than 100 ◦C the homogenisation
was completed within ∼10 hours. All traces in Figure 7.6a were ﬁtted to monoexponential decay
to determine the pseudo ﬁrst order rate constants of halide ion mobility. The apparent rate
constant for halide ion movement increased from 1.14 × 10−5 min−1 to 3.70 × 10−4 min−1 as
the temperature was increased from 60 ◦C to 140 ◦C. This dependence of halide ion mobility on
temperature was further analysed through the Arrhenius expression:
ln(k) = −Ea
RT + ln(A)
(11)
where k is the rate contact, Ea is the unknown activation energy for the reaction, R is the
universal gas constant, T is the absolute temperature in K, and A is a pre-exponential factor.
The straight line ﬁtted to the plot of ln(k) versus 1/T (Figure 7.6b) conﬁrms the validity of Ar-
rhenius relationship with activation energy of 50.7 kJ/mol for the movement of halide ions. This
value is comparable to activation energy of 0.62 eV (or 59 kJ/mol) estimated from photocurrent
measurements.[49]
==PAGE:41==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.6: (a) Change in absorbance of MAPbBr3 excitonic peak (523 nm) with time during
the homogenisation process (a) 23◦C, (b) 60◦C, (c) 80◦C, (d) 100◦C, (e) 120◦C, and (f) 140◦C.
The traces were ﬁtted with a monoexponential ﬁt to determine pseudo ﬁrst rate constants of
halide ion mobility. (b) Arrhenius plot of natural log of the rate constants versus the inverse of
temperature.
Using a simpliﬁed version of Fick’s second law for diﬀusion, an eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient is
calculated. The argument for using a simpliﬁed version and the term eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient, is that for this process, two diﬀerent sized ions (I−and Br−) diﬀuse in opposite directions
with diﬀerent rates hence making the law of diﬀusion analytically unsolvable.
The eﬀective
diﬀusion coeﬃcients are calculated from the expression:
Deff =
L2
τdiff
(12)
where Deff is the eﬀective diﬀusion coeﬃcient, τdiff is the lifetime measured from the mono-
exponential ﬁttings in Figure 7.6a, and L is the diﬀusion length or the average ﬁlm thickness
(128.5 nm), as measured from Figure C.2. The diﬀusion length is set to the distance between
the centre of the two clamped slides, which is made under the assumption that there is only
diﬀusion in one direction between the ﬁlms and no lateral ion movement within the ﬁlm.
Table 2 shows the calculated diﬀusion coeﬃcients using the approximated expression.
Table 2: Extracted lifetimes from the monoexponential ﬁttings in Figure 7.6a, and the calcu-
lated diﬀusion coeﬃcients at the six monitored temperatures.
Temperature (◦C)
Lifetime, τ (s)
Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient, D (cm2 s−1)
23
∼2000
∼8.26×10−14
60
1460.0
1.13 ×10−13
80
566.0
2.92×10−13
100
226.2
7.30×10−13
120
85.6
1.93×10−12
140
45.0
8.26×10−12
The observed values are consistent with the reported values from theoretical modelling. For
example, Walsh and Stranks estimated a diﬀusion coeﬃcient of 10−12 cm2 s−1 for I−ions at a
temperature of 50 ◦C.[38] It should be noted that the halide ion migration in the present study
is a bulk diﬀusion of two physically separated ﬁlms leading to the complete homogenisation.
==PAGE:42==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
34
Hence, the conditions for halide ion diﬀusion diﬀers from those in single crystals or halide
vacancy driven migration under photoirradiation.
Additionally, the measurements presented
in the present study deal with the movement of halide ions of diﬀerent ionic radii, which also
contributes to the overall mobility of the halide ions through the crystal structure.
7.6
Compositional Analysis
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was used to study the movement of halide ions across
the interface of the MAPbI3 and the MAPbBr3 ﬁlms during the homogenisation process, hence
making it possible to track the surface composition as bromide and iodide is incorporated into
the opposite ﬁlm during the halide ion homogenisation process.
XPS[50] is based on the photoelectric eﬀect that dictates that an atom can be ionised if it receives
a photon with an energy corresponding to its vacuum level. This additional transferred kinetic
energy allows bound electrons from the atom to escape the surface with a kinetic energy of:
Ekin = hν −Ebinding −Φ
(13)
where hν is the incoming photon energy, Ebinding is the unique element binding energy of an
electron to the atom, while Φ is the material work function. By irradiating a sample with mo-
noenergetic soft x-rays and then collecting the emitted electrons, the energy of the detected
electrons is analysed, and a surface analysis can be carried out. As the photon energy is known
and the kinetic energy is measured, the unique element binding energy can be determined to-
gether with the concentration of the elements in the surface. XPS is a highly surface sensitive
technique as the monoenergetic soft x-rays have a limited penetrating power in solids corre-
sponding to a skin depth of ∼5 nm.
However, this is a simpliﬁed system, as in reality all atoms embedded in the examined surface
interact with each other, facilitating a relaxation process of the atoms in order to minimise their
energy. Thus Equation 13 should be modiﬁed to:
Ekin = hν −Ebinding + EAR + Echem −Φ
(14)
where the atom relaxation of the structure, EAR, and the chemical surroundings that aﬀect the
electron, Echem, is included. What further complicates the process of determining the elemental
surface composition is the fact that orbitals with an angular momentum larger than 0 will
experience spin-orbit coupling. What this eﬀectively means is that the element speciﬁc binding
energy will split into its diﬀerent spin conﬁguration components.
XPS spectra were recorded for paired ﬁlms that had been thermal treatment at 100 ◦C for 0,
600, 900, and 1260 minutes. Figures 7.7a-7.7c show representative XPS of selected elemental
regions for the MAPbBr3 ﬁlm throughout the thermal treatment process. At 0 minutes (before
subjecting to thermal treatment), no iodide peaks can be resolved due to the absence of iodide
in the ﬁlms. However, by 600 minutes of annealing, iodide is clearly present in the ﬁlm. Similar
trend of increasing concentration of Br with increasing time of heating was observed in the
opposite fashion for the MAPbI3 ﬁlm (Appendix Figure C.5).
Using pseudo-Voigt ﬁtting parameters, the ratio of halide ion composition of the MAPbBr3 ﬁlm
was found throughout the annealing process. Figure 7.7d shows that the halide composition shifts
from 100% bromide at 0 minutes of annealing to 50% bromide at the end of the homogenisation
process. This supports the spectral data in Figure 7.4 and 7.5 in that a mixed halide perovskite
with a chemical formula of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 was obtained. For every time point 3-4 areas on each
of the slides were analysed showing less than 1% deviation in the halide ion composition ratio.
The same trend was seen in the MAPbI3 ﬁlm in Figure C.5d. showing that all halide ions are
accounted for and do not preferentially migrate to one side of the ﬁlms. It should be mentioned,
that the use of XPS is only a surface technique, as it was not possible to perform depth analysis
using XPS due to degradation of the perovskite ﬁlms. Hence, the measured 1:1 ratio of I:Br is
only at the interface (< 5nm).
==PAGE:43==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
35
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.7:
XPS spectra of one of the two ﬁlms (MAPbBr3 ﬁlm) acquired during halide
homogenisation at 100 ◦C, at 0, 600, 900 min, and 1260 min. The probed regions were (a) Pb
4f, (b) I 3d, (c) Br 3d, where ﬁts of individual peaks are shown in red and green, the cumulative
ﬁt is shown in blue, while the original data is shown as a black scatter plot. Complementary
data for the MAPbI3 ﬁlm is presented in Figure C.5. (d) The change in halide composition of
iodide and bromide during homogenisation is plotted over time.
The chemical changes at the surface of both ﬁlms during the thermal treatment process was
also probed. The binding energy of the various species were analysed to determine changes,
which might have occurred at the surface of perovskite ﬁlms during the homogenisation process.
Between 0 minutes and 600 minutes of homogenisation step, the binding energy of both the
bromide and lead peaks shift to higher binding energy, indicating that these species are slightly
oxidised and therefore more strongly bound through coulombic interactions than they are at
the start of the homogenisation process. This shift is attributed to oxidised states formed as a
result of exposure to air at elevated temperatures similar to the eﬀect seen on MAPbI3 ﬁlms
under irradiation.[51, 52] All of the binding energies, both before and throughout the annealing
process, show a high ﬁdelity to previously reported binding energies for MAPbX3 ﬁlms.[53] It
should be noted that the surface changes probed through XPS is a minor pathway and does not
inﬂuence the overall halide exchange process in the bulk.
==PAGE:44==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
36
7.7
Characterisation of Excited State Properties
Ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy is used to probe the excited state processes that
occur on the femtosecond (fs) to nanosecond (ns) time scale.
Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy [54] was employed to probe the completion of
halide ion exchange and its inﬂuence on excited state dynamics. A description of the experi-
mental setup and technical aspects are given in Appendix D. Furthermore, it is explained how
the probe beam is generated to create a white light supercontinuum enabling measurements in
the 400-750 nm range.
The theoretical description of femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy, given here, focuses
on the signal generated by the pump and probe pulse trains, that enable the sample to be probed
in both the ground (Absprobe) and excited (Abspump+probe) state. As mentioned in Appendix D,
the 387 nm pump pulse excites charge carriers from the ground state to the excited state of the
material of interest.
To probe the charge carrier relaxation dynamics, the absorbance of the sample is analysed both
in the ground state and at a time delay after excitation. This is achieved by using a white light
super-continuum probe pulse (that ﬁnds the absorbance over the entire visible region) as well as
a pump pulse (that excites the sample into the excited state). The sample is ﬁrst hit with the
probe pulse in order to obtain a ground state absorbance spectra. The sample is then excited
with the pump pulse and after a time delay the probe pulse takes another absorbance spectra.
The time delay after excitation can be varied from ∼50 fs all the way through the nanosecond
regime. By comparing the ground state absorbance spectra with the excited state absorbance
spectra (according to Equation 15), a diﬀerential absorbance spectrum that is both time and
wavelength dependent can be obtained.
∆A(λ) = −log
 I(λ)pumped
I(λ)unpumped

(15)
Since femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy is a time-resolved spectroscopy method, the
amount of data generated is signiﬁcant. The most valuable information that can be extracted
from transient absorption spectroscopy is how quickly the sample recovers back down to the
ground state. This can be shown by presenting the change in absorbance of all wavelengths at
speciﬁc time points (delta A spectrum) as well as the time dependent evolution of a speciﬁc
wavelength (kinetic trace) which are shown in Figures 7.8 and 7.9, respectively.
Three features can be seen in transient absorption spectrum, that each give valuable information
on the excited state dynamics of the sample. The ﬁrst is positive delta A signals that correspond
to simulated emission of the sample due to the laser pulses. For the used perovskite samples,
the quantum yield is low and therefore stimulated emission does not signiﬁcantly contribute to
the delta A signal. The second prominent feature is a negative delta A which is referred to as
the ground state bleach (GSB). The GSB relates the ground state absorbance to the absorbance
of the excited state after excitation. Due to excitation, the sample is unable to absorb the same
amount of white light from the probe beam, since charge carriers have been promoted to higher
energy states. This means, that the absorbance is decreased compared to the ground state ab-
sorbance spectra (i.e. the spectra taken with just the probe pulse). The magnitude and longevity
after excitation provide valuable information about both the excited state of the sample as well
as how the sample relaxes back to ground state. The ﬁnal feature of interest is another positive
delta A signal referred to as induced absorbance. Since the pump pulse is chosen to be far above
the band gap of the material, it is able to excite charge carriers above and below the conduction
band and valence band, respectively. This causes a positive signal at higher energy wavelengths
than the GSB.
Each of the paired ﬁlms (MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3) were subjected to 387 nm laser pulse exci-
tation before and after the completion of the homogenisation step. These ﬁlms correspond to
those discussed in Figure 7.2. The time resolved transient absorption spectra and corresponding
==PAGE:45==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
37
bleaching recovery are presented in Figure 7.8.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.8: Time-resolved transient absorption spectra recorded following laser pulse excitation
with 387 nm of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 ﬁlms (a,b) before and (c,d) after homogenisation.
The MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 ﬁlms exhibit characteristic bleach feature at wavelengths of 529 nm
and 757 nm, respectively, following the excitation with 150 fs laser pulse (387 nm). The bleach
recovery is seen over the period of nanoseconds as photogenerated charge carriers recombine.
Prior to homogenisation the individual ﬁlms exhibit bleach maxima at 757 nm and 529 nm for
MAPbI3 (Figure 7.8a) and MAPbBr3 (Figure 7.8b) respectively. The interesting aspect is when
these two ﬁlms are brought in contact with each other and allowed to homogenise at 100 ◦C.
The transient absorption spectra of the homogenised ﬁlms now exhibit similar bleach maximum
at 637 nm thus conﬁrming the matching composition of the mixed halide ﬁlm (Figures 7.8c and
7.8d). These transient absorption measurements conﬁrm that the perovskite ﬁlms do not retain
the individual excited state characteristics of the original ﬁlms, but with those of mixed halide
perovskites.
From Figure 7.8 it is seen, that the ground-state-bleach is located at the same wavelength as the
band gap of the materials (e.g. MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3), which corresponds to optically allowed
transitions of the material. As the delay time of the probe pulse is increased, the magnitude of
the ground-state-bleach decreases corresponding to the relaxation process of the charge carriers
==PAGE:46==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
38
back down to the ground state. It is this process, that is investigated through kinetic traces
obtained from transient absorption spectra, where the recovery of the bleach maxima is tracked
as a function of recovery time, as shown in Figure 7.9. The kinetic traces provide information
about the average lifetime of the excited state and can be used to describe the local charge
carrier. For the carried-out experiments, the optical position of the ground state bleach were
compared to elucidate whether the exchange processes had occurred. Furthermore, the excited
state lifetimes of the materials were compared to determine how these lifetimes changed as the
halide ion composition changed.
The charge carrier recombination of the pre- and post-homogenised ﬁlms is shown in Figure 7.9.
The bleach signal of the now mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms recovers with a rate faster than those
of original perovskite ﬁlms. The average lifetimes of bleaching recovery (844 ps for MAPbBr3
and 1722 ps for MAPbI3) decreased to about 457 ps for the homogenised mixed halide ﬁlms. The
ﬁtting parameters are shown in Table 3. The marked change in the excited state decay of the ﬁlm
before and after annealing can be attributed to the heterogeneity of the halide ions in mixed-ion
lead perovskite thin ﬁlms, which have been shown to aﬀect local charge carrier dynamics.[55]
The decreased excited state lifetime also suggests, that the halide exchange process has created
more surface defects at the grain boundaries leading to enhanced rate of charge recombination.
Such additional movement of halide ions under photoirradiation can also be beneﬁcially used to
remediate surface defects and overcome some of the adverse eﬀects. [56]
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.9: Recovery of bleaching of four ﬁlms recorded at bleach maxima: (a) MAPbI3 (757
nm), (b) MAPbBr3 (529 nm) and (c) and (d) homogenised ﬁlms (637 nm) for (a) short time
component (τ1) and (b) long time component (τ2)
Table 3:
Table showing extracted ﬁtting parameters for the fast and slow decay processes
obtained from the biexponential ﬁttings for the kinetics shown in Figure 7.9
A1 (%)
τ1 (ps)
A2 (%)
τ2 (ps)
τavg (ps)
MAPbI3
33.77
195.13
65.35
2511.32
1722.20
MAPbBr3
44.50
164.51
55.47
1389.29
844.10
MAPbI3−xBrx
49.78
117.54
49.74
781.88
499.58
MAPbBrBr3−xIx
64.67
187.43
34.66
838.54
414.63
==PAGE:47==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
39
7.8
Halide Ion Mobility of Mixed Halide Perovskite Films
To further investigate the process of halide ion mobility, two diﬀerent mixed halide ﬁlms with
bromide to iodide (Br:I) ratios of MAPbBr2.25I0.75 and MAPbBr0.75I2.25 were prepared. These
ﬁlms were paired together and left to homogenise at 100 ◦C. The absorption spectra recorded
before and after 1260 min of the homogenisation period are shown in Figure 7.10a with corre-
sponding photographs of the ﬁlms pre and post homogenisation shown in Figure 7.10b. Com-
paring the mixed halide perovskites in Figure 7.10a (at 0 min prior to annealing), to the pristine
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 ﬁlms in Figure 7.2b, it is evident that the absorbance of MAPbBr2.25I0.75
and MAPbBr0.75I2.25 is red- and blue-shifted, respectively, corresponding to mixed ﬁlms. De-
spite the initial Br:I ratio, both mixed ﬁlms attained similar 1:1 mixed halide composition after
homogenisation, as conﬁrmed by the absorption spectra and also by XPS analysis shown in
Appendix Figure C.6. Figure 7.10 shows the halide composition pre (0 min) and post (1260
min) homogenisation for the two ﬁlms MAPbBr0.75I2.25 and MAPbBr2.25I0.75, respectively. It
is evident that the initial 75/25 and 25/75 ratio becomes 50/50 for both ﬁlms after homogeni-
sation. These results further conﬁrm the ability of halides to mobilise and form stable mixed
halide composition.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.10: Tracking halide homogenisation at 100 ◦C for directly synthesised mixed halide
perovskite ﬁlms with diﬀerent I:Br ratios. Two ﬁlms of MAPbBr0.75I2.25 and MAPbBr2.25I0.75
with absorbance spectra of ﬁlms shown in (a) pre-and post-homogenisation. (b) Shows pho-
tographs taken of the two ﬁlms pre (a,b) and post (c,d) homogenisation.
In another experiment, that serves to show the ability to tailor the compositional ratio of I:Br
through ﬁlm exchange and homogenization, ﬁlms of diﬀerent molarity MAPbI3 were cast onto
FTO coated glass substrates. In short, instead of equimolar 0.3M MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 ﬁlms,
the MAPbBr3 ﬁlms were kept at 0.3M while the molarity of MAPbI3 was varied to achieve ratios
of 1:1, 2:1, 3:1 of MAPbI3:MAPbBr3 ratio, respectively.
Figure 7.11 shows the ﬁnal iodide composition percentage tracked with XPS after 1260 minutes
of halide homogenization at 100 ◦C for diﬀerent molarity ratios of iodide to bromide (I:Br).
Post-homogenization, the ﬁlms were separated and examined with XPS. From the ﬁnal %-iodide
composition, it is evident that for equimolar 1:1 iodide (0.3M) to bromide (0.3M) the iodide
composition is 50% in both ﬁlms, as seen in Section 7.2. However, for the 2:1 and 3:1 (i.e. iodide
(0.6/0.9M) to bromide (0.3M)), the iodide composition was 66% and 75% in both ﬁlms. This
implies that as the ﬁlms homogenize, the iodide and bromide equilibrate at a ratio depending on
the initial molar ratio of the MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 ﬁlms, and anions are not kept preferentially
on one side of the ﬁlm.
==PAGE:48==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
40
Figure 7.11: XPS measurements of diﬀerent molar ratio ﬁlms i.e. 2:1 and 3:1 Iodide to bromide
This shows that the ﬁnal compositional ratio in mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms can be tailored
depending on the initial molarity ratio of the two perovskite ﬁlms. Similar to the halide ion
exchange of CsPbBr3 to CsPbI3 (presented in Section 6.1), this clamped system provides a
controlled method for tailoring the ﬁnal halide composition. Hence, this method enables a new
approach to obtaining mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms that are diﬃcult to directly synthesise.
7.9
Suppression of Halide Diﬀusion with Interface Layer
As previously mentioned in Section 4.4.1, the favourable low temperature and solution-processed
fabrication conditions of perovskite solar cells are inevitably accompanied by the cations and
anions having low activation energies. As a consequence of this, all halides seem to be mobile
under operating conditions with grain boundaries and lattice defects further contributing to ion
transportation. As shown above, the mobility of anions is not only limited to internal movement
in a mixed halide perovskite ﬁlm, but also occurs across an interface between two physically
paired ﬁlms. Previously, it has been shown that anion exchange can be suppressed in caesium
lead halide perovskite nanocrystals by using PbSO4-oleate capping.[57] An attempt to suppress
the bidirectional halide exchange between the two paired perovskite ﬁlms was therefore made by
utilising a PbSO4-oleate interface layer spincasted between the two ﬁlms. Similar to the setup
described in Section 7.1, a PbSO4-oleate interface layer was here spincasted on the perovskite side
of both ﬁlms before they were clamped together and annealed to induce homogenisation. Figure
7.12 shows the halide homogenisation process for the collective absorption changes of the paired
ﬁlms with an intermediate PbSO4-oleate layer at intermediate time points of annealing at 60◦C
and 90◦C, shown in Figures 7.12a and 7.12b, respectively. From the ﬁgures, it is evident that
the homogenisation process occurring is not as simple as halide ion exchange process shown in
Figure 7.4a. It has previously been shown that transition metals with an s2 electron conﬁguration
(e.g. Pb2+) form unstable complexes when in the presence of excess halogens (e.g. iodide or
bromide ions).[58, 59] These plumbate complexes (e.g. PbI−
3 and PbI2−
4 ) exhibit characteristic
absorption bands corresponding to the coordination number of the complexes. However, the
presence of higher coordinated plumbate species is governed by the ratio of PbI2:I−in the initial
perovskite solution.
Thus, for the fabrication of MAPbI3, which is essentially a lead halide
complex (PbIn−
x ), the ratio of PbI2:I−has been optimised in order to avoid complexes forming.
==PAGE:49==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
41
Unfortunately, as is evident from Figure 7.12, the addition of the PbSO4-oleate layer containing
Pb2+ shifts this equilibrium, which allows these complexes to form. Looking at Figures 7.12a
and 7.12b, the peaks around 370nm and 425nm can be assigned to PbI−
3 and PbI2−
4 , respectively,
based on previous reports. [58]
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.12: Halide homogenisation of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 at (a) 60◦C and (b) 90◦C,
both with a PbSO4 interface layer between the two perovskite ﬁlms in an attempt to suppress
halide exchange.
What is interesting is that the PbI−
3 peak around 370 nm grows in until it reaches its maximum
shortly after the anneal process has been started (at 30 minutes (c) for 60◦C and 10 minutes
(b) for 80◦C). Following the reach of its maximum, the peak then starts to decrease until it
fully disappears around 300 minutes. As the PbI−
3 peak at 370nm slowly disappears, the peak
of PbI2−
4
starts to grow in at ∼425nm which then starts to red-shift under prolonged heating.
This indicates that PbI−
3 contributes to the formation of PbI2−
4
under these conditions.
Attempts to characterise the absorption band at 560 nm, which shows similar kinetics to the PbI−
3
band at 370 nm, were carried out by deconstructing the clamped MAPbI3/MAPbBr3 perovskite
ﬁlm setup. The diﬀerent components on their own and together with PbSO4-oleate were then
analysed. For example, PbSO4-oleate was deposited on a MAPbI3 and annealed. However, it
wasn’t possible to assign the distinctive peak at 560 nm. The hypothesis is therefore, that as
the two ﬁlms are clamped together, the excess Pb2+ from both the PbSO4-oleate and MAPbBr3
form a higher coordinated lead halide complex corresponding to the peak position at 560 nm. As
this has not previously been reported in literature it is diﬃcult to assign the absorption band to
a speciﬁc plumbate complex with absolute certainty without performing extensive analysis of the
setup. However, looking at how the diﬀerent lead complex species are spread 70 nm apart, the
most likely plumbate complex is PbI4−
6 . Due to time constraints on this project, further research
into the system was not conducted. However, eﬀort should still be directed towards minimising
the interlayer diﬀusion through PbSO4-oleate if the formation of lead halide complexes can be
suppressed.
7.10
Conclusion
In conclusion, it was found that when two ﬁlms of MAPbX3, with the anion X being either iodide
(I−), bromide (Br−) or a mixed halide (IxBry, with x+y=1), the ﬁlms undergo halide exchange
when physically paired and subjected to elevated temperatures. As the annealing temperature
is increased, the rate of halide diﬀusion is increased following an Arrhenius relationship with
==PAGE:50==
7 Halide Ion Mobility in Metal Halide Perovskite Films
42
a found activation energy of 51 kJ mol−1. Techniques such as UV-Vis, XPS and transient ab-
sorption spectroscopy were used to conﬁrm this halide diﬀusion. It was found that this process
is entropically favoured with the ﬁnal composition being MAPbI1.5Br1.5 in the case where the
combined composition of the two ﬁlms has a 1:1 I:Br ratio. In the case where the I:Br ratio is not
1:1, the ﬁnal composition is dictated by the ratio of I:Br in the initial ﬁlms, as was shown for 2:1
and 3:1 ratios. This goes to show that the ﬁnal compositional ratio in mixed halide perovskite
ﬁlms can be tailored depending on the initial molarity ratio of the two perovskite ﬁlms.
In an attempt to suppress or minimise the interlayer halide ion diﬀusion between the two ﬁlms,
an interface layer of PbSO4-oleate was used. However, this proved more diﬃcult than expected
as lead halide complexes with characteristic absorption bands, corresponding to the coordina-
tion number of the complexes, started to appear in the absorption spectra. Eﬀorts are therefore
needed to further study this phenomenon, as the halide diﬀusion across diﬀerent perovskite
composite layers can have detrimental eﬀects on the performance of tandem solar cell under
operating conditions.
Preliminary experiments looking at the halide ion mobility in mixed halide caesium ﬁlms (CsPbI3/
CsPbBr3) have been carried out with results shown in Figure C.7 and C.8 in Appendix C. Similar
to the results shown for MAPbI3/MAPbBr3, these caesium ﬁlms undergo halide exchange when
physically paired and subjected to elevated temperatures. A future prospect of this project is
therefore to characterise the diﬀusion of these halide species to determine the kinetics of this
thermally activated halide diﬀusion in caesium-based perovskites.
The results shown above are being published as an article, which at the time of thesis submission
is undergoing the review process in the journal ACS Energy Letters.
==PAGE:51==
8 Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
43
8
Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
One of the apparent challenges of perovskite solar cells are their instability at operating condi-
tions, with thermally induced degradation of MAPbI3 perovskites being a known problem.[60]
The aim of this section is therefore to investigate changes in material properties, when the pris-
tine (MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3) and mixed halide (MAPbI3−xBrx) perovskite ﬁlms are subjected
to elevated temperatures.
8.1
Fighting ﬁlm degradation
At elevated temperatures the degradation of ﬁlms containing iodide becomes apparent, as can
be seen from Figure 8.1a. Here a MAPbI3 ﬁlm is cast on to a FTO covered glass slide, similar
to what was used for solar cell fabrication and the halide ion mobility project presented in
Section 5 and 7, respectively.
From the ﬁgure it is clearly evident that the MAPbI3 layer
undergoes degradation and decomposition into a phase, that is not optically active corresponding
to the decrease in absorbance even at 80 ◦C. This process is not reversible as CH3I and NH3
molecules evaporate from the surface due to heat induced stress, leaving only thermally stable
PbI2.[60] Oppositely, MAPbBr3 shows no signs of thermal degradation, as shown in Figure 8.1b.
The initial shift is presumable due to a small thermally induced band gap shift, which will be
elaborated further in Section 8.2. An explanation of the thermal stability diﬀerence between
MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 can be found by comparing the Goldschmidt tolerance factor where
MAPbBr3 lies in the more stable regime. Furthermore, bromide forms a stronger Pb-Br bond
due to I being more electronegative than Br so the bonds are more covalent.[42, 61]
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.1: Thermal stability test of (a) MAPbI3 and (b) MAPbBr3 ﬁlms deposited onto
FTO coated glass substrates at 80◦C.
Figure 8.2 shows MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 ﬁlms that have been homogenised with thermal treat-
ment and subsequently separated to probe their stability. Both ﬁlms were then subjected to 80◦C
thermal annealing to probe the thermal stability of the ﬁlms. Even though both ﬁlms contain a
1:1 I:Br ratio, the degradation of the ﬁlms where tracked to see if one ﬁlm was inherently more
stable than the other. As CH3I and NH3 molecules start to evaporate from the ﬁlm surface,
the degradation is induced. Figure 8.2b shows that the ﬁlm, which was originally MAPbBr3,
undergoes a more rapid degradation compared to the ﬁlm that was originally MAPbI3 (8.2a).
==PAGE:52==
8 Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
44
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.2: Thermal stability test at 80◦C of (a) MAPbI3−xBrx and (b) MAPbBr3−xIx ﬁlms
after thermally induced homogenisation of ﬁlms.
The increased rate of degradation for the MAPbBr3−xIx ﬁlm suddenly stops as the ﬁlms transi-
tions into its originally stable MAPbBr3 phase. Oppositely, MAPbI3−xBrx in Figure 8.2a shows
no sign of a similar degradation into the MAPbBr3 phase within the experimental time win-
dow. An explanation to this may be found in the corresponding SEM images of the surface
topograhy of the two ﬁlms (Figure 7.3a and 7.3b) as well as the fabrication procedure of both
ﬁlms presented in Section 5.1. Looking at the surface topography of the ﬁlms, it is evident that
the grain sizes are quite diﬀerent, although both ﬁlms have been subjected to elevated 100◦C
temperature homogenisation for 21 hours. Hence, the initial crystallisation of the ﬁlms is vital
for the morphology of the layers, as this does not change signiﬁcantly with further annealing. As
the MAPbBr3 ﬁlms were crystallised at a higher temperature and for an extended period of time
compared to MAPbI3, this might provide an explanation to why the MAPbBr3−xIx ﬁlm (shown
in Figure 8.2b) degrades into its MAPbBr3 stable phase. This temperature induced degradation
of two ﬁlms that contain the same a 1:1 Br:I ratio shows the importance of morphology engi-
neering in the search for highly eﬃcient and stable perovskite solar cells.
It was therefore necessary to come up with a way of improving the thermal stability, such that
ﬁlms could be characterised under elevated temperatures. There exist several ways of doing this,
where the most popular method is sealing the cell a form of epoxy under an inert gas with a
glass slide on top. However, no signs of degradation were seen at elevated temperatures for the
project carried out on halide ion mobility presented in Section 7. It was therefore believed, that
since the degradation process is mainly surface driven, the surface could be passivated by simply
clamping a clean piece of FTO coated glass on top of the cell to simulate the clamped system.
Figure 8.3 shows equivalent samples to Figure 8.2 with the diﬀerence being that the ﬁlms have
now been encapsulated with a piece of FTO glass to passivate the surface driven degradation.
Suddenly, both ﬁlms show no signs of degradation even at elevated temperatures indicating a full
surface passivation. This system was adapted as a standard for all following projects involving
elevated temperatures.
==PAGE:53==
8 Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
45
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.3:
Thermal stability test at 80◦C of encapsulated (a) MAPbI3−xBrx and (b)
MAPbBr3−xIx ﬁlms after thermally induced homogenisation of ﬁlms.
Here no heat induced
degradation was seen for either ﬁlm over the course of 8 hours.
8.2
Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
As part of the thermally activated halide ion mobility project, an interesting phenomenon was
uncovered when the recorded absorbance spectrums showed signs of wavelength shift at diﬀerent
temperatures. The changes were even found for temperatures laying within what is considered
normal operating temperatures. It is known that as perovskite materials change from one crystal
phase to another there is a change in absorbance. For MAPbI3, it has previously been reported
by Angelis et al. [62] that as the material undergoes a tetragonal to cubic phase transition,
the materials structural and optical properties change.
For MAPbI3 there are known phase
transitions at -111◦C (orthorombic to tetragonal) and at 54 ◦C (tetragonal to cubic). The latter
of the two phase transitions at 54 ◦C is also the reason why the MAPbI3 ﬁlms during fabrication
are annealed at 65 ◦C (see Section 5.1). This temperature drives the phase transition of the
material into its optically active cubic phase. In the study by Angelis et al., they found that
when heating the MAPbI3 ﬁlms, a gradual blue shift in the band gap was seen. They found that
by varying the temperature from 20 ◦C to 127 ◦C a shift of ∆= 36 nm occurred. However, this
phenomenon is still not fully understood as silicon (Si), germanium (Ge) and GaAs show a red-
shift in band gap with increasing temperature. Furthermore, some Pb based compounds have
also been reported to show a red-shift.[62] To try and explain this shift in band gap, Angelis
et al. deployed several state-of-the-art simulation tools. However, due to the solution based
low temperature fabrication of most perovskite materials, they found that the simulations were
inconsistent with the experimental data, possibly due to the lack of highly symmetric cubic
crystal structure at high temperatures.
Figure 8.4 show the recorded absorbance changes as a result of the thermally induced band
gap shift for MAPbI1.5Br1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms. The ﬁlm was examined at diﬀerent
temperatures ranging from 23◦C to 160◦C, where the ﬁlm was held at each temperature to
stabilise the shift before acquiring an absorption measurement. Figure 8.4a shows the blue-shift
of the absorbance onset corresponding to a change in band gap for the recorded temperatures.
Figure 8.4b shows the recorded wavelength shift at the maximum band edge peak in Figure 8.4a
plotted against the temperature. The plot has been ﬁtted to a linear ﬁt, showing a clear linear
relation between the thermally induced band gap shift and the temperature, as the band gap
monotonically blue-shifts with increasing temperature. This recorded temperature eﬀect can be
used for stable band bending eﬀects at the interfaces and grain boundaries in device applications.
==PAGE:54==
8 Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
46
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.4: Thermally induced band gap shifting of MAPbI1.5Br1.5 mixed halide perovskite
ﬁlms recorded at diﬀerent temperatures with (a) showing the shift in absorbance acquired with
UV-VIS and (b) the maximum band edge peak position as a function of temperature.
To measure the reversibility of this thermally induced band gap shift, a MAPbI1.5Br1.5 mixed
halide perovskite ﬁlm was heated to 120◦C. The ﬁlm was then allowed to cool to room tem-
perature (23◦C) while absorbance was tracked, as shown in Figure 8.5a. The reversibility of
the shift in band gap, as it cools to room temperature from 120◦C, is shown in Figure 8.5b for
5 cycles of reheating the ﬁlm to 120◦C and subsequently cooling to room temperature. The
cycling of the thermally induced band gap shift shows no permanent change or hysteresis eﬀect
to the ﬁlm, indicating that this blue shift with temperature is entirely reversible. This might
also be the explanation why this phenomenon has not previously been widely reported, as only
a little research has been performed on perovskite solar cells at elevated temperatures due to
the apparent challenges with stability shown previously in Section 8.1.[62]
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.5: Reversibility with no permanent changes of the thermally induced band gap shifting
of MAPbI1.5Br1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms is tested by (a) heating ﬁlm to 120◦C and
tracking the absorbance as ﬁlm cools to room temperature, and (b) measured absorbance at the
band gap centre for temperature-recovered ﬁlm reheated to 120 ◦C 5 times.
==PAGE:55==
8 Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
47
It should therefore also be mentioned that all of these experiments were performed with the de-
veloped encapsulation system presented in Section 8.1 to suppress thermally induced degradation
of the ﬁlms.
Figure 8.6 shows the rate of band gap recovery tracked as it recovers over time when the ﬁlms
are cooled for the preheated temperature, similar to Figure 8.5a. From Figure 8.6 it is evident,
that regardless of the initial ﬁlm temperature, all band gaps recover to the same position when
cooled to 23 ◦C corresponding to room temperature. For temperatures higher than 160 ◦C it was
found that the perovskite ﬁlm started to degrade even though it was encapsulated as discussed
above.
From the ﬁgure it is evident, that the rate at which the wavelength changes with time follows an
monoexponential trend corresponding to the temperature rate-of-change dictated by Newton’s
law of cooling. This law states that the rate of heat loss is directly proportional to the diﬀerence
in temperature between the object and its surroundings, described by a diﬀerential equation
for temperature-diﬀerence as a function of time. Hence, as the glass substrates cool from the
preheated temperature to room temperature, the band gap of the MAPbI1.5Br1.5 mixed halide
perovskite ﬁlm recovers. All rates, except the ﬁlm held at 23 ◦C, were ﬁtted with a monoexpo-
nential ﬁt.
Figure 8.6: Reversibility of thermally induced band gap shifting of MAPbI1.5Br1.5 mixed halide
perovskite ﬁlms preheated to diﬀerent temperatures (23, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140 and 160 ◦C),
with wavelength shift tracked with steady state absorbance over time as ﬁlms cool to room
temperature (23◦C). All traces have been ﬁtted with monoexponential ﬁt.
8.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, single anion and mixed halide perovskites perovskite ﬁlms containing iodide un-
dergo rapid degradation when subjected to elevated temperatures. The degradation process is
non-reversible as CH3I and NH3 molecules evaporate from the surface leaving only the thermally
stable PbI2. To mitigate this surface driven degradation, it was found that passivating the sur-
face with a clean piece of FTO glass resolved this issue. This system was therefore adopted for
all future project involving elevated temperatures, similar to the mechanically clamped system
presented in Section 7.
Thermally induced band gap shifting when perovskite ﬁlms are subjected to elevated tempera-
tures was not a phenomenon known to our group prior to the experiments on thermally activated
halide ion mobility. Hence, as this eﬀect became apparent, eﬀorts were put into understanding
the mechanisms behind this process as it was found that the band gap even shifts within what is
considered operating conditions. It was found that the band gap shift has a linear dependence on
temperature as it blue-shifts to lower wavelengths. The reversibility of this shift was examined
==PAGE:56==
8 Thermally Induced Band Gap Shifting
48
by repeating the heating process and subsequently letting the ﬁlm temperature-recover to room
temperature. No permanent change or hysteresis eﬀect was found, showing that this process
is fully reversible, and can be used for stable band bending eﬀects at the interfaces and grain
boundaries of device applications. A project to further study the thermally induced band gap
shifting and how this depends on the MAPbBr3−xIx composition of the perovskite ﬁlm, is now
under way in our group. The aim is here to vary ’x’ and relate these diﬀerent compositions to
the observed kinetics.
Based on the ﬁndings any experiments involving elevated temperatures have prospectively been
modiﬁed so that ﬁlms examined at elevated temperatures are preheated prior to any absorption
measurements performed.
==PAGE:57==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
49
9
Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
Another interesting aspect that inﬂuences the solar cell performance is the mobility of halide
ions within the perovskite ﬁlm. In fact, the crystalline liquid like property of these materials
enables the movement of ions with relative ease. As shown in Section 7, two physically paired
MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 ﬁlms undergo halide ion exchange when driven by thermal activation.
The diﬀerence in spectral features of the two perovskite ﬁlms, makes it possible to track the
movement of halide ions and its dependence on the temperature during the homogenisation
process.
Whereas entropy of mixing explains the thermally activated homogenisation of halide ions to
yield mixed halide perovskite (i.e. MAPbBr3−xIx), an opposite trend is observed when the mixed
halide ﬁlm is subjected to photoirradiation. This process commonly referred to as photoinduced
phase segregation or halide segregation, yields Br-rich and I-rich perovskite domains, as explained
in Section 4.4.1. A schematic illustration of this is shown in Figure 9.1.
Figure 9.1: Schematic illustration of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 which undergoes photoinduced phase-
segregation, thus forming I- and Br-rich regions.
Several models have been proposed to explain photoinduced segregation of halides. These in-
clude: two state model in the excited state [27], polaron induced lattice strain [28], defect driven
halide ion movement [29, 30], carrier trapping and charge accumulation at perovskite surfaces
[31], band gap reduction of iodide-rich phase [32] and overcoming the thermal activation of mix-
ing with band gap excitation [33]. Hence, it is evident that there is no consensus about a single
model describing the photoinduced phase separation in mixed halide perovskites. The aim of
this project is therefore to contribute to the understanding of this phenomenon.
Following photoinduced phase segregation, thermal activation drives the segregated domains
back to the original homogenised composition when the ﬁlm is subsequently left in dark.
The two diﬀerent types of halide ion movement can be summarised through the following two
expressions for the processes occurring when the mixed halide perovskite ﬁlm is subjected to (1)
photoirradiation and subsequently (2) left in the dark to recover:
In Light (1) :
n MAPbBr1.5I1.5
hν
−→
n/2 MAPbBr3 + n/2 MAPbI3
(16)
In Dark (2) :
n/2 MAPbBr3 + n/2 MAPbI3
−→
n MAPbBr1.5I1.5
(17)
Compared to Equation 9, which was stated in Section 4.4.1, Equation 16 is a simpliﬁed version.
Here it is assumed that the initial unsegregated states undergo full segregation forming the I-
and Br- rich domains.
These reactions are used to describe how the halide ions prefer to remain segregated under irradi-
ation, while the stable geometry in the dark is the mixed or homogeneous state. Since these two
processes compete under photoirradiation, it is important to establish the driving force behind
such unusual activity. The suppression of photoinduced phase segregation is critical for mixed
halide perovskite solar cells, as it has been shown that the formation of iodide- and bromide-rich
domains induces dramatic spectral diﬀerences in absorption.
In order to obtain insight into these two processes, this project aims at determining the tem-
perature dependence of rate of segregation and dark recovery. The kinetic and thermodynamic
arguments that explain the photoinduced halide segregation and dark recovery are discussed.
==PAGE:58==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
50
9.1
Preparation of Mixed Halide Perovskite Films
Mixed halide ﬁlms of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 were cast on 0.5 µm FTO coated glass slides using static
drop casting. The substrates were subsequently annealed at 65 ◦C for 1 minute followed by
immediate annealing at 100 ◦C to facilitate the nucleation process of adjacent grains, similar to
the method presented in Section 5.1. A 0.9M solution of 45 mM PbI2, 45 mM MAI, 45 mM
PbBr2 and 45 mM MABr dissolved in 0.45 mM DMSO, such that a molar ratio of (1:1:1:1:2) was
obtained, which was then mixed with DMF to obtain the employed precursor solution. Through
XPS analysis it was conﬁrmed that the ﬁlms had a 1:1 composition, as shown in Appendix Figure
E.1, while a ﬁlm thickness of 235 nm was determined through cross-sectional SEM, as shown
in Appendix Figure E.2. To suppress the surface driven degradation at elevated temperatures
these ﬁlms were covered with a blank FTO slide and clamped to passivate the surface, as was
discussed in Section 8.1.
The ﬁlms were then placed in a spectrophotometer with a Peltier
thermal setup, and subjected to light/heat treatment while steady state UV-VIS absorption
spectra were recorded to track the photoactivated and thermally activated mobility of halide
ions. All experiments where the photoactivated halide ion mobility was probed, a white light
source was used to simulate operating conditions. A spectrum of the lamp can be found in
Appendix Figure E.3.
9.2
Photoactivated Mobility of Halide Ions
The mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms were subjected to visible light irradiation, similar to the
schematic illustration shown in Figure 9.1, to track the phase segregation through changes in
the absorption. By tracking the absorbance of the ﬁlm as shown in Figure 9.2a for 20 mW/cm2, a
loss of excitonic peak and an increased absorbance in the red region is observed, corresponding to
the formation of Br-rich and I-rich regions in the MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlm. The diﬀerence absorption
spectra recorded in Figure 9.2b show these changes with an isosbestic point around 630 nm, which
further shows the photoinduced conversion of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 into Br-rich and I-rich regions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.2: Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlm recorded at
diﬀerent times of the segregation process. The ﬁlm was held at constant room temperature
(23 ◦C). (a) Segregation of ﬁlm when photoirradiated with an intensity of 20 mW/cm2. (b)
Diﬀerence absorbance spectra obtained from spectra b-j in (a) with 0 minute spectrum (a) being
used as a reference.
The prominent bleach at 616 nm and the induced absorption at 642 nm can be tracked to
==PAGE:59==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
51
determine the rate of halide segregation (Reaction 1, Equation 16). To determine how the light
intensity changes the segregation rate, a study was carried out where the illumination intensity
was varied, as shown in Figure 9.3a. All kinetic traces were ﬁtted with monoexponential ﬁttings
to determine the rate constants. Figure 9.3b shows the ﬁrst order rate constant increase with
increasing intensity of excitation. The rate constant at 20 mW/cm2 increases from 0.02 s−1 to
0.07 s−1 when the intensity was increased to 60 mW/cm2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.3: (a) Tracking of the diﬀerence absorption spectra for diﬀerent intensities (30, 40,
50 mW/cm2) at the bleach (616 nm) and the induced absorption at 642 nm. (b) Rate constant
obtained for monoexponential ﬁt for diﬀerent intensities in (a) as a function of intensity used
for segregation.
9.3
Thermally Activated Mobility of Halide Ions
As mentioned, once the illumination of the ﬁlm is turned oﬀand the ﬁlm is kept in the dark,
the ﬁlm starts to recover into its original mixed halide form.
This is shown in Reaction 2
(Equation 17) where the mobility of halide ions is in the opposite direction compared to under
illumination. As this process is similar to what was found for the halide ion mobility project
presented in Section 7, it was believed that rate of recovery could be increased through thermal
activation. The aim was therefore to study the thermal eﬀect on recovery, using ﬁlms that had
been segregated under the same conditions (30 mW/cm2 at 23◦C), based on the ﬁndings in
Section 9.2. Figure 9.4 shows the dark recovery of the photosegregated ﬁlm at 23 ◦C and 80 ◦C.
At room temperature it takes almost 14 hours for the halide ion segregated ﬁlm to fully recover,
thus showing the slow mobility of halide ions. However, with increasing temperature the rate
of dark recovery (or mixing of halide ions to original mixed halide composition) is signiﬁcantly
increased. For example when the ﬁlm was kept at 80 ◦C, it took just 20 minutes for the ﬁlm to
recover and attain its original mixed halide composition, as shown in Figure 9.4c. As previously
found in Section 7.5, this follows from Fick’s law of diﬀusion (Equation 12) which includes the
temperature dependent diﬀusion coeﬃcient from the Arrhenius expression (Equation 11).
The diﬀerence spectra were recorded using the original MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlm (before subjecting
it to photoirradiation) as reference. Thus, the spectra (a) in Figures 9.4b and 9.4d corresponds
to the unsegregated halide ion state. With increasing time, the recovery is seen reversing the
trend observed during the photoirradiation. The presence of an isosbestic point (Figures 9.4b
and 9.4d) at both these temperatures, conﬁrm that the recovery represents the existence of both
the segregated and mixed halide composition.
==PAGE:60==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
52
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.4: Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms recorded at
diﬀerent times of the recovery process. (a,b) Recovery of fully segregated ﬁlms when recovered
at room temperature (23 ◦C) and when subjected to 80 ◦C heating. (c,d) Diﬀerence absorbance
spectra obtained from (a,b), showing the reversible recovery process until their initial position.
To study the thermal eﬀect on the rate of dark recovery, the diﬀerence absorbance spectra for all
the recorded temperatures (with 23 and 80 ◦C shown in Figure 9.4b and 9.4d, respectively), were
monitored at the two peak positions, namely 620 and 650 nm. Figure 9.5a shows the tracked
recovery of the bleach at 616 nm and induced absorption at 650 nm for 23, 70 and 80 ◦C . From
here it is evident that rate of recovery signiﬁcantly increases as the temperature is increased. The
time required for the ﬁlms to fully recover is shown in Figure 9.5b. This shows the importance
of thermal activation in inducing the mobility of halide ions, thus reversing the trend observed
during photoirradiation. All traces in Figure 9.5a together with the additional temperatures,
were ﬁtted to monoexponential decay to determine the pseudo ﬁrst order rate constants for
the dark recovery. This dependence on temperature was further analysed through the Arrhenius
expression, previously shown in Equation 11. The plot of ln(k) versus inverse temperature shown
in Figure 9.5c exhibits a linear relationship. The activation energy determined from the slope of
the plot was 53.47 ± 3.83 kJ mol−1. This value is similar to the activation energy (50.7 kJ/mole)
that was determined from the exchange of halide ions between physically paired of MAPbBr3
and MAPbI3 ﬁlms, shown in Figure 7.6b.
==PAGE:61==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9.5: Change in absorbance for the initial fully segregated position of the MAPbBr1.5I1.5
mixed halide perovskite. (a) Tracking of the diﬀerence absorption spectra for diﬀerent recovery
temperatures (23 ◦C (see Figure 9.4b), 70 ◦C and 80 ◦C (see Figure 9.4d)) at the bleach (620
nm) and the induced absorption at 650 nm. (b) Extracted recovery times from (a) showing a
signiﬁcant decrease in recovery time as temperature is increased. (c) Arrhenius plot of natural log
of the rate constants versus the inverse of temperature, with the rate constants being extracted
from monoexponential ﬁts of (a).
These results show the thermodynamic activation barrier for observing mobility of halide ions in
perovskite ﬁlms. As discussed earlier, the entropy of mixing plays an important role in attaining
the mixed halide composition with an energy of activation of 53 kJ/mol.
9.4
Combined Photo and Thermal Activation
Based on the ﬁndings presented above for photoactivated and thermally activated halide ion
mobility, as well as the two competing reactions presented in Reaction 1 and 2 (Equation 16 and
17), it was believed that the photosegregation could be suppressed at elevated temperatures.
Under photoexcitation the bromide and iodide prefer to remain separate as iodide rich and
bromide rich domains, while in dark they prefer to stay together with homogenized or mixed
halide composition. Again, mixed halide MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlms were prepared as described in
==PAGE:62==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
54
Section 9.1, and ﬁlms and subjected to photoirradiation (constant intensity 20 mW/cm2) at
diﬀerent temperatures in an attempt to suppress segregation. The results are shown in Figure
9.6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.6: (a) Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms recorded
at diﬀerent times of the segregation process. (b) Diﬀerence absorbance spectra obtained from
spectra b-l in (a) with 0 minute spectrum (a) being used as a reference. (c) Tracking of the
segregation evolution in (b) for diﬀerent annealing temperatures at the bleach (620 nm) and
the induced absorption at 650 nm. Kinetic traces have been ﬁtted with monoexponential ﬁts to
obtain rate constants. Arrhenius plot of natural log of the rate constants versus the inverse of
temperature, with the rate constants being extracted (c).
Figure 9.6a and 9.6b show the absorbance spectra and diﬀerence absorption recorded during
photoirradiation of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlm at 100 ◦C. Similar experiments were carried out at dif-
ferent temperatures, and the absorbance change monitored at 620 and 650 nm were recorded at
the diﬀerent temperatures. Figure 9.6c shows representative kinetic traces of halide ion segrega-
tion observed at 23 ◦C, 60 ◦C, and 100 ◦C. From this it is evident, that the rate of segregation
increases with increasing temperature. This is believed to be caused by the thermal energy that
mobilises the halide ions, which then have a lower activation barrier causing I-rich and Br-rich
domains to form faster. All traces in Figure 9.6c were ﬁtted to monoexponential decay to deter-
mine the rate constants. Using these rate constants, the Arrhenius plot of ln(k) versus inverse
==PAGE:63==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
55
temperature in Figure 9.6d shows a linear relationship. The activation energy determined from
the slope of this linear plot is 28.94 ± 1.11 kJ/mol−1, which is lower than that found for the
homogenisation of mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms. This lower activation energy of photosegre-
gation overcomes the larger activation barrier of thermal mixing and thus favours halide ion
segregation.
9.5
Thermal Suppression of Segregation
As discussed above, it was found that segregation above 20 mW/cm2 could not be suppressed
even at temperatures up to 100 ◦C. It was therefore necessary to signiﬁcantly lower the intensity.
Masaru Kuno et al.[32] found a threshold intensity of 40 µW/cm2 at room temperature using a
green 405nm laser. However, as this project aimed at simulating operating conditions, the same
white light source as for the other experiments was used. The low intensity was obtained by
using a series of neutral density ﬁlters (NDFs).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.7: Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms recorded at
diﬀerent illumination intensities for 10 hours. (a,c) Shows the absorbance and diﬀerence ab-
sorbance spectra obtained for 30 µW/cm2 at 23◦C. (b,d) Shows the similar spectra obtained
for 80 µW/cm2 at 23◦C, where the segregation is present.
The aim was now to determine at what excitation intensity (Iexc) the MAPbI3−xBr3 ﬁlms would
==PAGE:64==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
56
start to segregate. As it evident form Figure 9.7a and 9.7c, a threshold intensity at room tem-
perature (23◦C) of 30 µW/cm2 was found.
All measurements were performed over 10 hours as it was found that the segregation at these
low intensities occurs at a much slower rate, compared to what was found in Section 9.2 and
9.4. When the intensity was increased to 40 µW/cm2 and above, segregation of the mixed halide
perovskite ﬁlm occurred. As previously mentioned, this can be seen by the loss of excitonic peak
and an increased absorbance in the red region observed in the absorbance. Figure 9.7b and 9.7d
shows this formation of I- and Br-rich domains for 80 µW/cm2.
A series of experiments were carried out at diﬀerent temperatures to determine the temperature
dependent threshold intensity where the forward reaction (Equation 16) and the reverse reaction
(17), cancel out. The results are shown in Figure 9.8. The complementary data for the diﬀerent
threshold excitation intensities at diﬀerent temperatures is shown in Appendix Figure E.4. As
can be seen in Figure 9.8, the excitation intensity threshold below which no segregation occurs,
follows a linear temperature dependence. At the threshold intensity, the forward and reverse
driven reactions (Equation 18) are in equilibrium such that no segregation occurs.
n MAPbBr1.5I1.5
h ν
−−−⇀
↽−−−
Heat n/2 MAPbBr3 + n/2 MAPbI3
(18)
However, if this equilibrium is shifted either by lowering the temperature or increasing the
intensity, the equilibrium is shifted towards the photoinduced phase segregation, thus making
this the dominating reaction. Oppositely, increasing the temperature or lowering the intensity
will shift the equilibrium towards the stable phase where no segregation occurs. These results
are incredibly important for the further study of phase segregation in an attempt to understand
the photoinduced dynamics.
As previously mentioned, suppressing the phase segregation is
important, as this eﬀect causes a signiﬁcant decrease in the power conversion eﬃciency of the
mixed halide perovskite photovoltaics.
Figure
9.8:
Threshold excitation intensity (Iexc) as a function of temperature for
MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms. Below the recorded Iexc for each temperature,
no segregation of the ﬁlms was found.
==PAGE:65==
9 Photo versus Thermal Activated Halide Ion Mobility
57
9.6
Conclusion
In conclusion, three diﬀerent approaches were used to characterise the kinetics of photoinduced
segregation in MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms. First, the photoactivated halide ion
mobility was probed by illuminating the samples with diﬀerent intensities at 23 ◦C. This was
done to determine the forward segregation rate constants, which were found to increase from
0.02 s−1 at 20 mW/cm2 to 0.07 s−1 at 60 mW/cm2. Second, the thermally activated mobility
was probed by subjecting fully segregated ﬁlms to elevated temperatures to increase the rate of
dark recovery. It was found, that as the annealing temperature is increased, the rate of halide
diﬀusion is increased following an Arrhenius relationship with an activation energy of 53 kJ
mol−1. Third, MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlms were subjected to both photoexcitation and heat treatment
to determine the rate of segregation. Here the illumination intensity of 20 mW/cm2 was held
constant while the temperature was varied. It was found, that as the temperature was increased,
the rate of segregation increased following an Arrhenius relationship with an activation energy of
29 kJ mol−1. This lower activation energy of the photoactivated segregation assists to overcome
the dark (thermally activated) mixing, and exists as Br-rich and I-rich regions as long as the
mixed halide ﬁlm is irradiated continuously with visible light. When the intensity was lowered
in an attempt to cancel out the two competing reactions, it was found that the intensity had to
be signiﬁcantly decreased. The excitation intensity threshold below which no segregation occurs,
was found to follow a linear temperature dependence. It was found that no phase separation
occurs below 30 µW/cm2 at 23◦C, while at 100 µW/cm2 segregation can be suppressed at 90◦C.
These results are of great importance for the future development and understanding of phase
segregation in mixed halide perovskites. Because of this, the results shown above are at the time
of thesis submission being composed into an article which will be published in an undecided
journal.
==PAGE:66==
10 Summary and Conclusion
58
10
Summary and Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to relate diﬀerences in material, processing, and irradiation conditions
to variations in the photophysics of the photovoltaics and use this to further the knowledge of
the perovskite solar cell (PSC) ﬁeld.
In summary, the objective of this thesis was to initially produce high eﬃciency MAPbI3 per-
ovskite based solar cells with high reproducibility (Section 5). The performance of the photo-
voltaic devices was examined with I-V characterisation and IPCE, such that the performance
could be compared with other results and to determine the reproducibility.
Following this, an attempt was made to fabricate a gradient mixed halide perovskite layer of
MAPbI3/MAPbBr3 and CsPbI3/CsPbBr3 (Section 6). The aim was to fabricate ﬁlms such that
an iodide rich region of the ﬁlm lies at one interface while a bromide rich region lies at the other
interface. The gradient ﬁlm serves to facilitate an accelerated carrier extraction to minimise
recombination. This however proved harder than expected.
Meanwhile, it was discovered that by mechanically clamping the two perovskite ﬁlms together
(i.e. MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3), and subjecting them to elevated temperatures, the halide ions
would exchange across the interface and a mixed halide composition would form (Section 7).
The purpose of this project was thus to establish the thermally activated halide movement of
halide ions in metal halide perovskite ﬁlms by spectroscopically probing the evolution of the
mixed halide composition at diﬀerent temperatures. The mechanistic and kinetic details of bro-
mide and iodide movement was characterised using UV-VIS, XPS and Transient Absorption
Spectroscopy.
As a result of subjecting the perovskite ﬁlms to elevated temperatures, it was discovered that
there is a thermally induced blue-shift of the band gap (Section 8). This monotonically band
gap shift is important to take into account when performing experiments where samples are sub-
jected to elevated temperatures, and hence all subsequent experiments were modiﬁed to these
ﬁndings.
Mixed halide perovskites are known to undergo photoinduced phase segregation yielding Br-rich
and I-rich perovskite domains (Section 9). The aim of the last project was to further study
this phenomenon and to make an attempt to suppress it by subjecting the ﬁlms to elevated
temperatures.
In conclusion, high eﬃciency and highly reproducible MAPbI3 solar cells have been successfully
fabricated. The performance of the devices was examined with current-voltage (J-V) character-
isation and IPCE, showing a high reproducibility of the cells with an average power conversion
eﬃciency of 16.02%, while the champion cell had a PCE of 18.4%. The second project involved
the fabrication of a gradient perovskite absorption layer, such that a gradational energy band
gap with appropriate band alignment could be achieved. However, this proved to be a more
complex challenge than expected, due to solvent compatibility issues and stability challenges.
Meanwhile, it was found that when two ﬁlms of MAPbX3, with the anion X being either iodide
(I−), bromide (Br−) or a mixed halide (IxBry, with x+y=1), the ﬁlms undergo halide exchange
when physically paired and subjected to elevated temperatures. It was found that by increasing
the annealing temperature, the rate of halide diﬀusion increased following an Arrhenius rela-
tionship with a found activation energy of 51 kJ mol−1. Techniques such as UV-VIS, XPS and
transient absorption spectroscopy were used to conﬁrm this halide diﬀusion. It was found that
this process is entropically favoured with the ﬁnal composition being MAPbI1.5Br1.5 in the case
where the combined composition of the two ﬁlms has a 1:1 I:Br ratio. In the case where two
I:Br ratio is not 1:1, this dictates the ﬁnal composition as was found from the experiment with
excess iodide compared to bromide. This goes to show that the ﬁnal compositional ratio in
mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms can be tailored depending on the initial molarity ratio of the two
perovskite ﬁlms. Subjecting mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms to elevated temperatures was found
to induce a blueshift of the band gap. It was found for MAPbI1.5Br1.5 ,that there is a linear
==PAGE:67==
10 Summary and Conclusion
59
relation between the thermally induced band gap shift and the temperature, as the band gap
monotonically blue-shifts with increasing temperature. No permanent change or hysteresis eﬀect
was found when the reversibility of this shift was examined, showing that this process is fully
reversible, and can be used for stable band bending eﬀects at the interfaces and grain boundaries
of device applications. The halide ion mobility in mixed halide perovskite exhibits two opposite
trends in response to photo and thermal activation. While halides prefer to remain as Br-rich
and I-rich domains under steady state light irradiation of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlms, they prefer to
remain in a mixed composition in dark, just as it was found for the thermally activated halide ion
mobility. The activation energies as determined from the temperature dependent rate constants
were 29 kJ mol−1 for segregation and 53 kJ mol−1 for dark recovery. This lower activation energy
of the photoactivated segregation assists to overcome the dark (thermally activated) mixing, and
exists as Br-rich and I-rich regions as long as the mixed halide ﬁlm is irradiated continuously
with visible light. A room temperature threshold excitation intensity, Iexc, of 30 µW/cm2 was
determined, while this increases to 70 µW/cm2 at 60 ◦C. A linear relation between the threshold
intensity and the elevated temperature at which the ﬁlm is held was found. Hence, segregation
of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ﬁlms was successfully suppressed, giving an insight into the photoinduced seg-
regation of mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms.
The results presented here provides a direct measurement of the entropically favoured halide
diﬀusion in mixed halide perovskite ﬁlms, thus contributing to the further understanding of this
mechanism. The study of photo and thermal activation of phase segregation in MAPbBr3−xIx
ﬁlm provides the foundation for new and exciting ways of studying the segregation mechanism
and thus develop ways to eﬀectively control segregation. Both projects contribute to the de-
velopment of high-performance mixed halide perovskites which can be used for next generation
tandem solar cells.
==PAGE:68==
11 Future Prospect
60
11
Future Prospect
In regard to the future prospect of this project, it is evident from the presented work that some
of the projects have left open-ended questions, while others require additional work.
In chronological order of the presented projects, the following future prospect is therefore pro-
posed:
• For the fabrication of gradient mixed halide perovskites it was found, that solvent compati-
bility issues for MAPbX3 perovskites and stability challenges for CsPbX3 perovskites, with
X being either I or Br, made this project more complex than expected. A new approach
to this project could be to use the newly developed fabrication procedure for CsPbI3 de-
veloped by Wang et al.[46]. In this study, they found that the performance and stability
of solar cells containing this stabilised CsPbI3 perovskite layer, was signiﬁcantly improved.
This would most likely enable the deposition of CsPbBr3 on top of CsPbI3 to achieve the
desired gradient mixed halide perovskite layer.
• Interlayer halide ion diﬀusion across diﬀerent perovskite composite layers can have detri-
mental eﬀects on the performance of tandem solar cell under operating conditions. In this
project an interface layer of PbSO4-oleate was deployed between two physically paired
perovskite ﬁlms, as this has previously been shown to suppress anion exchange in CsPbX3
nanocrystals, with X being either I or Br. However, this proved more diﬃcult than ex-
pected as lead halide complexes with characteristic absorption bands corresponding to the
coordination number of the complexes started to appear in the absorption spectra. Eﬀorts
are therefore needed to further study this phenomenon, and ultimately suppress inter-
layer diﬀusion by including a chemical barrier (e.g., PbSO4) or employ long-chain organic
ammonia capping layers.
• Preliminary experiments looking at the halide ion mobility in mixed halide caesium ﬁlms
(CsPbI3/CsPbBr3) were carried out. These caesium ﬁlms undergo halide exchange when
physically paired and subjected to elevated temperatures, similar to what was found for
MAPbX3. A future prospect of this project is therefore, to characterise the diﬀusion of
these halide species to determine the kinetics of this thermally activated halide diﬀusion in
caesium-based perovskites. Further work will branch into looking at A site cations, with
the work already being underway in our group by a person looking at cation exchange
between FAPbBr3 and CsPbBr3.
• A project to further study the thermally induced band gap shifting and how this depends
on the MAPbBr3−xIx composition of the mixed halide perovskite ﬁlm, where x will be
varied to change the composition, is now under way in our group. This project serves to
further the understanding of the thermally induced band gap shifting, which is still not
fully understood. The study will most likely be compared to a computational study, with
the aim of simulating the shift under diﬀerent MAPbBr3−xIx compositions and operational
conditions.
• One future prospect of the photoinduced segregation project is to continue characterising
the optimal operating conditions under which segregation can be suppressed. However, as
this is <1 mW/cm2, which is far from real operating conditions, ﬁnding another way of
suppressing segregation will most likely be more beneﬁcial. It has been found that coating
the ﬁlm surface with an electron donating ligand such as trioctylphosphine (TOPO)[31]
signiﬁcantly reduces the onset of the halide segregation in mixed halide perovskite, while
furthermore reducing the nonradiative recombination. Hence, looking at similar surface
treatments could prove useful in an attempt to understand the segregation mechanism and
developed ways to eﬀectively control surface driven segregation in high-performance mixed
halide perovskites used for next generation tandem solar cells.
==PAGE:69==
==PAGE:70==
REFERENCES
61
References
[1] EEA
European
Environmental
Agency.
How
do
human
activities
con-
tribute
to
climate
change
and
how
do
they
compare
with
natural
inﬂuences?
https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/climate/faq/how-do-human-activities-contribute-
to-climate-change-and-how-do-they-compare-with-natural-inﬂuences, Visited 17th of June
2019.
[2] EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency. Sources of greenhouse gas emissions.
https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions, Visited 17th of June
2019.
[3] IPCC The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ar4 climate change 2007: The
physical science basis. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar4/wg1/, Visited 17th of June 2019.
[4] International Energy Agency (IEA). Global energy and co2 status report 2018, march 2019.
https://www.iea.org/geco/, visited 13th of May 2019.
[5] Lazard.
Lazard’s
levelized
cost
of
energy
analysis
(lcoe
12.0).
https://www.lazard.com/perspective/levelized-cost-of-energy-and-levelized-cost-of-storage-
2018/, visited 2th of February 2019.
[6] U.S Energy Information Administration (EIA). Annual energy outlook, published january
2019. https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/aeo2019.pdf, visited 31st of March 2019.
[7] Hui-Seon Kim, Chang-Ryul Lee, Jeong-Hyeok Im, Ki-Beom Lee, Thomas Moehl, Arianna
Marchioro, Soo-Jin Moon, Robin Humphry-Baker, Jun-Ho Yum, Jacques E. Moser, Michael
Graetzel, and Nam-Gyu Park. Lead Iodide Perovskite Sensitized All-Solid-State Submicron
Thin Film Mesoscopic Solar Cell with Eﬃciency Exceeding 9%. SCIENTIFIC REPORTS,
2, AUG 21 2012.
[8] National
Renewable
Energy
Laboratory
(NREL).
Nrel
eﬃciency
chart.
https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-eﬃciency.html, Acessed on 19th of April 2019.
[9] Gray, J. L. (2010) The Physics of the Solar Cell, in Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and
Engineering, Second Edition (eds A. Luque and S. Hegedus), John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,
Chichester, UK. doi: 10.1002/9780470974704.ch3.
[10] Neamen, Donald. Semiconductor Physics And Devices. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, NY,
USA, 4 edition, 2012.
[11] Joseph S. Manser, Jeﬀrey A. Christians, and Prashant V. Kamat. Intriguing Optoelectronic
Properties of Metal Halide Perovskites.
CHEMICAL REVIEWS, 116(21):12956–13008,
NOV 9 2016.
[12] Martin A. Green, Anita Ho-Baillie, and Henry J. Snaith. The emergence of perovskite solar
cells. NATURE PHOTONICS, 8(7):506–514, JUL 2014.
[13] Samuel D. Stranks, Giles E. Eperon, Giulia Grancini, Christopher Menelaou, Marcelo
J. P. Alcocer, Tomas Leijtens, Laura M. Herz, Annamaria Petrozza, and Henry J. Snaith.
Electron-Hole Diﬀusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Per-
ovskite Absorber. SCIENCE, 342(6156):341–344, OCT 18 2013.
[14] Hui-Seon Kim, Anders Hagfeldt, and Nam-Gyu Park. Morphological and compositional
progress in halide perovskite solar cells. CHEMICAL COMMUNICATIONS, 55(9):1192–
1200, JAN 28 2019.
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
62
[15] Swift
Solar.
Making
better
solar
cells
with
perovskites.
https://www.swiftsolar.com/2019/04/11/introducing-swift-solar/,
Visited 19th of June
2019.
[16] Akihiro Kojima, Kenjiro Teshima, Yasuo Shirai, and Tsutomu Miyasaka.
Organometal
Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells. JOURNAL OF THE
AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, 131(17):6050+, MAY 6 2009.
[17] Luis M. Pazos-Outon, T. Patrick Xiao, and Eli Yablonovitch.
Fundamental Eﬃciency
Limit of Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells. JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY
LETTERS, 9(7):1703–1711, APR 5 2018.
[18] Moritz H. Futscher and Bruno Ehrler. Eﬃciency Limit of Perovskite/Si Tandem Solar Cells.
ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 1(4):863–868, OCT 2016.
[19] Jin Hyuck Heo, Sang Hyuk Im, Jun Hong Noh, Tarak N. Mandal, Choong-Sun Lim,
Jeong Ah Chang, Yong Hui Lee, Hi-jung Kim, Arpita Sarkar, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, Michael
Graetzel, and Sang Il Seok. Eﬃcient inorganic-organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells
containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors. NATURE PHOTONICS,
7(6):487–492, JUN 2013.
[20] Julian Burschka, Norman Pellet, Soo-Jin Moon, Robin Humphry-Baker, Peng Gao, Mo-
hammad K. Nazeeruddin, and Michael Graetzel. Sequential deposition as a route to high-
performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells. NATURE, 499(7458):316+, JUL 18 2013.
[21] Seungchan Ryu, Jun Hong Noh, Nam Joong Jeon, Young Chan Kim, Seok Yang, Jangwon
Seo, and Sang Ii Seok. Voltage output of eﬃcient perovskite solar cells with high open-circuit
voltage and ﬁll factor. ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, 7(8):2614–2618, AUG
2014.
[22] Nam Joong Jeon, Hag Geun Lee, Young Chan Kim, Jangwon Seo, Jun Hong Noh, Jaemin
Lee, and Sang Il Seok. o-Methoxy Substituents in Spiro-OMeTAD for Eﬃcient Inorganic-
Organic Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL
SOCIETY, 136(22):7837–7840, JUN 4 2014.
[23] Namyoung Ahn, Dae-Yong Son, In-Hyuk Jang, Seong Min Kang, Mansoo Choi, and Nam-
Gyu Park. Highly Reproducible Perovskite Solar Cells with Average Eﬃciency of 18.3% and
Best Eﬃciency of 19.7% Fabricated via Lewis Base Adduct of Lead(II) Iodide. JOURNAL
OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, 137(27):8696–8699, JUL 15 2015.
[24] Jingjing Zhao, Xiaopeng Zheng, Yehao Deng, Tao Li, Yuchuan Shao, Alexei Gruverman,
Jeﬀrey Shield, and Jinsong Huang. Is Cu a stable electrode material in hybrid perovskite
solar cells for a 30-year lifetime? ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, 9(12):3650–
3656, 2016.
[25] Rohit Prasanna, Aryeh Gold-Parker, Tomas Leijtens, Bert Conings, Aslihan Babayigit,
Hans-Gerd Boyen, Michael F. Toney, and Michael D. McGehee. Band Gap Tuning via Lat-
tice Contraction and Octahedral Tilting in Perovskite Materials for Photovoltaics. JOUR-
NAL OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, 139(32):11117–11124, AUG 16 2017.
[26] Norman Pellet, Peng Gao, Giuliano Gregori, Tae-Youl Yang, Mohammad K. Nazeeruddin,
Joachim Maier, and Michael Graetzel. Mixed-Organic-Cation Perovskite Photovoltaics for
Enhanced Solar-Light Harvesting.
ANGEWANDTE CHEMIE-INTERNATIONAL EDI-
TION, 53(12):3151–3157, MAR 17 2014.
[27] Seog Joon Yoon, Sergiu Draguta, Joseph S. Manser, Onise Sharia, William F. Schneider,
Masaru Kuno, and Prashant V. Kamat.
Tracking Iodide and Bromide Ion Segregation
in Mixed Halide Lead Perovskites during Photoirradiation.
ACS ENERGY LETTERS,
1(1):290–296, JUL 2016.
==PAGE:72==
REFERENCES
63
[28] Connor G. Bischak, Andrew B. Wong, Elbert Lin, David T. Limmer, Peidong Yang, and
Naomi S. Ginsberg.
Tunable Polaron Distortions Control the Extent of Halide Demix-
ing in Lead Halide Perovskites.
JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY LETTERS,
9(14):3998–4005, JUL 19 2018.
[29] Seog Joon Yoon, Masaru Kuno, and Prashant V. Kamat. Shift Happens. How Halide Ion
Defects Inﬂuence Photoinduced Segregation in Mixed Halide Perovskites. ACS ENERGY
LETTERS, 2(7):1507–1514, JUL 2017.
[30] Alex J. Barker, Aditya Sadhanala, Felix Deschler, Marina Gandini, Satyaprasad P.
Senanayak, Phoebe M. Pearce, Edoardo Mosconi, Andrew J. Pearson, Yue Wu, Ajay
Ram Srimath Kandada, Tomas Leijtens, Filippo De Angelis, Sian E. Dutton, Annamaria
Petrozza, and Richard H. Friend.
Defect-Assisted Photoinduced Halide Segregation in
Mixed-Halide Perovskite Thin Films.
ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 2(6):1416–1424, JUN
2017.
[31] Rebecca A. Belisle, Kevin A. Bush, Luca Bertoluzzi, Aryeh Gold-Parker, Michael F. Toney,
and Michael D. McGehee. Impact of Surfaces on Photoinduced Halide Segregation in Mixed-
Halide Perovskites. ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 3(11):2694–2700, NOV 2018.
[32] Sergiu Draguta, Onise Sharia, Seog Joon Yoon, Michael C. Brennan, Yurii V. Morozov,
Joseph M. Manser, Prashant V. Kamat, William F. Schneider, and Masaru Kuno. Ratio-
nalizing the light-induced phase separation of mixed halide organic-inorganic perovskites.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS, 8, AUG 4 2017.
[33] Daniel J. Slotcavage, Hemamala I. Karunadasa, and Michael D. McGehee. Light-Induced
Phase Segregation in Halide-Perovskite Absorbers. ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 1(6):1199–
1205, DEC 2016.
[34] Michael Saliba, Taisuke Matsui, Ji-Youn Seo, Konrad Domanski, Juan-Pablo Correa-Baena,
Mohammad Khaja Nazeeruddin, Shaik M. Zakeeruddin, Wolfgang Tress, Antonio Abate,
Anders Hagfeldt, and Michael Gratzel. Cesium-containing triple cation perovskite solar cells:
improved stability, reproducibility and high eﬃciency. ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL
SCIENCE, 9(6):1989–1997, 2016.
[35] Giles E. Eperon and David S. Ginger. B-Site Metal Cation Exchange in Halide Perovskites.
ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 2(5):1190–1196, MAY 2017.
[36] Giles E. Eperon, Clara E. Beck, and Henry J. Snaith. Cation exchange for thin ﬁlm lead
iodide perovskite interconversion. MATERIALS HORIZONS, 3(1):63–71, JAN 2016.
[37] Jon M. Azpiroz, Edoardo Mosconi, Juan Bisquert, and Filippo De Angelis. Defect migration
in methylammonium lead iodide and its role in perovskite solar cell operation. ENERGY
& ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, 8(7):2118–2127, 2015.
[38] Aron Walsh and Samuel D. Stranks. Taking Control of Ion Transport in Halide Perovskite
Solar Cells. ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 3(8):1983–1990, AUG 2018.
[39] Jie Xing, Qi Wang, Qingfeng Dong, Yongbo Yuan, Yanjun Fanga, and Jinsong Huang. Ultra-
fast ion migration in hybrid perovskite polycrystalline thin ﬁlms under light and suppression
in single crystals. PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY CHEMICAL PHYSICS, 18(44):30484–30490,
2016.
[40] Michael Saliba, Taisuke Matsui, Konrad Domanski, Ji-Youn Seo, Amita Ummadisingu,
Shaik M. Zakeeruddin, Juan-Pablo Correa-Baena, Wolfgang R. Tress, Antonio Abate, An-
ders Hagfeldt, and Michael Gratzel. Incorporation of rubidium cations into perovskite solar
cells improves photovoltaic performance. SCIENCE, 354(6309):206–209, OCT 14 2016.
==PAGE:73==
REFERENCES
64
[41] Sergiu Draguta, Jeﬀrey A. Christians, Yurii V. Morozov, Anselme Mucunzi, Joseph S.
Manser, Prashant V. Kamat, Joseph M. Luther, and Masaru Kuno. A quantitative and
spatially resolved analysis of the performance-bottleneck in high eﬃciency, planar hybrid
perovskite solar cells. ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, 11(4):960–969, APR 1
2018.
[42] Ivano E. Castelli, Juan Maria Garcia-Lastra, Kristian S. Thygesen, and Karsten W. Jacob-
sen. Bandgap calculations and trends of organometal halide perovskites. APL MATERIALS,
2(8), AUG 2014.
[43] Loredana Protesescu, Sergii Yakunin, Maryna I. Bodnarchuk, Franziska Krieg, Riccarda
Caputo, Christopher H. Hendon, Ruo Xi Yang, Aron Walsh, and Maksym V. Kovalenko.
Nanocrystals of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I): Novel Opto-
electronic Materials Showing Bright Emission with Wide Color Gamut. NANO LETTERS,
15(6):3692–3696, JUN 2015.
[44] Jacob B. Hoﬀmann, Gary Zaiats, Isaac Wappes, and Prashant V. Kamat. CsPbBr3 Solar
Cells: Controlled Film Growth through Layer-by-Layer Quantum Dot Deposition. CHEM-
ISTRY OF MATERIALS, 29(22):9767–9774, NOV 28 2017.
[45] Jacob B. Hoﬀman, A. Lennart Schleper, and Prashant V. Kamat. Transformation of Sin-
tered CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals to Cubic CsPbI3 and Gradient CsPbBrxI3-x through Halide
Exchange. JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, 138(27):8603–8611,
JUL 13 2016.
[46] Yong Wang, Taiyang Zhang, Miao Kan, and Yixin Zhao. Bifunctional Stabilization of All-
Inorganic alpha-CsPbI3 Perovskite for 17% Eﬃciency Photovoltaics. JOURNAL OF THE
AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY, 140(39):12345–12348, OCT 3 2018.
[47] Norman Pellet, Joel Teuscher, Joachim Maier, and Michael Graetzel. Transforming Hybrid
Organic Inorganic Perovskites by Rapid Halide Exchange. CHEMISTRY OF MATERIALS,
27(6):2181–2188, MAR 24 2015.
[48] Reimer, Ludwig. Scanning Electron Microscopy - Physics of Image Formation and Micro-
analysis, 2nd edition. Springer, 1998.
[49] Christopher Eames, Jarvist M. Frost, Piers R. F. Barnes, Brian C. O’Regan, Aron Walsh,
and M. Saiful Islam. Ionic transport in hybrid lead iodide perovskite solar cells. NATURE
COMMUNICATIONS, 6, JUN 2015.
[50] Jolm F. Moulder, William F. Stickle, Peter E.Sobol and Kennetlf D. Bomben. Handbook of
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Perkin-Elmer Corporation, 1992.
[51] Jintara Padchasri and Rattikorn Yimnirun.
Eﬀects of annealing temperature on stabil-
ity of methylammonium lead iodide perovskite powders. JOURNAL OF ALLOYS AND
COMPOUNDS, 720:63–69, OCT 5 2017.
[52] Youzhen Li, Xuernei Xu, Congcong Wang, Ben Ecker, Junliang Yang, Jinsong Huang, and
Yongli Gao. Light-Induced Degradation of CH3NH3PbI3 Hybrid Perovskite Thin Film.
JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY C, 121(7):3904–3910, FEB 23 2017.
[53] Gergely F. Samu, Rebecca A. Scheidt, Prashant V. Kamat, and Csaba Janaky. Electro-
chemistry and Spectroelectrochemistry of Lead Halide Perovskite Films: Materials Science
Aspects and Boundary Conditions. CHEMISTRY OF MATERIALS, 30(3):561–569, FEB
13 2018.
[54] The Prashant Kamat Laboratory,
University of Notre Dame.
Schematic illustra-
tion of
tas.
https
:
//www3.nd.edu/
∼
kamatlab/facilitiesspectroscopy.html,
Acessed on 19th of April 2019.
==PAGE:74==
REFERENCES
65
[55] Sarah Wieghold, Jason Tresback, Juan-Pablo Correa-Baena, Noor Titan Putri Hartono,
Shijing Sun, Zhe Liu, Mariya Layurova, Zachary A. VanOrman, Alexander S. Bieber, Janak
Thapa, Barry Lai, Zhonghou Cai, Lea Nienhaus, and Tonio Buonassisi. Halide heterogeneity
aﬀects local charge carrier dynamics in mixed-ion lead perovskite thin ﬁlms. Chemistry of
Materials, 0(0):null, 0.
[56] Gee Yeong Kim, Alessandro Senocrate, Tae-Youl Yang, Giuliano Gregori, Michael Gratzel,
and Joachim Maier. Large tunable photoeﬀect on ion conduction in halide perovskites and
implications for photodecomposition. NATURE MATERIALS, 17(5):445+, MAY 2018.
[57] Vikash Kumar Ravi, Rebecca A. Scheidt, Angshuman Nag, Masaru Kuno, and Prashant V.
Kamat. To Exchange or Not to Exchange. Suppressing Anion Exchange in Cesium Lead
Halide Perovskites with PbSO4-Oleate Capping. ACS ENERGY LETTERS, 3(4):1049–
1055, APR 2018.
[58] Kevin G. Stamplecoskie, Joseph S. Manser, and Prashant V. Kamat. Dual nature of the
excited state in organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites. Energy Environ. Sci., 8:208–215,
2015.
[59] Seog Joon Yoon, Kevin G. Stamplecoskie, and Prashant V. Kamat. How lead halide complex
chemistry dictates the composition of mixed halide perovskites. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry Letters, 7(7):1368–1373, 2016. PMID: 27007695.
[60] Nam-Koo Kim, Young Hwan Min, Seokhwan Noh, Eunkyung Cho, Gitaeg Jeong, Minho
Joo, Seh-Won Ahn, Jeong Soo Lee, Seongtak Kim, Kyuwook Ihm, Hyungju Ahn, Yoonmook
Kang, Hae-Seok Lee, and Donghwan Kim. Investigation of Thermally Induced Degrada-
tion in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells using in-situ Synchrotron Radiation Analysis.
SCIENTIFIC REPORTS, 7, JUL 5 2017.
[61] G. P. Nagabhushana, Radha Shivaramaiah, and Alexandra Navrotsky. Direct calorimetric
veriﬁcation of thermodynamic instability of lead halide hybrid perovskites. PROCEED-
INGS OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, 113(28):7717–7721, JUL 12 2016.
[62] Claudio Quarti, Edoardo Mosconi, James M. Ball, Valerio D’Innocenzo, Chen Tao, Sandeep
Pathak, Henry J. Snaith, Annamaria Petrozza, and Filippo De Angelis. Structural and op-
tical properties of methylammonium lead iodide across the tetragonal to cubic phase tran-
sition: implications for perovskite solar cells. ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE,
9(1):155–163, 2016.
[63] Oxford instruments.
Transient absorption spectroscopy - all you need to know.
https://andor.oxinst.com/learning/view/article/transient-spectroscopy,
Visited
17th
of
June 2019.
[64] Unknown.
Introduction
to
time-resolved
spectroscopy.
http
:
//web.vu.lt/ff/m.vengris/images/TRspectroscopy02.pdf, Visited 19th of June 2019.
==PAGE:75==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
66
Appendix
A
Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
The following fabrication procedure is adapted from earlier work reported by Nam-Gyu Park
[23], combined with modiﬁcations implemented during my stay at University of Notre Dame.
Required equipment, solid materials & solvents
Equipment
Fume hood, Highly precise scale, Spin coater, 2 × hotplates, vials, Sonicator, probe soni-
cator, oven, spatulas, 0.45 µm PTFE ﬁlters, pipettes (several sizes), stirbars, desiccator.
Solid materials & solvents
Methylammon iodide, MAI (Greatcell solar); Titania Paste, TiO2-paste (30NR-D, Great-
cell Solar); Lead(II) iodide, PbI2 (ultra dry, 99.999% (metals basis) -10 Mesh Beads, Alfa
Aesar); Diethyl ether (for HPLC, ≥99.9%, inhibitor-free, Sigma Aldrich); Acetonitrile (An-
hydrous 99.8%, Sigma Aldrich); N,N-Dimethylformamide, DMF (Anhydrous 99.8%, Sigma
Aldrich); Titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate), TiO2-stock (75 wt.
% in iso-
propanol, Sigma Aldrich); Bis(triﬂuoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt, Li-TFSI (99.95%
trace metals basis, Sigma Aldrich); 2,2’,7,7’-Tetrakis(N,N -di-p -methoxyphenylamino)-
9,9’-spirobiﬂuorene, Spiro-MeOTAD, (LT-S922, >99.5% (HPLC), LUMTEC, Lumines-
cence Technology Corp.); 4-tert-Butylpyridine (96%, Sigma Aldrich); 1-Butanol ( An-
hydrous, 99.8% Sigma Aldrich); Dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO (Anhydrous, ≥99.9%, Sigma
Aldrich); Chlorobenzene (Anhydrous, 99.8%, Sigma Aldrich)
Fabrication Procedure
1. Preparing the FTO Substrate
(a) Cut the FTO substrate to a 10 cm × 5 cm piece (in the end this will become 4 solar
cells, with 5 measurement areas each)
(b) Conﬁrm which side of the FTO is conductive using the multimeter (set to the resis-
tance setting with an alarm)
(c) Clean the FTO piece with a stream of air
(d) Mask left and right sides of the FTO substrate with Scotch tape as shown in Figure
A.1 – Remove Air bubbles with glass rod
(e) Etch the middle of the slides with ﬁne Zn powder:
i. Deposit a thin layer of Zinc powder (roughly two scoops) and spread it out evenly
while lightly tapping it to create a dense layer.
Small non-covered areas are
allowed.
ii. Squirt 3N HCL in a zigzag motion from top to bottom of the zinc powder. Start
the timer for 5 minutes.
iii. Soak up any HCL around FTO substrate to avoid etching under the tape.
iv. After ∼30 seconds press down with a cotton swab to relieve any build up air
under the zinc powder. The zinc powder will break into smaller pieces, so make
sure they don’t glide for each other thus creating uncovered areas.
v. If necessary, repeat cotton swab an additional time after ∼3min.
vi. After 5 minutes remove zinc powder with Chemwipe; Rinse immediately with
water while removing tape to stop etching and avoid etching under the tape
when removing it.
==PAGE:76==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
67
vii. Wash the FTO slide with soapy water, rinse with DI water
viii. Put the FTO slide in absolute ethanol/water bath and sonicate it for 20 min
ix. Rinse slides with Isopropanol and dry oﬀwith air stream
Figure A.1: This picture shows desired masked area with scotch tape and applied zinc powder
to etch away FTO.
2. Preparation of solution for mesoporous TiO2 layer
Note: the following amounts are for a basis of four 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm cells (cut from the 5
cm × 5 cm piece shown in Figure A.2a
(a) Cut the FTO substrate into two 5 cm × 5 cm pieces
(b) Blow oﬀany dust/glass pieces with an air stream, then plasma clean (5 min) and
blow with compressed air again
(c) Put a Kapton tape (7mm Kapton tape width) mask on the FTO surface (on either
side of the FTO, as pictured in Figure A.2a)
(d) Place the slides into a petri dish and close lid to reduce dust accumulation
(e) (for 4 cells) Weigh out 0.144 grams of the Dyesol TiO2 paste into a 20 mL scintillation
vial; add a stir bar
(f) Add 1.2 mL of EtOH into the vial. Vortex mix to get any paste oﬀthe sides of the
vial
(g) Let the solution stir at room temperature for 1 hour
Figure A.2: This picture shows desired masked area with with Kapton tape.
3. Preparing the solution for the compact TiO2 layer
(a) The following needs to be taking into the glove box:
i. 1 vial for the butanol
ii. 1 vial for the blocking layer solution
iii. 1 vial for the ﬁltered blocking layer solution
==PAGE:77==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
68
iv. >2 mL syringe and PTFE syringe ﬁlter
v. The prepared substrates
(b) Inside glove box turn on hotplate to 125 ◦C
(c) From a 75 wt% (2.0 M) Ti-diisopropoxide dis(acetylacetonate) in isopropanol stock
(how it comes from Sigma Aldrich), dilute to 0.15 M using 1-butanol
i. (For 4 cells) place 0.113 mL of the Ti-diisopropoxide stock solution into a vial.
Add ∼2 mL of butanol to the butanol vial. Add exactly 1.388 mL of butanol
into the Ti-stock vial (1000 µL from the big adjustable pipette, then 388 µL from
the medium adjustable pipette). Mix by agitation in the vial. Pour this into a
syringe equipped with a syringe ﬁlter. Filter the solution into another vial.
4. Spin-coating of the compact TiO2 layer
(a) Set the spin coater to the program which has the following spinning parameters:
i. Step 1: 700 rpm for 8 s (default acceleration of 1200 rpm)
ii. Step 2: 1000 rpm for 10 s (default acceleration of 1200 rpm)
iii. Step 3: 2000 rpm for 40 s (acceleration 1000 rpm)
(b) Place the cells in the absolute centre of the spin-coater, and use the duster to remove
any dust that has accumulated on the cells. Press Vac on the spin coater, then gently
tap the edge of the cell to make sure a good seal has been made
(c) Dynamic Spin-coating process
i. Draw up 0.5 mL (500 µL) of the ﬁltered 0.15 M Ti-diisopropoxide in butanol
stock using an adjustable pipette
ii. Position the pipette in the centre of cell. Press the green Start button to start
the spinning
iii. After reaching max speed (i.e.
∼3 seconds after pressing start) add the Ti-
diisopropoxide stock in one continuous motion
iv. After the spin process has stopped, press Vac once more to release the cell.
Quickly but carefully place the cell on the hot plate and heat treat for 5 minutes
at 125 ◦C
5. Spin-coating of mesoporous (mp)-TiO2 layer
(a) After the mesoporous-TiO2 solution has stirred for 1 hour, probe sonicate the mp-
TiO2 solution for 3 minutes. Make sure to clean the probe tip by probe sonicating a
vial of clean ethanol twice for 5 minutes.
(b) Bring the mp-TiO2 solution into the glove box.
(c) Static Spin-coating process
i. Place the 5 cm × 5 cm substrates in the absolute centre of the spin coater. Press
the Vac button and check that a good seal has been made. Dust thoroughly with
the duster.
ii. Select the program with the following parameters: 2000 rpm for 20 seconds (1200
rpm acceleration)
iii. Uniformly spread 1 mL of the mp-TiO2 solution onto the substrate by carefully
dropping small droplets of the solution from the pipette onto the substrate, start-
ing with a drop in the middle and adding more drops in a spiral pattern. Place
the drops apart from each other such that as each drop spreads out due to gravity,
the drops will touch each other over time. Make sure to add droplets at the edges
of the substrate as well.
==PAGE:78==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
69
(d) Spin coat at 2000 rpm for 20 seconds. Remove the Kapton masks and bring the cells
to the furnace. Be careful not to scrape oﬀthe TiO2 as it is fragile
(e) Anneal at 500 ◦C for 1 hr (Do not preheat the furnace)
(f) Roughly 30 minutes into the 1 hr furnace step, begin pre-heating a water bath to
95◦C-100◦C for the TiCl4 treatment. It is a good idea to set the hot plate very hot
(∼300 ◦C) to quickly heat the bath.
(g) If solar cells are made within 1 day, jump to step 7 while the cells are in the furnace
(h) After 1 hour, let ﬁlms cool slowly by opening the furnace door partially, and only
remove the cells at ∼200 ◦C (to avoid thermal cracking of ﬁlms)
(i) Cut the substrates into halves, cutting down the etched FTO portion (each cell is
now 2.5 cm × 5 cm, see Figure A.2b)
(j) Remove any dust / glass particles with a compressed air stream, then plasma clean
for 5 minutes, then clean with an air stream once more
6. TiCl4 treatment of the mesoporous TiO2 layer
(a) Apply Kapton masks (7 mm) on the left and right sides of the front of the cells –
make sure to align the edges of the Kapton tape with the center region of the cells,
not necessarily with the edges of the FTO slide. See Figure A.3. Then, and add wide
Kapton tape on the backside of the cells.
(b) Preheat the furnace to 500 ◦C
(c) From a 2.0 M (97 w%) TiCl4 stock solution, prepare 20 mM aqueous solution (TiCl4
violently reacts with H2O, fumes if opened). This can be done in a graduated cylinder;
1 mL of 2.0 M solution and dilute up to 100 mL with DI H2O
(d) Arrange the cells facing downwards in a Pyrex glass bowl as shown in Figure A.4, and
add the 20 mM solution slowly along the sides of the dish to avoid bubble formation.
(e) Cover the Pyrex dish with aluminium foil (make sure the aluminium foil doesn’t touch
the water bath, and that no water from the bath enters the dish). Cover the water
bath with aluminium foil
(f) Treat the immersed substrates for 10 min at 85-90◦C in the water bath
i. Note: if the water bath is at 95◦C before adding the pyrex dish with the samples
and TiCl4 solution, it will drop to approx. 85◦C. Plan accordingly, and only time
the 10 minutes once the temperature is stabilised at 85+ ◦C
(g) After 10 minutes of treatment, place the hot Pyrex dish on a cork ring and let it cool
for approx. 5 minutes. Then slowly pour out the hot solution. This is done to avoid
thermal cracking of the dish.
(h) With the samples still taped in the dish, carefully rinse the cells/Pyrex dish with DI
water, by slowly pouring it into the dish at an angle, to minimize bubble formation.
Do this 3 times, and carefully pour the DI water out each time.
(i) Carefully remove the Kapton tape – it can easily bend back and scrape oﬀthe TiO2
(j) Quickly but completely dry the substrates and place them in a preheated furnace at
500 ◦C for 30 min. Afterwards, let ﬁlms cool slowly and remove at ∼200 ◦C (to avoid
cracking of ﬁlms)
(k) Cut the substrates into two halves.
Clean the surface with compressed air, then
plasma clean for 5 min, then blast oﬀglass/dust again with an air stream. At this
point the process can be stopped and the samples stored under vacuum for maximum
of 1 day. If this is done, the samples must be plasma treated once more the following
day before proceeding
==PAGE:79==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
70
(l) Mask the conductive FTO portion of the substrate with 7mm Kapton tape (do so
outside the glove box as it is diﬃcult to do accurately inside)
Figure A.3: Align 7mm Kapton tape pieces along these edges; it may be diﬃcult to see, but
catch the light and see the small ridge that deﬁnes the middle portion of the cell.
Figure A.4: Setup used for TiCl4 treament.
7. Preparing the MAPbI3 solution
(a) The following materials needs to be brought into the glovebox, with varying amounts
depending on how many cells are being made in one day:
i. Vials (typically 2 dram size) for each of the following: one for DMF, DMSO,
the perovskite stock solution, the syringe-ﬁltered perovskite stock, acetonitrile,
acetonitrile/Li-TFSI stock, spiro-OMeTAD stock, ﬁltered spiro-OMeTAD stock,
chlorobenzene, and 2 extra vials, just in case, as well as a 20 mL scintillation vial
for diethyl ether
ii. At least one 3 mL syringe for diethyl ether addition, and 2 more syringes for sy-
ringe ﬁltering. Additional syringes can be included for the diethyl ether addition
as the solvent weakens the syringe over time
iii. 2 PTFE syringe ﬁlters (of ﬁlter size 0.2 mm, from VWR)
iv. 1 stir bar (small size) for the perovskite stock
v. 4 spatulas – one for each of the following: PbI2, methylammonium iodide (MAI),
Li-TFSI, and spiro
vi. The cells
(b) A stock solution of PbI2 : CH3NH3I : DMSO (1:1:1 molar ratio) will be dissolved in
DMF with a ﬁnal concentration of 1.428 M
(c) (for 4 cells) 0.091 grams of methylammonium iodide (MAI) is added to a vial. To
this same vial, 0.263 grams of PbI2 is added – PbI2 is light-sensitive, and must spend
minimal time exposed to light.
(d) Next, 360 µL of DMF are added to the vial with the PbI2 and MAI. The contents
are swished around to mix.
(e) 40 µL DMSO are then added. A stir bar is placed in this vial and allowed to stir in
the glovebox at room temp for 1 hr.
8. Preparing the spiro-OMeTAD stock solution
==PAGE:80==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
71
(a) (for 4 cells): in the glovebox, 0.13 grams of Lithium bis(triﬂuoromethanesulfonyl)imide
(Li-TFSI) is added to a tared vial. Next, 250 µL of acetonitrile is added to that vial,
thus making the Li-TFSI stock
(b) Shake the Li/Acetonitrile solution to make sure its all dissolved – look for salt on
sides of vial
(c) (For 4 cells): 0.0231 grams of spiro-OMeTAD are added to a tared vial. Then, 5.6
µL of the Li-TFSI stock are added to this vial, followed by 9.22 µL of 4-tert-butyl
pyridine.
(d) 320 µL of chlorobenzene is then added to the above spiro/Li-TFSI/pyridine stock
solution, then the whole stock is ﬁltered via syringe ﬁlter and placed into a new vial
9. Spin-coating the perovskite layer
(a) After the 1 hr of stirring, the PbI2:CH3NH3I:DMSO:DMF stock is ﬁltered with a
syringe ﬁlter to remove any colloids formed during the process, and placed in a new
vial.
(b) Turn on the two hot plates to 65◦C and 100◦C
(c) Static spin-coating procedure
i. First prepare a syringe with 0.5 mL of diethyl ether (Note: use 3 mL syringes)
ii. Align the cell on the center of the spin coater and apply Vac. Dust oﬀthe cell as
always.
iii. To apply the perovskite solution to the cell, very carefully draw up 50 µL of the
stock solution with a pipette.
iv. Position the pipette tip to the far end of the substrate, and angle the pipette such
that the widest end of the pipette tip is resting on the single piece of Kapton tape.
Very slowly press on the pipette to let out a few drops of the solution, allowing
the ﬁrst drop to reach the edge of the Kapton tape. Once that portion of the
substrate has a drop, move the tip of the pipette downward such that the far
edge of the substrate is coated in material. Then, rest the end of the tip at the
side opposite the Kapton tape. Use the pipette tip as an applicator and smearing
tool to continuously spread/apply more material onto the substrate by moving
the tip toward the other end of the substrate. Move the tip back toward the
centre of the substrate, squeezing out the last bit of solution, lifting the tip oﬀ
the substrate when it is in the centre of the substrate. Make sure no bubble has
formed on the surface. The process is shown in Figure A.5.
v. Attempt to keep the whole process in the 10-15 second range
vi. Immediately after statically-coating the perovskite solution onto the substrate (to
minimize static evaporation), press start on the spin coater to begin the spinning
at 4000 rpm for 25 sec (with an acceleration of 1200 rpm)
vii. Exactly 10 seconds after pressing start on the spin coater, swiftly and in a contin-
uous motion add 0.5 mL of diethyl ether (approx. over the course of
1 second).
This acts as an antisolvent to force crystallization of the perovskite
viii. As soon as the substrate stops spinning, quickly press Vac to stop the vacuum
on the spin coater, carefully grab the substrate by the Kapton tape, and place
on the centre of the small hot plate at 65◦C for 1 minute
ix. As soon as 1 minute is up, carefully grab the substrate (again by the Kapton)
and move to the second hot plate which is at 100◦C. Let it anneal for 2 minutes.
x. After the 2 minute annealing is done, remove the Kapton tape
xi. Check for high quality, specular ﬁlms – note morphology (Note: if a vortex forms
on perovskite ﬁlm, or if the surface of the perovskite is highly scattering, the
diethyl ether has been added too early)
==PAGE:81==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
72
Figure A.5: Graphic showing static application of perovskite stock.
10. Spin-coating the spiro-OMeTAD layer
(a) As always, position the substrate in the middle of the spin coater. Dust oﬀwith the
bulbed duster.
(b) Set the spin coater to program with the following settings: 3000 rpm for 30 seconds
(default of 1200 rpm)
(c) Using a dynamic spin coating procedure: Press start on the spin coater, then 3 seconds
after that rapidly and in a continuous motion add 30 µl of the spiro solution to the
substrate via a pipette
i. Note: care must be taken not to add the last drop of the solution to the substrate,
as this will cause a bubble to form on the surface of the substrate, ultimately
causing a short circuit in the device. It is a good idea to practice this step by
drawing up the 30 µl of the spiro solution and rapidly injecting it back into the
vial of spiro solution, so as to monitor whether or not that last drop was injected.
(d) Once the spiro-OMeTAD layer is on the substrate, it once again can be stored for
short times under vacuum / in a glove box, for maximum of 1 day.
11. Formation of gold (Au) contacts
(a) Remove the spiro-OMeTAD from the conductive side of the FTO with chlorobenzene
(dip cotton stick [Qtip] in the chlorobenzene – be careful not to accidentally dissolve
away the active area!!)
(b) Remove the perovskite layer from the non-conductive (etched) part of the FTO sub-
strate with a razorblade. Again, do not harm the active area! Better to leave a bit of
perovskite on the non-conductive side than hurt the active area.
(c) Apply the metal masks on the substrate prior to thermal evaporation of 100 nm-thick
gold contacts. The wide portion of the mask goes over the conductive part of the
substrate (see Figure A.6). Secure with Kapton tape by wrapping around the wide
portion of the mask
(d) Secure masks to the thermal evaporator’s platter with Kapton tape, taping the cells
together along the top and bottom. Note: the dual purpose of the bottom tape is to
make room for the indium contacts later
(e) Evaporate the 100 nm of gold using a thermal evaporator. The rotation of the stage
should be 10 rpm, and the stage should be water cooled (this is standard for this
evaporator)
12. Soldering of indium to the gold contacts
(a) Remove the Kapton tapes
(b) Apply Indium solder via ultrasonic soldering tip, soldering temperature of 275 ◦C
(c) Apply indium contacts to each of the 5 gold electrodes, and a continuous line of
indium on the conductive part of the FTO substrate
(d) 1 cell yields 5 measurement points for J-V curve and IPCE
==PAGE:82==
A Perovskite Solar Cell Fabrication Procedure
73
(e) The solar cell devices are now ready for characterisation
Figure A.6: Masking of samples for Au deposition and soldering of indium contacts
==PAGE:83==
B Preparation of Caesium Lead Halide Perovskite Films
74
B
Preparation of Caesium Lead Halide Perovskite Films
The synthesis procedure is a modiﬁed version of the process developed by Kovalenko, et al.[43].
The deposition technique for annealing CsPbBr3 nanocrystals into a bulk and halide exchanging
the Br with I, was developed by Hoﬀman et al. [44, 45]
Synthesis of CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals
1. Preparation of Cs-Oleate
Cs-Oleate was prepared by mixing .153 g of Cs2CO3, 1.4 mL of Oleic Acid, and 1.5 mL of
1-Octadecene in a 25 mL round bottom ﬂask. The mixture was degassed at 80 ◦C for 1
hour.
2. Preparation of PbBr3 precursor
The lead-bromide precursor was prepared by adding 3 mL of Oleic Acid, 3 mL of 1-
Octadecene, and .414 g of PbBr2 to a 25 mL round bottom ﬂask and degassing for 1 hour
at 80◦C. After one hour, the temperature was raised to 170◦C and 3 mL of oleylamine
were added to the mixture. The vacuum was then turned oﬀand the ﬂask was put into a
nitrogen environment
3. Synthesis of NCs Simultaneously, the Cs-Oleate precursor was brought up to 150◦C and
put under a nitrogen atmosphere. After both solutions were brought up to temperature,
2 mL of Cs-Oleate were added to the lead-bromide precursor with a heated syringe. The
mixture was then immediately placed into an ice bath until it reached a temperature of 65
◦C.
4. Separation and puriﬁcation of NCs
(a) The nanocrystals were washed with 40 mL of 1-Octadecene transferred to 4 centrifuge
tubes.
The centrifuge tubes were spun down for 10 minutes at 7800 rpms.
The
supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed with 5 mL of 1-Octadecene in
each centrifuge tube. The nanocrystals were spun down again for 10 minutes at 7800
rpms.
(b) The supernatant was again discarded. The pellet was brieﬂy washed with acetone
and completely dried under an air ﬂow. 3 mL (in total) of a 90% hexane/10% heptane
by volume solution were added to the pellet to suspend the pellet. The mixture was
spun down once more for 5 minutes at 7800 rpms and the supernatant was collected.
5. The colloidal nanocrystals were kept in a dark environment for no more than 48 hours
before spin coating.
==PAGE:84==
B Preparation of Caesium Lead Halide Perovskite Films
75
Figure B.1: Setup used for synthesising CsPbBr3 nanocrystals
Spin coating of CsPbBr3 ﬁlms
1. 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm FTO coated glass slides were sonicated in a versa-clean/DI water bath
for 15 minutes. They were then washed with DI water. The slides were then sonicated in
an ethanol bath for an additional 15 minutes and ﬁnally washed in ethanol. Immediately
before spin-coating, the slides were put into a plasma cleaner for 15 minutes.
2. The prepared CsPbBr3 solution is spun down for 5 minutes at 7800 rpm, and the super-
natant is collected.
3. Hotplate is heated to 250◦C, and spin coater is set to 5000 rpm for 30s with 3s acceleera-
tion/deacceleration time.
4. Deposition technique
(a) 15 µL of solution is deposited using dynamic spin coating
(b) At precisely 30s (e.g. 6 s after start) the solution is injected vertically above the ﬁlm.
Take care so that the last drop doesn’t fall onto the sample.
(c) The ﬁlm is inspected visually. In case is doesn’t look good the ﬁlm is rinsed with
hexane and dried with an air stream, after which the process is repeated.
(d) If the ﬁlm passes the substrate is placed on the 250 ◦C hotplate for 3 minutes.
(e) After 3 minutes the substrate is removed and let to cool. When cooled to room tem-
perature the substrate is rinsed with hexane to remove any non-crystallised CsPbBr3,
followed by drying with an air stream.
(f) The deposition process is then repeated until desired ﬁlm thickness (absorbance) is
achieved, as shown in Figure 6.3a.
5. To determine how much the undiluted stock needs to be diluted, the above described
procedure is carried out 2-3 with the undiluted solution. Static absorption (UV-Vis) is
==PAGE:85==
B Preparation of Caesium Lead Halide Perovskite Films
76
then taken. Based on the absorption at the excitonic peak of CsPbBr3, the solution should
be diluted such that every layer corresponds to 0.2 Abs. For very thin-ﬁlms it was found
that this should be lowered.
6. The buildup of the bulk CsPbBr3 is then carried out as described above with the diluted
stock until achieved thickness is obtained.
Halide exchange of CsPbBr3 to CsPbBr3
1. The PbI2 solution is prepared by diluting 68 mg PbI2 (ultra dry, 99.999% (metals basis)
-10 Mesh Beads, Alfa Aesar) in 0.6 mL oleylamine, 0.4 mL of Oleic Acid, and 20 mL of
1-Octadecene in a beaker. Make sure the PbI2 beads are ﬁne crushed, as it otherwise won’t
go into solution.
2. A stirbar is added and the solution is placed on a 170◦C hotplate. The solution is agitated
to speed up process.
3. When all PbI2 is dissolved, the temperature is decrease to 90◦C, and the beaker is immersed
into an silicon oilbath to help maintain temperature. The stirbar is removed from the PbI2
solution, and a stirbar is added to the silicon oilbath.
4. When solution has reached 90◦C the CsPbBr3 ﬁlm is immersed into the PbI2 solution with
the ﬁlm facing upwards.
5. After a certain time, depending on whether a gradient/mixed ﬁlmed is desired, or a fully
exchanged, the ﬁlm is taken out of the solution and rinsed with hexane to remove any
ligands.
6. Take special care, as the CsPbI3 is not very stable and turns into its non-optically or-
thorhombic phase if exhaled upon.
==PAGE:86==
C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
77
C
SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.1: Top down SEM images of homogenized ﬁlms at 100 ◦C acquired at 600 min (C.1a,
C.1b) for MAPbI3−xBrx and MAPbBr3−xIx, respectively. (C.1c, C.1d) Corresponding images
of ﬁlms after 900 min of homogenization. All images were acquired at 100 000X magniﬁcation
using 2kV acceleration voltage.
==PAGE:87==
C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
78
Figure C.2: Cross sectional SEM image of equimolar (0.3M) planar (A) MAPbI3 and (B)
MAPbBr3 layers deposited on 0.5 µm FTO-coated glass. The average thickness of 5 measured
thicknesses across the surface were 165 ± 18 nm and 92 ± 12 nm, respectively.
Figure C.3: Analyzed average MAPbI3 grain size of as prepared pre homogenized ﬁlm (0min)
and post homogenized ﬁlm (1260 minutes), showing a slight increase in average particle size.
Obtained from Figure 7.3.
==PAGE:88==
C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
79
Figure C.4:
(A, C, E, G) Steady-state absorption spectra of paired MAPbI3/MAPbBr3
perovskite ﬁlms recorded at diﬀerent times of homogenization at 60, 80, 120 and 140◦C. (B, D,
F, H) Corresponding diﬀerence absorbance spectra obtained from the 4 diﬀerent temperatures,
where minute 0 spectrum is used as a reference.
==PAGE:89==
C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
80
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure C.5: Complementary XPS spectra of one of the two ﬁlms (MAPbI3 ﬁlm), with the other
being shown in Figure 5. Acquired duringhalide homogenization at 100◦C, at 0, 600, 900 min,
and 1260 min. The probed regions were (a) Pb 4f, (b) I 3d, (c) Br 3d, where ﬁts of individual
peaks are shown in red and green, the cumulative ﬁt is shown in blue, while the original data
is shown as a black scatter plot. (d) The change in halide composition of iodide and bromide
during homogenization is plotted over time.
==PAGE:90==
C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
81
(a)
(b)
Figure C.6: The change in halide composition of iodide and bromide during homogenization
is plotted over time for (a) MAPbBr0.75I2.25 and (b) MAPbBr2.25I0.75.
Figure C.7: Photographs of the two separate (a) CsPbI3 and (b) CsPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms
deposited on FTO glass before, and (c) CsPbI3−xBr3 and (d) CsPbBr3−xI3 after homogenisation
at 200 ◦C for 720 minutes
==PAGE:91==
C SI Figures for Halide Ion Mobility Project
82
(a)
(b)
Figure C.8: (a) Absorption spectra of paired CsPbI3/CsPbBr3 perovskite ﬁlms recorded at
diﬀerent times of homogenisation (200 ◦C). (b) Diﬀerence absorbance spectra obtained from
spectra b-k in (a) with 0 minute spectrum (a) being used as a reference.
==PAGE:92==
D Experimental Setup and Theory on Femtosecond TAS
83
D
Experimental Setup and Theory on Femtosecond TAS
A schematic illustration of the used spectroscopy system is shown in Figure D.1.
Figure D.1: Schematic illustration of the femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy system
using a Clark MXR CPA-2010 laser (775 nm fundamental, 1 mJ/pulse, fwhm = 150 fs, 1 kHz
repetition rate) together with a calcium ﬂuoride (CAF2) crystal.[63]
A 775 nm fundamental beam is generated through mode-locking inside the laser cavity (a Clark
MR-2010 laser system). Mode-locking works by constraining the initially generated light within
the laser cavity by a set of mirrors, of which one is semitransparent. Diﬀerent modes with a
variety of wavelengths are transferred between the two mirrors. Wavelengths that constructively
interfere with each other eventually build up into a high energy laser pulse that is then let
out of the cavity. This process is what enables laser pulses on the femtosecond times scale to
be created. These ultra-short pulses are then ampliﬁed through chirped pulse ampliﬁcation as
shown in Figure D.2.
Figure D.2: Schematic illustration of the chirped pulse regenerative ampliﬁer used to stretch,
amplify and compress the pulse.[64]
Through these two processes, ultra-fast and ultra-powerful laser pulses are created and can then
be used in transient absorption spectroscopy.
In the Clark 2010 system, a 775 nm laser pulse generated from a SERF-ﬁber laser is used in the
==PAGE:93==
D Experimental Setup and Theory on Femtosecond TAS
84
chirped pulse ampliﬁcation. Following the ampliﬁcation of the pulse train, the beam is directed
through a mixing crystal together with a 532 green pump laser to create a 775 nm fundamental
beam with a suﬃcient high energy, ultra-short pulse.
As the beam leaves the laser cavity the beam is split into two beams with a 95%/5% separation
ratio, with the former being the pump and the latter the pulse. The pump beam is sent through a
frequency multiplier and doubled to create a 387 nm pulse. The beam then goes through a series
of mirrors and a chopper system serving to reduce the number of pump pulses from the pulse
train at a certain frequency, such that the sample can be probed both in its ground (Absprobe)
and excited (Abspump+probe) state. The beam is then directed through a neutral density ﬁlter
and an iris of a known diameter such that the power of the pulse is kept at a power density of
8 µJ/cm2.
The remaining 5% of the continuum beam is used to create the probe and is redirected through
the movable delay stage used for sampling the excited state properties of the sample at diﬀerent
time points. The lower resolution limit i.e. the sampling rate for the system in question is
limited by is the duration of the pulse, which is 35 fs for the system equivalent to the FWHM of
the Gaussian pulse. From the delay stage the pulse train is directed though a calcium ﬂuoride
(CAF2) crystal to create a white-light supercontinuum enabling measurements in the 400-750
nm spectrum.
The laser generated by the Clark MR-2010 laser system has a 775 nm fundamental beam with
1 mJ/pulse, fwhm = 150 fs, 1 kHz repetition rate
==PAGE:94==
E SI Figures for Photo versus Thermal Activated Mobility Project
85
E
SI Figures for Photo versus Thermal Activated Mobility
Project
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure E.1: XPS spectra of directly synthesised MAPbI1.5Br1.5. The probed regions were
(a) Pb 4f, (b) I 3d, (c) Br 3d, where ﬁts of individual peaks are shown in red and green, the
cumulative ﬁt is shown in blue, while the original data is shown as a black scatter plot.
==PAGE:95==
E SI Figures for Photo versus Thermal Activated Mobility Project
86
Figure E.2: Cross sectional SEM image of 0.9M MAPbI3−xBr3 deposited on 0.5 µM FTO-
coated glass. THe average thickness of 10 measured thicknesses across the surface was 232 ± 40
nm.
Figure E.3: Normalised Low Intensity Lamp Output of the AMScope 150-A, 150 Watt white
light source used to illuminate ﬁlms.
==PAGE:96==
E SI Figures for Photo versus Thermal Activated Mobility Project
87
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure E.4: Complementary absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite
ﬁlms recorded at diﬀerent illumination intensities for 10 hours. (a,c) Shows the absorbance and
diﬀerence absorbance spectra obtained for 70 µW/cm2 at 60◦C. (b,d) Shows the similar spectra
obtained for 100 µW/cm2 at 90◦C, where the segregation is present.
==PAGE:97==
F Paper 1 - Submitted
88
F
Paper 1 - Submitted
==PAGE:98==
 
 
Bidirectional Halide Ion Exchange in Paired Lead Halide Perovskite 
Films with Thermal Activation 
 
Tor Elmelund1,2, Rebecca A. Scheidt1, Brian Seger2 and Prashant V. Kamat1* 
1Radiation Laboratory, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, and 
Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA 
and 
2SurfCat, Department of Physics 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
*Address correspondence to pkamat@nd.edu 
 
 
 
==PAGE:99==
2 
 
Abstract 
MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 films cast onto glass slides and physically paired together, undergo halide exchange 
to form mixed halide films. The change in halide composition in these two ~130 nm thick films occurs 
concurrently with Br diffusing towards the MAPbI3 film and I diffusing towards the MAPbBr3 film. The 
diffusion of these halide species, which is tracked through changes in the absorption, offers a direct 
measurement of thermally activated halide diffusion in perovskite films. The increase in the rate constant 
of halide diffusion with increasing temperature (from 5×10-5 s–1 at 23 °C to 2.2×10-3 s–1 at 140 °C) follows 
an Arrhenius relationship with activation energy of 51 kJ/mole.  The thermally activated halide exchange 
shows the challenges of employing layers of different metal halide perovskites in stable tandem solar cells. 
 
TOC Graphics 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
3 
 
The interplay between ionic conductivity and electronic conductivity of metal halide perovskites has 
dominated the discussion of explaining their unusual optoelectronic and photovoltaic properties.1-5 In 
particular, halide ion mobility in metal halide perovskites plays an important role in determining the 
performance of perovskite solar cells.6-8 For example, the high ionic conductivity in MAPbI3 compared to 
the electronic conductivity along with high native ionic disorder leads to the trapping of the electronic 
carriers.9 The intrinsic ionic defects, specifically halide ion vacancies, often dictate the mobility of halide 
species within the perovskite film during the operation of solar cells.10,11 One such effect is the 
accumulation of halide ions near the electrode surface during the solar cell operation, thus increasing the 
cell capacitance. This effect often results in hysteresis between forward and reverse J-V (current-voltage) 
scans during solar cell operation.11-16  Thus, control of ion migration becomes important in decreasing such 
hysteresis effect.17 The built-in potential bias in the solar cell also induces drift velocity for the movement 
of halide ions which has been visualized through emission microscopy techniques.18-21 Impedance 
spectroscopy is another technique that is commonly used to elucidate the ionic conductivity both in dark 
and under illumination. Recently, Peng et al have correlated low-frequency response of MAPbBr3 single 
crystals with the chemical reactivity of moving ions towards hole transport layer interface to show the 
diffusion of halide ions through perovskite.22 The diffusion of halide ions towards the surface can either 
remediate the defects23,24 or can induce degradation of perovskite solar cells.25,26 
One of the interesting aspects of halide mobility is the photoinduced phase segregation seen in mixed 
halide perovskite films under steady state irradiation10,27-30  and its effect on solar cell performance.31-33  
The halide ion segregation in these films has been tracked through absorption and emission 
spectroscopy.28,30,34 Upon storage in dark, the process is reversed and the original mixed halide 
composition is restored. Several explanations have been provided to gain insight into the photoinduced 
movement of halide ions. These explanations include polaron induced strain,35 two state model in the 
excited state36 and halide ion defect driven movement.30,37 While the debate continues to explain 
photoinduced halide ion segregation, a similar one on why they reverse movement in dark to regenerate 
mixed halide composition is ongoing.  
The recent results on halide ion exchange between semiconductor nanocrystals to form mixed halide 
perovskite nanocrystals or nanostructured films show that site sharing between halides is favored by 
perovskite nanocrystals.38-40 For example, Akkerman et al have shown previously that the exchange of 
halide ions between CsPbBr3  and CsPbI3  readily proceeds when two nanocrystals are mixed in solution.38 
The mixed phase appears to be thermodynamically favored phase when these two separately synthesized 
==PAGE:101==
4 
 
nanocrystals are stored together in the dark. In order to establish thermally activated halide movement 
of halide ions in metal halide perovskite films we have spectroscopically probed the evolution of mixed 
halide composition at different temperatures. The mechanistic and kinetic details of bromide and iodide 
movement between physically paired films are discussed. 
Homogenization of Paired Perovskite Films. Films of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 (see Supporting information 
for experimental  procedure) were cast onto separate FTO (fluorine doped tin oxide) coated glass slides 
in a glove box and annealed at 100 °C for 10 minutes for MAPbBr3 while MAPbI3 films were annealed for 
1 minute at 65°C followed by immediate annealing at 100 °C for 2 minutes. The annealed films were 
paired together such that the films are physically in contact with each other. The slides were clamped with 
binder clips and placed on a temperature-controlled hot plate. Care was taken to maintain the 
temperature around the glass slide assembly at constant temperature. The clamped slides were 
periodically transferred to a Carry-50 UV-visible spectrophotometer to record the absorption spectra at 
different times and monitor changes in the absorbance associated with variations in the halide 
composition leading to homogenization of the films. 
Figure 1A shows the individual slides coated with MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 films before (pre-homogenization) 
and after (post-homogenization) heat treatment at 100 °C for 1260 min (21 hours). The corresponding 
absorption spectra of these two films are shown in Figure 1B. As prepared films of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 
are visibly and spectrally different exhibiting excitonic absorption at 523 nm and 750 nm respectively. 
Both films exhibit matching absorption onsets following homogenization at 100 °C indicating the same 
 
Figure 1. A. Photographs of the two separate MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite films deposited on 
FTO glass before (a, b) and after (c, d) homogenization. The two films facing each other were 
clamped and kept at 100 °C for 1260 min to achieve homogenization (B) Absorbance spectra of the 
films in A, recorded pre and post thermal treatment.   
Post homogenization
Pre homogenization
100°C
MAPbI3
(a)
MAPbBr3
(b)
MAPbI3-xBrx
(c)
MAPbBr3-xIx
(d)
A
B
==PAGE:102==
5 
 
optical band gap, which is supported by visual 
inspection of the separated films color (Figure 
1A). These results show that upon subjecting 
these two paired films to a temperature of 100 
°C they undergo homogenization as the Br and 
I migrate from one film into the other, viz: Br 
moving towards MAPbI3 film side and I moving 
towards 
MAPbBr3 
side 
until 
complete 
homogenization occurs and a mixed halide 
perovskite is formed. 
 Figure 2 shows the SEM images of the two films 
employed in the illustration of Figure 1A. The 
overall morphology of the two films remains 
unaffected following the halide exchange 
between the two films at 100 °C after 1260 min. 
(The SEM images of intermediate samples recorded after 600 min and 900 min are shown in Figure S1 and 
cross-sectional SEM images are shown in Figure S2.) However, a slight increase in grain size seen in Figures 
2C and D is likely to arise from to the effect of extended thermal annealing during homogenization step. 
The average MAPbI3 grain size increases from 120 to 155 nm following homogenization at 100 °C (Figure 
S3) as seen in previous studies into perovskite grain growth under annealing.41 Based on these images it 
is possible to conclude that there is no major change in morphology following the halide exchange 
process.  
In another experiment, we employed two different mixed halide films with dissimilar Br:I ratios (viz., 
MAPbBr2.25I0.75 and MAPbBr0.75I2.25). These films were paired together and left to homogenize at 100 °C. 
The absorption spectra recorded before and after 1260 min of homogenization period are shown in Figure 
S4 (supporting information). Despite the initial Br:I ratio both films attained similar 1:1 mixed halide 
composition as confirmed by the absorption spectra and also by XPS analysis.  These results further 
confirm the ability of halides to mobilize to attain a stable mixed halide composition. 
Figure 2. Top down SEM images of as prepared (A) 
MAPbI3 and (B) MAPbBr3 films (pre (0 min) 
homogenization) (C) and (D) same films following 
homogenization at 100 °C (1260 min). All images 
were acquired at 100 000X magnification. 
==PAGE:103==
6 
 
The absorption spectra in Figure 3A show the collective absorption changes of the paired MAPbI3 and 
MAPbBr3 films at intermediate time points of annealing (100 °C). The changes in absorption was probed 
by rapidly transferring the clamped slides to the spectrophotometer at different time points, acquiring a 
spectrum, and returning the clamped system to the hotplate. The constant temperature maintained 
during the homogenization process allowed exchange of Br and I to proceed between the two films 
continuously. The changes in the Br/I composition during the homogenization process is seen from the 
red-shift of the MAPbBr3 excitonic peak (523 nm) and simultaneous blue-shift of the MAPbI3 band edge 
(750 nm) with increasing time. At the end of homogenization period (1260 min) the two absorption peaks 
merge exhibiting a maximum at 589 nm. This excitonic peak, which lies between the absorption edge of 
the original MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 films corresponds to the absorption of a mixed halide film confirming 
the homogenization of both perovskite films. The position of the peak at 589 nm is also indicative of 1:1 
distribution of Br and I in the homogenized film. The peak shift seen in these absorption spectra during 
the initial period are plotted in Figure 3B. At the end of the homogenization process these peaks become 
indistinguishable thus confirming the two films to contain identical Br:I ratio. 
The difference spectra recorded in Figure 3C further highlights the changes in the absorbance of the films 
during annealing. The dominant MAPbBr3 peak at 523nm shows continuous decrease in its absorption 
with time. During the same period the loss of iodide absorption is represented by the change in the band 
edge with a blue shift in the peak. Once no further shift in the absorbance spectra is seen, and when the 
two films were taken apart and measured separately, the band positions were the same (Figure 1B). With 
the exchange of Br and I between the films the increased absorption at 580 nm becomes a dominant 
 
Figure 3. (A) Absorption spectra of paired MAPbI3/MAPbBr3 perovskite films recorded at different times 
of homogenization (100 °C). (B) Gradual change in absorbance of paired films during homogenization 
process is tracked through the shift in excitonic peak in terms of wavelength and energy.  The kinetic 
traces have been fitted with a monoexponential fit to guide the eye. (C) Difference absorbance spectra 
obtained from spectra b-j in (A) with 0 minute spectrum (a) being used as a reference.  
B
A
C
==PAGE:104==
7 
 
feature of the paired film. The experimental results presented in Figures 1 and 3 show that the halide ions 
are mobile and cross the physical barrier when the two films are kept in contact with each other. The 
ability to undergo complete Br/I exchange between the two physically paired film highlights that the most 
favored phase consists of mixed halide composition. 
Thermally Activation of Halide Ion Mobility. Thus far, we have discussed films at annealed 100 °C. If the 
exchange of Br/I is induced by thermal activation, we should be able to see a strong dependence on 
temperature for the rate of diffusion. The experiment described in Figure 3 was therefore repeated by 
maintaining different temperatures for homogenization. The halide ion exchange rates as measured from 
the changes in the absorption of MAPbBr3 excitonic peak at 523 nm with time at different temperatures 
are shown in Figure 4.  The individual absorption spectra corresponding to these experiments are included 
in Figure S5. The halide ion exchange rate was negligibly slow at room temperature but becomes more 
prominent as the paired films are subjected to elevated temperature. At temperatures greater than 100 
°C the homogenization was completed within ~10 hours. All traces in Figure 4A were fitted to 
monoexponential decay to determine the pseudo first order rate constants of halide ion mobility. The 
apparent rate constant for halide ion movement increased from 1.14 × 10-5 min–1 to 3.70 × 10-4 min–1 as 
the temperature was increased from 60 °C to 140 °C. This dependence of halide ion mobility on 
temperature was further analyzed through the Arrhenius expression (1) 
ln(k) = -Ea/RT + ln(A) 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
Figure 4. (A) Change in absorbance of MAPbBr3 excitonic peak (523 nm) with time during the 
homogenization process (a) 23 °C, (b) 60 °C, (c) 80 °C, (d) 100 °C, (e) 120 °C, and (f) 140 °C. The 
traces were fitted with a monoexponential fit to determine pseudo first rate constants of halide 
ion mobility. (B) Arrhenius plot of natural log of the rate constants versus the inverse of 
temperature. 
A
B
==PAGE:105==
8 
 
The straight line fitted to the plot of ln(k) versus 1/T (Figure 4B) confirms the validity of Arrhenius 
relationship with activation energy of 50.7 kJ/mole for the movement of halide ions. This value is 
comparable to activation energy of 0.62 eV (or 59 kJ/mole) estimated from the photocurrent 
measurements.42 While previous studies34,43 estimate the diffusion of iodide (or iodide vacancies) under 
light irradiation, the present study exclusively estimates the halide diffusion under thermal activation in 
the film. Although the diffusion of halide ions in perovskite films is extremely slow, it becomes faster at 
elevated temperature. At 60 °C the halide ion diffusion coefficient is estimated to be around 1.13 × 10-13 
cm2/s which increases with an order of magnitude at 120 °C (Table 1). Mobility of halide ion vacancies 
(10 μm s–1) have also been measured for MAPbI3 films under electrical bias with iodide diffusion 
coefficient of 2.4 × 10-8 cm2/s.44 The difference in values obtained in our study arises from lack of external 
driving force other than thermal activation. 
Using a simplified version of Fick’s second law for diffusion, an effective diffusion coefficient is calculated. 
The argument for using a simplified version and the term effective diffusion coefficient is that for this 
process, two different sized ions (I- and Br-) diffuse in opposite directions with different rates hence 
making the law of diffusion analytically unsolvable.  The effective diffusion coefficients as measured from 
the expression (2) are listed in Table 1. 
 
Deff = L2/τdiff 
(2) 
Deff is the effective diffusion coefficient, τdiff is the lifetime measured from the plots in Figure 4A and L is 
the diffusion length or the average film thickness (128.5 nm). The diffusion length is set to the distance 
between the center of the two films, which is made under the assumption that there is only diffusion in 
one direction between the films and no lateral ion movement with the film. 
Table 1 
Halide Ion Diffusion Parameters 
Temperature (°C) 
Lifetime, τ (s) 
Diffusion Coefficient, D (cm2 s-1) 
23 
~2000 
~8.26 x 10-14 
60 
1460.0 
1.13 x 10-13 
80 
566.0 
2.92 x 10-13 
100 
226.2 
7.30 x 10-13 
==PAGE:106==
9 
 
120 
85.6 
1.93 x 10-12 
140 
45.0 
8.26 x 10-12 
 
The observed values are consistent with the reported values from theoretical modeling. For example, 
Walsh and Stranks estimated a diffusion coefficient of 10−12 cm2 s–1 for I− ions at a temperature of 50 °C.45  
However, a greater halide ion diffusion coefficient (1.76 × 10-8 cm2 s–1 ) was estimated for MAPbBr3 single 
crystals using impedance spectroscopy.22 It should be noted that the halide ion migration in the present 
study is a bulk diffusion of two physically separated films leading to the complete homogenization. Hence 
the conditions for halide ion diffusion differs from those in single crystals or halide vacancy driven 
migration under photoirradiation. Additionally, the measurements presented in the present study deal 
with the movement of halide ions of different ionic radii, which also contributes to the overall mobility of 
the halide ions through the crystal structure. 
==PAGE:107==
10 
 
  XPS Analysis. To further study the movement of halide ions across the interface of the MAPbI3 and the 
MAPbBr3 films during the 
homogenization process, 
XPS analysis was carried 
out in order to determine 
the 
concentration 
of 
bromide and iodide ions 
on the surface of the 
films.  
XPS 
spectra 
were 
recorded at 0, 600, 900, 
and 
1260 
minutes 
following 
the 
thermal 
treatment of paired films 
at 100 °C.   Figures 5A-5C 
show representative XPS 
of 
selected 
elemental 
regions for the MAPbBr3 
film 
throughout 
the 
thermal treatment process. At 0 minutes (before subjecting to thermal treatment), no iodide peaks can 
be resolved due to the absence of iodide in the films.  However, by 600 minutes of annealing, iodide is 
clearly present in the film.  Similar trend of increasing concentration of Br with increasing time of heating 
was observed in the opposite fashion for the MAPbI3 film (Figure S6).  
Using pseudo-Voigt fitting parameters, the ratio of halide ion composition of the MAPbBr3 film was found 
throughout the annealing process.  Figure 5D shows that the halide composition shifts from 100% bromide 
at 0 minutes of annealing to 50% bromide at the end of the homogenization process.  This supports the 
spectral data in Figure 3 which shows that a mixed halide perovskite with a chemical formula of 
MAPbBr1.5I1.5 was obtained. For every time point 3-4 areas on each of the slides were analyzed showing 
less than 1% deviation in the halide ion composition ratio.  The same trend was seen in the MAPbI3 film 
in Figure S6D showing that all halide ions are accounted for and do not preferentially migrate to one side 
of the films. It should be mentioned that the use of XPS is only a surface technique, as it was not possible 
 
Figure 5. XPS spectra of one of the two films (MAPbBr3 film) acquired 
during halide homogenization at 100 °C, at 0, 600, 900 min, and 1260 
min. The probed regions were (A) Pb 4f, (B) I 3d, (C) Br 3d, where fits 
of individual peaks are shown in red and green, the cumulative fit is 
shown in blue, while the original data is shown as a black scatter plot. 
Complementary data for the MAPbI3 film is presented in Figure S6.  
(D) The change in halide composition of iodide and bromide during 
homogenization is plotted over time. 
A
B
C
D
==PAGE:108==
11 
 
to perform depth analysis using XPS due to degradation of the perovskite films. Hence, the measured 1:1 
ratio of I:Br is only at the interface (< 5nm).   
We also probed the chemical changes at the surface of both films during the thermal treatment process. 
The binding energy of the various species were analyzed to determine changes that might have occurred 
at the surface of perovskite films during the homogenization process.  Between 0 minutes and 600 
minutes of homogenization step, the binding energy of both the bromide and lead peaks shift to higher 
binding energy. This shift indicates that these species are slightly oxidized and therefore more strongly 
bound through coulombic interactions than they are at the prehomogenization process.  We attribute this 
shift to oxidized states formed as a result of exposure to air at elevated temperatures 46 similar to the 
effect seen on MAPbI3 films under irradiation.47   All of the binding energies, both before and throughout 
the annealing process, show a high fidelity to previously reported binding energies for MAPbX3 films.48  It 
should be noted that the surface changes probed through XPS is a minor pathway and does not influence 
the overall halide exchange process in the bulk. 
Excited State Dynamics of Pre- and Post-Homogenized Films. We also employed femtosecond transient 
absorption spectroscopy to probe the completion of halide ion exchange and its influence on excited state 
dynamics. Each of the paired films (MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3) were subjected to 387 nm laser pulse excitation 
before and after the completion of the homogenization step. These films correspond to those discussed 
in Figure 1. The time resolved transient absorption spectra and corresponding bleaching recovery are 
presented in Figure 6. As prepared films of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 exhibit characteristic bleach at 
==PAGE:109==
12 
 
wavelengths of 529 nm and 757 nm respectively following the excitation with 150 fs laser pulse (387 nm). 
The bleach recovery is seen over the period of nanoseconds as photogenerated charge carriers 
recombine. A detailed discussion of bimolecular and trap assisted charge carrier recombination in pristine 
lead halide films can be found in earlier published work.49-53  Prior to homogenization the individual films 
exhibit bleach maxima at 757 nm and 529 nm for MAPbI3 (Figure 6A) and MAPbBr3 (Figure 6B), 
respectively. The interesting aspect is when these two films are brought in contact with each other and 
allowed to homogenize at 100 °C. The transient absorption spectra of the homogenized films now exhibit 
similar bleach maximum at 637 nm thus confirming the matching composition of the mixed halide film 
(Figures 6C and D). These transient absorption measurements confirm that the perovskite films do not 
retain the individual excited state characteristics of the original films, but with those of mixed halide 
perovskites.54 
We also investigated the charge carrier recombination of the pre- and post- homogenized films (Figure 
6E).  The bleach signal of the now mixed halide perovskite films recovers with a rate faster than those of 
original perovskite films. The average lifetimes of bleaching recovery (844 ps for MAPbBr3 and 1722 ps for 
MAPbI3) decreased to about 457 ps for the homogenized mixed halide films. The fitting parameters are 
 
 
Figure 6. Time-resolved transient absorption spectra recorded following laser pulse excitation 
with 387 nm of MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 films (A, B) before and (C, D) after homogenization. (E) 
Recovery of bleaching of four films recorded at bleach maxima: (a) MAPbI3 (757 nm), (b) MAPbBr3 
(529 nm) and (c) & (d) homogenized films (637 nm). 
==PAGE:110==
13 
 
shown in Table S1. The marked change in the excited state decay of the film before and after annealing 
can be attributed to the heterogeneity of the halide ions in mixed-ion lead perovskite thin films which 
have been shown to affect local charge carrier dynamics.55 The decreased excited state lifetime also 
suggests that the halide exchange process has created more surface defects at the grain boundaries 
leading to enhanced rate of charge recombination.  Such additional movement of halide ions under 
photoirradiation can also be beneficially used to remediate surface defects and overcome some of the 
adverse effects. 25  
On the Mobility of Halide Ions. Halide ion exchange has been extensively used to obtain the desired 
composition of mixed halide films of different bandgaps by exposing a lead halide film (e.g., MAPbBr3) to 
another halide ions (e.g., iodide) solution.39,40 This exchange of halide ions is fully reversible and the 
original film can be restored by treating the mixed halide film with original halide ions in solution. Similarly, 
exchange of Br and I can also be achieved by mixing CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 nanocrystals suspended in 
solution.38,56  The simplicity of halide ion exchange process can be utilized to design a halide gradient 
structure within the CsPbBr3 film by controlling the exposure time to halide solution.57  The ease of halide 
ion diffusion and exchange between these two lead halide perovskite films shows inherent softness of the 
perovskite crystal structure. The results discussed in the present study offer a unique way to investigate 
the halide ion diffusion between two physically paired films of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3.  
There have been several theoretical and spectroscopic studies to explain the halide ion movement within 
the perovskite films.6,11,28,29,37,58,59 The defects or halide ion vacancies are thought to be crucial in driving 
the halide ion movement within the perovskite film. While such defect driven halide ion movement plays 
an important role during photoirradiation (as in the case of solar cell operation), the thermally activated 
diffusion shows the thermodynamic preference to attain a mixed composition of halides in perovskite 
films (Scheme 1).  
==PAGE:111==
14 
 
 
Scheme 1. Thermal activation of halide diffusion to produce homogenized perovskite films 
The thermally activated halide ion diffusion presented in the present study contrasts the movement of 
halide ions under light activation. Under photoirradiation the mixed halide films undergo halide 
segregation to produce Br-rich and I-rich domains. These domains remain segregated as long as light 
continues to shine the film. The light activation enables halide ions to overcome the thermodynamic 
barrier of entropy of halide ion mixing in perovskite films.60 Once the light is turned off the perovskite 
films return to original mixed halide favored configuration. The results presented here offer an 
explanation to why the films prefer to attain a mixed halide composition when the photoirradiated films 
are stored in the dark. This process occurs due to entropy of mixing favoring a homogenized configuration 
for metal halide perovskites at room temperature. Efforts are therefore needed to minimize the interlayer 
diffusion by including a chemical barrier (e.g., PbSO4)61 or employ long-chain organic ammonium capping 
layers62 between layered films of different  halide composition. Additionally, as shown in this study the 
mobility of halide ions in perovskite films is strongly dependent on the temperature and gets accelerated 
==PAGE:112==
15 
 
at higher temperature. Since the outdoor operation of solar cell involves both light and heat, the halide 
ion mobility becomes an important issue.  Thus, there is a need to obtain greater insights into the 
combined effect of irradiation, which causes halide segregation, and heat, which causes halide ion mixing, 
in mixed halide perovskite films. Efforts are underway to investigate these effects as well as their influence 
on the perovskite solar cell operation. 
 Acknowledgment: P.V.K., RAS and TE acknowledges the support of the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, 
and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy, through award DE-FC02-
04ER15533.  B.S. would like to thank funding from the Villum Foundation V-SUSTAIN Grant 9455. TE and BS would 
also like to acknowledge the support from Technical University of Denmark, with the fellowship for conducting 
collaborative research at Notre Dame.  R.A.S. acknowledges the support of the Arthur J. Schmitt Leadership 
Fellowship This is contribution number NDRL No. 5244 from the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory.  The authors 
would also like to thank Prof. M. K. Kuno for helpful discussions as well as Dr. Tatyana Orlova of the Notre Dame 
Integrated Imaging Facility for her helpful discussion on cross-sectional SEM. 
 
 
Supporting Information: The supporting information contains synthetic and annealing procedures, and 
experimental procedures (UV-Vis absorbance, Transient absorption, TEM, and XPS) and the detailed results on the 
absorption and XPS measurements. 
References. 
1. 
Eames, C.; Frost, J. M.; Barnes, P. R. F.; O'Regan, B. C.; Walsh, A.; Islam, M. S. Ionic transport in 
hybrid lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Nature Communications 2015, 6, Article No. 7497. 
2. 
Johnston, M. B.; Herz, L. M. Hybrid Perovskites for Photovoltaics: Charge-Carrier Recombination, 
Diffusion, and Radiative Efficiencies, Accounts of Chemical Research 2016, 49, 146-154. 
3. 
Manser, J. S.; Christians, J. A.; Kamat, P. V. Intriguing Optoelectronic Properties of Metal Halide 
Perovskites, Chemical Reviews 2016, 116, 12956–13008. 
4. 
Wang, H.; Bou, A.; Guerrero, A.; AlMayouf, A. M.; Bisquert, J. Kinetic and Material Properties of 
Interfaces Governing Slow Response and Long Timescale Phenomena in Perovskite Solar Cells, Energy & 
Environmental Science 2019. 
5. 
Schulz, P.; Cahen, D.; Kahn, A. Halide Perovskites: Is It All about the Interfaces?, Chemical Reviews 
2019, 119, 3349-3417. 
6. 
Yuan, Y.; Huang, J. Ion Migration in Organometal Trihalide Perovskite and Its Impact on 
Photovoltaic Efficiency and Stability, Accounts of Chemical Research 2016, 49, 286-293. 
7. 
Li, C.; Tscheuschner, S.; Paulus, F.; Hopkinson, P. E.; Kiessling, J.; Kohler, A.; Vaynzof, Y.; Huettner, 
S. Iodine Migration and its Effect on Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, Advanced Materials 2016, 28, 
2446-2454. 
==PAGE:113==
16 
 
8. 
Senocrate, A.; Moudrakovski, I.; Kim, G. Y.; Yang, T.-Y.; Gregori, G.; Grätzel, M.; Maier, J. The 
Nature of Ion Conduction in Methylammonium Lead Iodide: A Multimethod Approach, Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition 2017, 56, 7755-7759. 
9. 
Yang, T.-Y.; Gregori, G.; Pellet, N.; Grätzel, M.; Maier, J. The Significance of Ion Conduction in a 
Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Lead-Iodide-Based Perovskite Photosensitizer, Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition 2015, 54, 7905-7910. 
10. 
Gratia, P.; Grancini, G.; Audinot, J.-N.; Jeanbourquin, X.; Mosconi, E.; Zimmermann, I.; Dowsett, 
D.; Lee, Y.; Grätzel, M.; De Angelis, F.; Sivula, K.; Wirtz, T.; Nazeeruddin, M. K. Intrinsic Halide Segregation 
at Nanometer Scale Determines the High Efficiency of Mixed Cation/Mixed Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, 
Journal of the American Chemical Society 2016, 138, 15821-15824. 
11. 
Lee, H.; Gaiaschi, S.; Chapon, P.; Marronnier, A.; Lee, H.; Vanel, J.-C.; Tondelier, D.; Bourée, J.-E.; 
Bonnassieux, Y.; Geffroy, B. Direct Experimental Evidence of Halide Ionic Migration under Bias in 
CH3NH3PbI3–xClx-Based Perovskite Solar Cells Using GD-OES Analysis, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 2, 943-949. 
12. 
Unger, E. L.; Hoke, E. T.; Bailie, C. D.; Nguyen, W. H.; Bowring, A. R.; Heumuller, T.; Christoforo, M. 
G.; McGehee, M. D. Hysteresis and transient behavior in current-voltage measurements of hybrid-
perovskite absorber solar cells, Energy & Environmental Science 2014, 7, 3690-3698. 
13. 
van Reenen, S.; Kemerink, M.; Snaith, H. J. Modeling Anomalous Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar 
Cells, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2015, 6, 3808-3814. 
14. 
Meloni, S.; Moehl, T.; Tress, W.; Franckevicius, M.; Saliba, M.; Lee, Y. H.; Gao, P.; Nazeeruddin, M. 
K.; Zakeeruddin, S. M.; Rothlisberger, U.; Graetzel, M. Ionic polarization-induced current-voltage 
hysteresis in CH3NH3PbX3 perovskite solar cells, Nature Communications 2016, 7. 
15. 
Correa-Baena, J.-P.; Turren-Cruz, S.-H.; Tress, W.; Hagfeldt, A.; Aranda, C.; Shooshtari, L.; Bisquert, 
J.; Guerrero, A. Changes from Bulk to Surface Recombination Mechanisms between Pristine and Cycled 
Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 2, 681-688. 
16. 
Tress, W.; Marinova, N.; Moehl, T.; Zakeeruddin, S. M.; Nazeeruddin, M. K.; Grätzel, M. 
Understanding the Rate-Dependent J–V hysteresis, Slow Time Component, and Aging in CH3NH3PbI3 
Perovskite Solar Cells: The Role of a Compensated Electric Field, Energy & Environmental Science 2015, 8, 
995-1004. 
17. 
Calado, P.; Telford, A. M.; Bryant, D.; Li, X.; Nelson, J.; O’Regan, B. C.; Barnes, P. R. F. Evidence for 
ion migration in hybrid perovskite solar cells with minimal hysteresis, Nature Communications 2016, 7, 
13831. 
18. 
Li, C.; Guerrero, A.; Zhong, Y.; Graser, A.; Luna, C. A. M.; Kohler, J.; Bisquert, J.; Hildner, R.; 
Huettner, S. Real-Time Observation of Iodide Ion Migration in Methylammonium Lead Halide Perovskites, 
Small 2017, 13, Article No: UNSP 1701711. 
19. 
Li, W.; Rothmann, M. U.; Liu, A.; Wang, Z. Y.; Zhang, Y. P.; Pascoe, A. R.; Lu, J. F.; Jiang, L. C.; Chen, 
Y.; Huang, F. Z.; Peng, Y.; Bao, Q. L.; Etheridge, J.; Bach, U.; Cheng, Y. B. Phase Segregation Enhanced Ion 
Movement in Efficient Inorganic CsPbIBr2 Solar Cells, Advanced Energy Materials 2017, 7, Article Number: 
1700946. 
20. 
Vashishtha, P.; Halpert, J. E. Field-Driven Ion Migration and Color Instability in Red-Emitting Mixed 
Halide Perovskite Nanocrystal Light-Emitting Diodes, Chemistry of Materials 2017, 29, 5965-5973. 
21. 
Tang, X.; van den Berg, M.; Gu, E.; Horneber, A.; Matt, G. J.; Osvet, A.; Meixner, A. J.; Zhang, D.; 
Brabec, C. J. Local Observation of Phase Segregation in Mixed-Halide Perovskite, Nano Letters 2018, 18, 
2172-2178. 
22. 
Peng, W.; Aranda, C.; Bakr, O. M.; Garcia-Belmonte, G.; Bisquert, J.; Guerrero, A. Quantification of 
Ionic Diffusion in Lead Halide Perovskite Single Crystals, ACS Energy Letters 2018, 3, 1477-1481. 
23. 
Motti, S. G.; Meggiolaro, D.; Barker, A. J.; Mosconi, E.; Perini, C. A. R.; Ball, J. M.; Gandini, M.; Kim, 
M.; Angelis, F. D.; Petrozza, A. Controlling Competing Photochemical Reactions 
==PAGE:114==
17 
 
Stabilizes Perovskite Solar Cells, Nature Photonics 2019, 13, doi: 10.1038/s41566-019-0435-1. 
24. 
Ghosh, S.; Pal, S. K.; Karki, K. J.; Pullerits, T. Ion Migration Heals Trapping Centers in CH3NH3PbBr3 
Perovskite, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 2, 2133-2139. 
25. 
Kim, G. Y.; Senocrate, A.; Yang, T.-Y.; Gregori, G.; Grätzel, M.; Maier, J. Large tunable photoeffect 
on ion conduction in halide perovskites and implications for photodecomposition, Nature Materials 2018, 
17, 445-449. 
26. 
Li, J.; Dong, Q.; Li, N.; Wang, L. Direct Evidence of Ion Diffusion for the Silver-Electrode-Induced 
Thermal Degradation of Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells, Advanced Energy Materials 2017, 7, 1602922. 
27. 
Hoke, E. T.; Slotcavage, D. J.; Dohner, E. R.; Bowring, A. R.; Karunadasa, H. I.; McGehee, M. D. 
Reversible Photoinduced Trap Formation in Mixed-Halide Hybrid Perovskites for Photovoltaics, Chemical 
Science 2015, 6, 613-617. 
28. 
Yoon, S. J.; Draguta, S.; Manser, J. S.; Sharia, O.; Schneider, W. F.; Kuno, M.; Kamat, P. V. Tracking 
Iodide and Bromide Ion Segregation in Mixed Halide Lead Perovskites during Photoirradiation, ACS Energy 
Letters 2016, 1, 290-296. 
29. 
Yoon, S. J.; Kuno, M.; Kamat, P. V. Shift Happens. How Halide Ion Defects Influence Photoinduced 
Segregation in Mixed Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 2, 1507–1514. 
30. 
Barker, A. J.; Sadhanala, A.; Deschler, F.; Gandini, M.; Senanayak, S. P.; Pearce, P. M.; Mosconi, E.; 
Pearson, A.; Wu, Y.; Srimath Kandada, A. R.; Leitjens, T.; De Angelis, F.; Dutton, S. E.; Petrozza, A.; Friend, 
R. H. Defect-Assisted Photoinduced Halide Segregation in Mixed-Halide Perovskite Thin Films, ACS Energy 
Letters 2017, 2, 1416–1424. 
31. 
Samu, G. F.; Janáky, C.; Kamat, P. V. A Victim of Halide Ion Segregation. How Light Soaking Affects 
Solar Cell Performance of Mixed Halide Lead Perovskites, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 2, 1860-1861. 
32. 
Yun, J. S.; Seidel, J.; Kim, J.; Soufiani, A. M.; Huang, S.; Lau, J.; Jeon, N. J.; Seok, S. I.; Green, M. A.; 
Ho-Baillie, A. Critical Role of Grain Boundaries for Ion Migration in Formamidinium and Methylammonium 
Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Advanced Energy Materials 2016, 6, 1600330-n/a. 
33. 
Gualdrón-Reyes, A. F.; Yoon, S. J.; Mora-Seró, I. Recent insights for achieving mixed halide 
perovskites without halide segregation, Current Opinion in Electrochemistry 2018. 
34. 
Draguta, S.; Sharia, O.; Yoon, S. J.; Brennan, M. C.; Morozov, Y. V.; Manser, J. M.; Kamat, P. V.; 
Schneider, W. F.; Kuno, M. Rationalizing the Light-Induced Phase Separation of Mixed Halide Organic-
Inorganic Perovskites, Nature Communications 2018, 8, Article No. 200 (DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-00284-
2). 
35. 
Bischak, C. G.; Hetherington, C. L.; Wu, H.; Aloni, S.; Ogletree, D. F.; Limmer, D. T.; Ginsberg, N. S. 
Origin of Reversible Photoinduced Phase Separation in Hybrid Perovskites, Nano Letters 2017, 17, 1028-
1033. 
36. 
Slotcavage, D. J.; Karunadasa, H. I.; McGehee, M. D. Light-Induced Phase Segregation in Halide-
Perovskite Absorbers, ACS Energy Letters 2016, 1, 1199-1205. 
37. 
Azpiroz, J. M.; Mosconi, E.; Bisquert, J.; De Angelis, F. Defect migration in methylammonium lead 
iodide and its role in perovskite solar cell operation, Energy & Environmental Science 2015, 8, 2118-2127. 
38. 
Akkerman, Q. A.; D’Innocenzo, V.; Accornero, S.; Scarpellini, A.; Petrozza, A.; Prato, M.; Manna, L. 
Tuning the Optical Properties of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals by Anion Exchange 
Reactions, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2015, 137, 10276-10281. 
39. 
Pellet, N.; Teuscher, J.; Maier, J.; Grätzel, M. Transforming Hybrid Organic Inorganic Perovskites 
by Rapid Halide Exchange, Chemistry of Materials 2015, 27, 2181-2188. 
40. 
Jang, D. M.; Park, K.; Kim, D. H.; Park, J.; Shojaei, F.; Kang, H. S.; Ahn, J.-P.; Lee, J. W.; Song, J. K. 
Reversible Halide Exchange Reaction of Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Colloidal Nanocrystals for Full-
Range Band Gap Tuning, Nano Letters 2015, 15, 5191-5199. 
41. 
Scheidt, R. A.; Atwell, C.; Kamat, P. V. Tracking Transformative Transitions: From CsPbBr3 
Nanocrystals to Bulk Perovskite Films, ACS Materials Letters 2019, 1, 8-13. 
==PAGE:115==
18 
 
42. 
Eames, C.; Frost, J. M.; Barnes, P. R. F.; O’Regan, B. C.; Walsh, A.; Islam, M. S. Ionic transport in 
hybrid lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Nature Communications 2015, 6, 7497. 
43. 
Brennan, M. C.; Draguta, S.; Kamat, P. V.; Kuno, M. Light-Induced Anion Phase Segregation in 
Mixed Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Letters 2018, 3, 204-213. 
44. 
Li, C.; Guerrero, A.; Huettner, S.; Bisquert, J. Unravelling the role of vacancies in lead halide 
perovskite through electrical switching of photoluminescence, Nature Communications 2018, 9, 5113. 
45. 
Walsh, A.; Stranks, S. D. Taking Control of Ion Transport in Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS 
Energy Letters 2018, 3, 1983-1990. 
46. 
Padchasri, J.; Yimnirun, R. Effects of Annealing Temperature on Stability of Methylammonium 
Lead Iodide Perovskite Powders, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 2017, 720, 63-69. 
47. 
Li, Y.; Xu, X.; Wang, C.; Ecker, B.; Yang, J.; Huang, J.; Gao, Y. Light-Induced Degradation of 
CH3NH3PbI3 Hybrid Perovskite Thin Film, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2017, 121, 3904-3910. 
48. 
Samu, G. F.; Scheidt, R. A.; Kamat, P. V.; Janáky, C. Electrochemistry and Spectroelectrochemistry 
of Lead Halide Perovskite Films: Materials Science Aspects and Boundary Conditions, Chemistry of 
Materials 2018, 30, 561-569. 
49. 
Manser, J. S.; Kamat, P. V. Band Filling with Charge Carriers in Organometal Halide Perovskites, 
Nature Photonics 2014, 8, 737–743. 
50. 
Stamplecoskie, K. G.; Manser, J. S.; Kamat, P. V. Dual Nature of the Excited State in Organic-
Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskites, Energy & Environmental Science 2015, 8, 208 - 215. 
51. 
Draguta, S.; Thakur, S.; Morozov, Y. V.; Wang, Y.; Manser, J. S.; Kamat, P. V.; Kuno, M. Spatially 
Non-uniform Trap State Densities in Solution-Processed Hybrid Perovskite Thin Films, The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry Letters 2016, 715-721. 
52. 
Herz, L. M. Charge-Carrier Mobilities in Metal Halide Perovskites: Fundamental Mechanisms and 
Limits, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 1539-1548. 
53. 
Stranks, S. D. Nonradiative Losses in Metal Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Letters 2017, 1515-
1525. 
54. 
Yoon, S. J.; Stamplecoskie, K. G.; Kamat, P. V. How Lead Halide Complex Chemistry Dictates the 
Composition of Mixed Halide Perovskites, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2016, 7, 1368-1373. 
55. 
Wieghold, S.; Tresback, J.; Correa-Baena, J.-P.; Hartono, N. T. P.; Sun, S.; Liu, Z.; Layurova, M.; 
VanOrman, Z. A.; Bieber, A. S.; Thapa, J.; Lai, B.; Cai, Z.; Nienhaus, L.; Buonassisi, T. Halide heterogeneity 
affects local charge carrier dynamics in mixed-ion lead perovskite thin films, Chemistry of Materials 2019. 
56. 
Ravi, V. K.; Scheidt, R. A.; Nag, A.; Kuno, M.; Kamat, P. V. To Exchange or Not to Exchange. 
Suppressing Anion Exchange in Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites with PbSO4–Oleate Capping, ACS Energy 
Letters 2018, 3, 1049-1055. 
57. 
Hoffman, J. B.; Schleper, A. L.; Kamat, P. V. Transformation of Sintered CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals to 
Cubic CsPbI3 and Gradient CsPbBrxI3–x through Halide Exchange, Journal of the American Chemical Society 
2016, 138, 8603–8611. 
58. 
Eames, C.; Frost, J. M.; Barnes, P. R. F.; O'Regan, B. C.; Walsh, A.; Islam, M. S. Ionic Transport in 
Hybrid Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat Commun 2015, 6, Article No. 8497  
59. 
Domanski, K.; Roose, B.; Matsui, T.; Saliba, M.; Turren-Cruz, S. H.; Correa-Baena, J. P.; Carmona, 
C. R.; Richardson, G.; Foster, J. M.; De Angelis, F.; Ball, J. M.; Petrozza, A.; Mine, N.; Nazeeruddin, M. K.; 
Tress, W.; Gratzel, M.; Steiner, U.; Hagfeldt, A.; Abate, A. Migration of Cations Induces Reversible 
Performance Losses Over Day/Night Cycling Iin Perovskite Solar Cells, Energy & Environmental Science 
2017, 10, 604-613. 
60. 
Ruth, A.; Brennan, M. C.; Draguta, S.; Morozov, Y. V.; Zhukovskyi, M.; Janko, B.; Zapol, P.; Kuno, 
M. Vacancy-Mediated Anion Photosegregation Kinetics in Mixed Halide Hybrid Perovskites: Coupled 
Kinetic Monte Carlo and Optical Measurements, ACS Energy Letters 2018, 3, 2321-2328. 
==PAGE:116==
19 
 
61. 
Ravi, V. K.; Scheidt, R. A.; DuBose, J.; Kamat, P. V. Hierarchical Arrays of Cesium Lead Halide 
Perovskite Nanocrystals through Electrophoretic Deposition, Journal of the American Chemical Society 
2018, 140, 8887–8894. 
62. 
Xiao, Z.; Zhao, L.; Tran, N. L.; Lin, Y. L.; Silver, S. H.; Kerner, R. A.; Yao, N.; Kahn, A.; Scholes, G. D.; 
Rand, B. P. Mixed-Halide Perovskites with Stabilized Bandgaps, Nano Letters 2017, 17, 6863-6869. 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
Supporting Information 
 
Bidirectional Halide Ion Exchange in Paired Lead Halide Perovskite Films 
with Thermal Activation 
 
Tor Elmelund1,2, Rebecca Scheidt1, Brian Seger2 and Prashant V. Kamat1* 
1Radiation Laboratory, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, and 
Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA 
and 
2SurfCat, Department of Physics 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
*Address correspondence to pkamat@nd.edu 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
Experimental Section 
Materials and film preparation procedures 
The preparation procedure for the MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 perovskite films were adapted from 
earlier reports.1,2  2.5 x 2.5 cm FTO coated glass substrates were used to resemble full solar cell 
device fabrication. The substrates were washed with soapy water, rinsed with DI water and placed 
directly into an absolute ethanol bath. The FTO slides were left to sonicate for 20 minutes before 
being rinsed with Isopropanol and dried with an airstream. To remove any remaining organics the 
substrates were plasma cleaned for 10 minutes after which a 7mm wide Kapton tape was placed 
at one side of the substrate to resemble full solar cell device fabrication. The substrates were then 
transferred to a N2 filled glovebox for spin coating of perovskite films.  
Two perovskite solutions (MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3) were prepared by dissolving all precursors in 
dimethylformamide, DMF (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.8%) and dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO 
(Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, ≥99.9%). For both MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3, a 0.3M solution was prepared 
from PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich, Ultradry, beads, −10 mesh, 99.999% trace metals basis) and MAI 
(Greatcell Solar) for MAPbI3, while the MAPbBr3 was made using PbBr2 (Alfa Aesar, 98+%) and 
MABr (Greatcell Solar). The solutions were left to stir 1 hour at room temperature and 
subsequently filtered through an inorganic membrane filter (0.2 µm pore size, G8549141, 
Whatman) before use. The MAPbI3 films were obtained using static drop casting of 50µL of MAPbI3 
and subsequently spin coating at 4000rpm for 25s with an acceleration of 1200 rpm. An 
antisolvent treatment step with diethyl-ether (Sigma-Aldrich, for HPLC, ≥99.9%, inhibitor-free) was 
used, with 0.5 mL being rapidly injected after 10 seconds. The films were immediately transferred 
to a preheated hotplate for 1 min at 65°C, and then transferred to a 100°C hotplate for 2 minutes. 
After annealing the films were removed from the hotplate and left to cool down before use. The 
MAPbBr3 films were obtained using static drop casting of 50µL of MAPbBr3 and subsequently spin 
coating at 1000rpm for 10s with an acceleration of 1200 rpm, then at 4000 rpm for 35 s with an 
acceleration of 1200 rpm. Here 0.1mL toluene (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.8%) was used for the 
antisolvent treatment step, and was rapidly injected after 20 seconds.  The films were immediately 
transferred to a preheated hotplate for 10 minutes at 100°C. After annealing the films were 
removed from the hotplate and left to cool.  
==PAGE:119==
Halide Ion Exchange of films 
The prepared MAPbI3 and MAPbBr3 substrates were transferred from the glovebox to a hotplate 
located next to the spectrophotometer (Cary 50 Bio spectrophotometer, Varian) for halide ion 
exchange of the films. The Kapton tape was removed, and the films were placed in contact with 
each other and clamped with binder clips at either end of the films. The clamped films were then 
placed on a brass plate with the MAPbBr3 film facing downwards to allow for direct heating of the 
films. The temperature of the brass plate was monitored and controlled by adjusting the 
temperature of the hotplate.   
Characterizations and Methods used 
Steady state UV-vis absorption spectra were recorded using a Cary 50 Bio spectrophotometer 
(Varian). The clamped system was periodically removed from the hotplate and transferred direct 
to the spectrophotometer for acquiring absorption spectra and immediately transferred back to 
the hotplate. The absorption was used to monitor the halide ion exchange between the films. 
SEM imaging was performed on a Magellan 400 digital field emission scanning electron 
microscope operated with a beam voltage of 2 kV.  
Surface halide composition analysis was performed using X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, XPS 
on a PHI VersaProbe II. The compositional analysis was performed using 15kV high power point.  
For transient absorption measurements a Clark MR-2010 laser system (775 nm fundamental, 1 
mJ/pulse, fwhm = 150 fs, 1 kHz repetition rate) was used together with a detection software from 
Ultrafast Systems (Helios). The white-light continuum beam is split in two beams with a 95/5 
separation ratio, with the 95% beam being doubled to 387 nm to create the pulse. Using a neutral 
density filter together with an iris of a known diameter, the power of the pulse is kept at a power 
density of 8 μJ/cm2. The remaining 5% portion of the white-light continuum beam is used to 
create the probe by directing the beam though a calcium fluoride (CAF2) crystal to create a super 
continuum. 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
Supporting Results 
 
Figure S1: Top down SEM images of homogenized films at 100 °C acquired at 600 min (A, B) for 
MAPbI3-xBrx and MAPbBr3-xIx, respectively. (C, D) Corresponding images of films after 900 min of 
homogenization. All images were acquired at 100 000X magnification using 2kV acceleration 
voltage.   
 
 
==PAGE:121==
 
Figure S2: Cross sectional SEM image of equimolar (0.3M) planar (A) MAPbI3 and (B) MAPbBr3 
layers deposited on 0.5 μm FTO-coated glass. The average thickness of 5 measured thicknesses 
across the surface were 165 ± 18 nm and 92 ± 12 nm, respectively.   
 
 
Figure S3: Analyzed average MAPbI3 grain size of as prepared pre homogenized film (0min) and 
post homogenized film (1260 minutes), showing a slight increase in average particle size. Obtained 
from Figure 2(A, C).  
==PAGE:122==
 
Figure S4: Tracking halide homogenization at 100 °C for directly synthesized mixed halide 
perovskite films with different I:Br ratios. Two films of MAPbBr0.75I2.25 and MAPbBr2.25I0.75 with 
absorbance spectra of films shown in (A) pre- and post-homogenization. (B) shows photographs 
taken of the two films pre (a,b) and post (c,d) homogenization. Figure (C, D) shows the halide 
composition pre (0 min) and post (1260 min) homogenization for the two films MAPbBr0.75I2.25 and 
MAPbBr2.25I0.75, respectively. It is evident that the initial 75/25 ratio becomes 50/50 for both films 
after homogenization.  
 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
Figure S5: (A, C, E, G) Steady-state absorption spectra of paired MAPbI3/MAPbBr3 perovskite films 
recorded at different times of homogenization at 60, 80, 120 and 140°C. (B, D, F, H) Corresponding 
==PAGE:124==
difference absorbance spectra obtained from the 4 different temperatures, where minute 0 
spectrum is used as a reference.  
 
Figure S6: Complementary XPS spectra of one of the two films (MAPbI3 film), with the other being 
shown in Figure 5. Acquired during halide homogenization at 100 °C, at 0, 600, 900 min, and 1260 
min. The probed regions were (A) Pb 4f, (B) I 3d, (C) Br 3d, where fits of individual peaks are shown 
in red and green, the cumulative fit is shown in blue, while the original data is shown as a black 
scatter plot. (D) The change in halide composition of iodide and bromide during homogenization is 
plotted over time. 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
Table S1: Table showing extracted fitting parameters for the fast and slow decay processes 
obtained from the biexponential fittings for the kinetics shown in Figure 6E. 
 
 
References 
1. Ahn, N.; Son, D.-Y.; Jang, I.-H.; Kang, S. M.; Choi, M.; Park, N.-G. Highly Reproducible Perovskite Solar 
Cells with Average Efficiency of 18.3% and Best Efficiency of 19.7% Fabricated via Lewis Base Adduct of 
Lead(II) Iodide, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2015, 137, 8696-8699. 
2. Luan, J.; Xu, J.; Chen, J.; Shi, X.; Zhang, B.; Dai, S.; Yao, J. Efficient Planar CH3NH3PbBr3 Perovskite Solar 
Cells Prepared at Room Temperature with Ionic-Liquids/Fullerene as an Electron Transport Bilayer, Journal 
of Solid State Chemistry 2019, 270, 436-442. 
 
 
==PAGE:126==
G Paper 2 - Draft
117
G
Paper 2 - Draft
==PAGE:127==
Halide Ion Mobility in Mixed Halide Perovskite Films.  
Photo versus Thermal Activation 
 
Tor Elmelund1,2, Brian Seger2 and Prashant V. Kamat1* 
1Radiation Laboratory, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, and 
Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA 
and 
2SurfCat, Department of Physics 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
*Address correspondence to pkamat@nd.edu 
 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
2 
 
Abstract 
The halide ion mobility in mixed halide perovskite exhibits two opposite trends in response to photo and 
thermal activation. While halides prefer to remain as Br-rich and I-rich domains under steady state light 
irradiation of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 films, they prefer to remain in mixed composition in dark. The activation 
energies as determined from the temperature dependent rate constants were 28.94 kJ mol-1 for 
segregation and 53.47 kJ mol-1 for dark recovery. This lower activation energy of the photoactivated 
segregation assists to overcome the dark (thermally activated) mixing and exists as Br-rich and I-rich 
regions as long as the mixed halide film is irradiated continuously with visible light.  
 
 
TOC Graphics 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
3 
 
Significant strides have been made in recent years to boost the efficiency of metal halide perovskite 
solar cells. While challenges remain to develop solar cells that can exhibit stability for several years 
under outdoor operations. In addition to intrinsic and surface defects several intriguing properties 
contribute to instability. Efforts have been made to employ trication (Cesium (Cs), methyl ammonium 
(MA) and formamidium (FA)) based perovskite films or surface treatments and improve the stability of 
perovskite solar cells.  
Another interesting aspect that influences the solar cell performance is the mobility of halide ions within 
the perovskite film. In fact, the crystalline liquid like property of these materials enables the movement 
of ions with relative ease. For example, we have recently shown that physically paired MAPbBr3 and 
MAPbI3 films when paired together undergo exchange of halide ions driven through thermal activation. 
(Cite XXX) The difference in spectral features of the two perovskite films enabled us to track the 
movement of halide ions and its dependence on the temperature during homogenization process. Other 
techniques such as impedance spectroscopy and infrared imaging have also been employed to track the 
halide ion mobility. (Cite XXX)  
Whereas entropy of mixing explains the thermally activated mixing of halide ions to yield mixed halide 
perovskite, an opposite trend is observed when the mixed halide film is subjected to photoirradiation. 
This process commonly referred to as photoinduced phase segregation or halide segregation yields Br-
rich and I-rich perovskite domains. The interesting part is the total recovery when the film is left in dark 
as thermal activation drives the segregated domains back to the original homogenized composition. 
Several models have been proposed to explain photoinduced segregation of halides. These include two 
state model in the excited state, polaron induced lattice strain, defect driven halide ion movement and 
overcoming the thermal activation of mixing with bandgap excitation. (Cite XXX)  
Thus, the two different types of halide ion movement can be summarized through following expressions 
(reactions 1 and 2) 
In light:  nMAPbBr1.5I1.5    ⎯h→   n/2MAPbBr3+ n/2MAPbI3  
(1) 
In dark: n/2MAPbBr3+ n/2MAPbI3 ⎯→ nMAPbBr1.5I1.5        
(2) 
In other words; the halide ions prefer to remain segregated under irradiation, while the stable geometry 
in dark is the mixed or homogeneous state. Since these two processes compete under photoirradiation, 
it is important to establish the driving force behind such unusual activity. In order to obtain insight into 
these two processes we have now undertaken temperature dependence of rate of segregation and dark 
recovery.  The kinetic and thermodynamic arguments that explain the photoinduced halide segregation 
and dark recovery are discussed. 
Mixed halide films of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 were cast on 0.5 μm FTO coated glass slides using a spin cast methed, 
and the substrates were subsequently annealed at 65 C for 1 minute followed by immediate annealing 
at 100 C to facilitate the nucleation process of adjacent grains. A XXXM solution of ?? mM PbI2, ?? mM 
MAI, ?? mM PbBr2 and ?? mM MABr dissolved in DMF and DMSO, was employed as precursor solution. 
The film had a 1:1 composition as confirmed through XPS analysis (See supporting information Figure 
S1). The thickness of the film was maintained around 200 nm. To suppress the surface driven 
degradation at elevated temperatures these films were covered with a blank FTO slide and clamped to 
passivate the surface before fixing placing the films in a spectrophotometer with Peltier thermal setup 
==PAGE:130==
4 
 
and subjecting the films to light/heat treatment while recording the steady state UV-VIS absorption 
spectra of the photoactivated and thermally activated mobility. 
Photoactivated mobility of halide ions. When the mixed halide perovskite film is subjected to visible 
light irradiation, we observed a loss of excitonic peak and increased absorbance in the red region (Figure 
1A). The difference absorption spectra recorded in Figure 1B show these changes with an isosbestic 
point around 630 nm. This further shows the photoinduced conversion of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 into Br-rich and 
I-rich regions confirming the observations as reported in earlier studies. (cite XXX) The prominent bleach 
at 616 nm and the induced absorption at 642 nm can be followed to determine the rate of halide 
segregation (Reaction 1). The dependence of photoinduced segregation rate on the light intensity is 
shown in Figures 1C and D. The first order rate constant increase with increasing intensity of excitation. 
The rate constant at ?? mW/cm2 increases from ?? s-1 to ?? s-1 when intensity was increased to ?? 
mW/cm2. At intensity below ?? we could not observe photoinduced halide segregation. 
 
 
Figure 1: Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite films recorded at different 
times of the segregation process. All films were held at constant room temperature (23 C). (A) 
Segregation of film when photoirradiated with an intensity of 20 mW/cm2. (B) Difference 
absorbance spectra obtained from spectra b-j in (A) with 0 minute spectrum (a) being used as a 
reference. (C) Tracking EXPLAIN. (D) EXPLAIN. 
==PAGE:131==
5 
 
Many different models have been proposed to explain the halide ion mobility under light irradiation. 
The defects arising from halide ion vacancies seems to play a role in driving the halide ions away from 
each other. As discussed in earlier studies the intensity threshold observed for photosegregation shows 
the thermodynamic activation barrier for making halide ions move away from each other. (Cite XXX) 
Thermally activated mobility of halide ions. When halide segregated films were stored in dark the 
original mixed halide form was restored thus showing the mobility of halide ions in the opposite 
direction (Reaction 2). This movement of halide ions was similar to our earlier study showing the 
exchange of Br and I in paired films of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 films with thermal activation. At room 
temperature it took almost 14 hours for halide ion segregated film to recover fully, thus showing the 
slow mobility of halide ions. However, with increasing temperature one can significantly increase the 
rate of dark recovery (or mixing of halide ions to original mixed halide composition). For example, the 
previously photosegregated halide film when kept at 80 C, it took just 20 minutes for the film to 
recover and attain original mixed halide composition. Figure 2 (A-D) show dark recovery of the 
previously photosegregated film at 23 C and 80 C.  
 
Figure 2: Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite films recorded at different 
times of the recovery process. (A, B) Recovery of fully segregated films at when recovered at room 
temperature (23 C) and when subjected to 80 C heating. (C, D) Difference absorbance spectra of 
obtained from (A, B) showing the reversible recovery process until their initial position.   
==PAGE:132==
6 
 
The difference spectra were recorded using the original MAPbBr1.5I1.5 film (before subjecting it to 
photoirradiation) as reference. Thus, the spectra a in Figures 2C and D corresponded to the halide ion 
segregated state. With increasing time, the recovery is seen reversing the trend observed during the 
photoirradiation. The presence of an isosbestic point (Figures 2C and D) at both these temperatures 
confirm that the recovery represents the existence of two states (viz: segregated and mixed halide 
composition). 
We further analyzed the dark recovery at different temperatures by monitoring the absorption change at 
616 and 642 nm (Figure 3A). The recovery of the bleach at 616 nm and the decay of the induced absorption 
matched quite well at all temperatures. The dependence of time required for the full recovery (Figure 3B) 
on temperature shows the importance of thermal activation in inducing the mobility of halide ions, 
reversing the trend observed during photoirradiation. We determined the rate constant for the dark 
recovery at different temperatures and the values were analyzed for Arrhenius expression (1). 
ln(k) = -Ea/RT + ln(A) 
 
 
 
(1) 
The plot of ln(k) versus inverse temperature shown in Figure 3C exhibits a linear relationship. The 
activation energy determined from the slope of the plot was 53.47 ± 3.83 kJ mol-1.  This value is similar to 
the activation energy (50.7 kJ/mole) that was determined from the exchange of halide ions between 
physically paired of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 films.   
These results show the thermodynamic activation barrier for observing mobility of halide ions in 
perovskite films. As discussed earlier, the entropy of mixing plays an important role in attaining the 
mixed halide composition with an energy of activation of 53 kJ/mole. 
Halide ion mobility under combined photo and thermal activation. The experiments described above 
highlight two conflicting scenarios. Under photoexcitation the bromide and iodide prefer to remain 
separate as iodide rich and bromide rich domains, while in dark they prefer to stay together with 
homogenized or mixed halide composition. The obvious question is how combined photo and thermal 
 
Figure 3: Change in absorbance for the initial fully segregated position of the MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed 
halide perovskite. (A) Change in recovery rate as films are subjected to thermal treatment of 
different temperatures (a) 23 C, (b) 70 C and (c) 80 C.EXPLAIN (B) Extracted recovery times 
from (A) showing a significant decrease in recovery time as temperature is increased. (C) 
Arrhenius plot of natural log of the rate constants versus the inverse of temperature, with the 
rate constants being extracted from monoexponential fits of (A).      
==PAGE:133==
7 
 
effects influence the mobility of halide ions. We prepared mixed halide (MAPbBr1.5I1.5 ) films and 
subjected to photoirradiation (constant intensity  20 mW/cm2) at different temperatures. The results are 
shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4A shows difference absorption recorded during photoirradiation of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 film at 23 C. 
Similar experiments were carried out at different temperatures. The absorbance change monitored at 
620 and 650 nm were recorded at different temperatures. Figure 4B shows representative kinetic traces 
of halide ion segregation observed at 23 C, 60 C, and 100 C. The rate of segregation increases with 
increasing temperature (Figure 4B). The Arrhenius plot of ln(k) versus inverse temperature shows a 
linear relationship. The activation energy determined from the slope of this linear plot was 28.96 ± 0.54 
kJ/mol-1. The lower activation energy of photosegregation overcomes the larger activation barrier of 
thermal mixing and thus favors halide ion segregation. 
Although photoactivation and thermal activation drive the Br and I ions in opposite direction (Reactions 
1 and 2), the photoexcitation with sufficient energy (>?? mW/cm2) can overcome reaction 2. The Br-rich 
and I-rich domains remain separated as long as the film remains under light irradiation.   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Absorbance spectra of MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed halide perovskite under constant 
photoirradiation (20 mw/cm2) when held at elevated temperatures. (A) Difference absorbance 
spectra acquired at interval timepoints when held at 100 C. (B) EXPLAIN . (C) Arrhenius plot of 
natural log of the rate constants versus the inverse of temperature, with the rate constants 
extracted from monoexponential fits of (B).      
==PAGE:134==
Supporting Information 
 
Halide Ion Mobility in Mixed Halide Perovskite Films.  
Photo versus Thermal Activation 
 
Tor Elmelund1,2, Brian Seger2 and Prashant V. Kamat1* 
1Radiation Laboratory, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, and 
Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA 
and 
2SurfCat, Department of Physics 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
*Address correspondence to pkamat@nd.edu 
 
 
 
==PAGE:135==
Experimental Section 
Materials and film preparation procedures 
The mixed halide MAPbBr3-xIx perovskite films were prepared using an adapted procedure earlier 
reported. (10.1021/jacs.5b04930) 2.5 x 2.5 cm FTO coated glass substrates were prior to film 
deposition washed with soapy water and rinsed with DI water. Subsequently, the substrates were 
placed directly into an absolute ethanol bath and sonicated for 30 minutes before being rinsed 
with IPA and dried using a compressed airstream. To ensure minimal adherence of organics to the 
surface, the substrates were plasma cleaned for 15 minutes just prior to transferring the 
substrates to a N2 filled glovebox. A 7 mm wide Kapton tape was placed on one side of the FTO 
substrate to resemble the conditions to which the procedure was optimized.  
The mixed halide perovskite (MAPbBr3-xIx) solution was prepared by dissolving PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 
Ultradry, beads, −10 mesh, 99.999% trace metals basis), MAI (Greatcell Solar), PbBr2 (Alfa Aesar, 
98+%) and MABr (Greatcell Solar) in dimethylformamide, DMF (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.8%) 
and dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich, anhydrous, ≥99.9%). A XXXM MAPbBr1.5I1.5 mixed 
halide perovskite solution was made using XXX.    
A stirbar was added to the vial and left to stir for 1 hour at room temperature, before being 
filtered through an inorganic membrane filter (0.2 µm pore size, G8549141, Whatman) prior to 
deposition. Using a spin coater 50µL of the MAPbBr3-xIx solution was statically drop casted onto the 
substrate and spin coated at 4000rpm for 25s with a standard acceleration of 1200 rpm. After 
exactly 10 seconds 0.5 mL of diethyl-ether (Sigma-Aldrich, for HPLC, ≥99.9%, inhibitor-free) was 
rapidly injected as an antisolvent treatment to facilitate a fast crystallization and thus obtain highly 
planar films post annealing. The films were transferred directly onto a preheated hotplate for 1 
min at 65°C, and subsequently transferred to a 100°C hotplate for 2 minutes to promote continuity 
between adjacent grain and obtain the desired films. The films were left to cool, and then stored 
in the glovebox until used.  
Before placing the films in a spectrophotometer, the surface driven degradation process at 
elevated temperatures was passivated by clamping a clean piece of FTO coated glass (2.5 x 2.5 cm) 
on top of the films using binder clips.  
==PAGE:136==
 
Characterizations and Methods used 
A Cary 50 Bio spectrophotometer (Varian) was used to record steady state UV-VIS absorption 
spectra of the photoactivated and thermally activated mobility of halide ions under different 
experimental conditions. For all experiments the temperature around the glass slide assembly was 
maintained at constant temperature using a Peltier thermal setup within the spectrophotometer. 
For the photoactivated mobility experiments the Peltier was maintained at room temperature 23 
°C to provide consistent experimental conditions. For the elevated temperatures to probe the 
thermally activated mobility of halide ions the Peltier was increased to the specified temperature. 
The absorption spectra were recorded at different times to monitor changes in the absorbance 
associated with changes in the halide composition as a result of either homogenization or 
segregation i.e. the formation of Br-rich and I-rich domains.  
A white light source (AMScope 150-A, 150 Watt halogen variable intensity fiber optic cold light 
source) was used to probe the photoactivated halide ion mobility. The light source was placed at a 
fixed distance from the sample and the light intensity was adjusted such that the specified 
irradiance was achieved.  
Supporting Results 
Figure S1: 
References 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
==PAGE:138==
