==PAGE:1==
POST-OCCUPANCY EVALUATION 
OF MASTERPLANS IN SOCIAL 
HOUSING AREAS 
GADEKÆRVEJ, VALBY  & SKOLEPARKEN, HILLERØD 
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK, DTU  
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING 
STINE SKOV CHRISTENSEN 
MASTER’S THESIS, SPRING 2019 
IN COLLABORATION WITH RAMBØLL A/S
==PAGE:2==
 
MASTER’S THESIS OF 30 ECTS POINTS 
POST-OCCUPANCY EVALUATION OF MASTERPLANS IN SOCIAL 
HOUSING AREAS 
GADEKÆRVEJ, VALBY & SKOLEPARKEN, HILLERØD  
© STINE SKOV CHRISTENSEN, S172993 
SUBMITTED 28TH OF JUNE 2019 
SUPERVISOR, DTU:  
PER SIEVERTS, SENIOR RESEARCHER  
DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT ENGINEERING  
TECHNICAL UNIVERISTY OF DENMARK  
SUPERVISOR, RAMBØLL A/S: 
TRINE RELSTER THOUBER, PROCESS CONSULTANT  
ARCHITECTURE AND INTEGRATED DESIGN  
RAMBØLL DENMARK A/S 
PICTURE ON FRONT PAGE: OWN PHOTO
==PAGE:3==
POST-OCCUPANCY EVALUATION OF 
MASTERPLANS IN SOCIAL HOUSING AREAS 
GADEKÆRVEJ, VALBY  & SKOLEPARKEN, HILLERØD 
Master’s Thesis, Spring 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stine Skov Christensen
==PAGE:4==
 
PREFACE
This thesis is the end of my master’s degree in architectural engineering at 
DTU, but it is also the ending to a new beginning since it is the last work of 
mine before graduating as an engineer.  
It was obvious to me that I wanted to concern my thesis on social housing in 
Denmark since it has been something I have worked with and found interest 
in throughout my 5,5 years of engineering studies. Therefore, I am extremely 
glad that Rambøll A/S gave me the possibility to collaborate with me on this 
thesis in order to work with sustainability in social housing in a 5 month-long 
project.  
The thesis has helped me explore the learnings from my previous studies to 
an extent that has conﬁrmed me that the ﬁeld of engineering is something I 
really like to work on and from this, I am happy to have a career in 
engineering in front of me. I am very excited to see what is coming and I 
hope that this thesis can beneﬁt the future work of mine since social housing 
in Denmark will always be an interest of mine and a ﬁeld of engineering I 
would happily be employed with in the future.  
The thesis could not be realized without the help from certain individuals why 
I would like to appreciate their time and effort which they have put into this 
thesis.  
First, I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU Per Sieverts Nielsen and my 
supervisor at Rambøll Trine Relster Thouber for useful guidance, meetings 
and helpful advice throughout the entire process.  
Second, I would like to thank all interviewees who have made the entire thesis 
possible by sharing their knowledge and experiences with me: Katja 
Waagepetersen, Sirkku Singer, Lars Jevanord, Michael Hansen, Board 
Members in Skoleparken, Board members at Gadekærvej and Finn Rumohr. 
Thank you for great conversations! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stine Skov Christensen 
IV
==PAGE:5==
ABSTRACT
In the 21st century, many social housing areas has had physical masterplans 
implemented due to the decay of buildings and social segregation from the 
20th century’s industrialized construction and increasing welfare. Besides 
updating the building physic, the masterplans aims to increase the quality of 
the areas and to increase the social conditions.  
 
The thesis evaluates two social housing areas that has had physical 
masterplans completed in order to analyze how it is possible to increase 
social sustainability through master planning. A post-occupancy evaluation 
evaluates the understanding and consideration of social sustainability, the 
stakeholder collaborations in master planning, the development of social 
sustainable solutions and the performance of implemented solutions from a 
social sustainable perspective.  
The thesis ﬁnds that it is possible to increase social sustainability from 
physical masterplans if some factors are considered comprehensively.  
 
The initial understanding and considerations of social sustainability 
are good, however social sustainability will never be the main target as the 
physical masterplans prioritizes the building physic. Furthermore, the social 
sustainable solutions are chosen with a lack of evidence. A development of 
strategic sustainable workﬂows that focuses of aims and targets in 
sustainability will help the agenda of social sustainability in master planning.  
 
Stakeholder collaborations are greatly present and especially 
residents are important. Yet, their lack of knowledge on building processes 
creates a difﬁcult situation, why the collaboration must be greatly cared for. A 
collaboration process with start-up meetings, regularly meetings in the 
beginning of building phases and better transition in commissioning will help 
the professionals and residents to gain a better process with increased ﬂow of 
information, solving challenges and working from same understandings.  
 
The solutions implemented in the social housing areas are found to be 
limited or entirely skipped throughout the building process. There process to 
ensure a holistic social sustainable masterplan and realization seems to be 
uncontrolled. A holistic and more comprehensive analysis of solutions and 
potentials of the speciﬁc areas will help developing the right solutions within 
the limited frames that the building process creates.  
 
Social performance of the implemented solutions ﬁnds that the 
residents are far more satisﬁed with the quality of the solutions than the social 
effect. A lack of optional activities, use of half-private areas and diversity in 
implemented solutions are the most signiﬁcant barriers for social 
sustainability in the evaluated masterplan. The implementation of suggested 
improvements will enhance social sustainability and create a more structured 
and strategic work that prioritizes social sustainability to a higher extent.  
V
==PAGE:6==
TABLE OF CONTENT
PREFACE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IV 
ABSTRACT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  V 
1 INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 
 
 
  1 
 
1.1 Background  
 
 
 
 
 
  2 
 
 
 
1.2 Problem statement & Research questions 
 
  5 
 
 
1.3 Delimitations  
 
 
 
 
 
  6 
 
 
 
1.4 Limitations 
 
 
 
 
 
  7 
2 METHODOLOGY  
 
 
 
 
 
  9 
 
 
 
2.1 Thesis design  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
2.2 Post-occupancy Evaluation 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
2.2.1 Selecting cases  
 
 
 
11 
 
 
2.2.2 Perfomance of social sustainability  
 
13 
 
 
 
2.3 Theoretical study  
 
 
 
 
14 
 
2.4 Empirical study 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
2.4.1 Stakeholder involvement  
 
 
15 
 
 
2.4.2 Questionnaires  
 
 
 
16 
 
 
2.4.3 Observations 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
2.4.4 Interviews 
 
 
 
 
19 
3 LITERATURE STUDY  
 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
3.1 Social housing in Denmark  
 
 
 
22 
 
 
3.1.1 The development of social housing  
 
22 
 
 
3.1.2 Today’s challenges in social housing  
25 
 
3.2 Sustainability  
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
3.2.1 Sustainability as a term  
 
 
26  
 
 
3.2.2 Social Sustainability  
 
 
 
29 
 
3.3 Humans and built environments  
 
 
31 
 
 
 
3.3.1 The importance of the built environment 
31 
 
 
3.3.2 Planning living housing areas  
 
32 
 
 
3.3.3 Social relations for built environment   
40 
 
3.4 Post-Occupancy Evaluation 
 
 
 
43 
 
 
3.4.1 Deﬁnition and purpose  
 
 
43 
 
 
3.4.2 Conducting POE 
 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:7==
4 CASES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 
4.1 Skoleparken, Hillerød 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
4.1.1 Masterplan 
 
 
 
 
49 
 
 
4.1.2 Implemented solutions  
 
 
54 
 
4.2 Gadekærvej, Valby 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
4.2.1 Masterplan 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
 
4.2.2 Implemented solutions  
 
 
62 
5 FIELD STUDY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 
 
5.1 Questionnaires 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
5.2 Observations  
 
 
 
 
 
68 
 
5.3 Interviews  
 
 
 
 
 
70 
6 RESULTS & ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
6.1 Process evaluation  
 
 
 
 
74 
 
 
6.1.1 Understanding social sustainability  
 
74 
 
 
6.1.2 Stakeholder collaboration 
 
 
78 
 
 
6.1.3 Development of solutions 
 
 
84 
 
6.2 Use evaluation  
 
 
 
 
 
92 
 
 
6.2.1 Resident’s use of space 
 
 
92 
 
 
6.2.2 Performance of implemented solutions 
96 
7 DISCUSSION  
 
 
 
 
 
          106 
 
7.1 Research question 1 
 
 
 
           106 
 
 
7.1.1 Partial conclusion 
 
 
           110 
 
7.2 Research question 2  
 
 
     
           111 
 
 
7.2.1 Partial conclusion 
 
 
           116 
 
7.3 Research question 3  
 
 
 
           117 
 
 
7.3.1 Partial conclusion  
 
 
           120 
 
7.4 Research question 4 
 
 
                        121 
 
 
7.4.1 Partial conclusion 
 
 
           125 
8 CONCLUSION 
 
 
 
 
 
          128 
9 FUTURE WORK   
 
 
 
 
          130 
10 BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
 
 
   
          132 
11 APPENDICES  
 
 
 
 
 
          138
==PAGE:8==
 
 
LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES
Figure 2-1 
Illustrative overview of thesis design. 
Figure 2-2 
Illustration of evaluated phases and underlying subjects for  
 
 
evaluating the performance of social sustainability.  
Figure 2-3  
Illustration of each subject within the total knowledge-space.  
 
 
Each circle represents one subject.  
Figure 2-4 
Coverage of process of masterplans and use of solutions by  
 
 
empirical studies. 
Table 2-5  
Chosen dates and time for observations in the social housing  
 
 
areas. 
Table 2-6 
Interviewees with name, education, position, organisation and  
 
 
project.  
Figure 3-1 
Three pillars model and triangular model of sustainability.  
 
 
(Lubk, 2016).  
Table 3-2 
Non-physical factors of urban social sustainability (Dempsey,  
 
 
Bramley, Power & Brown 2009).  
Figure 3-3 
Conceptual model of collaborative sustainability 
 
 
(Ghomashchi 2012).  
Figure 3-4 
Path from physical factors to social sustainability.  
Figure 3-5 
Model of plan principles: to gather or to spread (Gehl, 2010).  
Figure 3-6 
Connection between quality of physical environment and  
 
 
activities, (Gehl, 2010). 
Figure 3-7 
Overview of different contact from intensity, (Gehl, 1996).  
Figure 3-8 
Factors that mediate or hinders see and look contacts  
 
 
(Gehl, 2010).  
Figure 3-9 
Post-occupancy evaluation - Phases and steps (Preiser, 2001).  
Figure 4-1 
Location of Skoleparken in relation to Copenhagen.  
 
 
(Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Effektivisering, u.d.).  
Table 4-2  
Physical solutions and actions presented in masterplan for  
 
 
Skoleparken, Hillerød,(Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). 
Figure 4-3 
Site plan of open outdoor spaces in Skoleparken, Hillerød 
  
 
(Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012).  
Figure 4-4 
Entry zones, walking paths  and larger green areas at  
 
 
 
Skoleparken, Hillerød. (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012) 
Figure 4-5 
Rendering of activity house and balconies from masterplan in  
 
 
Skoleparken, Hillerød. (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012) 
Figure 4-6 
Implemented activity house, facade with gardens and  
 
 
 
walking paths. 
Figure 4-7 
Location of Gadekærvej in relation to Copenhagen center 
 
 
(Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Effektivisering, u.d.).  
Figure 4-8 
Overview of buildings and division of section 1 and 2 in   
 
 
Gadekærvej. (WITRAZ, 2012) 
==PAGE:9==
Table 4-9 
Physical solutions and actions presented in masterplan for  
 
 
Gadekærvej, Valby. (WITRAZ, 2012). 
Figur 4-10 
Site plan of open outdoor spaces in Gadekærvej, Valby.  
 
 
(WITRAZ, 2012) 
Figure 4-11 
Illustration of westerns facade for arrival in Gadekærvej,   
 
 
Valby. (WITRAZ, 2012)  
Figure 4-12 
Illustration of tempered glass spandrels at balconies in  
 
 
 
Gadekærvej, Valby. (WITRAZ, 2012).  
Figure 4-13 
Implemented facades, seating areas, walking path with  
 
 
 
terraces and ball court at Gadekærvej, Valby.  
Figure 5-1 
Questionnaire for residents at Gadekærvej and Skoleparken  
 
 
in Danish. 
Figure 5-2 
Observation scheme.  
Figure 5-3 
Interview Guide for Rambøll employees.  
Figure 6-1 
Pictures of facades, seating areas and fencing of the outdoor  
 
 
spaces at Gadekærvej.  
Figure 6-2 
Pictures of middle area, entrances and seating areas in  
 
 
 
Skoleparken. 
Figure 6-3 
Observation data for each location - Gender, Age group,   
 
 
Position, Activity and Time spend.  
Figure 6-4 
Illustration of patterns for trafﬁc and stays in Gadekærvej and  
 
 
Skoleparken. 
Table 6-5 
Total performance for each location in percentages of the  
 
 
positive, neutral and negative answers. 
Figure 6-6 
Total performance within the categories of community and  
 
 
quality for Gadekærvej and Skoleparken. 
Figure 6-7 
Positive, neutral and negative answers in percentages within  
 
 
community from Gadekærvej. Green is positive, gray is  
 
 
 
neutral and red is negative. 
Figure 6-8 
Positive, neutral and negative answers in percentages within  
 
 
quality from Gadekærvej. Green is positive, gray is neutral  
 
 
and red is negative.  
Figure 6-9 
Positive, neutral and negative answers in percentages within  
 
 
community from Skoleparken. Green is positive, gray is   
 
 
neutral and red is negative.  
Figure 6-10 
Positive, neutral and negative answers in percentages within  
 
 
quality from Skoleparken. Green is positive, gray is neutral 
and  
 
red is negative.  
Figure 7-1 
Steps to analyze sustainable possibilities within speciﬁc social 
 
 
housing areas.  
Figure 7-2 
Circle showing the amount of communication throughout the 
 
 
buildings phases. 
Figure 7-3 
Illustration of interdependency between social performance  
 
 
and optional activities.  
Figure 9-1 
Steps to establish framework for future work on social  
 
 
 
sustainability in masterplans. 
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
INTRODUCTION
1
==PAGE:12==
The ﬁrst housing movements began in the 1860s in Copenhagen. In these 
movements, the residents could, by paying a fee for many years, obtain the 
possibility to own their own apartment. At this time, the housing market was 
on a private level however organizing housing for the common population 
was initiated. This led to the development of the social housing sector where 
the buildings and areas are common ownership within social housing 
organizations (KAB, 2008; Landsbyggefonden, 2016). 
The ﬁrst social housing dwellings was built in 1913 by the ﬁrst social housing 
organizations and until World War 2, the number of social housings 
increased. During World War 2, the construction of housing did not meet the 
demand, especially in the city-areas and by the end of World War 2 in 1945, 
the need for housing was roughly 50.000 dwellings due to the lack of 
housing and the estimated future housing reserve (KAB, 2008; 
Landsbyggefonden, 2016). Furthermore, the 1940s’ industrialization created 
a need for housing in city-areas due to the migration of workers from the 
country side. To meet the demands for housing, the following decades led to 
a quantitative supply of social housing buildings and here, the construction of 
industrialized prefabricated buildings made its entrance. It was now possible 
to build cheap, easy and quick housing and from 1945-1975, over 310.000 
social housing buildings were constructed (KAB, 2008).  
Throughout the 1940s to 1970s, the social housing organizations was strong 
and social housing was considered as contemporary housing with modern 
comforts which was known as the “social housing line”. The overall thought 
behind the social housing line was to help the underprivileged population to 
obtain better social well-being by becoming a part of the social housing 
areas and to have and use cheap production- and operational methods (KAB, 
2008). Unfortunately, the times changed in the 1970s and forward. The 
demand for social housing decreased because private housing became 
within reach of the common population. Between 1960 and 1980, the share 
of privately-owned housing increased from 46 to 54% (KAB, 2008). At the 
1.1 Background
1 Introduction
This section will introduce the basis of the chosen topic. The ﬁrst introduction 
will have a short presentation of the social housing in Denmark while problem 
statement, objective and research questions will be presented in this section 
also. Therefore, the introduction will work as the starting point for the entire 
thesis with the speciﬁc aims presented for what the thesis will try to answer. 
2
==PAGE:13==
same time, an increased focus on the qualitative side of housing led to 
criticism of the social housing areas and the focus shifted to be sociologically 
driven (KAB, 2008). The sociologically focus led to an understanding of the 
importance of quality in living environments and problems of economic, 
physical and social kind arose throughout the 1980s and forward due to a 
social segregation where the least privileged gathered in the social housing 
areas (KAB, 2008). 
Today, there are 595.000 social housing dwellings in Denmark. This means 
that the social housing dwellings in Denmark represents 20% of the total 
Danish housing stock of roughly 2.7 million dwellings (Landsbyggefonden, 
n.d.). The large amount of social housing and the economic, physical and 
social problems has created a great need for restoration and renovation. In 
2001, the National Building Fund performed an analysis showing that the 
social housing areas in Denmark needed renovation for 189,1 billion DKK. 13 
years later, in 2014, a new analysis showed a need for renovation of still 169,2 
billion DKK (Landsbyggefonden, 2014).  
Since 2000, masterplans have been scheduled and arranged to restore and 
prevent the long-term problems that challenges the social housing areas’ 
competitiveness (Landsbyggefonden, 2016). The masterplans are performed 
through investments from the social housing organizations and often also 
through funding from the National Building Fund. Here, ﬁnancial support can 
be given for masterplans handling renovation and/or social and preventive 
measures. The overall goal of the National Building Fund is to strength the 
vulnerable social housing areas’ competitiveness and bring the areas into a 
positive development as well as prevent social housing areas from 
developing into problematic areas (Landsbyggefonden, 2016). 
 
Masterplans are to ensure the future of social housing by making the 
areas more attractive and competitive. The quality of the social housing areas 
is to be improved to make residents stay and attract new residents (WITRAZ, 
2012; Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). Therefore, the physical 
changes are considered as possible ways to ensure the above-mentioned 
goals and the overall target to restore and future-proof the areas by handling 
the problems of physical and social kind.  
While masterplans are solutions towards the physical, economic and social 
problems which has developed through the last decades in social housing 
areas, masterplans do not work actively with sustainability. By working 
towards a better today and future for social housing areas it would be 
obvious to work with sustainability ﬁrst initiated in the report “Our common 
future” in 1987 (Dansk Arkitektur Center, 2017). Here, it was stated that 
“Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their 
own needs” (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987). 
Furthermore, sustainability today works with three main pillars: social, 
Masterplans:  
Masterplans analyses 
the buildings and 
surroundings to give 
an overview and helps 
the social housing 
organisation to ﬁnd 
solutions for the found 
problems (DAB, n.d.).
3
==PAGE:14==
economic and environmental which are all relevant to the problems found in 
social housing areas (KAB, 2008).  
Especially social sustainability could potentially be beneﬁcial to consider 
because the social housing areas were built without qualitative 
considerations. The quantitative methods in the 1940s-1970s did not 
accommodate the fundamental social factors like people’s needs and 
behavior which became central themes from the 1980s until today (Gehl & 
Svarre, 2013). Therefore, considering social sustainability could be an ideal 
way to actively work against the dysfunctional environment that the 
industrialization created, and it could potentially in the context of today’s 
sustainable agenda work towards reaching the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals number 11 Sustainable Cities and Communities which 
works with the goal of making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, 
resilient and sustainable (The United Nations, 2018; Gehl & Svarre, 2013). 
4
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Problem Statement & Research questions
Working with masterplans is a way to restore the social housing areas as 
attractive, safe and modern housing for the Danish population. As 
urbanization creates a higher number of citizens in the larger cities of 
Denmark, the social housing areas becomes more and more important due to 
the large share of social housing in the total Danish housing stock. Therefore, 
the work to improve the areas becomes equally important.  
However, there seems to be some challenges and problems associated with 
the designing and implementing of masterplans concerning social 
sustainability. The obvious link between masterplans and sustainability seems 
unrealized since the seems to be not strategies for working with social 
sustainability, and the is no current gathering of experiences or data through 
master planning. 
 
The identiﬁed problems indicate that the work towards a more 
sustainable area, city and planet is not a main target when working with social 
housing areas. At the same time, the missing evaluation of masterplans’ 
performance in social housing areas makes it impossible to know if the 
masterplans designed and implemented makes an actual difference.  
The thesis will look into the process of masterplans performed in two social 
housing areas from the ﬁrst thoughts until the commissioning of the ﬁnal 
solutions. Through a post-occupancy evaluation (POE), the performance 
relevant to social sustainability will be assessed within the entire process of 
master planning. The ﬁndings and collection of knowledge through the POE 
will form the basis of a knowledge sharing that will give feedback, possible 
improvements and considerations which can be helpful for stakeholders in 
the future work with masterplans in social housing areas. This outcome will try 
to increase sustainability in future work through the evaluation of masterplans 
performed already. The objective will be reached through the reasearch 
questions stated below. The question and the four sub-questions are 
guidelines for the thesis and its direction. 
How is it possible to increase social sustainability through the design and 
implementation of masterplans in social housing areas? 
➡
How is social sustainability understood and considered when designing 
and implementing masterplans in social housing areas? 
➡
How are stakeholder collaborations ensured throughout the design and 
implementetion of masterplans in social housing areas? 
➡
How does planned solutions in masterplans develop throughout the 
building process, and how does it affect the ﬁnal outcome? 
➡
How does implemented solutions perform on a social sustainable level?
5
==PAGE:16==
1.3 Delimitations
The scope of the thesis is delimited to set an overall frame. Some 
delimitations are given, and some are chosen to set the most suitable scope 
in which the thesis will develop. The delimitations are as follows:  
➡Project location and cases  
The thesis focuses on two cases which are all placed in Copenhagen or 
Northern Zealand and they are all started in 2012. The cases are found 
suitable and representative to draw overall conclusions of master planning 
in general. However, the delimitation lies within the possibility that the 
location on Zealand and the chosen two cases may not show every aspect 
of master planning in relation to social sustainability.  
➡Time and thesis 
The thesis is limited due to the timeframe of 5 month. The thesis takes 
place from start February to end June 2019 which is the season of winter 
and spring. This may inﬂuence the data collected from weather conditions, 
holidays etc. but the thesis will try to give the most suitable image given 
the circumstances.  
➡Scope within sustainability 
The scope is delimited to social sustainability. The thesis will not consider 
economic and environmental sustainability thoroughly. Social sustainability 
is chosen as the main focus based on both academical and personal 
interests.  
➡Scope within masterplans 
The masterplans work on different breakdowns which each represent a 
division of the work in the masterplan. Roughly it can be divided into four 
main breakdowns: Residence, edge zone of residence, common areas and 
connection to surroundings. The thesis is delimited to the edge zones and 
the common areas. These areas are found most suitable and 
representative for the focus on social sustainability.  
➡Theoretical approach to social housing areas 
The theory applied will in some cases be theory of urban planning and 
public spaces that often are associated with spaces within cities. Even 
though masterplans in social housing areas may be framed towards the 
residents and not the public population, the scope of edge zones and 
common spaces are considered equivalent to public urban spaces. 
Therefore, the theory is also found suitable for this thesis. 
6
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Limitations
Throughout the thesis some limitations are chosen and given. The 
circumstances of the thesis is necessary to consider because they might 
weaken the thesis. The circumstances of the thesis could always be better and 
stronger, yet a limited process in time will create limited circumstances. The 
limitations are as follows: 
➡Two areas are included in the thesis  
The post-occupancy evaluation in this thesis concerns two social housing 
areas in Denmark. It was intended to have three areas covered to have 
more representation for the studies. However, the third area in Tingbjerg, 
Copenhagen, was late in the process skipped due to challenging 
circumstances. The renovation ended in lawsuits due to severe problems 
with the building physic, thus it was decided not to use the area because 
the circumstances would affect the entire empirical study and the ﬁnal 
results.  
➡The areas’ implementation of masterplans are relatively new  
The masterplans have not been implemented in the chosen areas for many 
years, thus there is a risk that the implemented solutions have not been 
fully integrated yet. However, the areas’ renovations have been completed 
for 1-2 years, why it must be considered suitable to evaluate the solutions 
while they are still relatively new. At Skoleparken, only a part of the areas 
has been ﬁnalized, why this part of the area has only been investigated and 
evaluated.  
 
 
➡Thesis only covers a few months in empirical studies 
The thesis is done from February to June with the empirical studies 
conducted during april. This means that the empirical studies potentially is 
affected by the season. The studies would potentially have other 
outcomes, if they were conducted during the summer, fall or winter. Thus it 
would be ideal to follow the areas during an entire year to have a full 
coverage of the seasons. However, the time frame of the thesis makes this 
impossible.  
➡Limited amount of questionnaire data 
Unfortunately, only respectively 17% and 7,5% of residents asked in 
Gadekærvej and Skoleparken has responded to questionnaires. This 
means that the questionnaire data has statistical uncertainties, and that the 
ﬁndings from the questionnaires potentially does not show the correct 
state of the social housing areas regarding the performance of 
masterplans.  
7
==PAGE:18==
  
8
==PAGE:19==
METHODOLOGY
2
==PAGE:20==
3: Literature Study
4: Cases
Case 1
Case 2
5: Field Studies
Questionnaires
Observations
Interviews 
6: Results
7: Analysis
8: Diskussion
9: Conclusion
10: Future Work
Social housing in Denmark
Sustainability
Humans and built environments
Post-occupancy Evaluation
1: Introduction
2: Methodology
2.1 Thesis design
As seen in the illustration in ﬁgure 2-1, the thesis goes through different 
chapters within the overall method of post-occupancy evaluation. The 
designed structure of the thesis is well-considered to have a simple and 
logical setup that suits the chosen method. The thesis ﬁrst works on a 
theoretical level through the introduction, methodology and literature study. 
The cases act as a bridge towards the empirical part of the thesis with the 
ﬁeld studies, results and analysis. Hereafter, the discussion will combine and 
process both the theoretical and empirical study which will lead to the ﬁnal 
conclusion and future work. 
Figure 2-1: Illustrative 
overview of thesis 
design. 
Own production
2 Methodology 
The methodology will show what methods that have been applied during the 
thesis to evaluate the masterplans in the social housing areas and how both 
the theoretical framework and the empirical framework has been handled.  
The section will shortly describe the thoughts on thesis design, then the 
overall method applied on Post-occupancy Evaluation and at last the 
theoretical and empirical studies will be described. 
10
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Post-occupancy Evaluation
2.2.1 Selecting cases
As quickly mentioned in 2.1 'Thesis design’, the overall method of the thesis is 
Post-Occupancy Evaluation (POE). The term post-occupancy evaluation is a 
review of the process and performance of a built environment (Higher 
Education Funding Council for England, 2006).  
The post-occupancy evaluation (POE) evaluates two social housing areas in 
edge zones of residence and common areas. The performance of the process 
designing and implementing masterplans in the social housing areas as well 
as the ﬁnal result are assessed within the scope of social sustainability. The 
performance assessed are covered by the sub-questions in the problem 
statement. The ﬁnal end-result will be feedback and possible improvements 
for for future improvements of the work performed in social housing areas.  
The method of POE is chosen for the thesis because the method is extremely 
suitable for reviewing already completed projects and to use the reviews for 
sufﬁcient feedback, like Rambøll A/S has wished for. The method allows to 
obtain insight in the process and commissioning of the projects which has 
great relevance in the daily work of designing and implementing masterplans 
in social housing areas. 
This section look deeper into the choice of the cases and the next sections 
will describe the methods of theoretical and empirical studies that lies within 
the method of POE. A deeper theoretical explanation of POE is found in 
chapter 3 ‘Literature Study’ together with explanation of what factors the 
performance of social sustainability is evaluated from.
When doing researches and evaluations with cases included, the cases 
should be carefully selected, and every chosen case should serve a speciﬁc 
purpose within the overall scope (Yin, 1994). In this speciﬁc case and for this 
speciﬁc thesis, the cases are chosen in collaboration with Rambøll A/S. Since 
Rambøll A/S has the overall wish for the evaluation and knowledge for future 
improvements of social sustainability, the cases are found based on their 
wishes and experiences. The cases are also found to be suitable to obtain a 
general improvement of social sustainability in masterplans.  
The following bullets desribed the considerations behind the chosen cases: 
➡Location of social housing areas 
The location was considered due to the empirical studies that has to be 
carried out on site of the social housing areas. Therefore, the cases were 
11
==PAGE:22==
 
found to be situated in Copenhagen or the surrounding areas which gives 
the opportunities to visit the areas and collect data throughout the entire 
period of doing the thesis. The method of empirical studies and the 
outcome would be extremely limited if the cases were situated out of 
reach. 
➡Degree of vulnerability 
The thesis is concentrated on evaluating  social sustainability meaning that 
the areas have to be relevant to consider in this context. The two cases 
have different degrees of vulnerability making the evaluation broader and 
applicable for more than just one type of vulnerable area. However, the 
areas are not vulnerable to an extent that makes the evaluation too difﬁcult 
to perform.  
➡Degree of physical solutions implemented 
The thesis evaluates the physical masterplans of the social housing areas. 
Therefore, the areas need to have had physical changes done that allows 
the thesis to have materials to evaluate from. The areas need to give the 
opportunity to analyze, discuss and conclude in a broader sense than just a 
few isolated solutions. If only isolated solutions were considered, 
projections and overall considerations of social housing areas in general 
would not be valid.  
➡Interest of Rambøll A/S 
Last but not least, the interest of Rambøll A/S has to be considered. The 
thesis is done in collaboration with Rambøll meaning that the outcome of 
the thesis has to have relevance for the future work of Rambøll in social 
housing areas. Therefore, the areas are chosen with Rambøll to have 
mutual interest in the project and its outcome.   
The chosen cases are:  
➡ Gadekærvej, Valby  
➡ Skoleparken, Hillerød  
➡ Tingbjerg, Copenhagen (skipped in May - see 1.4 Limitations) 
Further explanation and description of the cases are found in Chapter 4 
Cases. 
12
==PAGE:23==
2.2.2 Performance of social sustainability
The performance of social sustainability is assessed in the thesis to gather 
information and knowledge of how the masterplans succeed when 
implemented in the social housing areas.  
The thesis evaluates the two social housing areas with the interest to evaluate 
the master planning of the two social housing areas. The evaluation of 
performance concerns both the performance of the process and the 
performance of the ﬁnal results when it is put into use. 
 
The overall performances of the process and the use of the ﬁnal result 
are furthermore divided into categories to cover the important parts of the 
two phases. Figure 2-2 shows how the two phases are looking the 
respectively the understanding of social sustainability, the stakeholders and 
the solutions developed as well as the use of implemented spaces, the 
quality of solutions and the community created from solutions. These subjects 
follow the research questions to have consistency throughout the thesis.   
The performance of the implemented solutions is assessed from empirical 
studies, especially questionnaires, interviews and observations. This allows to 
obtain insight to the success of the implemented solutions as well as 
assessing how the process has developed throughout the building process. 
Process
Use
Community
Quality 
Stakeholders
Solutions
Understanding social sustainability
Use of spaces
Figure 2-2: Illustration 
of evaluated phases 
and underlying 
subjects for evaluating 
the performance of 
social sustainability.  
Own production
13
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Theoretical study  
The theoretical framework of the thesis is the literature study. Here, relevant 
literature has been collected to obtain insight and knowledge of chosen 
subjects. By handling well-considered subjects in relation to the research 
questions, the literature study works as the overall knowledge-space. As 
illustrated in ﬁgure 2-3, the four subjects of the literature study lie within the 
overall knowledge-space. The amount and quality of literature is crucial for 
the coverage of knowledge, since the overlapping space from each subject is 
signiﬁcantly small considering the knowledge found in each subject. 
To gather information that covered the total knowledge-space, both a 
random and a systematically literature search was carried out. First, a 
brainstorm of keywords relevant to the problem statement and research 
questions was performed. The keywords found was systematically sorted and 
combined together with different search techniques to obtain a broad and 
comprehensive gathering of information. The brainstorm and applied search 
techniques can be seen in Appendix A.  
The literature search has been carried out through various search engines like 
DTU ﬁnd it, Google Scholar, Scorpus and Springer together with libraries in 
Copenhagen and a smaller library at Rambøll A/S. When ﬁnding relevant 
literature, the references of the literature was investigated to ﬁnd further 
sources of information.  
All literature found has been screened for relevance and the most useful 
literature has been categorized and sorted to ensure an overall coverage of 
the knowledge-space illustrated in ﬁgure 2-3. The categorization of chosen 
literature can be seen in Appendix A.  
Figure 2-3: Illustration 
of each subject within 
the total knowledge-
space. Each circle 
represents one 
subject.  
Own production
Knowledge-space
Overlapping space
14
==PAGE:25==
Process
Use
Interview: Housing associations 
Observations in areas
Interview: Rambøll
Questionnaire: Residents
Figure 2-4: Coverage 
of process of 
masterplans and use 
of solutions by 
empirical studies.  
Own production
2.4 Empirical study 
The empirical study contains different surveys and researches completed in 
the social housing areas. Here, questionnaires, observations and interviews 
are conducted in all two areas to obtain insight and knowledge of the cases 
which are evaluated in the POE.  
The three different types of surveys are chosen to gather relevant information 
that covers the entire process of master planning in social housing areas. As 
illustrated in ﬁgure 2-4, the three types cover the different phases of process 
and use. Within the chosen surveys, different stakeholders are also 
considered to ensure workable and representative knowledge.
2.4.1 Stakeholder involvement 
The people involved in the empirical studies have been considered greatly to 
obtain a representative data collection. The chosen stakeholders who are 
involved must have the required knowledge relevant for the thesis. 
Different stakeholders have different opinions and perspectives and 
therefore, it is chosen to have both primary, secondary and key stakeholders 
represented in the empirical studies. The primary stakeholders are the 
residents since they are directly inﬂuenced while the secondary stakeholders 
are the housing associations since they are indirectly affected. The employees 
at Rambøll are also important since they have great inﬂuence on the changes 
made with the masterplans in the social housing areas.  
 
Within the primary and secondary stakeholders, key stakeholders are 
also considered, e.g. project leaders, board of housing associations and 
resident representatives. 
15
==PAGE:26==
Questionnaires are conducted in the social housing areas to obtain 
knowledge on the ﬁnal results of the masterplan in the areas. The 
questionnaires are conducted from residents in all two areas to gain insights 
into their perception of how the chosen designs of the common areas and 
edge zones of residence perform.  
The distribution of the questionnaires and hereafter the collection of the 
questionnaires are done in cooperation with the housing associations. The 
knowledge of the housing associations is used to do the questionnaires in a 
way that suits the speciﬁc social housing areas, e.g. how to distribute, when to 
send out the questionnaires, how to collect the answers etc.  
The questions for the questionnaires are done with the respondents in mind. 
Therefore, the questions are done in a way that is understandable and 
possible for the residents to answer. It has been greatly considered what 
knowledge the respondents have. Thus, the questionnaire is constructed so it 
does not seem too much or too complex for the residents to answer. 
The questionnaires will ask questions regarding the residents’ perception of 
the quality and the community of the implemented solutions. The questions 
are all constructed in the same way. The questions are constructed as a 
statement and the respondent has to answer on a unipolar Likert scale from 
1-5, where 1 is ‘meget uenig’, 2 is ‘uenig’, 3 is ‘neutral’, 4 is ‘enig’ and 5 is equal 
to ‘meget enig’.  
The questionnaires will be analyzed from the respondents answers to the 
statements. All answers are collected in Microsoft Excel to process the data.  
Data for each of the social housing areas are ﬁrst calculated in percentage 
separately in order to see the percentage distribution for each answer within 
each question. Hereafter, each question with the answers from 1-5 are 
registered and grouped in three categories for each social housing area:  
➡Negative covers answer 1 and 2 
➡Neutral covers answer 3 
➡Positive covers answer 4 and 5 
The percentage distribution of negative, neutral and positive answers is then 
calculated for each question: 
2.4.2 Questionnaires
16
==PAGE:27==
The percentage distribution of negative, neutral and positive answers is 
calculated for the total performance of all questions:
This section covers the overall thoughts on the method of questionnaires and 
the processing of data.  
Section 5.1 will go further into the questionnaire scheme for the residents. 
17
==PAGE:28==
2.4.3 Observations
Observations are done to gain personal insight into the residents’ daily life of 
the social housing areas, more speciﬁc the common areas and the edge 
zones. When observing people, it becomes possible to observe patterns and 
to map the use of the built environment, and this gives important insight 
towards the use of the built environments.  
The observations have happened at different times a day and at different 
weekdays to obtain representative information about the use of the built 
environment and to see how the use changes throughout the day. Weekdays 
and different timeslots are chosen to see the daily life of the residetns. Two 
observations were done in each area and 1-1,5 hours were spent at each 
observation. The observations are carried out by walking around the areas 
since the entire areas cannot be observed from one position. Thus, the 
observations will potentially miss some persons or observations in other parts 
of the areas when moving around.  
Table 2-5 shows the location, dates and time-slots for each observation.  
Section  
Section 5.2 will look deeper into the observations and which elements that 
will be observed as well as a scheme for observations on site. 
Location
Date
Time
Gadekærvej
08.04.19
15.00 - 16.30
Gadekærvej
25.04.19
17.00 - 18.00
Skoleparken
10.04.19
14.30 - 16.00
Skoleparken
02.05.19
16.30 - 17.30
Table 2-5: Chosen 
dates and time for 
observations in the 
social housing areas.  
Own production
18
==PAGE:29==
2.4.4 Interviews 
Name
Position
Organization 
Project
Sirkku Singer
Landscape Architect
Rambøll 
Skoleparken  
Gadekærvej 
Katja Petersen
Architect
Rambøll 
Skoleparken 
Lars 
Project Leader
Rambøll 
Skoleparken  
Gadekærvej 
Michael Hansen
Project Leader
Boligkontoret 
Danmark
Skoleparken 
Finn Rumohr 
Property responsible
Domea
Gadekærvej 
Board members  
Skoleparken
Board of residents
-
Skoleparken 
Boards Members  
Gadekærvej 
Board of residents
- 
Gadekærvej 
Interviews are conducted in order to obtain qualitative data. Several 
interviews are conducted from relevant employees at Rambøll who have 
been a part of the masterplans. The employees have knowledge and insight 
in both the design and implementation of the masterplans in the social 
housing areas. Representatives from the housing associations are also 
interviewed since they have great knowledge of the areas and the residents. 
The housing associations have a daily feeling of the state of the areas and 
how it has evolved throughout the renovations from the masterplans.  
At last, board members of the resident board are interviewed in group 
interviews to have the board of residents tell their perception of the 
renovation. The board members are the residents that have been the main 
representatives during the masterplan and building process. 
The interviews are semi-structured with prepared questions and directions for 
the conversation. Yet still, the interviewees have the possibility to direct the 
interview which allows the interview to change direction. By doing this, the 
interview collects the knowledge found important by the interviewee who is 
the expert. Thus, the prepared questions are open-ended to support the 
direction of the interview without leading the interviewees to speciﬁc answer. 
Table 2-6 shows the interviewees with their, position, organization and 
respective project registered.  
Section 5.3 will provide more detailed explanation of the semi-structured 
interviews and the prepared questions. 
Table 2-6: Interviewees 
with name, education, 
position, organisation 
and project.  
Own production
19
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
LITERATURE STUDY
3
==PAGE:32==
3 Literature study
In the section a literature study has been carried out. Here, the chosen 
important theories are described in order to establish the theoretical 
framework of the thesis.  
The theoretical framework consist of a description of the development of 
social housing in Denmark in order to understand how the social housing 
have been established in Denmark. Then the literature study will move on to 
sustainability including social sustainability and humans in built environments 
to gain insight in the existinsing theories on social sustainability in 
cooperation with built environments. Last, the methods of Post-occupancy 
Evaluation will be further described as an existing theory. 
3.1 Social housing in Denmark
This section will look a into social housing in Denmark since the model 
of social housing is quite unique. The section will also look into relevant 
issues and challenges that the many social housing areas faces before 
going through renovations and refurbishments. Thus, it will investigate 
the future of social housing since renovations and refurbishments tries 
to future-proof the social housing areas in Denmark. 
3.1.1 The development of social housing
The background of the thesis in section 1.1 shortly introduced social housing 
in Denmark from a historical point of view, showing how social housing in 
Denmark has developed from strong organizations to social segregated areas 
with physical and social problems. This section will go deeper into the model 
of social housing in order to understand the ground basis of social housing 
areas in Denmark. 
The entire development of social housing in Denmark has been through 
several phases from the beginning of the 20th century and forward.  
 
The ﬁrst three decades of the 20th century, Denmark developed from 
an agricultural country to an industrial society due to the migration from 
country side to the cities. By the beginning of the 20th century 60% of the 
population in Denmark lived outside the cities. By 1940, the share was down 
to 36%. The construction of housing did not meet the migration towards the 
cities which meant that the growing population in the cities had to gather in 
22
==PAGE:33==
the already existing housing. The quality of housing in the cities where poor 
yet better than the country side (DAB, 2017). 
New suburbs were created in 1920s and 1930s. In the larger cities of 
Copenhagen, Odense, Aarhus and Aalborg, new housing was constructed in 
three, four and ﬁve story housing. Late 1930s, the need for housing was 
relieved but it quickly shifted since the construction of housing was reduced 
in the occupation during the World War 2. The construction of new housing 
decreased while the demand increased because the population had more 
funds available due to the lack of other consumer goods. At the same time 
the baby boom in 1940s and 1950s increased the demand for housing (DAB, 
2017).  
 
The pressure on the housing market through the 20th century resulted 
in the formation of the ﬁrst housing association in 1912-1913. In 1919, a joint 
organization of Fællesorganisation for Almennyttige Danske Boligselskaber, 
FO, was founded. Even though the different associations had different 
political views, they all agreed to build good and affordable housing for the 
less fortunate. The formation of social housing associations continued and 
increased further when a new law in 1938 was approved that had a set of 
rules which promoted non-proﬁt associations. From 1940 to 1945, the 
amount of housing associations developed from 21 member organizations to 
110 member organizations in FO (DAB, 2017). 
After the occupation during World War 2, the migration to the cities and the 
conversion to industrial society went fast. The construction of housing that 
was needed in the cities increased after the war and after years with lack of 
goods for construction, the construction ﬁnally increased.  In 1945, the state 
published ‘Det fremtidige boligbyggeri’ and FO published ‘Fremtiden 
byggevæsen’. Both publications concluded that social housing had to be 
promoted because the social housing associations was capable of building 
larger, well-planned constructions (DAB, 2017). The construction of housing 
increased to 25.000 dwellings a year around 1950. However, these dwellings 
were still small in size and the need for housing was still great throughout the 
1950s (DAB, 2017). 
During the 1950s, the Ministry of Housing pressured to introduce the 
industrialized construction with prefabricated elements. The pressure resulted 
in the breakthrough of industrialized constructions around 1960. This resulted 
in a period from 1960 to 1980 where the construction of housing expanded 
greatly. It was now easy and quick to build housing, but it did not care for the 
technical and architectural qualities. Over 900.000 dwellings were built in the 
period of 20 years from 1960 to 1980 (DAB, 2017).  
 
However, throughout the 1960s and in the beginning of 1970s the 
increasing welfare meant that families moved from social housing to privately-
owned housing. The social housing tried to compete with the privately-
owned housing, but the single-family houses were still more attractive for the 
families with now two incomes. This put a pressure on the social housing 
areas and created economic problems in the housing associations which 
23
==PAGE:34==
inﬂuenced the economic and social conditions greatly. Less social stable 
groups moved into the social housing areas, and in 1976 it was generally 
warned that social housing in Denmark was now habitation for residents from 
the lowest part of the social hierarchy (Bech-Danielsen & Christensen, 2017).   
The 1980s showed how the concrete buildings from the industrialized 
building period in the 1960s and 1970s needed to be renovated. The 
concrete buildings decayed quicker than expected and the maintenance of 
the housing became more extensive. At the same time, residents were often 
assigned by the municipality creating a resident composition that also had a 
great effect on the decay of the buildings. The social housing areas were 
exposed to more neglect, crime and vandalism which made it difﬁcult to 
maintain the network and activities within the areas (DAB, 2017). The 
warnings from 1970s was correct; Social housing in Denmark was increasingly 
becoming habitation for residents with lack of resources (Bech-Danielsen & 
Christensen, 2017).  
 
In 1985, it was concluded that there was not one speciﬁc reason for 
the problems arising in the social housing areas. The problems were based 
on both social, economic and physical issues (Bech-Danielsen & Christensen, 
2017). 
It became clear that targeted actions had to be done in order to help the 
problems in the social housing areas. In 1991, the National Building Fund 
took over the ﬁnancing system for building damage. The focus was to 
improve the physical problems and damages found in the social housing 
areas. The aim was to make the areas more attractive to attract the resourceful 
families again (Bech-Danielsen & Christensen, 2017). 
 
Even though several actions were performed in 1980s and 1990s to 
improve the conditions of the social housing areas, the social and ethnical 
problems continued into the 21st century. In the 21st century, the most 
problematic social housing areas got known as ghettos but still a lot of areas 
had smaller problems while not being ghettos. The actions to improve the 
areas continued but now it was through extensive masterplans ﬁnanced 
through the National Building Fund. The focus on social cohesion was 
enhanced and the aim was to increase the quality of the areas in order to be 
more attractive and obtain a better image (DAB, 2017; Bech-Danielsen & 
Christensen, 2017). Renovations from 2000 - 2007 showed that the physical 
renovations resulted in gradual improvements opposite the renovations 
performed during 1980s and 1990s (Bech-Danielsen & Christensen, 2017). 
In 2011, it was politically adopted to invest more money in the renovations 
and the National Building Fund received a frame of 6,5 billion DKK in 2011, 
11 billion DKK in 2012 and 6 billion DKK in 2013 to support renovations in 
social housing areas. The renovations throughout these years showed how it 
was possible to keep the architecture, the history and the culture of the 
buildings and areas but still increase the quality of the social housing areas. 
The social housing areas got recognized as worthy housing that needed to be 
preserved and renewed (Bech-Danielsen & Christensen, 2017). 
24
==PAGE:35==
3.1.2 Today’s challenges in social housing
The previous section shows how social housing has been a great part of 
Denmark through several decades and centuries. Social housing has been 
through several ups and downs and the need for improvements is still strong 
after many years of renovations and refurbishments. 
Of cause, many challenges and issues that renovations have to deal with are 
based on the development of social housing as explained in the previous 
section. Many cases have fundamental issues from the industrialized 
construction methods from the 1960s and forward, and the social problems 
that came from social segregation are also present today. However, the social 
housing areas are also challenged by new challenges.  
The National Building Fund (Landsbyggefonden, 2014) states that the 
renovations of social housing areas have to concern a strategy that deals with 
both environmental, economic and social sustainability. Overall the 
renovations must work on a holistic level to maintain a Danish viable social 
housing sector.  
The National Building Fund that must be seen as an organization with expert 
knowledge and insight in social housing in Denmark has concluded several 
subjects that are found relevant for today’s renovations. Some subjects are 
grounded in the historical development of social housing and some are 
grounded in the development of society and construction as seen today 
(Bech-Danielsen & Christensen, 2017; Landsbyggefonden, 2014).  
The challenges that social housing areas faces today, and the challenges that 
masterplans need to work on are mentioned below (Bech-Danielsen & 
Christensen, 2017; Landsbyggefonden, 2014): 
➡Housing Quality  
➡Competitiveness  
➡Building Heritage 
➡Accessibility  
➡Infrastructure change 
➡Identity  
➡Community  
➡Safety  
➡Outdoor spaces
25
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Sustainability 
3.2.1 Sustainability as a term 
This section will look into sustainability in different levels. First, the section will 
introduce sustainability in general to understand the overall term. Hereafter, 
social sustainability will be explored deeper as a part of sustainability. The 
section will provide the knowledge from which the work and importance of 
social sustainability are understood. 
Sustainability has been a greatly discussed topic since the report ‘Our 
Common Future’ ﬁrst addressed “the major challenge to the world 
community” in 1987. Here, sustainability was deﬁned as “development that 
meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their needs” (World Commission on Environment and 
Development, 1987). Ever since a wealth of terms has evolved from the 
general topic of sustainable development now including: urban sustainability, 
sustainable management, environmental sustainability, weak or strong 
sustainability and so forth. The many terms have led to a conceptual chaos 
and the term remains vague which compromises the term’s utility and a wide 
disagreement still exists on what is sustainable and what it is not (Vallance, 
Perkins, & Dixon, 2011; Farrell, 1996). When going deeper into the serious 
amount of literature handling the term, many reaches the same point. 
Sustainable development, no matter how it is interpreted, are often based on 
the deﬁnitions from ‘Our Common Future’ (1987).  
‘Our Common Future’ (1987) suggest, that sustainability is about caring for 
the world around us and the planet, so that the future generations have the 
same planet to live on and that all need to have their needs fulﬁlled without 
consuming more than necessary. And this might seem to be the issue; ‘Our 
Common Future’ has found symptoms that shows how the population on 
earth are not succeeding in sustainable consumptions of resources. This non-
sustainable use of resources is not only limited to rising living standards in the 
developed countries, it also concerns the developing countries that are less 
privileged. The sustainable development is not only regarding the 
environmental aspect that evolves from the high rate consumption of natural 
resources. It also concerns the economic and social aspects; The need of 
resources which people experiences are socially and culturally driven and 
many live beyond the world’s ecological means. At the same time, the 
presence of many essential needs and resources depends on achieving 
growth potential, for instance in developing countries (World Commission on 
Environment and Development, 1987).  
26
==PAGE:37==
“Our Common Future” (1987) has derived four primary dimensions in the 
“major challenge to the world community” (Holden, Linnerud, & Banis, 2014): 
➡Safeguarding long-term ecological sustainability 
➡Satisfying human basic needs 
➡Promoting intragenerational equity  
➡Promoting intergenerational equity 
The dimensions all work within the three aspects of sustainability and even 
though, the dimensions were presented back in 1987, they are still valid in 
today’s world. It is seen from today’s focus on sustainable development, e.g. 
United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in 2014, that 
sustainability is still on a high international and national agenda many years 
after “Our Common Future” was published (Holden, Linnerud, & Banis, 2014). 
The report, Sustainable development: Our Common Future revisited (2014), 
has compared 167 countries on thresholds based on the four dimensions 
from “Our Common Future”. It was found that no country meets all four 
thresholds and furthermore, the report concludes that it is possible to reach 
the thresholds by 2030 (Holden, Linnerud, & Banis, 2014). This research 
shows how the ﬁndings from 1987 still acts a fundamental agenda for 
sustainable development and how the dimensions are still ones to reach in 
the future.  
Having established a more fundamental understanding of sustainable 
development handled since 1987, the three aspects of sustainability 
becomes even more important. The following will describe the three pillars 
(Basiago, 1999): 
➡Environmental sustainability requires maintenance of natural capital. The 
maintenance lies both within sources and sinks which are respectively 
when the world harvest of natural resources is kept within the regeneration 
rates and when waste from industrial production is controlled to follow the 
environmental assimilation. The protection of natural systems is a 
necessary component for achieving economic, social and environmental 
sustainability. 
➡Economic sustainability concerns growth, development and productivity. It 
implies a system of production that present consumptions levels without 
compromising future needs. First, it was the belief that the natural 
resources were unlimited making the capacity of the market to allocate 
resources efﬁciently. Today, the belief has changes and an understanding 
has emerged that uncontrolled growth strains natural resources. An 
economic system is now one that embraces other forms of capital than 
money, here natural, social and human as well as being constrained by the 
requirements of environmental sustainability. 
➡Social Sustainability implies a system of social organizations. It established 
the nexus between social conditions and environmental decay, why the 
social conditions and the environmental aspect are very interdependent. 
27
==PAGE:38==
 
Net losses of natural capital hinder social gains from improvements in 
ﬁnancial, technical and human capital. The social organizations and 
condition are further described in the following section 3.2.2 on social 
sustainability.  
Figure 3-1 illustrates the three-pillar system of environmental, social and 
economic sustainability. Each pillar is able to stand on their own but 
sustainability acts as the uniting term that makes them interdependent and 
united; Therefore, the three pillars cannot be seen individually since they 
interact and inﬂuences the goals and targets established to obtain and 
maintain well-being over a long, perhaps, indeﬁnite period (Lubk, 2016; 
Kuhlman & Farrington, 2010; Pareja-Eastaway, 2012). Yet, the three aspects 
are also considered in the sustainability triangle, also illustrated in 3-1. This 
shows the links between the three aspect, which the three-pillar system has 
been criticized not to show. The triangle illustrated how measures can be 
allocated on one of the lines affecting two of the aspects or within the entire 
triangle affecting all three aspects (Lubk, 2016). Both models are based on 
the same understanding which is important; That all three aspects are 
interdependent, and they affect each other. 
Figure 3-1: Three 
pillars model and 
triangular model of 
sustainability (Lubk, 
2016). 
Reproduction.  
ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY
SOCIAL
ECONOMIC
ENVIRONMENTAL
SOCIAL
ECONOMIC
In this section, surprisingly, no speciﬁc, agreed deﬁnition of sustainability was 
found. Of all literature found on this topic, no theory gave the same 
interpretation or deﬁnition. The only subject that theories fully agree upon, is 
that environmental, social and economic pillars is the basis of sustainability. 
Furthermore, the ﬁndings in this section shows how the following cite is truly 
believable: Sustainable development is said to be “universally desired, 
diversely understood, extremely difﬁcult to achieve, and won’t go 
away” (Lafferty, 2004). 
28
==PAGE:39==
3.2.2 Social Sustainability 
From the previous section, it was found that sustainability is very much based 
on the three aspects of environmental, economic and social sustainability. 
This thesis focuses on social sustainability, why this term will be further 
investigated in this section.  
As well as sustainability overall, social sustainability is a rather broad and 
multi-dimensional concept and it is approached in many different ways 
making the term deﬁned through criteria and key elements rather than an 
actual deﬁnition (Stender & Walter, 2019). This is caused by a limited amount 
of literature focusing on social sustainability as a deﬁned term, but rather as 
overlapping terms as social capital, social cohesion, social inclusion and 
social exclusion (Dempsey, Bramley, Power & Brown, 2009). 
The limited amount of literature may be caused by an imbalance between the 
three aspects of sustainability. Environmental, economic and social 
sustainability have not been equally prioritized within sustainable 
development. Theories say that the imbalance evolves from the 1960s’ and 
1970s’ environmental movements and approach to economic development 
(Landorf, 2011). However, Landorf (2011) indicates that regional and national 
governments in Europe are taken more and more interest in social 
sustainability.  
When looking into the European policy of social sustainability, it shows that 
European policy focuses not on social sustainability, but rather on sustainable 
communities which as a common european approach are deﬁned as “places 
where people want to live and work, now and in the future. They meet the 
diverse needs of existing and future residents, are sensitive to their 
environment, and contribute to a high quality of life. They are safe and 
inclusive, well planned, built and run, and offer equality of opportunity and 
good services for all” (Dempsey, Bramley, Power & Brown, 2009). Social 
sustainability is also assimilated with sustainable communities in the deﬁnition 
saying that social sustainability occurs when “the formal and informal 
processes, systems, structures and relationships actively support the capacity 
of current and future generations to create healthy and livable 
communities” (Barron and Gauntlett, 2002). 
These two explanations captures a lot of elements which are seen in other 
theories as well. Landorf (2011) indicated that literature in genereal shows 
that basic needs and equity are necessary physical and psychological themes 
of social sustainability. Furthermore, equitable access to services and 
opportunities, social capital, social cohesion and social identity are themes 
associated with social organization of communities that are evident in 
sustainable development literature. Woodcraft (2012) indicates from ﬁndings 
that in spite of multiple interpretations, conceptualizations of social 
29
==PAGE:40==
sustainability are well-established as individual ﬁelds of social policy, research 
and practice, notably social capital, social cohesion, well-being and quality of 
life. 
At the same time, not only overlapping terms appear; Also different 
categories of terms are handled throughout the literature. Landorf (2011) 
adresses that social sustainability both concerns traditional and emerging 
themes. The traditional themes are basic needs, education, employment, 
equity, human rights, poverty and social justice, while the emerging themes 
are said to be demographic change, social capital, empowerment and 
participation, social cohesion, sense of identity, health and safety and quality 
of life. Also Stender and Walter (2019) has in their ﬁndings of theory 
addressed both traditional element and more recent additions. The 
traditional elements are here found to be elements that stress equity in urban 
contexts including access to housing, education, jobs, income and human 
rights. The additions focus on social cohesion including empowerment, social 
capital, social mixing, identity and attachment to a place, safety, health, well-
being, happiness and quality of life. This follows the described development 
of challenges in social housing found in previous section 3.1 that also 
concerned new emerging challenges.    
The importance of the emerging terms is due to the goal of happy and 
healthy inhabitants in the sustainable environment. The happiness of 
inhabitants is more than being free from suffering, thus getting basic needs 
covered. More positive qualities are being in control over one’s life and 
having a positive relationship with the social and natural environments, thus 
reaching the emerging terms of social cohesion, social capital and so forth 
(van Bueren, van Bohemen, Itard, & Visscher 2012).  
All together different theories suggest terms that premises social 
sustainability. Dempsey, Bramley, Power & Brown (2009) has made an entire 
list of non-physical factors which all contributes to urban social sustainability 
found from a thorough literature review, see table 3-2. This is found to be the 
most widespread list of terms in the literature available. 
Education and training
Social justice
Participation and local democracy 
Community 
Social inclusion
Health, quality of life and well-being
Social capital 
Safety
Fair distribution of income
Social order
Social cohesion
Community cohesion
Social network
Social interaction
Sense of belonging
Employment 
Residential stability
Cultural traditions
Table 3-2: Non-
physical factors of 
urban social 
sustainability 
(Dempsey, Bramley, 
Power & Brown 2009) 
Reproduction.  
30
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Humans and built environments
3.3.1 The importance of the built environment
From the ﬁndings of social sustainability in section 3.2, it was found that social 
sustainability is obtained from psychological factors like social cohesion, 
quality of life and participation. To obtain these factors, physical factors in 
built environments can contribute, as seen in ﬁgure 3-4. This section will look 
deeper into theory of humans and built environments which links to social 
sustainability. This will give a better understanding of how and why the 
physical environment affects humans’ psychology and the overall social 
conditions in neighborhoods. 
SOCIAL  
SUSTAINABILITY
PSYCHOLOGICAL  
FACTORS 
PHYSICAL  
FACTORS 
Figure 3-4: Path from 
physical factors to 
social sustainability 
Own production.  
The surroundings that humans live in are extremely important for the lives of 
humans because the living environment consists of both social and physical 
environments. The built environment is directly linked to human’s behavior, 
especially the social behavior, and the urban design of a neighborhood have 
a great inﬂuence on social interaction and behavior; Humans’ desire and 
possibility to stay in urban spaces depends on the work done to make the 
spaces ﬁt the human dimension. If the built environment is anonymous and 
the urban design is of poor quality, human’s behavior becomes anti-social. 
No social interaction creates conditions for social problems, e.g. experiencing 
increased crime rates and feeling of unsafeness. On the other hand, better 
and more well-designed spaces invites humans to use urban spaces more, 
(van Bueren, van Bohemen, Itard, & Visscher, 2012; Gehl, 2010). It is 
suggested, that the fundamentals of the built environment is to meet the 
residents needs for now and for tomorrow. Thus, the ﬁndings here is clearly 
connected to the foundation of sustainability from ‘Our Common 
Future’ (1987). By discovering this link, it is now clear that social sustainability 
must be greatly dependent on the quality of the built environment because 
the surroundings has great inﬂuence on humans’ livability and from here, 
humans’ quality of life through the achievement of needs. The next sections 
will look into how, in theory, the built environment has to be designed to 
enhance the basis for achieving human needs and in what way the built 
environment has a great effect on humans’ lives in neighborhoods and 
communities. 
31
==PAGE:42==
3.3.2 Planning living housing areas 
This section will ﬁrst consider the overall planning of living and well-
functioning housing areas, in this mentioned as neighborhoods. Hereafter, 
the section will look deeper into the planning of neighborhoods that 
provides frames for beneﬁcial trafﬁc, stays and activities. The methods 
described will all be physical actions within built environments that enhance 
social qualities for residents.  
The principals behind living built environments can support planning of 
social sustainability. The neighborhood works as a frame for an environment 
where people get a greater understanding of each other through the daily 
activities in the built environment. The environment must embrace everyone 
in order to enhance the generations today and in the future, just as the 
concept of sustainability prescribes it  (Gehl, 2010).  
The spectrum of opportunities in the development of built environments are 
described from two extremes. One extreme is an environment with tall 
buildings, underground parking, massive trafﬁc from cars and great distances 
between building, spaces and functions. The environment has poor 
conditions for walking, biking and stays within public spaces. The outdoor 
areas are too big, to impersonal and unattractive. The other extreme is 
environments with low, close buildings with good conditions for sustainable 
trafﬁc and attractive urban spaces directly linked to housing and institutions. 
The extreme is a living environment with useful and well-functioning spaces 
that invites people to stay (Gehl, 1996).   
 
The living environments are not automatically given, and it has 
become a worthy but limited resource that must be carefully cherished 
through the planning of built environments (Gehl, 2010). The planning needs 
great attention for the human processes in life because the living 
environments in neighborhoods are problematic. If the neighborhood does 
not meet the desired patterns of the residents, then the neighborhood will 
hinder the patterns from happening. Gehl (1996) states, that under all 
circumstances, the physical frames inﬂuence the residents’ social situation.  
The development of well-functioning built environments comprises three 
scales: the city scale, the building scale and human scale. The following 
exploration of theory in relation to the built environment relevant for master 
plans in social housing areas will look into the building scale concerning the 
disposition of buildings and urban spaces and the human scale concerning 
the experience of the urban spaces from the residents’ point of view. The 
work done to invite humans into built environments is dependent on the 
human scale in a great matter. Often the work starts with the larger scales and 
ends with the humans or residents, but the ideal and necessary course of 
action is to consider human’s lives ﬁrst to create the real understanding of 
how the built environment has to be designed and developed (Gehl, 2010).  
32
==PAGE:43==
3.3.2.1 Trafﬁc 
Gehl (2010) states that everything residents do in a neighborhood start with 
residents moving by foot. The movement of residents in a neighborhood is 
the starting point from which small and big events evolve. If neighborhoods 
have good conditions for traveling by food, the conditions for living, safe, 
sustainable and healthy environments are created. Therefore, one of the most 
important factors to consider is the design of walking conditions. Traveling by 
foot is not only about moving, the design of walkable neighborhood is crucial 
for residents’ opportunities within the neighborhood: Meeting with other 
people, enjoying being outdoor and experiencing the outdoor environment. 
In a suitable walking neighborhood, walking not only becomes transport, 
walking also becomes the basis for social activities (Gehl, 2010).  
The potential for walking are greatly inﬂuences by many factors, including the 
quality of the rute, the coating of the path, the space given for moving and of 
cause also human factors, like age, mobility and habits. An important 
condition to a comfortable and enjoyable walk is that there is room to walk 
undisturbed and freely since humans, especially children and elderly requires 
walking without shoving and pushing. Factors for great walking conditions is 
also the consideration of human habits; Humans tend to walk directly to their 
destination crossing lawns and so forth. This requires that the paths are 
planned to meet the desired rutes for the users (Gehl, 2010; Gehl 1996).  
 
Besides the conditions of the rutes and path, the surrounding street 
patterns, sequences of spaces, characters of details and the entire 
intensiveness of exploration have a great inﬂuence on the joy of walking 
within the neighborhood. When the surroundings at the ground ﬂoor which 
people move along are inviting, interesting and eventful, walking becomes 
joyful and inspiring (Gehl, 2010).  
Walkable neighborhoods also concern having good conditions all year 
around. It is important to be able to walk in the neighborhood whether it is 
raining, sunny or snowing. Also the different hours of the day have to be 
considered. Lighting of rutes and paths is crucial to ensure safe walks at night. 
The lighting has to lighten up both the paths, humans and their faces and the 
surrounding facades and corners (Gehl, 2010).  
Walking, running, biking and physical activities within built environments 
beneﬁts not only the experience of the surroundings but also the health of 
the residents. Inviting residents to walk and bike as much as possible in the 
daily activities are essential for the health of the residents. Creating beautiful, 
safe and exciting surroundings invites people outdoor, and when people are 
moving more health issues are reduced and the quality of life and urban 
environment increases (Gehl, 2010). 
33
==PAGE:44==
3.3.2.2 Stays
Residential stays in neighborhoods are crucial for the social well-being of a 
neighborhood. Meeting opportunities, creating networks, having neighbors 
talk and the extent to which residents are outside their private homes has a 
great effect on the social level of a neighborhood. The more residents spend 
time outside their homes, the more residents will interact, gather and connect 
(Gehl, 1996).  
Stays in neighborhoods are often created from people moving, looking at 
other people and their stay, getting inspired and deciding to stay or take part 
in the already established stays. However, stays are also often centered 
around the necessity. The scale of stays in neighborhoods are dependent of 
the degree of necessity. At one end of the scale, the necessary stays are not 
dependent on the quality of the built environment. At the other end, the 
optional and recreational stays that takes place on benches and the like, 
where people are enjoying the surrounding life and neighborhood 
environment. These optional stays are greatly affected by the situation and 
the qualities of the places (Gehl, 2010).  
 
Gehl (2010) presents a survey showing that longer stays in built 
environments represent 89% of the life in the environment. The survey shows 
a connection between longer stays and living environments. When exploring 
different spaces, the most important observations is that the spaces that 
combines possibilities for both walking, stays, experiences and comfort are 
the most successful. 
The invite for stays is connected to how the spaces within the built 
environment is experienced; The spaces cannot be too big and blurred. 
Smaller spaces that is relatable and manageable are more inviting. If the 
environment is to big without character, it is necessary to create smaller 
spaces within the larger environment from greenery, outdoor furniture, 
plinths or the like which shapes more intimate spaces (Gehl, 2010).  
 
Studies from urban spaces in Stockholm has shown that four criteria 
are the most important when evaluating opportunities for stays (Gehl, 2010):  
➡Comfortable microclimate  
➡Good location as the edge of the space 
➡Suitable noise level and not being annoyed by other pollutions 
➡The view and attractions, like greenery, architecture, people and urban life 
When the local climate, the placement, protection and view go into unity, it 
becomes a nice place to stay for longer time. The Stockholm survey showed 
that seating with a few qualities where used for 7-12% of the time while the 
seating with many qualities where used for 61-72% of the time (Gehl, 2010). 
Seating for stays in the built environment needs both primary and secondary 
seating opportunities. The primary seating of benches, chairs and other 
seating furniture will provide to comfort for humans, especially elderly, who 
34
==PAGE:45==
need the support and the comfort from materials, good surfaces and 
insulation. The secondary seating opportunities, like stairs, plinths and 
monuments gives the opportunity to have more informal and spontaneous 
stays within the environment.  
 
The extent and duration of the stays in the built environments are 
essential for the life in the urban environments. When humans decide to stay 
for shorter or longer time, they tend to seek the edges of the spaces. It is 
often linked to the social feelings, e.g. people do not want to show that they 
are alone, besides not being in the way of other people. People tend to ﬁnd 
places at the edges that gives them a full view of the spaces besides having 
their back covered. The best conditions for stays are when edge zones, 
attractive details and installations like balconies and terraces at the facades 
are created. The edges need to have details that signals that people can take 
place at the edge zones, e.g. plinths, stairs or the like. The details also give to 
possibility to pull back and become less public or the opposite to step 
forward and become a greater part of the public life (Gehl, 2010; Gehl, 1996). 
 
 
To invite humans to use the built environment is the key for living and 
enjoyable environments. Like in many other cases in life, humans tend to stay 
where they feel comfortable and safe. The safety of the built environments is 
greatly affected by the life in the streets and spaces; When people choose to 
stay in speciﬁc areas, it indicates that the area is safe and pleasant to stay in. 
The invitation to stay and use the built environment can be created from 
different initiatives seen in the model to gather or to spread seen in ﬁgure 3-5 
(Gehl, 2010). The model shows essential condition worth considering 
planning built environments with respect for the human dimension (Gehl, 
1996; Gehl, 2010): 
➡To gather the people, stays and activities will give the opportunity for each 
event to stimulate other events. Participants in one event will have the 
opportunity to experience and participate in other events. This creates the 
basis for self-perpetuating process.  
➡To integrate different functions, people and events gives the opportunity 
to stimulate and inspire each other. Furthermore, it becomes possible to 
see how the community works and acts. It gives a faceted interface instead 
of being monotonously.  
➡To invite people into the public urban spaces of built environments is done 
by making the spaces accessible and welcoming when going from private 
to public atmospheres. The public physical environment has to be 
designed to invite people into the public space.  
➡To oopen for events and activities that creates extended and faceted 
opportunities for experiences. When functions and events are opened up 
for the public from transparency, it becomes visually accessible and 
thereby interesting.  
➡To increase the invite for people to stay at the built environments for a 
longer period of time is crucial. People using the public spaces for stays 
are the simplest and easiest way to strength living environments.
35
==PAGE:46==
3.3.2.3 Activities 
The physical design of the surrounding environment plays a great role in the 
human activities in urban spaces (Gehl, 1996). The activities within a built 
environment can be placed on a scale by the degree of necessity. In one end, 
the targeted and necessary activities are found, e.g. going to school, going 
grocery shopping and waiting for the bus. At the other end the recreational 
and optional activities are found, e.g. looking at the surrounding, enjoying 
good weather, enjoying other activities or enjoying the view. The better 
conditions the built environment provides, the more optional activities will 
happen. In built environments where the invite for optional activities are 
realized, the environment becomes more living, joyful and entertaining (Gehl, 
2010).  
To gather
To spread
To integrate
To segregate
To invite
To reject
To open
To close
To increase
To decrease
Figure 3-5: Model of 
plan principles: to 
gather or to spread 
(Gehl, 2010) 
Reproduction
36
==PAGE:47==
The connection between the quality of the built environment and the 
character and extent to which people are doing recreational, optional 
activities is further perceptible in the relation between the necessary, the 
optional and the social activities (Gehl, 2010). When the built environment is 
strengthened, the social activities are also strengthened as seen from the 
illustration in ﬁgure 3-6. The ﬁgure shows how the amount of the different 
activities changes from the quality of the built environment; The higher 
quality of the environment, the more optional and social activities.  
 
Gehl (1996) states that all activities evolve from elementary activities of 
walking, standing, sitting as well as seeing and looking. Thus, the quality of 
the built environment has to enhance the possibilities for those activities. The 
previous section has described how these elementary activities are created 
from the built environment.
High quality  
physical environment
Low quality  
physical environment
Necessary 
activities
Optional 
activities
Social  
activities
Figure 3-6: Connection 
between quality of 
physical environment 
and activities  
(Gehl, 2010) 
Reproduction
Necessary activities have to happen in both cases of physical environments 
however, the necessary activities tend to take longer when the quality is high. 
The optional activities will increase greatly together with social activities 
because it becomes inviting and attractive to use the outdoor space instead 
of being inside the private sphere. The social activities often follow from other 
activities where people are being the same places (Gehl, 2010; Gehl 1996).  
Just as section 3.4.2.2 presented about humans’ tendency to stay at the 
edges of the urban spaces, activities are also often situated at the edges 
where the housing and urban spaces meet. The edge zone is the most 
attractive outdoor space (Gehl, 2010).  
 
Gehl (2010) presents a survey showing how the amount of activities 
are affected by the design of the edge zones. The survey showed that 
activities in housing areas with front yards had 69% of the activities within the 
front yards and only 31% of the activities happened in the street space. The 
survey furthermore showed how a lot of activities where combined with 
outdoor stays while the residents have the opportunity to observe the 
37
==PAGE:48==
surrounding life. The activities in the outdoor half-private spaces are 
especially found when the spaces are connected to urban spaces with no 
heavy trafﬁc. Another survey from Copenhagen showed how 55% of the 
activities are happening in the half-private front spaces even though only 25% 
of the residents are living in the ground ﬂoor (Gehl, 2010). Residents tend to 
seek into more private spaces while still being connected to the surrounding 
public life, and this actually plays an essential role in the life and attractiveness 
of urban spaces; If the edges are active, open and living, the spaces becomes 
much more inviting (Gehl, 2010).  
 
Besides having more activities within the front yards, studies also show 
that other activities tends to happen when the ground ﬂoor is active. Active 
ground ﬂoors generate seven times as much activity than inactive ground 
ﬂoors, and these activities might as well be other activities not necessarily 
connected to the existing activities (Gehl, 2010).  
 
However, it is not enough that activities are happening. The range of 
different activities is also important since different activities creates 
possibilities to strengthen social sustainability. It has great importance that all 
groups and segments of the society, regardless of age, gender, religion or 
ethnicity, can meet through their daily routines and activities (Gehl, 2010). 
Gehl (1996) states that the best attraction for people is other people. The 
most inviting factor is when other people are doing their activities within the 
built environment. Thus, great events often evolve from smaller ones.  
Unfortunately, there are many examples of physical built environments that 
lacks quality. Often neighborhoods have too high buildings with increased 
density as well as poor urban spaces that does not function in practice. It is 
important, in such a case, that the desired high-density representing quantity 
is combined with high-quality urban spaces (Gehl, 2010). In social housing 
areas, the high quantity of housing is built from the post-war demand for 
housing, however, the quality of urban spaces did not follow in the 1950s 
-1970s.  Thus, nothing will happen in the areas because nothing is happening 
already — children are staying in watching TV because nothing is interesting 
outside and the elderly are staying in because there is nothing to look at. This 
creates a state of mind where it is not even interesting to look out the window 
anymore and this cuts off the entire built environment and neighborhood 
from each single dwelling. The empty neighborhood encourages vandalism 
and crime and this state will keep people of the street for good. What is 
important to recognize is that a lack of quality starts a vicious circle that results 
in problematic situations of crimes, lack of safety and lack of social 
sustainability (Gehl, 1996). 
38
==PAGE:49==
3.3.2.4 Architecture, greenery and lighting 
Aesthetic and visual aspects in the built environment improves the 
environment greatly - beautiful spaces, well-designed details and good 
materials gives valuable experiences when moving in the built environment. 
Monuments, sculptures, details of buildings and decorations adds valuable 
qualities for the urban environment. Here, visual elements can also be the 
main element creating visual experiences of art in the environments (Gehl, 
2010).  
Built environments that cares for the practical circumstances for the 
movement within the built environment while also caring for the details and 
the whole of the environment in one unity becomes a place that is pleasant 
for residents to use. The difﬁculty is often to create environments where all 
architectural element works as a whole to strengthen the qualities of the 
environment. Besides working with the spaces and details within the built 
environment, essential qualities can also be obtained by implementing 
special qualities - contact with water elements, use of greenery, considering 
the local climate and use of height differences creates attractive combinations 
of extra qualities (Gehl, 2010). 
 
 
Greenery as visual elements is often seen in built environment, and it has 
great inﬂuence of the quality of the environment. Greenery within built 
environment not only gives visual qualities but also symbolize recreation, 
beauty, sustainability and natural diversity. Furthermore, ﬂowers, plants and 
trees create shadow in the summer heat, gives shelter for rain, cools and 
cleans the air, creates spaces within larger environment and accentuate 
important spaces (Gehl, 2010). Gehl (1996) also states, that especially 
residents in the Northern European countries ﬁnds it valuable to be able to 
follow the seasons from the greenery - when people see how the trees are 
without leaves in the winter, people are twice as happy for the spring and 
summer.  
 
Rosenbak (2013) states that the diversity and choices of vegetation are 
important - variation of vegetation creates different recreational experiences 
and attracts different habitats of animals and spaces can be creates from 
diversity in vegetation instead of just large, green ﬁelds. Furthermore, the 
placement, growth conditions and choice of vegetation is important to 
consider in the context of the local climate and possible discomforts of 
pollen, shadow and seeding.  
As mentioned earlier, lighting is important at paths and paths when walking, 
especially at night, to ensure safety in the environment. Lighting has also 
great effect on the aesthetic quality of the built environment - the built 
environments also has to be considered at night where everything is dark. 
The use of lighting gives opportunities to have safe, beautiful and aesthetic 
environments at night. Lighting is both considered as the light from 
apartments and stairways and designed lighting of the built elements (Gehl, 
2010). 
39
==PAGE:50==
3.3.3 Social relations from built environments
In the section about activities, it was explored how a high-quality physical 
environment created more social activities. These activities are the basis of 
developing social relations.  
First, the social activities might only be short social exchanges, random 
meetings, minor conversations about the weather, asking for directions or the 
like. However, these brief social contacts develop into more serious social 
contacts. People will begin to have more subjects to interact over and people 
might ﬁnd common interests. From here, relationships develop and it all 
began with spontaneous and unpredictable small conversations (Gehl, 2010).  
 
Of cause, social relations can also be more developed from the 
beginning with playdates and friends meeting in the built environment as 
well as social relations can be developed from larger arranged community 
activities (Gehl, 2010).  
The important factor to consider is that social activities happens whenever 
two people are at the same place to see, listen and meeting is an important 
type of contact that is the starting point for more extensive social contacts 
and networks. Even though the physical environment has to power over the 
quality, the content and the intensity of the social contact, is has great power 
over the opportunities and presence of passive contacts that frames the 
following social relations (Gehl, 1996). Figure 3-7 illustrates how passive 
contact can develop to close relationships.
The social relations are not only beneﬁcial for the social harmony of the 
neighborhood or environment. The built environment as meeting place for 
social interactions and development of social relationships are directly linked 
to much greater perspectives of social sustainability, safety, conﬁdentiality, 
democracy and crime prevention. For instance, strengthening the life in urban 
spaces within neighborhoods is used as strategies for crime prevention 
because residents’ feel closer, more familiar and gain increased mutual 
consideration (Gehl, 2010).
Low intensity
High intensity
Passive contact (see and look)
Random contact
Acquaintances
Friends
Close friends
Figure 3-7: Overview 
of different contact 
from intensity,  
(Gehl, 1996) 
Reproduction
40
==PAGE:51==
When working with social relations from built environment, it is important to 
consider to comfort zones of human’ interacting or being in social situations. 
Humans are “no touching individuals” meaning that humans have different 
distances that are equal to different types of communication. The rules of 
communication are important in built environments. People need to have the 
opportunity to adjust the distances to other people to feel safe and 
comfortable. People need to be have the opportunity to get close with close 
friends or to dissociate in uncomfortable situations with random contacts. 
However, the distances must still be controlled by the environment. If the built 
environment have to large distances between buildings and spaces, the 
entire environment will feel impersonal, formal and cold. The scale becomes 
to big with lack of intense experiences (Gehl, 2010). Linked to this, Jane 
Jacobs (1962) states, that when people are not connected properly to each 
other within the built environment, they have to enlarge their private life. 
People have to share more than needed when contacts are established in the 
public built environments or settle with a lack of contact. Thus when people 
have to choose between sharing much or nothing, the choice is nothing. If 
there is a lack of natural and casual public life, it is common for residents to 
isolate themselves to a fantastic degree (Jacobs, 1962).  
As described earlier, the see and look contacts are the most important 
contacts in the built environment. They are the basis for development of more 
intense and personal social relations. The view to other people and their stays 
and activities is a prerequisite for communication between people thus it is 
ideal for residents to have a unimpeded view of the attractions within the 
neighborhood. This applies on ground but also from higher levels, e.g. in 
apartment buildings, where there needs to be contact between in- and 
outdoor (Gehl, 2010). However, the built environments must not have to large 
distances. Gehl (1996) states that the spaces must not be to wide or long, 
since people have short distances for social contact. Thus it is a good idea to 
work on maximum distance for events in built environments on 70-100 
meters and maximum distance for social contact on 20-25 meters.  
 
The physical planning of the built environment can mediate or hinder 
the see and look contacts. Jan Gehl (2010) suggests ﬁve conditions that 
affects the contacts between residents of neighborhoods as seen in ﬁgure 
3-8.
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3-8: Factors that 
mediate or hinders see 
and look contacts 
(Gehl, 2010) 
Reproduction
No walls
Walls
Small 
distances
Large 
distances
Low speed
High speed
One level
More levels
Orientation: 
Face to face 
Orientation: 
Back to back
42
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Post-Occupancy Evaluation
3.4.1 Deﬁnition & purpose 
The chosen method for the thesis is the post-occupancy evaluation. As the 
overall considerations choosing the method of POE is described in former 
chapter 2 ‘Methodology’, this section will look deeper into the theory deﬁning 
the purpose of POE, the approach of applying POE and the beneﬁts and 
barriers.
It is no secret that there are many different interpretations of a Post-
occupancy evaluation (POE). It is difﬁcult to have one simple and unique 
deﬁnition that helps obtaining information and insight to what POE is. Several 
scientist and theorists has given their deﬁnition of POE; POE is an “appraisal 
of the degree to which a designed setting satisﬁes and supports explicit and 
implicitly human needs and values of those for whom a building is designed”, 
POE is “examinations of the effectiveness for human users of occupied design 
environments”, POE “can be used as a tool to indicate performance of a site 
after it has been newly constructed or recently redeveloped” Friedman, 
Zimring, & Zube, 1978; Zimring & Reizenstein, 1980; Beutel & Dalton, 2010). 
These examples of deﬁnitions are different, yet they concern the same 
agenda, namely the POE is not only about the aspect of physical building 
technics, but it also deals with architectural and anthropological aspects. The 
approach towards POE has evolved from only addressing performance of 
buildings to also address design evaluations that has a more holistic, process-
oriented approach; This new approach makes it possible to consider non-
technical factors (Hadjri & Crozier, 2009): Preiser, 2001). 
 
Zimmerman and Martin (2001) suggests that the overall purpose is to collect 
valuable information to support the goal of continuous improvement. POE 
provides the real information on which to base decisions and gives the key to 
informing and improving the next project instead of creating projects which 
are based in assumptions. Thus, it becomes possible to obtain continuous 
improvements not only for built environments to be more successful but also 
to increase the efﬁciency by contributing to improved designs, systems and 
equipment (Zimmerman & Martin, 2001).  
POE becomes extremely valuable when implementing the approach of case 
studies. When evaluating a number of cases through POE, it becomes 
possible to analyze individual cases into reliable comparisons that can be 
further evaluated into more general manners. Doing case studies in POE 
provides contextual information, greater depth of data, opportunities for 
benchmarking performance and learning opportunities from each project 
(Turpin-Brooks & Viccars, 2006).
43
==PAGE:54==
Within the overall purpose and outcome of doing POE, lies several beneﬁts 
and aims that are both short-, medium- and long-term (Zimmerman & Martin, 
2001, Whyte & Gann, 2001, Preiser, 2001): 
➡Apply the skills of design and building more efﬁciently  
➡Improve the base on which decisions are made and obtain better decision-
making  
➡Improved commissioning and design of the built including cost-savings, 
re-cycling and space utilization 
➡Improved user requirements and management procedures  
➡Target refurbishments   
➡Provide knowledge for guides and regulatory processes and improved 
data-bases, standards and criteria  
➡Improvements in building performance 
Preiser (2001) ﬁnds the most important beneﬁt of POE the positive inﬂuence 
upon the delivery of humane and appropriate environments for people 
through improvements in the programming and planning (Preiser, 2001). 
However, Zimmerman and Martin (2001) suggests that POE are not an 
ingrained part of the delivery of buildings or built environments is that the 
process have not been taught for the right people; POE is often known by 
social designers and researcher but not education within the building 
industry. Furthermore, when building, the number of different stakeholders 
with different viewpoints, outlooks, technical languages, goals and the like is 
so great that it is difﬁcult to use POE in the right way, e.g. the investors has 
interest in time and cost while the end-user has interest in the end-results.
3.4.2 Conducting POE
POE includes three different types of reviews are listed below (Higher 
Education Funding Council for England, 2006; Preiser, 2001): 
➡Indicative POE 
The indicative POE is an indication of major strength and weaknesses of 
the performance. Selected interviews and a walk-through of the facilities 
forms the basis of quick useful information. 
➡Investigative POE 
Investigative POW is a more thorough investigation. The outcome is more 
in-depth information, causes and effects of problems within the 
performance investigated. The basis of the outcome is more rigorous 
research techniques to produce more robust data, like representative 
interviews and questionnaires.   
➡Diagnostic POE  
Diagnostic POW is a deeper very thorough analysis which correlate 
physical environmental measure to subjective occupant response 
measures. The outcome here is usually creation of new knowledge about 
aspects of the building performance.  
44
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3-9: Post-
occupancy evaluation- 
Phases and steps 
(Preiser, 2001).  
Reproduction
The phases and steps are considered within this thesis. Every step is covered 
throughout this report from the introduction to the conclusion. However, the 
steps are not described directly throughout the chapters and section in the 
thesis, but the steps are implemented and considered throughout the entire 
thesis. The ﬁrst phase of planning is done throughout the introduction and 
methodology.The conduction phase has been carried out to collect the data 
and analyzing the data. The chapters of ﬁeld studies, results and analysis 
covers this phase. Last, the applying phase is where the entire process has to 
be wrapped into useful and informative ﬁndings and recommendations. 
45
The POE of this thesis is carried out as an investigative review. It uses the 
representative interviews and questionnaires for acquiring information and 
data in order to evaluate the performance of the built environment in the 
social housing areas. To so do, the POE will both in theory and in practice go 
through several phases and steps.  
This phases and steps are described in different theories of POE. A thorough 
guide to POE introduces the following steps: (1) Identify the POE strategy, (2) 
decide on approach, (3) brief of the POE, (4) Plan the POE, (5) Carry out the 
POE, (6) Prepare the report and (7) Actions in response to POE (Higher 
Education Funding Council). Preiser introduces three different phases with 
different steps as seen in ﬁgure 3-9. The planning phase is to prepare the 
POE through (1) reconnaissance and feasibility, (2) resource planning and (3) 
research planning. The conducting phase consists of (4) initiating the on-site 
data collection, (5) monitoring and managing data collection procedures and 
(6) analyzing data. The last applying phase is to (7) report ﬁndings, (8) 
recommend actions and (9) reviewing outcomes (Preiser, 2001).  
Levels of POE
1. Diagnostic POE
Feedforward 
into next 
Building 
Cycle
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
PLANNING
CONDUCTIONG
APPLYING
Reconnaissance 
and feasibility
Resource 
planning
Research 
planning
Initiating on-site 
data collection
Monitoring and 
managing data 
collection 
procedures
Analyzing data
Reporting 
ﬁndings
Recommending 
actions
Reviewing 
outcome
1. Indicative POE
2. Investigative POE
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
CASES
4
==PAGE:58==
Address: Hillerødholmsallé, 3400 Hillerød 
Constructed in: 1958 / 1965-1968 
Consists of: 
10 apartments blocks  
426 apartments  
Renovated in: 2013 - 2019 
Inital economy of renovation: 460 million DKK 
Stakeholders: 
Housing organization: Boligselskabet Nordsjælland 
Consultancy: Rambøll A/S 
Contractor: Adserballe & Knudsen
Figure 4-1: Location of 
Skoleparken in relation 
to Copenhagen. 
(Styrelsen for 
Dataforsyning og 
Effektivisering, u.d.) 
Own production.  
4.1 Skoleparken, Hillerød
4 Cases
This section will introduce the two cases in Skoleparken, Hillerød and 
Gadekærvej, Valby. The section will show basis information, go through the 
masterplan and the suggested solutions as well as going through the actual 
implemented solutions. 
48
==PAGE:59==
4.1.1 Masterplan
The masterplan of Skoleparken is from 2012. The masterplan arises from 
physical building needs primarily caused by dilapidation. In 2005, it was 
identiﬁed that the facades where seriously dilapidated and from here, the 
housing association started a thoroughly registration of the buildings’ 
condition (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). From here, more 
examinations where performed while being in dialogue with the National 
Building Fund. The examinations showed the nedd for a masterplan in 
Skoleparken, Hillerød (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012).  
In 2010, the residents were noticed at a residents meeting and three different 
task groups were created. One for balconies/facades/bathrooms, one for 
activity house and one for the outdoor space. Their work towards future-
prooﬁng the areas was presented late 2010 and in collaboration with the 
National Building Fund, the masterplan was edited and ﬁnally approved in 
2012 (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012).  
The basis of the renovation is that Skoleparken was dilapidated. Most 
importantly, as mentioned, the facades where ruined and the open outdoor 
spaces were bland. Also, problems with installations, rooﬁng and bathrooms 
appeared. Lack of activities for younger people also created problems. In 
total, Skoleparken was falling apart and it needed to be upgraded in order to 
attract new resourceful residents (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). 
The aims of the masterplan for Skoleparken is among other (Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012): 
➡Create good and accessible outdoor spaces 
➡Create beautiful facades with variation and depth  
➡Obtain architectural ﬁnish that appears welcoming and well maintained  
➡Make the area appear light and friendly  
➡Increase safety and minimize risk of crime  
➡Offer contemporary housing 
The masterplans present various solutions for the social housing areas. Table 
4-2 shows the suggested solutions found to the problems. Every solution has 
also their own objectives which are also shown in the table (Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). What it necessary to notice is that the majority of 
the solutions are physical solutions for the building physic which is the main 
objective of physical masterplans. 
49
==PAGE:60==
Table 4-2: Physical 
solutions and actions 
presented in 
masterplan for 
Skoleparken, Hillerød 
(Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 
2012). 
➡Facades and gables 
‣
New insulation of outer walls 
‣
Windows in gables 
‣
New windows and balcony doors  
‣
Basement entrances are renovated
➡Balconies
‣
New balconies are installed  
‣
Terraces are built in ground ﬂoor apartments 
with direct access from apartments  
‣
French balconies are built in apartments without 
balconies 
➡Roof
‣
New insulation of rooﬁng 
‣
Roof tiles are ﬁxed  
‣
Gutter and downpipes are ﬁxed 
➡Entrance and 
stairways
‣
Access control are installed in all stairways  
‣
Stairways with increased accessibility are fully 
renovated 
‣
Windows are installed in the total height of the 
stairways 
‣
New entrances are built 
➡Bathrooms
‣
Bathrooms are fully renovated 
➡Sewage and drains
‣
The sewage are hosed and pipes are ﬁxed 
➡Water installations
‣
Installations are demolished  
‣
New installations are installed
➡Ventilation
‣
Mechanical ventilation is installed 
➡Electric installations
‣
Upgrading of installations  
‣
Upgrading of lighting in terrain 
➡Other 
‣
Mechanical ventilation is installed 
➡Accessibility 
‣
Installations in laundry rooms are renovated 
‣
Constant ventilation in laundry rooms are 
installed  
‣
Lowest parts of roof drains are done in 
materials  
‣
Cracks in basement outer walls are injected
➡Activity house 
‣
420 m2 activity house 
➡Outdoor space
‣
A square is built as meeting point 
‣
Areas by the entrances are upgraded into 
actual arrival areas  
‣
Smaller gardens are done with direct access 
from ground ﬂoor apartments  
‣
A large zone of greenery are made  
‣
Upgraded lighting
50
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4-3: Site plan of 
open outdoor spaces 
in Skoleparken, 
Hillerød.  
Source: Rambøll
For this thesis that has a focus on the common open spaces and the edge 
zone between residence and outdoor spaces, the following will look deeper 
into the solutions for these areas presented in the masterplan.  
Common outdoor space 
The entries’ yard area is divided into ﬁve green spaces that has existing grass 
areas, smaller playgrounds and open spaces with the building blocks on each 
side. Furthermore, parking spaces are placed in between the spaces. The 
spaces need upgrading since the areas are in very bad shape (Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). 
Centrally placed in the outdoor areas is a square. The square should be the 
meeting point and will also have an activity house. Around the activity house, 
spaces will be created for outdoor stays but also spaces for children and 
teenagers to play while their parents are enjoying the café-area (Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). 
A new larger green space is established. The large open space is directly 
linked to existing greenery with trees which are intended to expand into the 
unused area with greenery and terrain formations to make the large area 
more living and make the area more active (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 
2012). 
The existing ﬁve green spaces are outdated and has a serious need for 
activities and opportunities for stays. The plans were to create 5 spaces with 
different themes like water, soil, ﬁre and other natural elements. However, 
when the ﬁnal masterplan was developed in 2012, it was decided to skip the 
renovations of the spaces since the economic support from the National 
Building Fund could not cover all visions for Skoleparken (Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). 
 
The site plan in ﬁgure 4-3 shows the different initiatives of the outdoor 
spaces. Be aware that the plan only shows the area in Skoleparken which is 
considered in this thesis. 
51
==PAGE:62==
 
Entrances and stairways  
The existing entry zones around the entrances had walking paths directly 
towards the building facade. It created an unsafe zone since there was a risk 
of collision in front of the entrances and people was able to look directly into 
the ground ﬂoor apartments (Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012). 
An actual entry zone is developed at the entrances to have an area that allows 
a good arrival. The walking paths are moved from the facades to have a half-
private distance. Besides this, some entrances will have smaller green spaces 
to invite the residents for stays and meetings (Karl Henning Sørensen 
Arkitekter, 2012). 
Gardens and terraces 
The ground ﬂoor apartments will have a small garden with direct access from 
the apartments. The gardens will have a terrace and hedge on two or three 
sites. Figure 4-4 illustrates the gardens towards the larger green space and 
the stairways are columns on the entire height of the facade with windows.  
Figure 4-4: Entry 
zones, walking paths  
and larger green areas 
at Skoleparken, 
Hillerød.  
(Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 
2012). 
52
==PAGE:63==
Activity house  
The planned activity house is 420 m2 placed in the middle of the social 
housing area. The intension is to have an activity house with functions for all 
the residents including facilities for everyday use like shared dinners, 
meetings, hobbies, ball games as well as space for celebrations. The house 
will have a café, kitchen, toilettes, several multifunctional rooms and spaces, a 
larger multifunctional hall, estate ofﬁce and staff facilities. 
Figure 4-5: Rendering 
of activity house and 
balconies from 
masterplan in 
Skoleparken. 
(Karl Henning 
Sørensen Arkitekter, 
2012). 
Balconies 
New and deeper balconies are established with openable glass windows and 
elements with slats for sun protection. In the ground ﬂoor apartments, the 
balconies have doors with access to the gardens.  
Figure 4-5 illustrates the activity house and the balconies with the ground 
ﬂoor gardens.
53
==PAGE:64==
4.1.2 Implemented solutions
This section will describe the implemented solutions in Skoleparken.  
Gardens and terraces  
All ground ﬂoor apartments have got a smaller garden including a terrace. 
The gardens have the width of the apartments and all gardens are seven 
meters deep. The gardens have hedges on all sides besides the outer wall of 
the buildings. Thus, the gardens are fully deﬁned as the individual 
apartments’ garden.  
The gardens have a smaller terrace in grey tiles and a smaller lawn. The 
terraces ﬁt the size for a family to have a grill, outdoor furniture and a parasol. 
The terrace is directly reachable from the stairs towards the belonging 
apartment which extends the living space.  
The lawn makes it possible for people to either have it as a simple lawn or to 
work further in the gardens themselves. Besides the hedge, greenery and 
ﬂowers can be planted as the individual resident like. 
Activity house  
The activity house is placed in the middle of Skoleparken creating a meeting 
point for every resident in every building block. The activity house itself is 
approximately 300 m2. It has several different rooms for activities including 
gaming room, meeting room, smaller kitchen, three toilettes etc.  
The activity house is black with greenery crawling up wires to have green 
facades. It has larger windows and several entrances. Some windows have 
slats of wood which gives an architectural ﬁnish.  
The house is directly linked to a larger terrace with outdoor furniture where 
indoor and outdoor activities can be united. Besides space for stays, the area 
around the activity house has a larger available area with gravel including two 
pinned table tennis tables in orange.  
Balconies  
The balconies are made for all apartments. They are built as long columns on 
the facade and is closed of balconies. The columns are made of masonry that 
ﬁts the new facade and the balconies’ half height is also made of masonry. 
The upper half height of the balcony is windows which are able to slide in 
order to have a more open balcony. The balconies in the ground ﬂoor 
apartments have a door installed towards the gardens.  
54
==PAGE:65==
Walking paths  
The walking paths around the area of Skoleparken has been rearranged to ﬁt 
the area better. The walking paths are made more interesting with breaks and 
smaller straight lines that ﬁts the new ramps and stairs. The entire areas are 
accessible for disabled people since ramps connects the different levels 
everywhere. The walking paths have lighting all over in order for every 
resident to feel safe when walking in the neighborhood.  
Entry zones and entrances  
The entrances and the entry zones have been redone. The entrance is black 
‘boxes’ on the facade in the height of the ground ﬂoor. The walking paths are 
moved to have the distance of the entrance box towards the facade. The 
depth of the entrance box then becomes the distance from the facade to the 
public walking path.  
In the area created from the facade to the walking paths, smaller green 
patches are established. Some with grass and some with plants and ﬂowers.  
The entry zones are equipped with lighting, bike racks, outdoor benches and 
trash cans. 
Figure 4-6: 
Implemented activity 
house, facade with 
gardens and balconies 
and walking paths. 
Own photos. 
55
==PAGE:66==
4.2 Gadekærvej, Valby 
Address: Gadekærvej, 2500 Valby 
Constructed in: 1979 - 1981 
Consists of: 
1 apartments blocks  
203 apartments  
Renovated in: 2013 - 2017 
Initial economy of renovation: 126 million DKK 
Stakeholders:  
Housing organization: DOMEA 
Consultancy: Rambøll A/S  
Contractor: Enemærke & Petersen  
Figure 4-7: Location of 
Gadekærvej in relation 
to Copenhagen center. 
(Styrelsen for 
Dataforsyning og 
Effektivisering, u.d.) 
Own production.
56
==PAGE:67==
4.2.1 Masterplan
Figure 4-8: Overview 
of buildings and 
division of section 1 
and 2. 
(WITRAZ, 2012). 
Just as Skoleparken in Hillerød, the masterplan of Gadekærvej in Valby 
are based on the need for renovation due to dilapidation. The buildings 
and open spaces are unattractive and needs to go through necessary 
recovery and modernization. The apartments are not contemporary and 
there is a risk that the competitiveness fails and that the composition of 
residents shift towards social imbalance (WITRAZ, 2012).  
The aim is to make Gadekærvej an attractive housing area where 
people wants to live and stay. Furthermore, the aim is to make 
Gadekærvej an area where neighborliness and solicitude thrives 
(WITRAZ, 2012). The overall aims for the masterplan (WITRAZ, 2012): 
➡Attractive and well-functioning dwellings  
➡Good settings for community feelings and experiences  
➡Strengthened network between residents and local area  
➡A sustainable housing area 
The masterplan is based on material from the housing association 
including screening reports, economic data, examination of the 
buildings and conversations with operation personnel and residents. 
After dialog with the National Building Fund, examinations of building 
parts were conducted due to dilapidation and erosion (WITRAZ, 2012). 
Thus, the masterplan is based on physical renovation of buildings.  
The masterplan contains of three main actions that involves physical 
actions and changes that aims to create the physical settings for social 
togetherness and activities (WITRAZ, 2012): 
➡Environmental improvements 
➡Accessibility  
➡Rebuilding  
The masterplan focuses on the buildings in two sections - section1 and 
2. The sections are illustrated in ﬁgure 4-8. The buildings are naturally 
divided into two sections due to the fact that the social housing areas 
has been divided into two different social housing departments 
previously.
57
==PAGE:68==
➡Roof 
‣
New rooﬁng (2500 m2)  
‣
Green roof (2500 m2)  
‣
Two roof terraces 
➡Outer walls 
‣
Outer insulation of gables  
‣
Lining with ﬁber concrete on gables  
‣
Two roof terraces 
➡Doors and 
windows 
‣
Change of windows against balconies  
(86 apartments in section 1 and 115 apartments in 
section 2) 
‣
New entrance doors in 30 stairways 
➡Balconies 
‣
New balustrades towards west in 95 dwellings 
‣
Accessibility in balconies in 116 dwellings  
‣
80 larger balconies towards west (section 2) 
‣
Individually options for balconies towards east 
(section 2)
➡Floor 
structures 
‣
Righting of membrane and concrete 
➡Wet rooms
‣
Modernization of 81 bathrooms (section 1)  
‣
Modernization, expansion and accessibility 
improvements in 115 bathrooms (section 2) 
➡Drains in soil 
and buildings
‣
Righting of sewer system
➡Technical 
plants 
‣
Renovation of VVS in  
(5 stairways in section 1 and 10 stairways in section 2) 
‣
Renovation of ventilation in 15 stairways  
‣
Renovation of 15 elevators  
‣
Increase of height in two elevators for roof level  
‣
Renovation of electric installation in 15 stairways 
➡Other 
building parts 
‣
New kitchens (196)  
‣
Upgrade of open spaces, including handling of 
rainwater 
‣
Upgrade of accessibility in terrain  
‣
Upgrade of stairways and entrances 
➡Area 
expansion
‣
7 ground ﬂoor apartments are rebuilt into 5 apartments 
for disabled residents in section 1 
‣
Expansion of living space in 100 apartments (section 2) 
due to new balconies and windows 
Table 4-9: Physical 
solutions and actions 
presented in 
masterplan for 
Gadekærvej, Valby.  
(WITRAZ, 2012). 
First and foremost, the masterplan presents solutions for the buildings 
(WITRAZ, 2012). Table 4-9 shows the solutions to renovate the housing areas 
in order to meet the aims of the masterplan. As well as Skoleparken, the 
overall solutions are oriented towards the building physic. 
58
==PAGE:69==
The following will look deeper into physical solutions that lies within the 
delimitation of open outdoor spaces, common areas and edge zones 
between residence and outdoor space which are included in the ﬁrst main 
action - environmental improvements. 
Common outdoor space 
The common outdoor spaces need upgrading and beautiﬁcation of the 
existing activities and spaces. The existing newer playgrounds are unsafe and 
the outdoor space are limited in size. The masterplan presents the following 
actions (WITRAZ, 2012): 
➡Different activity areas within the outdoor space 
➡Ensure safe equipment within the outdoor spaces  
➡Reduce the harder coating of the terrain and replace with more grass to 
make the space more kind and inviting to stay within.  
➡Creation of ramp from Gadekærvej to the outdoor space  
➡Creation of meandering paths to obtain a more soft and human expression 
➡Lighting along paths to make the areas safe at night  
➡Wild and maintenance free greenery that appears beautiful and lush  
➡Creation of outdoor seating furniture above skylights for parking 
basement 
➡Closed off areas with fence in both ends to stop trafﬁc from mopeds to 
make the area safer for elderly people, children and parents 
➡Creation of two roof terraces with green roofs together with new solar 
panels on the roof 
Figure 4-10 illustrated the initiatives on a site plan. 
Figure 4-10: Site plan 
of open outdoor 
spaces in Gadekærvej, 
Valby.  
(WITRAZ, 2012). 
59
==PAGE:70==
Entrances and stairways  
The side of the areas towards west all has entrances to stairways and 
apartments. A tall concrete plinth dominated the facade and it had a lot of 
greenery that limits views and create a feeling of privacy. This had to be kept 
but there was more potential to the solutions than achieved in the existing 
solutions. Bike parking and niches are created to meet the need for parking 
bikes and to exploit the zone for stays (WITRAZ, 2012). 
The stairways lay in the middle of the buildings and limited daylight are able 
to reach. The stairways need beautiﬁcation to have a welcoming arrival at the 
social housing area. The spaces are upgraded with new painting, new 
materials on ﬂoor, better lighting and decorations (WITRAZ, 2012). 
 
The corridors are nicely maintained however they were dark and 
created a feeling on being at an institution. They are beautiﬁed and the 
lighting is upgraded.   
Figure 4-11 illustrates the ﬁnal solutions at the western facade (WITRAZ, 
2012). 
Figure 4-11: Illustration 
of westerns facade for 
arrival in Gadekærvej, 
Valby. 
(WITRAZ, 2012). 
Balconies  
The social housing areas has an uneven distribution of balconies since the 
existing section 1 has balconies towards both west and east and section 2 
only has smaller balconies towards west and only French balconies towards 
east.  
 
The smaller balconies in section 2 are taken in as a part of the living 
space and new balconies are built. The protection at the balconies are done 
in tempered glass with colors or graphic design to give the facade more life 
and to allow more light to access the apartments. Figure 4-12 Illustrates the 
tempered glass spandrels. 
60
==PAGE:71==
The existing balconies at section 1 are kept but the 
spandrel is changed to match the new balconies in 
section 2. Furthermore, the accessibility is upgraded at 
the balconies in section 1 since there are existing 
differences in levels of inside the apartment and 
outside at the balconies. The width of the doors are 
changes to ﬁt the width of a wheelchair.  
Figure 4-12: Illustration 
of tempered glass 
spandrels at balconies 
in Gadekærvej, Valby. 
(WITRAZ, 2012). 
61
==PAGE:72==
4.2.2 Implemented solutions
Common outdoor space 
The outdoor space at Gadekærvej is known as ‘gården’ since it is closed off 
from the public. It has a ramp at the end of the area with a fence that closes 
the area from towards the public park belonging the municipality.  
Inside ‘gården’ there has been implemented several different areas. ‘Gården’ 
is divided into different spaces along the rectangular area. Several spaces 
have outdoor furniture and seating areas. The seating areas are arranged as 
wooden platforms above some of the existing ventilation openings towards 
the parking basement. Other oexisting ventilation openings has greenery 
crawling on wire systems to beautify the existing coverings of the ventilation 
openings. Besides the outdoor seating arrangements, the area has a 
barbecue-area for with covered seating area including a grill for everyone to 
use.  
The outdoor areas also consist of several playground areas with different 
playground equipment including swings, a slide and a cableway. 
Furthermore, a closed ball court has been installed.  
The area has different greenery including trees, bushes by the seating 
arrangements and different grass areas.  
Balconies  
The two section has got different solutions regarding balconies. The ﬁrst 
section at Gadekærvej had existing balconies which are renovated for 
accessibility. Furthermore, the existing balconies have got an extra pipe as 
railing on balconies since the ﬂoor level has increased. However, the look of 
the balconies have not been changed as planned.   
Section 2 had built-in balconies. These have been removed and the existing 
area has been implemented in the indoor apartment area. Section 2 has got 
new balconies that are different from the section 1. They are triangular in 
shape and have a different expression than section 2 with white concrete 
frame and frosted glass shield.  
Furthermore, section 2 has got bay windows installed on the eastern side of 
the buildings to create some architectural ﬁnish to the existing facade. 
Therefore, the looks of the two sections are now different both on the eastern 
and westerns facade.  
62
==PAGE:73==
Entrances and stairways  
The entrance area on the western side of the building has been upgraded 
with bike racks and beautiﬁcation of the existing concrete plinths.  
The stairways in section 1 has got smaller niches with a built-in bench and 
bulletin board indoor when entering the building in the stairway. The 
entrances at section 2 has got outdoor some benches installed at the 
entrances.  
Terraces  
The ground ﬂoor apartments have got terraces installed on the eastern side 
of the buildings. On the western side, section 2 has ground ﬂoor terraces 
built towards the entrance ramp.  
 
The terraces have tiles and wood fence to frame the terraces from the public. 
The fences are made in different heights to create spaces where their 
residents are able to be more private or be more public, as they like.  
Figure 4-13: 
Implemented facades, 
seating areas, walking 
path with terraces and 
ball court at 
Gadekærvej, Valby.  
Own fotos. 
63
==PAGE:74==
64
==PAGE:75==
5
FIELD STUDY
==PAGE:76==
5.1 Questionnaires
The questionnaires are done to gather information about the residents’ 
perception on the renovation of the social housing areas. The questionnaire 
was undertaken through a questionnaire scheme distributed to the residents 
in both social housing areas. The aim is to cover the performance of the ﬁnal, 
implemented solutions from the residents’ point of view. Thus, the 
performance of social sustainability is assessed from the questionnaire of 15 
questions.  
The 15 questions are constructed to gain insight to the performance in social 
sustainability of the solutions. The 15 questions are divided into two themes: 
Quality and Community. Seven questions are done to gain insight in the 
performance of community building. The questions regard to what extent 
the residents feel that the renovations has gained community and social 
contact within the social housing areas. Eight questions are done to gain 
insight in the performance of quality. The questions regard the residents’ 
perception of the quality of the implemented solutions.  
The ﬁrst subject is background questions that makes it possible to see the 
demographics of the respondents. It is important to know the background of 
the respondents in order to know the representativeness of the survey. 
Second, the main questions are presented. 15 questions are formed to get 
an understanding of the social development from the physical elements. 
Some questions are similar to check for consistency in the respondent’s 
answers. The ﬁrst thoughts were to have questions regarding every single 
physical element, but the amount of questions became insufﬁcient. Residents 
are greatly inﬂuenced by the amount of questions and the time it takes to ﬁll 
out the questionnaire. Thus, it is considered more sufﬁcient to have a smaller 
amount of questions though they have to cover several physical elements or 
have more questions incorporated in one.  
 
All questions are answers by the Likert-scale making it possible to 
process all data collected from the questionnaires while also being easy to 
answer for the respondents.   
5 Field study
The section will look into the three methods used to collect data for the 
evaluation of the two housing areas in Hillerød and Valby. The three methods 
are questionnaires, observations and interviews. In this section the ﬁnal use 
and construction of the methods is described. 
66
==PAGE:77==
Questionnaire, Residents  
Baggrund: 
Hvad er dit køn? 
Hvad er din alder? 
Hvor lang tid har du boet på Gadekærvej / i Skoleparken? 
Hovedspørgsmål:  
1.
Jeg føler mig godt tilpas og tryg, når jeg færdes i boligområdet, eksempelvis på 
fællesområder, på grønne områder, og når jeg skal til og fra min bolig  
2.
Jeg synes, at fællesområderne inviterer til ophold i længere tid for at slappe af, nyde 
vejret, nyde omgivelserne m.m.  
3.
Der er aktiviteter og faciliteter for alle i områder, og områder indbyder alle aldre til 
aktivitet  
4.
Generelt er områder blevet mere åbent og velkomment, eksempelvis via nye 
indgangsparter og grønne ideområder  
5.
Jeg synes, at kvaliteteten af de nye fysiske elementer, eksempelvis bænke, karnapper, 
terrasser m.m. er af god kvalitet og pæne at se på  
6.
De nye elementer skaber et visuelt løft af området, og jeg kan godt lide det nye udtryk, 
eksempelvis vis grønne elementer, kunst og nye tiltag på facader  
7.
Der er skabt bedre udsyn og overblik over boligområdet, og jeg har lyst til at følge med i 
hvad der sker, eksempelvis via karnapper, altaner og forhaver  
8.
Jeg synes, at de nye fysiske elementer i fællesområderne er skabt i god forbindelse med 
hinanden og er integreret godt i boligområdet  
9.
Jeg føler, at der vil komme et større fællesskab mellem beboerne, fordi fællesområderne 
indbyder til at samler og være mere sociale  
10.
Jeg møder ﬂere af de andre beboere end før renoveringen, og jeg føler generelt, at der 
er mere aktivitet i områder, fordi folk eksempelvis opholder sig mere i fællesområderne  
11.
Der er skabt mere social kontakt mellem beboerne i forbindelse med fællesområderne, 
eksempelvis gennem små haver, gården og fælleshus 
12.
Jeg mener, at de nye fællesområder skaber et samlingspunkt for beboere fra forskellige 
opgang og blokke, så det er lettere at møde andre beboere  
13.
Jeg har lyst til at benytte mig af fællesområder, og jeg vil i fremtiden bruge mere tid 
udenfor  
14.
Jeg støder oftere ind i de andre beboere end før renoveringen, eksempelvis ved de små 
haver, ved indgangspartierne til opgangene eller lignende steder 
15.
Jeg synes, at fællesområderne og de nye altaner, terrasser, karnapper, indgangspartiet 
m.v. har øget kvaliteten af boligområdet 
Figure 5-1: 
Questionnaire for 
residents at 
Gadekærvej and 
Skoleparken in Danish.  
Own production. 
Third and last, there is an empty space for the respondents to ﬁll out if 
wanted. Here, the respondents can write other subjects, comments or the like, 
if the respondents ﬁnd it relevant. 
200 questionnaires have been distributed at Gadekærvej and 160 
questionnaires has been distributed in Skoleparken. At Skoleparken, the 
entire area has not been ﬁnalized yet, thus the part with everything delivered 
has been asked. The collection of questionnaires after two weeks was a total 
of 34 answers at Gadekærvej and 12 answers in Skoleparken.  
The questionnaire scheme, as distributed to the residents, can be seen in 
Appendix B in Danish. The questions can be seen in ﬁgure 5-1 in Danish. 
The data from questionnaires conducted can be seen in Appendix E.  
67
==PAGE:78==
5.2 Observations
Observations were undertaken based on ‘How to study public life’ by Jan 
Gehl and Birgitte Svarre (2013). The literature provides theories on how to 
study public life and what questions to answer when doing observations in 
public areas (Gehl & Svarre, 2013): 
➡How many?  
The observation will be based on how many people are moving, staying or 
doing an activity. This observation makes it possible to assess the amount 
of general activity within the areas.  
➡Who? 
This observation will provide knowledge of the speciﬁc groups of people 
who uses the areas. The knowledge makes it possible to see the behavior 
of groups, like women, children, elderly etc.  
➡Where? 
It is observed where people choose to stay within the areas since it is 
useful to see, if the residents uses the areas and individual spaces as 
intended. In this category, it will also be studies if people are staying on 
the edges, in the middle, in public or private spaces or evenly distributed 
in the areas.  
➡What?  
Observations here will tell something about what happens in the spaces. 
Here, it will ﬁrst concern necessary or optional activities, and these will 
further be divided into speciﬁc activities. 
➡How long? 
The approximately time residents spend in the areas will be observed. The 
duration of the time spend gives useful insight to the success of the 
environments.  
Within the categories, observations for speciﬁc stays and activities was 
planned but additional element was also observed when the observation 
takes place, since residents may do other activities than expected or the like. 
When observing the residents, counting, mapping and tracing are also used 
to obtain knowledge of the residents’ behaviors. The three methods will 
provide useful materials to see the patterns from the observation. 
A scheme was created that makes the actual observations possible in the 
social housing areas. The scheme can be seen in table 5-2. The table shows a 
scheme for observation for 10 people, however the actual observation will 
have room for the actual amount of people. 
The observations completed in the two social housing areas can be seen in 
Appendix D.  
68
==PAGE:79==
Observation scheme
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Gender
Woman 
Man
Age Group
Child
Teenager 
Adult
Elderly
Position?
Private areas
Semi-private area
Public areas
Playground
Seating area
Balcony/Terrace
Footpath 
Activity?
Necessary
Optional
Walking
Running
Playing
Sitting
Biking
Gardening
Time spend?
< 5 min
> 5 min
Figure 5-2: 
Observation scheme
69
==PAGE:80==
5.3 Interviews 
Several different interviews have been conducted in the thesis. Thus, different 
interview guides have been done to ﬁt the speciﬁc interviewee. Some 
questions in the guides are the same or similar since opinions from several of 
the interviewees is wanted, however they are still created to ﬁt the 
interviewee for instance from Rambøll, Board of Housing Associations and 
employees of operation within the social housing areas.  
All interviews are approached in the same way with semi-structured 
interviews that allows the interviewees to give the relevant input no matter 
asked or not but still the interviews are directed towards the relevant themes 
and subjects.  
The interview guides will all start with questions of the interviewees 
background and position related to the social housing areas.  
Second, the interviews will concern the interviewees’ understanding of social 
sustainability to see how the interviewees work with the interrelation between 
physical renovation and social sustainability.  
Third, the interview will go into the speciﬁc physical changes within the social 
housing areas, to understand the thoughts and aims behind the physical 
changes. Furthermore, it is useful knowledge to have expert’s opinion on the 
ﬁnal results and how the physical changes have turned out.  
Finally, the interview will concern the process of renovation and the 
participation of residents. The aim here is to gain knowledge of how the 
processes happens from ﬁrst masterplan to ﬁnal results.  
The interview guide for Rambølls’ employees can be seen in ﬁgure 5-3 and 
the other interview guides for Housing Association and Operations can be 
seen in Appendix C. The interview guides are in Danish since the interviews 
are held in Danish. The transcriptions of all interviews conducted can be seen 
in Appendix F.  
70
==PAGE:81==
Interview Guide, Rambøll employees  
Forståelse af social bæredygtighed 
-
I hvor høj grad er I bevidste om at de fysiske forandringer kan skabe bedre grundlag for 
social bæredygtighed, bedre livskvalitet og bedre opfyldelse af beboernes social behov? 
-
Arbejder I med termen social bæredygtighed? Hvis ikke - hvordan arbejder I så med det 
sociale aspekt i jeres projekter? Tænker I meget over koblingen mellem det fysiske og det 
sociale? 
-
Er der en fælles forståelse for social bæredygtighed i afdelingen eller arbejder i meget 
individuelt med det? 
-
Hvordan føler du, at kunden (boligforeningerne) efterspørger eller har lyst til at indarbejde 
fysiske løsninger, der kan medføre social forandringer? Har de ønsker på det område eller 
hvordan er samarbejdet? 
-
Hvilke speciﬁkke emner arbejder i med og på hvilken måde? Tryghed, fællesskab, traﬁk, 
skalaer, æstetik eller andet? 
De fysiske elementer i boligområderne 
-
Vil du fortælle lidt om de speciﬁkke fysiske ting, I har designet og udført? 
-
Hvordan designer og planlægger I de fysiske løsninger, der udføres i fællesområder? 
-
Når I udarbejder de løsninger, som skal udføres hvilke overvejelser gør I jer så? På hvilken 
baggrund tager I beslutninger om, hvad der er godt at gøre i områderne? 
-
Har I nogle strategier for hvilke fysiske løsninger, der kan medføre social forandringer? Er 
der ud fra erfaringer eller har I på anden vis metoder for hvilke ting, der skal udføres? 
-
Hvordan forsøger I indenfor de rammer I får givet (budget, tid osv.), at skabe de 
nødvendige løsninger, der ikke bare er fysiske, men også skaber nogle ramme for socialt 
liv?  
-
Føler I at der er midlerne til at udføre tingene i en tilpas kvalitet? Er der ligesom fare for, at 
de fysiske løsninger, der bliver udarbejdet ikke får den rette effekt, fordi tingene er af for 
dårlig kvalitet? 
-
Er der noget, du mener som I kunne gøre anderledes, hvis I havde andre forhold? Er I 
meget begrænset I jeres arbejde? 
-
Oplever I at de mere social løsninger nedprioriteres fordi der er fysiske udfordringer, som 
er vigtigere? Skimmelsvamp, asbest, indeklima mv.? 
Processen, herunder beboerinddragelse 
-
Hvordan arbejder I med beboerne under jeres designproces og i det videre forløb under 
renoveringen? 
-
Er beboerne en stor del af løsningerne eller hvordan fungerer det? Guider i kunden i 
forhold til løsningerne? 
-
Er det tydeligt for jer, at beboerne mangler nogle tiltag i fællesområderne, der understøtter 
social kontakt? Mangler beboerne det incitament? 
-
Hvordan foregår udviklingen af jeres designs af områderne? Udarbejder der forskellige 
udgaver og versioner af forslåede løsninger eller hvordan foregår det? 
- Dertil - oplever I, at mange af jeres tiltag reduceres eller forsvinder jo længere i processen 
I kommer? 
-
I hvor høj grad bliver de løsninger, som I først tænker rent faktisk udført? I hvor høj grad 
sker der en reduktion i det tiltag, som måske er tænkt til at understøtte social 
bæredygtighed? 
Figure 5-3: Interview 
Guide for Rambøll 
employees 
71
==PAGE:82==
72
==PAGE:83==
RESULTS & ANALYSIS
6
==PAGE:84==
6.1 Process evaluation
6 Results & Analysis
This section will show the results of the conducted POE. The POE are shown 
in data collected through observations, questionnaires and interviews 
together with an analysis of the masterplans. From this data, an analysis will 
be carried out to see the outstanding points and learnings from the data 
collection in the POE.  
The results and analysis are divided into the main section, respectively the 
process and the performance. This aim is to have a clear division between the 
ﬁndings of how the process of master planning has been carried out and how 
the ﬁnal solutions then perform. Thus, the process will be oriented towards 
the interviews and analysis of the development throughout master planning 
and the ﬁnal performance will be oriented towards the observations and 
questionnaires since these shows the current state of the residents’ use and 
perceptions of the implemented solutions. 
6.1.1 Understanding social sustainability
This section concerns how the different stakeholders, especially the architects 
and landscape architects, understands social sustainability in order gain 
insight how social sustainability are handled when masterplans are 
implemented in social housing areas. Interview with relevant stakeholders 
have been undertaken to gain the knowledge of their work with social 
sustainability. The interviewees’ statements are shown to understand their 
perception of social sustainability and from here, the implemented solutions 
are analyzed to see how it ﬁts the theory on social sustainability. 
The chosen ﬁndings from the interviews are written in Danish since the 
interviews are held in Danish. 
Studies have been undertaken to gain knowledge of the process of master 
planning. Even though the evaluation often is interested in the outcome of 
the process and the performance of the solutions, it is also important to 
understand the process behind. Through this section, the thesis will look 
closer into the understanding of social sustainability, the collaboration 
between stakeholders and the development of the implemented solution 
throughout the master planning and building process. 
74
==PAGE:85==
Katja Waagepetersen, Architect, Rambøll
➡Vi prøver altid at få så meget socialt ind som muligt.  
➡Social bæredygtighed er jo noget, vi ligger indeni.  
➡Det er en normal tankegang, at man prøver at få folk til at socialisere sig 
mere. Det er jo det, vi gerne vil.  
➡Der er fokus på at gøre fællesområderne bedre, så man derigennem 
skaber et bedre fællesskab.  
➡Det er vigtigt, at man har mulighed for at møde sin nabo. Mulighed for a 
møde folk, der kommer og går. Det har vi i de ﬂeste af vores projekter - 
muligheden for at mødes.  
➡Hver gang vi laver nye elementer, tænker vi over at der laves områder, 
hvor der skabes et møde med naboen, uformelle mødesteder og alle de 
ting.  
➡Generelt er det jo bygningsfysisk, men vi prøver jo. Men det er ofte følger 
af bygningsfysiske ting, som vi bliver nødt til at tage fat i.  
➡Støtten fra Landsbyggefonden er jo ikke ovre i en social helhedsplan, så 
det går ikke under socialstøtte. Det handler mere om fremtidssikring, 
selvom det er en social ting. 
Understanding of social sustainability
Examples of social sustainable initiatives:
Gadekærvej: 
➡Vi lavede noget midlertidig arkitektur, fordi vi godt vidste, at de skulle bo i 
et byggerod, og de havde ikke nogen steder at være, så vi lavede et 
område med noget rullegræs og nogle bænke, hvor de kunne opholde 
sig i byggeperioden.  
➡Vi ændrede lidt i klimaskærmen og lavede en altan, sådan at folk kommer 
lidt på afstand. Så er der en mellemzone, som giver kvalitet tilbage til 
boligen.  
➡Det aﬂukkede område er et perfekt eksempel på, at man gør noget, som 
har den modsatte effekt. Det er ikke særlig bæredygtigt, at der ikke gives 
noget tilbage til byen, hvor ﬂest muligt får gavn af de grønne områder.  
➡Der er lavet bænke i begge afsnit - både indenfor som nicher og udenfor 
som bænke. Det er tænkt, at man skal kunne sidde der og vente, snakke 
og møde sin nabo.  
Skoleparken: 
➡Vi lavede bænke, så man ligesom kan møde sin nabo. Det var en kedelig 
strækning før, så det er vigtigt, at man kan gøre ophold og sidde med en 
kop kaffe. 
75
==PAGE:86==
Sirkku Singer, Landscape Architect, Rambøll
➡Det er det sociale, der spiller en rolle for mig. Altså at man mødes, at der 
er rart at være, så man ligesom tvinger folk til at mødes. Jeg forsøger at 
arrangere landskabet sådan, at mødet sker lidt tilfældigt. At beboerne 
kommer i kontakt med hinanden.  
➡Vi er interesseret i at folk mødes. At de krydser veje, at de måske mødes 
ved affaldsskuret, at de lige sætter sig på bænken - det er klart, det der er 
målet. Det der er fundamentet er, at det ikke bliver anonymt.  
➡Jeg synes, at vi får en del med i projekterne, men jeg vil jo altid gerne 
skrue det op.  
➡Det handler om at lave nogle steder, hvor folk bliver trukket hen. Når man 
har nogle projekter, så opfordrer man mennesker til at mødes.  
➡Vi arbejder ikke med bæredygtighed i den forstand, at der handler om tal. 
For os arbejder vi mere med værdi. Det er hvilke følelser, det giver 
beboerne, at de her renoveringer bliver lavet.  
➡Vi fokuserer ikke altid kun på en målgruppe, men alle skal jo ud med 
affald eller hvad det nu kan være. Så det behøver ikke være så fortænkt.  
Understanding of social sustainability
Gadekærvej: 
➡Gården tilbyder noget til alle aldre - mest til børn, men også til voksne og 
teenagere.  
➡Det er virkelig ærgerligt, at beboerne holdt fast i, at gården skulle 
indhegnes. Der er ligesom en afgrænsning til drømmegavlen og det 
grønne ude foran, og der er egentlig en god forbindelse mellem de to.  
Skoleparken:  
➡Skoleparken er langstrakt, og det hele gentager sig, så jeg havde 
udarbejdet nogle haver med forskellige dybder for at bryde med de lane 
træk. Men det blev lavet om, så alle ﬁk lige dybe haver, fordi beboerne 
blev uvenner over, at nogle havde større haver end andre.  
➡Langs stisystemerne er der skabt nogle lommer, hvor man kan gøre 
ophold. Så bliver det ikke udelukkende til og fra sin bolig, men der er 
nogle steder, hvor man kan stille sine ting og sådan, og så skabes 
muligheden for at man mødes.  
➡Der er arbejdet med bede med meget frodig vegetation. Før var det bare 
græs, græs, græs. 
➡Aktivitetshuset var det første der var færdigt, så folk kunne mødes der, når 
det larmede for meget fra byggeriet. Især fordi renovering tager så mange 
år.  
➡Alt lignede hinanden i skoleparken, og der var ret meget turbulens, når 
det blæser. Jeg har forsøgt, at bryde det lidt på tværs. Problemet var, at 
midterarealet ﬁk vi ikke med i vores opgave, så det var stort set kun langs 
bygningerne. Så jeg har forsøgt, at alting langs facaderne ikke bare går 
parallelt, men der er lidt zigzag og nicher, hvor man kan sætte sig. 
Examples of social sustainable initiatives:
76
==PAGE:87==
Lars Jevanord, Project leader, Rambøll
➡Altså det skal være et godt sted at bo, og der skal være rart at være. Det 
har vi meget fokus på - der skal være gode boliger med plads til alle. Det 
skal være rart at komme til bebyggelsen - at der er ﬂotte bygninger, ﬂot 
arkitektur og et ﬂot landskab, og så selvfølgelig af boligerne er af god 
kvalitet. 
Understanding of social sustainability
Lessons learnt:  
➡The social aspects play an important role for the staff in Rambøll when 
designing and implementing masterplan in social housing areas  
➡The work with the social aspect always comes from the building physic 
which is the starting point of every masterplan.  
➡The work is focused on getting people to meet, both randomly and 
intentionally.  
➡The employees have the same thoughts on social sustainability which are 
based on the meeting between people.  
➡There is no indication that the theory of social sustainability in urban 
environments is considered.  
➡The work seems based on experience from employees’ carrier, and not 
based on a theoretical framework. 
77
==PAGE:88==
6.1.2 Stakeholder collaboration 
Katja Waagepetersen, Architect, Rambøll
➡Der er altid en masse interessenter i sådanne projekter, så det er helt 
naturligt, at der er mange medvirkende. Men det ligger også meget 
naturligt til mig at arbejde med det.  
➡Når man laver noget nyt i områderne, så er det ret svært for beboerne i 
forhold til for eksempel helt nye beboere. Oftest går beboerne altid ind i 
det med sådan en ‘jeg vil ikke have lavet noget-holdning’.  
➡Vi giver beboerne informationer løbende om, hvad der skal ske, og vi 
laver nogle workshops med dem, hvor vi snakker om udeområder eller 
lignende.  
➡Vi hjælper beboerne og vejleder dem, men det er beboerne selv, der 
tager den sidste beslutning, og det får man helt sikkert det bedste ud af - 
at de ligesom har medbestemmelse.  
➡Det kan være rigtigt svært at håndtere alle beboere, og der er jo nogle 
beboere, som man skal arbejde med på et andet niveau.  
➡Det er jo ofte et fælles mål at få løst de her bygningsfysiske tiltag, og så få 
løst det på en ﬁn måde i samarbejde med beboerne og bestyrelsen.  
➡Der står jo ikke foreskrevet noget om, hvor meget beboerne skal 
involveres. Der skal ikke være forskellige udvalg, for eksempel 
køkkenudvalg. Det er alt sammen noget vi gør, fordi vi synes, det er 
vigtigt.  
➡Det er ofte Landsbyggefonden går ind og støtter 100%, hvis tiltagene er 
socialt skabende. 
➡Bestyrelserne er meget forskellige. Vi har bestyrelser, der er rigtig gode, 
og så har vi bestyrelser, der bare sidder, fordi de keder sig, og det 
generelt imod renoveringen. Vi prøver jo at forklare bestyrelserne det, 
men de hører kun det, de selv vil høre.  
➡Vi skal ligesom håndtere bestyrelserne. Nogle har brug for styring, nogle 
har brug for, at man bestemmer det hele, og nogen er ligeglade og vil 
bare have det, de selv gerne vil have.  
Information about the collaboration of stakeholders in the two cases of social 
housing renovation have been collected through interviews. The stakeholder 
collaboration and shared visions of social sustainability are important in the 
process of designing and implementing masterplans in social housing areas. 
Both consultants, board members and project leaders have been interviewed 
to have a full understanding of the collaboration on every side of the table 
when masterplans are done in the two social housing areas.  
The statements included in this section will address different parts of this 
subject, however it will all regard stakeholder collaboration. This will give a 
varied picture of the stakeholder collaboration throughout the masterplans 
78
==PAGE:89==
Sirkku Singer, Landscape Architect, Rambøll
➡I processen tegnede jeg noget, og så skulle jeg præsentere det, og så har 
de en mening om det. Bestyrelsen er jo med, men så havde vi en 
workshop, hvor beboerne også blev spurgt.  
➡Beboerne kommer ofte med ønsker, som er noget de kender. Så vi 
forsøger at komme med noget andet for at inspirere dem, for ellers 
kommer de med klassiske elementer, som de kender. Derfor synes jeg, 
det er vigtigt, at vi har beboerinddragelse, men det er vigtigt, at vi 
kommer med noget først for at inspirere dem.  
➡Enten stiller beboerne spørgsmål, brokker sig eller siger, at der er noget, 
de godt kan lide. Men det er ofte sådan, at når de ikke siger noget, så er 
de glade, og når de siger noget, så er de utilfredse.  
➡I Skoleparken var de ikke tilfredse med haverne, der havde forskellige 
dybder, så det løste vi ved, at alle haverne er syv meter dybe. Hækkene 
der adskiller haverne har så forskellige længder, så man stadig har 
forskellighed. Den dag i dag forstår de det nok ikke helt, men jeg håber, at 
de ikke fjerne dem.  
➡På Gadekærvej, der lavede vi en slags session, hvor vi gjorde lidt mere ud 
af det, i stedet for bare at mødes og vise nogle slides. Jeg synes, det er 
vigtigt, at det er menneske til menneske i stedet for rådgiver, der deler 
med beboerne.  
➡Det er både positivt og negativt, når beboerne synes, at noget er 
forfærdeligt. Det er positivt, fordi de er engageret, og det er jo godt, at de 
tænker sådan.  
➡Vi laver nogle gange workshops, hvor vi har en af vores procesrådgivere 
med. Vi spurgte bevidst ikke ind til, hvad de ville have, men vi spurgte i 
stedet hvilken følelse, de godt kunne tænke sig. Det er ikke det klassiske, 
men jeg synes, det er ret interessant, hvordan man spørger.  
➡I helhedsplanen i Skoleparken er der foreslået alt muligt med ild, vand og 
alle mulige elementer, og det troede beboerne jo, at de ﬁk. Det er jo lidt 
farligt måske, for da vi holdt workshops, der var de lidt trætte af os, og de 
sagde, at nu kommer Rambøll igen og spørger, hvad vi vil have, og så 
bliver det sikkert ikke til noget. Det er lidt synd, men de har jo ret. Igen 
blev det ikke til noget.  
➡Det er selvfølgelig også grænseoverskridende. Det er jo noget af det mest 
private, som man går ind i. 
➡En gang imellem tror bestyrelserne, at vi kommer for at irritere dem, og 
der tror jeg, at det er vigtigt, at vi ligesom får fortalt, at vi er her for at 
hjælpe dem, fordi deres huse er ved at falde ned om ørene på dem. Vi gør 
ikke noget for at genere dem.  
➡Alle beboere bliver ikke informeret på samme måde som byggeudvalget, 
i forhold til hvordan det hele hænger sammen. Det er jo byggeudvalget, 
der tager beslutningen på vegne af de andre beboere. Vi laver ikke noget 
uden af byggeudvalget er inde over.  
79
==PAGE:90==
Michael Hansen, Project Leader, Boligkontoret Danmark
Lars Jevanord, Project Leader, Rambøll
➡Når vi arbejder med renoveringer, så har det med brugerproces og 
brugerinddragelse at gøre. Vi har rigtig meget med beboerne at gøre - 
både før, under og efter.  
➡Der bliver nedsat et byggeudvalg, som repræsenterer beboerne. De er 
med til at bestemme materialevalg og sådan noget. Nogle gange går vi 
selvfølgelig ind og overruler, men de er inddraget i processen.  
➡I Skoleparken vandt vi projektet, som et totalrådgiver-udbud, hvor der lå 
en foreløbig helhedsplan. Vi skulle så i samarbejde med bygherre 
færdiggøre en endelig helhedsplan, og der var lidt bump på vejen. 
Beboerne havde jo fået kendskab til den foreløbige helhedsplan og 
hæftes sig ved billeder og beskrivelser, og så kommer vi og har en anden 
holdning til det - altså hvordan vi vil gøre det og udforme det.  
➡Det er jo lidt ligesom at arbejde i en landsby. Hvis man gør noget, så ved 
de det 5 minutter efter i den anden ende af boligområdet.  
➡Der afholdes afdelingsmøder hver 3. måned eller hvert halve år. Vi har 
også procesrådgivere, der laver information til beboerne, og så har der 
været møder, hvor vi taler om status på renoveringen og bygherren 
kommer og præsenterer økonomien. Så der afholdes møder for 
orientering løbende. 
➡Det er klart, at når vi aﬂeverer projektet, så overgår det til driften. Så bliver 
det hele ligesom overtaget, og så henvender beboerne sig til 
boligselskabet og ikke os mere.  
➡I Skoleparken har vi bygget et rigtig ﬁnt aktivitetshus. Der er lidt 
problemer med det, hvor man ikke må bruge alle toiletter, fordi det er for 
besværligt at gøre rent, så der er kun et toilet åbent, og så skal man stå i 
kø, når man er til møder. Man må nærmest ikke bruge det. Det er sådan 
lidt misforstået. Der har været en fraktion, der ville det ene, og en fraktion, 
der vil noget andet, så det har været svært at blive enige om at drive 
aktivitetshuset. 
➡Det er svært at rekruttere beboere til afdelingsbestyrelsen og 
byggeudvalget. Folk vil hellere sidde og brokke sig på Facebook i stedet 
for at tage del i arbejdet. Det er kampen desværre.  
➡Byggeudvalget har nogle gange følt, at Rambøll har trukket nogle 
beslutninger ned over dem. I bagklogskabens lys skulle beboerne nok 
have været inde over, men der er så mange beslutninger, der skal tages i 
sådan en proces, så nogle gange hopper kæden lidt af.  
➡I forhold til fælleshuset i Skoleparken, der gjorde Rambøll en stor indsats. 
Ikke nok med at der nu er et aktivitetshus, men hvad skal det bruges til? 
Rambøll satte nogle projekter i gang, men det løb desværre ud i sandet. 
Der mangle nogle ildsjæle for at få det til at køre rundt.  
80
==PAGE:91==
Board members, Skoleparken
Finn Rumohr, Property Responsible, Domea
➡Der er ofte ganske få initiativtagere som gør noget. Det er normalt sådan.  
➡Det er jo et fantastisk system, hvor beboerne bestemmer en hel del, 
selvom man bor til leje. Det er dog også det, der gør det lidt tungt for os i 
nogle tilfælde, fordi folk føler, at de nærmest ejer det. Så der kan være 
nogle lidt urealistiske forventninger. Vi skal jo tage hensyn til helheden, og 
vi kan ikke tage hensyn til alle mulige enkeltstående tilfælde.  
➡Det er meget beboernes egen bolig, det handler om. Man kan jo ikke 
sige, at alle er sådan, men hovedparten - man kommer hjem, lukker sin 
dør, og så er det sin egen lejlighed, de koncentrerer sig om.  
➡Nogen gange kan man godt mærke, at bestyrelsen måske ikke 
repræsenterer den store, brede masse.  
➡Man kan jo være lidt bekymret for beboerdemokratiet. Vi har jo svært ved 
at have bestyrelser alle steder, og speciel folk med anden etnisk herkomst 
- det har de ikke lyst til. Det er jo lidt bekymrende på længere sigt. 
➡Vi lavede et projekt tilbage i 2010. Vi havde et stort møde med 200 - 300 
mennesker, hvor vi stemte ind. Vi stemte om et skitseprojekt, og det var vi 
egentlig ikke klar over. Så da det kom i udbud, så blev det hele lavet om.  
➡Vi har haft lidt sammenstød - også med kommunen. For eksempel skulle 
aktivitetshuset have været meget større, og der skulle have været en 
multisal, og der skulle bygges ovenpå, men det ville kommunen ikke have.  
➡Samarbejdet udvikler sig jo, og de sidste lejligheder er jo mere positive 
end de første. De er lidt mere forberedt, fordi de kan se, hvad der er sket.  
➡Jeg synes, at Rambøll har været til at snakke med. Selvfølgelig er vi heller 
ikke helt tossede, så vi har også kunne se hensigten og økonomien - det 
➡Landsbyggefonden, når du gang den vej, går ind og siger til 
boligselskabet, at der skal kigges på helheden. Det vil også sige 
udearealer for at højne hele området - noget mere lys, nogle bedre 
udearealer, så beboerne føler sig godt tilpasse.  
➡En af øvelserne er jo for eksempel, at nogle vægge skal males og andre 
skal ikke males, så for at få afstemt forventningerne, så lavede vi åbent hus, 
så beboerne kunne se hvad der præcis ville blive lavet. Da vi så kom 
længere hen i processen, så var der nogen der brokkede sig, og så kunne 
man jo godt se, at de havde ikke været oppe og se til åbent hus. Når de 
ikke får den information, så står de først i køen med brok.  
➡Man skal nok klæde afdelingen på i forhold til at hvordan man skal bruge 
de forskellige tiltag. Der skal nok kastes lidt mere efter det. 
81
==PAGE:92==
Board members, Gadekærvej 
➡Jeg synes, at der manglede bedre koordination mellem entreprenør og 
rådgivere og i sidste ende også Domea Byg. Det hele har været lidt tough.  
➡Det første informationsmøde, hvor alle bebeorne blev inviteret til Taastrup 
for at fortælle, om hvad det er, vi skulle igang med, og hvad der skal ske 
fra Rambøll og Domea Byg. Det var faktisk meget, meget positivt, og det 
blev faktisk velmodtaget, fordi folk følte sig informeret.  
➡Vi afholdte nogle opgangsinfomøder, og det fungerede godt. Problemet 
er bare, at de vi stod og forklarede, og uanset hvor gode vi var til at varsle, 
så levede renoveringen så ikke op til. Så ﬁk vi jo bare boomerangen 
tilbage i nakken igen.  
➡Vi oprettede også et koordineringsudvalg, som bestod af de samme 
personer som ved byggemøderne. I starten mødtes vi en gang om ugen, 
og så satte vi så frekvensen lidt ned. Det var super godt, for der ﬁksede vi 
mange af de ting, der var gået galt.  
➡De fungerede rigtig ﬁnt med infoblade, hvor man fortalte lidt om hvad der 
foregik. Det gav en forståelse for, at det er en svær proces at komme 
igennem.  
➡Vi havde en workshop, hvor man blev sat i grupper, og så kom vi med 
idéer. Så er der taget ud fra nogle af de idéer og så bygget ud - hvad har 
vi råd til at lave.  
➡Det er svært at få beboerne med. Vi har for eksempel lige haft en 
rundspørge, fordi vi har to lokaler, som er ledige. Det er under 10%, der 
gider at svare. 
har de selvfølgelig guidet os hen imod. Nogle gange har vi dog 
protesteret og sagt nej.  
➡Da Rambøll vandt udbuddet blev hele området jo noget helt andet. Vi har 
haft store diskussioner. Vi følte os lidt dumme, når vi stod med et 
skitseprojekt, som ikke bliver til noget.  
➡Vi havde simplethen brugt så meget energi på det skitseprojekt, og det 
blev jo kylet ud af vinduet.  
➡Vi har oplevet, at der har været nogle ting, som Rambøll har været gode til 
at forklare, men der har også været mange ting, som folk har været 
utilfredse med, hvor der er givet en sludder for en sladder. 
82
==PAGE:93==
Lessons learnt:  
➡Workshops and info-meetings are held in both social housing areas to 
inform the residents. Ongoing information was handed out to residents. 
➡Consultants experience that social housing areas are very different hence 
the work needs to be done differently. Some needs guidance, some needs 
to be controlled and some just do not care.  
➡It can be hard to inform every residents on the same level since the 
building committee represents the residents and receives the highest 
amount of information.  
➡It is important to guide the residents when it comes to selection solutions 
for the area since residents tend to wish for solution that they know and 
not innovative solutions.  
➡The residents have experienced that presented solutions have changed 
throughout the proces several times which affected their trust to the 
project and professionals.  
➡There are sometimes problems with the commissioning of implemented 
solutions because transition is difﬁcult. The good solution and 
implementation are not always lead when consultants hands over the ﬁnal 
project.  
➡It is experienced that the boards does not always represents the residents 
correctly. It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd residents who will volunteer and therefore, 
the resident democracy might be challenged.  
➡The social housing areas experienced an increased need for follow-ups 
and coordination throughout the process. The meetings had to happen 
more regularly than expected. 
83
==PAGE:94==
6.1.3 Development of solutions
The development of solutions look at how solutions develops throughout the 
process of masterplanning. The section is based on both interviews and 
analysis of the implemented solution versus the ﬁrst designed solutions in 
order to see how the process has affected the solution.  
In order to see how the solutions have changes and developed throughout 
the process, the masterplans and the ﬁnal solutions are compared. The 
ﬁndings are based on section 4 which presented the two social housing 
cases. 
Gadekærvej 
The masterplan of Gadekærvej showed good aims and intensions. The 
masterplan has a lot of aims that works around social sustainability to have 
attractive and well-functioning dwellings, good community feelings and 
experiences and strengthened networks between residents and local area. 
Besides this, one of the main aims was to have environmental improvements.  
The improvements that are the most important in the masterplan for this 
thesis are the outdoor spaces, entrances and stairways and the balconies. 
These solutions in the masterplans are of cause made to gain physical 
upgrades but however also aims to add social values.  
The masterplan provided upgrades with various different solutions in the 
outdoor spaces, the entrances and the facades with balconies, and it is quite 
different if the solutions has been actually implemented. The following will go 
through the planned initiatives to see what has been realized.  
Common outdoor spaces 
➡Different activity areas within the outdoor space 
➡Ensure safe equipment within the outdoor spaces  
➡Reduce the harder coating of the terrain and replace with more grass to 
make the space more kind and inviting to stay within.  
➡Creation of ramp from Gadekærvej to the outdoor space  
➡Creation of meandering paths to obtain a more soft and human expression 
➡Lighting along paths to make the areas safe at night  
➡Wild and maintenance-free greenery that appears beautiful and lush  
➡Creation of outdoor seating furniture above skylights for parking 
basement 
➡Closed off areas with fence in both ends to stop trafﬁc from mopeds to 
make the area safer for elderly people, children and parents 
➡Creation of two roof terraces with green roofs together with new solar 
panels on the roof
84
==PAGE:95==
The green colored solutions are implemented while the red ones have not 
been implemented in the ﬁnal solutions. At ﬁrst glance, the majority has been 
implemented however when going deeper into the solutions, there has been 
more changes than at ﬁrst sight.  
The activity areas within the outdoor space are in the masterplan shown as 
seating furniture, a hilly landscape, playground, ﬂower meadows, outdoor 
ﬁtness, ball court and greenery all around. However, in the implemented 
solutions only the playgrounds, the ball court, seating areas has been 
realized. This means that the number of different solutions has been reduced 
and now playgrounds and seating areas are the only represented spaces in 
the outdoor area. This creates little or no activities for teenagers or adults that 
initiates mixed-use of outdoor areas. Besides this, the entire landscape has 
been implemented in a much more structured design and zoning and not 
with the curved, more random expression that would gather and invite 
people. The spaces are less intimate and cozy.  
 
The seating arrangements are placed in the middle of the area leaving 
no possibility for stays in the edge zones which often makes people safer. 
Thus, the use of the spaces becomes very public and interactive in an 
uncomfortable way.  
Some of the actually realized solution has also an opposite social expression. 
The fence in both ends of the outdoor area are done to prevent trafﬁc going 
through the area to make the area safer. The effect might be good for the 
residents and their safety, but it also limits the social part of having an open 
and accessible area for everyone you know.  
Regarding greenery, different expressions are showing along the seasons. It 
creates nice varying experiences of the outdoor space and the main entrance 
has got beautiful ﬂower beds with ﬂowers and trees. However, the greenery 
looks very sad and non-inspirational during the winter and spring before 
blossom which may be difﬁcult to avoid.  
A lot of the things has been implemented but they are also underlying 
elements of the other larger solutions. Even though the lighting, the greenery 
and the safe equipment has been implemented, it is undermined by the 
missing solutions. The intentions are good but the executing has missing 
items.  
Entrances and stairways  
➡Existing plinths are kept but upgraded 
➡Bike parking  
➡Niches on the west side to have meetings  
➡Beautiﬁcation of stairways  
In the entrances, three out of four solutions are implemented. However, the 
only solution not implemented is the most social-based. Only smaller niches 
85
==PAGE:96==
have been done in the stairways. Therefore, the side of the building with 
entrance areas has almost no meeting spots for common people. There are only 
a few benches outdoor at section 2 while there are small niches in the stairway 
at section 1. 
The walking paths for the necessary trafﬁc are limited to one long path parallel 
to the buildings. The curved, more exciting walking paths has not been realized. 
It creates easy accessibility to the stairways, however it also creates a straight 
“border” between the building and the outdoor spaces. This also limits the 
connection between the ground ﬂoor terraces and the common outdoor 
spaces and it limits the possibility to invite for people to randomly use the area. 
However, the paths and levels are nice and in good shape all year around.  
Balconies  
➡New balconies in section 2 
➡New front on balconies with tempered glass 
➡Accessibility is upgraded on balconies 
A third initiative in the masterplan was the balconies which was originally 
different from section 1 to section 2 of the building. Section 2 have received 
new balconies as intended, and the existing balconies in section 1 has got 
better accessibility. The new fronts with tempered glass are not implemented 
which means that the balconies respectively on section 1 and 2 are different in 
size, looks and expression. This means that the expression of the area in total 
are not the same and that the total renovation of the existing balconies in 
section 1 is not as thoroughly renovated as expected. 
Figure 6-1: Pictures of 
facades, seating areas 
and fencing of the 
outdoor spaces at 
Gadekærvej. 
Own photos.
86
==PAGE:97==
Skoleparken
Just as Gadekærvej, Skoleparken also had a lot of good aims that was 
directed measures which dealt with social sustainability. It aims were deﬁned 
to be physical changes, but the aims also concerned more psychological 
features including beautiful facades, variation and depth in architecture and 
to have the area be light and friendly.  
Again, the focus is on the physical changes that are the focus of the thesis but 
also has a high effect on the social situations in the social housing areas. At 
Skoleparken these solution in the masterplans concerns the outdoor spaces, 
entrances, balconies, activity house and gardens and terraces.  
 
Actually, Skoleparken has a lot of initiatives that aims to both aims to 
improve the physical frames of the area, however still aims to improve the 
social conditions.  
The following will analyze how the planned solutions in the masterplans have 
actually been realized and implemented.  
Common outdoor spaces  
➡Centrally placed square as meeting point for residents 
➡Outdoor space around activity house for stays and plays  
➡Large green area in connection to existing greenery with additional 
greenery, trees and terrain formations 
The outdoor spaces have generally throughout the process been limited. At 
ﬁrst, before the existing masterplan, the temporary masterplan planned to 
upgrade ﬁve existing green spaces to have different themes of ﬁre, soil, water, 
etc. However, this was already before this masterplan skipped due to the 
ﬁnancial situation from the National Building Fund.  
The centrally placed square with an activity house has been realized but the 
elements of the square has been limited. In the masterplan, it is illustrated 
and described as a place where children can play, and parents can be seated 
in a café-area. The implemented solutions are three set of tables and benches 
and two tennis table tables. Besides that, the space is surrounded with a 
larger area with gravel that is unused. This center with the activity house is the 
only place to meet that is completely public.  
 
The area in general becomes big and wide with no smaller spaces to 
have different qualities implemented, and even though the gardens and 
entrances are faced towards each other, the large distance limits the 
possibility for both intentional and random contacts. Thus, the invitations for 
activities and stays are limited, and the possibilities decreased.  
The large green space illustrated in the masterplan with room for playing 
games, playing football and a long green space are not considered 
87
==PAGE:98==
implemented. The area has got a path along the building and the gardens 
for the ground ﬂoor apartments. The area towards the existing trees and 
greenery are not done with the terrain formations, and the trees and 
greenery as suggested. The area has larger bank of soil between the area 
and the existing greenery. The path also makes playing football or the like 
quite limited.  
Entrances and walking paths  
➡Walking paths are moved in distance from the facade 
➡Some entrances have smaller green spaces outside 
➡The stairways are made columns at the height of the building with glass 
➡Bike racks at the entrances  
➡Walking paths around areas are made more interesting 
The entrances in the masterplan has to different looks. One with an entire 
entrance area that had a small “garden” outside the entrance and the 
stairway was done as a separate built column attached to the facade. The 
other had only a one-story heigh entrance attached and windows in the 
facade at the stairway.  
The ﬁrst solution which is more comprehensive are not realized. Instead, the 
second solution with smaller elements are almost realized as planned in the 
masterplan. This means that entrances do not have the welcoming gardens 
that invites people for stays and meetings, and the attached columns for 
stairways are not implemented but the glass facade towards the stairways 
are realized. Instead, the entrances have got benches along the walking 
paths that have been moved away from the facade that allows meeting and 
rests along the pathways yet they are not placed in edge zones.  
The walking paths in general has been realized as intended with breaks and 
cuts that makes the walk more interesting and breaks the parallel lines of the 
area. The system of paths is quite comprehensive and the paths across the 
area makes access to the speciﬁc entrances easy. The paths are also 
completely accessible for disabled people.  
Activity House 
➡Activity house 
➡420 m2 
➡Kitchen, multifunctional rooms, toilettes 
➡Multifunctional hall  
The activity house has been built. However, the house has been changed 
throughout the process and is does not have the look or the inside spaces as 
thought originally. Overall the ﬁnal outcome has been limited in the design.  
88
==PAGE:99==
 
The activity house has decreased in size with approximately 140 m2 meaning 
that the indoor facilities has been limited. For instance, the two-story heigh 
multifunctional hall has been cancelled and the house was only built in one 
story with less different activity rooms. 
Gardens, terraces and balconies 
➡Smaller gardens in ground ﬂoor  
➡Gardens have terrace and lawn  
➡Directly access to gardens from ground ﬂoor 
➡All stories have balconies  
In this category all initiatives have been implemented. They do not look like 
the ones illustrated in the masterplan, so changes have been done 
throughout the process. However, no solution has been completely skipped 
or limited in a way that inﬂuences the ﬁnal results.  
The changes are more corrections. The balconies are changes in shape and 
looks while the gardens are changing a bit with the hedges. The direct access 
from the apartments and the terraces are kept in the gardens.  
Even though the solutions to a great extent has been realized, the previous 
ﬁndings of unrealized solutions impacts the total possible outcome for the 
area. The solutions greatly affects each other and works interdependently why 
the realized solutions may have less effect.  
Figure 6-2: Pictures of 
middle area, entrances 
and seating areas in 
Skoleparken. 
Own photos.
89
==PAGE:100==
Katja Waagepetersen, Architect, Rambøll
Sirkku Singer, Landscape Architect, Rambøll
➡Vi starter tit ud med en helhedsplan, som er bundet op på noget 
bygningsfysisk, og så skal man søge nogle penge, hvor man kan ligge 
noget socialt ind, men vi kan ikke bare ligge alt muligt ind i projektet.  
➡Vi (Rambøll) arbejder jo med helheden sammen med byggeudvalget, og 
så skal det stemmes igennem. Når man så går i gang med at projektere, så 
ændrer meget sig.  
➡Ofte når vi går igang, så ændrer tingene sig fuldstændigt.  
➡ bGenerelt føler vi os ikke meget begrænset, men i forhold til budget er vi 
sindssygt begrænset.  
➡Der ligger jo ofte en foreløbig helhedsplan, og så bliver der tjekket for alle 
mulige bygningsfysiske forhold, og så laver vi en helhedsplan, hvor vi 
forsøger at give dem så meget som muligt for pengene.  
➡Alt hvad vi laver handler jo om budget. Vi har en anlægssum, som vi skal 
holde os indenfor, og ofte sprænges den under projekteringen, og så 
barberer vi ned bagefter.  
➡Ofte har vi jo en forestilling om hvordan tingene skal ske ud, og så er der 
ikke råd alligevel. Det er desværre ofte landskab, det går ud over, fordi det 
er lettere at give dem noget andet, hvis de ikke kan få det ene. 
➡Økonomien gør jo meget. Det begrænser stort set altid, og fordi vi som 
landskabsarkitekter kommer sidst, så bliver en stor del sparet væk.  
➡Mellemstykket i Skoleparken med legepladserne. Det havde de ikke råd 
til, fordi renoveringen er bygningerne blev dyrere og dyrere.  
➡Der sker ofte nedskæringer i starten, fordi så er der ikke råd til tingene 
alligevel.  
➡Problemet er, at vi som landskabsarkitekter er sidst i rækkefølgen. Men 
landskabet giver en helt anden følelse af området, så man skal passe på, 
at man ikke sparer det hele væk. 
Furthermore, stakeholders have in the interviews commented on the 
development of solutions through the master planning and implementing 
process since they have experiences with the changes and challenges that 
the process provides.
90
==PAGE:101==
Board members, Gadekærvej
➡Som totalløsning har vi som byggeudvalg og bestyrelse ikke følt os 
begrænset. Der er under den lange byggeproces selvfølgelig kommet 
andre ting til, men haveprojektet - det er lavet ret professionelt. 
➡Det vi har fået er langt fra det, som vi i skitseprojektet selv havde foreslået.  
➡Alt det vi havde aftalt med alle de frivillige, som dukkede op til møderne 
ved skitseprojektet og var entusiatiske - det er blevet skudt i sænk tre 
gange.  
➡Midterarealet mellem blokkene, der var planlagt legepladser med ild, 
vand, jord m.m., men det sagde landsbyggefonden, at det var ikke med i 
denne plan.  
➡Vi føler jo, at legepladserne er nedprioriteret.  
➡Overordnet mener vi, at Rambølls visioner har været gode - der er bare 
altid problemer med økonomien. 
Board members, Skoleparken
Lessons learnt:  
➡There is a general economic limitation when it comes to implementing 
social sustainable solutions.  
➡There is an experience of reductions in social sustainable solutions 
throughout the process.  
➡The reduction of social sustainable solution happens in two phases. First is 
the reduction due to lack of budget and next there is a further reduction 
throughout the process due to increased costs of other things.  
➡The reductions often concerns landscape because the building physics 
comes ﬁrst in priority throughout the entire building process.  
➡The boards members have different perceptions. Gadekærvej feels no 
limitations while Skoleparken has experiences changes, limitations and 
downgrading. 
91
==PAGE:102==
6.2 Use evaluation 
6.2.1 Residents’ use of space
The section of performance evaluation will look into the results of 
observations and interviews to see how the implemented solutions perform. 
The empirical methods are based on the residents since the residents are the 
most important stakeholder in the performance aspect. They are the ones 
using the area for the future and the ones who might experience the 
increased social sustainability if succeeded.  
The results and analysis are the cornerstones of the performance evaluation 
that in the discussion will determine how the social sustainability in the two 
social housing areas have evolved from the renovations. 
Table 6-3:  
Observation data for 
each location - 
Gender, Age group, 
Position, Activity and 
Time spend. 
Observations have been carried out in the two social housing areas to see 
how the interaction between the residents and the renovated spaces is. The 
observations help understand how the residents are using the spaces which 
gives and insight to the success of the different initiatives within the edge 
zones and outdoor spaces. 
Table 6-3 shows the observation data for each of the two locations, 
Gadekærvej and Skoleparken. These locations are divided into two, for 
instance Gadekærvej 1 and Gadekærvej 2 since two observations has been 
carried out at each location. The durations of the observations are 1,5 hours 
for the ﬁrst observations and 1 hour for the second observation. 
Gadekærvej 1
Gadekærvej 2
Skoleparken 1
Skoleparken 2
[N]
[%]
[N]
[%]
[N]
[%]
[N]
[%]
Gender
Woman
26
62
17
52
20
61
18
55
Man
16
38
16
48
13
39
15
45
Age group
Child
9
21
13
39
9
27
9
27
Teenager
7
17
3
9
5
15
3
9
Adults
14
33
17
52
14
42
17
52
Elderly
12
29
0
0
5
15
4
12
Position
Private areas
0
0
0
0
1
3
3
9
Semi-private areas
0
0
6
18
3
9
8
24
Public areas
42
100
27
82
29
88
22
67
Playground
6
14
9
27
3
9
3
9
Seating areas
0
0
10
30
3
9
0
0
Balcony/terrace
0
0
6
18
2
6
11
33
Footpath
36
86
8
24
25
76
19
58
92
==PAGE:103==
Activity
Necessary
36
86
8
24
25
76
20
61
Optional
6
14
25
76
8
24
13
39
Walking
33
79
8
24
23
70
18
55
Running
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Playing
6
14
15
45
4
12
5
15
Sitting
0
0
10
30
4
12
5
15
Biking
3
7
0
0
0
0
1
3
Gardening
0
0
0
0
2
6
4
12
Time spend
< 5 min
36
86
9
27
25
76
19
58
> 5 min
6
14
24
73
8
24
14
42
In both locations, the gender distribution is little uneven with most women 
using the areas, however not in a great amount. The average difference 
between man and women are only 14% for Gadekærvej and 15% for 
Skoleparken, which also shows that the gender difference is shown to be 
equal in the two locations. 
The age groups show a ﬂuctuate picture when looking at the different 
observations. Thus the average of the two locations are calculated to have an 
average situation to consider.  
 
At Gadekærvej, the distribution of age groups in average are 30% 
children, 13% teenagers, 42,5% adults and 14,5% elderly. Thus, the majority 
of ages are adults and children. This might be expected since the 
observations where undertaken after work and school hours where children 
are playing at their residence, often assisted by their parents.  
 
At Skoleparken, the average distribution are 27% children, 12% 
teenagers, 47% adults and 13,5% elderlies. Thus, the same situation is seen 
here as Gadekærvej. In both cases, the age groups of teenagers and elderly 
people are close in average.  
 
The observations might be affected by the time of the observations. 
When observing in afternoon hours, is it possible that teenagers tend to stay 
inside after school or work and elderly people might have done their 
everyday routines when adults and children are in school and at work. 
The residents use, in all four observations, most time in public areas meaning 
spaces in the social housing areas that everyone has access to. Observed in 
Gadekærvej is that their outdoor space is fenced, why it is not fully accessible 
for the public. However, every resident has access.  
 
In both locations, the second highest observations are in the semi-
private areas including fenced terraces, gardens and balconies. The variation 
in observations here has no obvious explanation, except that the highest 
observations, 18% in Gadekærvej and 24% at Skoleparken are observed on 
days with better weather than the other observations which obvious makes a 
difference.  
The more speciﬁc positions of the residents are also observed. First, it is seen 
than the residents are using the footpaths mostly which must be considered 
naturally since the trafﬁc to and from the residents’ homes requires passing 
93
==PAGE:104==
through the observed outdoor areas. In three out of four cases walking is the 
most observed activity. 
In all four observations, playing was observed. In relation to the previous 
observation regarding walking activities, playing activities increased in the 
second observation in Gadekærvej, most likely affected by the weather. In the 
other three observations, both in Gadekærvej and Skoleparken, the playing 
activities was observed in 12-15% of the entire amount activities.  
 
The same situations are seen within the activity of sitting. Again, more 
residents where using the outdoor spaces at the second observation in 
Gadekærvej. Furthermore, at Skoleparken the percentages followed the 
percentages of playing, maybe because children playing often leads to adults 
sitting outdoor following their children. In the ﬁrst observation in 
Skoleparken, no activity of sitting has been observed. The reason for this is 
unknown but the little amount of activities may be the reason.  
In both areas, a small amount of biking was observed. There is no deviant 
behavior seen here to explain or observe further.  
When it comes to gardening, Gadekærvej has no observed activities here. 
Gadekærvej has no gardens but only terraces which means that gardening 
here would require residents to purchase their own pot plants etc. In 
Skoleparken, all ground ﬂoor apartments have got smaller gardens meaning 
that there will automatically be gardening to do. Thus, observations of 
respectively 6% and 12% has been observed in Skoleparken. The ﬁrst 
observation was undertaken in slightly worse weather than the second 
observation explaining the difference.  
Again, when looking at the time spend in the areas, the weather affects the 
use of the spaces. When the weather is better, the time spend increases as 
seen in the second observation in Gadekærvej and at Skoleparken. In 
Gadekærvej the time spend above 5 minutes increased with 59% and at 
Skoleparken, it increased with 18%. 
 
The high increase at Gadekærvej is caused by the weather at ﬁrst but 
also a large group of residents being outdoor together has an inﬂuence. In 
Skoleparken, the increase is caused by smaller groups of people or single 
people. Thus, the increase at Gadekærvej does not mean that many different 
people chose to stay outdoor for a longer time, it means that one large group 
stayed outdoor together for a longer period of time.  
Furthermore, it is relevant to consider that when more people are staying 
outside for a longer period of time, less people are walking through the areas 
to and from their homes. At Gadekærvej, the number of people using less 
than 5 minutes, who is often people passing through, decreased from 36 
people to 9 people. Maybe residents’ choses other paths to pass through 
when many are staying at one area.  
 
In Skoleparken, the number also decreases but not in the same 
amount as Gadekærvej. However, Skoleparken is a larger area with many 
94
==PAGE:105==
different opportunities for passing through meaning that the residents may 
not be that affected by staying groups and residents.  
The patterns of the use are illustrated in ﬁgure 6-4 where both trafﬁc and stays 
are illustrated. The trafﬁc is illustrated with lines and the stays are illustrated 
with circles. The illustration of Gadekærvejs shows that the trafﬁc of walking 
happens parallel to the building while Skoleparken has more varying trafﬁc 
which might be affected by the size of the areas as residents have more 
places to go and possibilities to enter and leave the entire housing area.  
The stays are in both places of cause affected by the stays in residents’ own 
gardens, terraces and balconies. However, Gadekærvej has more varying 
stays due to their more extensive renovation of outdoor areas. 
Figure 6-4:  
Illustration of patterns 
for trafﬁc and stays in 
Gadekærvej and 
Skoleparken.  
Own production
Gadekærvej
Building blocks
Skoleparken
Building block
Building block
Building block
Building block
95
==PAGE:106==
6.2.2 Performance of implemented solutions
The performance of the implemented solutions plays an important part of the 
evaluation of the renovations in the two social housing areas. Therefore, 
questionnaires are undertaken to gain insight towards the residents’ 
perception of the implemented solutions. 
 
As mentioned in chapter 5, Field Study, the questions are generated in 
the same way in both areas but speciﬁcally customized the areas based on 
the implemented solution in both areas. However, the basic questions are the 
same in order to make the results comparable.
Total performance
Gadekærvej [%]
Skoleparken [%]
Positive
48
52
Neutral
32
22
Negative
20
26
The total performance from the questionnaires are seen in table 6-5.  The 
total performances of the two social housing areas are the total positive, 
neutral and negative answers from all 15 questions in the questionnaires 
handed out in Gadekærvej and Skoleparken.  
The overall performance shows that both social housing areas has a majority 
of positive answers which covers the ‘enig’ or ‘meget enig’ answers. Thus, 
both social areas have a majority of the satisﬁed/positive residents. 
Skoleparken performs the best with over 50% positive residents while 
Gadekærvej has just below 50% positive answers. Thus, the ﬁnal results of the 
performance is not impressive.  
While both areas have a majority of positive residents, the difference from the 
neutral and negative residents is not convincing. Both areas have 1/5 or more 
negative or neutral residents which has to be considered as quite high 
percentages when it regards new renovated areas that aims to create 
successful and attractive areas.  
The following will look closer into the answers in the categories of quality and 
community as described in section 5.1, and from here, look further into the 
speciﬁc questions to gain knowledge of the positive, neutral and negative 
perceptions of the solutions implemented.
Table 6-5:  
Total performance for 
each location in 
percentages of the 
positive, neutral and 
negative answers.  
Own production. 
96
==PAGE:107==
Quality performance
0
20
40
60
80
100
Gadekærvej
Skoleparken
16
13
22
24
62
63
Satisﬁed
Neutral
Negative
Community performance
0
20
40
60
80
100
Gadekærvej
Skoleparken
38
29
22
40
40
31
Satisﬁed
Neutral
Negative
Figure 6-6:  
Total performance 
within the categories 
of community and 
quality for Gadekærvej 
and Skoleparken.  
Own production. 
Figure 6-6 shows the performance within the two categories that the 
questionnaire has investigated in the social housing areas. At ﬁrst glance, the 
clearest observation is that the performance regarding the quality of the 
renovation is far more positive than the community performance. In both 
areas, the residents are respectively 22% and 32% more positive in the quality 
of the renovation than the community building from the renovation. Thus, the 
residents are far more neutral and negative when it comes to the community 
performance from the implemented solutions.  
These observations states that the majority of residents are positive and 
happy with the implemented solutions and the quality of them but not as 
positive about the social effect of the solutions. The residents are not 
unhappy with the speciﬁc solutions, chosen materials or the different type of 
implemented solutions however they do not feel that the social changes has 
followed. Only 40% or below thinks that the community has grown. In 
addition to this, up to 38% are negative about the community from the 
masterplan. Thus, there are two counterpoints of positive and negative 
residents.  
In Skoleparken, the neutral residents do not change from the community 
category to the quality category meaning that the positive residents in the 
quality category has directly shifted to a negative perception in the 
community category. At Gadekærvej, the residents shift from positive to be 
evenly neutral and negative in the community category. This might indicate 
that the residents at Gadekærvej have a harder time assessing the effect from 
the renovation. Yet still 16% shifts from positive votes to negative votes in the 
questions regarding community.  
The following will look into the speciﬁc questions from the questionnaire to 
gain insight and understand the answers in the two social housing areas 
individually. In the following, tables will show the percentages of the positive, 
neutral and negative answers within each question. The questions have been 
shortened down to headings of the questions within the tables.
97
==PAGE:108==
Gadekærvej
Safety when moving around 
area 
Increased community from 
inviting common areas 
Increased meetings and more 
activities from increased stays 
in common areas 
Increased social contact from 
common areas
0
50
100
0
6
94
0
30
60
23
53
24
0
25
50
38
41
21
0
25
50
44
47
9
0
25
50
35
44
21
0
25
50
24
44
32
35
50
15
New spaces are meeting 
points for residents and it is 
easier to meet others 
Increased desire to use the 
common areas and the future 
will have more outdoor stays 
Increased meetings through 
gardens, new entrances and 
the like
Community performance
Figure 6-7:  
Positive, neutral and 
negative answers in 
percentages within 
community from 
Gadekærvej. 
Green is positive, gray 
is neutral and red is 
negative.  
Own production. 
The ﬁrst important thing to notice at the overall picture of the seven questions 
is that only one question has a majority of positive residents. The other 
questions have a majority of neutral residents and furthermore also high 
percentages of negative answers.  
Almost every respondent and residents feel safe when moving around the 
area, however when it comes to more in-depth community-based questions 
the picture changes. Residents either have neutral opinions or negative 
opinions when it comes to increased community, social contact and meetings 
with other residents from the implemented solutions. It is of cause difﬁcult to 
know why many residents have neutral opinions regarding the community-
based questions. However, it seems logical that residents tend to have neutral 
opinions when they feel that they cannot evaluate the difference from before 
or simply do not know. Maybe they have not used the new areas to an extent 
where the difference is assessable or they do not have a basis to compare 
from.  
Only one of the six questions with high neutral and negative percentages has 
about 1/3 positive residents. All the other questions have about 1/5 positive 
residents. This must be considered low percentages considering that new, 
modern and re-thought solution have been implemented through the 
masterplans in Gadekærvej. And the picture speaks for itself; It cannot be 
assessed that the implemented solutions have had a positive effect on the 
community at Gadekærvej - at least not to a level which are considered 
successful.  
98
==PAGE:109==
The common areas invites 
residents to stay  
Facilities and activities are for 
everyone in all ages 
The areas have become more 
open and welcoming 
The physical elements are of 
good quality and is nice to 
look at 
15
23
62
21
26
53
15
18
67
12
12
76
3
29
68
18
38
44
9
23
68
8
21
81
Increased visual quality from 
new elements and new looks  
Increased overview over area 
and increased desire to 
follow the everyday life  
The new physical elements 
are created in good 
connection and with good 
integration in the area  
Increased overall quality of 
social housing area
Figure 6-8:  
Positive, neutral and 
negative answers in 
percentages within 
quality from 
Gadekærvej. 
Green is positive, gray 
is neutral and red is 
negative.  
Own production. 
Quality performance
When it comes to the quality of the solutions, the majority of residents are 
positive. From the questions regarding the community to these questions 
about the quality, the answers change drastically. The dividing of questions 
into two categories are not visible for the respondents. Thus, they are not 
affected by the division of categories. Therefore, this change in the resident’s 
minds are happening naturally and without force.  
Besides the increasing positive answers, the neutral answers decrease. This 
means that the residents might ﬁnd it easier to assess the solutions within this 
category. Thus, it is not a general thing that residents tend to have neutral 
opinions about the renovation and implemented solutions as seen in the 
community category.   
Furthermore, the negative answers have decreased massively. The residents 
have the ability to differ between the solutions’ quality and the actual effect 
on the social situation within the area. The difference in answers might imply 
that the quality of the solutions is acceptable, for instance totally 81% of the 
respondents feels that the overall quality of the areas has increased. At the 
same time, only 9% feels that they have experienced increased social contact 
through the new solutions. Residents are happy with the solutions yet not 
feeling the difference in social sustainability.  
This indicates that the residents actually feel a high value of the solutions on a 
physical level. They are positive about the visual quality, the quality of the 
physical elements and the integration of solution in the existing areas. 
However, the positive answers decrease a little bit when concerning following 
the everyday life and having facilities for all ages which might also affect the 
social outcome.  
99
==PAGE:110==
The residents had the opportunity to come with additional comments in the 
questionnaire. The comments are collected and shown here for Gadekærvej 
together with some additional comments from the interview with the board 
members: 
➡Vi bruger mest udenomslegepladsen, når vi har vores børnebørn på 
besøg, som er et virkelig godt løft efter renoveringen.  
➡Der er den del fremmede (anden etnisk herkomst) i ejendommen, men 
desværre holder de ﬂeste for dem selv, når vi mødes udenfor på 
legepladsen.  
➡På forsiden af bygningerne er renoveringen ﬁn med træer, bede og 
cykelstativer.  
➡Det er ærgerligt at gården ikke indbyder til mere ophold med hyggekroge 
og andre tiltag.  
➡De små haver langs facaden har ikke megen fred - stien burde lægges ud 
på den anden side af garage åbningerne.  
➡Kørestolsbrugere kan ikke benytte alt i gårdanlægget, f.eks. manglende 
adgang til grillplads/græsareal.  
➡Det er perfekt, at gården er blevet aﬂåst, så det ikke længere er muligt for 
områdets unge, at opholde sig i gården. Det giver stor tryghed.  
➡Jeg synes ikke det har højnet aktiviteterne bland beboer-grupperne. 
Gårde står ofte tom, fordi arealet er aﬂåst.  
➡Planter på udearealerne (både foran facaden og i gården) er kedelige at se 
på.  
➡Vi må nok indrømme, at vi insolvente danskere har lidt svært ved at komme 
ud og være deltagende. De anden etniske danskere bruger området 
meget. De er bedre til at gå ud og være fælles, mødes og snakke.  
➡Der var mange, der var imod, at vi skulle lave det lukket. Et åbent rum er 
godt for sammenhængskraften og samværet, problemer er bare, at det 
trækker det med, som vi ikke vil have.  
100
==PAGE:111==
Safety when moving around 
area 
Increased community from 
inviting common areas 
Increased meetings and more 
activities from increased stays 
in common areas 
Increased social contact from 
common areas
8
0
92
42
42
16
50
25
25
25
33
42
58
17
25
25
33
42
58
0
42
New spaces are meeting 
points for residents and it is 
easier to meet others 
Increased desire to use the 
common areas and the future 
will have more outdoor stays 
Increased meetings through 
gardens, new entrances and 
the like
Figure 6-9:  
Positive, neutral and 
negative answers in 
percentages within 
community from 
Skoleparken. 
Green is positive, gray 
is neutral and red is 
negative.  
Own production. 
Skoleparken
Community performance
The community performance of Skoleparken is a bit more positive than 
Gadekærvej. Here, three questions have a majority of positive residents, yet 
the majority is not convincing percentages. The only question with a high 
percentage is regarding safety in the areas. The positive answers decrease 
when questions concern more social aspects. The more positive answers 
might be caused by the fact that Skoleparken might be more social already 
why areas might easier increase in social sustainability or that Skoleparken 
might be less functional before and therefore feels a larger difference 
quicker.  
Still, many residents have neutral and negative opinions towards the 
community. In questions that regards increased community, increased 
meetings with other residents and new spaces as meeting points 42-58% of 
the residents have a negative opinion. About half of the residents does not 
feel a change in the community after the renovation. It might be due to the 
fact that the renovation has not been ﬁnished for more than 1-2 years but it 
also might be due to the fact that it has not made a real change. The reasons 
are hard to tell.  
In four out of seven questions, the neutral answers are relatively high and in 
two of these questions the percentage of neutral answers is higher than the 
negative answers. As in Gadekærvej, the cause might be that the residents 
have a hard time assessing the change or they do not know the change since 
they might not be a great part of the community already. 
101
==PAGE:112==
The common areas invites 
residents to stay  
Facilities and activities are for 
everyone in all ages 
The areas have become more 
open and welcoming 
The quality of physical 
elements are of good quality 
and is nice to look at 
33
42
25
58
25
17
9
8
83
9
8
83
0
17
83
8
25
67
8
42
50
0
8
92
Increased visual quality from 
new elements and new looks  
Increased overview over area 
and increased desire to follow 
the everyday life  
The new physical elements 
are created in good 
connection and with good 
integration in the area  
Increased overall quality of 
social housing area
Figure 6-10:  
Positive, neutral and 
negative answers in 
percentages within 
quality from 
Skoleparken. 
Green is positive, gray 
is neutral and red is 
negative.  
Own production. 
The quality performance creates the same picture of development from 
community performance as Gadekærvej. Skoleparken are greatly positive 
about the quality of the implemented solutions. Six out of eight questions 
have high positive percentages meaning that the majority of the residents 
have positive opinions on the quality of the solutions.  
 
Furthermore, four questions have extremely high positive rates from 
the residents which says that they feel the areas as welcoming and open, they 
are satisﬁed with the quality of the physical elements, they feel an increases 
visual quality and the overall quality is increased also.  
The only two questions where the residents have a noticeable negative 
percentage is when asked if the areas invites people to stay and if there are 
facilities and activities for everyone. The reason for the negative response 
might be the same for both questions; It is likely that the fact that there are 
missing activities for all ages affects the feeling of invitation to stay and use 
the areas. The area as discussed before is missing solutions for activities and 
residents agree.  
Four questions have neutral answers worth considering. The four questions 
have at least 25% neutral answers. The neutral answers in these four situations 
might be due to a neutral opinion on these factors in general. It is likely that 
residents might be neutral if not noticing the connection of elements, the 
overview of the area, the invitations and activities in general. The questions 
are somehow linked, for instance that the overview has something to do with 
the experience connectivity and that activities for everyone is linked to the 
invitation for stays. When one is missing as solutions, the other one becomes 
unimportant, why residents may have a hard time assessing the ﬁnal 
outcome. 
Quality performance
102
==PAGE:113==
The additional comments from the questionnaires from Skoleparken are 
listed below including comments from the interview with the board members 
at Skoleparken: 
➡Jeg er spændt på når de grønne områder bliver færdige. Jeg håber på lidt 
træer imellem blokkene.   
➡Jeg har været meget glad for det fællesskab vi har haft, selv om tiderne 
ændrer sig, er det vigtigt med et godt fællesskab. 
➡Fællesområder, legepladser og grønne områder indbyder ikke til fælles 
aktiviteter, da de ikke er færdige endnu.  
➡De grønne områder er endnu ikke færdige og benytter derfor dem ikke 
endnu. 
➡Jeg ser frem til at de bliver færdige, og man dermed kan være mere ude. 
➡Jeg synes ikke at indgangspartierne har gjort nogen forskel  
➡Med haverne lærer du dine naboer at kende på en helt anden måde. Vores 
nabo har nogle ting, og vi har nogle ting, og så deler vi bare lige henover 
hegnet. Vi hjælper hinanden.  
➡Det hedder ikke blokken mere - nu hedder det Skoleparken.  
➡Børnene kan ikke rigtig være nogen steder. Der er endelig kommet noget 
græs nede ved os, og der løber de og spille bold, for der er ikke andre 
steder. Før i tiden havde nogen nok råbt efter dem, men folk ved godt, at 
de ikke har andre steder at være.  
➡Sidste år i vinteren, der kom jeg gående udefra, og der lyste opgangene 
virkelig det hele op. Det var virkelig ﬂot. 
➡Sammenholdet sker jo - det kan vi også se med haverne. Så kom en nabo 
lige og spurgte om vi ikke manglede en bænk, så kom hendes mand 
slæbende med en bænk til os. En anden nabo stod lige og manglede et 
eller andet, så lånte hun det af os. Sådan gør man.  
103
==PAGE:114==
104
==PAGE:115==
DISCUSSION
7
==PAGE:116==
7 Discussion 
This chapter will discuss the ﬁndings from the previous section. The aim is to 
discuss the four research questions to be able to conclude how it is possible 
to increase social sustainability in social housing areas. The research 
questions will be discussed based on the theory found on the subjects and 
the ﬁeld studies that involves residents and professionals.The research 
questions will be discussed individually with individual partial conclusions.  
The discussions will only handle ﬁndings presented in section 7 Results & 
Analysis, why for instance statements from interviews will not be re-written in 
this chapter. When the text in the following section refers to already stated 
theories, interview statements or the like, the respective section will be shown 
in angular brackets, for instance if something is used from section 3.4.2, it will 
be shown as [3.4.2].
7.1 Research question 1
How is social sustainability understood and considered when 
designing and implementing masterplans in social housing areas?
The understanding of social sustainability is mostly seen from Rambøll’s point 
of view since they are the ones handling the part of the designing and 
implementation. It is clear from the ﬁndings the employees to some extent 
has a social agenda within the work of master planning and that the 
employees have a fundamental understanding of social sustainability. The 
perception and ground thought in their work is to create possibilities for 
people to meet and to have elements that enhance the creation of social 
relations. Landscape architect, Sirkku Singer, states that her work on social 
sustainability is concerned about the meetings between people. Through the 
design of solutions meetings should be initiated to increase residents’ social 
relations [6.1.1]. Architect, Katja Waagepetersen, shares the same vision of 
her work. She states that, she ﬁnds in natural to have residents socialize and 
that the solutions aim to support social contacts [6.1.1].  
 
There is a mutual understanding of how social sustainability is handled 
in masterplans and what the implemented solutions should initiate. This 
perception of social sustainability goes along with the fact that passive 
contacts are the starting point to obtain more extensive social relations and 
contacts  [3.4.3]. Thus, the employees have a mutual understanding of social 
relations and how the built environment can act as meeting point that leads 
to development of social relationships. 
106
==PAGE:117==
It is also clear that the presented thoughts on social sustainability are the 
main objectives in the solutions in the masterplan. Examples given in the 
interviews shows how the solutions are designed to initiate residents to meet 
each other, both in organized and random get togethers. Benches, gardens 
and pathways are examples of how it is attempted to create conditions in 
which residents are brought togehter [6.1.1]. Thus, there is a fundamental 
understanding that the physical elements and solutions affect the social 
conditions in the social housing areas and that physical solutions have to be 
designed to initiate the social relations between residents. It is crucial for the 
entire work on social sustainability that architects and landscape architects 
understand the relation between the built environment and the social 
conditions of an area, and that is the case here. However, there seems to be a 
lack of understanding when it comes to social sustainability as a term. The 
work done somehow circles around the term without actually getting to the 
core of it.  
Even though the fundamental thoughts of social sustainability or more 
correctly social relations in social housing areas are commonly understood, it 
seems to be the only point of view when considering social sustainability. 
Relative to the extensive theory found on social sustainability, the 
understanding found are quite limited, especially when considering 
sustainability in general. Sustainability concerns not only social sustainability 
alone; It is fundamentally known that it concerns three pillars that are 
interdependent [3.2.1]. Thus, social sustainability will affect either 
environmental or economic sustainability or both as seen in ﬁgure 3-1 in 
section 3.2.1 showing the triangular relationship between the three pillars of 
sustainability. The knowledge of sustainability, all three pillars, could 
potentially help to have better understanding of a speciﬁc area and the right 
solutions for this area. If the work focused on for instance the environmental 
pillar together with the social pillar of sustainability, the work would be better 
designed and implemented since designs that focuses on the environmental 
aspect would beneﬁt the work on social sustainability. This could beneﬁt the 
entire process of master planning, for instance to be able to tell whether or 
not a social solution would be a success in different areas with different 
economic or environmental conditions [3.2.1]. Furthermore, a more focused 
process on sustainability as a whole would beneﬁt the building sector 
because master planning in general will become a more sustainable part of 
the building sector, and with 20% of housing in Denmark being social 
housing, the masterplans actually has great inﬂuence of the building sector. 
Thus, a sustainable workﬂow in master planning must not be neglected, and it 
must be considered important to have a more comprehensive understanding 
of social sustainability as well as economic and environmental sustainabilit 
that goes beyond social conditions.  
Furthermore, the understanding is not only inadequate, the work in practice 
also lacks correct tools for a succesfull implementation of social sustainability.  
It is found that the work is not strategic and focused on measures that would 
help evaluating or deﬁning the success of the solutions implemented. 
107
==PAGE:118==
Landscape Architect, Sirkku Singer states that the work implemented are not 
focused on measurable parameters, it is focused on the value which are 
created from the physical initiatives [6.1.1]. When working with sustainability 
by all means, the outcome beneﬁts from a focused work that does not only 
keep the residents in mind but also concerns more measurable conditions, 
like seen in the 17 Sustainable Development Goals from The United Nations. 
The value of social sustainability is not obtained from good intentions, it is 
obtained from hardcore goals and aims that states what the work needs to 
deliver in order to give value.  
 
It could be beneﬁcial to implement the same strategic work as the 17 
Sustainable Development goals in a scale that ﬁts the purpose. It would make 
it possible to have an extensive understanding of how social sustainability are 
developed in social housing areas by using prepared methods, measures and 
strategies. Furthermore, it would make it possible to gain better evaluations 
and understandings of how the implemented solution perform on a 
sustainable level for future masterplans. This would allow master planning to 
actually work on sustainability as presented in ‘Our Common Future’, also 
known as the Brundtland report, where sustainability is for now and for the 
future.  
 
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals are found to be good 
inspiration because it has the structure of goals and targets within 
sustainability including measures that makes it possible for all to have the 
same strategic aims for work within sustainability. To establish some goals and 
targets would help increase the focus on social sustainability while also 
include more than just social contacts between residents. For instance, the 17 
sustainable goals have direct targets to improve health, community and 
inclusion which are highly relevant subjects in social sustainability. 
As it is now, it seems that the work is focused on social conditions from 
experiences and the solutions chosen seem to come from a package of 
known solutions. Both Skoleparken and Gadekærvej have had the same 
range of solutions implemented though they are two quite different areas 
with different residents and structure. For instance, both areas have had 
terraces, balconies and new entrances implemented, howevere there seems 
to be no analysis behind the chosen solutions. The solutions follows to a great 
extent the theories on good solutions to implement, but no reasons shows 
that both areas would beneﬁt from the same solutions. No existing 
evaluations are found as evidence for the effect of the solutions and this 
creates a missing link between the performance of the solutions and the 
intentions behind the solutions. Thus, a strategic practice to ﬁnd the correct 
solutions for each speciﬁc area would beneﬁt the process and the end-result 
because the speciﬁc areas’ potentials and possibilities within the existing 
environment has been analyzed and understood. A toolbox to understand 
the given circumstances would make every single masterplan have better 
solutions and qualities. It seems that the professional’s knowledge base is 
comprehensive enough to engage in a strategic work however, the work has 
to be initiatied. Today, the work on social sustainability in different social 
housing ares is limited to the same thought, solutions and actions even 
108
==PAGE:119==
though proffesionals are aware that social housing areas are extremely 
different [6.2.1].  
The model in ﬁgure 7-1 shows an example of how small analytical steps can 
create a strategic work frame to have an increased focus on the sustainable 
work within the masterplan. To analyze the area and further on in steps 
analyze beneﬁcial aims, possible solutions, and expected effects will make the 
work on sustainability become a larger and better part of the designing and 
planning.  
The missing strategic work with social sustainability is highly affected by the 
general working procedure of master planning. The starting point of all 
masterplans implemented in social housing areas is the physical conditions of 
the buildings. Thus, the main focus is to renovate the building mass because 
the buildings are decayed. The work on social sustainability is always second 
priority and this inﬂuences the outcome greatly because the work on social 
sustainability will never be the main aim of the masterplan. This fact is also 
why it was found previous in this section that the professionals worked in a 
non-comprehensive way because they automatically have limited possibilities 
when social sustainability is badly prioritized.  
 
It seems that the physical work on buildings and the social work runs 
in two parallel directions, however always with the social part as the least 
prioritized and this does not go along with the fact that the ideal way to work 
on social sustainability in buildings is to start with the social parameter and 
have the physical parameters come next [3.3.2]. Today, it is the completely 
opposite which indicates that the social work within the social housing areas 
needs to be taken to a level that allows both parallel lines to progress evenly 
and without changes, limitation or the like. This is very difﬁcult to master since 
the economic frame of the entire project are very limited and therefore often 
prioritizes the physical conditions and limits the possible social solutions. It is 
crucial here that the solutions found for social housing areas are simple, 
robust and well-designed in order to be realized.  
 
The ﬁndings show that the funding from the National Building Fund 
are the only ﬁnances that are earmarked for social purposes. The earmarked 
funding happens from a holistic point of view, thus funding for social 
elements are given to obtain a coherent social housing area that offers not 
only renovated buildings but also additional social solutions.  
Model of steps: 
➡Analysis of speciﬁc social housing areas and the current conditions  
➡Analysis of suitable sustainable aims and targets 
➡Analysis of potential elements and solutions  
➡Analysis of solutions’ effect and probability for success  
Figure 7-1: Steps to 
analyze sustainable 
possibilities within 
speciﬁc social housing 
areas, 
109
==PAGE:120==
7.1.1 Partial conclusion 1
The ﬁndings show how complex the understanding and work is when it 
comes to social sustainability. At its core, social sustainability is difﬁcult to 
enhance, and it is difﬁcult to have a primary focus on social sustainability 
especially in masterplans in social housing areas because the projects 
prioritizes the building physic. The vexed situation is that social sustainability 
will always be second priority and have limited opportunities in social 
housing areas even though the designers might have great intensions. Thus, 
it becomes much more important to have a strategic and well-planned 
sustainable workﬂow that focuses on aims and targets within social 
sustainability and analysis the given social housing areas for the best possible 
solutions. 
110
==PAGE:121==
7.2 Research question 2
How are stakeholder collaborations ensured throughout the design 
and implementetion of masterplans in social housing areas?
In this research question a lot of ﬁndings has been done that all forms an 
understanding of how the visions are shared among stakeholders in the 
building process. First, it is necessary to ascertain that there are many 
stakeholders within the process of master planning and that stakeholder 
collaboration takes up a lot of time. As the theory prescribed, it is necessary 
for the all stakeholders to be engaged in the processes in order to meet the 
needs of the area [3.2.3]. This is also clearly seen in Skoleparken and at 
Gadekærvej. Architect Katja Waagepetersen states that naturally many 
stakeholders are present in the projects and it is a natural part of the project 
to work with many different stakeholders [6.2.1]. All stakeholders take part in 
the project and especially the board members, which are the engaged 
residents, are implemented in the project. Of cause, there are many different 
collaborations in projects since the high number of stakeholders creates 
many different relationships; Consultantts, the National Building Fund, 
contractors, builders and residents are all stakeholders who are a part of the 
projects. However, in the design and implementation concerning social 
sustainability, the stakeholder collaboration is especially expressed in the 
relationship between the consultants and residents. This collaboration is 
crucial and will be handled in this section since the entire development of 
social sustainability depends on the relationship between built environments 
and residents which consultants design solutions for.  
The crucial participation of stakeholders, including residents are clearly 
understood by the professionals running the design and implementation 
processes. All consultants asked says that they do workshops, on-going 
information and additional committees that involves the residents and keeps 
them up to date when the process is ongoing [6.1.2]. This shows that there is 
a willingness to include the residents in the processes and even though it is 
not a requirement, the consultants put effort into having an integrated 
stakeholder collaboration, especially through the building committees that 
includes the residents. Through the building committee decisions are made 
regarding design, materials and the like which gives representatives from the 
residents’ participation in decision-making. There seems to be a well-
functioning participation process implemented and the consultants have a 
good understanding of the need to include stakeholders like residents in the 
processes which beneﬁts the possibility for shared visions and goals greatly.  
111
==PAGE:122==
Having found an understanding of the importance of stakeholder 
collaboration, it is now relevant to look into how the collaboration needs to 
be adressed in order to share the visions for the social housing areas. The 
following will adress the possibilities and challenges that collaborations face 
when residents are grealtly included in the projects.  
Theory says that residents have to follow the thoughts of the professionals in 
order to engage in the establishment of social sustainability [3.2.3]. The 
renovations change the residents’ entire everyday life which is why it is crucial 
for the renovation to take care of the resident’s human processes in life 
[3.3.2]. As landscape architect, Sirkku Singer says, it is a strange situation for 
the residents since the most private spheres are taken over [6.1.2]. Thus, the 
residents may feel violated by the suddenly invasion of their private space, 
and they may no longer feel safe in places where people are supposed to feel 
safe. Therefore, it is clear that the entire residential situation has to be 
respected deeply in order to have the residents’ understanding and 
participation.  
 
Furthermore, it has to be acknowledged that the residents may also 
have a feeling of ownership of the area and especially their individual 
apartments even though they are tenants. Property responsible, Finn Rumohr, 
says that he often in his work representing the housing association 
experiences that the resident democracy causes a feeling of ownership which 
creates unrealistic expectations [6.1.2]. Thus, residents feel that their 
individual needs have to be prioritized. This creates a difﬁcult situation if the 
residents have unrealistic expectations to the outcome of the stakeholder 
involvement. It is not possible to satisfy every single resident thus it quickly 
becomes a complex situation to handle residents that are individually 
dissatisﬁes with the planned solutions and the implemention of them. 
Therefore, the right stakeholder involvement becomes crucial in order to 
have the residents understand that their wishes and needs are respected but 
the social housing areas are considered in a holistic view that does not 
appreciate all residents’ wishes and needs. Even though it may put a damper 
on the involvement, it is important to be completely honest with the residents 
and have them understand from the beginning that the outcome might not 
be as they indicidually expect. 
Furthermore, when inviting residents into the design process of solutions, the 
residents feels included but when residents becomes a part of the solutions 
with individual wishes and expectations, it needs to be remembered that the 
residents often takes presented solutions and possibilities very literally. What 
naturally are sketches or drafts for professionals, might be considered ﬁnal 
solutions for residents because they do not have the same knowledge and 
experience with design processes. Even though it is important for residents to 
follow the ambitions and possible outcomes, it is also dangerous. The many 
corrections or limitations that building projects create may results in a breach 
of trust. Project leader, Lars Jevanord, tells that the collaboration between 
consultants and residents had some issues when designing the ﬁnal 
masterplan because residents already gained strong connections to the 
112
==PAGE:123==
solutions presented in the preliminary masterplan [6.1.2], and this experience 
are also on the board members minds at Skoleparken. They tell how their lack 
of experience with master planning created a situation where their 
preliminary masterplan which included all their wishes were highly changed 
going into the ﬁnal masterplan. The many hours that the residents had put 
into the preliminary masterplan felt suddenly lost for no worth [6.1.2]. This for 
professionals are the normal circumstances, yet the residents did not know 
that. Thus, it creates a bad starting point for the entire collaboration when 
residents start off by feeling that dreams are broken, and it inﬂuences the trust 
that residents have in the professionals.  
The ﬁrst observations and discussions have been centered around the design 
process, but throughout the building process and planning of it, there also 
seems to an issue that the residents experiences a missing link between the 
information received and the actual actions performed. Board members at 
Gadekærvej says that the well-done work informing residents backﬁred 
because the renovation almost never went as intended and informed [6.1.2]. 
Even though this missing link is highly affected by the building process that 
often experiences changes in solutions, time or the like, it has a great 
inﬂuence of the residents’ experience of the entire project which furthermore 
affects the shared visions and aims. When the residents cannot follow the 
process and feels misinformed, the trustworthy bond in the collaboration falls 
apart. Therefore, it is crucial to have the residents understand that building 
processes are extremely vulnerable. The board at Gadekærvej presents that 
their solution was to have weekly meetings in the beginning to be up front 
with the unexpected challenges [6.1.2]. This corrected the missing link 
because the board members could follow the process as it goes and always 
be up to date when residents missed information. Thus, it is not only 
important to have residents present in the creation of solutions but also have 
them present in the ongoing planning-process of the entire implementation. 
The collaboration between professionals and residents that are familiar with 
the area will beneﬁt the process and the residents will have a deeper 
engagement because the process will more be based on their terms. The 
model in ﬁgure 7-2 shows how the participation process and collaboration 
between stakeholders has to be consistent at ﬁrst and then it will be possible 
to scale it down as the process goes on. The circle represents how the project 
will beneﬁt going through the meeting schedule in every phase, when 
designing, building and commissioning the masterplan.  
Start-up 
meeting
Weekly 
meetings
Bi-weekly 
meetings
Monthly 
meetings
Figure 7-2: Circle 
showing the amount of 
communication 
throughout the 
buildings phases.
113
==PAGE:124==
It has to be considered that no solutions ﬁt all social housing areas, and 
therefore the amount of collaboration and meetings might change to ﬁt a 
speciﬁc area. The engagement of residents to be spokesmen and participate 
in the building process might not be present in all areas. In Skoleparken and 
Gadekærvej, this is not a problem while it might be difﬁcult in other areas. 
Different stakeholders in the studies conducted states that boards at different 
areas are differently engaged and involved. Architect, Katja Waagepetersen, 
tells how the board of residents has to be handled differently in social 
housing areas. Some needs management, some needs to be controlled and 
some just want their own wishes realized and are not focused on the area as a 
whole [6.1.2]. Furthermore, Project leader, Michael Hansen, experiences that it 
is difﬁcult in general to recruit board members [6.1.2]. Thus, is becomes 
increasingly difﬁcult to have a structured and compact processes with the 
residents when residents tend to be less willing to do the necessary 
participation. Therefore, it is also crucial to put time into establishing a 
stakeholder collaboration because all areas might not have a well-functioning 
board of residents to collaborate with from the beginning.  
 
The difference in areas also makes is increasingly important to start off 
by establishing ground rules for the collaboration. The start-up meeting will 
have to establish a common understanding of who to contact, what the 
inform about, how often to inform, which residents to involve, how to reach as 
many residents as possible etc. This will all help the stakeholder collaboration, 
the team formation and the management consideration [3.2.3], and it will 
help the the entire collaboration ﬁt the speciﬁc areas better. If ground rules 
are discussed from the beginning in all areas, the risk of having 
miscommunications and misunderstandings decreases because all 
stakeholders and parties have agreed on basic terms.  
It is also experienced that the residents tend to speak up in the building 
process when they are dissatisﬁed and opposite, they tend to stay silent. This 
limits the possibilities for a continuous stakeholder collaboration because it is 
difﬁcult to have the residents involved in all processes because they 
engagement and willingness to be involved varies throughout the process, 
thus it is increasingly important to understand how the residents can be 
gathered and included in all situations whether they are satisﬁed or 
dissatisﬁed. It would truly beneﬁt the stakeholder collaboration to also have 
residents speak up when they are positive and not just have a negative 
contact when challenges are faced. Therefore, it is once again important to 
collaborate with the residents continuously throughout the process in all 
building phases and have meetings that celebrates when the process is good 
while still take care of the process when it is bad. This will beneﬁt all 
stakeholders because everyone’s work beneﬁts from the successes which also 
is a part of the building process. Today, it seems that the focus often shifts to 
be oriented towards the negative progresses which may not be ideal. 
Landscape architect Sirkku Singer states that she misses receiving positive 
responses from residents [6.1.2]. 
114
==PAGE:125==
Another thing that shows the complexity of the collaboration that includes 
residents, is that the participation of residents in decision-making can both be 
good and bad. The good outcome is that all theory shows that participation 
of residents gives the best results because a shared vision ensures trust, 
social relationships and knowledge of the project which will lead further on to 
human capital and social sustainability [3.2.3]. However, it has some negative 
consequences that needs to be considered carefully when initiating a 
collaboration with residents. Examples from ﬁndings show how professionals 
and residents have different approaches to solutions that enhances social 
sustainability. Where professionals tend to have more innovative and non-
traditional solutions, residents tend to think in solutions that are familiar. 
Landscape Architect Sirkku Singer says that it is necessary to inspire the 
residents with solutions that are unfamiliar because residents tend to wish for 
traditional solutions if asked directly [6.1.2]. An example is how gardens in 
Skoleparken was designed to have different depth in order to break the 
parallel lines in Skoleparken. The residents held on to the solution that every 
garden must have the same depth because nobody should have larger 
gardens than others. When the presented solutions are limited in this way, the 
effect on social sustainability are also limited since small elements, like 
variation and shape of solution in the area has a great effect on social 
conditions. Another example is the fencing of Gadekærvej which was the 
residents’ choice of solution. This solution shows exactly how social 
sustainability is limited when residents have too much power over solutions. 
Thus, there seems to be a missing link between professionals and residents 
that limits the extent to which visions are shared and understood because the 
residents may not be able to follow the professional’s mindset. This could also 
potentially hurt the effect of the ﬁnished solutions, if the intentions behind the 
implemented solutions may not be fully understood by the residents. 
Therefore, it is a tough tightrope to be innovative while still create solutions 
that residents can relate to, and it needs to be considered that the residents 
has to be involved carefully without taking over the professionals work and 
knowledge.  
The use of the implemented solutions is highly affected by the shared vision 
and a common understanding of the intentions. Findings show that many 
stakeholders, both consultants and housing associations experience a lack of 
collaboration at the ﬁnal end of the entire project. When solutions are 
implemented with social initiatives included, the professionals deliver the 
project like in normal building projects. However, it might be difﬁcult for 
residents to initiate the intended social initiatives without any help or 
guidance. The transitions could be made more successful if guidance were 
offered at the beginning of the commissioning period. 
115
==PAGE:126==
7.2.1 Partial conclusion 2
The ﬁndings show that the focus on stakeholder collaboration is present 
when masterplans are designed and implemented in social housing areas. 
The most important collaboration between consultants and residetns are 
found because the designed solutions and their ﬁnal outcome are greatly 
inﬂuenced by these two stakeholders.  
The collaboration between the two parties have shown to be relevant 
throughout the entire project, and the collaboration must start with agreeing 
on ground rules while also having meetings regularly in the beginning of 
phases throughout the project. This makes the collaboration easier and 
makes the residents more involved and informed in a suitable level.  
 
Furthermore, some challenges are found that among other comes 
from the fact that residents tend to feel ownership of the area which makes 
building projects seem invasive, and they are often unfamiliar with social 
sustainability and building processes. Therefore, including residents is a 
tighrope that needs to be considered. 
116
==PAGE:127==
7.3 Research question 3 
How does planned solutions in masterplans develop throughout the 
building process, and how does it affect the ﬁnal outcome?
At ﬁrst glance, the analysis of implemented solutions showed that many 
planned solutions from the masterplan actually has been realized, however 
the analysis also showed that within the solutions implemented reductions 
happened in almost every category. Besides this, some solutions were 
skipped and not realized at all [6.1.3]. Thus, the analysis showed an overall 
reduction of social initiatives in the ﬁnal solutions, and this creates a difﬁcult 
situation concerning social sustainability.  
The difﬁcult situation occurs because the analysis shows how the limitations in 
implemented solutions often concerns social elements. There seems to be a 
pattern that solutions tend to limit the social elements in order to realize as 
many physical solutions as possible, meaning that the solutions might be 
realized however the social initiatives within the solution are limited. For 
instance, when outdoor activity spaces have been realized but the actual 
individual spaces are limited in range and diversity which reduces the social 
elements. Thus, when looking at the bulleted solutions on paper, many of 
them are realized but when looking into the single solutions, they have 
limitations in social elements, why the situation on paper might not show the 
real picture of implemented solution for social sustainability. When 
renovations are over, it might seem that many solutions were implemented 
but that does not necessarily mean that social sustainability was implemented 
to the same extent or to the extent wich was originaally planned. 
As discussed in previous section 8.2, the initiatives concerning social 
sustainability becomes second priority and the aim when building the 
planned solutions are more focused on the building physic. Consultants state 
that the budget always limits the possibilities and that the solutions changes 
because the budget is found not to cover the costs for all planned solutions 
[6.1.3]. Furthermore, Landscape Architect Sirkku Singer says that she often 
experiences that the solutions within the landscape are reduced further 
because it is the last solutions to be implemented [6.1.3]. Thus, it seems that 
the building process is so vulnerable and unpredictable that the budget for 
social solutions are tightened further through the building process. It is found 
to be the natural consequence of physical masterplans and even though the 
intentions are good, and consultants try to put as much social initiatives into 
the project as possible, the end-result changes the entire effect on social 
117
==PAGE:128==
sustainability. When the solutions develop into reduced or limited 
implementations, it has a great effect not only on the ﬁnal outcome of social 
sustainability but also on the residents’ perception of the solutions.  
 
Board members at Skoleparken states that they ﬁnd the intentions 
from the consultants good, but the problems always seem to be the 
economy, and furthermore they feel that their outdoor area has been less of a 
priority throughout the process [6.1.3]. Opposite, Gadekærvej has not been 
feeling limited in opportunities, and they state that the outdoor spaces are 
professionally done [6.1.3]. There is different experiences and opinions on 
the development of solution throughout the process. One reason might be 
that the areas a quite different in size making Skoleparken as the largest 
project far more vulnerable to changes that Gadekærvej. Thus, it indicates 
that the vulnerability of the masterplans’ accomplishments increases with the 
size of the projects. This must be considered likely to be the case since larger 
projects often have more uncertain parameters.  
Furthermore, the size also affects the ﬁnal outcome. At Gadekærvej, smaller 
solutions might have a great effect on the area that is smaller in size where 
Skoleparken opposite has to have more extensive solutions implemented to 
have a comprehensive effect. This seems to be the major problem in 
Skoleparken; There are a lot of great solutions implemented but larger 
outdoor areas are not handled due to economic limitations which 
overshadows the actual implemented solutions, and also reduce the effect of 
the implemented solutions. For instance, Skoleparken has entrances and 
gardens towards the same middle of the area which follows the guide to have 
people oriented towards each other. However, the larger green areas in 
between are not handled in the masterplan due to economy and therefore, 
there is a large untouched distance that makes the face-to-face effect fall 
apart. The feeling of something missing is clearly seen when visiting the area. 
The larger areas without anything implemented overshadows the solutions 
implemented along the facades which makes the solutions less social 
sustainable.  
The full effect might only be obtained when and if solutions are implemented 
to cover a comprehensive amount of the guidelines from theory. The 
interdependency between solutions is crucial to consider because it is 
unknown throughout the process which solutions will be implemented and 
which will be skipped. Therefore, the work on social sustainability becomes 
increasingly difﬁcult because all theories show that social sustainability is 
successfully built from the combination of several elements to increase the 
quality of the area. The theories of Jan Gehl shows how many elements and 
solutions has to be implemented in a holistic view in the social housing areas 
[3.4.2]. If one element is skipped, it might affect other elements greatly 
decreasing the ﬁnal outcome and effect. Therefore, what might be seen in the 
social housing areas is that the lack of coverage in solutions affects the 
outcome of social sustainability. 
118
==PAGE:129==
When looking at the analysis and the found reductions from section 6.1.3, it 
shows that important elements are reduced throughout the process that 
might affect the ﬁnal outcome in total. Examples shows that Skoleparken has 
had great reduction in the outdoor solutions for public spaces. Even though 
gardens and balconies has been implemented, there has been no green 
spaces implemented that is accessible for all — a larger green area in 
connection to existing greenery has been implemented differently, smaller 
green spaces at entrances has been skipped and the already mentioned ﬁve 
green spaces where also cut out of the project [6.1.3]. The reduction of these 
solutions has severe consequences for scale, architectural quality, and 
activities to mention a few. Not only does it limit the mentioned elements 
within the speciﬁc solution, it also affects the ﬁnal outcome of the entire area. 
When the public green spaces are skipped, it affects the outcome of the 
balconies and gardens, because the connectivity between solution is 
removed. For instance, gardens might not be as successful because they 
become adjacent to boring outdoor areas and uninteresting views. Thus, it 
creates a situation where reductions challenge the ﬁnal holistic effect and 
outcome because the interdependency becomes missing.   
 
Furthermore, the ﬁndings show that implemented solutions might 
accommodate one element while at the same time downgrade another 
important element. For instance, at Gadekærvej, the fencing of the outdoor 
space has removed previous problems with mopeds that drove through the 
area in high speed making residents unsafe. Now, the area only has low 
speed trafﬁc which is an important element in theory for residents to feel safe 
[3.4.3]. However, the fencing also creates a border to the surrounding 
environment which on the other hand conﬂicts the theory to invite and to 
open up the area for the common good [3.4.2.2]. Thus, it is important to 
implement solutions that satisfy as many elements as possible and to have 
solutions that prioritizes elements without downgrading others. If many 
solutions are implemented that challenges important elements behind social 
sustainability without accommodate a majority of other elements, the 
challenged elements might outweigh the implemented social solutions.  
It would be beneﬁcial to have a holistic analysis of solutions in order to see 
how solutions affect each other and how one solution might not beneﬁt social 
sustainability in a holistic view. It would create an understanding of what 
solutions to prioritize because the effect and element of every single solution 
will be analyzed and known. If it is common that downgrading happens 
throughout the building process and that solution are skipped or reduced, it 
would be beneﬁcial to have a strategic understanding of every single 
solutions’ effect and accommodating elements in order to reach the most 
beneﬁcial outcome within the given budget and costs. The analysis will in the 
end help the holistic effect because every solution has been analyzed for 
itself and in connection to other solutions. Thus, it would be possible to 
choose and prioritize solutions that would obtain the highest possible social 
sustainability within the given circumstances. The current status of developing 
solutions through the building process seems to regard implementing as 
119
==PAGE:130==
many social sustainable elements with as little effort as possible without 
affecting the area as a whole.  
Like other ﬁndings show, the work with social sustainability through physical 
masterplans is really difﬁcult and working with social sustainability is walking 
on a tightrope; Nobody really knows how the actual outcome will look or act. 
This makes it so much more important to have well-thought solutions that 
make social changes individually and along with other solutions. Therefore, it 
is important to have a more strategic work ﬂow that does not limit solutions as 
the building process develops without exactly knowing how these limitations 
affects the ﬁnal outcome. Right now, it seems that consultants put as much as 
possible into the project at ﬁrst, then it is limited throughout the building 
process and at last, they hope that something will happen on the social 
dimension. It seems that there a no real contol over how social sustainability is 
built and implemented. Theory shows that it is possible to control the social 
behavior of people but as it is now, the social behavior which is created is 
from luck rather than controlled circumstances. Thus, it seems that the ﬁnal 
outcome and success are highly deﬁned by secondary parameters rather 
than primary strategies.  
7.3.1 Partial conclusion 3
Findings show how many social limitations are found in the implemented 
solutions and many limitations happens throughout the building process. 
There seems to be no controlled process on how to make solutions that will 
be realized and how to ensure that social sustainability is created in the social 
housing areas. Both the work on single solutions are missing but also the 
holistic view on solutions is missing creating a situation where there is a need 
for holistic analysis and understanding of how solutions affect each other.  
 
The analysis will beneﬁt the overall outcome since the right solutions 
will be chosen instead of today’s randomly choice of solutions to implement. 
120
==PAGE:131==
7.4 Research question 4 
How does the implemented solutions perform  
on a social sustainable level? 
The overall ﬁndings of the performance of the solutions are not great. The 
studies show that in total performance only about 50% of residents are 
positive about the ﬁnal outcome. This cannot be considered as a successful 
performance of masterplans in social housing areas considering the amount 
of thoughts, work and ambitions that are put into projects. When looking at 
the initial aims for the projects that highly concerned social parameters, the 
aims cannot say to be satisfactory reached when every ﬁfth respondent is 
negative about the performance of the implemented solutions.  
 
Furthermore, the examined quality and social performance shows the 
most important lesson when looking into the studies. The difference in 
positivity between quality and community is unnoticeable, and it is of great 
importance of the thesis’ POE. The studies give fortunate insight and initiate 
important learnings that will beneﬁt the future work of social sustainability. 
Therefore, it is necessary to look into how this difference has happened.  
The lower social performance is clearly seen in the observations as missing 
optional trafﬁc and stays. The majority of activity in the areas including trafﬁc 
and stays are happening from necessity. It might evolve by time when the 
areas are more settled in their new environments but as it is now, the social 
conditions are difﬁcult to develop when optional activities are happening in a 
limited amount [3.4.2.3]. It is unknown whether the social performance is low 
due to the missing optional activities or if the optional activities is limited due 
to the low social performance but as ﬁgure 7-3 illustrates both elements affect 
each other greatly. The lack of optional activities inﬂuences the entire 
outcome since the optional activities, stays and interactions really inﬂuences 
the probabilities for social sustainaility. The solutions implemented in the 
areas have room for optional activities, but the limitations which are seen 
makes the optional acitivites less interesting. For instance, Gadekærvej was 
planned to have a green area with various solutions that was for all ages, for 
all kind of people with ﬂower gardens, playgrounds, seating areas, curvy 
paths; Overall just an expressive space. However, the ﬁnal outcome was close, 
differentiated spaces with no diversity and coziness. When the solutions are 
changes in this way, and residents are shown the planned spaces but given 
something else, it is no wonder that they hesitate and become reluctant.  
 
Furthermore, it might seem that the problem is to have a good initial 
beginning. This arises from the same problem discussed in 8.2 where a lack 
121
==PAGE:132==
of collaboration in the commissioning phase was found. The results and 
ﬁndings presented here might be a result of that; If the collaboration 
between professionals and residents suddenly stops when the masterplan 
has been ﬁnally implemented, it seems difﬁcult for residents to start the social 
progress on their own. Thus the social performance will not increase. 
Therefore, there is a necessity to have guidance from professionals  to initiate 
the social progress in order to break the circle of interdependent 
circumstances that limits the possibility for increasing social sustainability. The 
guidance from professionals would make the probability for optional 
activities increase because residents would be guided into how the social 
elements in the solutions are thought to be adressed.  
Second, it is clear that the diversity in activities and stays are crucial 
parameters in the social performance. At Gadekærvej, the implemented 
solution favors children which is why children and adults are mostly using the 
area. Opposite, Skoleparken has more solutions for adults since no 
playgrounds or the like has been realized. Thus, the majority of observed 
residents using the areas here are adults. The board members at Skoleparken 
states that the children actually have no place to be, and they use smaller 
grass areas to play football when all they need is a play where they can act as 
children [6.2.2]. The lack of diversity in solutions makes it difﬁcult to have a 
diverse social progress since the area does not meet all residents’ needs. The 
analysis of solutions in the work to develop solutions mentioned in 8.3 will 
beneﬁt the diversity of solutions since the work will show how the solutions 
ﬁts the resident’s and the area’s needs. The analysis will show where solutions 
lack quality in the social spectrum and help professionals to see where there 
is abundance of some solutions and a lack of others.  
Last, it is noticeable that the public areas are the most used at all 
observations. It was expected to have a majority of stays and activities in the 
private or half-private areas since these from theory are said to be important 
for residents to be more involved the surrounding environment. It is of cause 
affected by the already mentioned majority of necessary trafﬁc because this 
happens in public spaces but considering the amount of available half-private 
solutions the use of them is signiﬁcantly low. The reason for this is hard to tell 
since it from theory should be successful solutions to implement. Looking into 
the questionnaire for reasons, it shows in Gadekærvej that the outdoor 
terraces implemented in the ground ﬂoor apartments has a lack of peace and 
quietness due to the walking paths that runs along the terraces. These 
Social performance
Optional activities
Figure 7-3: Illustration 
of interdependency 
between social 
performance and 
optional activities. 
122
==PAGE:133==
walking paths are the main access paths for the entrances, and the 
observations illustrated in ﬁgure 6-2 showed how these are greatly used for 
all exits and entries [6.2.1]. Opposite, Skoleparken has more activities 
observed in their half-private and private spaces which has no waking paths 
located just besides gardens and terraces making the use less interrupted. 
However, Skoleparken has limited public spaces implemented which gives 
the residents less possibilities for public activities. Therefore, they are forced 
to used their half-private solutions to a greater extent.  
 
Additionally, it might seem that the solutions of half-private gardens 
and terraces does not ﬁt both areas. As mentioned previous in section 8.3, 
the solutions are implemented in both areas without no reason. Skoleparken 
is a larger area where it was observed that almost every garden and terrce 
was put into use with additional plants, ﬂowers and equipment implemented. 
At Gadekærvej, the terraces were not as well received, and it seemed that the 
solution did not ﬁt the small area. Stays in the half-private areas seemed to 
become too public due to the small distances between elements and spaces 
while stays in Skoleparken was more comfortable in scale.  
The three examples above it chosen to show some reasons for social 
performance to be considered low in the two social housing areas. The 
difference in positivity between the quality performance and the social 
performance shows that the majority of residents are positive about the 
quality of the implemented solutions, why it must be recognized that the 
designs are well received and acknowledged in the areas. Residents are 
especially happy with the quality of the elements and ﬁnds that the overall 
quality is increased in the areas. Thus, it shows that the design of solutions is 
already well-functioning while the social factors in the solutions might be 
missing. The next step looking forward in master planning is to keep 
developing good quality solutions while improving the social work in order to 
reach a social sustainable level where solution perform successfully in both 
quality and community.  
The ﬁnding of a missing links between the quality performance and the social 
performance makes it interesting to ask what might affect the social 
parameters to an extent that creates this missing link? It would be natural to 
expect a situation where residents that are positive about their surroundings 
also want to spend time in the surroundings, but yet this is not the case.  
 
The social performance investigated in the questionnaire survey 
shows that both areas have a high number of neutral residents which might 
lead to some clues why the missing link appears. Neutral residents must have 
a hard time assessing the social aspect of the performance, maybe because 
they are not involved in the social contacts to a point where they can feel or 
assess a difference. The observations support the statement that residents in 
general may not use the areas to an extent that allows them to assess whether 
they agree or disagree with the statements of the questionnaires since the 
number of residents observed are far from the residents living in the areas.  
 
This is also shown in examples on how the general lack of social 
contacts between people makes a mark on the social performance in the 
123
==PAGE:134==
areas. The board members at Gadekærvej all agrees that the society has 
changed and that the population in general are far less social and 
participating today, and furthermore, they experience how ethnic Danes and 
foreigners are not participating in the same fellowship [6.2.2]. The different 
background and cultures are not mixed in the social housing area, and the 
observation also showed that when a larger group of foreigners had a 
barbeque in the outdoor space, nobody else was present at Gadekærvej. This 
might also say something about the design of the spaces, since different 
groups of people to not feel comfortable in being outdoor at the same time 
and residents in the questionnaire asked for more shielded spaces.   
Additionally, both housing associations and consultants mentions that it is 
difﬁcult to ﬁnd volunteers within the areas to be a part of the board of 
residents, and that residents tend to care about their own apartment more 
than the area in total [6.1.2]. The fact that the culture has changed to be less 
social and to be more anonymous changes the circumstances under which 
social conditions progress. Thus, it is necessary to re-think the use of social 
solutions in social housing areas. Yet, it is an extremely difﬁcult task because 
the residents do not participate on a level that beneﬁts the developing of 
solutions, and it becomes increasingly difﬁcult to suite solutions for the 
speciﬁc area if residents are mostly concerned about their own unit and not 
the area as a whole. At the same time, it also becomes increasingly difﬁcult as 
technology makes people less social in the way that the traditional solutions 
beneﬁt. As mentioned before, the solutions that are greatly implemented 
favors adults and children, and it is maybe because they are the easiest to 
create solutions for. In the context of socializing today, teenagers are not 
social in outdoor environments anymore, they are social through social media 
or the like. The solution has to be suited todays conditions in society in order 
to meet the resident’s social behavior and culture. Social progress happens 
when the area acts as a whole, including residents’ adaptability for new social 
environments. Thus, the lack of social performance is to some extent also 
affected by the areas’ lack of social readiness, why an innovation of social 
solutions has to be performed in order to suit the state of the population.  
Considering the state of the resident, it is also clear from the performance 
measures, as discussed in section 8.2, that the resident’s expectations of the 
end-result are highly affected by what residents has been presented for 
during the design of masterplans. At Skoleparken, several respondents state 
that they cannot assess the questions, or they are not fully positive yet 
because they still need the last solutions to be implemented [6.2.2]. However, 
the solutions they are waiting for, which are the green public areas and 
playgrounds are not to be implemented at all since they have been skipped 
due to economy as presented in section 8.3. Residents adhere to the 
presented solution to an extent that affects their perception of the ﬁnal result 
in a signiﬁcantly poor way. This is not beneﬁcial for any stakeholder since the 
professionals appear not to have performed as planned and promised, and 
the residents becomes less happy with the end-result because they expected 
something else. It becomes a lose-lose situation, and therefore it is 
124
==PAGE:135==
7.3.1 Partial conclusion 4
The overall performance of the masterplans shows that the is an unsuccesful 
number of residents that are positive about the ﬁnal outcome of the 
masterplan implemented. Furthermore, it is found that residents are quite 
happy with the solutions’ quality while they are generally unhappy with the 
community performance. Thus, the residents feels that the social aspect of the 
masterplan is missing and that the community performance has not been 
realized.  
Findings shows a lack of optional activities, a lack of use in half-private areas 
and a lack of diversity in solutions for the social housing areas. These three 
elements are found to be the most signiﬁcant reasons for the lack of 
community. Furthermore, it is found that residents are waiting for solutions 
that are not planned to be implemented which reasons for a misperception of 
the masterplan and its solutions.  
throughout the process extremely important to determine in collaboration 
with the residents what solution to implement and what solutions to skip or 
limit. This will beneﬁt the expectation to the end-result which is just as 
important as the actual result of the masterplan. This performance evaluation 
clearly shows that if the expectations and end-results are not aligned, then the 
performance will be thereafter.  
This section shows the importance of evaluation, and it shows how 
knowledge for future works are found in evaluations but is also shows the 
difﬁculty in implementing solutions that beneﬁt the area as a whole. The 
evaluation gives insight in performances that are not accessible at any other 
point of the process from the ﬁrst masterplan to the ﬁnal result. Therefore, 
important knowledge is lost when evaluations are not conducted properly. 
125
==PAGE:136==
126
==PAGE:137==
CONCLUSION
8
==PAGE:138==
How is it possible to increase social sustainability through the design and 
implementation of masterplans in social housing areas?
In Denmark, 20% of all Danish housing is social housing. Most of the social housing in 
Denmark has been constructed during the 1940s to the 1970s. Today, the need for 
renovations are great due to the decay of the poorly constructed buildings, and the need 
for social change are often seen as necessary because social housing in general has 
experienced social segregation. To renovate social housing, physical masterplans are 
carried out and implemented in the social housing areas. Furthermore, the masterplans 
often aim to increase attractiveness and improve social conditions.   
The thesis ﬁnds that it is possible to increase social sustainability, and that the opportunity 
to increase social sustainability is especially valid under the following circumstances:  
First, the work on social sustainability has to be prioritized differently. The work today 
concerns general social conditions rather than social sustainability as a part of 
sustainability, also concerning economic and environmental pillars. To increase the focus 
on social sustainability and have it work in a well-functioning duo with the highest 
prioritized building physic, the work has to concern a more strategic focus that involves 
sustainable aims and measures. This will not only help the single project to have a 
coherent sustainable progress within the building process, but it will also help to focus on 
the beneﬁts that projects have on a sustainable level in the entire building sector.  
Second, a strategic workﬂow also has to be established within the speciﬁc projects to 
enhance social sustainability successfully. The solutions planned and implemented in the 
social housing areas cannot be seen individually and the changes that projects 
experience throughout the building process has great inﬂuence on the ﬁnal social 
outcome. Thus, it is recommended to start an analytical workﬂow that among others 
analyzes the speciﬁc social housing area, which solutions are best to implement, how the 
solutions act together and which solutions to prioritize if needed. Then it becomes 
possible to obtain the greatest effect under the circumstances of building processes.  
Third, the participation of stakeholders is found extremely important and stakeholder 
collaboration is already greatly prioritized within the building process. However, the 
thesis shows that there is a need for severe inclusion of stakeholders, especially residents 
during the process. The participation and the frequency of meetings must be extremely 
high in the beginning of building phases in order to handle the challenges the building 
process creates. Professionals already have experience with challenging building 
processes opposite residents that need to be guided through every step and challenge. 
Thus, the residents will be more understanding and supportive when they can follow the 
processes closely and they will be more correctly informed during the entire renovation.  
By considering and following the three advices, the work on social sustainability becomes 
more focused and strategic which will beneﬁt the speciﬁc areas and the overall work for a 
sustainable building sector.  
128
==PAGE:139==
FUTURE WORK
9
==PAGE:140==
The thesis showed some ﬁndings that leaded to the establishments of several 
advices on actions that could potentially beneﬁt the process and the result 
and ﬁnal performance of social sustainability. These advices contain actions 
that need to be performed in order to move forward and re-think how to work 
on social sustainability through physical masterplans. 
Therefore, it is found necessary in the future work to create a work group that 
focuses on implementing sustainability in a strategic way. This advised future 
work focuses on a strategic work in a larger scale meaning that the entire 
building sector working with masterplans will beneﬁt from establishing a 
common framework. Thus, every stakeholders and professionals will work in 
the same direction towards the same goals and targets, just like seen in the 
17 sustainable development goals.  
 
In this work group, when working on a more basic level, stakeholders 
are not only consultants, contractors and builders. The entire process would 
beneﬁt that experts in sustainability attends.  
However, this presented future work can also be performed on speciﬁc 
projects and masterplan in order to have every stakeholder present to have 
the same starting point and aims of the single project. This process of 
gathering all stakeholders to agree on the projects sustainable goals and 
aims will always beneﬁt the masterplan and the building process whether an 
overall framework for the building sector concerning masterplans are 
established or not.  
Figure 9-1 shows suggested steps towards ﬁnalizing the framework and 
future work on social sustainability. The steps presented here are focused to 
establish the overall framework for the building sector. Thus, they have to be 
altered to suit establishing a framework for speciﬁc project and masterplan.  
This establishment of frameworks are the suggested ﬁrst action to do in the 
future in order to start a focused work on social sustainability in masterplans 
and social housing areas. 
Suggested steps to establish framework: 
➡Choose representatives from all stakeholder groups 
➡Agree and establish ﬁnal purpose and aim for the work group  
➡Agree on aims for sustainability including social sustainability 
➡Establish sustainability goals, targets and measures 
➡Agree on ﬁnal framework that all stakeholders can adopt in 
their work 
➡Follow up and evaluate the framework when put into use  
➡Establish on-going stakeholder collaborations to keep focus 
on the sustainable workﬂow
Figure 9-1: Steps to 
establish framework 
for future work on 
social sustainability in 
masterplans. 
130
==PAGE:141==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
10
==PAGE:142==
Ayodeji, O. E. & Aigbavboa, C. O., 2017. Sustainable Value Management for 
Construction Projects. s.l.:Springer. 
Barron, L. & Gauntlett, E., 2002. Model of social sustainability. Stage 1 Report., 
s.l.: Housing and Sustainable Communities Indicators Project.. 
Basiago, A. D., 1999. Economic, social, and environmental sustainability in 
development theory and urban planning practice, Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
Bech-Danielsen, C. & Christensen, G., 2017. Boligområder i bevægelse - 
fortællinger om fysiske og boligsociale indsatser i anledning af 
Landsbyggefondens 50 års jubilæum. København: Landsbyggefonden. 
Beutel, L. & Dalton, A., 2010. Post Occupancy Evaluation, s.l.: Australian 
Planner. 
Copenhagen Municipality , n.d. Renovering af almene boliger 2012, 
Copenhagen: Copenhagen Municipality . 
DAB, 2017. 75 år med almene boliger, Frederiksberg: DAB.  
DAB, n.d. Helhedsplan. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.dabbolig.dk/om-os/dabs-ydelser/helhedsplan/ 
[Accessed February 2019]. 
Dansk Arkitektur Center, 2017. 1987 | BRUNDTLAND RAPPORTEN: VORES 
FÆLLES FREMTID, København: DAC. 
Dempsey, N., Bramley, G., Power, S. & Brown, C., 2009. The Social Dimension 
of Sustainable Development: Deﬁning Urban Social Sustainability, Oxford, UK: 
Wiley Online Library. 
Farrell, A., 1996. Sustainability theory and the design of knowledge tools, 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia: IEEE. 
Forum for the Future, n.d. Sustainability and system change. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.forumforthefuture.org/sustainability-and-system-
change [Accessed March 2019]. 
FRI, 2018. BYGGERIET 2035 - EN FORESIGHT-ANALYSE, s.l.: FRI - Foreningen 
for Rågivende Ingeniører. 
Friedman, A., Zimring, C. & Zube, C., 1978. Environmental Design Evaluation. 
New York: Plenum. 
132
==PAGE:143==
Gehl, J., 1996. Livet mellem husene - udeaktiviteter og udemiljøer. 4. udgave 
red. København : Arkitektens Forlag. 
Gehl, J., 2010. Byer for Mennesker. 1. udgave red. Bogværket . 
Gehl, J. & Svarre, B., 2013. How to study public life. Washington: Island Press. 
Gehl, J. & Svarre, B., 2013. How to study public life, Island Press. 
Ghomashchi, V., 2012. Building sustainability through collaborative planning, 
Stratford: University of Prince Edward Island. 
Graver, H., 2018. Ny rapport om fremtidens byggeri opfordrer til handling. 
[Online] 
 Available at: http://www.dagensbyggeri.dk/artikel/99050-ny-
rapport-om-fremtidens-byggeri-opfordrer-til-handling  
[Accessed March 2019]. 
Higher Education Funding Council for England, 2006. Guide to Post 
Occupancy Evaluation, HEFCE. 
Holden, E., Linnerud, K. & Banis, D., 2014. Sustainable development: Our 
Common Future revisited, Elsevier. 
Jacobs, J., 1961. The death and life of great american cities. New York: 
Random House. 
KAB, 2008. Håndbog om almene boliger. København: KAB. 
Karl Henning Sørensen Arkitekter, 2012. Skoleparken Helhedsplan, 
København.  
Københavns Kommune, n.d. Renovering af almene boliger 2012 - bilag 1, 
København: Københavns Kommune. 
Kuhlman, T. & Farrington, J., 2010. What is sustainability?, MDPI AG.  
Lafferty, W. M., 2004. Governance for Sustainable Development. The 
Challenge of Adapting Form to Function.. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar 
Publishing. 
Landorf, C., 2011. Evaluating social sustainability in historic urban 
environments, International Journal of Heritage Studies. 
Landsbyggefonden, 2014. Nye udfordringer for det almene boligbyggeri, 
København: Landsbyggefonden. 
Landsbyggefonden, 2016. Almene boliger med fremtid. København: Quickly 
Tryk A/S. 
133
==PAGE:144==
Landsbyggefonden, n.d. The Danish social housing sector. [Online]  
Available at: https://lbf.dk/om-lbf/english/ 
[Accessed February 2019]. 
Li-Yin Shen, Jian Li Hao, Vivian Wing-Yan Tam & Hong Yao, 2007. A checklist 
for assessing sustainability performance of construction projects, s.l.: Journal 
of Civil Engineering and Management . 
Lubk, C., 2016. The Concept of Sustainability and Its Application to Labor 
Market Policy. Springer. 
Pareja-Eastaway, M., 2012. Social Sustainability, Elsevier. 
Preiser, W. F. E., 2001. The Evolution of Post-Occupancy Evaluation: Toward 
Building Performance and Universal Design Evaluation,  
– In Learning from buildings: A State-of-the-Practice Summary of Post-
Occupancy Evaluation. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.  
Regeringen, 2018. Her er ghettoerne og de udsatte boligområder. [Online]  
Available at: https://www.regeringen.dk/nyheder/ghettoudspil/liste-over-
ghettoer-og-udsatte-bolig-omraader/ [Accessed February 2019]. 
Rosenbak, C., 2013. GRØNNE OMRÅDERS KVALITET I DEN TÆTTE BY, Center 
for Strategisk Byforskning. 
 – In Den grænseløse by. Center for Strategisk Byforskning, Danmark.  
Ruth, M. & Franklin, R. S., 2013. Livability for all? Conceptual limits and 
practical implications, Elsevier. 
Stender, M. & Walter, A., 2019. The role of social sustainability in building 
assessment, Building Research & Information. 
Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Effektivisering, n.d. sdfekort.dk. [Online]  
Available at: https://sdfekort.dk/spatialmap? [Accessed February 2019]. 
The United Nations, 2018. Sustainable Development Goal 11. [Online]  
Available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg11 
[Acessed February 2019]. 
Turpin-Brooks, S. & Viccars, G., 2006. The development of robust methods of 
post occupancy evaluation, Emerald Group Publishing Limited.  
United Nations, 1997. Agenda for Development, United Nations.  
134
==PAGE:145==
Valdes-Vasquez, R. & Klotz, L. E., 2013. Social Sustainability Considerations 
during Planning and Design: Framework of Processes for Construction 
Projects, Clemson University.  
Vallance, S., Perkins, H. C. & Dixon, J. E., 2011. What is social sustainability? A 
clariﬁcation of concepts, Elsevier. 
van Bueren, E., van Bohemen, H., Itard, L. & Visscher, H., 2012. Sustainable 
Urban Environments, Springer. 
Whyte, J. & Gann, D., 2001. Closing the loop between design and use: 
postoccupancy evaluation, s.l.: Building Research & Information. 
WITRAZ, 2012. Endelig fysisk helhedsplan, Gadekærvej - Valby, København.  
- Nuværende Rambøll Arkitektur og Integreret Design  
Woodcraft, S., 2012. Social Sustainability and New Communities: Moving from 
concept to practice in the UK, Elsevier. 
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987. Our Common 
Future, WCED. 
Zimmerman, A. & Martin, M., 2001. Post-occupancy evaluation: beneﬁts and 
barriers , Building Research & Information. 
Zimring, C. & Reizenstein, J., 1980. Publikation, Georgia: SAGE 
PUBLICATIONS INC.  
135
==PAGE:146==
136
==PAGE:147==
APPENDICES
11
==PAGE:148==
APPENDIX A: Literature search  
 
 
 
 
  1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B: Questionnaire scheme 
 
 
 
  8 
 
B1: Questionnaire for residents at Gadekærvej 
 
B2: Questionnaire for residents in Skoleparken 
APPENDIX C: Interview guides 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
C1: Interview guide, Housing associations  
 
C2: Interview guide, Operations  
APPENDIX D: Observation data 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
D1: Data from observation 1, Gadekærvej, 08.04.19  
 
D2: Data from observation 2, Gadekærvej, 25.04.19  
 
D3: Data from observation 1, Skoleparken, 10.04.19 
 
D4: Data from observation 2, Skoleparken, 02.05.19 
APPENDIX E: Questionnaire data 
  
 
 
 
28 
APPENDIX F: Transcriptions of interviews  
 
 
34 
 
F1: Katja Waagepetersen, interview 1, 21.03.19 
 
F2: Sirkku Singer, interview 1, 22.03.19  
 
F3: Lars Jevanord, 25.03.19 
 
F4: Board members, Gadekærvej, 08.04.19 
 
F5: Board members, Skoleparken, 10.04.19  
 
F6: Michael Hansen, 24.04.19 
 
F7: Katja Waagepetersen, interview 2, 25.04.19  
 
F8: Sirkku Singer, interview 2, 25.04.19  
 
Fu9: Finn Rumohr, 06.05.19  
138
==PAGE:149==
==PAGE:150==
