==PAGE:1==
Identifying Security Breaches of
Corporate IT Networks with
Windows Event Logs & Machine
Learning
Alexander Staalgaard, s144467
Mikkel Peter Frohn, s172970
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In this paper, we propose a method for detecting malicious behaviour in internal
networks. Benign and malicious activity are emulated in a test domain, and
Windows event logs are collected from the systems. The logs are analyzed using
machine learning, and the results are used to develop a solution model, which
is able to distinguish malicious from benign behaviour. The proposed method
is highly accurate but under certain circumstances relatively slow and requires
further improvements before implementation in production environments can
be considered.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
I denne afhandling vil vi foreslå en metode til detektering af ondsindet adfærd
i interne netværk. Godsindet og ondsindet aktivitet emuleres i et testdomæne,
og Windows event logs indsamles fra systemerne. Loggene analyseres ved brug
af machine learning, og resultaterne bruges til at udvikle en løsningsmodel, som
er i stand til at skelne ondsindet fra godsindet adfærd. Den foreslåede metode
er meget nøjagtig men er under visse forhold forholdsvis langsom og kræver
yderligere forbedringer, før implementering i et produktionsmiljø kan overvejes.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in collab-
oration with Danske Bank in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring an
M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
Lyngby, 06-June-2019
Alexander Staalgaard, s144467
Mikkel Peter Frohn, s172970
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisors Christian D. Jensen from DTU Compute
and Martin Clausen from Danske Bank for their help in this project.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Revised Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure of the Report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Domain-Based Internal Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Exploitation Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Reconnaissance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Privilege Escalation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Lateral Movement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Data Cleaning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.3
Exploratory Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.5
Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.6
Models & Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.7
Assessing Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Analysis
19
3.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Activity Emulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Method
23
4.1
Lab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Server Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.2
Domain Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Activity Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.1
Automation of Benign User Activity . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.2
Additional Emulation of Benign User Activity . . . . . . .
27
4.2.3
User Activity Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Emulation of Malicious Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3.1
Emulating Speciﬁc Attack Techniques . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Emulating a Worm on the Domain Network . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4.1
Changes to Logging in Default Domain Policy . . . . . . .
36
5
Data Analysis
39
5.1
Technology Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Data Cleaning and Data Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Feature Vector Engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.1
Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.2
Labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.3
Normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Models & Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4.1
Principal Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4.2
k-Means Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4.3
k-Nearest Neighbors Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.5
Proposing a Time Based Probabilistic Model
. . . . . . . . . . .
67
6
Discussion
71
6.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.1.1
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.1.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2.1
Feature Vector Engineering & Labels . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2.2
Machine Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6.2.3
Proposed Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2.4
Weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7
Conclusion
77
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
A Appendix
79
A.1 Attachments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2 Additionally Installed Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.3 User Activity Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.4 Emulated Attacks on Lab Machines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
It can impact a business severely if its internal IT network is taken out of service.
In 2017, A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S was hit by a malware attacks called NotPetya
that infected the internal systems of the company and took them down. The
infection originated from a backdoor in a piece of Ukrainian tax accounting
software. From there, it spread on the internal network of the company using
a combination of attacking unpatched machines with the EternalBlue exploit
and leveraging common methods for lateral movement. It has been estimated
that the attack cost Mærsk somewhere between 1.5 and 1.8 billion DKK [Rit18]
[SSH17]. Other companies suﬀering signiﬁcant damages due to the NotPetya
malware include Merck and FedEx [Greb].
An important takeaway from the Mærsk incident is that breaches of the internal
network of a company are inevitable. Defending against supply chain attacks,
where a trusted third-party is compromised and used to spread malware, can
be close to impossible, and that type of attacks is on the rise [DL18]. However,
limiting the damages caused by the initial infection by stopping further malicious
movement throughout the network could potentially lower the total impact of
such an attack.
We want to explore how a breach of the internal network of a company can be
contained, so the damages can be limited. For that reason, this project will focus
on detecting malicious activity on a network after the initial breach occurred.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
We will do this by analyzing logs from compromised systems and identifying
malicious behaviour. Instead of using a rule-based approach, we intend to use
machine learning, both with and without supervision, to recognize patterns and
thereby create an abstract model to be used for prediction.
We intend to explore whether a machine learning based approach could alle-
viate some of the inherent requirements for extensive domain knowledge, that
is usually associated with identifying breaches of internal networks, by giving
probability based warnings. A system which, with high probability, correctly
identiﬁes malicious activity could provide businesses with the ability to respond
quickly to an ongoing breach of their internal network.
The approach we wish to take is based on having some domain knowledge and
acquiring signiﬁcantly more, but without considering ourselves domain experts.
This is due to the focus we want to put on using machine learning techniques
to identify the core aspects of the collected data. Using this approach makes
evaluating the results generated by our machine learning models even more
interesting. Namely because if such an approach is concluded to be work with
high enough probability, then it could indirectly be concluded that malicious
and benign activity can be separated by statistical or regression functions.
For this project, we will consider the internal network of a small company. We
will set up a lab network and emulate benign user and system activity as well
as malicious behavior based on exploitation techniques used in the wild. By
collecting and analyzing Windows event logs from the systems in the lab, we
will show that malicious activity can be distinguished from normal baseline
activity with high accuracy.
Our main goal for this project is to propose a method for detecting malicious
behaviour on a small internal corporate network by analyzing Windows event
logs.
As our ﬁnal data product, we therefore intend to deﬁne a time based
probabilistic model for identifying breaches. This model will be based on the
results from our applied machine learning on the collected data. Along side this,
we will discuss the challenges in actually deploying this model in the real world.
1.1
Revised Project plan
1. Research common corporate IT environments, common exploitation tech-
niques, and data analysis models.
2. Set up a lab with a realistic test environment.
3. Emulate benign and malicious activity in the lab.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Scope
3
4. Collect logging data from the systems in the lab.
5. Analyze the resulting data set.
6. Develop solution model.
1.2
Scope
Due to time and budget constraints, the project scope was narrowed down to
the following:
• The project focuses on smaller internal networks (<100 machines). Given
a larger network, changes would have to be made to accommodate scaling.
• Point of entry is out of scope. Any attacks are assumed to have origin
inside the network from an already infected machine.
• Only the detection of malicious activity is considered.
Preventing and
mitigating malicious activity is out of scope.
• The project only considers a centrally administered network. Home net-
works or similar decentralized networks are out of scope.
• No unpatched vulnerabilities are considered for this project. All successful
emulated attacks rely on functionality "working as intended".
1.3
Structure of the Report
Introduction Introduces the reader to the motivation and goal of the project.
Project plan and scope is deﬁned.
Background Explains the theoretic background of the topics covered. Domain-
based internal networks are brieﬂy described as well as common exploita-
tion techniques and relevant data analysis theory.
Analysis Argues why the speciﬁc methods were chosen based on the back-
ground.
Method Describes the practical work of the project including setup of a test
lab, emulation of benign and malicious activity, and data collection.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
Data Analysis Analyzes the resulting data set from the test lab with the main
goal being to detect malicious behaviour and separate it from benign ac-
tivity.
Discussion Discusses advantages and disadvantages of the chosen method and
explores the usefulness of the results. Puts the results into perspective
with respect to existing tools and methods.
Conclusion Concludes the report and evaluates the project as a whole.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter will describe the background of internal corporate networks and
exploitation techniques used in the wild. It will additionally describe the theory
behind relevant data analysis methods.
2.1
Domain-Based Internal Networks
A domain-based network is a network with central administration of users,
groups, and other objects. Active Directory is a directory service developed
by Microsoft used to store, manage, and query objects in a domain. It also
includes mechanisms for authentication and authorization on systems in the
domain [Micf]. In a domain-based network with Active Directory, at least one
server is running Active Directory Domain Services (AD DS). A server running
AD DS is called a domain controller. A domain controller stores a copy of the
global catalog which can be queried for all objects in the domain. A domain
controller is also responsible for authenticating and authorizing users and com-
puters in the domain. User accounts in the Domain Admins group in a domain
are domain administrators with the ability to modify domain-wide settings. Do-
main administrators have local administrator privileges on all machines in the
domain.
==PAGE:20==
6
Background
Active Directory uses the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) for
accessing and processing the directory services, Kerberos for authentication and
authorization, and DNS for hostname resolution.
Settings for computers and users in an Active Directory domain can be modiﬁed
using group policies. Group policies can be modiﬁed by a domain administrator
and changes are subsequently pushed to all machines in the domain in regular
intervals. The default domain policy aﬀects all machines in the domain.
2.2
Exploitation Techniques
Exploitation techniques refer to all the methods used by malicious attackers to
compromise and exploit computer systems. In this project, we are focusing on
the following three exploitation types as they are used in an internal network
based on Windows systems and Active Directory: Reconnaissance, privilege
escalation, and lateral movement.
For each the three exploitation types, an
example for a speciﬁc implementation of the exploitation type is given. These
examples are used in the implementation of a worm used to generate malicious
activity.
2.2.1
Reconnaissance
Reconnaissance, while maybe not used directly to compromise systems, is an
important step for any attacker trying to compromise a device or a network.
Performing reconnaissance allows an adversary to collect information about de-
vices on the network, open ports, and running services. Based on parameters
like the estimated value of the target and the estimated diﬃculty of exploitation,
the adversary can then decide on a target. The gathered information can also
be used to determine the most optimal method for attacking a speciﬁc target.
Assuming an adversary has already gained access to the internal network of an
enterprise, discovery of other devices on the network will usually be a necessary
next step if the attacker’s goal includes compromising other devices on the
network. Host discovery on a local network can be carried out in many diﬀerent
ways. An attacker can ﬁnd devices on the network by listening to traﬃc and
collect the source and destination addresses of the packets. With a more active
approach, an attacker can scan the subnet of the local network by sending
ICMP based ping requests, by trying to connect to common TCP and/or UDP
ports, or by sending ARP requests [LLC]. These methods of host discovery on
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Exploitation Techniques
7
local networks usually broadcast large amounts of requests and generate a lot
of traﬃc.
2.2.1.1
Device Discovery with Active Directory
On an internal network with a domain backed by Active Directory, host discov-
ery can be performed in a much more focused manner. The domain controller(s)
in the domain store(s) a catalog of the machine names of all servers and work-
stations on the local network.
These machine names can be queried from a
domain controller and will be returned in a single list. The DNS server(s) on
the domain can then be queried for the IP addresses of the systems, and the
returned IP addresses can then be scanned using on of the previously mentioned
methods to determine whether the systems are online.
A simple LDAP search ﬁlter that can be used to query a domain controller for
all computers in the current domain can be written as [Micg]:
(objectCategory=computer).
While a large query to a domain controller to extract the machine names for all
computers on the network will also generate a decent amount of traﬃc on the
local network, this traﬃc will be focused towards a single or a few servers and
will not be broadcasted to the whole domain.
2.2.2
Privilege Escalation
Privilege escalation is the act of obtaining a higher level of privileges on a system
or network [Corq]. Classic privilege escalation techniques rely on misconﬁgu-
rations and vulnerabilities in software. If it is possible to trick some software
running in a higher privileged context to run arbitrary code from a lower privi-
leged context, an attacker can abuse this to bypass restrictions in execution of
commands and code.
In some cases, privilege escalation does not rely on a classic type of vulnerability
but a design ﬂaw is a system or network as a whole. A common example of this
is an internal network with multiple users, where users are logged in on systems
where other users have local administrator rights. A local administrator have
unrestricted access to the local system and can impersonate other local users
or domain users with an active session on the system. This does obviously not
cause any privilege escalation on the local system since the local administrator
==PAGE:22==
8
Background
Figure 2.1: Escalation of privileges in a domain. Alice obtains higher privi-
leges on a remote system by impersonating Bob, who has an active
session on a system administrated by Alice. Red outline indicates
elevated privileges.
already has the highest level of privileges on that system. However, if a user
with local administrator rights on a system impersonates a domain user with an
active session on the system, the local administrator is in some cases then able
to access network resources authenticating as the domain user. This means that
if a user Alice has local administrator rights on a system Alfa where domain
user Bob with access to a network resource Bravo has an active session, Alice
can impersonate Bob and use his credentials to access Bravo (see ﬁgure 2.1).
While such an attack does not lead to privilege escalation on the local system,
it does lead to privilege escalation on the domain network.
2.2.2.1
Account Impersonation with Token Stealing
Windows uses access tokens to store information about ownership in processes
and threads. The security context of the process or thread is determined by the
current access token. An adversary can impersonate other users on a system by
duplicating a token from a process or thread running in the context of another
user. This attack requires administrative rights on the local system but allows
the adversary to access network resources as the impersonated user [Corb].
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Exploitation Techniques
9
This type of attack does not require exploitation of any vulnerabilities and is
supported by functionality built into the operating system itself. The attack
ﬂow could include the following sequence of function calls to the Windows API:
OpenProcess Opens a handle to a process running with the security context
of the target user for impersonation.
OpenProcessToken Opens a handle to the access token of the process.
DuplicateTokenEx Creates a duplicate of the access token.
ImpersonateLoggedOnUser Sets the duplicated access token as the access
token for the current thread and eﬀectively lets the program perform ac-
tions on behalf of the impersonated user.
2.2.3
Lateral Movement
Lateral movement is the act of moving from one compromised system to an-
other on a network [Cork]. When an adversary gains a foothold on a network,
the initially compromised system may not be the ﬁnal target of the attacker.
Therefore, it is often necessary for the attacker to move through other systems
on the network until the ﬁnal target is reached. If the attacker is able to ob-
tain the right credentials, lateral movement can be as simple as logging into
another system using those credentials, in some cases making lateral movement
indistinguishable from legit usage.
2.2.3.1
Authenticated Code Execution with PsExec
PsExec is a tool developed by Microsoft for remote administration of system on
a local network. A very interesting feature of this tool is its ability to execute
arbitrary code on a remote system if it is running in the context of a user
with suﬃcient privileges on the remote host. Internally, the tool achieves this
functionality by copying a service executable to target host, registering a service,
and then starting the service using the Service Control Manager on the target
host.
This functionality employed by PsExec has been widely replicated by
malware and APT groups for lateral movement [Cors].
The attack ﬂow could include the following sequence of function calls to the
Windows API:
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
CopyFile Copies a service executable to a share on the target remote host.
OpenSCManager Establishes a connection to the Service Control Manager
on the remote host.
CreateService Registers the copied service executable as a service on the re-
mote host.
StartService Starts the created service.
2.3
Data Analysis
The general approach to data analysis applied in this project is an iterative
approach similar to the one advocated for by C. O’Neil et al. [SO13]. This
results in dividing the data analysis process into segments, that can be executed
iteratively, which in our case was data collection, exploratory analysis, data
cleaning, data processing and ﬁnally design of models & algorithms. After each
segment of the process has been completed, it might be necessary to return
to the previous step to make additions or alterations, given the additionally
acquired knowledge. In this section we will explain the theory we used to deﬁne
each of these segments, the important reﬂections to be made during them as
well as how they interact with each other. An illustration of this can be found
in ﬁgure 2.2, which will be used as a reference throughout this section.
2.3.1
Data Collection
As the initial part of data collection, which in it self is the initial phase of
our data analysis approach, the gathered data has to be speciﬁed. Research-
ing common methods for detecting lateral movement gives multiple examples
of computer emergency response teams (CERTs) using the Windows event log
to successfully detect lateral movement in a (simulated) corporate infrastruc-
ture [SMABS17] [Cen17]. Additionally, Rapid7, the creators of the Metasploit
Framework [Rapb], has similarly expressed that Windows event logs are useful
to achieve this [Rapa]. Other methods of detecting lateral movement have also
been proven to be eﬀective, such as through SMB or network traﬃc [Ull16].
However, even though other methods exist, we have conﬁned the scope to Win-
dows event logs, since they appear to be popular among eﬀective approaches.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Data Analysis
11
Figure 2.2: The data analysis approach used in this project, based partly on
the concepts proposed in [SO13], but with an even more iterative
approach.
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
2.3.2
Data Cleaning
As mentioned previously, the data cleaning is performed early in the data anal-
ysis phases. Furthermore, the data cleaning is also performed after the data
processing phase, in which case the approach is entirely diﬀerent. In the ini-
tial data cleaning, the focus is mostly on removing noise and making sure the
recorded logs adhere to the expected format. This can be achieved by pars-
ing each recorded log and assessing its quality, along side removing duplicates,
unifying time format and possibly segmenting columns / rows. Furthermore,
performing statistical analysis can help identify noise and bring forth the inter-
esting outliers to further verify whether they are indeed interesting or just the
result of inaccuracies.
2.3.3
Exploratory Analysis
The exploratory analysis is a step usually performed after data cleaning. How-
ever, there is an advantage to perform this step iteratively along data cleaning,
since it helps identify unnecessary noise.
Furthering this approach, the ex-
ploratory analysis can be performed iteratively along side data processing and
the development of models and algorithms.
In those cases, the exploratory
analysis helps identify whether a chosen approach is likely to yield good results.
This is based on the beneﬁts described in [SO13], but taken a step further. An
even more iterative approach could be beneﬁcial, where even the data collection
is performed iteratively, perhaps even moving from the data product back to
data collection and reiterating the whole process. Such an approach would be
extremely time and resource consuming and has therefore been deemed out of
scope for this project.
Removing noise and predicting yielded results like this should be done with
utmost care and be based on extensive domain knowledge, as to avoid removing
data that is crucial in classifying patterns as benign. In the same vein, letting
domain knowledge interfere too much in this early exploratory analysis can also
cause this exact issue, since it forces the concluding classiﬁcation to rely on more
domain knowledge than necessary.
In this project the exploratory analysis was performed along side cleaning, data
processing and the design of models / algorithms. In each of these scenarios, the
results of the exploratory analysis was used to iteratively perform these steps.
The data visualizations in the section 5.4.1.2 are the results of the exploratory
analysis performed in the initial part of the ﬁnal phase before a data product is
produced. They mark the key point where exploratory analysis can transition to
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Data Analysis
13
mathematical modeling, e.g. by visualizing the results from applied algorithms.
2.3.4
Data Processing
With the goal of using machine learning being to classify the collected data, the
primary goal of data processing is to generate features from the collected data
set into what is called a feature vector. This requires engineering such a vector
ﬁrst and subsequently transforming the data into feature space, resulting in a
data set of feature vectors.
2.3.4.1
Features and Feature Vectors
A feature, in the context of machine learning, is a measured property that can
be derived from the collected data. An example could be a data set containing
closeup pictures of eyes, where a feature could be the distance between the
eyes measured in some consistent unit.
The general idea behind the use of
features is that using a multitude of them can seek to approximately describe
the observations in a more machine readable way. This is further pronounced
by the fact that features are of numerical values.
A feature vector is an n-dimensional vector of these numerical features. Choos-
ing the right collection of features is integral to the performance of subsequently
applied models and algorithms. This process is referred to as feature vector en-
gineering. The challenge lies in the fact that engineering a feature vector is very
dependent on the existence and application of domain knowledge, which poses
a tricky balance problem as described in section 2.3.3. Once a feature vector
has been engineered, the act of of processing the the collected data into feature
vectors is referred to as feature construction [LM98].
2.3.4.2
Labeling
As the goal of data analysis is to use collected data to devise methods for
predict some speciﬁc property (label) based on a series of features, these labels
must be associated with the generated feature vector.
A data set can have
multiple labels and prediction can be performed independently for each label.
Additionally, when using multiple labels, the underlying samples can have an
overlap of labels. An example of this could be a data set of plants with one label
stating whether a plant originated from outside Denmark and another stating
==PAGE:28==
14
Background
Figure 2.3: A funnel analogy for the data analysis approach used in this
project, similar to the OE/DII (Operational Environment, Data,
Information, Intelligence) approach used e.g. in military contexts
to assess and analyze situations.
whether a plant originated from outside Europe. If the second label is true,
then the ﬁrst must also be true, meaning more than one label can be true and
that labels can be intercorrelated.
2.3.4.3
Multiple Data Sets with Overlapping Data
When generating processed data sets from the collected data, it is an option
to generate multiple diﬀerent processed data sets, even if only a single data set
was collected. There are primarily two ways to achieve this. Firstly, the data
sets can be generated using diﬀerent feature vectors or variations of the same
feature vector, which could serve to ﬁnd the best approach at recognizing a
certain pattern, by e.g. minimizing amount of data needed. Secondly, if the
collected data comes from multiple diﬀerent sources, then a series of data sets
could be generated, each with a unique combination of data sources, which could
help identify from which sources the patterns are most eﬀectively recognized.
2.3.5
Normalization
Normalization or feature scaling describes the act of independently scaling each
feature to be within a given range. The main reason for the use of normalization
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Data Analysis
15
Let the Euclidean distance between two vectors in the feature space be:
dist(X1, X2) =
v
u
u
t
n
X
i=1
(x1i −x2i)2
(2.1)
Figure 2.4
in the context of machine learning is the fact that the many classiﬁers calculate
the Euclidean distance (ﬁgure 2.4) between feature vectors. Therefore, if two
features both describe measurements, but one ranges from 2 to 5 centimeters
and the other ranges from 100 to 400 kilometers, then the Euclidean distance
is signiﬁcantly more aﬀected by diﬀerences in the second feature. As such, to
capture the relative distances evenly across features, normalization to within
the same range is applied.
2.3.6
Models & Algorithms
When a data set of normalized feature vectors has been produced, the applica-
tion of models and algorithms can begin. However, before applying anything the
dimensions of the data set might need to be evaluated and likely reduced. This
can be done by calculating each feature’s contribution to the data sets variance,
either total or weighted towards labeled samples, or by reducing the features to
principal components. This second approach is similarly based on contribution
to variance, but the resulting vector does not map directly back to the original
features.
The main goal of applying creating models and applying machine learning algo-
rithms is in order to predict the label of a given data sample (a vector). Overall
there are three categories of these prediction algorithms, namely regression,
classiﬁcation and clustering. More over, algorithms in these categories can be
classiﬁed as supervised, unsupervised or reinforcement. In this project we have
chosen to only focus on algorithms in the categories classiﬁcation and clustering,
using both supervised and unsupervised types.
In this section we will describe the theory behind supervised learning, unsu-
pervised learning, dimensionality reduction, classiﬁcation and clustering algo-
rithms, two concrete algorithms (k-Means and k-NN ), how to assess the perfor-
mance of a machine learning algorithm and ﬁnally what technology is available.
==PAGE:30==
16
Background
2.3.6.1
Unsupervised Learning
The goal of unsupervised learning is do ﬁnd patterns in a data set without
having awareness of any labels or previously known patterns. An example of this
could be cluster analysis, which ﬁnds naturally occurring clusters in a data set.
Another example could be principal component analysis, which uses a statistical
approach to reduce the data dimensions using variance. This could abstractly
be thought of as ﬁnding out which dimensions cluster up the least.
2.3.6.2
Supervised Learning
In supervised learning, the objective is to produce an inferred function from a
set of training data and use it to predict on a set of test data. This creation of
this function varies from algorithm to algorithm, but they all share the common
method of using a speciﬁed set of labels for the training data as a milestone
for the functions optimization. The choice of parameters are often crucial to
the performance of supervised learning and optimization of these variables are
therefore important.
2.3.6.3
Training, Validation and Testing
When applying mainly supervised algorithms, but technically any approach
seeking to perform predictions, there is a clear need for multiple data sets.
Otherwise, the algorithm would reach what is known as overﬁtting. This can
be avoided by splitting a single data set into a training set, a testing set and
optionally a validation set. The training set is then used to train the algorithm
or ﬁt the model and the testing set is used to measure its performance. The
training set and testing set must have the same distribution and variance, es-
pecially for labels, in order for the results to be representative. The validation
set can be a subset of the training set and can be used to measure the assumed
precision reached during the training, but before testing.
Choosing a split ratio is key when discussing the performance results afterwards.
The reason for this is that using too much of the data set as training data
might cause overﬁtting, while choosing too small a training set will hinder the
algorithms performance. However, if the intention is to measure an algorithms
performance on less known data points, perhaps in an attempt to emulate the
variance encountered when a machine learning system is deployed in the wild,
then a smaller training set can help measure that.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Data Analysis
17
2.3.6.4
Clustering
Clustering or cluster analysis works by grouping similar samples in a data set
together without prior knowledge of their labels. Clustering is well suited for the
initial stages of model generation during data analysis, since it can be performed
without much setup and still provide useful results. Clustering works by, usually
incrementally, sorting a set of samples into a (often) speciﬁed number of clusters.
2.3.6.5
Classiﬁcation
As opposed to clustering, classiﬁcation utilizes the sample labels extensively
when training or ﬁtting. Having knowledge of the labels makes the main goal
of a classiﬁcation algorithm to identify the features of a sample which indicate
that it should be labeled as such. In other words, classiﬁcation can be described
as pattern recognition and is a type of supervised learning.
2.3.6.6
Dimensionality Reduction
The process of reducing the length of the feature vector, dimensionality reduc-
tion, serves to give further algorithms fewer variables to consider.
This can
make learning much quicker, but can also incur some data loss, since the ﬁtting
to lower dimensions is by deﬁnition bound to not be lossless. Therefore, an
acceptance for loss should be deﬁned and the reduction performed such that no
more than the accepted amount of variance is lost.
If a high dimensional feature vector is not reduced prior to application of classi-
ﬁcation, regression or clustering algorithms, then the "curse of dimensionality"
might inﬂuence the results. This is especially true for algorithms which rely
on the Euclidean distance, since its helpfulness is inversely proportional to the
number of dimensions, due to most of the high dimension vectors being almost
equidistant to each other. [Cla94]
2.3.7
Assessing Results
When machine learning algorithms are applied to a data set, there is often the
need for deﬁning some parameter, such as k in both k-NN and k-Means. In order
to achieve the best results, this parameter should be optimized, which means
that some deﬁnition of performance measurement should be deﬁned.
In the
==PAGE:32==
18
Background
True positive rate:
TPR =
T P
T P +F N
False positive rate:
FPR =
F P
F P +T N
False omision rate:
FOR =
F N
F N+T N
Precision:
PPV =
T P
T P +F P
Accuracy:
ACC =
T P +T N
T P +T N+F P +F N
F1 score:
F1S =
2T P
2T P +F P +F N
MCC:
MCC =
T P ×T N−F P ×F N
√
(T P +F P )(T P +F N)(T N+F P )(T N+F N)
Table 2.1
context of binary classiﬁcation, the most typical approach is using a confusion
matrix based on the statistical measures of sensitivity and speciﬁcity. These are
derived either by the algorithms performance on the test set or optionally the
validation set.
The idea is to calculate the number of true positives (TP), meaning the binary
classiﬁcation correctly predicted a positive outcome, true negatives (TN), false
positives (FP) and false negatives (FN). These are calculated by comparing
the actual results in the test set with the predictions of some algorithm for
the test set. These 4 values are not particularly interesting on their own, but
the diﬀerent ratios between them certainly are. A selection of the derivations
and terminology made from a confusion matrix can be found in table 2.1, among
which are the Matthews correlation coeﬃcient (MCC) and the positive predictive
value (precision / PPV).
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Analysis
In this chapter, we will use the information outlined in the introduction and
background to determine the method to use for the data generation, data col-
lection, and data analysis.
3.1
Data Generation
To achieve the main goal for this project, we need a lot of data to analyze.
Performing our testing in a real internal corporate network would be ideal in
terms of operating in a realistic environment, but due to the problems of data
conﬁdentiality and the stability risks of doing that, we make the obvious choice
to set up our own internal network. We do not have the required hardware to
setup a test lab of a respectable size, so we set it up using a cloud service. Since
the target for this project is a small company, and due to a limited budget, we
decide on a network with a total of 20 machines connected.
We choose to base our lab network mostly on Windows systems. The lab network
is set up as an Active Directory domain. The reason being that this type of setup
is very common for the internal network of companies. An additional machine
in the lab is necessary for launching attacks and collecting logs. The operating
==PAGE:34==
20
Analysis
system for this machine is not important for the results, so we decide on a
Debian Linux machine due to preference.
3.1.1
Activity Emulation
An idle lab environment with no activity is less than interesting to analyze.
To generate some interesting and somewhat realistic data, a benign baseline for
normal user and system behaviour has to be established. Additionally, malicious
behaviour has to be emulated, since that is what we seek to detect.
For benign activity emulation, we install and conﬁgure software and automate
user activity on the systems in the network. Manually creating all the activity
on the systems by actually using the systems for daily tasks would be very time
consuming, so user accounts corresponding to ﬁctional users of the network are
created and given diﬀerent roles. These roles will be deﬁned arbitrarily, but
the intention is simply to create variance in the baseline activity. Of course,
distinguishing malicious behaviour from benign baseline activity is fairly easy
if the baseline is completely "ﬂat".
Therefore, some benign outliers will be
emulated manually.
For malicious activity emulation, we split the testing into two parts: In the
ﬁrst part, attacks emulating malicious behaviour found in the wild are launched
against systems on the network. The target user and machine as well as the
timestamp is written down, whenever an attack is carried out. This will be used
to identify the attack during data analysis. In the second part, a tool is written
to emulate a worm that spreads on an internal network. It will use the techniques
described in section 2.2.1.1, 2.2.2.1, and 2.2.3.1 for reconnaissance, privilege
escalation, and lateral movement, respectively. The technique for reconnaissance
is chosen for its relative simplicity and robustness in an Active Directory domain.
The techniques for privilege escalation and lateral movement were some of the
techniques used by the NotPetya malware [SSH17], although it is not publicly
known exactly which techniques made the attack on Mærsk so eﬀective.
3.2
Data Collection
Generating a lot of activity in the lab environment is great, but to be able
to actually analyze the activity, the activity has to be logged in some way. We
decide on analyzing Windows event logs from the systems in the lab. This choice
was made because it is built-in functionality in the operating system, is simple
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Data Analysis
21
to set up, and can be conﬁgured using group policies. Analyzing network traﬃc
was initially considered, but it was decided that the event logs by themselves
would be a solid foundation for detecting malicious behaviour.
One of the parameters that has to be conﬁgured and tested is the Windows
event logging settings. Many log events can be enabled or disabled, and we
will have to ﬁnd a balance between getting enough data and not generating too
much noise. Extra noise will put a higher load on the systems in the network
and consume more storage space. It will additionally be more time consuming
to ﬁlter it out subsequently.
The actual collection of the event logs also has to be considered. To reduce the
storage space and conﬁguration needed on the individual systems, a centralized
solution is written and implemented. Windows event logs will be collected from
the clients and are then sent to a centralized log aggregation server. When all
activity has been executed in the lab, the logs will be collected from the central
server and used for further data analysis.
3.3
Data Analysis
Having collected data does by no means put us particularly close to predicting
anything about malicious activity.
As we know from our research into data
analysis and machine learning, we must perform a signiﬁcant amount of cleaning,
processing and exploratory analysis before we can feed our data to any algorithm
or model. In order to do this, we must also decide on what machine learning
technology we will be using for this project.
The data analysis workﬂow model outlined forms the backbone of our work
in this area and the heavy focus on iterative exploratory analysis will likely
help immensely in the initial stages of data cleaning as well as the ﬁnal stages
of data processing. More speciﬁcally, the decision we will make in chapter 5
regarding which speciﬁc algorithms to use will be based on our outline of learning
types and algorithm categories. Additionally, we must decide on algorithms for
dimensionality reduction and normalization.
Before any of these are decided however, we must engineer a feature vector by
deﬁning a number features describing the state of the Windows event logs on a
machine at a given time. In the same vein, we must incorporate the information
about targets involved in our emulated malicious activity and its timing. This
data will constitute the labels used in the ﬁnal prediction with the chosen models
and algorithms.
==PAGE:36==
22
Analysis
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Method
The overall process for the practical work in this project has been setting up a
lab emulating the internal network domain in a small company using a cloud
computing service, logging events from user activity and malicious behaviour on
the systems in the lab, and analyzing this data using machine learning to create
a strategy for distinguishing malicious behaviour from benign behaviour on the
systems in the network. This chapter will describe the methods used for attack
emulation, user activity baseline generation, and event log collection.
4.1
Lab
Initially, we attempted to set up a test lab in Microsoft Azure. However, due to
restrictions in the number of virtual machines we could run, we decided to use
Amazon Web Services (AWS) instead.
4.1.1
Server Setup
A test lab was set up using AWS to replicate the internal domain of a small
company. The lab consisted of one domain controller (DC), three servers (S_
==PAGE:38==
24
Method
Name
Instance type
Operating system
Purpose
DC
t3.medium
Windows Server 2019
Domain Controller
S_WEB
t3.medium
Windows Server 2019
Server
S_DB
t3.medium
Windows Server 2019
Server
S_DEV
t3.medium
Windows Server 2019
Server
W1
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W2
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W3
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W4
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W5
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W6
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W7
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W8
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W9
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W10
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W11
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W12
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W13
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W14
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
W15
t3.small
Windows Server 2019
Workstation
CTRL
t3.medium
Debian 9
Log aggregation and
attack center
Table 4.1: EC2 instances in the lab.
WEB, S_DB, and S_DEV), and 15 workstations (W1 - W15). Additionally, a
Linux server (CTRL) was set up to collect event logs from the other systems on
the domain (see section 4.4). This server was also used to launch attacks against
systems on the domain (see section 4.3). All Windows machines on the domain
were running Windows Server 2019. Ideally, the workstations would have been
running a desktop version of Windows, but those versions of Windows were not
available on the hosting platform of the lab.
The Linux server was running
Debian 9.
The lab machines were all connected on a virtual local network and had internet
access. The DC, S_WEB, S_DB, S_DEV, and CTRL machines were assigned
a public IP address and could communicate directly with other system on the
internet. To limit the amount of public IP addresses needed for the lab setup, the
workstations were set up to communicate through a Squid web proxy running
on the CTRL server.
An overview of the lab machines including their EC2 instance types, operating
systems, and purpose in the lab can be found in table 4.1.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Activity Baseline
25
4.1.2
Domain Setup
AD DS was installed on the designated domain controller, Active Directory was
set up in the lab, and all servers and workstations were joined to the domain.
A domain user was created for each of the workstations (USER1 - USER15).
When emulating user activity, each user had a dedicated workstation where
they carried out scripted activity according to a given role. This means that
USER1 would be logged in on and making activity on W1, USER2 on W2,
and so on. The diagram in ﬁgure 4.1 shows the systems on the lab domain
(excluding the CTRL server) and where the users of the workstations had active
sessions. An arrow from W6 to S_WEB means that USER6 would, in addition
to being logged in on W6, have an active session on S_WEB. A more in-depth
description of the user roles, the scripted activity, and the relationships between
the systems, see section 4.2.
4.1.2.1
Default Domain Group Policy Changes
A few domain-wide settings were modiﬁed using the default group policy in the
lab. Windows Defender was disabled on all systems to avoid interference with
the payloads discussed in section 4.3. Additionally, ﬁrewall exceptions for ﬁle
and printer sharing and ICMP echo requests were added.
Several settings relating to Windows event logging were modiﬁed as well. These
changes are documented in section 4.4.1.
4.2
Activity Baseline
The choice to include an activity baseline as part of the generated data is a
key point in the method we chose. Such a baseline provides the bulk of the
dataset, making the detection of malicious behavior a matter of ﬁnding outliers.
Naturally, the only outliers can not merely be the malicious data points, so the
baseline must be accompanied by benign outliers. In this section we will describe
our approach to emulating user activity using mostly automation alongside some
manual input.
==PAGE:40==
26
Method
Figure 4.1: The topology of the domain lab. Blue arrows indicate normal user
sessions. Red arrows indicate privileged sessions with local ad-
ministrator rights. Users/machines of the same type are grouped
within a black rectangle.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Activity Baseline
27
4.2.1
Automation of Benign User Activity
To emulate benign user activity on the domain, a PowerShell script would con-
tinuously run on each workstation under the designated user of that machine.
These scripts would perform actions in the Windows desktop environment on
the machine that an employee of the company would be doing during a normal
workday. This includes starting programs, browsing web sites, and accessing
folders, all in random intervals. Tasks would be weighted, so that some tasks
would be performed more often than others.
The user activity scripts would run at all times during data collection. In a
real company network, employees would (hopefully) take breaks and not work
24 hours a day, and this would lead to a variance in user activity throughout
the day. We chose to limit the scope to detecting malicious behaviour during
work hours where most activity is benign. For the full PowerShell scripts used
to emulate the user activity, see the table in section A.1 under User activity
scripts.
4.2.2
Additional Emulation of Benign User Activity
In addition to the automated user activity, we manually logged in on several
systems during data collection to perform actions on behalf of those users. This
was done to ensure that outliers in the dataset would not consist entirely of
malicious behaviour, since that would make detection of malicious behaviour
trivial.
The user actions performed manually includes running a harmless encoded Pow-
erShell script and using the oﬃcial PsExec tool to run Windows Command
Prompt commands on other systems. These types of actions were chosen, since
they are often seen in connection with malicious behaviour. However, without
a malicious payload they are by themselves harmless.
4.2.3
User Activity Patterns
Several diﬀerent patterns of user activity were scripted to emulate diﬀerent types
of employees. The employees of our ﬁctional company are grouped in into eight
diﬀerent user types according to the groupings in ﬁgure 4.1. An overview of the
user types can be found in table 4.2.
==PAGE:42==
28
Method
User Type
Domain Users
Intern
USER1, USER2, USER3
System Administrator
USER4
Domain Administrator
USER5
Web Communications
USER6, USER7
Web Administrator
USER8
HR
USER9, USER10
Developer
USER11, USER12, USER13, USER14
Lead Developer
USER15
Table 4.2: User types in the lab domain.
Most of the diﬀerences between the user types lie in the weights assigned to the
diﬀerent types of tasks of the users and the software run by the diﬀerent user
types. The tasks performed by the users include:
• Accessing websites from a list of websites associated with the user type.
The websites were accessed from Internet Explorer.
• Browsing ﬁles on the local system.
• Running (and later closing) programs installed for that user type.
• Running an encoded PowerShell script.
• Running PsExec against other systems in the domain.
For an overview of the software installed on the machines for the diﬀerent types
of users and on the servers, see section A.2. For an overview of the weights of
the user activity tasks for the diﬀerent types of users, see section A.3. The table
shows the approximate time distribution of the diﬀerent tasks.
4.3
Emulation of Malicious Activity
To emulate malicious behaviour on the lab domain, we launched several diﬀerent
types of attacks against the systems and the network. This project uses the
ATT&CK knowledge base by MITRE and the adversary techniques described
there for attack emulation. This ensures that the tested techniques are based on
attacks from the real world [Corl]. The attacks were launched while the baseline
activity from installed software and the user activity scripts were running.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Emulation of Malicious Activity
29
4.3.1
Emulating Speciﬁc Attack Techniques
To emulate speciﬁc techniques in a controlled manner, we used the Purple
Team ATT&CK Automation tool from Praetorian [Pra].
The tool is based
on the Metasploit Framework and implements many techniques (TTPs) from
the ATT&CK knowledge base as post modules. Post modules can be launched
from a Metasploit Framework Console against compromised systems with an
active Meterpreter session.
Our procedure to emulate speciﬁc attack techniques consisted of:
1. Generating a reverse Meterpreter payload using msfvenom [Sec].
2. Setting up a local listener on the CTRL server using the Purple Team
ATT&CK Automation tool.
3. Running the payload on a machine on the network as either a domain user
or as a local administrator.
4. Launching post modules emulating techniques documented in the ATT&CK
knowledge base.
Whenever the payload was run on a machine, several diﬀerent types of attacks
would be launched, chosen randomly from a subset of the available post modules.
The modules used for our testing are brieﬂy described below.
T1031 - Modify Existing Service An adversary can modify an existing ser-
vice to gain persistence on a system [Corm]. The module stops an existing
service, changes the path of the binary referenced by the service, and then
starts the service again. Requires administrative privileges on the local
system.
T1033 - System Owner/User Discovery An adversary can collect user ac-
count information to identify potential targets [Corv]. The module uses
built-in commands in Windows to collect some of this information. Does
not require administrative privileges on the local system.
T1035 - Service Execution An adversary can create a service to execute
code on a system [Coru]. The module uploads a service executable, creates
a service referencing the executable, and then starts the service. Requires
administrative privileges on the local system.
T1055 - Process Injection An adversary can inject code into the memory
space of another process to evade detection and escalate privileges on
==PAGE:44==
30
Method
a system [Corr].
The module injects code into a process using several
diﬀerent methods. Requires administrative privileges on the local system
depending on the target process.
T1056 - Input Capture An adversary can capture user input to collect ac-
count credentials [Corj]. The module starts a keylogger on the machine.
We had some issues with this module as it had a tendency to crash the
payload process. Requires administrative privileges on the local system.
T1081 - Credentials in Files An adversary can search local ﬁles and remote
ﬁle shares to collect account credentials [Corh]. The module uses Sharp-
Web [Hoh] to retrieve saved browser credentials on the system. Requires
administrative privileges on the local system.
T1083 - File and Directory Discovery An adversary can enumerate ﬁles
and folders to collection information [Cori]. The module uses the dir com-
mand to search for .docx ﬁles on the local system. Requires administrative
privileges on the local system depending on the folder to search.
T1086 - PowerShell An adversary can execute PowerShell code on a system
[Corp]. The module loads PowerShell on the system and executes a Pow-
erShell command. Does not require administrative privileges on the local
system.
T1088 - Bypass User Account Control Ad adversary can bypass User Ac-
count Control (UAC) to escalate privileges on the local system [Core].
The module will try to bypass UAC using a patched exploit [Fer]. Does
not require administrative privileges on the local system.
T1099 - Timestomp An adversary can modify timestamps of ﬁles to evade
detection [Corw]. The module uses PowerShell to change the Creation-
Time, LastAccessTime, and LastWriteTime attributes of a ﬁle. Requires
administrative privileges on the local system.
T1110 - Brute Force An adversary can use brute force to accounts on many
diﬀerent types of services [Cord].
The module will try to brute force
the password of an account over SMB. Does not require administrative
privileges on the local system.
T1115 - Clipboard Data An adversary can collect the data stored in the
clipboard to collect information [Corf]. The module collects the clipboard
data for the current user. Does not require administrative privileges on
the local system.
T1121 - Regsvcs/Regasm Regsvcs and Regasm are utilities that are used
to register .NET assemblies for use with the Component Object Model
(COM). They can be used to execute code om a system and for evasion of
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Emulation of Malicious Activity
31
detection [Cort]. The module uploads and registers an assembly. Requires
administrative privileges on the local system.
T1170 - Mshta Mshta is a utility that is used for executing Microsoft HTML
Applications (HTA). It can be used to execute code om a system and for
evasion of detection [Corn]. The module uploads and executes an HTA
ﬁle. Requires administrative privileges on the local system depending on
the destination folder.
T1191 - CMSTP Microsoft Connection Manager Proﬁle Installer (CMSTP)
is a utility that is used to install Connection Manager service proﬁles.
It can be used to execute code on the local system and for evasion of
detection [Corg]. The module uploads an executable and an INF ﬁle and
uses CMSTP to launch the executable. Requires administrative privileges
on the local system.
T1197 - BITS Jobs Windows Background Intelligent Transfer Service (BITS)
is a ﬁle transfer mechanism that is used for applications operating in the
background to communicate using available idle bandwidth.
It can be
used to download and execute code on the local system [Corc]. The module
downloads a ﬁle using the built-in bitsadmin tool. Requires administrative
privileges on the local system depending on the destination folder.
T1201 - Password Policy Discovery An adversary can collect information
about password policies to help brute force passwords and avoid triggering
lockout policies [Coro]. The module collects information about policies
using the built-in net command. Does not require administrative privileges
on the local system.
BloodHound BloodHound is a tool to collect, analyze, and visualize (unin-
tended) relationships between objects in an Active Directory environment
[ARS]. The module launches the data collection module of BloodHound
against the current domain. Should not require administrative privileges
on the local system, but we were unable to make it work properly without.
Modules requiring administrative privileges would fail when running as a normal
user. All the listed modules were used at least three times on diﬀerent machines
running as diﬀerent users.
For an overview of all the attacks launched against machines in the lab domain
using the Purple Team ATT&CK Automation tool, see section A.4. Attacks
are included whether they failed or succeeded.
==PAGE:46==
32
Method
4.3.2
Emulating a Worm on the Domain Network
One of the initial goals of the project was to create a tool to test the security
level of a local domain network. To tie the goal together with the goal of being
able to detect malicious behaviour, we chose to write a worm that could infect
and spread on the internal network of the lab domain, which we would then try
to detect as fast as possible. We called this tool "Jellyﬁsh".
Jellyﬁsh is written in C++17 and compiles to a single PE ﬁle and does not re-
quire any dependencies not found on a freshly installed Windows system (Win-
dows API/Active Directory Service Interfaces). The tool is tested on Windows
10 and Windows Server 2019 but should be supported on all Windows versions
going back to Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008. The tool is only tested
when compiled as a 64-bit executable but should work when compiled as a 32-bit
executable. The tool has not been tested on a 32-bit platform. The compiled
executable can run as a console application or as a Windows service.
Jellyﬁsh has four stages of execution:
Initialization In the initial stage, the tool checks whether it runs from the
console or as a Windows service. If it runs from the console, all output
will be sent to standard output. If it runs as a service, all output will be
logged to a ﬁle.
Reconnaissance In the reconnaissance stage, the tool uses the method de-
scribed in section 2.2.1.1 to query a domain controller for all servers and
workstations in the domain. It then sends an ICMP echo request (ping)
to each of the returned computers to determine which of them are online.
Privilege Escalation In the privilege escalation stage, the tools enumerates
all running processes on the system and then uses the method described in
section 2.2.2.1 to steal an access token for each active user on the system.
If the tool does not run with administrative privileges, it will usually
not be able to steal any tokens, and this stage will not yield any results.
However, if the tool does run with administrative privileges, it will be
able to steal tokens from domain users who might have higher privileges
on other systems in the domain than the current user. The tool will not
be able to escalate privileges on the local system.
Lateral Movement In the lateral movement stage, the tool uses the PsExec
method described in section 2.2.3.1 to perform lateral movements in the
domain network. The tool will try to copy itself to a remote host. If it
succeeds, it starts the copy on the remote host as a service. The service
will run with SYSTEM privileges on the remote system. The tool will try
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Emulation of Malicious Activity
33
Machine
User
* W14
USER14
* W6
USER6
* W1
USER1
* W9
USER9
* W15
USER15 →
S_DEV
USER15
* W8
USER8 →
S_WEB
USER8 →
S_DB
USER4 →
Everything
USER5
Table 4.3: Machines and users infected by Jellyﬁsh. An asterisk indicates the
initial infection of that iteration. An arrow indicates that the in-
fection spread to another machine/user.
to perform lateral movement as all users it has stolen a token from against
all other systems in the domain.
Jellyﬁsh is started on a single host acting as the compromised entry point for
the worm to spread. Every instance of the tool runs independently; there is no
central control. This means that each instance of the tool will try to spread
to every other machine on the network. However, it will not be able no spread
to an already infected machine since copying the executable to the remote host
will fail.
The full source code for Jellyﬁsh is attached. See Jellyﬁsh in the table in section
A.1.
4.3.2.1
Infecting the Lab Domain
To emulate diﬀerent levels of "success" for an attack against the domain, sev-
eral machines were over multiple iterations infected with the Jellyﬁsh tool. In
some iterations, the tool was initially run on a machine as a user without any
local administrator privileges on any machines. Such an environment made it
impossible for the tool to spread anywhere. In another iteration, the tool could
at some point steal an access token for a domain administrator. In that case,
the tool would spread to all other machines in the domain network successfully.
See table 4.3 for all Jellyﬁsh infections started in the domain.
The results of the infections are consistent with the domain structure described
==PAGE:48==
34
Method
in 4.1. The tool moves along red arrows, indicating administrative privileges on
the remote system, and can assume the identity of any user with an arrow from
their workstation to a compromised system, indicating an active user session,
given that the tool has administrative privileges on the system.
4.4
Data Collection
In addition to the machines depicted in the domain lab topology 4.1, a custom
log aggregation server was also instantiated in the lab running on the CTRL
server. The purpose of this server was to gather and store all the logs generated
on each machine in an easily processed format. Besides simplifying the data
collection by centralizing it, making extraction for e.g. analysis trivial, this also
reduced the disk space required for each of the machines in the lab, thus making
them cheaper to run and operate. A logging client was installed on each of the
machines in the domain to collect logs and send them to the log aggregation
server in regular intervals. The continuous process used for collecting and storing
event logs from the lab machines is described below.
1. At regular intervals, the log clients use PowerShell to collect the Security,
System, Application, and Windows PowerShell Windows event logs. The
intervals are slightly randomized to avoid all clients sending data to the
log aggregation server at the same time.
2. The log client parses the event logs into JSON format.
3. The log client sends all newly collected logs to the log aggregation server.
The log clients keeps track of which logs have already been sent.
4. The log aggregation server receives the logs, converts them to CSV format,
and stores them. A CSV ﬁle is created for each log type for each client.
The log client is written in Python 3 and compiled to run natively on Windows
using PyInstaller [Baj], which means that no Python interpreter needs to be
installed on the client. Additionally, for collecting the Windows event logs it
uses PowerShell, but does not explicitly send the PowerShell logs produced by
itself to the server. The log aggregation server is also written in Python 3 and
is a simple Flask [Ron] web server.
The log aggregation server and the log clients communicate over HTTP. For our
test setup, this communication was unencrypted. It is important to note that
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Data Collection
35
Figure 4.2: A Venn diagram of the data sets that we generate in this project,
their data overlap and their relative size.
Windows event logs can contain conﬁdential information. In a production envi-
ronment, logs should be encrypted at rest, and communication between clients
and log server should be encrypted. For our implemented logging solution, this
could be accomplished by enabling disk encryption on clients and server and
letting the clients communicate with the server over HTTPS, where the com-
munication is encrypted using the TLS protocol and a valid certiﬁcate. For ease
of implementation, no encryption was used in out test lab.
When baseline activity, attack emulation, and all other activity in the lab net-
work had been completed, all logs could be collected directly from the log ag-
gregation server.
The source code for both log client and server is attached. See Log client-server
in the table in section A.1.
4.4.0.1
Generating Multiple Data Sets
As there were multiple diﬀerent types of machines in the lab we generated 5 data
sets with the purpose of encapsulating diﬀerent behaviour in each. The relation
between these data sets can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2 along with their relative sizes.
Their concrete sizes can be seen in table 4.4. This separation was not carried
out until the ﬁnal stages of data processing.
==PAGE:50==
36
Method
Data Set Name
Samples
Size (KB)
all
410699
35000
no_dc
380784
32383
only_dc
29915
2620
servers
63291
5384
workstations
317494
27000
Table 4.4: The data set sizes of the ﬁve ﬁnal processed data sets.
4.4.1
Changes to Logging in Default Domain Policy
The logging settings on the systems in the lab were modiﬁed slightly to enable
more relevant log events and to disable irrelevant log events causing unnecessary
noise in the event data. The settings were modiﬁed using the default domain
group policy.
The method used to decide which settings to enable or disable was fairly simple,
although a bit arbitrary. Logging settings that did not seem interesting from a
security perspective were disabled or left to the default setting. Logging settings
that seemed interesting were enabled, and if this caused the event logs to be
ﬂooded by benign events in a very short time span, they would be set back to
the default setting.
The changes to the default domain group policy can be found in table 4.5. Only
the settings diﬀering from the default settings are listed.
The settings were
conﬁgured in the default domain group policy under Computer Conﬁguration >
Windows Settings > Security Settings > Advanced Audit Policy Conﬁguration
> System Audit Policies.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Data Collection
37
Account Logon
Audit Credential Validation
Always Enabled
Audit Kerberos Authentication Service
Always Enabled
Audit Kerberos Service Ticket Operations
Always Enabled
Audit Other Account Logon Events
Always Enabled
DS Access
Audit Directory Service Access
Always Enabled
Logon/Logoﬀ
Audit Account Lockout
Always Enabled
Audit User/ Device Claims
Always Enabled
Audit Group Membership
Always Enabled
Audit Logoﬀ
Always Disabled
Audit Logon
Always Enabled
Audit Other Logon/LogoﬀEvents
Always Enabled
Audit Special Logon
Always Enabled
Object Access
Audit File Share
Always Enabled
Audit Other Object Access Events
Always Enabled
Audit Registry
Always Enabled
Privilege Use
Audit Sensitive Privilege Use
Always Enabled
Table 4.5: Changes to default log settings.
==PAGE:52==
38
Method
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Data Analysis
In this chapter we will describe the data analysis process.
This covers the
tools we used, our concrete approach to data cleaning, the speciﬁc design and
reasoning for our engineered feature vector, data labeling, pre-processing of the
feature space data set, the applied models / algorithms, and ﬁnally the result
of those applications.
5.1
Technology Used
When faced with choosing a library or set of machine learning tools to use, we
decided on two criteria to look for. First of all, we wanted something which
could be interfaced with programmatically in a language we were familiar with,
so that we could utilize our skills as much as possible. Second of all, we wanted
something which allowed us spend as little time as possible hunting bugs, due to
modelling machine learning already being a time consuming task. We considered
Tensor Flow [Soub], scikit-learn [Soua] and the machine learning module in
Elastic Search [Inc]. However, we deemed the ﬁrst to have to much functionality
and too steep a learning curve for our planned usage, as it mainly excels in deep
learning. We discarded the latter for a diﬀerent reason, namely due to its lack of
a common programming language to interface with and its lack of transparency.
==PAGE:54==
40
Data Analysis
Thus, we ended up using scikit-learn for the data analysis in this project.
5.2
Data Cleaning and Data Selection
The terms data cleaning and data selection are very intertwined, especially in
our project. Overall, we performed two diﬀerent types of cleaning / selection.
For one, we discarded logs collected with a timestamp before 21:00:00 UTC on
day one of the data collection, since this time was used to setup the user accounts
and their activity. Additionally, we discarded any logs with a timestamp after
19:55:00 UTC on the third and ﬁnal day, because we initiated the lab shutdown
at 19:56:00 UTC on that day. This gave us a total of almost 3 days of logs.
Another way we cleaned / selected data, was by skipping the ﬁrst 5000 lines of
the ﬁnal feature vector data sets. The number of lines was chosen arbitrarily
with the purpose of removing 0-state samples. By 0-state samples, we refer to
the initial lack of Event Log history, meaning the feature vectors mostly consists
of 0s. The choice of 5000 was to at least achieve 10 minutes of event logs and
several a signiﬁcant amount of logs for the feature that are not time constrained,
without removing a signiﬁcant amount of the data set. This number was reached
through exploratory analysis of the raw logs.
5.3
Feature Vector Engineering
The crucial data points to identify are those, which stem from techniques com-
monly used post exploitation. Therefore, our feature vector should ideally con-
sist of any events which might be relevant to any such technique.
5.3.1
Features
In this section we will describe the 37 features that we extracted from the
Windows event logs obtained from the data collection. The descriptions cover
the reasons for inclusion in the feature vector, the data type used in the vector
and the EventID used. Overall, the features can be divided into the 8 categories
new services, PowerShell, accessing admin network shares, privileged services,
querying group membership information, logon, operations on objects and change
in transaction state.
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Feature Vector Engineering
41
5.3.1.1
New Services
The installation of new services is in and of itself not a sign of malicious activity.
However, it is a common way to ensure persistent access to a compromised
host post exploitation, since the access will then transcend a reboot or loss of
connection [Gui].
We have therefore devised 4 features identifying the installation and execution
of new services as boolean values, both within the last 30 seconds and the last
10 minutes (see table 5.1).
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
0
new_service_installed_30s
boolean
1073748869
1
new_service_installed_10m
boolean
1073748869
2
new_service_started_30s
boolean
1073748860
3
new_service_started_10m
boolean
1073748860
Table 5.1: Features pertaining to the installation and execution of new services
on the host, all derived from the System Event Log.
5.3.1.2
PowerShell
In contrast to installation and execution of new services, usage of PowerShell
is slightly more conspicuous. Especially execution of PowerShell with encoded
commands as arguments is sometimes cause for investigation, since it is integral
to a popular trend of ﬁleless post exploitation techniques. Furhtermore, these
techniques often spawn the PowerShell process from another process, such as
cmd.exe or directly from the malware itself, meaning the host process ﬁeld in
the Event Log is particularly interesting [Con].
We have incorporated these signs of malicious activity into 8 features, which
aims to both ﬁnd rapid conspicuous behaviour and suspicious behavior over a
longer period of time (see table 5.2). Finally, these features also encapsulate
the benign PowerShell made to look malicious, that is executed on the systems.
Which was included in order to emulate legitimate, although questionable, use
in system administrative tasks.
==PAGE:56==
42
Data Analysis
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
4
powershell_executed_30s
integer
400
5
powershell_executed_10s
integer
400
6
suspicious_powershell_command
boolean
400
7
suspicious_powershell_command_30s
integer
400
8
suspicious_powershell_command_10m
integer
400
9
suspicious_powershell_host_process
boolean
400
10
suspicious_powershell_host_process_30s
integer
400
11
suspicious_powershell_host_process_10m
integer
400
Table 5.2: Features pertaining to execution of PowerShell on the host, all de-
rived from the PowerShell Event Log.
5.3.1.3
Accessing Admin Network Shares
Accessing or attempts to access the network share admin$ is very rare in a Win-
dows machines ordinary operation. This does of course not make the appearance
of such logs interesting. What makes those logs interesting is the correlation
with a number of diﬀerent known malicious techniques. One such technique is
the act of checking whether a locally acquired access token has elevated privi-
leges. Another could be to perform devastating changes to a DCs admin$ share
after becoming domain admin [Met].
The features we have devised attempts to discover a slow approach to access as
well as rapid brute force, which is common if several tickets are obtained. This
is achieved using 4 boolean features, as seen in table 5.3. Feature 13 could have
been an integer feature, due to these features does not accurately cover a slow
approach to ticket testing. Additionally, it should be noted that these features
do not include attempts to access the local IPC share, which could also be a
sign of malicious activity [Grea].
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
12
admin_share_access_failure
boolean
5140
13
admin_share_access_success
boolean
5140
14
admin_share_access_attempt_30s
boolean
5140
15
admin_share_access_attempt_10m
boolean
5140
Table 5.3: Features pertaining to access or attempted access to the admin$
share, which is derived from the Security Event Log.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Feature Vector Engineering
43
5.3.1.4
Privileged Services
Calling a privileged service is not inherently a malicious activity, quite the con-
trary, the Security Event Log has a high volume of noisy logs of exactly this
type [Cora]. However, abuse of these privileged services especially SeTcbPrivi-
lege are common in post-exploitation. For instance, SeTcbPrivilege can be used
to generate a new more privileged token [Tec].
As for the features extracted regarding privileged services, we have extracted
both failed and successful attempts within the last 30 seconds and 10 minutes
totalling 4 features, which can be seen in table 5.4.
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
16
priv_service_called_failure_30s
boolean
4673
17
priv_service_called_failure_10m
boolean
4673
18
priv_service_called_success_30s
boolean
4673
19
priv_service_called_success_10m
boolean
4673
Table 5.4: Features pertaining to the execution and attempted execution of
privileged services, which is derived from the Security Event Log.
5.3.1.5
Querying Group Membership Information
When an account requests a logon, the group information queried for that ac-
count is logged [Mica]. This is the case whenever any logon is initiated for any
reason. Under regular use of a Windows machine in an Active Directory net-
work, a couple of these logs are generated on every logon. As such, there are two
reasons for this log event to be interesting. Firstly, it are relevant to the logon
features 5.3.1.6 and secondly it should not occur excessively. If a user enters an
incorrect password a number of times in a row, then this event is also logged at
least once per try, which could therefore generate a signiﬁcant number of logs in
a short time span. The resulting pattern of i submissions of incorrect passwords
followed by a correct password, when considered together with the logon features
can be described as (LF0, GM0)−> · · · −> (LFi, GMi)−> (LS0, GMi+1)
where LF is a logon failure, LS a logon success and GM a querying of group
membership.
When i becomes increasingly large or when successes are succeeded by failures,
which is not common user activity without ﬁrst triggering other log worthy
mechanisms, then the likelihood of lateral movement taking place increases.
The two features extracted regarding group membership information cover both
==PAGE:58==
44
Data Analysis
its presence within the last 30 seconds and the last 10 minutes, as seen in table
5.5.
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
20
group_membership_info_queried_30s
integer
4627
21
group_membership_info_queried_10m
integer
4627
Table 5.5: Features pertaining to group membership query performed when a
new account logon is attempted, which is derived from the Security
Event Log.
5.3.1.6
Logon
When not discussing the use of exploits to compromise a machine and purely
looking at post exploitation, as we do in this project, then logging on to systems
is the essential in furthering an attackers foothold on the systems. This could
be by attempting to compromise additional accounts e.g.
using brute force
or by attempting to compromise other systems using the already compromised
account. In both those cases the logs could be characterized as several failed
attempts followed by a successful one, as described in section 5.3.1.5.
Additionally, logons with special privileges assigned e.g. administrative privi-
leges are indicative that super user activity is about to occur on the system.
This log event is therefore not by it self inherently malicious as mentioned in
section 5.3.1.4. The occurrence of this log event followed by or in conjunction
with other indicators does however pose as a strong sign of malicious actors.
An overview of the 9 total features related to logons extracted can be found
in table 5.6. Overall they seek to extract logon activity related to credential
validation by DC, use of explicit credentials and splitting them across successes,
failures and time.
5.3.1.7
Operations on Objects
During what is considered usual user activity, Active Directory objects are ac-
cessed regularly, even when the user does not perform any explicit actions.
Mostly, an operation in this context is merely accessing an object [Micb]. How-
ever, rapid operations in great volumes can indicate a malicious actor that
enumerates the Active Directory objects in an attempt to either move laterally
to other systems by spreading a payload or an attempt to ﬁnd objects where
the current accounts access can be utilized.
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Feature Vector Engineering
45
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
22
logon_failure_creds_mismatch_30s
integer
4776
23
logon_failure_creds_mismatch_10m
integer
4776
24
logon_success_explicit_creds_30s
integer
4648
25
logon_success_explicit_creds_10m
integer
4648
26
logon_success_account_30s
integer
4624
27
logon_success_account_10m
integer
4624
28
logon_failure_account_30s
integer
4625
29
logon_failure_account_10m
integer
4625
30
special_privs_assigned_logon
boolean
4672
Table 5.6: Features pertaining to logon attempts using diﬀerent methods as
well as additional assigned privileges, which is all derived from the
Security Event Log.
Furthermore, when privileged objects are accessed the presence of super user
activity is indicated [Micc]. As mentioned in 5.3.1.6, this can similarly be used
in conjunction with other features as part of a greater indicator of compromise.
The 4 features based on operations of objects, which are split across time and
privilege, can be found in table 5.7.
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
31
operations_on_objects_30s
boolean
4662
32
operations_on_objects_10m
boolean
4662
33
operations_on_priv_objects_30s
boolean
4674
34
operations_on_priv_objects_10m
boolean
4674
Table 5.7: Features pertaining to operations performed on Active Directory
objects, even privileged ones, which can be derived from the Secu-
rity Event Log.
5.3.1.8
Change in Transaction State
The documentation from Microsoft and other Windows Event Log sources are
quite limited on the usefulness of this Event Log type in general [Micd][Smi].
The log type is related to local object access, or more precisely transactions to
and from the disk. This event is a non-event in and of itself, but the act of
writing to disk in such a manner that triggers this event has previously been
successfully used as part of an indicator of compromise [MdCPTT16].
The two features deﬁning the occurrence of this event in 30 second and 10 minute
==PAGE:60==
46
Data Analysis
time spans can be seen in table 5.8.
#
Feature Name
Data Type
EventID
35
transaction_state_changed_30s
boolean
4985
36
transaction_state_changed_10m
boolean
4985
Table 5.8: Features pertaining to a state change in the Transaction Manager
for the disk, as logged in the Security Event Log.
5.3.2
Labels
In this project we have opted for 5 diﬀerent labels, which seek to categorize
diﬀerent key aspects of our emulated malicious activity (see section 4.3). These
labes are has_been_compromised, has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_
or_jellyﬁsh, recent_ttps_10min, recent_ttps_10min_admin_only and jellyﬁsh_
10min. Some overlap in the labels are present, for instance anything labelled
as recent_ttps_10min_admin_only is also labelled as recent_ttps_10min. The
full relations between the labels can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1. Some of these labels
are time constrained by the arbitrarily selected time frame of 10 minutes, while
others are indeﬁnite.
Figure 5.1: The relations between the 5 labels. The L2-true labelled data in
some data set can be said to be a subset of the L1-true labelled
data in the same data set, but without the transitivity.
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Feature Vector Engineering
47
5.3.2.1
has_been_compromised
The label for general compromise is a not time constrained and thus creates
the goal of ﬁnding any indicator on compromise from the features also not
constrained by time. This is broadest of the labels we deﬁned and it is also set
for a given sample if any other label is set for that sample.
5.3.2.2
has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_jellyfish
The purpose of the label for privileged TTPs and/or Jellyﬁsh (lateral movement)
is ignore the likely undetectability of TTPs executed in a non-privileged context.
Similarly to the has_been_compromised label, this label is not constrained by
time and therefore also relies on the indeﬁnite features.
5.3.2.3
recent_ttps_10min
This label is time constrained and covers all the time frames where TTPs were
used independent of execution privilege. Data is labeled from the ﬁrst recorded
application of a TTP to 10 minutes after last application. This is on a per
session basis, of which there can be multiple per host.
5.3.2.4
recent_ttps_10min_admin_only
A number of the TTPs, that we have selected to use, function the best in a
privileged context (see section 4.3). Therefore, most of them are implemented
to check whether they are executed from within a privileged session and only
continue if that is the case.
This raises the concern, that the TTPs executed in non-privileged sessions will
quite often not produce any signiﬁcant log events. The motivation to create
an admin_only edition of the recent_ttps label was therefore that the models
might perform better on this label. It could also perform worse, since there is a
lower variance in the outcome of non-privileged TTP execution, but either way
a comparison of results is interesting.
==PAGE:62==
48
Data Analysis
x′
i =
xi −Xmin
Xmax −Xmin
(5.1)
Figure 5.2: Min-Max Normalization for transforming a value x of some (nu-
merical) feature X to be between 0 and 1 (x′).
5.3.2.5
jellyfish_10min
Aptly named after the lateral movement testing tool we have developed 4.3.2, the
jellyfish_10min label marks recent lateral movement activity. The labeling
of this feature was assisted by the timestamps in the log ﬁles generated by the
Jellyﬁsh executable. Eventually, all machines have this label set, since in the
ﬁnal hour of our lab we let Jellyﬁsh spread across the entire network.
This
successful spreading is what generated most of the data, which we mark with
this label.
5.3.3
Normalization
The most common method for normalization is min-max normalization, which
scales the features to be within the range 0 to 1 or -1 to 1. Scaling the features
to be within the range 0 to 1 is achieved by subtracting the minimum value of
a feature from each other value and dividing it by the maximum value, from
which the minimum value is also subtracted, as seen in ﬁgure 5.2.
Concretely, the MinMaxScaler from scikit-learn (the preprocessing package) is
what we used in this project for normalization. This version of Min-Max nor-
malization bounds the values between 0 and 1. We applied it to each of the
5 data sets independently both right after feature extraction and right after
principal component analysis (see section 5.4.1).
5.4
Models & Algorithms
In this section we will describe the concrete steps we took to apply diﬀerent
models and algorithms to our normalized data set in feature space. Although it
was not the ﬁrst part of this phase that we executed, it is the ﬁrst part in our ﬁnal
analysis chain after initial normalization, namely dimensionality reduction. The
results of dimensionality reduction using Princical Component Analysis (PCA)
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
49
w(1) = argmax
||w||=1
( X
m
(p1)2
(m)
)
= argmax
||w||=1
( X
m
(x(m) · w)2
)
(5.2)
Figure 5.3
is also carefully described. Next, the data is again normalized in the same way
as described in 5.3.3, after which follows a description of applied clustering and
classiﬁcation algorithms.
5.4.1
Principal Component Analysis
A speciﬁc technique for reducing dimensions called principal component analysis
(PCA), which is a type of unsupervised learning that uses a statistical approach,
and is what we apply in this project.
When faced with a large number of
features with low variance, PCA can be more eﬃcient than feature selection,
since it likely results in a smaller ﬁnal vector. PCA serves to produce at most
n components from i feature variables and d observations, where |n| = min(d −
1, i). These n components are ordered by the attribution to the observations
variance, with the ﬁrst n0 having the largest and nmin(d−1,i), which in our case
is the same as ni.
PCA achieves this by mapping the data onto a new coordinate system, where the
largest variance of a given projection of the data is mapped to the ﬁrst point, the
second largest variance to the second point, etc [HW10]. More concretely, given a
data set as a matrix X of dimensions i×d, with normalized values as described in
section 2.3.5, the initial component can be found as follows. Let the mapping be
deﬁned as a set of i-dimensional weight vectors w(k) = (w1, . . . , wi)(k) mapping
each vector x(m) in X to a principal component vector p(m) = (p1, . . . , pl)(m),
where pk(m) = x(m) · w(k) for m ∈{1, . . . , d} for k ∈{1, . . . , l}. Choosing of the
w(1) such that its variance is as large as possible, w(1) must satisfy the condition
in ﬁgure 5.3. For subsequent weights, e.g. the kth weight used to ﬁne the kth
component, the ﬁrst k −1 components are simply subtracted from X.
5.4.1.1
Application of PCA
Since PCA requires a speciﬁed n, which is our case is bounded by the total
number of features, we must ﬁrst ﬁnd an optimal n. In order to to this, we must
==PAGE:64==
50
Data Analysis
deﬁne optimal in regards to PCA. Choosing any n principal components less
than the total number of features in our data sets will almost certainly give less
variance than choosing n equal to total number of features. Therefore, we must
accept that we cannot reach complete variance and that a margin of error is
unavoidable. We decided to deﬁne that any principal component must provide
an increase in variance ratio greater than half of what is expected by the number
of features. This can be formulated as variance(pj) >
1
2i∀j ∈1, . . . , n, where
i is the total number of features (37), pj is the jth component and variance is
the increase in variance by the component pj compared to pj−1. This is thus
our deﬁnition of optimal, which results in n = 10 and a total variance of 97,4%
as seen in ﬁgure 5.4.
Figure 5.4: The variance ratio of the data ﬁtted with PCA using n components
to ﬁnd the optimal value for n, such that each component provides
> 1
2i variance, where i is the total number of features.
5.4.1.2
Data Set after PCA
After ﬁnding the 10 principal components, we explored the resulting data sets in
an attempt to better understand how the labeled samples could be distinguished
from the benign samples, by plotting each feature in sets of three.
For instance, looking at the has_been_compromised label, where the high vari-
ance provided by the 3 most signiﬁcant principal component features seem to
distinctly be split the all data set, as seen in ﬁgure 5.5a. This indicates that the
data variance captured by the PCA is signiﬁcantly correlated with that label in
the data set.
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
51
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: The 3 most signiﬁcant principal component features of the data
set all and the label values of the has_been_compromised and
has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_jellyfish labels
plotted pairwise.
==PAGE:66==
52
Data Analysis
(a) The 7th, 8th and 9th most signiﬁcant principal component fea-
tures of the data set all and the label values of the has_been_
compromised label plotted pairwise.
(b) The 3 most signiﬁcant principal component features of the data
set no_dc and the label values of the jellyfish_10min label plot-
ted pairwise.
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
53
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: The 2 most signiﬁcant features of the data set server and the
label values of the recent_ttps_10min and recent_ttps_10min_
admin_only labels plotted pairwise.
==PAGE:68==
54
Data Analysis
Comparing this to the has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_jellyfish
label, which we expected to have a higher variance-label correlation, there is a
clear similarity (see ﬁgure 5.5b). Although, the variance-label correlation is still
present, it is not nearly as pronounced as in ﬁgure 5.5a, with feature_2 being
the most obvious diﬀerence. This indicates, that applied machine learning on
the narrower label of ﬁgure 5.5b will likely perform worse than the more general
one. This is contrary to our hypothesis that the TTPs executed in a privileged
context would more likely be outliers.
To illustrate the steep diﬀerence in added variance, and thus likelihood to clearly
distinguish the labeled data, the 7th, 8th and 9th principal component features
can be seen in ﬁgure 5.6a. These features add only a few percent variance and
seems like they will mostly help identify benign outliers. This is as expected,
given the nature of PCA, but interesting nonetheless to verify it using visuali-
sation.
The jellyfish_10min label on the no_dc data set, plotted in ﬁgure 5.6b, dis-
plays very clear splits between the labeled and benign samples. It is therefore
likely that our applied algorithms will perform very well on this label.
Finally, the recent_ttps_10min and recent_ttps_10min_admin_only are par-
ticularly interesting, since we have already observed their indirect eﬀect on the
two compromised labels. Looking at ﬁgures 5.7a and 5.7b, the privileged TTP
label seems to have less label spread on its two most signiﬁcant features, but
appears to contain the labeled samples within fewer natural clusters.
5.4.2
k-Means Clustering
k-Means is an algorithm for clustering n data samples in to k clusters. This
is done without looking at the labels in the data set and is thus completely
unsupervised. A resulting mapping from some sample to some cluster Cm does
not promise to serve as a label for the sample, unless the number of clusters
k is exactly the the number of possible values for that label. Due to this, an
additional step mapping the k clusters to the number of possible values for the
label must be performed if classiﬁcation is desired.
The problem which k-Means aims to solve is NP-hard, but there exists eﬃcient
heuristics, which make it eﬃcient. However, these heuristics prevents the prob-
lem from being solved consistently and more often than not, the algorithm will
end up converging on a local optimum because of them. Partially because of
this, the algorithm is weak at representing density based clusters, due to the
focus on distributed variance, which could pose a problem for our data set,
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
55
n
X
i=0
min
µj∈Cm(||xi −µj||2)
(5.3)
Figure 5.8
since large sections are high density. Another thing to note, is that due to the
local optimization performed, the k-Means algorithm heavily inﬂuenced by the
positions of the initial centroids.
5.4.2.1
The k-Means Algorithm
The k-Means algorithm works by separating data it into the k cluster by fo-
cusing on producing similar variance in them. This is achieved by minimiz-
ing the variance of the probability distributions in each cluster Cm, where
Cm ∈{C0, . . . , Ck}, or more commonly referred to as minimizing inertia. Math-
ematically, this can be described as minimizing the sum of squares between each
data point xi and the mean µj, in its corresponding cluster Cm, as seen in ﬁgure
5.8. The goal of the inertia measure is to represent internal cluster coherence,
but since it assumes that clusters are both convex and isotropic, its performance
can be weak on data sets not adhering to this. The data visualisation in ﬁgures
5.6b and 5.6a clearly shows that our data set contains anisotropicly distributed
data.
Stepping through the algorithm, it starts by randomly selecting k data points
to be the initial centroids, with a possible optimization of choosing relatively
distant data points for this. Following this the algorithm continually swaps be-
tween assigning each sample to its nearest centroid and choosing a new centroid
based on the mean values of all samples clustered under a centroid. The al-
gorithm terminates when the change in distance between two reaches below a
minimum threshold or a deﬁned maximum number of iterations are met.
When the algorithm terminates, then the classiﬁcation properties of the clusters
can be assessed.
There are multiple ways to map the k cluster dimensions
down to the binary labels used in our project. We have chosen the majority
vote approach, which simply labels a sample based on the majority label in its
corresponding cluster.
==PAGE:70==
56
Data Analysis
Figure 5.9: The eﬀects on TPR, PPV, F1 score and MCC given diﬀerent values
for k in k-Means, when applied to the all data set and classifying
based on majority vote using the has_been_compromised label.
5.4.2.2
Optimizing k
As mentioned in section 5.4.2, the k-Means algorithm requires that the number
of clusters k is speciﬁed, which means we must start by choosing a suitable value
for k. This choice is important, as the clusters should aim to encapsulate the
data in a way that could hopefully be used to classify the samples.
To ﬁnd and optimal value for k we applied the k-Means algorithm to the all data
set using diﬀerent values for k, while using the has_been_compromised label.
Along with this, we recorded the true positive rate (TPR), positive predictive
value (PPV), F1 score (F1S) and Matthews correlation coeﬀecient (MCC), the
results of which can be seen in ﬁgure 5.9. From this we gathered two particularly
interesting observations.
Firstly, the performance of the algorithm increase steadily with k, which is to
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
57
be expected, as running k-Means with k = n, where n is the number of samples,
should produce ﬂawless classiﬁcation. This is due to each sample essentially
having its own cluster. Thus, limiting the number of clusters k is necesasry to
prevent this regressional overﬁtting.
Secondly, the algorithm performs surprisingly well for k = 2, meaning there is
deﬁnitely a clear two-dimensional split in the all data set on the has_been_
compromised label. The algorithms performance reaches a local maximum at
k = 34, which it does not outperform until k > 50, making a good optimal
option if we wish to bound k to avoid overﬁtting.
5.4.2.3
Results of k-Means Clustering
Having found two interesting local maxima for k, one eﬃcient and small, the
other more eﬀective, but still bounded, we can now proceed to analyze the
results produced by them. From the results shown in ﬁgures 5.10, 5.11 and
5.12, we gathered 3 major points.
Most noticeably, visualizing the results of 10 dimensional clustering is very diﬃ-
cult, especially with a high value for k like 34. In ﬁgure 5.10, we see the general
spread of the clusters, as seen from the two most signiﬁcant principal compo-
nents’ dimensions. Here it is clear, especially on the plot with cluster colors
reduced modulo 5, that the clusters do have slightly convex isotropic shapes.
This is as expected, albeit a bit challenging to discern. In the same vein, get-
ting a further understanding of how well they ﬁt the data is diﬃcult from those
visualizations.
Using a smaller k, such as 2, the visualization becomes signiﬁcantly easier, which
ﬁgure 5.11 shows. Here the clusters in the data can clearly be seen, although
both seem to cover a mixture of labeled and unlabeled samples. Looking at the
application with k = 34 in ﬁgure 5.12, we see a way more modest size of the
clusters with a majority of labeled data.
Finally, this begs the question, of what the concrete statistical evaluation of the
two k-values performance actually tells us about the underlying data points. As
seen in table 5.9, k-Means performance signiﬁcantly better with k = 34 than
k = 2 and even produces a higher TPR and lower FNR (1-TPR). This is greatly
contrasted by the overall fewer visual labeled points in ﬁgure 5.12 vs ﬁgure 5.11,
meaning that the data must be particularly dense on those few visualized points.
In conclusion, the performance of k-Means is in most aspects mediocre, as the
best case only produces a TPR of around 75%. Considering that our data set
==PAGE:72==
58
Data Analysis
does not adhere to the algorithms assumed cluster shapes, these results become
a bit more impressive. Additionally, the mediocrity of the performance can also
be attributed to the denseness of labeled data points, which k-Means is weak
on.
k
TPR
FPR
PPV
FOR
ACC
F1S
MCC
2
0.594
0.021
0.843
0.074
0.916
0.697
0.663
34
0.740
0.020
0.880
0.049
0.941
0.804
0.774
Table 5.9: Results from running the k-Means algorithm and the resulting val-
ues for k optimized for TPR for the label has_been_compromised.
Figure 5.10: k-Means cluster (C) relation with k = 34 plotted against the
1st and 2nd principal components using random feature vectors.
Left shows one color for each cluster Cm, while right shows colors
based on Cm mod 5.
==PAGE:73==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
59
Figure 5.11: k-Means prediction with k = 2 plotted against the 2nd and 3rd
principal components. Left shows predictions on random feature
vectors, while right shows predictions on the actual samples in
the all data set.
Figure 5.12: k-Means prediction with k = 34 plotted against the 2nd and 3rd
principal components. Left shows predictions on random feature
vectors, while right shows predictions on the actual samples in
the all data set.
5.4.3
k-Nearest Neighbors Classiﬁcation
The k-nearest neighbors algorithm (k-NN) can be used for both regression and
classiﬁcation, but only classiﬁcation will be considered in this project.
The
algorithm is a lazy learning algorithm, where all computation is postponed until
==PAGE:74==
60
Data Analysis
The ith nearest neighbor has weight wni where:
n
X
i=1
wni = 1
(5.4)
Figure 5.13
the classiﬁcation of test samples. This, along with how the algorithm works,
makes the classiﬁcation phase particularly time consuming on larger data sets.
There are methods for speeding up k-NN on larger data sets, speciﬁcally by
applying KD-trees to the training set, but since our project does not meet the
time limitations of the k-NN algorithm we have considered these techniques
unnecessary to implement.
5.4.3.1
The k-NN Algorithm
The k-NN algorithm works by taking each sample in the test set and computing
its Euclidean distance (ﬁgure 2.4) to each sample in the training set. The label
of the sample from the test set is then deﬁned by a majority vote among the k
closest samples (nearest neighbours) from the training set. This vote can either
be uniform, where each of the k votes have equal weight, or it can be weighted
by distance. Commonly the weight chosen is 1
d, where d is the distance, which
is essentially linear interpolation. The assignment of weights can be described
as seen in ﬁgure 5.13. The beneﬁt of the distance weighted approach is greatest
when the distribution of classes is skewed e.g. there are more benign samples
than malicious ones, since a uniform voting approach would be aﬀected by the
greater representation of the more common class [CM82].
Choosing a good k, such that the algorithm performs as optimal as possible,
given some variable to optimize for, is paramount to good results. Doing so
might not be a linear optimization problem, since the majority-based voting
system behaves diﬀerently for uneven values of k compared to even ones. Testing
a variety of values for k could therefore be considered necessary when applying
k-NN.
The k-NN classiﬁer can be applied to data regardless of distribution, which
importantly means that the labels does not have to be separable by a linear
boundary. This makes it a powerful tool, given its simplicity, but its eﬀectiveness
is drastically dependent on the number of samples, so it performs poorly on
sparse data sets.
==PAGE:75==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
61
5.4.3.2
Train-Test Split
In order to both train and test the k-NN algorithm on our data set, we split it
into a training set and a testing set. We omit creating a validation set and purely
use the testing set to assess the performance of the algorithm. As mentioned
in section 2.3.6.3, the split ratio is important, since it aﬀects how we assess the
results later on. Even though k-NN does not perform well on sparse data sets,
we have the liberty of having enough data, that we can choose a smaller training
set, which means we will get results more indicative of the performance of k-NN
in deployment. We chose to use 1/3 of the data set as the training set and 2/3
as test set.
5.4.3.3
Optimizing k
Since the k-NN algorithm requires a speciﬁed k, we must ﬁrst choose a suit-
able value. As mentioned in section 5.4.3.1, choosing an optimal k essential to
algorithm performance. However, it also is a diﬃcult task, because it requires
both the choice of optimization parameters and quite a lot of time. Due to the
lazy nature of the algorithm, prediction is very slow and additionally very large
values for k will make it polynomially slower.
In order ﬁnd the optimal k we have chosen two optimization parameters for
optimization, so that the performance can be compared and discussed. For one,
we will use the true positive rate (TPR), to optimize for correct positive predic-
tions. Secondly, we have chosen a more traditional approach, where we take the
Matthews correlation coeﬃcient (MCC), the F1 score (F1S) and to a smaller
extent the TPR into consideration.
We have named these two optimization
parameters O1 and O2 respectively.
Label
O1
O2
has_been_compromised
17
14
has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_jellyfish
1
5
recent_ttps_10min
8
10
recent_ttps_10min_admin_only
6
10
jellyfish_10min
6
6
Table 5.10: The optimal k for each label given either of two optimization pa-
rameters O1 and O2.
==PAGE:76==
62
Data Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14: The eﬀects on TPR, PPV, F1 score and MCC given diﬀerent
values for k in k-NN when applied to the all data set and us-
ing the has_been_compromised and has_been_compromised_
admin_only_ttps_or_jellyfish labels respectively.
==PAGE:77==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
63
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.15: The eﬀects on TPR, PPV, F1 score and MCC given diﬀerent val-
ues for k in k-NN when applied to the all data set and using the
recent_ttps_10min and jellyfish_10min labels respectively.
==PAGE:78==
64
Data Analysis
Due to the polynomial run time increase with k, we have deﬁned k < 20 as
our upper bound. To achieve this, we have run the k-NN algorithm with all
positive values of k where k < 20 on the all data set. This is important to note,
as we will use the all data set to extrapolate the optimal values for k onto the
other data sets. Ideally, this should be done for each data set independently,
but given the time consumption of running the algorithm that many times, we
have decided to extrapolate from the collective data set.
In ﬁgures 5.14a, 5.14b, 5.15a and 5.15b, the resulting TPR, F1S, MCC and
positive predictive value (PPV) from using diﬀerent values of k can be seen. It
is important to note, that even though MCC and F1S are strongly correlated in
these graphs, they are not completely correlated. In the same vein, TPR and
PPV are also clearly inversely correlated, though the factor of this inverse eﬀect
varies across labels. Figure 5.15b displays the scores, for which optimization is
easiest. In fact, k = 6 is the optimal value based on both of our optimization
parameters. For the other 4 labels, the optimization parameter does not overlap
and have several close maxima, making the optimal values for k more diﬃcult to
determine. The results of this optimization can be found in table 5.10. Finally,
it should be noted that the recent_ttps_10min_admin_only label is not rep-
resented in the ﬁgures, which is due to it being almost entirely identical to the
recent_ttps_10min label depicted in ﬁgure 5.15a, just shifted slightly down.
Figure 5.14b and to some extent ﬁgure 5.14a, clearly shows how k-NN can behave
very diﬀerently when using either even or odd values for k. This is indicative of
having data points which strongly resemble labeled data points but are not.
5.4.3.4
Results of k-NN Classiﬁcation
The results depicted in tables 5.13 and 5.11 could also be gauged from ﬁgures
5.14a, 5.14b, 5.15a and 5.15b. However, these tables show the results using the
optimal values from table 5.10. In order to assess the results, we need to consider
two primary points. Firstly, we should assess optimization and extrapolation
from the all data set. Secondly, we should discuss the performance in the context
of the labels relationships.
The optimization for k was done on the all data set, so the extrapolation is
interesting to evaluate. It is clear that the optimization only truly holds on the
all data set, where the results optimized for O1 all have the highest TPR and the
results optimized for O2 all have the highest MCC and F1S (without signiﬁcant
loss in TPR). However, O1 does somewhat hold up when extrapolated, with
only one higher value for TPR recorded for O2, but O1 also seems to produce
higher values for MCC and F1S in general. The lower MCC and F1 scores seen
==PAGE:79==
5.4 Models & Algorithms
65
in for O2 can be considered negligible, as they on multiple accounts only amount
to 1/10th of a percent. In conclusion, the optimization for O1 seems to perform
the best on the all data set, since it does not seem to require any trade-oﬀon
MCC / F1S.
Data Set
l
TPR
FPR
PPV
FOR
ACC
F1S
MCC
0
0.968
0.011
0.945
0.006
0.986
0.956
0.948
1
0.773
0.017
0.781
0.018
0.968
0.777
0.760
all
2
0.806
0.001
0.883
0.001
0.998
0.843
0.843
3
0.788
0.000
0.847
0.001
0.999
0.816
0.816
4
0.973
0.000
0.978
0.000
0.999
0.975
0.975
0
0.949
0.009
0.958
0.011
0.984
0.954
0.944
1
0.695
0.010
0.855
0.025
0.967
0.767
0.754
no_dc
2
0.767
0.000
0.977
0.001
0.999
0.860
0.865
3
0.755
0.000
0.957
0.001
0.999
0.844
0.850
4
0.963
0.000
0.980
0.001
0.999
0.971
0.971
0
0.949
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.974
0.974
only_dc
1
0.983
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.991
0.991
4
0.950
0.001
0.939
0.001
0.999
0.945
0.944
0
0.996
0.004
0.987
0.001
0.996
0.991
0.989
1
0.986
0.003
0.990
0.004
0.994
0.988
0.985
servers
2
0.793
0.000
0.979
0.002
0.998
0.876
0.880
3
0.695
0.000
0.992
0.002
0.997
0.817
0.829
4
0.960
0.000
0.992
0.001
0.999
0.976
0.976
0
0.951
0.012
0.937
0.009
0.982
0.944
0.933
1
0.683
0.026
0.546
0.015
0.961
0.607
0.591
worksta.
2
0.745
0.000
0.960
0.001
0.999
0.839
0.845
3
0.750
0.000
0.931
0.001
0.999
0.830
0.835
4
0.948
0.000
0.981
0.001
0.999
0.964
0.964
Table 5.11: Results from running the k-NN algorithm with the O1 (TPR)
optimized values for k, with label names available in table 5.12.
Bold indicates whether the value outperforms the corresponding
value in table 5.13.
l
Label Name
0
has_been_compromised
1
has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_jellyfish
2
recent_ttps_10min
3
recent_ttps_10min_admin_only
4
jellyfish_10min
Table 5.12: Label names from label indices.
==PAGE:80==
66
Data Analysis
Data Set
l
TPR
FPR
PPV
FOR
ACC
F1S
MCC
0
0.955
0.008
0.957
0.009
0.986
0.956
0.948
1
0.747
0.012
0.834
0.019
0.971
0.788
0.774
all
2
0.786
0.000
0.944
0.001
0.999
0.858
0.861
3
0.771
0.000
0.934
0.001
0.999
0.844
0.848
4
0.973
0.000
0.978
0.000
0.999
0.975
0.975
0
0.943
0.008
0.963
0.012
0.984
0.953
0.943
1
0.655
0.008
0.876
0.028
0.966
0.749
0.740
no_dc
2
0.767
0.000
0.977
0.001
0.999
0.859
0.865
3
0.750
0.000
0.961
0.001
0.999
0.842
0.848
4
0.963
0.000
0.980
0.001
0.999
0.971
0.971
0
0.983
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.991
0.991
only_dc
1
0.983
0.000
1.000
0.000
1.000
0.991
0.991
4
0.942
0.001
0.916
0.001
0.998
0.929
0.928
0
0.986
0.003
0.991
0.004
0.995
0.989
0.985
1
0.986
0.003
0.990
0.004
0.994
0.988
0.985
servers
2
0.735
0.000
0.997
0.003
0.997
0.846
0.855
3
0.695
0.000
0.992
0.002
0.997
0.817
0.829
4
0.960
0.000
0.992
0.001
0.999
0.976
0.976
0
0.946
0.012
0.937
0.010
0.981
0.942
0.930
1
0.600
0.021
0.575
0.019
0.963
0.587
0.568
worksta.
2
0.745
0.000
0.972
0.001
0.999
0.844
0.850
3
0.748
0.000
0.958
0.001
0.999
0.840
0.846
4
0.948
0.000
0.981
0.001
0.999
0.964
0.964
Table 5.13: Results
from
running
the
k-NN
algorithm
with
the
O2
(F1S+MCC+TPR) optimized values for k, with label names avail-
able in table 5.12. Bold indicates whether the value outperforms
the corresponding value in table 5.11.
The k-NN algorithm seems to perform the best on the has_been_compromised
and jellyfish_10min labels. This is likely largely attributed to the eﬀectiveness
on the latter, since around half of the hosts are not compromised until the
Jellyﬁsh worm is deployed.
A larger spread of hosts compromised by other
means prior to infection with Jellyﬁsh would have made the performance on that
label more impressive. The good performance of the has_been_compromised
label can of course not entirely be attributed to its relation with jellyfish_
10min, since it also beneﬁts from doing a broader classiﬁcation than the other
labels, which is by deﬁnition easier to accomplish.
The prediction regarding the has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_
jellyfish label produced some particularly interesting results when applied to
the servers or only_dc data set. This is likely due to the fact that most of the
==PAGE:81==
5.5 Proposing a Time Based Probabilistic Model
67
servers are not exposed to a privileged compromise and thus relies mostly on the
deployment of Jellyﬁsh, meaning that the poorer performance when detecting
recent_ttps has less impact. Similarly, the domain controller is not exposed
to any type of compromise except Jellyﬁsh, which has a signiﬁcant impact due
to its high volume of logs.
Aside from this speciﬁc result on the servers and only_dc data set, the results
are very similar across the data sets. The performance does seem to beneﬁt
having both servers and the domain controller in the pool, since the weakest
performance is seen when applied only to workstations.
It is only natural,
that the algorithm should perform better on larger data sets, but the high
performance on the smaller data sets could also be attributed to those data sets
simply being too small.
5.5
Proposing a Time Based Probabilistic Model
Based on the results from the machine learning algorithms we applied, especially
k-NN, we are able to predict most of the chosen labels with high probability.
Even more so, when considering the entire data set. However, since the PPV
and NPV (1 - FOR) are still signiﬁcantly below what might be considered an
acceptable risk for a business, we want to propose a model alleviating that.
Considering the probability that a positively labeled sample is correctly classiﬁed
and that negatively labeled sample is correctly classiﬁed, it seems like we should
be able to chain their respective probabilities. This could be formulated as the
probabilities PP and PN, which are functions of passed units of time t, as seen
in ﬁgure 5.16.
PP (t) = 1 −(1 −PPV )t+1
(5.5)
PN(t) = 1 −(1 −NPV )t+1
(5.6)
Figure 5.16: Naive probabilistic model.
However, this is not the case in practice, as the rule of chained probability only
applies to independently random events, which consecutive feature vectors are
not. They are in fact very dependent, meaning that two consecutive recorded
feature vectors are likely to be identical. Concretely, this probability is approx-
imately 85% across all the non-randomized data sets.
Such a factor is very
==PAGE:82==
68
Data Analysis
dependent on the data set, but could be generalized as v, meaning 1 −v is the
probability that two consecutive feature vectors are distinct. Figure 5.17 shows
a revived version of the naive model in 5.16.
PP (t) = 1 −(1 −PPV )(1−v)t+1
(5.7)
PN(t) = 1 −(1 −NPV )(1−v)t+1
(5.8)
Figure 5.17: Less naive probabilistic model.
Applying the values for v, PPV and NPV (1 −FOR), which we observed
in this project we can roughly estimate the number of units of time it would
require to achieve a speciﬁc certainty for true positives and true negatives. Using
the results from the k-NN algorithm on the all data set seen in table 5.11 we
can calculate the number of time units t required to reach some certainty in
our data set. Choosing a desired certainty C of 1/10000000 for negative and
positive predictions, produces the results seen in table 5.14. For this we used
tX
min, which for a given probability function PX is deﬁned as the smallest t
satisfying PX(t) > 1 −C.
The reason for choosing the certainty we did was to ensure that false positives
or false negatives would not occur too often. With this certainty the likelihood
of a false prediction would be
t
C = 10000000t.
l
tP
min
tN
min
0
31
15
1
65
20
2
44
9
3
51
8
4
22
7
Table 5.14: Minimum samples required, given one sample per time unit t, in
order to satisfy the deﬁned criteria for certainties. The mapping
from label indices l to label names is available in table 5.12.
The minimum t, for which both certain (according to C) positives and negatives
is the maximum of their respective minimum values. With this and assuming
that t is measured in seconds, like in our data set, the results in table 5.14 shows
that the less naive probabilistic model would be able to identify a breach within
22-65 seconds, depending on the label. Additionally, with the assumption that t
==PAGE:83==
5.5 Proposing a Time Based Probabilistic Model
69
is measured in seconds a false prediction would occur on average approximately
once every 16 weeks (at 1 sample per t), if the variance in the logged data is
consistent at all hours of the day.
As expected, the labels has_been_compromised_admin_only_ttps_or_jellyﬁsh,
recent_ttps_10min and recent_ttps_10min_admin_only perform the worst,
while has_been_compromised and jellyﬁsh_10min perform the best. This was
expected because they had both been predicted with much higher precision by
our applied machine learning algorithms.
Even still, this model is naive. For instance, it does not consider the probability
that two consecutive distinct samples will both be incorrectly labeled due to
their likely small diﬀerence in Euclidean distance. Introducing a factor q, which
deﬁnes the likelihood that two consecutive distinct samples are both incorrectly
labeled, can alleviate this (see ﬁgure 5.18). Calculating a value from q from our
data set was deemed to diﬃcult and our data set would likely be too small for
derive a precise enough value anyways.
PP (t) = 1 −(1 −PPV )(1−v)(1−q)t+1
(5.9)
PN(t) = 1 −(1 −NPV )(1−v)(1−q)t+1
(5.10)
Figure 5.18: Even less naive probabilistic model.
However, all of this uses the assumption that our machine learning model can
identify any malicious sample, which it can not. Even though most of the false
predictions are near the beginning or end of some malicious activity, not all of
it is. Those cases where our predictive model just does not predict correctly on
a whole group of samples would mean that our probabilistic model likely would
not reach its desired certainty, ever.
As a ﬁnal note for our proposed model, we would like to state that this approach
is almost exclusively based on our own original idea for time based probabilistic
improvement of the predictions made by machine learning algorithms.
This
makes the proposition is interesting in two major ways.
Firstly, the model
could provide newfound improvements to the ﬁeld of machine learning in cyber
security. However, it also makes it more prone to not be thoroughly tested due
to the limited amount of review performed.
==PAGE:84==
70
Data Analysis
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In this chapter, we will take a look at advantages and disadvantages of the
chosen methods for generating the test data and the data analysis. The results
will be discussed with respect to the overall goal for the project, and related
work will be reviewed and compared.
6.1
Method
This section will describe some considerations regarding the data generation
procedures on the test lab systems and the subsequent data collection.
6.1.1
Data Generation
6.1.1.1
User and System Activity Emulation
As pointed out earlier, collecting the data used for the data analysis from a
real corporate network was not possible. Due to that, we had to emulate all
activity in a controlled environment where most of the activity was automated by
==PAGE:86==
72
Discussion
scripts. While controlled environments can be great test environments in some
cases, we needed a realistic activity baseline with variance and benign outliers
for our data analysis. Some outliers were added by manually performing actions
on the systems as diﬀerent domain users, but more complex usage patterns from
real users of the network could have had an impact on the ﬁnal results.
6.1.1.2
Worm Emulation
The Jellyﬁsh tool was written to emulate a worm spreading on an internal
network using common exploitation techniques. Existing tools already exist for
this purpose:
DeathStar An automation script for Empire. Empire is a post-exploitation
tool based on PowerShell with a command-and-control structure [Emp].
DeathStar automates functionality in Empire to install an agent on clients
in the network [byt],
ANGRYPUPPY A tool to automatically execute an attack path from Blood-
Hound in the Cobalt Strike framework. Cobalt Strike is another post-
exploitation tool with a command-and-control structure [SC]. ANGRY-
PUPPY consumes an attack path collected by BloodHound and automates
functionality in Cobalt Strike to install an agent on clients in the network
[MDS].
The reason we chose to implement our own solution was to create a tool with
few dependencies that did not rely on a command-and-control structure. This
simpliﬁed the attacker setup since no centralized control was necessary. Not
having dependencies on PowerShell or other frameworks was supposed to reduce
the footprint of the tool, so the data analysis could focus on detecting the
malicious behaviour itself without unnecessary noise. However, the tool was
not written with a stealthy approach in mind, and due to the decentralized
behaviour of it, every instance of the tool would perform reconnaissance and
collect the same data over and over again. This generated a lot of noise on the
systems. We did not have the time to experiment with these other tools, but it
could certainly be interesting to compare the footprint of a tool using a more
centralized approach with a tool using a decentralized approach.
==PAGE:87==
6.1 Method
73
6.1.2
Data Collection
6.1.2.1
Log Settings Considerations
A very important parameter for the data collection was how much logging we
could and should enable on the systems. In general, more logs give a better
and more comprehensive data set. However, having too much logging enabled
does have some disadvantages. From a practical standpoint, a higher logging
frequency requires more hardware resources. More storage is required for sav-
ing the logs, more bandwidth is required for transferring the logs, and more
processing power is required for generating the logs. Excessive logging requires
more data cleaning as well since more logs probably means more noise that
needs to be ﬁltered. As described earlier, we took a fairly arbitrary approach
to deciding which log settings to enable and which to disable. In a real produc-
tion environment, a more methodological approach to this problem is probably
necessary to avoid high hardware requirements and needless data cleaning while
still capturing important events.
6.1.2.2
Alternative Log Collection Methods
For this project, a custom log collection solution was written to continuously
collect Windows event logs on a central server.
This was done to minimize
the storage space needed on most of the machines in the lab and to emulate
a realistic environment where data is processed in real-time. However, for our
data analysis, all the data could have been collected simultaneously after all the
activity had been generated. In addition to the standard Windows event log,
Event Tracing for Windows (ETW) could have been utilized for ﬁner control
over the generated log events. ETW is a built-in framework in Windows for
logging kernel and application events [Mice]. The custom log collection software
was chosen as a quick and simple solution for collecting exactly what we needed
for the data analysis. In a real production environment, using Windows Event
Forwarding (WEF) for centralized log collection would be a more appropriate
solution. WEF can be managed through group policies and solves the security
considerations of log collecting by encrypting the events using Kerberos [Mich].
6.1.2.3
Alternative Log Sources
We chose to base our project on analyzing Windows event logs. Other interest-
ing data sources for detecting malicious behaviour on an internal network exist.
==PAGE:88==
74
Discussion
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) of-
ten rely on network traﬃc to identify attacks. Examples of such systems include
Snort [Cis] and Suricata [Fou]. While we chose to limit the scope to event logs
only, it could be interesting to include a data source such as network traﬃc to
detect malicious behaviour. Some actions, like accessing clipboard data, would
generally be considered benign until the data is suddenly sent to an unknown
address over the network.
6.2
Data Analysis
6.2.1
Feature Vector Engineering & Labels
The results produced by the data analysis we performed is heavily dependent on
the feature vector we engineered. As such, by far the most challenging part of the
data analysis was exactly this. We decided to use several pieces of work related
to the forensics work performed when manually identifying breaches, along side
the limited amount of related work we found on automated rule based detection
(especially [SMABS17], [Cen17] and [Rapa]). Since we did not ﬁnd any related
work which speciﬁcally designed a feature vector based on Windows event logs,
it is diﬃcult to compare and discuss our approach to this.
In addition to our engineered feature vector, the results of our applied machine
learning are even more dependent of our chosen labels. Especially the choice
of 10 minute time constrained labels, and thus equally constrained features, is
paramount to our approach. We chose this approach due to short time frame
in the breaches, that inspired this project [Greb].
6.2.2
Machine Learning
We chose to apply both unsupervised and supervised learning algorithms, with
some of them being chained.
This chaining of principal component analysis
(PCA) with k-Means and k-NN respectively improved our results tremendously,
although the non-PCA results for either was not included in this report, as
testing it was part of our exploratory analysis. The eﬀectiveness of this chaining
should have led us to explore additional chaining. Speciﬁcally, it would have
been interesting to explore representation learning, for which we could have used
the clustering results from k-Means to generate additional features for k-NN,
similarly to how it was done in [CN12]. This is further underlined by how poorly
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Data Analysis
75
the application of k-Means performed compared to k-NN, since its results could
have been put to use in our proposed model this way because the latter might
have seen improved performance.
An important approach to creating labels for machine learning in the context
of cyber security and log analysis, which we did not include in this project,
is the weakly labeled data approach described in [Ana18].
Additionally, we
did not explore a particularly large set of machine learning algorithms and we
could possibly have beneﬁted from applying algorithms well suited for anomaly
detection, as done in [Ana18].
6.2.3
Proposed Model
The model we proposed is purposefully naive, as we lacked several parameters
required to propose an more intelligent or sophisticated one. However, this does
not mean that the proposed model can not be used to estimate the eﬀectiveness
of our approach, it should merely be taken into consideration along side that.
Looking at the concrete results produced by our naive model, we are interested
in how it compares to real world examples of breaches discussed in the begin-
ning of this report. The NotPetya attack on Oschadbank concluded that the full
compromise only took around 45 seconds [Greb]. Using this as a measurement,
our proposed model appears to be beneﬁcial, as it could detect a lateral move-
ment based breach in about half that time. Furthermore, if a greater acceptance
of false positives can be accepted, this time could be improved signiﬁcantly. Fi-
nally, in our proposed solution we did not discuss our implicit assumption that
positively labeled samples only occur at a fraction of the rate that negatively la-
beled ones do. This means, that the certainty could be lowered by the expected
ratio between them.
6.2.4
Weaknesses
Finally, we would like to list some of the most interesting weaknesses of our
approach and proposed model.
Firstly, the choice of labels and the design
of our feature vector has not been veriﬁed on real world data, due to several
organizational challenges making it unfeasible to do so. Secondly, the ability
to outpace the mentioned NotPetya attack is based on strong assumptions with
limited backing. Thirdly, the limited availability of strongly related work with
regards to analyzing logs using machine learning caused us use a trial and error
approach at several points in out data analysis.
==PAGE:90==
76
Discussion
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The main goal for this project was to propose a method for detecting malicious
behaviour on a small internal corporate network. We wanted to achieve this
goal by analyzing Windows event logs using machine learning.
We set up a test lab imitating the internal network of a small company. In
this lab, an activity baseline for the systems was created, and successful and
unsuccessful attacks against systems on the network were emulated. Windows
event logs from the systems in the test lab were collected afterwards and used
as the foundation for the subsequent data analysis.
Using the described machine learning methods, the collected data was processed
into a labeled feature space and trained to perform predictions. These meth-
ods performed with a varying degree of success, but were particularly eﬀective
at identifying the emulated lateral movement.
For this, positive predictions
were correctly given 97.8% of the time while negative predictions were correctly
given 99.9% of the time. Additionally, we proposed a naive probabilistic model
for optimizing the correct prediction probability, which under a number of as-
sumptions could detect a lateral movement based breach, at a certainty of 1 in
10000000, within around 22 seconds.
We have shown that the proposed solution model presented in this paper can be
used to distinguish malicious behavior from benign behaviour on systems in an
==PAGE:92==
78
Conclusion
internal network with high accuracy. While the solution does not seek to replace
current security mechanisms, with some improvements it could be implemented
as an additional layer of defense in existing systems. This would allow security
controls in company networks to quickly react to a potential security breach
and contain the attack in an early stage, limiting the damages inﬂicted on the
network and the company.
==PAGE:93==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Attachments
Name
Filename
Description
User activity scripts
UserActivity.zip
PowerShell scripts used to gener-
ate benign user activity.
Jellyﬁsh
Jellyﬁsh.zip
Jellyﬁsh source code.
Log client-server
LogClientServer.zip
Log client & log aggregation
server source code.
Log data
Logs.zip
The collected log data used for
the data analysis.
Data analysis
DataAnalysis.zip
The code used to clean, process,
apply machine learning to, and
plot the collected logs.
Table A.1: Attached ﬁles for this project.
==PAGE:94==
80
Appendix
A.2
Additionally Installed Software
User Type
Software
Intern
LibreOﬃce
Spotify
VLC Media Player
System Administrator
Notepad++
PuTTY
Wireshark
Domain Administrator
Notepad++
PsExec
PuTTY
Web Communications
Adobe Dreamweaver
GIMP
LibreOﬃce
Web Administrator
Git
Notepad++
PuTTY
HR
7-Zip
Adobe Reader
LibreOﬃce
Developer
Git
PyCharm
Python 3
Lead Developer
Git
PyCharm
Python 3
Table A.2: Additional software installed for each type of user.
Server
Software
S_WEB
Microsoft IIS
S_DB
Microsoft SQL Server
S_DEV
Microsoft IIS with Bonobo Git Server
Table A.3: Additional software installed on the servers.
==PAGE:95==
A.3 User Activity Distribution
81
A.3
User Activity Distribution
User Type
Browsing
Websites
Browsing
Files
Running
Programs
Intern
30%
10%
60%
System Administrator
30%
20%
50%
Domain Administrator
30%
10%
60%
Web Communications
15%
5%
80%
Web Administrator
40%
10%
50%
HR
20%
15%
65%
Developer
40%
20%
40%
Lead Developer
40%
20%
40%
Table A.4: Distribution of user activity for each type of user.
A.4
Emulated Attacks on Lab Machines
Machine
User
Admin
Module
Timestamp
W10
USER10
No
T1056
09-16:32:20
W10
USER10
No
T1081
09-16:33:55
W10
USER10
No
T1086
09-16:34:52
W10
USER10
No
T1115
09-16:35:30
W10
USER10
No
T1201
09-16:36:16
W10
USER10
No
T1110
09-16:38:24
W10
USER10
No
T1033
09-16:39:20
W10
USER10
No
T1099
09-16:40:23
W10
USER10
No
T1170
09-16:41:30
W2
USER2
No
T1031
09-16:46:05
W2
USER2
No
T1033
09-16:46:28
W2
USER2
No
T1035
09-16:47:06
W2
USER2
No
BloodHound
09-16:51:35
W2
USER2
No
BloodHound
09-16:52:37
W2
USER2
No
T1055
09-16:54:20
W10
USER10
No
T1115
10-01:41:30
SWEB
USER7
No
T1086
10-01:48:40
SWEB
USER7
No
T1033
10-01:49:50
SWEB
USER7
No
T1201
10-01:51:30
SWEB
USER7
No
T1035
10-01:54:30
SWEB
USER7
No
T1055
10-01:58:10
SWEB
USER7
No
T1088
10-01:59:10
SWEB
USER8
No
T1088
10-02:02:00
==PAGE:96==
82
Appendix
SWEB
USER8
Yes
T1031
10-02:03:00
SWEB
USER8
Yes
BloodHound
10-02:04:40
SWEB
USER8
Yes
T1055
10-02:06:20
W5
USER5
Yes
BloodHound
10-03:49:30
W5
USER5
Yes
T1083
10-03:51:30
W5
USER5
Yes
T1115
10-03:52:20
W5
USER5
Yes
T1035
10-03:53:10
W5
USER5
Yes
T1033
10-03:54:20
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1083
10-17:39:00
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1121
10-17:42:42
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1191
10-17:43:25
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1197
10-17:44:36
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1035
10-17:45:22
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1055
10-17:46:11
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1086
10-17:49:47
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1081
10-17:50:26
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1110
10-17:52:10
SDEV
USER15
Yes
T1099
10-17:53:43
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1031
10-18:00:28
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1056
10-18:01:25
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1083
10-18:02:58
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1115
10-18:03:33
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1121
10-18:04:19
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1031
10-18:05:50
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1115
10-18:08:25
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1121
10-18:09:41
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1031
10-18:10:26
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1055
10-18:10:54
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1197
10-18:13:45
W12
W12\Administrator
Yes
T1170
10-18:14:53
W7
USER7
No
T1033
10-19:37:40
W7
USER7
No
T1086
10-19:37:57
W7
USER7
No
T1088
10-19:38:14
W7
USER7
No
T1115
10-19:38:28
W7
USER7
No
T1115
10-19:39:40
W4
USER4
Yes
T1201
10-19:44:18
W4
USER4
Yes
T1197
10-19:44:35
W4
USER4
Yes
T1056
10-19:45:15
W4
USER4
Yes
T1081
10-19:46:46
W4
USER4
Yes
T1081
10-19:48:27
W4
USER4
Yes
T1099
10-19:49:13
W4
USER4
Yes
T1170
10-19:49:35
W4
USER4
Yes
T1191
10-19:50:06
W4
USER4
Yes
T1110
10-19:51:15
==PAGE:97==
A.4 Emulated Attacks on Lab Machines
83
W4
USER4
Yes
T1033
10-19:53:10
W4
USER4
Yes
T1191
10-19:54:15
W4
USER4
Yes
BloodHound
10-19:54:46
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1099
10-19:59:59
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1121
10-20:01:08
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1197
10-20:01:25
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1081
10-20:02:02
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1035
10-20:02:23
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1083
10-20:02:40
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1191
10-20:03:23
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1031
10-20:03:48
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1170
10-20:04:06
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1033
10-20:04:28
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1086
10-20:04:46
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1201
10-20:05:05
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1121
10-20:05:21
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1099
10-20:06:06
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1055
10-20:06:27
W15
W15\Administrator
Yes
T1170
10-20:08:25
SDB
USER4
Yes
BloodHound
10-20:11:51
SDB
USER4
Yes
BloodHound
10-20:17:28
W2
USER2
No
T1086
10-20:19:55
W2
USER2
No
T1115
10-20:20:14
W2
USER2
No
T1033
10-20:20:35
W2
USER2
No
T1088
10-20:20:55
W8
USER8
No
T1115
10-20:22:21
W8
USER8
No
T1191
10-20:22:42
W8
USER8
No
T1086
10-20:23:00
W8
USER8
No
T1033
10-20:23:18
Table A.5: Emulated attacks on the machines in the lab domain. Machine
and User indicates the machine and user the attack was launched
against. Admin indicates whether the attack was launched with
administrative rights. Module and Timestamp describes what
module from the Purple Team ATT&CK Automation tool was
used and at what time.
==PAGE:98==
84
Appendix
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[Ana18]
Christoforos Anagnostopoulos. Weakly supervised learning: How
to engineer labels for machine learning in cyber-security. Data
Science For Cyber-security, vol 3, page 195, 2018.
[ARS]
Rohan Vazarkar Andrew Robbins and Will Schroeder. Blood-
hound. https://github.com/BloodHoundAD/BloodHound. Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-15.
[Baj]
Giovanni Bajo. Pyinstaller. https://www.pyinstaller.org/.
Accessed: 2019-06-19.
[byt]
byt3bl33d3r.
Automating
the
empire
with
the
death
star:
getting
domain
admin
with
a
push
of
a
button.
https://byt3bl33d3r.github.io/automating-the-empire-
with-the-death-star-getting-domain-admin-with-a-
push-of-a-button.html. Accessed: 2019-06-23.
[Cen17]
Japan Computer Emergency Response Team Coordination Cen-
ter. Detecting lateral movement through tracking event logs (ver-
sion 2). Technical report, JPCERT/CC, 2017.
[Cis]
Cisco. Snort - network intrusion detection & prevention system.
https://www.snort.org/. Accessed: 2019-06-24.
[Cla94]
Kenneth L. Clarkson. An algorithm for approximate closest-point
queries. SCG ’94, p. 160-164, 1994.
[CM82]
D. Coomans and D. L. Massart. Alternative k-nearest neighbour
rules in supervised pattern recognition : Part 1. k-nearest neigh-
==PAGE:100==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
bour classiﬁcation by using alternative voting rules. Analytica
Chimica Acta 136, p. 15-27, 1982.
[CN12]
Adam Coates and Andrew Y. Ng. Learning feature representa-
tions with k-means. Originally published in: G. Montavon, G. B.
Orr, K.-R. Müller (Eds.), Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade,
2nd edn, Springer LNCS 7700, 2012, 2012.
[Con]
Eric
Conrad.
Threat
hunting
via
windows
event
logs.
https://www.sans.org/cyber-security-summit/archives/
file/summit-archive-1524493093.pdf. Accessed: 2019-06-13.
[Cora]
Microsoft Corporation.
4673(s,
f):
A privileged service
was called.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/
security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4673.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-21.
[Corb]
The MITRE Corporation. Access token manipulation. https:
//attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1134/. Accessed: 2019-06-
01.
[Corc]
The MITRE Corporation. Bits jobs. https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1197/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Cord]
The MITRE Corporation. Brute force. https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1110/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Core]
The MITRE Corporation. Bypass user account control. https:
//attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1088/. Accessed: 2019-06-
15.
[Corf]
The MITRE Corporation.
Clipboard data.
https://attack.
mitre.org/techniques/T1115/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Corg]
The MITRE Corporation. Cmstp. https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1191/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Corh]
The MITRE Corporation. Credentials in ﬁles. https://attack.
mitre.org/techniques/T1081/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Cori]
The MITRE Corporation. File and directory discovery. https:
//attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1083/. Accessed: 2019-06-
15.
[Corj]
The MITRE Corporation.
Input capture.
https://attack.
mitre.org/techniques/T1056/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Cork]
The MITRE Corporation. Lateral movement. https://attack.
mitre.org/tactics/TA0008/. Accessed: 2019-06-01.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[Corl]
The MITRE Corporation.
Mitre att&ck.
https://attack.
mitre.org/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Corm]
The MITRE Corporation.
Modify existing service.
https://
attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1031/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Corn]
The MITRE Corporation. Mshta. https://attack.mitre.org/
techniques/T1170/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Coro]
The MITRE Corporation. Password policy discovery. https:
//attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1201/. Accessed: 2019-06-
15.
[Corp]
The MITRE Corporation. Powershell. https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1086/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Corq]
The MITRE Corporation.
Privilege escalation.
https://
attack.mitre.org/tactics/TA0004/. Accessed: 2019-05-31.
[Corr]
The MITRE Corporation. Process injection. https://attack.
mitre.org/techniques/T1055/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Cors]
The MITRE Corporation. Psexec. https://attack.mitre.org/
software/S0029/. Accessed: 2019-06-01.
[Cort]
The MITRE Corporation. Regsvcs/regasm. https://attack.
mitre.org/techniques/T1121/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Coru]
The MITRE Corporation. Service execution. https://attack.
mitre.org/techniques/T1035/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Corv]
The MITRE Corporation. System owner/user discovery. https:
//attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1033/. Accessed: 2019-06-
15.
[Corw]
The MITRE Corporation. Timestomp. https://attack.mitre.
org/techniques/T1099/. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[DL18]
CrowdStrike Dan Larson. Global survey reveals supply chain as
a rising and critical new threat vector. CrowdStrike Blog, 2018.
[Emp]
EmpireProject.
Powershell
empire.
https://www.
powershellempire.com/. Accessed: 2019-06-23.
[Fer]
Ernesto Fernandez.
Dccwbypassuac.
https://github.com/
L3cr0f/DccwBypassUAC. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[Fou]
Open Information Security Foundation. Suricata | open source
ids / ips / nsm engine. https://suricata-ids.org/. Accessed:
2019-06-24.
==PAGE:102==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Grea]
Michael Gree. Making the red team wave the white ﬂag with dark-
trace ai. https://www.darktrace.com/en/blog/making-the-
red-team-wave-the-white-flag-with-darktrace-ai/.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-14.
[Greb]
Andy Greenberg. The untold story of notpetya, the most devas-
tating cyberattack in history. https://www.wired.com/story/
notpetya-cyberattack-ukraine-russia-code-crashed-
the-world/. Accessed: 2019-06-27.
[Gui]
Esteban Guillardoy.
Staying undetected post-exploitation.
https://resources.infosecinstitute.com/stay-
undetected-post-exploitation/. Accessed: 2019-06-10.
[Hoh]
Dwight
Hohnstein.
Sharpweb.
https://github.com/
djhohnstein/SharpWeb. Accessed: 2019-06-15.
[HW10]
Abdi Hervé and Lynne J. Williams. Principal component anal-
ysis. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: computational statistics 2,
no 4, p. 433-459, 2010.
[Inc]
Elasticsearch Inc. The elastic stack machine learning. https:
//www.elastic.co/products/stack/machine-learning.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-25.
[LLC]
Insecure.Com LLC.
Host discovery | nmap network scan-
ning.
https://nmap.org/book/man-host-discovery.html.
Accessed: 2019-05-30.
[LM98]
H. Liu and H. Motoda. Feature selection for knowledge discovery
and data mining. Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
[MdCPTT16] Gabriel Sánchez Pérez María del Carmen Prudente Tixteco, Lidia
Prudente Tixteco and Linda Karina Toscano. Intrusion detec-
tion using indicators of compromise based on best practices and
windows event logs. ICIMP 2016: The Eleventh International
Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection, 2016.
[MDS]
MDSec. Introducing angrypuppy. https://www.mdsec.co.uk/
2017/08/introducing-angrypuppy/. Accessed: 2019-06-23.
[Met]
Sean Metcalf. Attack methods for gaining domain admin rights in
active directory. https://adsecurity.org/?p=2362. Accessed:
2019-06-13.
[Mica]
Microsoft.
4627(s): Group membership information.
https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/threat-
protection/auditing/event-4627. Accessed: 2019-06-23.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
[Micb]
Microsoft.
4662(s,
f):
An operation was performed on
an object.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/
security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4662.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-23.
[Micc]
Microsoft. 4674(s, f): An operation was attempted on a priv-
ileged object. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/
security/threat-protection/auditing/event-4674.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-23.
[Micd]
Microsoft.
4985(s):
The state of a transaction has changed.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/
threat-protection/auditing/event-4985.
Accessed:
2019-
06-23.
[Mice]
Microsoft.
About event tracing.
https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/windows/desktop/etw/about-event-tracing. Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-24.
[Micf]
Microsoft.
Active
directory
domain
services
overview.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/
identity/ad-ds/get-started/virtual-dc/active-
directory-domain-services-overview.
Accessed:
2019-
06-02.
[Micg]
Microsoft.
Active directory:
Ldap syntax ﬁlters.
https://
social.technet.microsoft.com/wiki/contents/articles/
5392.active-directory-ldap-syntax-filters.aspx.
Ac-
cessed: 2019-05-30.
[Mich]
Microsoft.
Use
windows
event
forwarding
to
help
with
intrusion
detection.
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-
us/windows/security/threat-protection/use-windows-
event-forwarding-to-assist-in-intrusion-detection.
Accessed: 2019-06-24.
[Pra]
Praetorian. Purple team att&ck automation. https://github.
com/praetorian-code/purple-team-attack-automation. Ac-
cessed: 2019-06-15.
[Rapa]
Rapid7.
Detecting lateral movement with windows event
logs.
https://www.rapid7.com/resources/using-windows-
event-logs-to-detect-lateral-movement/. Accessed: 2019-
06-05.
[Rapb]
Rapid7. The metasploit framework. https://www.metasploit.
com/. Accessed: 2019-06-05.
==PAGE:104==
90
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Rit18]
Ritzau.
Fakta: Hackerangreb kostede mærsk over en milliard
kroner. Jyllands-Posten, 2018.
[Ron]
Armin Ronacher. Flask. http://flask.pocoo.org/. Accessed:
2019-06-19.
[SC]
LLC Strategic Cyber. Adversary simulation and red team opera-
tions software - cobalt strike. https://www.cobaltstrike.com/.
Accessed: 2019-06-23.
[Sec]
Oﬀensive Security.
Msfvenom.
https://www.offensive-
security.com/metasploit-unleashed/msfvenom/.
Accessed:
2019-06-15.
[SMABS17]
M. Soria-Machado, D. Abolins, C. Boldea, and K. Socha. De-
tecting lateral movements in windows infrastructure. Technical
report, CERT-EU, 2017.
[Smi]
Randy Franklin Smith.
Windows security log event id 4985.
https://www.ultimatewindowssecurity.com/securitylog/
encyclopedia/event.aspx?eventID=4985. Accessed: 2019-06-
23.
[SO13]
Rachel Schutt and Cathy O’Neil. Doing Data Science: Straight
Talk from the Frontline. O’Reilly Media, 1 edition, 2013.
[Soua]
Open Source. scikit-learn: Machine learning in python. https:
//scikit-learn.org/stable/. Accessed: 2019-06-25.
[Soub]
Open Source. Tensorﬂow: An end-to-end open source machine
learning platform. https://www.tensorflow.org/.
Accessed:
2019-06-25.
[SSH17]
Karan Sood and CrowdStrike Shaun Hurley. Notpetya techni-
cal analysis – a triple threat: File encryption, mft encryption,
credential theft. CrowdStrike Blog, 2017.
[Tec]
Palantir Technologies. Windows privilege abuse: Auditing, de-
tection, and defense. https://medium.com/palantir/windows-
privilege-abuse-auditing-detection-and-defense-
3078a403d74e. Accessed: 2019-06-20.
[Ull16]
I Ullah. Detecting lateral movement attacks through smb using
bro. Master’s thesis, University of Twente, 2016.
