==PAGE:1==
Master thesis
Local and hepatic immune response to bone
infections in pigs
Author:
Nadia Sara Møller s141030
Supervisors:
Kerstin Skovgaard
Freja Lea L¨uthje
Louise Kruse Jensen
June 28th 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Osteomyelitis is inﬂammation in the bone, usually caused by bacterial infection and can
lead to bone destruction. It is diﬃcult to treat and early diagnose and increased incidences
of human osteomyelitis have been seen in recent years. To improve this, more research on
the ﬁeld is needed. The aim of the present study was to investigate the genes involved in
osteomyelitis to provide new insight into the inﬂammatory response. Further, to examine
how the immune response of a novel porcine model of implant-associated osteomyelitis (IAO)
corresponds to the immune response of hematogenous osteomyelitis found in slaughter pigs.
The present study investigated genes of the innate immune response in bone and liver tis-
sue from seventeen slaughter pigs with osteomyelitis (including seven controls) using high
throughput quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The study also inves-
tigated the expression of complement C3 in bone from the same infected slaughter pigs by
immunohistochemistry.
The results showed that seventeen genes were signiﬁcantly (p-value < 0.05 and FC > 2)
regulated in the bone between infected slaughter pigs and controls.
The genes included
proinﬂammatory cytokines, acute phase proteins and genes involved in bone remodeling.
The expression of the liver showed a slight regulation of two acute phase proteins and one
component of the complement system. The results also showed that the investigated immune
response of the IAO pigs were quite similar to that of the infected slaughter pigs with os-
teomyelitis. The present study thus indicated that the immune response of infected pigs with
osteomyelitis does not induce a large systemic response but a strong inﬂammatory response
in the bone.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The present study is written as master thesis at the Technical University of Denmark in
collaboration with the University of Copenhagen. The thesis is composed by Nadia Sara
Møller and was credited 30 ECTS points. The project started the 28th of January 2019 and
was handed in the 28th of June 2019.
I would like to specially thank my supervisors Kerstin Skovgaard, Freja Lea L¨uthje and
Louise Kruse Jensen. Thank you for guidance and support every time needed and through
the entire process. Thanks to Karin Tarp for her help in the laboratory when Freja did
not have the opportunity. Likewise, a thank to Soﬁe Amalie Blirup for help regarding the
histology part and to Betina Gjested Andersen and Elisabeth Wairimu Petersen for the
histological preparation and stainning.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Abbreviations
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
2
2.1
The innate immune response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Bone anatomy and physiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Osteomyelitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Acute phase proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4.1
Serum Amyloid A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4.2
C3 and the complement system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Experimental background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.1
High-throughput RT-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.2
Immunohistochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Materials and methods
10
3.1
Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
RNA extraction and quality assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
cDNA synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4
qPCR primers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Pre-ampliﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.6
High-throughput RT-qPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.8
Immunohistochemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Results
16
4.1
Quality control and data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Gene expression results from the bone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.1
PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Proinﬂammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.3
Genes involved in bone remodeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.4
Comparison of bone gene expression in slaughter pigs and pigs from
the IAO model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Gene expression results from the liver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.1
PCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.2
The hepatic immune response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.3
Hepatic gene expression in slaughter pigs compared to pigs from the
IAO model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Histology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4.1
Chronic osteomyelitis of the infected slaughter pigs . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4.2
Immunohistochemical C3 positive cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
iii
==PAGE:5==
5
Discussion
26
5.1
The local and hepatic gene regulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
The acute phase response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Histopathological ﬁndings and genes involved in bone remodeling . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Experimental IAO pigs as a model for osteomyelitis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
Tissue from slaughter pigs as sample material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Conclusion and perspectives
32
References
33
Appendices
39
Appendix A Grouping of used genes
40
A.1 List of genes for the bone samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
A.2 List of genes for the liver samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Appendix B Complete list of primers
44
Appendix C Quality assessments
45
C.1
Bone samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
C.2
Liver samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Appendix D Heat maps
46
D.1 Dynamic array of the bone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
D.2 Dynamic array of the liver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Appendix E Gene expression changes between control and infected slaughter
pigs
48
E.1
Gene expression changes in the bone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
E.2
Gene expression changes in the liver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Appendix F List of genes for the PCAs
50
F.1
PCA bone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
F.2
PCA bone comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
F.3
PCA liver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
F.4
PCA liver comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
ACAN: Aggrecan
AEC: Amino-ethyl-carbazole
B2M: Beta-2-Microglobulin
C3: Complement C3
C1a: Complement C1s
C4A: Complement C4A
C5AR1: Complement C5a receptor 1
cDNA: Complementary DNA
CFB: Complement factor B
CFD: Complement factor D
CFP: Complement factor P
CP: Ceruloplasmin
CRP: C-Reactive Protein
CSF3: Colony stimulating factor 3
CT: Computed tomographic
CTSK: Cathepsin K
FC: Fold change
FPR: Formyl peptide receptors
HDL: High density lipoprotein
HE: Haematoxylin and Eosin
HRP: Horseradish peroxidase
IFNB1: Interferon beta 1
IFNG: Interferon gamma
IHC: Immunohistochemistry
IAO: Implant associated osteomyelitis
IL1A: Interleukin 1 alpha
IL1B: Interleukin 1 beta
IL6: Interleukin 6
IL11: Interleukin 11
IL23: Interleukin 23
MAC: Membrane attack complex
MBL2: Mannose binding lectin 2
M-CSF: Macrophage colony stimulating factor
MMP1: Matrix Metallopeptidase 1
MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging
NTC: None template control
OPG: Osteoprotegerin
PAMP: Pathogen-associated molecular pattern
PCA: Principle component analysis
PIGMAP: Pig major acute phase protein
PPIA: Peptidylprolyl isomerase A
PRR: Pattern recognition receptors
PTN: Pleiotrophin
qPCR: quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
RANK: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B
RANKL: Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B Ligand
RIN: RNA integrity numbers
v
==PAGE:7==
RPL13A: Ribosomal protein L13a
RT: Reverse transcription
SAA1: Serum amyloid A1
SAA2: Serum amyloid A2
SAA3: Serum amyloid A3
SAA4: Serum amyloid A4
S. aureus: Staphylococcus aureus
SERPINA1: Serpin family A member 1
SOX9: SRY-Box 9
TBP: TATA-box binding protein
TLR: Toll like receptor
TNF: tumor necrosis factor
TF: Transferrin
TRAP: Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
YWHAZ: Tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein zeta
vi
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction
Osteomyelitis is inﬂammation in the bone, usually caused by bacterial infection, and can
result in destruction of the bone[1].
Increased incidences of human osteomyelitis due to
Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) have been seen in recent years[2], however little is known
of the molecular pathways. Early diagnosis and treatment of osteomyelitis are diﬃcult, mak-
ing the need for more research on the ﬁeld greater[3]. Recently, a novel porcine model of
IAO has been developed to achieve this and in long term to provide information to reduce
treatment failures and improve prevention and diagnosis[4]. Pigs are remarkably similar to
humans in terms of anatomy, genetics and physiology, which make them an advantageous
animal model[5].
The aim of the present study was to investigate the genes involved in osteomyelitis in order
to gain a better understanding of the inﬂammatory response. Furthermore, to examine how
the immune response of the porcine model of IAO corresponds to the immune response of
hematogenous osteomyelitis found in slaughter pigs. The study will investigate the expression
of innate immune factors in bone and liver tissue from slaughter pigs with osteomyelitis using
high throughput qPCR. Genes included in the investigation comprise acute phase proteins,
genes associated with bone remodeling, cytokines, chemokines and genes involved in the
complement system. The grouping of the genes are found in appendix A.1 and A.2 for bone
and liver respectively. Abbreviations for the investigated and described genes will be used
but the full name is found in the list of abbreviations.
The aim also included an investigation of the translation and expression of the acute phase
protein, C3 in the osteomyelitic bone tissue by IHC.
1
==PAGE:9==
2. Background
2.1
The innate immune response
The immune system is a host defense system consisting of variety of eﬀector cells and
molecules that protects the host from infections. It comprises of two systems, the innate
and the adaptive immune system. The innate immune system is the non-speciﬁc and the
ﬁrst line of defense, whereas the adaptive immune response is acquired and highly speciﬁc,
initiated hours or days after the infection[6]. The present study will mainly focus on the
innate immunity.
Invading pathogens are sensed by recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs), which are structures conserved among microbial species. The PAMPs are rec-
ognized by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) expressed in cells of the immune system.
The PRRs are divided into several subgroups and are localized in the plasma membrane, the
cytoplasm or in endosome membranes, depending on the type of invading pathogen recog-
nized[7]. A part of the innate immune system is also physical and chemical barriers which
prevent the entry from pathogens. After the pathogen has crossed the anatomical barrier,
immune cells start killing the invading pathogens by phagocytosis. The major and ﬁrst met
phagocytic cells are the macrophages followed by large numbers of neutrophils. The dendritic
cells are also a class of phagocytes and are generating peptide antigens after the phagocytosis
to activate the adaptive immune response[6].
Besides phagocytosis, recognition by PRRs upregulates the transcription of genes for an-
timicrobial proteins, proinﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines. The proinﬂammatory cy-
tokines can regulate cell death of inﬂammatory tissues, modify vascular permeability, recruit
leukocytes to the inﬂamed tissues and induce production of acute-phase proteins[7].
2.2
Bone anatomy and physiology
Bone is an active connective tissue, which constantly undergoes remodeling during life to
maintain the structural integrity[8].
Besides supporting the body structurally and act
as a reservoir for calcium and phosphorus, the bones permit movement and locomotion,
protect the vital organs, maintain the acid-base balance and provide an environment for
hematopoiesis in the bone marrow[8, 9, 10].
Bones are generally classiﬁed into 4 groups; long bones, short bones, ﬂat bones and irregular
bones and are composed of two distinct types of tissue; cortical and trabecular bone. The
two types have the same matrix composition but diﬀer in structure and function[11]. Corti-
cal or compact bone is dense, strong and surrounds the marrow cavity, whereas trabecular
or spongy bone consists of a network of trabecular plates and rods interspersed in the bone
marrow compartment. Trabecular bone has high porosity and is less dense and more ﬂexible
than the compact bone. Figure 2.1 shows the structure of a long bone[9].
Periosteum and endosteum are connective tissue covering respectively the outer and inner
surface of the bone. Periosteum is composed of two distinct layers, an outer ﬁbrous layer
consisting of ﬁbroblasts, collagen, elastin ﬁbers along with a network of nerves and vessels
and an inner cellular layer. The cellular layer contains mesenchymal stem cells, diﬀerentiated
osteoprogenitor cells, ﬁbroblast, microvessels and sympathetic nerves. Endosteum, the inner
surface of the bone consists of a thin layer of bone lining cells (inactive osteoblasts), which
enclose the bone marrow [11]. The bone matrix of both cortical and trabecular is composited
of organic and inorganic components. The organic matrix consists primarily of collagen but
10% is made of other proteins such as ﬁbronectin, osteopontin, osteocalcin, bone sialopro-
2
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
tein and proteoglycans. The inorganic matrix serves as a reservoir for calcium, phosphorus,
sodium and magnesium[9, 11].
Figure 2.1: The anatomy of a long bone. Tissue types, structure and elements of the bone. The ﬁgure
obtained from Pearson education, inc., publishing as Benjamin Cummings.
The cellular elements compose only a small amount of the total mass of the bone but are
essential for development and remodeling of the bone. The main cell types involved are osteo-
clasts derived from hematopoietic stem cells and osteoprogenitor cells, osteoblasts, osteocytes
and bone lining cells derived from mesenchymal stem cells[8]. The remodeling process is re-
sponsible for removal and repair of damaged bone and is based on several highly regulated
phases. The remodeling is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Bone remodeling. Osteoclast precursors are activated and diﬀerentiate into mature resorbing
osteoclasts, which secrete acid and proteolytic enzymes to resorb the bone. A reversal phase couples the
bone resorption to the bone formation phase (not shown) and formation of the bone occurs by osteoblasts
producing a new mineralized bone. The ﬁgure is obtained from Fuchs et al.[11]
The bone resorption phase is mediated by osteoclasts, which are large multinucleated cells
resorbing the bone[12].
They are derived from the monocyte/macrophage hematopoietic
lineage and diﬀerentiate in the presence of macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF)
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
and receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B Ligand (RANKL)[13], see ﬁgure 2.3. M-
CSF and RANKL are produced by marrow stromal cells and osteoblasts, which synthesize
new bone. RANKL binds to RANK, a receptor on the osteoclasts, and induce expression
of genes such as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), calcitonin receptor and the
beta3-integrin, which classiﬁes the osteoclast lineage and lead to development of mature
osteoclast[11, 12]. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a protein secreted by osteoblasts and osteogenic
stromal stem cells but it protects the bone from resorption by binding to RANKL and thus
prevent the interaction with RANK[12].
Figure 2.3: Osteoclast diﬀerentiation and activation. Hematopoietic precursor cell diﬀerentiates into
mature osteoclasts, which are fused polykaryon. M-CSF and RANKL are required for the osteoclastogenesis,
whereas OPG attenuates the diﬀerentiation by binding to RANK. The ﬁgure is obtained and modiﬁed from
Boyle et al.[12]
After the activation and diﬀerentiation into mature osteoclasts, the osteoclasts attach to
the mineralized bone surface. In order to facilitate the attachment, unmineralized osteoid
that lines the bone surface is degraded by the bone lining cells[14]. The attached osteoclasts
create a sealed zone where hydrogen ions are secreted and the mineralized matrix is dissolved.
The remaining organic matrix is degraded by secretion of collagenolytic enzymes, particular
cathepsin K (CTSK). The resorption induces cavities on the trabecular bone surface, called
Howship lacunae, or cylindrical Haversian canals in cortical bone[15]. Following the bone
removal, there is a reversal phase where the bone lining cells digest the collagen remnants,
form a so-called cement line and deposit a thin layer of collagen[14]. The reversal phase
includes releasing of coupling signals to links the bone resorption to the formation of bone,
which is performed by the osteoblasts. The osteoblasts are derived from the mesenchymal
stem cells in the bone marrow and secrete molecules to form a new organic matrix at the
resorption site, see ﬁgure 2.2. The bone is subsequently mineralized. Following the formation,
the mature osteoblasts undergo apoptosis, become bone lining cells or are embedded in the
matrix and diﬀerentiate into osteocytes[15].
2.3
Osteomyelitis
Osteomyelitis is inﬂammation in the bone, usually caused by bacterial infection and can
lead to bone destruction[1, 3]. Osteomyelitis can according to Waldvogel et al be classiﬁed
into three groups hematogenous osteomyelitis, osteomyelitis secondary to a contiguous focus
of infection and osteomyelitis associated with peripheral vascular disease[16]. Contiguous
osteomyelitis occurs due to local spread from a contiguous infection, which follows trauma,
bone surgery or joint replacement. Osteomyelitis associated with vascular disease is predom-
inantly found in people with diabetes and often follows foot soft tissue infections[3]. The last
type, hematogenous osteomyelitis is primarily seen in children with blood-borne bacteria,
which usually aﬀects the long bones[17].
According to the time-dependent clinical course, osteomyelitis is distinguished between an
acute and chronic stage[1]. Acute osteomyelitis manifests by suppurative inﬂammation where
4
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
bacteria or other microorganism are embedded. Releasing of inﬂammatory factors and emi-
gration of leukocytes contribute to destruction/necrosis of bone trabeculae and bone marrow.
Especially, the cytokines tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin 1 (IL1) and interleukin
6 (IL6) have been shown to induce osteoclast activity and inhibit the bone formation by
osteoblasts[18, 19].
The inﬂammatory process also leads to compression of the vascular
channels and ischemia, resulting in bone necrosis. Segments of the necrotic bone can become
separated from the healthy tissue and are called sequestra. The chronic state is often charac-
terized by sequesters and is deﬁned as a long-term inﬂammation evolved over several months
or years[3]. Furthermore, chronic inﬂammation is generally characterized by the formation
of blood vessels and connective tissue and the presence of macrophages, lymphocytes and
monocytes[20].
Osteomyelitis often develops into a chronic stage as a result of sequester formation.
Se-
questers cannot be resorbed by the host and represents an optimal surface for the attachment
of bacteria. S. aureus is the most common pathogenic microorganism involved in all types
of osteomyelitis[3] and is known to form bioﬁlm. Formation of bioﬁlm protects the bacteria
from antibiotics and coupled with the inﬂammatory cells not reaching the avascular area,
osteomyelitis becomes very diﬃcult to treat[17].
Besides treatment diﬃculties, osteomyelitis is complicated to diagnose. The clinical symp-
toms cover fever, localized pain, redness and swelling of the aﬀected bone. However, several
methods are required to conﬁrm the diagnosis[1, 3]. The diagnostic procedures involve bone
biopsies, blood cultures and imaging[3, 21]. Blood cultures and bone biopsies are used to
identify the microorganisms where positive blood cultures only can be achieved in hematoge-
nous osteomyelitis. Bone biopsies are also obtained for further histopathological investiga-
tions[3]. The concentration of C-Reactive Protein and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate
are commonly used as indication, but they are not speciﬁc markers of inﬂammation and
can be elevated for other reasons than osteomyelitis. Imaging methods as plain ﬁlms radio-
graphy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomographic (CT) can be useful
in identiﬁcation of soft tissue swelling, bone destruction, sequester formation and periosteal
reaction, however several of these are ﬁrst visible after a longer period of time[3, 21].
2.4
Acute phase proteins
The acute phase response is a part of the innate immune system and is a systemic reaction
of the host to infection, inﬂammation, tissue injury or trauma[22, 23]. It involves increase in
production of plasma proteins, which are known as acute phase proteins. The acute phase
proteins are primarily synthesized in the liver by hepatocytes, although the genes for some
such as serum amyloid A (SAA) are also expressed in tissues and cells extrahepatic[24, 25].
The acute phase response is stimulated by release of cytokines such as IL1, IL6 and TNF
from immune cells at the site of inﬂammation or infection[23, 24, 26]. The increase in acute
phase proteins vary between one- and twofold and up to 1000-fold or more, dependent on the
acute phase protein. Major acute phase proteins with increase up to 3000 times normally
peak already about 48 hours after an acute event, whereas it for others can take days to reach
their peak values[24]. Within 4-7 days after the initial stimulus, the response will fall again
if no further stimulus occurs. During chronic inﬂammation, increased serum concentrations
of acute phase proteins are generally observed. Simultaneous with production of a large
number of acute phase proteins, the liver also reduces a number of proteins, which therefore
are classiﬁed as negative acute phase proteins during the acute phase response[23]. Although
the proﬁle of acute phase proteins is considered to be relative conserved between species, some
do not react in the same way. For example, transferrin (TF), which is a negative acute phase
5
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
protein in many mammalian species is a positive in chicken[22].
The acute phase proteins are further classiﬁed on the basis of their mode of action, which
include protease inhibitors, coagulation proteins, complements proteins, transport proteins
and other proteins[23].
2.4.1
Serum Amyloid A
SAA is a major acute phase protein and has been found to be quickly induced and highly
increased with serum concentration reaching 1000-fold compared to healthy controls[25, 27].
It is a small protein and regarded as an apoliprotein, since the majority of circulating SAA is
bound to high density lipoprotein (HDL)[28] and has a four-exon three-intron structure which
is characteristic of many other apolipoproteins[29]. The SAA protein is highly conserved in
mammals but is also found in a wide range of vertebrates like ﬁsh and birds [28]. Three
isoforms of the gene are reported for many diﬀerent species but for humans, pigs and mice,
the SAA gene cluster consists of four gene loci (SAA1, SAA2, SAA3, SAA4)[25]. In general,
SAA1 and SAA2 are preferentially expressed in the liver, while SAA3 has shown to be the
main local isoform synthesized in other tissue[25, 28].
The wide species conservation of the protein and the dramatic expression induction, during
the acute phase response, suggest a signiﬁcant role for the protein[25, 28, 29]. However, the
biological role of SAA is still unclear. A wide range of possible functions are suggested based
on several studies[27]. SAA is shown to bind and interact with gram-negative bacteria and
diﬀerent receptors such as toll like receptors (TLRs) and formyl peptide receptors (FPRs)
and overall to be involved in lipid metabolism/transport, tissue remodeling in relation with
extracellular-matrix-degrading enzymes and recruitment of inﬂammatory cells[27, 29].
2.4.2
C3 and the complement system
C3 is an acute phase protein with a moderate increase, during the acute phase response,
compared to SAA[22]. It is playing an essential role in the complement system, which is
an integral part of the innate immune response[30]. The complement system is comprised
of more than 30 soluble and cell surface-bound proteins and ensures a rapid and adequate
response against invading pathogens. Activation of the complement cascade can occur by
diﬀerent molecules, including surfaces components of pathogens and antigen-antibody com-
plexes, leading to activation of one of the three pathways; classical, lectin or alternative[30,
31], see ﬁgure 2.4. Common for all three pathways is activation of the C3 convertase (C4bC2a,
C3bBb), which cleaves C3 into C3a and C3b.
The anaphylatoxin C3a, induces proinﬂammatory signals that promotes neutrophil respira-
tory burst[30] and vasodilation, acts as chemoattractant as well as inducing cytokine and
chemokine release[31, 32]. C3b can bind to various surface receptors and acts as an opsonin.
Furthermore, C3b is a part of the C3 convertase in the alternative pathway and a building
block of the C5 convertases (C4bC2aC3b, C3bBbC3B). The C5 convertase cleaves C5 in two
components, where the small fragment C5a acts similarly to C3a and the larger fragment
C5b is a subunit of the membrane attack complex (MAC). MAC consists further of C6, C7,
C8 and several C9 molecules and can form a pore by inserting itself into the cell membrane,
which resulting in lysis of the cell[31].
In addition to the role as defense system and promotion of inﬂammation, the complement
system has been found to have far more extensive functions, among others in tissue home-
ostasis and repair. Growing evidence indicates that the complement system could be involved
in regulation of bone metabolism and turnover at physiological and pathophysiological con-
ditions[30, 33].
6
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
Figure 2.4: Overview of the complement system. The complement cascade can be activated by three
pathways the classical, the lectin or the alternative. The C3 convertases cleave C3 into C3a and C3b, where
C3b is a subunit of both the C3 convertase in the alternative pathway and the C5 convertase, which cleave
C5 into C5a and C5b. C3a and C5a works as proinﬂammatory mediators and C5b forms, with C6, C7, C8,
and several C9, the membrane attack complex (MAC). MAC can be inserted into cell membranes and induce
cell lysis. The ﬁgure is obtained and modiﬁed from Mathern et al.[32]
2.5
Experimental background
2.5.1
High-throughput RT-qPCR
Reverse transcription (RT) qPCR (RT-qPCR) is an eﬀective technique for studying gene
expression changes[34]. It is based on the PCR method developed in 1983 by Kary Mullis
but is able to quantify the ampliﬁed product after each cycle of the PCR[35].
To ensure a successful mRNA analysis using RT-qPCR, the RNA must be of high purity
and high integrity. The purity of a sample can be determined by absorbance measurements
from a spectrophotometer[34]. Nucleic acids absorb light at 260nm and measurements of the
A260/A280 ratio and the A260/A230 ratio provide an indication of contamination of proteins
and phenols in the sample respectively. For a pure RNA sample, the ratios of both should be
around 2[36].RNA integrity can be measured by a microﬂuidics-based electrophoresis system,
such as the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. This provides a software algorithm to evaluate the
integrity of a RNA sample by a RNA integrity numbers (RIN) ranging from 1 to 10, where
10 represents intact RNA and 1 highly degraded RNA. The RIN algorithm is based on the
18S and the 28S speaks[37].
RT-qPCR includes reverse transcription of the RNA into complementary DNA (cDNA). This
step is important due to the prevalence of RNases and the increased stability of DNA[34,
38]. In addition, for the cDNA to function as a template for the DNA polymerase during
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
the ampliﬁcation.
During qPCR, the ampliﬁed DNA product is quantiﬁed by ﬂuorescence after each cycle.
The present study uses EvaGreen as binding dye, which upon binding to double-stranded
DNA emits a ﬂuorescent signal. Thus, the amount of ﬂuorescence is proportional with the
amount of double-stranded DNA initially present in each sample and increases after each
cycle reﬂecting the exponential increase in the PCR product[35].
In order to ensure that signal derives from the targeted cDNA, a no–reverse transcription
control (-RT) and a none template control (NTC) should be included. The -RT detects
the background level of genomic DNA present in the sample and the NTC controls for
contamination of the reagents or unintended ampliﬁcation products, for example primer
dimers[38].
After the last qPCR cycle, melting curves are generated and subsequently analyzed to verify
the product. A single peak as shown for the samples in ﬁgure 2.5A indicates that only a single
product is produced. Samples with more than one main peak or wrong melting temperature
as shown for the few samples with a melting temperature around 86◦C in ﬁgure 2.5A can be
a result of contaminated samples or genomic DNA.
Figure 2.5: Melting- and ampliﬁcation curves from a speciﬁc primer. Primary data of melting- and
ampliﬁcation curves obtained from the Fluidigm software from the present study. A) Melting curves with
single melting peaks around 78◦C for most of the samples and around 86◦C for four of the samples. The
green vertical lines indicate the individual melting temperatures. B) Ampliﬁcation curves of samples with
diﬀerent amount of target DNA. The blue horizontal line indicates the threshold.
In connection with the quantiﬁcation of DNA, ampliﬁcation curves are generated and all
individual reactions are characterized by a quantiﬁcation cycle (Cq). Cq is the number of
ampliﬁcation cycles needed for a ﬂuorescent signal to rise above a deﬁned threshold[39]. In
this way, a high Cq value indicates a sample with a low amount of DNA as more cycles
are needed to reach the threshold, whereas a low Cq indicates a sample with high levels
of DNA. Figure 2.5B shows an example of ampliﬁcation curves for a speciﬁc primer. The
blue horizontal line indicates the threshold and diﬀerent numbers of cycles (Cq 9 to 23) are
required for the individual samples to reach the threshold.
In the present study, high-throughput RT-qPCR using a 48.48 dynamic array platform was
applied. This system allows to combine 48 samples and 48 primer pairs/assays resulting in
2304 PCR reactions.
2.5.2
Immunohistochemistry
IHC is a technology bridging three disciplines: immunology, histology, and chemistry[40,
41]. The fundamental concept is detecting an antigen within a tissue section with a speciﬁc
antibody and visualizing it with the aid of chemistry and microscopy[42]. Immunohisto-
chemical staining has become a valuable technique and is widely used in clinical diagnostics
and medical research[41, 43]. IHC can be classiﬁed into colorimetric and ﬂuorescent staining
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
and further into several direct and indirect detection systems. Only the colorimetric indirect
polymer-based method will be covered here.
The ﬁrst essential part of IHC is ﬁxation of the tissue, which is necessary for stabilization
and preservation of cellular components, including soluble and structural proteins, and pre-
vention of autolysis and displacement of cell constituents as antigens and enzymes. The
cross-linking formaldehyde is the standard ﬁxative and creates chemical bonds between cer-
tain amino acids in the tissue. Afterwards, decalciﬁcation, dehydration and embedding in
paraﬃn follow to produce the tissue sections. This and ﬁxation modify the three-dimensional
structure of proteins and prevent detection of the antigens. Thus, the cut tissue sections are
deparaﬃnized and pre-treated in order to reverse the changes produced by the ﬁxation and
dehydration[41].
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is one of the most used enzymes for detection in IHC and is
also applied in this study. Peroxidase is found naturally in the tissue, in several types of
cells, such as erythrocytes, granulocytes, macrophages and hepatocytes. Therefore, it can be
necessary to block the endogenous peroxidase activity. Another problem may be unspeciﬁc
binding of antibodies, which through ionic and hydrophobic interactions, can adhere to tissue
molecules. This can be overcome with blocking proteins[42].
The most important reagent in IHC is the primary antibody, which binds to the antigen
of interest. In the indirect method, a secondary antibody used for detection recognizes and
binds the Fcγ portion of a primary antibody, see ﬁgure 2.6. To do this, the secondary anti-
body must be from another animal species than the primary antibody.
To visualize the presence of the antigen-antibody complex, the secondary antibody and nu-
merous HRP molecules are conjugated on a backbone of polymer, see ﬁgure 2.6. When a
chromogenic substrate as amino-ethyl-carbazole (AEC) is available to the HRP enzymes, the
enzymes can produce a colored product that is visible in a microscope. With the indirect
polymer-based method, the signal from one primary antibody can be ampliﬁed up to 100-
fold[42].
Figure 2.6:
Indirect polymer-based immunohistochemistry.
Binding a primary antibody to an
antigen of interest, after which an HRP-conjugated secondary antibody binds the Fc region of the primary
antibody. AEC chromogen are catalyzed by the HRP enzymes that produce a red colored product. The ﬁgure
is obtained and modiﬁed from Shi et al.[42]
9
==PAGE:17==
3. Materials and methods
3.1
Experimental design
The present study is based on tissue from seventeen slaughter pigs. Bone and liver samples
were collected at the same slaughter house (Danish Crown, Ringsted) but the animals were
from diﬀerent farms and of diﬀerent age and gender. Seven of the pigs were used as control
pigs and had no sign of inﬂammation.
The remaining ten pigs were selected because of
osteomyelitic bone lesions. The bone lesions were investigated for bacterial infection in two
ways, by a swab of the lesion and by a small sample collected from the bone. An overview
of the pigs, sample/lesion localization and type of infection is seen in table 3.1. Only the
ﬁrst sixteen slaughter pigs were used for RT-qPCR due to space limitations on the dynamic
array. Furthermore, samples from the liver were only collected for ﬁfteen of the pigs.
Table 3.1: An overview of the slaughter pigs.
Status
Sample localization
Lesion
Bone tissue
Control
Radius
-
-
Control
Radius
-
-
Control
Radius
-
-
Control
Rib
-
-
Control
Unknown
-
-
Control
Unknown
-
-
Control
Unknown
-
-
Chronic
Vertebrae
T. pyogenes + F. necrophorum
T. pyogenes
Chronic
Pelvis
S. dysgalactiae + F. necrophorum
-
Chronic
Rib metaphysis
T. pyogenes
T. pyogenes
Chronic
Vertebrae thorax
T. pyogenes
T. pyogenes
Chronic
Vertebrae
T. pyogenes + P. indolicus
-
Chronic
Vertebrae thorax
T. pyogenes
-
Chronic
Vertebrae thorax
T. pyogenes
-
Chronic
Vertebrae thorax
T. pyogenes + F. necrophorum
-
Chronic
Rib metaphysis
T. pyogenes
-
Chronic
Vertebrae tail
Actinomyces-like
-
In order to conﬁrm the translation of the mRNA into proteins and evaluate the spatial
distribution of the protein, the acute phase protein complement C3 was selected for further
investigation by IHC. For this investigation, bone tissue from the ten infected slaughter pigs
were used. However, the controls were from a porcine model of IAO and consisted of six
healthy tibia. An overview of the used samples is shown in table 3.2 and the process of the
performed high-throughput RT-qPCR is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1.
10
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Table 3.2: An overview of which samples have been used for qPCR and IHC.
Sample material
RT-qPCR
IHC
Control slaughter pigs
7
-
Infected slaughter pigs with osteomyelitis
9 (bone)
8 (liver)
10
Control pigs from the IAO model
-
6
Results from the qPCR and IHC were compared to results of infected pigs of the IAO model
(the qPCR were performed in an earlier study by another author). The model is based on
∼30 kg speciﬁc pathogen-free pigs, where a cavity is drilled in the right tibia and a 15 mm
steel implant is inserted. The insertion of the implant is either combined with inoculation of
saline or 104 CFU S. aureus [4].
In the present study, a comparison is made between pigs euthanized ﬁfteen days after implant
insertion and the slaughter pigs. An overview of the IAO pigs is found in table 3.3
Figure 3.1: Outline of the high-throughput RT-qPCR setup. The ﬁrst step in the green panel was
performed externally; all other steps in blue were performed by the author of this study.
Table 3.3: An overview of the IAO pigs.
Group
Number of pigs
Control
6
Saline
4
Saline + implant
2
S. aureus
4
S. aureus + implant
2
11
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.2
RNA extraction and quality assessment
Bone and liver tissue were kept in RNAlater (Qiagen) at -20◦C before the extraction. The
two kits, miRNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen) and RNase-Free DNase set (Qiagen), were used for
the puriﬁcation of RNA.
Max 30 mg tissue was added to M-tubes containing 1 ml QIAzol Lysis Reagent and homoge-
nized with GentleMACSTM. After the homogenization, 200 µl chloroform was added, shook
for 15 sec and centrifuged at 1200 g for 15 min at 4 ◦C. Thereby, the homogenate separated in
three phases and 300 µl from the upper aqueous phase was mixed with 450 µl 100% ethanol.
The samples were transferred to RNeasy Mini Spin Columns and washed with 350 µl RWT
buﬀer. 10 µl DNase I stock solution and 70 µl RDD buﬀer were mixed. 77.5 µl DNase I mix
was added to the RNeasy silica membranes containing the samples and placed for 15 min
at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were washed ﬁrst with 350 µl RWT buﬀer
and then twice with 500 µl RPE buﬀer. Afterwards, the RNA was eluted in RNase-free water.
The concentration and the purity of the extracted RNA were assessed on the NanoDrop ND-
1000 spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). For determination of the RNA integrity,
Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer were used.
3.3
cDNA synthesis
cDNA synthesis was performed with the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription kit (Qiagen).
The cDNA synthesis was carried out in duplicate with 400 ng total RNA. Prior to reverse
transcription, a DNase treatments step was included in order to remove genomic DNA. This
was carried out using 11.5 µl RNase-free water, 1.5 µl gDNA Wipeout buﬀer and 1 µl RNA
sample, which were incubated in the thermocycler (Analytik Jena) in 2 min at 42 ◦C.
6 µl Master Mix consisting of 0.75 µl Reverse Transcriptase, 0.75 µl RT Primer Mix, 3
µl RT buﬀer and 1.5 µl RNase-free water was added to each DNase treated sample. The
Reverse Transcriptase enzyme was not added to the -RT control sample. The samples were
incubated in the thermocycler at 42 ◦C for 15 min followed by 95 ◦C for 3 min. Before the
pre-ampliﬁcation, 2 µl of the resulting cDNA were diluted in 18 µl low EDTA TE buﬀer
(Panreac Applichem). Undiluted and diluted cDNA were stored at -20 ◦C.
3.4
qPCR primers
A complete list of primers applied for this study is listed in appendix B. The majority of
the primers have already been tested at the Translational Immunology group of the research
section Protein Science and Biotherapeutics of DTU. However new primers for six genes
(CP, C1s, C4A, MBL2 CFP, SERPINA1) were designed for the present study. For each of
the genes two diﬀerent primer pairs were designed and applied. To verify the reliability,
the expression of the separate primer pairs should be correlated. All the new primers were
designed using the online Primer3 v. 0.4.0 software with product sizes of 70-100 bp and
primer melting temperatures of 59-61 ◦C. It was attempted to design the primers so that the
primers were spanning an intron, otherwise the primers were placed on each side of a large
intron.
12
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.5
Pre-ampliﬁcation
A pre-ampliﬁcation step was included in order to subsequently secure a quantiﬁable amount
of qPCR product.
For the pre-ampliﬁcation mix, 3 µl TaqMan PreAmp Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 2
µl low TE buﬀer and 2.5 µl 200 nM primer mix were used. Afterwards, 2.5 µl diluted cDNA
was added and the tubes were incubated in the thermocycler at 95 ◦C for 10 min followed
by 17 cycles of 95 ◦C for 15 sec and 60 ◦C for 4 min for the liver samples and 21 cycles of 95
◦C for 15 sec and 60 ◦C for 4 min for the bone samples.
An exonuclease treatment step was included after the pre-ampliﬁcation to remove residual
primers. The exonuclease I (New England Biolabs) was diluted to 4 U/µl using 3.5µl RNase-
free water, 0.5µl reaction buﬀer and 1µl Exo 20U per cDNA sample. 4 µl diluted exonuclease
was added to the 10 µl pre-ampliﬁed sample and the samples were incubated in the thermo-
cycler at 37 ◦C for 30 min followed by 80 ◦C for 15 min.
The pre-ampliﬁed and exonuclease treated cDNA samples were diluted 10x in low TE buﬀer
and stored at -20 ◦C.
3.6
High-throughput RT-qPCR
High-throughput RT-qPCR was performed on the BioMarkTM HD (Fluidigm) using the
48.48 dynamic array (Fluidigm) including sample and assay loading kit (Fluidigm). A 48.48
dynamic array was applied for both the liver samples and the bone samples. First, assay
master mix was made of 2.5 µl 2x assay loading reagent and 0.25 µl low EDTA TE buﬀer.
Then, 2.8 µl of the assay master mix and 2.3 µl 20 µM speciﬁc primer pair were distributed
in wells for each primer pair in a microtiter plate. The microtiter plate was covered with foil
and stored at 4 ◦C.
Pre-sample mix was prepared with 3µl 2x TagMan Gene Expression Master mix (Applied
Biosystems), 0.3µl 20x DNA binding dye (Fluidigm), 0.3µl 20x EvaGreen and 0.9µl low
EDTA TE buﬀer. 6.4 µl pre-sample mix was added to each well of a microtiter plate together
with 1.5 µl pre-ampliﬁed cDNA. The plate was stored at 4 ◦C. Control line ﬂuid was added
to the two accumulators of the 48.48 dynamic array. The dynamic array was placed in the
IFC controller MX (Fluidigm) and the chip prime script 113x was run. Subsequently, 5 µl of
the assay mix was added to the left side of the 48.48 dynamic array and 5 µl of the sample
mix was added to the right side of the 48.48 dynamic array. The loaded 48.48 dynamic array
was checked for air bubbles and placed into the IFC controller MX again and the load mix
113x script was run.
Following the load mix script, the 48.48 dynamic array was transferred to the BioMarkTM
HD in which the qPCR was performed with the thermal protocol seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
3.7
Data processing
The qPCR data generated from the BioMarkTM HD was veriﬁed and pre-processed using the
Fluidigm Real-Time PCR Analysis software and the GenEx software. Data pre-processing
removes technical variation from the data set, making it possible to analyze biological vari-
ation between the samples.
First, the Fluidigm program was used to verify the data set by viewing and evaluating
ampliﬁcation- and melting curves for all individual 2304 qPCR reactions, including the non-
template control (NTC) and minus reverse transcriptase control (-RT). Further to calculate
the ampliﬁcation eﬃciencies for all primers based on three independent standard curves.
13
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 3.2: qPCR thermal protocol. The used thermal protocol for the 48.48 dynamic arrays on the
BioMarkT M HD. The x-axis shows the time in seconds and y-axis the temperature in degree Celsius.
Only an eﬃciency between 90-120% and a R2 >0.98 were accepted. For the primers with a
lower or higher eﬃciency, an average of the accepted primers was used.
Subsequently, the data set was analyzed using the GenEx software. Processing of data in
GenEx included adjusting of Cq values for qPCR eﬃciency, normalizing of Cq values with
reference genes, handling of missing data and performing of t-test and principle Component
Analysis (PCA).
The normalizing to reference genes was performed based on a panel of genes, which were
evaluated using the two algorithms geNorm[44] and NormFinder[45]. For the dynamic ar-
ray with the bone samples, 3 genes (RPL13A, TBP, YWHAZ) were used and for the liver
samples, 5 genes (B2M, RPL13A, PPIA, TBP, YWHAZ) were used. Following the normal-
ization, the cDNA replicates were analyzed. cDNA replicates were removed from the data
set if 20% or more data points were missing of if more than 15% of the replicates had a Cq
diﬀerence of more than 1.5. The technical replicates were averaged and missing data points
were given the highest Cq value for the speciﬁc primer assay +1. The Cq values were then
converted into relative quantities by which the sample with the highest Cq was given a value
of 1. The relative quantities were applied for analyzing fold changes of the gene regulation.
For statistical analysis the data set was converted into log2 scale. The signiﬁcantly diﬀer-
ently expressed genes between the control group and the infected group were determined by
a two-tailed unpaired t-test. The changes in the expressed genes were considered statisti-
cally and biological signiﬁcant if the p-value was < 0.05 and if the fold change (FC) between
groups was > 2 up or down regulated. PCA was also performed using the log2 scaled data.
PCAs to compare slaughter pigs and IAO pigs from the model were performed by adjust-
ing the Cq values to qPCR eﬃciencies for each dynamic array separately. Only identical
primers shared between the dynamic arrays were included. The normalizing of Cq values
with reference genes and handling of missing data were performed together in the same way
as described above. Fold changes and p-values for comparison were determined separately,
where infected slaughter pigs were compared to control slaughter pigs and infected IAO pigs,
including both pigs with and without implants, were compared to control IAO pigs. Both
control groups were scaled to one.
14
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.8
Immunohistochemistry
The slides for the histo- and immunohistochemistry were prepared and performed at the
Laboratory of the Veterinary Pathology Group, in the section for Pathobiological Sciences,
University of Copenhagen. The bone tissue was ﬁxed in formalin, followed by decalciﬁcation
for four to six weeks. The ﬁxed bones were cut into 3-4 mm thick slices, dehydrated with
ethanol and embedded in paraﬃn. Afterwards, the tissue was cut into sections of 4-5 µm,
prepared for staining with Haematoxylin and Eosin (HE), Masson Trichrome or immunos-
taining with complement C3 antibody, see ﬁgure 3.3.
The immunostaining was carried out by application of the UltraVisionTM LP Detection Sys-
tem HRP and a polyclonal rabbit C3 complement IgG antibody (BioSite-LS-C372631). The
tissue sections were deparaﬃnized and pre-treated with trypsin pH 7.8 for 30 min at 37
◦C. Subsequently, the endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by 0.6% H2O2 for 15 min
followed by blocking of unspeciﬁc binding with Ultra V Block (AH diagnostics) for 5 min.
This was followed by application of the primary antibody C3 complement, diluted 1:50 in
1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)/tris buﬀered saline (TBS) and incubated overnight at 4
◦C. For some of the slides, the primary antibody was diluted 1:100 due to a new batch and a
stronger staining. Primary antibody enhancer (AH diagnostics) was added and stored for 20
min. Then, HRP polymer (AH diagnostics) was applied to work for 30 min and the reaction
was carried out with the AEC (AH diagnostics) as chromogen. Between all the steps ex-
cept after Ultra V block, the slides were washed in TBS pH 7.6. After the immunostaining,
Mayer’s haematoxylin (VWR) was used to counterstain the sections.
Negative staining controls without and with dilutions of the primary antibody was run on
parallel sections.
A kidney from a slaughter pig with glomerulonephritis was used as a
positive staining control [46].
Figure 3.3: Overview of the used staining methods. The images are from bone tissue of the infected
slaughter pigs and show A) HE staining, B) Masson Trichrome staining and C) IHC stain of C3.
The presence of positive immunoreactions was semi-quantiﬁed in osteoclasts and leukocytes
by a scoring system based on ten high-power ﬁelds for each cell type. A high-power ﬁeld had
a ﬁeld of vision of 40x objective (400x magniﬁcation) and all positive reactions lying clearly
inside the cells were counted. No distinction has been made between the types of leukocytes.
After the scoring, a t-test was performed to determine if the amount of C3 positive cells was
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between the groups (p-value < 0.05). Before the t-test, normality and
homogeneity of variance were tested. The tests were made in RStudio.
15
==PAGE:23==
4. Results
The results consist of four sections with appertaining subsections. The ﬁrst section, quality
control and data processing, contains results from both the bone and liver samples. The
qPCR results are divided in the following sections; gene expression results from the bone
and gene expression results from the liver. The last section, histology, contains the results
from the histo- and immunohistochemistry. A comparison of the results from the IAO model
is included in the relevant sections.
4.1
Quality control and data processing
RNA was successfully extracted from the bone and liver tissue. The mean and range of
concentrations, purity and integrity of extracted RNA are listed in table 4.1. The RNA con-
centrations from the liver samples were higher than for the bone samples. The purity of the
samples was determined by the 260/280 and 260/230 absorbance ratios and the mean was
for both the bone and liver around 2. The RNA integrity, expressed by RIN, were generally
a bit low for the bone and liver samples, indicating the RNA were partly degraded. RNA
from four liver samples were extracted again due to a very low RIN. All four samples showed
a better RIN after the second extraction. Thus, the original samples were discarded and
the new extracted RNA were used in the following analysis. An overview of the individual
results is shown in appendix C.1 and C.2.
Table 4.1: Means and ranges of RNA amount, purity and quality.
Bone
ng/µl
A260/280
A260/230
RIN
Mean
394.4
2.13
1.84
5.3
Range
152.1-983.4
1.95-2.18
0.67-2.20
2.2-9.3
Liver
ng/µl
A260/280
A260/230
RIN
Mean
2110.4
2.11
2.03
6.7
Range
832.9-2919.3
2.07-2.13
1.15-2.19
4-8.9
The dynamic array with the bone samples showed ampliﬁcation eﬃciencies between 86-114%
with a mean of 98%. The ampliﬁcation eﬃciencies for the run of the dynamic array with the
liver samples were for all the primers relatively high ranging from 109-119% with a mean of
116%. During veriﬁcation of all individual melting curves, three primers (IL23, IL17, CSF3)
for the bone dynamic array and 6 primers (IL6, IL1A, IFNB1, CFB, CFD, CFP) for the liver
dynamic array were removed from the data set due to too many samples with wrong melting
temperatures or a too low Cq value for the -RT, which indicating the presence of genomic
DNA. Removed primers due to for many samples with incorrect melting temperatures had
very high Cq values, indicating very low concentrations of RNA in the samples.
Furthermore, two more primers (IFNG, IL11) and two technical cDNA replicates from the
dynamic array of the bone and two more primers (IL1B, C5AR1) and three technical cDNA
replicates from the dynamic array of the liver were removed from the further analysis. Either
due to 20% or more missing data points or more than 15% of the replicates showing a Cq
diﬀerence of more than 1.5. Appendix D.1 and D.2 show the heat maps.
The ﬁnal number of primers left after initial pre-processing and quality control include 43
and 39 primers (including reference genes and several primers for the same gene) for gene
16
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
expressing changes between control and infected slaughter pigs in the bone and liver respec-
tively.
4.2
Gene expression results from the bone
The analysis of the bone tissue is based on 34 genes without the reference genes, and where
multiple primers existed for the same gene, the primer with the lowest diﬀerence between
the two cDNA replicates was selected for downstream analysis. Out of the 34 genes, 17 of
them showed to be signiﬁcantly regulated (p-value < 0.05 and FC > 2) between the control
and infected slaughter pigs. Only a selection of the genes is described in the following section
but for a complete list see appendix E.1.
4.2.1
PCA
PCA of data from all 34 genes (the used genes are listed in appendix F.1) was performed to
get an overview of the total variation of mRNA expression proﬁles between the two slaughter
pig groups, the infected and the controls. The PCA in ﬁgure 4.1 illustrates that the pigs in
the infected group (red) and the samples in the control group (green) are clustering in two
separate groups.
Figure 4.1: PCA of gene expression in the bone. The PCA is based on 34 genes and compares infected
(red) and control slaughter pigs (green). The PCA was mean center scaled.
4.2.2
Proinﬂammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins
mRNA proﬁles of ﬁve acute phase proteins in the bone were investigated, of which four of
them (SAA1, SAA3, C3, PIGMAP) were signiﬁcantly upregulated compared to the control
pigs, see ﬁgure 4.2.
Especially the genes SAA1 and SAA3 were highly upregulated with fold changes over 300.
The bar diagram below also includes the proinﬂammatory cytokines, IL1A and IL1B, where
IL1A is higher upregulated. For SAA1, SAA3, IL1A and IL1B a very large variation is seen
among the infected pigs.
17
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.2: Regulation of proinﬂammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins. The graphs show
the relative fold change between control slaughter pigs (green) scaled to one and infected slaughter pigs (red).
Note the graps have diﬀerent fold changes on the y-axis. Error bars: SEM; Signiﬁcant diﬀerence: * indicates
p-value < 0.05; ** indicates p-value < 0.01; *** indicates p-value < 0.001. A) Relative quantities up to 600.
B) Relative quantities up to 30.
4.2.3
Genes involved in bone remodeling
A broad selection of genes, which could be involved in bone remodeling was investigated and
some of them are visualized in ﬁgure 4.3. MMP1 and ACAN were highly upregulated in the
infected pigs compared to the control with fold changes around 290 and 150 respectively.
Figure 4.3: Regulation of genes involved in bone remodeling. The graphs show the relative fold
change between control slaughter pigs (green) scaled to one and infected slaughter pigs (red). Error bars:
SEM; Signiﬁcant diﬀerence: * indicates p-value < 0.05; ** indicates p-value < 0.01; *** indicates p-value <
0.001. A) Relative quantities up to 500. B) Relative quantities up to 20.
18
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
For these, a substantial spread was seen within the infected pigs. The genes PTN, SOX9
and CTSK were moderately but still signiﬁcantly upregulated in the infected pigs. Unex-
pectedly, no signiﬁcant gene regulation of TNFSF11 (RANKL), TNFRSF11B (OPG) and
TNFRSF11A (RANK) was seen between infected and control.
4.2.4
Comparison of bone gene expression in slaughter pigs and pigs from
the IAO model
To examine how the gene expression in the bone of pigs from the IAO model corresponded
to the infected slaughter pigs, a PCA was constructed. The PCA in ﬁgure 4.4 contains the
above two groups of slaughter pigs (square) and ﬁve groups of the IAO model (circle) and is
based on 31 genes. A list of the genes is found in appendix F.2. As shown in the ﬁgure, the
control pigs from the model (light green) are clustering together with the control slaughter
pigs (dark green). In that connection, a much greater variation was seen between the control
slaughter pigs compared to the control pigs from the model. The two pigs with an implant
inoculated with S. aureus (dark blue) are clustering together with the infected slaughter
pigs (red), while three out of four pigs inoculated with S. aureus without an implant cluster
between the control and infected pigs. The pigs inoculated with saline (purple and pink) are
clustering together with the control slaughter pigs.
Figure 4.4: PCA of gene expression in the bone in slaughter pigs and pigs from the IAO model.
The PCA is based on 31 genes and compares slaughter pigs (square) and pigs from the IAO model (circle).
The PCA was mean center scaled.
While the PCA provides an overview of how the overall expression proﬁle of the IAO model
is consistent with that of the slaughter pigs, it is also relevant to see how the expression
of individually genes is regulated. Table 4.2 shows some of the most upregulated genes for
the slaughter pigs and pigs inoculated with S. aureus. For the acute phase proteins (SAA1,
SAA3, C3, PIGMAP) and PTN, a higher upregulation was seen in the pigs from the IAO
model than in the infected slaughter pigs. In contrast, a larger upregulation was seen for the
proinﬂammatory cytokines (IL1A, IL1B) and ACAN in the slaughter pigs (not all signiﬁcant
in the pigs from the IAO model).
With regard to TNFSF11, TNFRSF11B and TNFRSF11A, no signiﬁcant regulation was
seen in the pigs from the IAO model (p-value < 0.05 and FC > 2).
19
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Table 4.2: Comparison of fold changes and p-values in infected slaughter pigs and infected pigs
from the IAO model (both pigs with and without implant). Fold changes and p-values are for the
infected slaughter pigs in relation to the control slaughter pigs (scaled to one) and for the inoculated S. aureus
pigs in relation to the control IAO pigs (scaled to one).
Infected slaughter pigs
S. aureus IAO pigs
FC
P-value
FC
P-value
SAA1
382.28
3.30E-08
779.86
3.26E-3
SAA3
316.69
1.23E-06
1246.99
3.02E-3
C3
15.23
1.01E-05
22.30
9.82E-4
PIGMAP
4.09
2.90E-04
6.27
0.03
IL1A
131.72
6.51E-05
10.59
3.52E-3
IL1B
17.21
0.01
4.91
0.02
PTN
13.56
1.25E-05
116.40
2.47E-3
ACAN
152.84
4.64E-04
30.19
0.01
TNFSF11
2.66
0.13
1.99
0.02
TNFRSF11B
2.09
0.41
0.66
0.09
TNFRSF11A
1.64
0.92
0.78
0.19
4.3
Gene expression results from the liver
The mRNA expression in the liver diﬀered greatly from that in the bone. 27 genes were left
for analysis after data processing and after removing of reference genes and multiple primers
for the same gene. Only three genes were found to be signiﬁcantly regulated (p-value < 0.05
and FC > 2) between the control and infected slaughter pigs. A complete list can be found
in appendix E.2.
4.3.1
PCA
A PCA was constructed and reﬂected that only a few genes were signiﬁcant regulated between
the infected (red) and control slaughter pigs (green), see ﬁgure 4.5. The PCA was based on
all 27 genes (see appendix F.3) and did not showed a clear clustering of the two groups.
Figure 4.5: PCA of gene expression in the liver. The PCA is based on 27 genes and compares infected
(red) and control slaughter pigs (green). The PCA was mean center scaled.
20
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.3.2
The hepatic immune response
A slight upregulation of the three signiﬁcantly regulated genes (PIGMAP, CRP, CFP) is
observed in the infected slaughter pigs compared to the controls, see ﬁgure 4.6. The three
acute phase proteins that were highly upregulated in the bone (SAA1, SAA3, C3) were not
found to be signiﬁcantly regulated in the liver.
Figure 4.6: Regulation of genes in the liver. The graph shows the relative fold change between control
slaughter pigs (green) scaled to one and infected slaughter pigs (red). Error bars: SEM; Signiﬁcant diﬀerence:
* indicates p-value < 0.05.
4.3.3
Hepatic gene expression in slaughter pigs compared to pigs from the
IAO model
In order to investigate whether the mRNA expression proﬁles in the liver of the pigs from
the IAO model clusters together or resemble those of the slaughter pigs, a new PCA was
performed, see ﬁgure 4.7. The constructed PCA is based on 10 genes (without reference
genes) as only these genes were shared between the two dynamic arrays. For a list of the
used genes see appendix F.4. As shown in ﬁgure 4.7, slaughter pigs (square) and pigs from
the diﬀerent IAO groups (circle) are separated in two clusters. These clusters are deﬁned by
type of pigs (IOA and slaughter) rather than infection.
The fold changes and the p-values for the genes in the infected IOA pigs showed, as the
infected slaughter pigs, only slightly signiﬁcant regulation for a few of the genes (data not
shown).
21
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.7: PCA of hepatic gene expression in slaughter pigs and pigs from the IAO model.
The PCA is based on 10 genes and compares slaughter pigs (square) and pigs from the IAO model (circle).
The PCA was mean center scaled.
4.4
Histology
The last section contains the results from the slides of the diﬀerent staining methods. The
ﬁrst subsection describes the histopathological ﬁndings in the infected slaughter pigs with
osteomyelitis and the second subsection shows immunohistochemically positive C3 and a
scoring of C3 positive osteoclasts and leukocytes in slaughter pigs and in the model of IAO.
4.4.1
Chronic osteomyelitis of the infected slaughter pigs
The results of the bone tissue from the HE staining showed substantial diﬀerences between
the infected slaughter pigs and the control pigs from the model of IAO. Figure 4.8A shows
how the healthy trabecular bone from the control pigs is organized and looks, whereas ﬁgure
4.8B shows how large areas of the trabecular bone are aﬀected by osteomyelitis in the infected
slaughter pigs.
Figure 4.8: Healthy and osteomyelitic bone tissue. A) HE stain of healthy bone trabeculae from
control pig from the model of IAO (2x objective). B) He stain of osteomylitic bone from an infected slaughter
pig (0.16x objective).
22
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
The bone tissue of the infected slaughter pigs consisted often of a cavity, as shown in ﬁg-
ure 4.8B surrounded by a rich layer of leukocytes and/or ﬁbroblasts. In generally for all
the slides, the bone tissue was dominated by accumulation of inﬂammatory cells, see ﬁgure
4.9A, and large areas of granulation tissue and ﬁbrous connective tissue, see ﬁgure 4.9B. Ad-
ditionally, the bone tissue consisted of small areas of necrotic trabecular bone, with empty
lacunas, see ﬁgure 4.9C. In several of the slides, formation of cartilage was also found, see
ﬁgure 4.9D. Varying amount of osteoblast proliferation was seen in the slides and generally
few osteoclasts were found in most of the infected slaughter pigs.
The histopathological ﬁndings indicated a chronic state of osteomyelitis in the infected
slaughter pigs.
Figure 4.9: Histopathological ﬁndings of the infected slaughter pigs. A) Accumulation of inﬂam-
matory cells, HE stain. B) Fibrous connective tissue, Masson Trichrome stain. C) Necrotic bone trabeculae,
HE stain. D) Cartilage formation, HE stain. All images are 4x objective.
4.4.2
Immunohistochemical C3 positive cells
The results of the immunohistochemical C3 staining showed diﬀerent positive cell types with
varying intensity of the red reaction product. The clearly dominated type of C3 expressing
cells in the bone sections from infected slaughter pigs were leukocytes and osteoclasts, which
is also why the scoring system is based on these two cell types. The scoring results of the
C3 positive osteoclasts and leukocytes are visualized in ﬁgure 4.10. As mentioned in the
previous section, relatively few osteoclasts were present in the bone tissue from the infected
slaughter pigs, but almost all the osteoclasts in the C3 stained slides of both the control
pigs from the IAO model and the infected slaughter pigs were positive. The scoring showed
a signiﬁcant increase in positive osteoclastic immunoreactions in the infected slaughter pigs
compared to the control pigs from the IAO model, see ﬁgure 4.10A. However, a large spread
was observed for the infected slaughter pigs and specially two pigs had a markedly higher
number of osteoclasts.
In addition to the infected slaughter pigs, osteoclasts and leukocytes were counted in four
23
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
pigs from the model of IAO with inserted implants, two combined with inoculation of saline
and two combined with inoculation of S. aureus. Due to results from only two pigs in each
group and a large spread, it was not possible to conclude how the pigs with implants repre-
sented the amount of osteoclasts in the infected slaughter pigs with osteomyelitis.
Contrary to the osteoclasts, which were mainly lying along the present trabecular bone, see
ﬁgure 4.11C, the C3 expressing leukocytes were mainly found close to the osteomyelitic cav-
ity or in the center of the inﬂammation. Here, large areas of C3 positive leukocytes were
found, see ﬁgure 4.11B. In other areas of the slides and in the sections from the control pigs,
the C3 expressed leukocytes were found more as single cells as shown in ﬁgure 4.11A.
The immunohistochemical C3 results from the leukocytes revealed an intense signiﬁcant in-
crease in positive C3 in the infected slaughter pigs, see ﬁgure 4.10B. The spread between the
individual pigs was notable, however the pig with the lowest amount of C3 expressing leuko-
cytes still showed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the control pigs and the infected slaughter
pigs. Like for the osteoclasts, it was not possible to see a tendency in positive leukocytes
for the pigs with implants inoculated with S. aureus, as one of the pigs showed an amount
of positive leukocytes close to the controls and the other an amount close to the infected
slaughter pigs. However, the pigs inoculated with saline showed an amount of C3 positive
leukocytes close to the control pigs with less spread in the group.
Figure 4.10: Immunohistochemical C3 expression in bone. Scatter plots of C3 positive osteoclasts (A)
and leukocytes (B) in slaughter pigs (square) and pigs from the IAO model (circle). Signiﬁcant diﬀerence: *
indicates p-value < 0.05; ** indicates p-value < 0.01; *** indicates p-value < 0.001. The horizontal lines show
the mean of each group. The number of C3 positive osteoclasts and leukocytes are based on ten high-power
ﬁelds (40x objective).
Besides C3 expressing osteoclasts and leukocytes, other types of cells in the bone tissue
showed a red reaction product. However, the other types of cells were much less common
in the sections. The other types of positive C3 cells included osteoblasts, osteocytes and
ﬁbroblasts, se ﬁgure 4.11D-F.
24
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.11: Immunopositive C3 cells. The images are from the infected slaughter pigs except ﬁgure D,
which is from a pig with an implant combined with inoculation of S. aureus. A) Single C3 positive leukocytes.
B) Large area of C3 positive leukocytes. C) C3 expressing osteoclasts along bone trabeculae. D) C3 expressing
osteoblasts. E) C3 positive osteocytes. F) Positive ﬁbroblasts in the connective tissue. All images are 20x
objective
25
==PAGE:33==
5. Discussion
5.1
The local and hepatic gene regulation
The immune response to bone infections were investigated locally in the bone and in the
liver. The results from the bone were ﬁrst obtained and showed a signiﬁcant (p-value < 0.05
and FC > 2) upregulation of many genes in the infected slaughter pigs compared to the con-
trol slaughter pigs, see ﬁgure 4.2, 4.3 and appendix E.1. The signiﬁcantly upregulated genes
included among others proinﬂammatory cytokines, acute phase proteins and genes involved
in bone remodeling. In contrast to the bone, the results from the liver showed almost no
regulation between the infected and the control slaughter pigs. Only three genes (PIGMAP,
CRP, CFP) were signiﬁcantly regulated in the liver, see ﬁgure 4.6. As a strong inﬂammatory
response was found in the bone and only a slight regulation was shown for three genes in the
liver, indicated that the immune response to infections in the bones occurs locally and does
not induce a large systemic response.
In the bone, it was expected to see the proinﬂammatory cytokines IL1A and IL1B upregulated
at the site of infection as these are produced by immune cells during tissue damage or
infection to initiate the inﬂammatory response [7, 22, 47]. The histopathological ﬁndings
also supported that the bone tissue from the infected slaughter pigs was dominated by
accumulation of inﬂammatory cells.
Surprisingly, all the examined acute phase proteins except the negative acute phase protein
TF were signiﬁcant upregulated in the infected bone tissue. This fueled an interest for the
expression of acute phase proteins in the liver. In the liver mainly acute phase proteins,
cytokines involved in the acute phase response and proteins of the complement system were
investigated. Acute phase proteins are known and described to be produced mainly in the
liver[24, 48, 49] and therefore it was surprising that only PIGMAP, CRP, CFP were regulated
in the liver, see ﬁgure 4.6. In agreement with the present study, extrahepatic production of
SAA2, PIGMAP and CRP in diﬀerent tissue in pigs has been reported after experimental
bacterial infection[50]. Another study has shown expression of among other SAA and CRP
in twenty diﬀerent tissues from healthy chicken[51]. For both studies, hepatic expression of
the same acute phase proteins was observed. Previous studies, using pigs and mice, detecting
regulation of acute phase protein in the liver have been within hours or days from the start
of bacterial infection [52, 53]. Others also show that high levels of acute phase proteins such
as SAA, CRP and PIGMAP decrease few days after bacterial inoculation in pigs [54, 55].
Based on these ﬁndings, it is possible that a larger regulation in the liver would have been
seen in the beginning of the infection in the present study. The speciﬁc acute phase proteins
are discussed further below.
The highly extrahepatically expressed acute phase proteins including SAA1, SAA3 and C3
suggest that they may have an important role in relation to the infection and that diﬀerent
cell types in the bone have the potential to produce acute phase proteins.
Which cell types that are positive of the acute phase protein, C3 in the bone, were examined
in this study. Likewise, in the bone, it was conﬁrmed that mRNA of C3 was translated
into proteins. For the rest of the genes, it must be noted that the investigated presence of
mRNA provides no information on whether the mRNA is translated into proteins or whether
it will be functional translated proteins[38]. Beside conﬁrming the translation into proteins,
it could be interesting to see the distribution of the protein and which cells producing them
for many of the other highly regulated genes in the bone. These results could also give an
indication of the function of the protein.
26
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
5.2
The acute phase response
C3 was one of the strongest upregulated acute phase proteins of the bone in the infected
slaughter pigs compared to controls, see ﬁgure 4.2B. C3 expression in the bone of mice is
observed in a previous study using qPCR. The study showed that the gene expression of C3
in the bone was higher for ovariectomy-treated mice compared to sham-operated mice[56].
In the present study, the presence of C3 in the bone tissue was conﬁrmed by IHC. The
distribution of various complement proteins, including C3, has been examined in tibias and
femurs from 19-day-old fetal rats. The study showed that C3 was found in cartilage[57].
In the present study, C3 was not found in cartilage but, in various other cell types (osteo-
clasts, leukocytes, osteoblasts, osteocytes and ﬁbroblasts), see ﬁgure 4.11. Osteoclasts and
leukocytes were the most frequently found C3 expressing cells in the bone tissue sections.
Specially, C3 expressing leukocytes are found in other studies, which include in vitro ﬁndings
of C3 expressing macrophages [58] and polymorphonuclear leukocytes[59] from humans. An
in vivo study revealed that osteoclasts from mice can secrete C3. This suggesting was based
on several investigations. For example showed a knock down of the C3 gene in osteoclasts a
decrease in the cleaved product C3a[56]. The local production by diﬀerent cells type suggest
C3 could have speciﬁc functions dependent on the location and the expressing cells.
The scoring of C3 positive osteoclasts and leukocytes was compared in the infected slaughter
pigs and control IAO pigs from the model. It should not have an inﬂuence on the bone
tissue that the control pigs were from the model and not slaughter pigs as both are healthy
bone [personal communication with the Veterinary Pathology Group]. The results showed
a major increase in C3 expressing leukocytes in the infected slaughter pigs compared to the
control pigs, see ﬁgure 4.10. These were primarily found in the center of the inﬂammation.
This makes sense as the immune cells try to clear the infection and the cleaved products
of C3 (C3a and C3b) induce proinﬂammatory signals, act as opsonin, chemoattractant and
component of the further complement cascade, resulting in MAC and lysis of the cell[31].
The diﬀerence in immunopositive C3 osteoclasts between the infected slaughter pigs and the
IAO control pigs was smaller than for the leukocytes. Several studies indicate that the com-
plement system is not only a defense system against pathogens but might also be involved
in bone homeostasis and bone disorders. The complement system has especially been found
to play a role in osteoclast- and osteoblast diﬀerentiation[56, 60, 61]. One of the studies
shows that C3 deﬁciency mice generated fewer osteoclasts than the wild type[60]. Similarly,
Matsuoka et al showed that expression of C3 in mice was increased during osteoclastogenesis.
Further, the study found that osteoclasts secrete C3 and the osteoclast-derived C3a stimu-
lates osteoblast diﬀerentiation, suggesting a coupling factor in bone remodeling[56]. The last
study, Ignatius et al, was an in vitro with human mesenchymal stem cells, osteoblasts and
osteoclasts. The study investigated the cleaved products of the complement system, C3a
and C5a, and its receptors. The ﬁndings indicated that C3a and C5a stimulate osteoclast
formation and suggest that the complement system may increase the number of osteoclasts
in a proinﬂammatory environment, for example during bone healing or in inﬂammatory bone
disorders[61]. These ﬁndings are consistent with the increase in C3 positive osteoclasts in the
infected slaughter pigs found in the present study. However, it is important to note that a
large variation was seen among the pigs and that the osteoclast and osteoblast related genes
(TNFSF11, TNFRSF11B, TNFRSF11A) were not signiﬁcantly regulated in the results from
the qPCR (discussed in the next section).
One of the few signiﬁcantly upregulated genes in the liver was CFP, which is a component
of the alternative pathway in the complement system. It can increase the stability of the C3
convertase (C3bBb) by binding to C3b and prevents cleavage by Factor H and I. The major
27
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
source of CFP is neutrophils but also monocytes, T cells and bone marrow progenitor cell
line can produce CFP[62]. Since this is one of the only genes regulated in the liver this could
have an important function. Examination of gene expression of CFP and more components
of the complement system in the bone could provide new insights to the inﬂuence of the
complement system on infection and inﬂammation in the bone.
The gene expression of all four SAA genes (SAA1, SAA2, SAA3, SAA4) were investigated
in the liver, whereas only SAA1 and SAA3 were included on the bone array. Both SAA1
and SAA3 were increased in the liver of infected slaughter pigs compared to the control, but
the p-value was only nearly signiﬁcant (p=0.08 and p=0.07, respectively). In the bone both
SAA1 and SAA3 were signiﬁcant upregulated, see ﬁgure 4.2A. A lot of papers have examined
the expression of the SAA genes in various tissues from diﬀerent animals[63]. However, little
is known about the expressed isoforms in pigs[28]. Studies using pigs have shown that SAA2
is mainly expressed the liver[25, 50], while SAA3 is found to be produced in extrahepatic tis-
sues[25, 64]. According to these ﬁndings, it makes sense that SAA3 is highly upregulated in
the bone and not the liver. SAA2 is not signiﬁcantly regulated in the liver, but as described
above, this could be explained by the bone infections do not induce a large systemic response
or due to the time for sample collection. It could be interesting to see whether SAA2 and
SAA4 was regulated in the bone.
Several possible functions of SAA have been suggested. For example, studies have demon-
strated that SAA1 puriﬁed from human can bind to many gram-negative bacteria and func-
tion as an opsonin. However, it was also shown that SAA1 did not bind gram-positive bac-
teria[65, 66]. The slaughter pigs were infected with both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria, so it is possible that SAA in the bone works as an opsonin. Another proposed im-
mune related function of SAA is acting as a chemoattractant, which have been demonstrated
in vitro by human SAA1, where SAA1 was shown to induce migration, adhesion and tissue
inﬁltration of monocytes and polymorphonuclear Leukocytes[67]. This is consistent with the
accumulation of immune cells found in the bone tissue in this study.
The last two acute phase proteins signiﬁcantly regulated in the present study is CRP and
PIGMAP. Both have previously been found to be highly upregulated in liver tissue from
infected pigs using qPCR[50, 52].
5.3
Histopathological ﬁndings and genes involved in bone re-
modeling
Beside acute phase proteins, the qPCR results from the bone included diﬀerential expression
of several genes involved in bone remodeling. Especially, regulation of the genes TNFSF11
(RANKL), TNFRSF11B (OPG) and TNFRSF11A (RANK) was expected as these genes play
a central role in osteoclast diﬀerentiation and activity, and thereby bone degradation[12].
As substantial bone loss was seen in the osteomyelitic lesion, it was expected to see an
upregulation of TNFSF11 (RANKL) in the infected slaughter pigs compared to the control
pigs, but no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found for any of the genes, see ﬁgure 4.3.
The results from the histology also surprisingly showed few osteoclasts in the slides in the
infected slaughter pigs and were thus consistent with the qPCR results.
The scoring of
C3 positive osteoclasts showed a small increase in osteoclasts (all found osteoclasts seemed
to express C3) in the infected slaughter pigs compared to the control IAO pigs. However,
both the slides from the histo- and immunohistochemistry showed that large areas of the
trabecular bone tissue was replaced by inﬂammatory cells, granulation tissue and ﬁbrous
connective tissue.
Here, no osteoclasts were found but instead they were present along
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
trabecular bone up to these areas. The osteomyelitis is in a chronic state in the infected
slaughter pigs, so it is possible that by looking at the gene expression and the histology
earlier or in the beginning of the infection, more osteoclasts would have been found.
Osteoclasts are described to be the bone resorbing cells. However, the results of the present
study suggest that other cells or proteins could be involved in the bone destruction. The
gene, CTSK coding for a lysosomal cysteine proteinase was showed to be a little upregulated
in infected slaughter pigs compared to the controls, see ﬁgure 4.3B. CTSK is involved in bone
remodeling and is required for bone resorption by osteoclasts. It is predominantly expressed
by osteoclasts and degrades the organic matrix of the bone[68]. The moderate fold change
of CTSK in the present study is in agreement with few osteoclasts and the gene expression.
The gene of MMP1 was found to be almost as highly regulated as SAA, see ﬁgure 4.3A.
MMP1 is an interstitial collagenase, which breaks down the interstitial collagens of types
I, II, and III. Overactivation of MMPs has previously been associated with various diseases
involving matrix degradation such as arthritis, periodontal diseases, osteogenesis imperfecta,
Alzheimer’s disease and tumor invasion and metastasis[69]. These ﬁndings, together with
the high upregulation, indicate that MMP1 might have an important function in relation to
the bone loss of the infected slaughter pigs.
Upregulation was also observed in the genes, ACAN and SOX9, see ﬁgure 4.3. ACAN is
one of the major components of cartilage[70] and SOX9 is a transcription factor required for
cartilage formation[71]. Upregulation of genes involved in cartilage formation is consistent
with the results from the histology, which showed formation of cartilage several places in
the bone tissue in the infected slaughter pigs. Cartilage formation is often associated with
bone growth[9] but could also be an eﬀect of the chronic inﬂammation seen in several of the
infected pigs.
A high fold change for the PTN gene was also found in the infected slaughter pigs, see ﬁgure
4.3. PTN is a secreted heparin-binding growth factor and its role in bone formation and
remodeling have been investigated in several studies[72]. One study using rats shows that
PTN is upregulated on the surface of damaged bone where recruited osteoblasts deposit
new osteoid by IHC[73] This is in agreement with the histological results from the present
study where varying amount of osteoblast proliferation was seen. Studies have also observed
expression of PTN in relation to cartilage formation[73, 74]. Yang et al showed in vitro
cartilage and bone formation by human bone marrow cells in the presence of PTN but not
in absence[74] and Imai et al found expression of PTN in developing cartilage in bones from
rats[73]. These ﬁndings indicate that PTN could be involved in cartilage formation, which
is consistent with increased expression of the genes ACAN and SOX9 and the histochemical
results.
5.4
Experimental IAO pigs as a model for osteomyelitis
The results from the slaughter pigs, obtained from qPCR and IHC, were compared to results
from pigs of the IAO model. The comparative PCA from the bone, see ﬁgure 4.4 showed
that the control slaughter pigs were clustering together with the control IAO pigs and that
the infected slaughter pigs were clustering together with the infected IAO pigs with implants.
The infected IAO pigs without implant were clustering somewhere in the middle of the in-
fected pigs and the control pigs, indicating insertion of implants aﬀected the gene expression.
Comparison of individual genes showed that the acute phase proteins were more upregulated
in the infected IAO pigs than slaughter pigs, see table 4.2. Acute phase proteins are known
to rapidly increase and previously ﬁndings show that concentration of SAA and PIGMAP
in pigs infected with S. aureus peak already at day two and ﬁve in serum, respectively[55].
Samples from the IAO pigs have been collected ﬁfteen days after implant insertion and S.
29
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
aureus inoculation, so it is expected that a higher fold change is found for them compared
to the infected slaughter pigs, which have been infected a longer time. On the other hand,
the proinﬂammatory cytokines ILA and ILB showed a higher fold change in the infected
slaughter pigs compared to the infected IAO pigs. This is properly due to more immune cells
present at the chronic infection in the slaughter pigs. Nevertheless, the most upregulated
genes revealed to be the same for both types of pigs.
The comparative PCA of the hepatic gene expression in ﬁgure 4.7 showed that the pigs were
clustering not based on infection but relative to type of pigs (IAO and slaughter). A reason
for this could be the low gene regulation found for both IAO pigs and slaughter pigs. Thus,
the clusters are deﬁned by standard levels of the genes and can be diﬀerent due to diﬀerent
age, weight or other parameters. For all the qPCR results, it is also important to note that
it is not possible to make a direct comparison between IAO pigs and slaughter pigs as the
samples are from diﬀerent dynamic arrays.
Compared to the results from the IHC, there were too few pigs and a too large variation to
conclude whether the IAO pigs with implants corresponded to the slaughter pigs, see ﬁgure
4.10.
The results obtained from pigs with osteomyelitis can also be relevant in relation to humans
as the anatomy, genetics and immune system of the pigs are closely related to the humans[5].
This makes the pig an excellent animal to study infectious diseases. However, it is important
that the animal models reﬂect the mechanism of the disease in order to gain a better under-
standing of the inﬂammatory response and to ﬁnd better diagnostic tools and treatments.
Based on primarily the gene expression proﬁles of the bone, the experimental infected IAO
pigs correspond well to the infected slaughter pigs with hematogenous osteomyelitis. The
results indicate that in spite of diﬀerent infection routes, bacterial pathogen and infection
period the gene expression proﬁles are similar.
5.5
Tissue from slaughter pigs as sample material
The sample material for the present study consisted primarily of tissue from slaughter pigs
collected at a slaughter house. After the RNA extraction, the low RIN for especially the
bone samples, see table 4.1 and appendix C.1 revealed that the RNA was partly degraded.
Partially degraded RNA may inﬂuence the qPCR assay’s sensitivity and validity[38]. The
RNA integrity has previously been shown to directly impact the Cq value and thus the reli-
ability[75]. In the present study, the sample with the lowest RIN (2.2) was from one of the
control pigs, Cq values for this sample were generally very high (low expression) or unde-
tectable for both genes of interest and reference genes. The consistent high Cq values could
be a result of the very low RIN. After data veriﬁcation and pre-processing, the rest of the
samples with RINs above 3 did not seem to be aﬀected by the low RNA integrity. Further,
some studies conclude that moderately degraded RNA can be reliable as long as the PCR
product does not have a length of more than around 200bp and the expression is normalized
against several validated internal reference genes[39, 75]. The low RIN for several of the
samples, both from control and infected pigs, indicated that this was probably due to the
handling of the samples as RNA integrity is easily aﬀected by sample collection and pro-
cessing methods[38] and that a slaughter house does not provide optimal sampling conditions.
The expression of many of the highly regulated genes showed large variation between the
infected slaughter pigs, ﬁgure 4.2A and 4.3A. This could be a result of the diﬀerent bacterial
infection in the diﬀerent bone, duration of the infection, as well as gender of the pigs. With a
30
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
larger sample material including more pigs, it could be interesting to study the exact impact
on gene expression of the above mentioned factors. A study has for example shown that
acute phase proteins were inﬂuenced by age and sex in G¨ottingen Minipigs[76].
It is also possible that the pigs have other not discovered infections, which may inﬂuence
the expression of some genes in the liver. This could also be the case in the control pigs.
For example, the pigs could be stressed in connection with slaughtering and therefore have a
higher level of acute phase proteins. Studies investigating the eﬀect on acute phase protein
expression in farm animals in relation to transport showed an increase in for example HP,
CRP, SAA and PIGMAP in serum[77, 78]. High levels of acute phase proteins in the control
pigs could be another reason for the low hepatic fold change of expression between infected
and control slaughter pigs seen in the present study. However, as only few hepatic genes
were found to be regulated in the IAO pigs, the low hepatic gene regulation is probably due
to a minor systemic response.
31
==PAGE:39==
6. Conclusion and perspectives
The investigation of innate immune factors in bone and liver tissue from infected slaughter
pigs showed a strong inﬂammatory response in the bone and only a slight regulation in the
liver for three genes. The three genes were CFP, a component of the complement system,
and the acute phase proteins, PIGMAP and CRP.
The acute phase proteins in the bone, especially SAA1, SAA3 and C3 were found to be
highly upregulated in the infected slaughter pigs compared to the controls. In the study,
SAA was suggested to act as an opsonin or a chemoattractant in the bone. Translation of
C3 into proteins was conﬁrmed by IHC. The results showed an increase in C3 positive os-
teoclasts and leukocytes in the infected slaughter pigs compared to control IAO pigs. Based
on the results and previous ﬁndings, C3 positive leukocytes were suggested to be positive
as the cleaved product of C3 (C3a and C3b) may induce proinﬂammatory signals, act as
opsonin, chemoattractant and formation of MAC and thereby lysis of the pathogen cells.
The expressed C3 in osteoclasts were presumed to be involved in osteoclast diﬀerentiation.
Unexpectedly, no regulation of TNFSF11, TNFRSF11B and TNFRSF11A was found in the
infected slaughter pigs. This was in agreement with the histology results, where few osteo-
clasts were found. It was expected to see more osteoclasts in the bone tissue of infected
slaughter pigs due large areas of degraded bone. Instead a high upregulation was seen for
the interstitial collagenase gene, MMP1. The exact function of MMP1 in this study is still
unclear but the high upregulation suggests an important function in relation to the infected
and degraded bone.
Further, an upregulation of the genes ACAN, SOX9 and PTN was
found in infected slaughter pigs compared to the control slaughter pigs. All three genes were
suggested to play a role in the found cartilage formation.
The aim of the present study was also to consider how the immune response of IAO pigs
corresponded to the immune response of the slaughter pigs. The gene expression proﬁle of
the experimental infected IAO pigs showed to be very similar to that of the infected slaugh-
ter pigs with hematogenous osteomyelitis. This was in spite of diﬀerent infection routes,
bacterial pathogen and infection period.
Based on the results from the present study, it can be concluded that the immune response
of infected pigs with osteomyelitis does not induce a large systemic response but is located
in the bone. The results obtained in this study can be relevant in order to get a better
understand the inﬂammatory response of osteomyelitis and in long terms and future studies
to reduce treatment failures and improve prevention and diagnosis of osteomyelitis.
In future studies, it could be relevant to investigate more acute phase proteins in the bone.
This study showed a signiﬁcant upregulation of all positive acute phase proteins studied and
by including more it is possible that several of them would be regulated. IHC of several of
the highly regulated genes, such as SAA and MMP1, could provide further information of
their distribution and expression and give a further indication of the function of the proteins.
Based on the present study, the complement system appears to play an important role in
the inﬂammation of the bone. Investigation of more of the components in the bone could
provide further knowledge of a larger part of the complement system and its role in infected
bones. Lastly, a large variation was observed for many of the genes in the slaughter pigs, both
control and infected. By including more pigs in the investigation, the inﬂuence of parameters
such as bacterial infection and bone types could be examined.
32
==PAGE:40==
References
[1]
Benedicta E. Beck-Broichsitter, Ralf Smeets, and Max Heiland. “Current concepts in
pathogenesis of acute and chronic osteomyelitis”. In: Current Opinion in Infectious Dis-
eases 28.3 (2015), pp. 240–245. issn: 0951-7375. doi: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000155.
[2]
Henrik Elvang Jensen et al. “A non-traumatic Staphylococcus aureus osteomyelitis
model in pigs”. In: In Vivo 24.3 (2010), pp. 257–264. issn: 0258851X.
[3]
Daniel P Lew and Francis A Waldvogel. “Osteomyelitis”. In: The Lancet 364.9431
(2004), pp. 369–379. issn: 01406736. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16727-5.
[4]
Louise Kruse Jensen et al. “Novel porcine model of implant-associated osteomyelitis:
A comprehensive analysis of local, regional, and systemic response”. In: Journal of
Orthopaedic Research 35.10 (2017), pp. 2211–2221. issn: 07360266. doi: 10.1002/
jor.23505.
[5]
Fran¸cois Meurens et al. “The pig: a model for human infectious diseases”. In: Trends
in Microbiology 20.1 (2012), pp. 50–57. issn: 0966842X. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2011.
11.002.
[6]
Kenneth Murphy and Casey Weaver. Janeway’s imunobiology. 9th. Garland science,
2017. isbn: 978-0-8153-4505-3.
[7]
Osamu Takeuchi and Shizuo Akira. “Pattern Recognition Receptors and Inﬂamma-
tion”. In: Cell 140.6 (2010), pp. 805–820. issn: 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.
2010.01.022.
[8]
L G Raisz. “Physiology and pathophysiology of bone remodeling.” In: Clinical chem-
istry 45.8 Pt 2 (1999), pp. 1353–8. issn: 0009-9147. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.20130.
[9]
Bart Clarke. “Normal Bone Anatomy and Physiology”. In: Clinical Journal of the
American Society of Nephrology 3.Supplement 3 (2008), S131–S139. issn: 1555-9041.
doi: 10.2215/CJN.04151206.
[10]
Stuart H. Ralston. “Bone structure and metabolism”. In: Medicine 41.10 (2013), pp. 581–
585. issn: 13573039. doi: 10.1016/j.mpmed.2013.07.007.
[11]
Robyn K. Fuchs, Stuart J. Warden, and Charles H. Turner. Bone anatomy, physiology
and adaptation to mechanical loading. Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2009, pp. 25–68.
isbn: 9781845693855. doi: 10.1533/9781845696610.1.25.
[12]
William J Boyle, W Scott Simonet, and David L Lacey. “Osteoclast diﬀerentiation and
activation”. In: Nature 423.6937 (2003), pp. 337–342. issn: 0028-0836. doi: 10.1038/
nature01658.
[13]
H. Yasuda et al. “Osteoclast diﬀerentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/
osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 95.7 (1998), pp. 3597–3602. issn: 0027-
8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.7.3597.
[14]
V. Everts et al. “The Bone Lining Cell: Its Role in Cleaning Howship’s Lacunae and
Initiating Bone Formation”. In: Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 17.1 (2002),
pp. 77–90. issn: 08840431. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.2002.17.1.77.
[15]
Liza J. Raggatt and Nicola C. Partridge. “Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Bone
Remodeling”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 285.33 (2010), pp. 25103–25108. issn:
0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R109.041087.
33
==PAGE:41==
REFERENCES
[16]
Francis A. Waldvogel, Gerald Medoﬀ, and Morton N. Swartz. “Osteomyelitis: A Re-
view of Clinical Features, Therapeutic Considerations and Unusual Aspects”. In: New
England Journal of Medicine 282.4 (1970), pp. 198–206. issn: 0028-4793. doi: 10.
1056/NEJM197001222820406.
[17]
Louise Kruse Johansen and Henrik Elvang Jensen. “Animal models of hematogenous
Staphylococcus aureus osteomyelitis in long bones: a review”. In: Orthopedic Research
and Reviews (2013), p. 51. doi: 10.2147/orr.s45617.
[18]
Kohei Nishitani et al. The Role of the Immune System and Bone Cells in Acute
and Chronic Osteomyelitis. Second Edition. Elsevier Inc., 2015, pp. 283–295. isbn:
9780128005712. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800571-2.00016-5.
[19]
J Ciampolini. “Pathophysiology of chronic bacterial osteomyelitis. Why do antibiotics
fail so often?” In: Postgraduate Medical Journal 76.898 (2000), pp. 479–483. issn:
00325473. doi: 10.1136/pmj.76.898.479.
[20]
James M. Anderson. Inﬂammation, Wound Healing, and the Foreign-Body Response.
Third Edition. 2005. Elsevier, 2013, pp. 503–512. isbn: 9780123746269. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-08-087780-8.00044-9.
[21]
Isaac Thomsen and C. Buddy Creech. “Advances in the diagnosis and management of
pediatric osteomyelitis”. In: Current Infectious Disease Reports 13.5 (2011), pp. 451–
460. issn: 15233847. doi: 10.1007/s11908-011-0202-z.
[22]
E. Gruys et al. “Acute phase reaction and acute phase proteins”. In: Journal of Zhejiang
University SCIENCE 6B.11 (2005), pp. 1045–1056. issn: 1009-3095. doi: 10.1631/
jzus.2005.b1045.
[23]
Sachin Jain, Vidhi Gautam, and Sania Naseem. “Acute-phase proteins: As diagnostic
tool”. In: Journal of Pharmacy and Bioallied Sciences 3.1 (2011), p. 118. issn: 0975-
7406. doi: 10.4103/0975-7406.76489.
[24]
Mark B. Pepys. “Acute Phase Proteins”. In: Encyclopedia of Immunology. Elsevier,
1998, pp. 18–20. isbn: 0122267656. doi: 10.1006/rwei.1999.0005.
[25]
Helle G. Olsen et al. “Organization and Biology of the Porcine Serum Amyloid A (SAA)
Gene Cluster: Isoform Speciﬁc Responses to Bacterial Infection”. In: PLoS ONE 8.10
(2013). issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076695.
[26]
Carolyn Cray, Julia Zaias, and Norman H Altman. “Assays of Acute Phase Proteins”.
In: Comparative Medicine 59.6 (2009), pp. 517–526.
[27]
George H. Sack. “Serum amyloid A – a review”. In: Molecular Medicine 24.1 (2018),
p. 46. issn: 1076-1551. doi: 10.1186/s10020-018-0047-0.
[28]
L. Soler et al. “Why working with porcine circulating serum amyloid A is a pig of a
job”. In: Journal of Theoretical Biology 317 (2013), pp. 119–125. issn: 00225193. doi:
10.1016/j.jtbi.2012.10.011.
[29]
Clarissa M. Uhlar and Alexander S. Whitehead. “Serum amyloid A, the major ver-
tebrate acute-phase reactant”. In: European Journal of Biochemistry 265.2 (1999),
pp. 501–523. issn: 0014-2956. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1327.1999.00657.x.
[30]
Yvonne M¨odinger et al. “Complement involvement in bone homeostasis and bone
disorders”. In: Seminars in Immunology 37 (2018), pp. 53–65. issn: 10445323. doi:
10.1016/j.smim.2018.01.001.
[31]
J. Vidya Sarma and Peter a Ward. “The complement system”. In: Cell and Tissue
Research 343.1 (2011), pp. 227–235. issn: 0302-766X. doi: 10.1007/s00441-010-
1034-0.
34
==PAGE:42==
REFERENCES
[32]
Douglas R. Mathern and Peter S. Heeger. “Molecules Great and Small: The Comple-
ment System”. In: Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 10.9 (2015),
pp. 1636–1650. issn: 1555-9041. doi: 10.2215/CJN.06230614.
[33]
Philipp Schoengraf et al. “Does complement play a role in bone development and
regeneration?” In: Immunobiology 218.1 (2013), pp. 1–9. issn: 01712985. doi: 10.
1016/j.imbio.2012.01.020.
[34]
Sean Taylor et al. “A practical approach to RT-qPCR — Publishing data that conform
to the MIQE”. In: Methods 50.4 (2010), S1–S5. issn: 1046-2023. doi: 10.1016/j.
ymeth.2010.01.005.
[35]
Heather D. VanGuilder, Kent E Vrana, and Willard M Freeman. “Twenty-ﬁve years of
quantitative PCR for gene expression analysis”. In: BioTechniques 44.5 (2008), pp. 619–
626. issn: 0736-6205. doi: 10.2144/000112776.
[36]
Brian Matlock. “Assessment of Nucleic Acid Purity - Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc”. In:
Protocols and Product Manuals (2011), pp. 1–2. issn: 0973709X. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/
2015/11821.5896. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
[37]
Andreas Schroeder et al. “The RIN: An RNA integrity number for assigning integrity
values to RNA measurements”. In: BMC Molecular Biology 7 (2006), pp. 1–14. issn:
14712199. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-7-3.
[38]
Stephen A Bustin et al. “The MIQE Guidelines: Minimum Information for Publication
of Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments”. In: Clinical Chemistry 55.4 (2009),
pp. 611–622. issn: 0009-9147. doi: 10.1373/clinchem.2008.112797.
[39]
Tania Nolan, Rebecca E Hands, and Stephen A Bustin. “Quantiﬁcation of mRNA using
real-time RT-PCR.” In: Nature protocols 1.3 (2006), pp. 1559–82. issn: 1750-2799. doi:
10.1038/nprot.2006.236.
[40]
J. A. Ramos-Vara. “Technical Aspects of Immunohistochemistry”. In: Veterinary Pathol-
ogy 42.4 (2005), pp. 405–426. issn: 0300-9858. doi: 10.1354/vp.42-4-405.
[41]
J. A. Ramos-Vara and M. A. Miller. “When Tissue Antigens and Antibodies Get
Along”. In: Veterinary Pathology 51.1 (2014), pp. 42–87. issn: 0300-9858. doi: 10.
1177/0300985813505879.
[42]
Zonggao Shi and MSharon Stack. “An Update on Immunohistochemistry in Transla-
tional Cancer Research”. In: Cancer Translational Medicine 1.4 (2015), p. 115. issn:
2395-3977. doi: 10.4103/2395-3977.163802.
[43]
Karunakaran Kaliyappan et al. “Applications of immunohistochemistry”. In: Journal
of Pharmacy and Bioallied Sciences 4.6 (2012), p. 307. issn: 0975-7406. doi: 10.4103/
0975-7406.100281.
[44]
Jo Vandesompele et al. “Accurate normalization of real-time quantitative RT-PCR
data by geometric averaging of multiple internal control genes.” In: Genome biology
3.7 (2002), RESEARCH0034. issn: 1474-760X.
[45]
Claus Lindbjerg Andersen, Jens Ledet Jensen, and Torben Falck Ørntoft. “Normal-
ization of Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription-PCR Data: A Model-Based
Variance Estimation Approach to Identify Genes Suited for Normalization, Applied to
Bladder and Colon Cancer Data Sets”. In: Cancer Research 64.15 (2004), pp. 5245–
5250. issn: 0008-5472. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-0496.
[46]
Rui Ma et al. “The Alternative Pathway of Complement Activation May Be Involved
in the Renal Damage of Human Anti-Glomerular Basement Membrane Disease”. In:
PLoS ONE 9.3 (2014). Ed. by Suzan H. M. Rooijakkers, e91250. issn: 1932-6203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0091250.
35
==PAGE:43==
REFERENCES
[47]
Jun-Ming Zhang and Jianxiong An. “Cytokines, Inﬂammation, and Pain”. In: Interna-
tional Anesthesiology Clinics 45.2 (2007), pp. 27–37. issn: 0020-5907. doi: 10.1097/
AIA.0b013e318034194e.
[48]
Mark W. Robinson, Cathal Harmon, and Cliona O’Farrelly. “Liver immunology and
its role in inﬂammation and homeostasis”. In: Cellular & Molecular Immunology 13.3
(2016), pp. 267–276. issn: 1672-7681. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2016.3.
[49]
Leif E. Sander et al. “Hepatic acute-phase proteins control innate immune responses
during infection by promoting myeloid-derived suppressor cell function”. In: The Jour-
nal of Experimental Medicine 207.7 (2010), pp. 1453–1464. issn: 0022-1007. doi: 10.
1084/jem.20091474.
[50]
Kerstin Skovgaard et al. “Rapid and widely disseminated acute phase protein response
after experimental bacterial infection of pigs”. In: Veterinary Research 40.3 (2009),
p. 23. issn: 0928-4249. doi: 10.1051/vetres/2009006.
[51]
Andreia T. Marques et al. “Widespread extrahepatic expression of acute-phase pro-
teins in healthy chicken ( Gallus gallus ) tissues”. In: Veterinary Immunology and
Immunopathology 190.January (2017), pp. 10–17. issn: 01652427. doi: 10.1016/j.
vetimm.2017.06.006.
[52]
Kerstin Skovgaard et al. “Hepatic gene expression changes in pigs experimentally in-
fected with the lung pathogen Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae as analysed with an
innate immunity focused microarray”. In: Innate Immunity 16.6 (2010), pp. 343–353.
issn: 1753-4259. doi: 10.1177/1753425909342730.
[53]
Lee J. Quinton et al. “Mechanisms of the Hepatic Acute-Phase Response during Bac-
terial Pneumonia”. In: Infection and Immunity 77.6 (June 2009), pp. 2417–2426. issn:
0019-9567. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01300-08. url: http://iai.asm.org/cgi/doi/10.
1128/IAI.01300-08.
[54]
Ma lgorzata Pomorska-M´ol et al. “C-reactive protein, haptoglobin, serum amyloid A
and pig major acute phase protein response in pigs simultaneously infected with H1N1
swine inﬂuenza virus and Pasteurella multocida”. In: BMC Veterinary Research 9.1
(2013), p. 14. issn: 1746-6148. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-14.
[55]
N.S. Sorensen et al. “The porcine acute phase protein response to acute clinical and
subclinical experimental infection with Streptococcus suis”. In: Veterinary Immunology
and Immunopathology 113.1-2 (2006), pp. 157–168. issn: 01652427. doi: 10.1016/j.
vetimm.2006.04.008.
[56]
Kazuhiko Matsuoka et al. “Osteoclast-Derived Complement Component 3a Stimulates
Osteoblast Diﬀerentiation”. In: Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 29.7 (2014),
pp. 1522–1530. issn: 08840431. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2187.
[57]
Jos´e A. Andrades et al. “Complement Proteins Are Present in Developing Endochon-
dral Bone and May Mediate Cartilage Cell Death and Vascularization”. In: Experi-
mental Cell Research 227.2 (1996), pp. 208–213. issn: 00144827. doi: 10.1006/excr.
1996.0269.
[58]
Denis A. Mogilenko et al. “Modiﬁed Low Density Lipoprotein Stimulates Complement
C3 Expression and Secretion via Liver X Receptor and Toll-like Receptor 4 Activation
in Human Macrophages”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 287.8 (2012), pp. 5954–
5968. issn: 0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.289322.
36
==PAGE:44==
REFERENCES
[59]
H. F. FARIED, T. TACHIBANA, and T. OKUDA. “The Secretion of the Third Compo-
nent of Complement (C3) by Human Polymorphonuclear Leucocytes from both Normal
and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Cases”. In: Scandinavian Journal of Immunology
37.1 (1993), pp. 19–28. issn: 0300-9475. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-3083.1993.tb01659.x.
[60]
Zhidan Tu et al. “Eﬃcient osteoclast diﬀerentiation requires local complement activa-
tion”. In: Blood 116.22 (2010), pp. 4456–4463. issn: 0006-4971. doi: 10.1182/blood-
2010-01-263590.
[61]
Anita Ignatius et al. “Complement C3a and C5a modulate osteoclast formation and
inﬂammatory response of osteoblasts in synergism with IL-1β”. In: Journal of Cellular
Biochemistry 112.9 (2011), pp. 2594–2605. issn: 07302312. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23186.
[62]
Lubna Kouser et al. “Properdin and Factor H: Opposing Players on the Alternative
Complement Pathway “See-Saw””. In: Frontiers in Immunology 4 (2013), pp. 1–12.
issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00093.
[63]
N. Upragarin et al. “Extrahepatic production of acute phase serum amyloid A”. In:
Histology and Histopathology 20.4 (2005), pp. 1295–1307. issn: 02133911.
[64]
L. Soler et al. “Serum amyloid A3 (SAA3), not SAA1 appears to be the major acute
phase SAA isoform in the pig”. In: Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology
141.1-2 (2011), pp. 109–115. issn: 01652427. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2011.02.019.
[65]
Chandrabala Shah. “Serum amyloid A is an innate immune opsonin for Gram-negative
bacteria”. In: Blood 108.5 (2006), pp. 1751–1757. issn: 0006-4971. doi: 10.1182/
blood-2005-11-011932.
[66]
Ranjeeta Hari-Dass et al. “Serum Amyloid A Protein Binds to Outer Membrane Pro-
tein A of Gram-negative Bacteria”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 280.19 (2005),
pp. 18562–18567. issn: 0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M500490200.
[67]
R. Badolato. “Serum amyloid A is a chemoattractant: induction of migration, adhesion,
and tissue inﬁltration of monocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes”. In: Journal
of Experimental Medicine 180.1 (1994), pp. 203–209. issn: 0022-1007. doi: 10.1084/
jem.180.1.203.
[68]
D.J Rieman et al. “Biosynthesis and processing of cathepsin K in cultured human
osteoclasts”. In: Bone 28.3 (2001), pp. 282–289. issn: 87563282. doi: 10.1016/S8756-
3282(00)00445-2.
[69]
Viola Vargov´a, Marek Pytliak, and Viola Mech´ırov´a. Matrix Metalloproteinase In-
hibitors. Ed. by Satya Prakash Gupta. Vol. 103. Experientia Supplementum. Basel:
Springer Basel, 2012, pp. 1–33. isbn: 978-3-0348-0363-2. doi: 10.1007/978-3-0348-
0364-9.
[70]
H. Watanabe, Y. Yamada, and K. Kimata. “Roles of Aggrecan, a Large Chondroitin
Sulfate Proteoglycan, in Cartilage Structure and Function”. In: Journal of Biochem-
istry 124.4 (1998), pp. 687–693. issn: 0021-924X. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.
jbchem.a022166.
[71]
Weimin Bi et al. “Sox9 is required for cartilage formation”. In: Nature Genetics 22.1
(1999), pp. 85–89. issn: 1061-4036. doi: 10.1038/8792.
[72]
Margarita Lamprou et al. “The role of pleiotrophin in bone repair”. In: Injury 45.12
(2014), pp. 1816–1823. issn: 00201383. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.10.013.
[73]
Shinji Imai et al. “Osteoblast Recruitment and Bone Formation Enhanced by Cell
Matrix–associated Heparin-binding Growth-associated Molecule (HB-GAM)”. In: The
Journal of Cell Biology 143.4 (1998), pp. 1113–1128. issn: 0021-9525. doi: 10.1083/
jcb.143.4.1113.
37
==PAGE:45==
REFERENCES
[74]
Xuebin Yang et al. “Induction of Human Osteoprogenitor Chemotaxis, Proliferation,
Diﬀerentiation, and Bone Formation by Osteoblast Stimulating Factor-1/Pleiotrophin:
Osteoconductive Biomimetic Scaﬀolds for Tissue Engineering”. In: Journal of Bone
and Mineral Research 18.1 (2003), pp. 47–57. issn: 08840431. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.
2003.18.1.47.
[75]
Simone Fleige et al. “Comparison of relative mRNA quantiﬁcation models and the
impact of RNA integrity in quantitative real-time RT-PCR”. In: Biotechnology Letters
28.19 (2006), pp. 1601–1613. issn: 0141-5492. doi: 10.1007/s10529-006-9127-2.
[76]
Berit Christoﬀersen et al. “Age- and sex-associated eﬀects on acute-phase proteins
in G¨ottingen Minipigs”. In: Comparative Medicine 65.4 (2015), pp. 333–341. issn:
15320820.
[77]
Germana Salamano et al. “Changes in haptoglobin, C-reactive protein and pig-MAP
during a housing period following long distance transport in swine”. In: The Veterinary
Journal 177.1 (2008), pp. 110–115. issn: 10900233. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2007.03.
015.
[78]
Francesco Fazio et al. “Utility of acute phase proteins as biomarkers of transport stress
in ewes and beef cattle”. In: Italian Journal of Food Safety 4.2 (2015), pp. 8–10. issn:
2239-7132. doi: 10.4081/ijfs.2015.4210.
38
==PAGE:46==
Appendices
39
==PAGE:47==
Appendix A
Grouping of used genes
A.1
List of genes for the bone samples
Gene class
Gene name
Reference genes
ACTB
RPL13A
PPIA
TBP
YWHAZ
Genes involved in bone remodeling
TNFSF11
TNFRSF11B
TNFRSF11A
SPP1
BGLAP
IBSP
CALCR
CTSK
SOX9
ACAN
PHEX
ALPL
APC5
PTN
PTGS2
MMP1
Continues next page
40
==PAGE:48==
APPENDIX A. GROUPING OF USED GENES
Gene class
Gene name
Acute phase proteins
PIGMAP
SAA1
SAA3
TF
C3
Pattern recognition receptors
NOD1
TLR2
TLR4
TLR6
Cytokines
IL1B
IFNG
IL10
IL1A
IL23
IL17
IL11
TNF
CSF1
CSF3
Chemokines
CCL2
CCL3
CCL17
CXCL12
41
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX A. GROUPING OF USED GENES
A.2
List of genes for the liver samples
Gene class
Gene name
Reference genes
ACTB
B2M
RPL13A
PPIA
TBP
YWHAZ
Serum Amyeloid A genes
SAA1
SAA2
SAA3
SAA4
Genes involved in the complement system
C1s
C3
C4A
C5
C9
C3aR1
C5aR1
CFB
CFD
CFP
MBL2
Continues next page
42
==PAGE:50==
APPENDIX A. GROUPING OF USED GENES
Gene class
Gene name
Positive acute phase proteins
ORM
CRP
HP
HPX
PIGMAP
FGG
CP
SERPINA1
ARG1
Negative acute phase proteins
TF
TTR
APOA1
Cytokines
TNF
IL6
IL8
IL1A
IL1B
IFNA1
IFNB1
43
==PAGE:51==
Appendix B
Complete list of primers
1
APOA1 (3)
44
MMP1 (330)
2
ORM (5)
45
CTSK (341)
3
ACTB (6)
46
NOD1 (365)
4
B2M (7)
47
CSF3 (464)
5
C3 (10)
48
CSF1 (616)
6
C5 (11)
49
SPP1 (723)
7
CRP (12)
50
BGLAP (725)
8
FGG (18)
51
IBSP (726)
9
HP (22)
52
TNFRSF11B (728)
10
HPX (23)
53
TNFRSF11B (729)
11
IL1B (29)
54
ALPL (731)
12
IL6 (35)
55
PHEX (742)
13
IL8 (37)
56
APC5 (747)
14
IFNA1 (49)
57
TNFRSF11A (748)
15
IFNG (51)
58
TNFRSF11A (749)
15
PIGMAP (56)
59
TNFSF11 (754)
16
RPL13A (58)
60
CCL17 (766)
17
SAA1 (60)
61
SOX9 (777)
18
TF (65)
62
ACAN (775)
19
TTR (67)
63
PTN (893)
20
TNF (74)
64
IL11 (898)
21
TNF (125)
65
CALCR (905)
22
PTGS2 (129)
66
C9 (1294)
23
IL10 (133)
67
C9 (1295)
24
PPIA (154)
68
C3aR1 (1355)
25
TBP (155)
69
C5aR1 (1357)
26
YWHAZ (156)
70
CP (1362)
27
IL1A (157)
71
CP (1363)
28
TLR2 (160)
72
C1s (1364)
29
TLR6 (163)
73
C1s (1365)
30
IL23 (195)
74
C4A (1366)
31
ARG1 (202)
75
C4A (1367)
32
IL17 (210)
76
MBL2 (1368)
33
IFNB1 (223)
77
MBL2 (1369)
34
CFB (224)
78
CFP (1370)
35
CFD (226)
79
CFP (1371)
36
IL1B (233)
80
SERPINA1 (1372)
37
TLR4 (235)
81
SERPINA1 (1373)
38
CCL3 (236)
82
SAA4 (1374)
39
SAA3 (238)
40
SAA2 (240F/241R)
41
CXCL12 (269)
42
TNFSF11 (283)
43
CCL2 (293)
44
==PAGE:52==
Appendix C
Quality assessments
C.1
Bone samples
PA code
Sample ID
ng/µl
A260/280
A260/230
RIN
2928/2929
2860
152.13
2.17
1.98
3
2930/2931
2861
330.64
1.95
1.31
7.8
2932/2933
2862
164.53
2.18
0.67
5.2
2934/2935
2863
253.17
2.17
2.01
6.5
2936/2937
2864
394.67
2.12
2.10
4.9
2938/2939
2865
401.89
2.11
1.96
9.3
2940/2941
2866
227.84
2.14
1.91
2.2
2942/2943
2867
983.38
2.15
2.20
5.1
2944/2945
2868
545.61
2.12
1.96
5.8
2946/2947
2869
266.79
2.13
2.05
5.4
2948/2949
2870
430.79
2.10
1.85
6.7
2950/2951
2871
924.59
2.17
2.18
3.7
2952/2953
2872
202.72
2.15
1.96
3.1
2954/2955
2873
388.99
2.10
2.00
5.7
2956/2957
2874
160.31
2.14
1.59
3.8
2958/2959
2875
481.64
2.17
1.71
6
C.2
Liver samples
PA code
Sample ID
ng/µl
A260/280
A260/230
RIN
577/578
3479
2919.31
2.07
2.02
8.9
579/580
3480
2373.96
2.11
1.96
8.5
581/582
3481
1857.95
2.13
2.11
8.5
583/584
3482
2187.51
2.10
2.10
6.4
585/586
3483
2700.43
2.10
2.12
6.5
587/588
3484
1832.57
2.13
2.19
6.2
589/590
3485
1558.95
2.14
1.15
6.7
591/592
3486
2176.07
2.12
2.12
7.3
593/594
3487
2402.06
2.10
1.98
7
595/596
3488
1591.35
2.12
1.98
6.1
599/600
3490
832.86
2.15
2.14
6.9
601/602
3491
2876.22
2.08
2.16
6.5
603/604
3492
1738.82
2.14
2.14
6.2
605/606
3493
2256.27
2.12
2.11
4
607/608
3494
2351.59
2.11
2.16
5
45
==PAGE:53==
Appendix D
Heat maps
D.1
Dynamic array of the bone
46
==PAGE:54==
APPENDIX D. HEAT MAPS
D.2
Dynamic array of the liver
47
==PAGE:55==
Appendix E
Gene expression changes between control
and infected slaughter pigs
E.1
Gene expression changes in the bone
Gene
Fold Change
SEM
P-value
SAA1(60)
382.28
172.39
3.30E-08
SAA3(238)
316.69
158.34
1.23E-06
CCL17(766)
32.03
7.72
9.64E-06
C3(10)
15.23
4.02
1.01E-05
PTN (893)
13.56
3.78
1.25E-05
MMP1(330)
287.83
181.20
2.84E-05
IL1A (157)
131.72
75.34
6.51E-05
CCL2(293)
6.83
1.76
1.97E-04
PIGMAP(56)
4.09
0.65
2.90E-04
ACAN(775)
152.84
115.18
4.64E-04
CCL3(236)
69.10
43.64
5.66E-04
SOX9(777)
5.94
2.31
6.15E-04
CXCL12 (269)
0.44
0.09
1.20E-03
IL1B(29)
14.63
5.83
4.48E-03
PTGS2 (129)
16.87
11.11
4.90E-03
NOD1 (365)
1.98
0.26
0.01
TLR2(160)
3.03
0.86
0.01
IL1B(233)
17.21
8.03
0.01
TF(64)
0.41
0.21
0.02
CTSK (341)
3.85
1.06
0.02
TBP(155)
0.84
0.05
0.03
IL10(133)
2.59
0.54
0.06
TLR4 (235)
1.70
0.33
0.09
BGLAP(725)
0.77
0.58
0.12
TNFA(125)
2.95
1.23
0.12
TNFSF11(754)
2.48
0.94
0.13
TNFSF11(283)
2.66
1.14
0.13
CSF1 (616)
4.33
2.26
0.13
RPL13A(58)
1.13
0.06
0.20
IBSP(726)
4.28
1.37
0.29
YWHAZ(156)
1.06
0.05
0.38
CALCR(905)
0.75
0.25
0.40
TNFRSF11B(728)
2.09
0.61
0.41
APC5(747)
1.76
0.57
0.51
TNFRSF11B(729)
2.21
0.90
0.56
TNFRSF11A(748)
2.15
0.79
0.68
PHEX(742)
1.41
0.44
0.75
PPIA(154)
0.96
0.10
0.77
ALPL(731)
1.25
0.31
0.84
SPP1(723)
2.22
0.68
0.85
TLR6(163)
1.10
0.15
0.87
TNFRSF11A(749)
1.64
0.54
0.92
ACTB(6)
0.98
0.15
0.95
48
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX E. GENE EXPRESSION CHANGES BETWEEN CONTROL AND
INFECTED SLAUGHTER PIGS
E.2
Gene expression changes in the liver
Gene
Fold Change
SEM
P-value
PIGMAP(56)
4.21
1.42
0.01
SERPINA1(1372)
0.53
0.07
0.01
TF(65)
0.61
0.09
0.02
CFP(1371)
2.27
0.62
0.02
TTR(67)
0.61
0.05
0.04
C3AR1(1355)
1.96
0.35
0.04
CRP(12)
2.83
0.82
0.04
SAA3(238)
2.44
0.55
0.07
TNF(74)
2.02
0.57
0.07
SAA1(60)
4.43
1.09
0.08
C9(1294)
0.69
0.12
0.10
SAA2(240F/241R)
4.00
1.03
0.12
ARG1(202)
202
0.57
0.14
PPIA(154)
0.87
0.06
0.14
CP(1363)
1.35
0.18
0.15
SERPINA1(1373)
0.63
0.11
0.20
IFNA(49)
1.79
0.63
0.29
ORM (5)
0.78
0.15
0.31
IL8(73)
6.29
3.38
0.34
APOA1 (3)
2.80
1.70
0.35
C3(10)
1.12
0.12
0.43
MBL2(1369)
0.74
0.25
0.43
CP(1362)
1.20
0.16
0.44
HPX(23)
0.86
0.13
0.47
TBP(155)
1.08
0.09
0.47
C1S(1365)
0.92
0.15
0.48
MBL2(1368)
0.87
0.32
0.48
ACTB(6)
1.36
0.44
0.50
C4A(1367)
1.15
0.14
0.54
C1S(1364)
0.95
0.15
0.55
C9(1295)
0.85
0.17
0.62
SAA4(1374)
0.35
0.08
0.64
C3(10)
1.07
0.12
0.69
C4A(1366)
1.08
0.15
0.77
HP(12)
1.14
0.19
0.83
FGG(18)
1.07
0.17
0.85
C5(11)
1.10
0.19
0.86
49
==PAGE:57==
Appendix F
List of genes for the PCAs
F.1
PCA bone
C3, PIGMAP, SAA, TF, TNFA, PTGS2, IL10, IL1A, TLR2, TLR6, IL1B, TLR4, CCL3,
SAA3, CXCL12, TNFSF11, CCL2, MMP1, CTSK, NOD1, CSF1, SPP1, BGLAP, IBSP,
TNFRSF11B, ALPL, PHEX, APC5, TNFRSF11A, CCL17, ACAN, SOX9, PTN, CALCR
F.2
PCA bone comparison
C3, PIGMAP, SAA, TF, TNFA, PTGS2, IL10, IL1A, TLR2, TLR6, IL1B, CCL3, SAA3,
CXCL12, TNFSF11, CCL2, CTSK, NOD1, CSF1, SPP1, BGLAP, IBSP, TNFRSF11B,
ALPL, PHEX, APC5, TNFRSF11A, ACAN, SOX9, PTN, CALCR
F.3
PCA liver
APOA1, ORM, C3, C5, CRP, FGG, HP, HPX, IL8, IFNA, PIGMAP, SAA1, TF, TTR,
TNF, ARG1, SAA3, SAA2, C9, C3AR1, CP, C1S, C4A, MBL2, CFP, SERPINA1, SAA4
F.4
PCA liver comparison
ORM, C3, C5, CRP, HP, HPX, PIGMAP, SAA1, ARG1, SAA2
50
