==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand
public transport
Author:
Victor Lantzenberg
Student Nr.:
s172468
July 2nd, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Abstract
This thesis deals with on demand public transport with diﬀerent types of passengers:
walking customers and disable clients. An Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS)
procedure is developed to solve a Dial-A-Ride Problem with Time Windows (DARPTW).
The model handles an heterogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles as well as various separated capacities
for walking passengers and wheelchairs.
The algorithm tackles a time horizon of a day. This day is then split in smaller periods.
For each period a constructor is applied.
This constructor, processed to build the
initial solution and to reinsert requests during the meta-heuristic, uses the unsupervised
machine learning approach K-mean clustering. Afterwards, a parallel insertion creates
routes for vehicles.
Thereafter, the procedure is tested on real datasets from a public transport company.
The outcome shows that the method leads to huge improvements regarding to the results
the company uses. The approach built in this thesis is cost oriented and intends to
reduce operational costs. However, the robustness of the method allows to handle strict
thresholds if the company requires to lessen both the in-vehicle time and waiting time
for customers.
1 of 85
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Acknowledgement
First of all, I would like to thank Evelien van der Hurk for supervising me all along these
6 months of master thesis. Our meetings and Skype calls were always very helpful to
guide me in my work.
I would also like to thank my family and especially Olivia and Gaspard for their advice
and support during the last semester.
2 of 85
==PAGE:4==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Contents
1
Introduction
5
2
Literature review
6
2.1
Characteristics of the dial-a-ride problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Presentation and models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Scenario analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Diﬀerent ways to solve the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Column generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Meta-heuristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Branch-and-cut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Problem Description
10
4
Mathematical model
11
5
Methodology
13
5.1
Initial Solution Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5.1.1
Vehicles Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.2
Time slices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.1.3
Number of clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1.4
K-mean clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.4.2
Distance function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.4.3
K-mean clustering concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.5
Creation of routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.5.1
Parallel insertion after clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.5.2
Parallel insertion for requests not inserted by clustering
26
5.1.5.3
Parallel insertion for wheelchair requests
. . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Theoretical concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.2
Destroy methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.2.1
Randomly remove routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.2.2
Remove the emptiest routes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.2.3
Remove the most expensive routes . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2.4
Remove routes from period with high rate of taxis . . .
32
5.2.3
Repair method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.4
Adaptive weights for destroy and repair methods selection
. . . .
34
5.2.5
Acceptance and stopping criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Study case : Konsentra AS
36
6.1
Konsentra presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
General data overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2.1
Data distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3 of 85
==PAGE:5==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
6.2.2
2 diﬀerent types of request . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.3
Data simpliﬁcation and assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Processing parameters upstream
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4.1
Distance and travel time matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4.2
Requests time windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4.2.1
Pick-up request time windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.4.2.2
Drop-oﬀrequest time windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Parameter tuning
44
7.1
Phase 1 : Initial clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.1.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.1.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Phase 2 : Initial solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.3
Phase 3 : Destroy and repair methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.3.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.3.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.3.2.1
Destroy Method 1 : randomly remove routes . . . . . .
52
7.3.2.2
Destroy Method 2 : remove the emptiest routes . . . . .
54
7.3.2.3
Destroy Method 3 : remove the most expensive routes .
54
7.3.2.4
Destroy Method 4 : remove routes from period with high
rate of taxis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.4
Phase 4 : Acceptance criterion and weights adaptation
. . . . . . . . . .
57
7.4.1
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
8
Results
59
8.1
Results : region AB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
8.2
Results : region FOL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
8.3
Results : region NROM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8.4
Results : region OROM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
8.5
Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
9
Conclusion
72
10 Appendices
77
4 of 85
==PAGE:6==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
1
Introduction
"The on demand transport is presented as an adaptable, ﬂexible, almost individualized
transport service which serves a real demand made by users. It is strictly speaking not
a ’transport mode’ since on demand transport is more a way to manage public transport
and a tool designed to complete the common transport oﬀer" Ludivine Allemand (2007)
[34]
The emergence of on demand transport occurred in-between both World Wars.
It
appeared in cities in Europe and in the United States while cities were lacking of resources
due to the ﬁnancial crisis of 1930s. Taxis were shared by passengers in order to reduce
costs. According to Passalacqua [35], on demand transport was born from a defected
existing transport system.
During 1970s and 1980s several countries like the United
States, the UK or France set a legislative frame to the on demand transport.
During the end of the 20th century the advent of software handling the optimization
of routes for vehicles and the requests from customers helped the development of on
demand transport [36].
Nowadays, as global warming is increasingly viewed as an
urgency. Shared transports become more popular. Furthermore, according to Emilie
Castex [36]on demand transportation will not become the way to handle public transport
but it is relevant for regions where demand is low. On demand transport has to be seen
as an additional service to the well-known public transport services in big cities.
Since the end of 1980s, scientists have established several model for optimizing pick-up
and delivery problems. Among all of them, the Dial-A-Ride problem is probably the
one which ﬁts the best to the on-demand transport. This thesis will base its work on
a version of this model. Then, some methods from machine learning will be applied to
the on-demand transport problem in order to develop a procedure to solve this kind of
problems.
The thesis is made of seven diﬀerent parts. The ﬁrst part deals with an overview of
the research done by scientists on the topic. Then, a proper description of the problem
studied in this report and the associated mathematical model will be detailed. Then,
a section is dedicated to the methodology which will be applied all along the report.
Finally, a study case will be presented and based on real dataset the parameters from
the procedure will be tuned and the results presented and commented.
5 of 85
==PAGE:7==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
2
Literature review
This section aims to give a general overview of research works achieved by the scientist
community about vehicle routing problem. The more common mathematical models are
introduced. Moreover, a subsection deals with a great deal of methods which have been
used to solve these kind of problems like column generation or meta-heuristics.
2.1
Characteristics of the dial-a-ride problem
2.1.1
Presentation and models
The dial-a-ride problem (DARP) is above all a vehicle routing problem (VRP). A vehicle
routing problem consists of serving clients with a ﬂeet of vehicles. When problems have
time windows constraints at customers, the VRP becomes a vehicle routing problem
with time windows (VRPTW). The VRPTW is extended from the Capacitated Vehicle
Routing Problem (CVRP). It especially imposes that a vehicle stays at the customer
during service. Furthermore, the beginning of the service has to be done within time
windows which can be speciﬁc for each customer [1].
The pick-up and delivery problem with time windows (PDPTW) is a generalization of
the VRPTW where the ﬂeet of vehicles is homogeneous -when vehicles are identical- and
there is only a single depot from where vehicles start and end their route. When a time
threshold is set between pick-up and delivery the problem becomes a dial-a-ride problem
(DARP)[2]. The dial-a-ride problem is also a generalization of the travelling salesman
problem with time windows (TSPTW) which is a NP-Hard problem. Since the DARP
can be seen as a generalization of the TSPTW it is NP-Hard [3]. A consequence for a
NP-hard problem is that the problem cannot be solved in a polynomial time.
Constraints can vary from one problem to another. Scientists have worked on diﬀerent
approaches depending on the constraints of their problem. In 1989, Dumas et al [4]
explored the transportation of goods problem.
They modeled it by a pick-up and
delivery problem with time windows (PDPTW). In their case, the ﬂeet of vehicles could
be heterogeneous. It means that the model can handle diﬀerent kind of vehicles with
diﬀerent capacities. Several depots were also possible. This model can be seen as a
generalized VRP. Before that, Desrosiers et al [5] (1986) developed another problem
called dial-a-ride problem with time windows (DARPTW). It looks like a constrained
travel salesman problem which was eﬃciently solved by the Bodin et al’s [6] method
"cluster ﬁrst, route second"-see below in the Column generation section.
Some of these models have been, then, adapted to the transportation of people including
handicapped people transportation. For instance, Ioachim et al [7] (1991) and Desrosiers
et al[8] (1992) went through transportation of disabled people problems. The transportation
of disable people can be more complex and constrained. First, each vehicle has several
capacities depending whether the person can use a regular seat or has to stay seated on
his/her wheelchair. Then, the type of wheelchair has to be taken into account : is it
6 of 85
==PAGE:8==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
possible to fold that chair ? All these characteristics lead to a more complex problem.
To solve these kind of problems, diﬀerent methods have been created by scientists. The
section 2.2 is dedicated to the description of these methods.
2.1.2
Scenario analysis
In 1985, Belisle et al [9] lead an analysis on operating scenarios. They studied diﬀerent
kind of vehicles ﬂeets -taxis or minibuses- for a company proposing a door-to-door service.
In addition, they handled both policies call-back and no call-back.
The second one
requires to give an answer instantly to the customer. They used a parallel insertion to
build a solution and then a dynamic algorithm to improve this solution. They concluded
that the service proposed to disable people was closer to a taxi service than a minibus
service.
They also drew the conclusion that a call-back policy or not was more an
organizational issue than an improvement of productivity or quality of service.
2.2
Diﬀerent ways to solve the problem
2.2.1
Column generation
Bodin et al [6] proposed a ’cluster ﬁrst-route second’ approach. This entails that ﬁrst
a cluster of clients is assigned to each vehicle, then, the order in which the customers
are visited is determined. This theory works well for vehicle routing of goods because
the capacity constraints are useful to create feasible cluster. However, when it comes
to problem with multiple sophisticated constraints, this method encounters diﬃculties
to provide feasible solutions [7]. For instance, vehicles capacity changes whether it is a
pick-up or a drop-oﬀnode in a PDPTW.
The necessity to have a model more eﬃcient for complex problem incited several scientists
at the end of 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s to work on a new way to cluster
customers.
Dumas et al [10] (1989), Desrosiers et al [11] (1991), and Ioachim et al
[7] (1991) elaborated new methods around a common concept : mini-clustering. Mini-
clustering aims to gather customers with close time windows and with common geographical
positions within a given vehicle.
These clusters are smaller because a mini-cluster
construction focuses on respecting local constraints. The objective is to build a route
with a vehicle both empty at the beginning and at the end of the mini-cluster. However,
in between the vehicle must never be empty. The global problem is thus divided in
smaller problems. Then, those mini-clusters are combined with global constraints so
that a global solution can be built on. This approach saves computation time [7].
Plenty of heuristics exist to determine these mini-clusters. Among them, Dumas et al
build their route with mini-clusters and then optimize them by exploiting the single
vehicle dial-a-ride algorithm of Desrosiers et al [5] (1986).
Desrosiers et al wrote a
parallel insertion method to create these mini-clusters where several criteria are explored
like temporal and spatial proximity or feasibility. When, the previous article bases its
7 of 85
==PAGE:9==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
heuristic on a neighbouring criteria, Ioachim et al applied mathematical optimization
models to generate these mini-clusters.
In some cases -Desrosiers et al[11] in 1991, the objective is, afterwards, to apply a column
generation. There are on one side the master problem and on the other side the sub-
problem which generates the columns needed to solve the master problem. A great deal of
dynamic programming algorithms have been developed to generate the minimal reduced
cost path like a Ford-Bellman type used by Desrosiers et al [12] (1984), a Dijkstra type
and a primal-dual algorithms used by Desrochers et al [13] (1988).
Dumas et al [10] (1989) applied the column generation on the mini-clusters in order
to reduce the size of their sets and thus the computation time. Once, they found the
optimal solution for the master problem they implemented branch-and-bound to restore
integrality constraints.
Branching is done in two phases.
First, pieces of work are
branched. A piece of work refers to a part or an entire driver day. The second phase
is only processed if the ﬁrst part was not suﬃcient to conclude. This time, branching
is done on the binary variables determining which arcs are used by a given vehicle.
However, the routing problem is sometimes still too large. In this case, the day is cut
in time-slices so that they get smaller problem. Dumas et al [4] (1990) developed the
same kind of column generation but this time the lower bound is augmented in order to
increase eﬃciency during the branch-and-bound by adding cuts.
Saving computation time is the crux when using column generation for large scale
problems.
That is why mini-clustering is used to decrease the size of problems and
solve smaller ones. Therefore, scientists have worked on how to save time. For instance,
Dumas et al (1989) relaxed the (=) constraint - stating that customers have to be
visited exactly once- to a (>) constraint. That leads to a better stability while solving
the problem using the simplex algorithm.
Another paper from Dumas et al (1989) tried both methods while solving the sub-
problem of the column generation. At each iteration, one is generating several columns
while the other generates only one column. Furthermore, when new columns are generated
during the shortest path problem solving, some of the labels in the network are either
unfeasible or not relevant to use. Removing these labels speeds up the process. Dumas
et al focused on three diﬀerent situations where removing labels was possible: non post-
feasible label, dominated labels and the order of treatment of the labels. In 1986, Dumas
et al [14] already worked on a way to reduce the number of label by discretizing time
values and thereby reducing the possible arrival time values. This method reduces the
size of the network to work with.
2.2.2
Meta-heuristics
As the dial-a-ride problem is NP-Hard, as soon as problems are not small enough the
computation time becomes huge when optimality is aimed. That is why scientists have
worked on methods to get quicker solutions but not optimal. Tabu search is one of these
methods. It has been explored by diﬀerent people. Nanry et al [15] (2000) developed a
8 of 85
==PAGE:10==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
reactive Tabu search (RTS) based on the Solomon’s [16] (1987) vehicle routing problem.
It has the particularity to continuously adapt the search parameter according to the
relevance of solutions found. For instance, if a solution is encountered twice in a given
period the short-memory is increased to avoid cycles. On the other hand, if a solution
has not been encountered for a while the short-term memory is reduced. Furthermore,
the RTS is subjected to three neighbourhoods moves: the single paired insertion, the
swapping pairs between routes and the within route insertion.
Li et al [17] (2001) associated the Tabu search with a simulated annealing. In their Tabu
algorithm Li et al use the simulated annealing to restart from the current best solution
if after some iterations no better solution has been found. The aim is to avoid cycles
when the local search is processed.
In 2003, Cordeau et al [18] explained that Tabu search was relevant for the dial-a-ride
problem because it is easy to adapt in terms of vehicles types or number of depots. In
addition, it allows to work with complex multi-objective functions which is often the case
in that kind of problem. Indeed, on one side travel time has to be reduced as much as
possible in order to save money. On the other side, companies have to provide a good
service level.
Another method has been developed by other scientists consisting in Large Neighbourhood
Search (LNS). Unlike other meta-heuristics, the LNS has less chance to get stuck on a
local extrema thanks to its large neighbourhood. Bent et al [19] (2003) were the ﬁrst
to apply LNS on a pick-up and delivery problem with time windows. Their algorithm is
composed of 2 phases. First, they used simulated annealing (SA) to reduce the number
of routes to deal with. Then, they implemented a LNS to minimize the travel cost. A
branch-and-bound algorithm is processed to go through the sub-neighbourhoods in the
exploration algorithm. Furthermore, they used a limited discrepancy search (LDS) while
ﬁnding the best insertion in the repair part of the LNS. That avoids long computing time
which alters the eﬃciency of the algorithm.
A few years later, Pisinger and Ropke [20] (2006) went further and invented an adaptive
large neighbourhood search (ALNS). This algorithm is made of diﬀerent heuristics for
the destroy and repair stages. The better an heuristic performs, the more it is used. In
this paper, three destroy methods are explored: the shaw removal, the random removal
and the worst removal. To repair the solution, two algorithms are used : either a classic
greedy heuristic or the regret heuristic created by Potvin et al [21] (1993). The ALNS
results in better results than LNS thanks to the diversity of heuristics.
More recently, Léhuédé et al [22] (2013) adapted the ALNS from Pisinger and Ropke to a
dial-a-ride problem for mentally disabled people. The problem studied results in a large
number of pick-up nodes and smaller number of delivery nodes. They implemented a
LNS based on a multi-criteria objective function. Instead of updating the probability of
using a neighbourhood operator as it was processed in the previous paper, they decided
to keep that selection random.
In 2005, Pankratz [23] adapted a grouping genetic algorithm to the pick-up and delivery
9 of 85
==PAGE:11==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
problem with time windows. This new incremental approach allows to keep the best
solution all over the process.
From the initial population, two children are created,
ﬁrst by crossover and then by mutation. This both children are then inserted again in
the population replacing the two current worst elements. This method had comparable
results as Tabu search from Li et al and Nanry et al.
In 2017, Carotenuto et al [24] developed a double dynamic fast algorithm to solve multi-
vehicle dial-a-ride problem. First, when a customer sends a request the algorithm returns
whether it is possible to accept this request by providing a feasible solution. In a second
time, from that initial solution another heuristic tries to improve that solution in order
to minimize the impact of this new request on the routes and schedules quality.
In
particular, they try to constantly reduce the number of vehicle used.
2.2.3
Branch-and-cut
Cordeau [25] (2006) imagined another approach than using column generation or meta-
heuristics.
He implemented branch-and-cut for the static dial-a-ride problem.
This
method, already used in other circumstances, consists in a branch-and-bound tree where
at each node a linear programming (LP) relaxation is solved. Then, for each branch,
valid inequalities are added. He dealt with 4 kind of valid inequalities : bounds on time
and load variables, sub-tour elimination constraints, capacity constraints and precedence
constraints. That linear relaxation gives a lower bound. In addition, a Tabu search
heuristic (Cordeau and Laporte [26] - 2003) is applied to get an acceptable upper bound.
This upper bound allows to prune during the branch-and-bound and therefore it avoids
to have a huge tree and long computation time.
3
Problem Description
The problem this report will deal with is a vehicle routing problem called dial-a-ride
problem with time windows (DARPTW). It intends to be applied on people transportation,
and in particular, on on demand public transport. An heterogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles
will be considered as well as diﬀerent capacities within a same vehicle. The considered
capacity will change according if the passenger is walking or disable. In this case, the
minibuses are equipped to handle some wheelchairs. The problem will also be constrained
by time windows and thresholds about the maximum in vehicle time for a customer.
These thresholds will be adapted regarding the age of the client. Some other speciﬁc
constraints coming from the experience of a real company will be dealt with.
The objective will be to reduce as much as possible the operational costs. The method
developed will be oriented towards reducing as much as possible operational costs.
However, as explained just above, the quality from customers point of view will be
ensured with some constraints on the model.
Especially, with the threshold which
10 of 85
==PAGE:12==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
could be adapted depending on the expectations of customers. Furthermore, KPIs -
Key Performance Indicators -, like the average waiting time, will be performed in order
to evaluate the solution and the method developed.
As all the report will be based on real data, it may occur that sometimes vehicles ﬂeets
are too small. If sometimes requests cannot be honored taxis are hired in order to fulﬁll
the demand. That obviously implies an extra cost for the company. Hence, the company
wants to avoid the use of taxis.
The following section will present a version of the
mathematical model for the DARPTW. Then, all the method developed to solve this
kind of problem will be detailed.
4
Mathematical model
In this report a dial-a-ride problem with time windows will be implemented (DARPTW).
It is deﬁned by a directed graph G=(N,A) with the aim to serve m requests. N represents
the nodes of the graph which are composed of the pick-up nodes P={1,...,m} and the
drop-oﬀnodes D={m+1,..., 2m}. In the problem considered, there are not terminals
because each driver keeps his vehicle at home.
However, two dummy terminals {0}
and {2m+1}are introduced respectively as the starting and ending terminals.
Thus,
N = {0} [ P [ D [ {2m + 1}. A depicts the feasible arcs between all nodes. Not all arcs
are feasible because of the time windows constraints.
Each node i 2 N needs to be serviced between a time window [ei,li]. Its requested load
is equal to rc
i which is a quantity positive if it is a pick-up node and the opposite of the
pick-up node’s value at the drop-oﬀnode. If i 2 P is a pick-up node, the associated
drop-oﬀnode is m+i. Requests can be of diﬀerent types c 2 C. For instance, this report
will study two types : walking and wheelchair requests. They lead to diﬀerent capacities
within vehicles. However, in this model each request can only be of one type. The vehicle
ﬂeet can be heterogeneous as the vehicles’ capacities are handled independently by the
parameters vk
c .
Each arc (i,j) has an associated travel time ⌧i,j and distance di,j because the cost is
calculated based on the time for vehicles, and, based on the distance and the type of
the request for taxis. If the vehicle k 2 K uses the arc (i,j) the decision variable xk
i,j
will be equal to 1, otherwise its value will be 0. If vehicles do not serve some requests,
these requests are assigned to taxis.
If the request i 2 P is assigned to a taxi the
binary decision variable yi will be equal to 1. The variable Dk represents the total travel
duration of a vehicle k within the day. It is then multiplied by the hour rate price of
drivers in the objective function so that the operational cost of the vehicles ﬂeet can be
evaluated. Furthermore, costs related to taxis are also part of the objective function.
They are split in two parts. First there is a ﬁxed cost for each taxi request no matter
the distance. Second, a rate per kilometer is applied with a minimum distance of a km.
If the distance between the pick-up node and the drop-oﬀnode is smaller, the minimum
distance a will be taken into account for the cost calculation.
11 of 85
==PAGE:13==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Sets
K
set of vehicles
m
number of requests
C
set of type of requests C= {1,2}(1 is a walking request, 2 is a wheelchair one)
P
pick-up nodes {1,...,m}
D
drop-oﬀnodes {m+1,...,2m}
{0}
dummy starting terminal
{2m+1}
dummy ending terminal
N
set of nodes N = {0} [ P [ D [ {2m + 1}
Parameters
si
service time at node i 2 P [ D
ei
earliest service time at node i 2 P [ D
li
latest service time at node i 2 P [ D
⌧i,j
travel time between node i 2 N and node j 2 N
di,j
distance between node i 2 N and node j 2 N
rc
i
requested load at node i 2 P [ D for request type c 2 C
vk
c
capacity of vehicle k 2 K for the request type c 2 C
hk
cost per hour of vehicle k 2 K
Fc
ﬁxed cost of a taxi for request type c 2 C
fc
variable cost of taxi or request type c 2 C
bc
i
1 if request i 2 P is of type c 2 C
a
minimum distance billed by a taxi
Decision variables
xk
i,j
1 if vehicle k 2 K travels from i 2 P [ D to j 2 P [ D, 0 otherwise
yi
1 if pick-up node i 2 P is served by a taxi, 0 otherwise
tk
i
time at which the node i 2 P [ D is served by vehicle k 2 K, 0 if it is not served by k
qk
i,c
load of vehicle k 2 K after serving the node i 2 P [ D for request type c 2 C
Dk
current travel duration of vehicle k 2 K
Objective function:
Min
X
k2K
Dk · hk +
X
i2P
X
c2C
bc
i · Fc · yi +
X
i2P
X
c2C
bc
i · fc · max(a, di,i+m) · yi
(1)
Subject to:
X
k2K
X
j2N
xk
i,j + yi = 1
8i 2 P
(2)
12 of 85
==PAGE:14==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
X
j2N
xk
i,j −
X
j2N
xk
m+i,j = 0
8i 2 P, 8k 2 K
(3)
X
j2N
xk
0,j = 1
8k 2 K
(4)
X
j2N
xk
j,i −
X
j2N
xk
i,j = 0
8i 2 P [ D, 8k 2 K
(5)
X
i2N
xk
i,2m+1 = 1
8k 2 K
(6)
tk
j ≥tk
i + si + ⌧i,j −M · (1 −xk
i,j)
8i 2 N, 8j 2 N, 8k 2 K
(7)
tk
i tk
i+m
8i 2 P, 8k 2 K
(8)
qk
j,c ≥qk
i,c + rc
j + ⌧i,j −M 0 · (1 −xk
i,j)
8i 2 N, 8j 2 N, 8k 2 K, 8c 2 C
(9)
tk
2m+1 −tk
0 = Dk
8k 2 K
(10)
ei tk
i li
8i 2 P [ D, 8k 2 K
(11)
max(0, rc
i) qk
i,c min(vk
c , vk
c + rc
i)
8j 2 N, 8k 2 K, 8c 2 C
(12)
xk
i,j 2 {0, 1}
8i 2 N, 8j 2 N, 8k 2 K
(13)
yi 2 {0, 1}
8i 2 P
(14)
The constraint (2) ensures that each customer is served exactly once either by a vehicle
or by a taxi. (3) makes sure that a client is picked-up and dropped-oﬀby the same
vehicle. A day starts and ends at these dummy terminals mentioned at the beginning
of the section -constraints (4) and (6). The ﬂow conservation is assured by (5), if there
is an incoming arc towards i it must be an out-coming arc from i.
The constraints
(7) and (11) ensure that time windows are respected and that the decision variable for
service time at node i by the vehicle k is well set. They also prevent the model from
sub-tours. The equation (8) excludes that a customer could be dropped-oﬀbefore being
picked-up. Vehicles capacities are regulated by constraint (9) and (12). They assure that
the maximum capacity is never exceeded. In addition, (9) allows to update the current
capacities of a vehicle at each node. Finally, (10) sets the total travel time of a given
vehicle within the day.
The next part of the report focuses on the methodology used to solve this dial-a-ride
problem with time windows with meta-heuristics. Furthermore, all algorithms present
in the procedure are deeply detailed.
5
Methodology
In the rest of the report the term route, which usually represents the schedule of a driver
for a full day, will refer to a part of the day schedule for a driver. The day schedule of a
vehicle will be composed of several routes built during diﬀerent time slices.
13 of 85
==PAGE:15==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
5.1
Initial Solution Heuristic
As mentioned in the literature review the dial-a-ride problem with time windows (DARPTW)
is NP-Hard.
That makes impossible to solve the DARPTW to optimality for large
instances.
Therefore, the objective is to generate approximate solution as good as
possible. Using meta-heuristics is a way to generate and look for good feasible solutions.
It has been decided to solve this problem using ALNS - Adaptive Large Neighbourhood
Search. First, this process requires to generate an initial solution. The aim is to have
a good enough solution to base the neighbourhood search on.
The initial solution
generation is made of several steps and functions which will be detailed later but the
general procedure is detailed by Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Initial Solution Generation
Get the vehicle ﬂeet for the given day and region
Determine pick-up and drop-oﬀtime windows for each request
Split the day in a given number of time slices nTimeSlices
for timeSlice from 1 to nTimeSlices do
Update vehicles state
Get available vehicles in the good order
Get the requests for the given time slice nRequestsT
Split wheelchair and walking requests (nWalkingT, nWheelchairT)
if nWalkingT > minRequests then
Get the number of clusters to generate with Silhouette Algorithm
Apply the K-mean clustering algorithm for the walking requests
Generate routes from these clusters with a parallel insertion algorithm
Parallel insertion algorithmfor walking requests which have not been assigned in
the previous phase
Parallel insertion algorithmfor wheelchair requests
else
Generate routes from the walking requests with a parallel insertion algorithm
Parallel insertion algorithmfor wheelchair requests
end if
Update pick-up and drop-oﬀtimes
end for
In this algorithm, two cases are diﬀerentiated. If the number of requests within a time
slice is too small, the K-mean clustering part is ignored.
This step is ignored when
there are too few requests because the aim is to ﬁt all requests within one vehicle if it is
possible. Therefore, the objective of having only one cluster makes the clustering phase
useless. Furthermore, when there are few orders it is possible to evaluate all positions
for all requests which is not acceptable neither possible for bigger sets. This "too small"
number -called minRequests in the algorithm- is tuned later in the parameter tuning part
of the report.
14 of 85
==PAGE:16==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
5.1.1
Vehicles Management
The algorithm is made to be able to manage an heterogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles. That
means that capacities can be diﬀerent -both wheelchair and walking passengers- as well as
costs associated to each vehicles. An update of the vehicle state is done at the beginning
of a time slice and at the end of each parallel insertion so that it ensures that 2 routes
will not use the same vehicle at the same time.
For a given time slice, if a vehicle has not ﬁnished its previous route yet it is considered
busy, and therefore unavailable, no matter when it will ﬁnish during the period. On the
other hand, if a vehicle has ﬁnished its previous route it is available for the current time
slice. The time to go from the last node of the previous route to the ﬁrst one of the new
route will be taken into account. That means if the vehicle cannot be on time for this
time slice because it was too far, it will be ignored for this time slice until it can reach
a customer within the time windows.
At each iteration, after having updated the vehicles’ state an order of available vehicles is
processed. The order states which vehicle is going to be used for the next route creation.
It prioritizes the already used vehicles and the biggest vehicles ﬁrst. For instance if there
are 4 vehicles at a given time t : 1 bus of 15 people already used, 1 bus of 8 people
already used, 1 bus of 10 people not used and 1 bus of 12 people not used. The order of
priority will be the following :
Position
Vehicle
1
bus of 15 people already used
2
bus of 8 people already used
3
bus of 12 people not used
4
bus of 10 people not used
Table 1: Instance priority order for vehicles
5.1.2
Time slices
The sizes of the handled datasets are big -datasets sizes are between 800 and 1200
requests- and the requests are spread within a whole day.
This time horizon is not
relevant considering that the aim is to cluster requests with common geographical and
temporal patterns. Working on requests spread within a whole day is irrelevant. Indeed,
it is appropriate to assign to a same route two requests with the same starting and ending
places. However, it does not make sense to try to cluster requests during the morning
with some during the evening because these two customers will never be picked-up by
the same driver at the same time. Splitting the day in time slices should provide smaller
datasets, and above all, allow to work on requests with similar temporal patterns.
A request has 3 main characteristics : the pick-up node, the drop-oﬀnode and the
requested pick-up time.
Time slices almost allow to get away from time constraints
15 of 85
==PAGE:17==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
upstream because only requests within a similar time horizon will be considered. That
removes one degree of freedom and makes easier the clustering then. Nevertheless, in
the K-mean clustering, a time penalty was added if within a time slice, a requested time
is too far from the other. But that permits to keep a simple function to manage time
diﬀerences. The number of time slices that will be used across a day will be one of the
parameters tuned in the parameter tuning section.
5.1.3
Number of clusters
Diﬀerent ways exist to determine the best number of clusters needed to represent as well
as possible a dataset. Among them there are the Elbow [27] method and the Silhouette
[29] approach. The Elbow method is, above all, a visual method which consists in plotting
the percentage of the variance explained for each number of clusters K. The clustering
is conducted from K=2 to a certain value depending on the dataset.
Figure 5.1: Eblow method representation
In the Figure 5.1, the distortion drops quickly for the ﬁrst values of K. Then, from K=3
the distortion slows down signiﬁcantly. Therefore, an elbow is reached on K=3. The
Elbow method will conclude to K=3 in this example. The main aspects of the dataset
will be represented with 3 clusters since adding more clusters will not result in a much
better solution. If a fourth cluster were added, the percentage of variance enlightened
will not be a lot higher than for 3 clusters. That is why adding more clusters will result in
more complex design without improving signiﬁcantly the outcome. However, sometimes
it is hard to decide where the elbow is. Indeed, sometimes the curve in almost ﬂat and
there is no slope variation visible like in Figure 5.2. In this case the Elbow method is
ineﬃcient[28].
16 of 85
==PAGE:18==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 5.2: Eblow method representation without visible elbow
After, some experiments, the approach selected in this report is the Silhouette method
for two reasons. First, even if it can be represented graphically, it is more based on
calculation so it looks less subjective to select the best K even if results are not good.
The second reason is that it is hard to say if, for each time slice, requests can be eﬃciently
clustered. This method provides a silhouette value for each value of K that can, then,
be interpreted to conclude to the eﬃciency of the clustering for a given dataset. A table
with diﬀerent stages of interpretation is introduced further (see Table 2).
Rousseeuw [29] developed a silhouette analysis which consists in estimating the average
dissimilarity of a request within its own cluster, and also, the dissimilarity with all other
clusters. That allows to evaluate ﬁrst, if a request is well included in its own cluster, and
then, how diﬀerent it is from the other clusters. The silhouette value is included between
-1 and 1. The value is close to 1 when the request is in the right cluster, it is around 0
when the request is between two clusters and it is around -1 when the request is part of
the "wrong" cluster.
The calculation of the silhouette value of a request can be split in 3 phases. First the
dissimilarity of a request within the request’s cluster c 2 C is calculated :
a(i) =
1
|C|−1
P
j2C: i6=j
d(i, j)
, 8i 2 C
(15)
Then, the dissimilarity of the second closer cluster is determined. It is the minimum of
the average dissimilarity of the request to all requests from another cluster :
b(i) = min
A6=C( 1
|A|
P
j2A
d(i, j))
, 8i 2 C
(16)
From these two calculations the silhouette value of a request can be infered with the
following expression :
s(i) =
b(i)−a(i)
max{a(i),b(i)}
, 8i 2 C
(17)
17 of 85
==PAGE:19==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Then, the silhouette value is plotted for each member of a cluster for each cluster. It
results in an average value for each cluster and also a global average value. It is the
global average value which is going to determine how many clusters the dataset needs,
so that it is represented as well as possible.
Let’s take an example to illustrate the theory explained just before. In the following
ﬁgures there will be the clustering distribution for K=3 and K=4, as well as a graph
plotting all silhouette values for K=3 and K=4.
Figure 5.3: Silhouette method : representation of clusters for K=3
Figure 5.4: Silhouette method : representation of silhouette values for K=3
18 of 85
==PAGE:20==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 5.5: Silhouette method : representation of clusters for K=4
Figure 5.6: Silhouette method : representation of silhouette values for K=4
The average silhouette values of clusters for K=3 is around 0.02 while this average
silhouette value is around 0.73 for K=4. That means that the dataset of the example
would be better represented with 4 clusters than with 3, as it can be observed on the
two graphs of Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.5.
Anja Struyf et al [30] determined a table based on experiments which allows to conclude
whether structure can be found between requests, according to the average silhouette
value determined :
Silhouette value
Interpretation
0.71–1.00
strong structure between requests
0.51–0.70
correct structure between requests
0.26–0.50
weak structure between requests
0.25
no structure between requests
Table 2: Instance priority order for vehicles
19 of 85
==PAGE:21==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Thus, the silhouette theory has been used to determine the number of clusters needed
for each time slice. As the silhouette value can vary from a run to another because of
the initial spread of the centroids [30], the silhouette algorithm will be ran several times
in the parameter tuning phase. The best value for each time slice will be, then, kept so
that the best initial solution can be generated. It especially means that, each time, the
initial composition of clusters is stored so that it can be used again.
5.1.4
K-mean clustering
5.1.4.1
Introduction
The initial solution is generated with an heuristic based on a machine learning concept:
K-mean clustering. It is an unsupervised machine learning [31] method which creates K
clusters from the data. First, K centers are determined randomly. Then, each request is
assigned to the nearest center according to a distance function. Once all requests have
been assigned to a cluster, each cluster center is updated as the mean of the assigned
requests. Finally, the process is iterated until the clusters centers no longer change.
Algorithm 2 K-Mean Clustering
Randomly generate K points as initial centroids
repeat
Assigned each request to the nearest centroid
Update each cluster centroid position as the mean of elements present in this cluster
until Centroids do not change
NB : The terms center and centroid refer to the same thing and will be used equally.
As introduced previously, a request is characterized, among other features,by a pick-up
and a drop-oﬀnodes. Thereby, centroids have the same aspect : one pick-up and one
drop-oﬀnodes. The pick-up node will be found as the average location of all requests
pick-up nodes of the cluster. The approach is the same for the drop-oﬀpoints. A centroid
will form what can be called an average request per cluster. In addition, the random
allocation of requests to the K clusters imposes that each cluster has at least one request
assigned to it so that centroids can be initialized.
5.1.4.2
Distance function
The distance function aims to cluster requests not only with the most identical both
pick-up and drop-oﬀlocations, but also with a requested time similarity. A distance M is
added if two request times are too far from each other -this parameter AcceptableTimeDeviation
will be tuned in the parameter tuning section. Building a route from a cluster could allow
a driver to pick-up a lot of people around a same place and then drop them oﬀaround
a same location. It could result in increased occupation rate within a vehicle and save
20 of 85
==PAGE:22==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
mileage. The distance function used for clustering is a crow ﬂies distance. The distance
between two requests follows the formula below:
distance(RequestA, RequestB) =
distanceCrowFlies(Pick −upA, Pick −upB)
+distanceCrowFlies(Drop −offA, Drop −offB)
+timeDistance(RequestTimeA, RequestTimeB)
(18)
The crow ﬂies distance between two points on Earth can be deﬁned by the following
formula:
distanceCrowFlies(PointA, PointB) =
REarth ⇤arccos (sin(LatA) ⇤sin(LatB)
+ cos(LatA) ⇤cos(LatB) ⇤cos(LongA −LongB))
(19)
A time component is added in the distance function in order to take into account the
fact that it is not relevant to cluster requests from a too diﬀerent time horizon. That
is why a step function for the time is introduced. If the diﬀerence between the absolute
value of two requested times is higher than a given value the time function takes the
value of M otherwise its value is 0. This function can be seen as a penalty function when
two requests are too far in terms of time, where M is a big enough number.
timeDistance =
(
0
if |RequestTimeA −RequestTimeB| < AcceptableTimeDeviation
M
otherwise
(20)
However, the K-mean clustering algorithm requires that the applied function distance to
actually be a distance. That means this function d has to respect the 3 properties that
deﬁnes a distance. Let’s deﬁne E a non-empty space and d an application from E2 to
R+ :
d(x, y) = 0 () x = y
8(x, y) 2 E2
(21)
d(x, y) = d(y, x)
8(x, y) 2 E2
(22)
d(x, y) d(x, z) + d(z, y)
8(x, y, z) 2 E3
(23)
The distance function deﬁned just above is in fact not a distance function because of the
deﬁnition of the time component. Indeed, the crow ﬂies distance is in fact the great circle
distance which is a function which respects the 3 properties of a distance [32]. Therefore,
without the time component, the distance deﬁned in (18) respects the properties from
(21) to (23) of a distance by sum of two distance functions. Furthermore, if it is assumed
that, during a time slice, there are not two diﬀerent requests starting from the same
pick-up node and ending at the same drop-oﬀnode, neither exists the reverse request
-which never happens in the datasets used-, then, properties (21) and (22) are respected.
21 of 85
==PAGE:23==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
PROOF
• Let’s prove that : d(x, y) = 0 () x = y, 8(x, y) 2 E2.
Let’s assume that distance(RequestX,RequestY)=0.
As distanceCrowFlies(Pick-upA,Pick-upB), distanceCrowFlies(Drop-oﬀA,Drop-oﬀB)
and timeDistance (RequestX,RequestY) are all positive by deﬁnition, that means
they all have to be null. By deﬁnition of distance function that means that Pick-
upA=Pick-upB and Drop-oﬀA=Drop-oﬀB. Regarding to the time component, as
it is assumed that there were no several identical requests or reverse request, the
request is therefore the same. We can conclude that RequestX=RequestY.
The opposite way is obvious by deﬁnition of the great circle distance and the
deﬁnition of the time distance.
If RequestX=RequestY, then distance(RequestX,RequestY)=0.
• Let’s prove that : d(x, y) = d(y, x), 8(x, y) 2 E2.
The crow ﬂies distance is symmetrical by deﬁnition. In addition, the timeDistance
is also by deﬁnition symmetrical because the absolute value is symmetrical.
However, the property (23) is not always respected because of the fact that the timeDistance
is deﬁned as a step function. For instance, if there are two requests X and Y separated
by 10 minutes and an AcceptableTimeDeviation of 8 min, the value of the timeDistance
will be M. But if a request Z is selected in between X and Y separated of 5 minutes from
both of them. The timeDistance will be null in both cases from X to Z and from Z to
Y. It means that the third properties of a distance function is not veriﬁed.
Nevertheless, experiments show that this function is actually working. Therefore, the
assumption is made that the distance function deﬁned above (18) is a distance and all
the theory of K-mean clustering will be applied like usual.
5.1.4.3
K-mean clustering concept
In this case, each centroid of the K-mean algorithm will have a pick-up point and a drop-
oﬀpoint. The pick-up point will be determined as the average location of all requests’
pick-up nodes of the cluster. The approach is the same for the drop-oﬀnodes.
The ﬁgures below highlights the steps of the K-mean clustering algorithm. The Figure
5.7 shows 4 requests -represented for each of them by a pickup node and a drop-oﬀnode-
and two clusters which have been initialized randomly within the area.
22 of 85
==PAGE:24==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 5.7: Initialization of the K-mean clustering
Thereafter, each request is assigned to the closest cluster and the centroid of each cluster
is updated. The arrows represent the new position of the centroids. The Figure 5.8
depicts how the requests are clustered and where are situated the updated centroids.
Figure 5.8: Iteration 1: determination of clusters and centroids update
The requests are assigned again to the closest cluster. As they are the same than the
previous iteration, the centroids are unchanged and the process stops. The 4 requests
have been clustered in two categories, as represented in Figure 5.9.
23 of 85
==PAGE:25==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 5.9: Iteration 2 : Determination of clusters
Once the K-mean clustering algorithm has been processed, routes need to be generated
from these clusters.
5.1.5
Creation of routes
From the clusters created in the previous phase, the aim is then to create routes to
assign to vehicles. A pick-up and drop-oﬀorder minimizing the traveling distance is
determined for each route. These routes must respect the set of constraints given by
the problem. More speciﬁcally, vehicles’ capacity and time windows must be taken into
account.
Furthermore, constraints from the customer must be respected as well, for
instance, the mobility type of the client - wheelchair or walking.
The creation of routes adapts depending on the size of the set of requests. When the
set size is greater than the parameter minRequests, requests are ﬁrst clustered with the
K-mean algorithm. This parameter will be explained deeper later in the report. From
the clustering, 3 steps follow in the route creation :
1. Create routes using parallel insertion for the clusters which have more than the
minimum number of walking requests in them.
2. Assign walking requests from small clusters to current routes and create new routes
if necessary.
3. Assign the wheelchair requests to current routes and create new routes if necessary.
NB : Note that the minimum number of requests to be present in a cluster so that the
parallel insertion is ran in phase 1 will be a parameter tuned in the parameter tuning
section.
If the set of requests is small, the clustering is not processed, all requests will form one
single cluster. The step 2 is removed:
24 of 85
==PAGE:26==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
1. Create routes using parallel insertion for walking requests.
2. Assign the wheelchair requests to current routes and create new routes if necessary.
The algorithms are basically the same no matter the size of sets. The only diﬀerence is
that the cluster size is not evaluated when sets are small.
5.1.5.1
Parallel insertion after clustering
The route creation considers independently each cluster. For each cluster, one or several
routes are created -depending on the size of the cluster- using a parallel insertion heuristic.
However, if the number of requests within a cluster is lower than the minimum ﬁxed, the
requests of this cluster are stored. They will be processed in phase 2 with all requests
from clusters which do not respect the minimum size.
First, the number of routes to start with is determined. The number of routes initialized
at the beginning depends on the size of the handled cluster.
The algorithm will be
initialized with the minimum number of routes needed to get a feasible solution. For
instance, if there are 31 requests and each vehicle has a 15 passengers capacity, then,
3 routes will be initialized.
This aims to exploit at maximum the parallel insertion
without having too much routes.
That would result in poorly ﬁlled routes which is
ineﬃcient because all requests are supposed to have common geographical patterns.
For each route a request is allocated. The allocation is done randomly. Afterwards,
comes an iterative process. At each iteration, the aim is to determine the best insertion.
Each time, the algorithm goes through all remaining requests and determines the position
in a route which increases the least the total cost. The pseudo-code of the implemented
algorithm follows in the Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Parallel insertion for clusters
Initialization
Consider requests for a given cluster
Determine how many routes to start with for the parallel insertion
Assign randomly a feasible request to each route
Iterations
while not all requests have been assigned to a route do
Determine the request, the route, and the position within the route which will
increase the global mileage the least
if a such a request exists then
Insert the request at the position determined at the previous phase
else if no feasible insertion possible and there is still a vehicle then
Create a new route and assign the ﬁrst feasible request of the list
else
Assign all the remaining requests to taxis
end if
end while
25 of 85
==PAGE:27==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
The route construction has to respect the constraint that all customers must be picked-
up before starting dropping them oﬀ. This method reduces the possibilities to insert
requests, but reduces also the computation time. In addition, requests have been clustered
considering that all customers will be picked up before being dropped oﬀ. It constitutes
the main reason why not all positions are evaluated during the routes creation after the
clustering phase. It would lead to a waste of time.
Nine cases can be encountered while inserting a request within a route. The Figure 5.10
illustrates the case when the insertion is made at the ﬁrst position for both the pick-up
and drop-oﬀnodes. The other possible cases can be ﬁnd in appendix (Figure 10.1 to
Figure 10.8). The new distance of the route is calculated based on these cases. To the
current distance the distance of the green edges is added and the distance of the red
edges is removed. Black edges represent the arcs kept and not impact by the insertion.
Figure 5.10: Case 1: Insertion of the new requests in ﬁrst position for both pick-up and
drop-oﬀnodes
5.1.5.2
Parallel insertion for requests not inserted by clustering
When the routes of all the clusters from a time slice have been created, the objective is,
then, to insert requests from the small clusters which have been stored in a ﬁrst time.
The algorithm is also a parallel insertion method but the initialization is diﬀerent. At
the expense of starting with a certain number of empty routes, the algorithm starts with
all the routes which were created during the previous step. Then, at each iteration the
aim is to ﬁnd the best insertion as it is for the parallel insertion after the clustering. It is
the insertion which will increase the least the total distance that will be made. If there
is no feasible insertion a new route is created. In the case there is no vehicle available,
all remaining requests are assigned to taxis so that the company can fulﬁll the demand.
However, the cost will be higher.
This stage is processed after the clustering phase. If there was not a clustering phase
-which means there were not enough requests-, this parallel insertion is used to create
route for walking requests. The only diﬀerence is that the algorithm will be initialized
with no route. Hence, it will start by creating a new one.
26 of 85
==PAGE:28==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
The diﬀerences with the parallel insertion for the clusters are that all positions are
evaluated for insertion. There is no longer the constraint about picking up every one
ﬁrst. The reason is that fewer requests are managed, thereby the computation time of
this phase is shorter. Furthermore, that gives the possibility to add a request which
may not have any common patterns with another one but which can be served within
an existing route. The Algorithm 4 deals with the diﬀerent steps applied in the parallel
insertion of requests from to small clusters.
Algorithm 4 Insertion of requests from too small clusters
Initialization
Consider the walking requests from all small clusters of the time slice
Consider all routes built for this time slice from clusters as starting routes
Iterations
while not all requests have been assigned to a route do
Determine the request, the route, and the position within the route which will
increase the global mileage the least
if a feasible insertion exists then
Insert the best request at the best position
else if no feasible insertion possible and there is still a vehicle then
Create a new route and assign the ﬁrst feasible request of the list
else
Assign all the remaining requests to taxis
end if
end while
Once the parallel insertion for walking customers from "too small clusters" is over. The
parallel insertion for wheelchairs requests is launched.
5.1.5.3
Parallel insertion for wheelchair requests
This phase is common to all cases no matter if there was a clustering step of not. It
consists in adding wheelchair requests into the route previously built and if necessary
adding new ones. The constraints are the same than before except the capacity. Each
vehicle has, indeed , both wheelchair and walking passengers capacities.
They are
independent but some vehicles do not have room for wheelchairs.
The Algorithm 5
is the same than for the previous phase except the available capacity of the route. A
vehicle which was full for a walking person may have room for a wheelchair passenger.
27 of 85
==PAGE:29==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Algorithm 5 Insertion of wheelchair requests
Initialization
Consider the wheel chair requests from the time slice
Consider all routes built for this time slice with wheelchair capacity
Iterations
while not all requests have been assigned to a route do
Determine the request, the route, and the position within the route which will
increase the global mileage the least
if a feasible insertion exists then
Insert the best request at the best position
else if no feasible insertion possible and there is still a vehicle then
Create a new route and assign the ﬁrst feasible request of the list
else
Assign all the remaining requests to taxis
end if
end while
The reason why the clustering phase is not applied on wheelchair requests is double.
First, vehicle capacities for wheelchairs never exceed 3 for the data studied. Second,
the number of wheelchair requests is much smaller than walking requests. Thus, the
combination of these two reasons makes it more eﬃcient to run directly a parallel insertion
on wheelchairs than cluster them before.
5.2
Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
5.2.1
Theoretical concept
The next step of the generation of solution is to improve the initial solution created in
the previous section. This initial section will be the starting point of this second phase.
The method which will be used is the Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS).
The ALNS, as mentioned in the literature review, is a heuristic method based on the
Large Neighbourhood Search (LNS)[20]. This function takes as input a solution and a
stopping criterion. Then, from this solution it removes a given part of the requests which
actually compose the solution. Then, it tries to reinsert them with an heuristic. Once
this phase done, it compares the solution with the current best one, if the new solution
is better then it becomes the current best solution. Otherwise, the current solution can
still be accepted. Indeed, in order not to be stuck in a local optimum, the algorithm
allows to accept worse solution than the best as input solution in order to be able to
visit a larger spectrum of solutions. This is determined by a function called acceptance
criterion. Finally, the process is reiterated until the stopping criterion becomes true.
28 of 85
==PAGE:30==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Algorithm 6 Large Neighbourhood Search [20]
scurrent = sinitial
sbest = sinitial
while stopping criterion=False do
scurrent = saccepted
Remove a given number a requests from scurrent
Reinsert the removed requests in scurrent
if f(scurrent) < f(sbest) then
sbest = scurrent
end if
if accept(scurrent, saccepted) then
saccepted = scurrent
end if
end while
Return sbest
The LNS algorithm (Algorithm 6) basically removes parts of the solution - here requests-
and reinsert them in another way. The remove and reinsert -also called destroy and
repair- methods are all based on heuristics. There is a method dedicated to the destroy
phase and one for the repair phase.
However in the ALNS, several methods are used for the destroy stage as well as the repair
phase. Each method has its speciﬁc probability to be chosen as the method which will be
processed during an iteration. The probabilities or weights are updated throughout the
process. The user deﬁnes what S. Ropke et al [20] call a segment. It is a given number
of iterations. Each time, this number of iterations is reached the probabilities speciﬁc to
each method are updated. The update is done according to the quality of results each
method has provided within this time range. In this way, the algorithm will encourage
to choose a method which has provided improved solutions. On the other hand, the
algorithm is going to decrease the probability to select the method which never brings
to an accepted solution. S. Ropke et al deﬁne a way to calculate the score of a method.
They diﬀerentiate 3 types of solution which are presented in the Table 3.
Type
Description
1
last iteration led to a new best global solution
2
last iteration led to a new accepted solution better than the current solution
3
last iteration led to a new accepted solution worse than the current solution
Table 3: Score type for weights adjustment
There are 3 ways for a method to score points : leading to a new best global solution,
leading to a new better accepted solution or leading to a new worse accepted solution.
Each type has a score associated. Scores are accumulated during a segment. At the end
29 of 85
==PAGE:31==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
of a segment, weights - or probabilities- are updated based on this score. Then the score
is reset for the next segment.
Finally, the ALNS method is summarized by the Algorithm 7. It combines the LNS
algorithm with an adaptation of methods probabilities and an acceptance criterion.
Algorithm 7 Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search
scurrent = sinitial
sbest = sinitial
Initialize probabilities to take any destroy(⇢−) and repair (⇢+) methods at the same
value
while stopping criterion=False do
scurrent = saccepted
Select a destroy method and a repair method using probabilities ⇢−and ⇢+
Remove a given number a requests from scurrent
Reinsert the removed requests in scurrent
if f(scurrent) < f(sbest) then
sbest = scurrent
end if
if accept(scurrent, saccepted) then
saccepted = scurrent
end if
if end of segment then
Update probabilities for destroy and repair methods ⇢−and ⇢+
end if
end while
Return sbest
The next subsections will detail deeper the destroy and repair methods that are used in
the method deployed in this report.
5.2.2
Destroy methods
The destroy methods are heuristics which are going to determine how many and which
requests to remove during an iteration of the ALNS. It is relevant to have diﬀerent
methods which will not target always the same requests. Otherwise, it is likely that the
solution will be stuck in a local optimum. The more diverse the requests removed are,
the more chances the process has to ﬁnd new solutions. In this algorithm, four diﬀerent
methods will try to remove diﬀerent kind of requests.
5.2.2.1
Randomly remove routes
The ﬁrst method used is a method based on randomness and has an input parameter
stating which percentage of the solution has to be removed. The principle is easy. A
30 of 85
==PAGE:32==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
random number is generate between 0 and 1.
If this number, is under the desired
percentage of the solution to be removed, a route is selected randomly and removed.
The process is iterated n times. This n represents the number of routes there was in the
solution at the beginning of the destroy phase.
Algorithm 8 Destroy method 1: Randomly remove routes
Get the number n of routes in the current solution
for i from 1 to n do
Attribute all remaining routes a number
Generate a random number d between 0 and 1
if d percentage of destruction then
Generate a random number r between 1 and the number of remaining routes
Remove the route r
end if
end for
This method needs the percentage of destruction to be tuned in the parameter tuning
section. The higher the percentage is, the higher the chance will be to visit new solutions.
However, if the percentage is high the process of the destroy function (Algorithm 8) will
be more time consuming and may impair the quality of the solution as well.
5.2.2.2
Remove the emptiest routes
The second method focuses on removing the emptiest routes within a solution. The
method has as input, the number of emptiest routes it has to remove. At each iteration,
the algorithm ﬁnds the emptiest route present in the solution and removes it (Algorithm
9). As not all vehicles have the same capacity - the method works for an heterogeneous
ﬂeet of vehicles-, a percentage of free seats is calculated for each route. If several routes
have the same percentage of free seats, the ﬁrst encountered is the one to be selected.
Algorithm 9 Destroy method 2: remove the emptiest routes
Get the percentage of free seats for each route of the solution
for i from 1 to number of emptiest route to remove do
Select the route r with the highest percentage of free seats
Remove the route r
end for
This second method also has a parameter to tune. It is the number of emptiest routes
that needs to be removed when this method is selected. A range of numbers that will be
tuned later.
31 of 85
==PAGE:33==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
5.2.2.3
Remove the most expensive routes
The third function focuses on removing the most expensive routes of the solution. In
this case, the term expensive is not referring to a cost or to the objective function but to
a duration. At each iteration, the algorithm removes the route whose average duration
per customer is the highest (Algorithm 10). Indeed, some clients may have been put
in the route by default and it could be interesting to see if there is not another way to
divide these requests among routes.
Algorithm 10 Destroy method 3: remove most expensive routes
Get the average duration per customer within each route of the solution
for i from 1 to number of most expensive routes to remove do
Select the route r with the highest average duration per customer
Remove the route r
end for
This destroy method also has a unique parameter to tune. It consists in tuning the
number of routes with the highest average duration to remove from the solution.
5.2.2.4
Remove routes from period with high rate of taxis
The last destroy function aims to remove routes from periods where taxis have been used.
Indeed, the more there were customers handled by taxis, the higher the chance is to
remove routes from this period. From this selected period, the algorithm removes routes
from the n previous periods as well. The goal of this is to target the "critical" periods
where taxis have been used because the company was running out of vehicles. Thereby,
the critical period is a consequence of what happened during the previous periods where
all vehicles were ﬁlled. That is why, not only are the "critical" period routes removed but
also the preceding routes. The Algorithm 11 below details the process of this heuristic.
Algorithm 11 Destroy method 4: remove routes from period with high rate of taxis
for i from 1 to number of iterations do
Get the probability to remove each time slice according to the number of taxis used
within this time slice
Generate a random number t using probabilities determined before
Remove all routes starting during the period t
for j from (t-numberOf Periods To Remove Before) to t do
Remove all routes starting during the j period
end for
end for
The probability of a time slice to be chosen is the number of taxis allocated within the
period divided by the global number of taxis across the day. That means that only
32 of 85
==PAGE:34==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
periods with taxis are ﬁrst targeted. However, once a time slice t is chosen so that all
its routes are removed, all routes starting within the n periods preceding the time slice t
are destroyed as well. This parameter n will be tuned in the parameter tuning section.
Furthermore, the size of the periods evaluated and the number of times the process is
iterated, will be tuned.
5.2.3
Repair method
The repair methods are heuristics which aims to reinsert all requests removed during the
destroy phase. It can be relevant to have diﬀerent repair algorithms so that solutions can
be built in diﬀerent ways and thereby more diﬀerent solutions could be visited. In this
case, only one repair method, based on the way that the initial solution was built on, is
used. One diﬀerence is, that the algorithm does not start with an empty solution but
from the remaining routes of the destroyed solution. It also means that not all requests
will be present in each time slice. For instance, as the clustering phase depends on the
quantity of requests, even if the algorithm is the same, it will behave diﬀerently each
time. The Algorithm 12 states all the steps executed during the repair phase.
Algorithm 12 Repair method : parallel insertion heuristic based on K-mean clustering
Get the vehicle ﬂeet
Determine pick-up and drop-oﬀtime windows for each destroyed request
Split the day in a given number of time slices nTimeSlices
for timeSlice from 1 to nTimeSlices do
Update vehicles state
Get available vehicles in the good order
Get the requests for the given time slice nRequestsRemovedT
Split wheelchair and walking requests (nWalkingT, nWheelchairT)
if nWalkingT > minRequests then
Get the number of clusters to generate
Apply the K-mean clustering algorithm for the walking requests
Generate routes from these clusters with a parallel insertion algorithm
Parallel insertion algorithm for walking requests which have not been assigned in
the previous phase
Parallel insertion algorithm for wheelchair requests
else
Generate routes from the walking requests with a parallel insertion algorithm
Parallel insertion algorithmfor wheelchair requests
end if
Update pick-up and drop-oﬀtimes
end for
A diﬀerence with the initial solution algorithm is the way to determine clusters number
within a time slice, according to the quantity of requests. In the initial solution, the
33 of 85
==PAGE:35==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
silhouette algorithm was used to determine this number. It is no longer the case because
the algorithm was too slow and was dividing by around 2 the number of iterations
made by the ALNS. Indeed, the K-mean clustering phase is the longest operation of the
algorithm. Each time the silhouette algorithm is ran, the clustering algorithm is ran
between 5 and 15 times depending on the number of value K to test. It is the reason
why it has been decided to choose a simpler way to determine this number of clusters.
The quotient of the euclidean division between the number of walking requests and the
capacity of the biggest vehicle plus 2 will be deﬁning the umber of clusters. In this way,
a minimum number of 2 clusters is used. More clusters are added if there is a great deal
of requests.
In addition, as the silhouette algorithm is not used in the ALNS part, the initial clusters
will be randomly built each time the K-mean clustering is processed. The only constraint
will be that each cluster owns at least one request at the beginning. Otherwise, algorithms
for the repair method are the same as the initial solution except that some routes already
exist. In parallel insertion heuristics, the program will ﬁrst aim to ﬁll all these existing
routes, except for the parallel insertion following a clustering phase where only new routes
are created.
There is only one algorithm for reinserting requests in the destroyed solution. Nevertheless,
the parameter tuning phase will tune a repair method for each destroy method which
means that there will be 4 repair methods with the same algorithmic behind but with
parameters which are likely to be diﬀerent from one method to another.
5.2.4
Adaptive weights for destroy and repair methods selection
As it has been explained in the ALNS theory in the introduction of this section, the
ALNS adapts the probabilities to choose a method -destroy or repair- regarding how
it has performed before.
The adaptation of probabilities is done at the end of each
segment. A segment is represented by a number of iterations. It will be determined in
the parameter tuning section. Ropke et al
[20] introduced a formula for the weight of
the method i during the segment j+1 :
wi,j+1 = wi,j · (1 −r) + r · ⇡i
✓i
(24)
where :
wi,j : weight of the method i during segment j
r : reaction factor
⇡i : score of the method during segment j
✓i : number of times the method i has been used during segment j
The reaction factor r is a number included between 0 and 1 which balances the importance
given to the previous weight and the importance of the score the method performed
34 of 85
==PAGE:36==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
during the last segment.
If r tends towards 0, a major importance is given to the
previous weight. On the other hand, if r tends toward 1 a bigger importance is given
to the performance of the method within the last segment. The reaction factor will be
tuned while testing the ALNS algorithm.
5.2.5
Acceptance and stopping criteria
In the ﬁrst part of the ALNS section, an acceptance function is employed to state if a
current solution will be accepted or not. The easiest way to do so is to compare the
current solution with the best one. If the current one is better it becomes the new global
best solution, otherwise the current solution is given up. However, if the current best
solution is never improved there is chance that the algorithm stays stuck and no longer
ﬁnds new solutions to explore. That is why allowing the algorithm to accept solution
which are not the best could help the program to explore new solutions and thus maybe
leave a local optimum to ﬁnd a better solution later.
The acceptance criterion that will be used in this report is the acceptance criterion from
the simulated annealing. It has been used by Ropke and Pisinger[20] in their paper
on the ALNS for the pick-up and delivery problem with time windows (PDPTW). The
probability that a solution will be accepted, even if it is worse than the best solution,
follows this formula :
p(accept s0) = exp (−f(s0) −f(s)
T
)
(25)
where :
s’ : current solution
s : current accepted solution
f : objective function
T : temperature
The temperature T is strictly positive and decreases at each iteration.
Indeed, this
temperature is each time multiply by a factor strictly included between 0 and 1. This
factor is called cooling rate.
The closer the cooling rate c is to 1, the slower the
temperature decreases. It means that the algorithm may accept worse solution during
more time than if the cooling rate is low. At the opposite, if c is small -close to 0- the
acceptance function will quickly no longer accept worse solution.
As Ropke et al explain in their article, the initialization of the temperature really depends
on the problem studied. They deal with the fact that a temperature can be initialized by
assuming that a solution is acceptable with a probability of 0.5 if its objective function
is g% higher than the best or reference solution. This report will apply this concept
by using the average results of the initial solution as result of reference. Then, the gap
35 of 85
==PAGE:37==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
g admissible will be tuned via the initial temperature value in the parameter tuning
section, as well as the cooling rate.
The stopping criterion in this algorithm will be the time, there is no threshold of iterations
because the running times are quite small.
6
Study case : Konsentra AS
This section presents a study case on what the methodology developed in the previous
part, will be tested on. It will allow to challenge the eﬃciency of the method with real
data from a public transport company called Konsentra AS.
6.1
Konsentra presentation
Konsentra AS is a non proﬁt organization in charge of public transportation in the region
of Oslo and Akershus, in Norway. Konsentra is a subsidiary hold at 100% by Ruter AS.
The company’s main role is, not only to transport people who lives in the countryside,
and do not have access to public transports, but also to transport people with speciﬁc
requests. That can be disable people who needs to travel in their wheelchair, children
or seniors who have a reduced degree of mobility. The transportation is managed is 4
diﬀerent regions :
• Asker & Bærum (AB)
• Follo (FOL)
• Nedre Romerike (NROM)
• Øvre Romerike (OROM)
Each region manages its requests independently, and owns a ﬂeet of minibuses to honour
the demand. Konsentra is a public transport service which means that it is has to serve
all demands. In the case where no mini-buses are available, the company sends a taxi to
serve the request. In addition, Konsentra has agreement with certain taxi companies in
order to reduce associated costs. As it is a non-proﬁt organization, it is important for
the company to reduce the operational costs as much as possible while keeping a high
rate of satisfaction of their customers.
The company receives two diﬀerent kind of requests. The major part of the requests
are recurrent requests. For instance, all the requests so that children can be brought to
school occur every week day. Then, there are exceptional requests which are diﬀerent
every day.
For example, if a customer wants to go to the cinema, it is likely to be
an exceptional request. The ALNS meta-heuristic method, which has been developed
during the previous section, has been tested on a dataset containing one day of requests
for all 4 regions.
36 of 85
==PAGE:38==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
6.2
General data overview
This report deals with data of only one day per region because of several reasons. First,
the time that takes to run all tests for a dataset is consequent. In addition, as it is
explained later, the generation of distance matrices requires a lot of itinerary requests to
companies like Google Maps or HERE. These companies limit the number of requests
per month which has made impossible to test more than 4 datasets.
6.2.1
Data distribution
The following ﬁgures (Figure 6.1 to Figure 6.4) represent the distribution of requests
within 5 diﬀerent days for each region. It can be observed that the distribution is very
close from one day to another day. That is why it does not really inﬂuence the model if
only one dataset is evaluated per region.
Figure 6.1: Requests distribution for 5 diﬀerent days within a day for region AB
37 of 85
==PAGE:39==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 6.2: Requests distribution for 5 diﬀerent days within a day for region FOL
Figure 6.3: Requests distribution for 5 diﬀerent days within a day for region NROM
38 of 85
==PAGE:40==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 6.4: Requests distribution for 5 diﬀerent days within a day for region OROM
Two conclusions are drawn from these ﬁgures. First, for a given region, the distribution
of requests across the day is almost the same for the 5 diﬀerent days represented. Second,
in each region a rush hour is observed in the morning around 8 am. Then follows an
oﬀ-peak period until the middle of the afternoon where the activity starts again. This
activity is spread across the afternoon, except for the region AB which knows a second
rush-hour around 5pm. However, it remains smaller than in the morning.
Konsentra deals with customers having special needs and/or disabled people. The Table
4 summarizes the quantity of special needs and the number of wheelchair requests present
within in each dataset.
Region
Total
Speciﬁc
Wheelchair
% Speciﬁc
% Wheelchair
AB
855
52
82
6%
10%
FOL
940
18
34
2%
4%
NROM
984
77
59
8%
6%
OROM
1173
66
33
6%
3%
Table 4: Distribution of speciﬁc/wheelchair requests per region
The speciﬁc requests can be of diﬀerent types. For instance, a client can require to be
picked-up and dropped-oﬀwithout detour. Furthermore, some customers ask for the
same driver all the time or need to have a companion on their side during the travel. All
39 of 85
==PAGE:41==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
these speciﬁc demands do not exceed 8% within a dataset. The proportion of disabled
people is similar and does not exceed 10%.
6.2.2
2 diﬀerent types of request
Beyond the mere fact that there are recurrent and occasional requests, it exists two
way to give a requested time for a customer. First, there is what the company calls the
’PICK-UP’ request. That implies that the customer has to be picked-up by the driver at
the requested time. On the other hand, there is the ’DROP-OFF’ request. This second
type of request requires that the customer arrives at the drop-oﬀplace at the requested
time. In addition of these two ways to order a trip, the maximum travel time duration
d a client can spend in the minibus depends on his age :
Age
Maximum travel duration
9
45 minutes
9-12
60 minutes
>12
75 minutes
Table 5: Maximum travel duration according to the age of the customer
For instance, for a ’PICK UP’ request of a 9 years-old kid, that signiﬁes that the customer
cannot arrive at the drop-oﬀnode later than 45 minutes after the requested time. If it
has been a ’DROP OFF’ request the child could not have been picked-up earlier than
45 minutes before the requested time.
Figure 6.5: Representation of maximum
travel duration for a pick-up request
Figure 6.6: Representation of maximum
travel duration for a drop-oﬀrequest
6.3
Data simpliﬁcation and assumptions
Some constraints hold by Konsentra are not hold in the method of resolution developed in
this report merely because they are very speciﬁc to Konsentra. Indeed, the speciﬁc needs
like, for instance, having the same driver for a given customer, or respecting that some
customers wish to go directly where they want to go without detour, or any companion
requests will not be taken into account. The main reasons why they will not be considered
40 of 85
==PAGE:42==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
is to simplify the problem because the rate of requests aﬀected by these considerations
is low. However, the wheelchair constraints will be handled.
Then, the number of taxis is assumed to be inﬁnite. Moreover, the method does not
use shared taxis. Hence, only two kind of taxis will be considered : the smallest of all
types used by Konsentra for the walking requests and the taxi for speciﬁc demands for
the wheelchair requests.
As soon as a customer gets on/oﬀthe minibus, an extra time of 1 minute is added no
matter if there are several people going down at the same stop or if it is a wheelchair.
This parameter has not be tuned at all in this study, and, would require experiments
in the ﬁeld to get a better idea of how long it really takes for someone to get oﬀthe
minibus. That would allow to make the distinction between a group of people , a single
person or a wheelchair going down. This is out of the scope of this report. However, if
the methodology had to be improved it would be relevant to improve this so that the
method would ﬁt even better to real life cases.
In terms of distance several assumptions are made. First, the distance and the travelling
time between a point A and a point B is assumed symmetric which means they are equal
to the ones going from B to A. Then, even if the K-mean clustering is using a crow
ﬂies distance, the route construction heuristics use the real distance and the travel time
without using the traﬃc information. It could be interesting and more accurate to take
these information into account. However, for this study it appeared impossible to get
these traﬃc data because that would require to make the request to HERE or Google
Maps at the say week day and at the time that the driver is expected to pick-up the
customer and reiterate the process for all requests. According, to the INRIX study[33]
made in 2018, Oslo presented a rate of traﬃc jam smaller than in other big European
capitals like Moscow or Rome -Oslo is ranked 93rd whereas Moscow is 1st and Rome is
10th of the ranking. That means it makes more sense to make this kind of assumption
in a city like Oslo than Moscow. Nevertheless, it would be more realistic to include the
traﬃc in the calculation.
Finally, as there was no information in the case presentation about drivers constraints,
it is assumed that the drivers start their work at the place where they have to pick-up
their ﬁrst customer and they end when they drop-oﬀtheir last customer. The total work
duration is the sum between every route duration and the time needed between the last
customer of a route to the ﬁrst customer of the next route. No maximum or minimum
time limits are taken into account.
6.4
Processing parameters upstream
6.4.1
Distance and travel time matrices
For a given dataset, the matrices for distances and travel times between two points
of the network have been processed upstream of the algorithm and are considered as
41 of 85
==PAGE:43==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
inputs of the ALNS meta-heuristic. This will ﬁrstly permit to save computation time
and thereby make the ALNS running faster. But, the reason is, above all, to restrict
the number of requests to APIs -Application Programming Interface- like Google Maps
or HERE. Indeed, it is possible to make some requests to an API so that it returns all
information needed about a trip between two points. It is exactly like when someone
goes on the Internet on Google Maps website to get an itinerary. However, when it is
done based on requests the APIs limit the number of calls that can be freely made per
month. Currently, Google Maps oﬀers 40 000 calls whereas HERE allows 250 000 calls
per month. That is why distance and travel time matrices have been generated with
HERE data. In addition, the symmetric assumption allows to divide by 2 the number
of requests needed to build the matrix.
Finally, the purpose of running the clustering algorithm with a crow ﬂies distance
is motivated by the fact that centroids of clusters never have the same coordinates.
Therefore, that would require to get a new distance matrix between the center and all
requests present in this time slice at every single iteration. Not only would that be time
consuming but that would also make the number of calls to the API explode.
6.4.2
Requests time windows
From the types of requests that can be made, and, the diﬀerent total travel duration
that can be handled depending on the age of the passenger, the pick-up and drop-oﬀ
time windows have to be determined. That will then allow neither to make distinction
between a pick-up or a drop-oﬀrequest, nor on the age of the customer. The only thing
which will need to take care is that pick-up and drop-oﬀtime windows are respected.
The formula to determine the earliest and latest starting and arrival time are detailed in
the following sub sections for both kind of requests.
6.4.2.1
Pick-up request time windows
For a pick-up request, the time windows are calculated from the earliest pick-up time
which is the requested time by the client :
pe = reqTime
(26)
pl = pe + d −tt
(27)
de = pe + tt
(28)
dl = pe + d
(29)
42 of 85
==PAGE:44==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Where :
pe : earliest pick-up time
pl : latest pick-up time
de : earliest drop-oﬀtime
dl : latest drop-oﬀtime
d : maximum duration between the requested time and the drop-oﬀtime
tt : travel time from pick-up node to drop-oﬀnode according to HERE data
reqTime : requested pick-up time from the customer
These equations can be illustrated by the following ﬁgure. It illustrates time windows
for a case where pick-up and drop-oﬀtime windows are distinct, which is not always the
case.
Figure 6.7: Representation time windows for a pick-up request
6.4.2.2
Drop-oﬀrequest time windows
For a drop-oﬀrequest, the time windows are calculated from the latest drop-oﬀtime
which is the requested time by the customer :
dl = reqTime
(30)
de = dl −d + tt
(31)
pe = dl −d
(32)
pl = dl −tt
(33)
43 of 85
==PAGE:45==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Where :
pe : earliest pick-up time
pl : latest pick-up time
de : earliest drop-oﬀtime
dl : latest drop-oﬀtime
d : maximum duration between the requested time and the drop-oﬀtime
tt : travel time from pick-up node to drop-oﬀnode according to HERE data
reqTime : requested pick-up time from the customer
These equations can be illustrated by the following ﬁgure. It illustrates time windows
for a case where pick-up and drop-oﬀtime windows are distinct which is, as mentioned
for pick-up requests, not always the case.
Figure 6.8: Representation time windows for a drop-oﬀrequest
7
Parameter tuning
This section will go through all the tests which have been done for all the parameters
introduced in the methodology section. In particular, will be tuned all parameters from
the initial solution, from the various destroy and repair methods within the ALNS, as
well as the parameters of the ALNS. The objective is to ﬁnd the best combination of
all these parameters so that the method will perform as well as possible.
The next
subsection details the guideline of the parameter tuning.
The parameter tuning is processed on 4 diﬀerent datasets. They represent each a week
day of requests. Each dataset is from a diﬀerent region : AB, FOL, NROM and ØROM.
At the end of this section, the objective is to get a set parameters that present the
44 of 85
==PAGE:46==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
best average solution so that they can be applied on all datasets of Konsentra. If it
had been possible, an independent parameter tuning could have been done per region
and then tested on other day from the same region. However, the diﬃculty to generate
distance matrices made it impossible. Therefore a unique model will be developed. The
parameter tuning has been processed in 4 mains phases. The following diagram (Figure
7.1) depicts which part of the algorithm is ran each time.
Figure 7.1: Diagram of the parameter tuning procedure
7.1
Phase 1 : Initial clusters
7.1.1
Procedure
The ﬁrst phase of this parameter tuning process is to ﬁt the input parameters the K-mean
clustering algorithm depends on. It depends on two aspects. First, the number of clusters
K for the representation of a dataset impacts the quality of the result. Moreover, as it is
mentioned in the methodology section, the initial position of centroids aﬀects drastically
the ﬁnal result. The Silhouette algorithm is used to select the best way to cluster a
dataset. The algorithm returns the optimal number of clusters to set and the initial
position of the centroids with which this result has been found.
However, for a given number of clusters K the quality of the clustering algorithm can
vary a lot from one initial composition to another. That is why it is important to run
several times this algorithm in order to get the best composition possible.
45 of 85
==PAGE:47==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
The Silhouette algorithm has thus been ran 10 times for each of the four datasets.
Furthermore, it has been processed for the diﬀerent time slices that will be tested during
the phase 2 - the initial solution parameter tuning. Indeed, if the length of the time slice
evolves, the sub databases of requests within a time slice will grow or reduce. Hence, the
number of cluster K which highlights the best the data may evolve as well.
In addition, the K-mean clustering algorithm is only applied on walking requests. Thereby,
the parameter tuning focuses only on this type of requests. Some time slices also do not
have enough requests -less than 2 walking requests. It makes the clustering impossible,
these time slices are skipped. It is relevant to notice that at this stage, the parameter
minRequests, which exempts some time slices considered to small from the clustering
phase, is not taken into account. All the time slices that can be clustered are tested.
Algorithms, during the generation of the solution, will decide to use or not the clustering
on a given time slice.
After the 10 runs, the number of cluster K and the initial positions of centroids with the
highest silhouette value, will be selected for each time slice and each dataset.
7.1.2
Results
The test has been ran for 5 diﬀerent length of time slices : 60 minutes, 40 minutes, 30
minutes, 20 minutes and 15 minutes. The Table 6 shows the results for the 4 datasets
with a time slice length of 60 minutes. Each dataset is represented by two columns. The
ﬁrst one is the number of clusters and the second one is the highest average silhouette
value S. The range of K tested is between 2 clusters and 14. The rest of the results for
the other time slice lengths can be found in appendix (Table 30 to Table 33).
46 of 85
==PAGE:48==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Time slice
KAB
SAB
KFOL
SFOL
KNROM
SNROM
KOROM
SOROM
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
3
0.73
-
-
-
-
5
4
0.77
3
0.33
3
0.18
2
0.38
6
2
0.01
3
0.02
2
0.10
13
0.02
7
3
0.23
3
0.09
2
0.46
2
0.40
8
4
0.36
4
0.75
3
0.32
4
0.68
9
2
0.93
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
5
0.69
4
0.57
7
0.50
3
0.78
11
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
0.89
12
2
0.60
6
0.41
4
0.76
8
0.73
13
3
0.47
2
0.12
2
0.22
5
0.10
14
5
0.10
3
0.22
8
0.16
2
0.27
15
3
0.26
7
0.07
2
0.06
2
0.17
16
11
0.0
2
0.92
2
0.96
17
4
0.31
14
0.21
2
0.81
2
0.41
18
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
21
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
average S
-
0.39
-
0.37
-
0.41
-
0.44
Table 6: Results of the Silhouette algorithm parameter tuning for a 60 minutes time slice
length
It results that in average the requests from the 4 datasets have a quite weak structure,
if reference is made to the interpretation table from Anja Struyf et al [30]. However, the
silhouette value are disparate depending on the time slices. Some of them are part of the
category with a strong structure between requests. On an other hand, some silhouette
values are very low even negative which can be interpreted as data with no common
pattern at all.
The Table 7 highlights the average silhouette values for diﬀerent time slice lengths for
the 4 datasets.
47 of 85
==PAGE:49==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Time slice length
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
60 min
0.39
0.37
0.41
0.44
0.40
40 min
0.68
0.44
0.32
0.42
0.47
30 min
0.66
0.33
0.41
0.36
0.44
20 min
0.64
0.41
0.34
0.24
0.41
15 min
0.42
0.36
0.24
0.33
0.34
Average
0.56
0.38
0.34
0.36
Table 7: Average of the silhouette values for diﬀerent time slice length for the 4 databases
It appears that requests from AB region have in general a better structure between each
other than in the three other regions. Indeed, if reference is made to Anja Struyf et al’s
[30] table in the three regions -FOL, NROM and OROM-, the structure between data is
considered weak. In addition, the results for the 4 longest time slices lengths are quite
close. It has an impact on each database, but not really on the global result except for
the 15 minutes length which seems less suitable, at ﬁrst sight.
Finally, the number of clusters for each time slice and each dataset have been determined
as well as the initial clusters. Now, comes the next phase : the parameter tuning of the
initial solution generation.
7.2
Phase 2 : Initial solution
7.2.1
Procedure
The objective of this stage is to tune the parameters of the initial solution generation.
The aim is to get the best combination of parameters so that a good initial solution can
be generated for the four datasets. Four parameters need to be introduced at this step :
• timeSliceLength: it represents in how many slices the day will be cut. The slices
are evaluated one by one. This parameter has already been used in the ﬁrst phase
while determining the best composition of initial clusters for each time slice length.
• timeDeviationAcceptable : it is the maximum time for which the temporal gap
between a request and a cluster is not penalized. This acceptable deviation must
be smaller than the time slice length considering that only requests within a given
time slice are processed. That is why the longer the time slice length will be, the
higher the number of values to tune will be.
• MinRequests: it represents the minimum number of walking requests during a time
slice from which the K-Mean clustering algorithm will be ran before implementing
the parallel insertion. For a number of walking requests smaller than the MinRequests
parameter the k-Mean clustering step will be skipped.
• TooSmallClusters: it represents the minimal number of requests so that a parallel
insertion is ran into the cluster. Otherwise, requests are stored and will be inserted
48 of 85
==PAGE:50==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
in the other routes of the time slice. If it is not suﬃcient, a new parallel insertion
will be ran with all the requests from too small clusters. This too small cluster size
has to be lower than the MinRequests parameter, because otherwise, no matter the
way it is clustered, there will never be a conﬁguration where a cluster is big enough
to allow the creation of a route with the parallel insertion algorithm.
A part of the generation of the initial solution is random because when a route is created
during parallel insertion, the initialization of the route picks a feasible request randomly.
That is why even with the same set of parameters the solution may diﬀer from one
iteration to another. This randomness factor leads the necessity to run the parameter
tuning tests several times.
In this report, each set of parameters will be ran 5 times. On one hand, that allows to
avoid to biased the ﬁnal decision with a better solution than the average would be. Or
at the opposite, it avoids to remove a combination of parameters that did not work once.
On the other hand, running 5 times each test does not lead to huge computation time
so that a large range of values for each parameter can be evaluated.
7.2.2
Results
The range of values used for each parameter that have been used is presented in the
following table.
Parameter
Range of values tuned
timeSliceLength (minutes)
{60, 40, 30, 20, 15}
timeDeviationAcceptable (minutes)
{60, 40, 30, 20, 15}
MinRequests
{3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21}
TooSmallClusters
{1, 3, 5}
Table 8: Range of values for the initial solution parameter tuning
NB : Note that only the feasible combinations will be ran, which means that for a 40
minutes time slice length, the 60 minutes acceptable time deviation will not be processed.
The huge amount of combinations makes almost impossible to summarize all the results
in a table. The Table 9 gives the average results for each dataset when the focus is
made on time slices length. All values represent the percentage of gap between the best
average and the current average value. For example, for the region AB the percentage
will represent the gap between the objective value of the best combination and the
average value for a given time slice length.The standard deviation is also showed in order
to measure if results are spread or not. The same table with the objective values is
available in appendix (Table 34) but for the parameter tuning section. It seems more
relevant to work on gap between results.
49 of 85
==PAGE:51==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Time slice length
60 min
40 min
30 min
20 min
15 min
MeanAB
6%
5%
6%
8%
10%
SDAB
2%
2%
1%
2%
2%
MeanFOL
5%
9%
6%
12%
15%
SDFOL
2%
3%
2%
2%
3%
MeanNROM
4%
8%
10%
17%
16%
SDNROM
2%
1%
2%
2%
2%
MeanOROM
7%
7%
7%
11%
12%
SDOROM
3%
2%
2%
2%
2%
Global Average
1%
3%
3%
8%
9%
Global SD
2%
2%
2%
2%
2%
Table 9: Mean and standard deviation for the average solution according to a time slice
length
From this table it can be concluded that the three longest lengths tuned -60, 40 and
30 minutes- seem to work better than the other ones. The fact that the gap of general
average is lower than the gap for each region could raise questions. It is actually because
the optimal objective function for each region is not reached with the same combination
of parameters. Therefore, the best global average is not the sum of these local optima.
However, this is an illustration in average which means that a combination with a 15
minutes time slice length could be better than everything else but is invisible with this
table. Almost all the best results are found within a parameters combination with a 60
minutes time slice length.
Thus, this value of 60 minutes will be chosen for the initial solution. This initial solution
parameter tuning is also the phase where the several best combination are retrieved in
order to test them on the ALNS repair methods, as they are the same parameters to
tune. Furthermore, it would be unfeasible to tune again all these parameters with each
of the destroy method, in terms of time. Thereby, the six best combinations are selected
at this phase in order to save time. The ALNS heuristic will only be ﬁtted with these
six ranges of values.
Nevertheless, when the parameter timeSliceLength is set to 60 minutes the computation
time is at least 3 times slower than every other value of the range. It is due to the fact
that the day is split in fewer parts, thus the size of sub-dataset increases and slows down
the process. This is not a problem to generate the initial solution because it is done
once. But, for the ALNS, the objective is to visit a great deal of solutions and therefore
this requires to have an algorithm which is fast enough to build solutions. In addition,
some combinations of parameters with 40 or 30 minutes time slice length provide results
with an objective value close to the best performances -no more than 2% higher than
the best average objective function.
Hence, for the purpose of having both a quick algorithm and diversity in the way to
repair solution in the ALNS, the decision has been made to chose the 2 best parameters
50 of 85
==PAGE:52==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
combinations for the 3 biggest time slice lengths. The following table summarizes the 6
sets of parameters selected for the ALNS parameter tuning -phase 3 and 4. The mean
(µ), the percentage of gap with the best solution (gap), the standard deviation (σ) are
presented in the Table 10. The best combination among the six selected will be also used
for the initial solution.
Parameters
µ
gap (%)
σ
Purpose
{60, 30, 15, 3}
226 481
0%
1.9%
Initial Solution, ALNS
{60, 60, 21, 3}
226 608
0.1%
1.6%
ALNS
{40, 30, 12, 1}
229 319
1.3%
1.8%
ALNS
{40, 20, 3, 1}
230 868
1.9%
1.7%
ALNS
{30, 20, 9, 5}
230 018
1.6%
1.8%
ALNS
{30, 30, 6, 1}
230 483
1.8%
1.4%
ALNS
Table 10: Results for the 6 ranges of parameters combination chosen for the next tuning
phase
7.3
Phase 3 : Destroy and repair methods
7.3.1
Procedure
This phase 3 focuses on tuning the destroy and repair methods one at a time. There
are four destroy methods and only one repair method. However, as mentioned in the
methodology section, a repair method will be tuned for each destroy method. That will
allow to have diﬀerent ways to build a solution. It is expected that the diversity of this
repairing methods improves even more the solution.
For the destroy methods the number of parameters to ﬁt varies from one function to
another. The three ﬁrst approaches have each of them one parameter to tune. The last
one requires 3 diﬀerent variables :
• Destroy method 1 : this algorithm requires the parameter %ofDestruction. It sets
the quantity of the solution to randomly be removed at each stage.
• Destroy method 2 : this method requires the number of emptiest routes to be
removed at each use. The parameter is called NrOfEmptiestRoutes.
• Destroy method 3 : same idea for this approach but this time the goal is to take
away a number of routes considered as the most expensive within the day. This
quantity is given by the parameter NrOfExpensiveRoutes.
• Destroy method 4 : this function needs 3 parameters as input which are tuned. The
ﬁrst thing is to set the size of the time the method will work with : timeSliceSizeDestroy.
This parameter has exactly the same role than the one used in the repair method.
The second setting needed, is the number of time slices before the period selected-
NrOfTimeSliceBefore- that the function will remove the routes from. Finally, the
51 of 85
==PAGE:53==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
last one sets how many time the process is iterated. It is called NrIterations.
In order to complete these tests, for each method and each dataset the initial solution
will be ran once, and then all the tests will use the solution to start with. That permits
to compare equally all parameters without disruption from the initial solution. The only
impact the initial solution could have is, that if it is a good one, the result will not
be improved as much as it could be with another worse solution. Nevertheless in this
phase, the relative performance between parameters is more important than the absolute
objective value.
As in the previous phase the tests will be ran 5 times for each combination. Furthermore,
as there is only one destroy and repair methods the algorithm looks like an LNS algorithm
and therefore the simulated annealing is used. The temperature and the cooling rate of
the simulated annealing will be tested deeply in the phase 4. However, for this phase,
and after a few experiments, all the tests will be ran with an initial temperature of 100
000 and a cooling rate of 0.8. These values will be estimated again afterwards. But,
for tests which last 45 seconds each this couple of values is eﬃcient and gives relevant
results.
It could have been better to test the simulated annealing parameters at the same time
than tuning the methods but the number of possible combination would lead to a huge
computation time which is not aﬀordable. That is why the decision has been made to
ﬁt these parameters during phase 4, while tuning the methods weights adaptation. The
Table 11 presents the range of values for each parameter of destroy methods.
Parameter
Range of values tuned
%ofDestruction
{10%, 30%, 50%}
NrOfEmptiestRoutes
{5, 10, 15, 20, 25}
NrOfExpensiveRoutes
{5, 10, 15, 20, 25}
timeSliceSizeDestroy
{24, 36}
NrOfTimeSliceBefore
{4, 7}
NrIterations
{1, 2}
Table 11: Range of values for the destroy methods parameter tuning
The repair methods combination will be based on the result of the initial solution. All
the combinations which will be used have been presented in Table 10.
7.3.2
Results
7.3.2.1
Destroy Method 1 : randomly remove routes
The ﬁrst destroy method did not lead to huge improvements. It was expected because
this approach is only based on randomness. Thereby, with a 45 seconds length for each
test, it seems coherent that the method provides better results occasionally. However, it
52 of 85
==PAGE:54==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
is important to keep this function, even if it does not work at each use, because it could
allow to get away from a local optimum by removing randomly some routes. It could not
be the case with other methods. The Table 12 provides average results for the diﬀerent
values of the destroy method parameter.
Destroy Parameter
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
0.1
-1.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.2%
0.3
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.5
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.7
0.0%
-0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
Average
-0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.1%
Table 12: Average results for destroy method 1 according to diﬀerent destroy values
The table illustrates that, when there are improvements, they are light. However, some
destroy values worked better than others. Even if one of the repair method provides
improvements for a destroy value of 0.7 (Table 13), the lowest destroy rate works better
in general. Indeed, for diﬀerent types of combination of repair parameters the objective
function is improved at an average of 0.3%. The Table 13 highlights the combinations
between destroy and repair parameters which produce the best results.
Destroy Parameter
Repair Parameters
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
0.1
{60, 30, 15, 3}
-1.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.3%
0.1
{40, 30, 12, 1}
-1.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.3%
0.1
{30, 20, 9, 5}
-1.3%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.3%
0.7
{40, 20, 3, 1}
0.0%
-1.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.3%
Table 13: Best average results for destroy method 1 according to diﬀerent destroy and
repair combinations
It can be noticed that improvements are only focused on region AB for the destroy value
0.1 and only focused on region FOL for the destroy value of 0.7. That means that the
two other datasets have never been improved. One of the reason why is that they are
bigger, thus, the random destroy is perhaps less eﬃcient.
Finally, it has been decided to keep the third line of the table 13 for two reasons. First, it
is the combination with the best average results. Second, for the implementation in the
ALNS algorithm afterwards, destroying a solution at a rate of 0.7 seems too consequent.
It would almost be like starting from scratch.
As this function is perceived like an
alternative for not being stuck in a local optimal, this idea is not to destroy everything
but remove only a small part of the solution in order to visit new solutions.
53 of 85
==PAGE:55==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
7.3.2.2
Destroy Method 2 : remove the emptiest routes
The second destroy approach targets the emptiest routes of the day schedule. Overall,
this method gives better results than the previous method.
Every regions had their
objective value improved, even if this time the region AB is less sensitive than for the
ﬁrst algorithm.
The table 14 below provides the average improvement rates for the
diﬀerent numbers of routes to remove tested.
Destroy Parameter
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
5
-0.3%
-0.4%
-0.5%
-0.2%
-0.4%
10
0.0%
-0.3%
-0.4%
-0.6%
-0.3%
15
0.0%
-0.4%
-0.3%
-1.6%
-0.6%
20
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.9%
-0.3%
25
0.0%
0.0%
-0.1%
-1.2%
-0.4%
Average
-0.1%
-0.2%
-0.3%
-0.9%
-0.4%
Table 14: Average results for destroy method 2 according to diﬀerent destroy values
The higher rate of improvement is given by the middle value -15 routes- of the destroy
parameter range with an average of improvement of 0.6%. For the other values, rates
do not exceed an improvement of 0.4%. The table 15 below emphasizes on the best
associations of parameters for this method.
Destroy Parameter
Repair Parameters
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
5
{60, 30, 15, 3}
-0.4%
-0.5%
-1.0%
-0.1%
-0.5%
15
{40, 20, 3, 1}
0.0%
-0.7%
-0.2%
-3.4%
-1.0%
15
{40, 30, 12, 1}
0.0%
-0.4%
-0.2%
-2.0%
-0.3%
15
{30, 20, 9, 5}
0.0%
-0.6%
-0.1%
-1.7%
-0.6%
25
{40, 20, 3, 1}
0.0%
0.0%
-0.1%
-1.6%
-0.5%
Table 15: Best average results for destroy method 2 according to diﬀerent destroy and
repair combinations
The second combination presents an improvement rate twice higher than the other
results. Therefore, these parameters have been selected for the second algorithm. Even
though this association seems not to be the best for region AB, it results in much better
objective values in other regions.
Another choice could also have been the ﬁrst line
because it has the advantage to have improved all datasets objective functions but it is
still twice less eﬃcient.
7.3.2.3
Destroy Method 3 : remove the most expensive routes
The third method for the destroy part is comparable to the previous function except that
it targets the most expensive routes. Improvements have been noticed for the full range
54 of 85
==PAGE:56==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
of values tuned for the destroy method as represented in the Table 16. The region AB and
OROM are more sensitive than the two other regions. Nevertheless, some combinations
of parameters exists where the 4 objective functions are lessened.
Destroy Parameter
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
5
-1.9%
-0.2%
-0.1%
-0.9%
-0.8%
10
-1.8%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.3%
-0.6%
15
-1.1%
-0.1%
0.0%
-0.1%
-0.3%
20
-1.5%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.1%
-0.4%
25
-0.9%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.2%
-0.2%
Average
-1.4%
-0.1%
-0.3%
-0.3%
-0.5%
Table 16: Average results for destroy method 3 according to diﬀerent destroy values
The best results are obtained when a small number of routes are removed each time.
Especially, all the region are impacted by this method for the value 5 for which the
results seem to be the best -average improvement of 0.8%. The Table 17 summarizes the
best combinations there are with the repair parameters.
Destroy Parameter
Repair Parameters
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
5
{ 40, 30, 12, 1}
-1.9%
-0.1%
-0.1%
-1.9%
-1.0%
5
{ 40, 20, 3, 1}
-2.2%
0.0%
-0.1%
-2.0%
-1.1%
5
{ 30, 20, 9, 5}
-2.2%
-0.2%
-0.2%
-0.7%
-0.8%
5
{ 30, 30, 6, 1}
-2.0%
-0.3%
-0.1%
-0.6%
-0.7%
10
{ 40, 30, 12, 1}
-2.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-1.4%
-0.9%
10
{ 40, 20, 3, 1}
-2.5%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.7%
-0.8%
Table 17: Best average results for destroy method 3 according to diﬀerent destroy and
repair combinations
As expected, the best combinations of parameters focuses on the two lowest number of
the destroy range : 5 and 10. The best average improvement is reached for the second
line with a rate of -1.1%. However, with these parameters the region FOL is not aﬀected
by the method. Furthermore, there is another combination of parameters with very close
results (1.0%) where the FOL region is involved. Therefore, in order to improve better
the 4 objective functions, the choice has been made to take the settings of the ﬁrst line.
It results in the same repair method settings than for the method 2.
7.3.2.4
Destroy Method 4 : remove routes from period with high rate of
taxis
The last method involves several parameters : the size of time slices that the algorithm
will deal with, the number of periods to remove before a period of high rate of taxis and
the number of iterations to process each time. It is the method which provides the best
55 of 85
==PAGE:57==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
average improvements among the 4 functions. For all the combinations the outcome -see
table 18- is between 0.9% and 1.7% which is much more than the other methods.
Destroy Parameter
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
{60, 4, 1}
-3.5%
-0.1%
-0.1%
-0.1%
-1.0%
{60, 4, 2}
-3.3%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-0.9%
{60, 7, 1}
-4.6%
-0.1%
0.0%
-0.1%
-1.2%
{60, 7, 2}
-4.3%
-0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
-1.2%
{40, 4, 1}
-3.4%
-1.5%
-1.2%
-0.1%
-1.5%
{40, 4, 2}
-3.5%
-1.5%
-1.2%
-0.1%
-1.7%
{40, 7, 1}
-3.5%
-0.1%
-0.1%
0.0%
-1.1%
{40, 7, 2}
-3.4%
-0.1%
-0.1%
0.0%
-1.1%
Average
-3.7%
-0.5%
-0.4%
0.0%
-1.2%
Table 18: Average results for destroy method 4 according to diﬀerent destroy values
The best solutions seem to be reached with a time slice length for the destroy method of
40 minutes. Furthermore, removing 4 periods before the high rate of taxis seems to be
the best way to tune the function. For the number of iterations results seem to be close.
The Table 19 will go through all the possibilities of associations, except for the two ﬁrst
parameters of the destroy method which are set to their best value respectively 40 and
4.
Destroy Parameters
Repair Parameters
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
{40, 4, 1}
{60, 30, 15, 3}
-4.0%
-1.8%
-1.4%
-0.0%
-1.8%
{40, 4, 1}
{60, 60, 21, 3}
-4.5%
-1.7%
-1.4%
-0.2%
-1.9%
{40, 4, 1}
{40, 30, 12, 1}
-3.7%
-1.0%
-1.0%
-0.0%
-1.4%
{40, 4, 1}
{40, 20, 3, 1}
-2.5%
-1.3%
-1.3%
-0.0%
-1.3%
{40, 4, 1}
{30, 20, 9, 5}
-2.9%
-1.8%
-1.0%
-0.1%
-1.4%
{40, 4, 1}
{30, 30, 6, 1}
-2.6%
-1.7%
-1.3%
-0.1%
-1.4%
{40, 4, 2}
{60, 30, 15, 3}
-4.1%
-1.8%
-1.3%
-0.1%
-1.9%
{40, 4, 2}
{60, 60, 21, 3}
-4.3%
-1.6%
-1.6%
-0.2%
-2.1%
{40, 4, 2}
{40, 30, 12, 1}
-3.8%
-0.8%
-1.2%
-0.0%
-1.6%
{40, 4, 2}
{40, 20, 3, 1}
-3.1%
-1.2%
-1.1%
-0.0%
-1.5%
{40, 4, 2}
{30, 20, 9, 5}
-2.8%
-1.7%
-0.7%
-0.1%
-1.4%
{40, 4, 2}
{30, 30, 6, 1}
-2.8%
-1.7%
-1.2%
-0.1%
-1.6%
Table 19: Best average results for destroy method 4 according to diﬀerent destroy and
repair combinations
The analysis of these results leads to a statement, no matter the number of iterations
done, the best results are achieved with the repair function using a 60 minutes time
slice length.
Furthermore, the results are a bit higher for 2 iterations than for only
one. Therefore, the number of iteration will be set to 2, and the set {60, 60, 21, 3}
56 of 85
==PAGE:58==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
will be used as repair method parameters. This set of parameter is all the more good
because it represents the highest improvement value for the region OROM which seems
less sensitive to this method than other regions.
This leads now to the last part of the parameter tuning procedure.
The ﬁtting of
parameters of the ALNS, like the initial temperature and the cooling rate for the simulated
annealing, but also the segment and the reaction factor for the weights adaptation.
7.4
Phase 4 : Acceptance criterion and weights adaptation
7.4.1
Procedure
This last phase is about tuning the acceptance criterion via simulated annealing. Two
parameters have to be set : the initial temperature which inﬂuences the probability to
accept worse solution and the cooling rate which inﬂuences at each iteration how fast
the temperature has to decrease to slowly or quickly converge towards a solution.
The other part of this last phase is to determine the size of the segment. A segment
decides how often the weight for each method is updated. Furthermore, when weights
are updated, the reaction factor impacts on the proportion of importance that the old
weight has versus the score acquired during the last segment. The scores of methods will
be calculated based on the three diﬀerent ways to score from Ropke et al [20]. Their
value will respectively be 2, 1.3 and 0.4. These numbers have been ﬁxed and will not be
tuned in this report. However, it could be interesting to test some other values in the
future.
The Table 20 reminds how will be set each part of the ALNS. In particular it summarizes
the conclusion drawn at the stage before.
Method
Settings
Initial Solution
{60, 30, 15, 3}
Destroy 1
0.1
Destroy 2
15
Destroy 3
5
Destroy 4
{40, 4, 2}
Repair 1
{30, 20, 9, 5}
Repair 2 & 3
{40, 20, 3, 1}
Repair 4
{60, 60, 21, 3}
Table 20: Parameters for each function of the ALNS
A bench of values for the 4 parameters highlighted before is tested for each region. The
Table 21 goes through the range of values. Each combination is tried. As during all the
previous phases, each type of test will be ran 5 times during 45 seconds.
57 of 85
==PAGE:59==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Parameter
Range
Initial temperature
{50 000, 100 000}
Cooling rate
{0.8, 0.85, 0.9}
Segment
{5, 10, 15}
Reaction factor
{0.3, 0.5, 0.7}
Table 21: Range of values to tune for each parameter
7.4.2
Results
For this phase, the results do not lead to a clear trend from a parameter to another.
Indeed, good results are spread with very diﬀerent associations of parameters. However,
all combinations have given a improvement between 0.3% and 1.1%. The diﬀerence is
not huge but the Table 22 highlights the best combination of parameters.
Simulated annealing
Weights adaptation
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Average
{50 000, 0.8}
{15, 0.3}
-0.7%
-0.6%
-0.2%
-1.6%
-0.8%
{50 000, 0.85}
{15, 0.3}
-0.9%
-1.0%
-0.1%
-1.5%
-0.9%
{50 000, 0.9}
{10, 0.7}
-1.4%
-0.6%
-0.4%
-1.3%
-0.9%
{100 000, 0.8}
{10, 0.5}
-1.3%
-0.1%
-0.7%
0.0%
-0.8%
{100 000, 0.8}
{15, 0.7}
-2.0%
-0.9%
0.0%
-0.8%
-0.9%
{100 000, 0.85}
{10, 0.5}
-2.5%
-0.4%
-0.3%
-1.1%
-1.1%
Table 22: Best average results for simulated annealing and weights adaptation parameters
of the ALNS
The average rate of improvement of these 6 best combinations are very close. Nevertheless,
some combinations of parameters do not provide improvements for some of the regions.
That needs to be avoided as much as possible. The combination of the last line of the
table presents the best results with 1.1% of average improvement and the result are good
for all region compared to the other values they reach. That is why it is decided to set
up the ALNS with {100 000, 0.85} for the simulated annealing and {10, 0.5} for the
weights adaptation.
All the phases of the parameter tuning are processed. All parameters of the ALNS within
the tuning scope have been assigned to a value. This leads to the next part which deals
with results of the method with the ﬁnal settings. The 4 diﬀerent datasets are ran with
the settings determined in this section. Then, a comparison is made regarding the results
that the company Konsentra has.
58 of 85
==PAGE:60==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
8
Results
This section goes through the results obtained for each region with all methods and
processes developed during this report. The ﬁnal algorithm is set with the parameters
providing the best solutions according to the bench of tests and the range of values
tested.
The method created is deliberately operational costs oriented. Indeed, in the objective
function only costs are taken into account. However, in the ﬁnal solution some KPIs
-Key Performance Indicators- are measured. Among them, some are customers oriented
in order to measure the eﬀects of this new way to schedule vehicles. In particular, it is
interesting to compare these numbers to those obtained by Konsentra who cares even
more about its customers convenience. The indicators which are used to evaluate the
quality of the solution are the following :
• Objective value : it represents the operational cost. It is the objective value that
the whole algorithm tries to minimize. It is calculated by the sum between the
cost of the ﬂeet of vehicles and the cost of taxis used when buses could not honor
a demand.
• Number of clients handled with buses : number of customers that Konsentra is
able to serve with its ﬂeet of vehicles within a region.
• Number of passengers took in charge by taxis : number of requests that cannot be
honored by the ﬂeet of minibuses. Thereby, they are assigned to taxis because the
company has to handle all requests as it is considered as public transportation.
• Average waiting time (AWT): the amount of time a customer waits between the
requested time and the pick-up time for a ’Pick-up’ request or the gap between the
drop-oﬀtime and the requested time for a ’drop-oﬀ’ request.
• Average extra in-vehicle time (AEVT): amount of extra time the customer spends
in comparison with the travel time for a direct way. This extra time is caused by
the fact that drivers pick-up as much people as possible.
Not only will these ﬁve key ﬁgures allow to compare the quality of the solution in terms
of costs but also with a customer point of view.
The next subsections deal with the results of each region.
The algorithm has been
processed during 5 minutes which lets a bit more time for improvement than during
the parameter tuning section where tests were 45 seconds long. A discussion about the
ALNS parameters evolution is also led.
8.1
Results : region AB
The ﬁrst phase of the parameter tuning has shown that the orders for this region had
common patterns. Its average silhouette value is higher than in the three other regions.
59 of 85
==PAGE:61==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Therefore, it is expected that the heuristic based on the K-mean clustering works well.
This region is the smallest one in terms of requests with 854 requests. The table 23
summarizes how the initial solution and the ALNS performs.
KPI
Konsentra
Initial
ALNS
Gap Initial
Gap ALNS
Objective
220 037
162 340
157 626
-26.2%
-28.3%
Customers in buses
741
813
820
8.4%
9.3%
Customers in taxis
113
41
34
-63.7%
-69.9%
AEVT (minutes)
11.3
22.7
20.6
100.9%
82.3%
AWT (minutes)
2.29
13.6
13.7
493.9%
498.3%
Table 23: KPI for region AB
Several conclusions can be drawn. First, the method reduces by more than 25% the
operational cost within the day. This is partially due to the fact that the algorithm
provides a solution which signiﬁcantly reduces the number of times a taxi is called to
fulﬁll a demand.
The number of taxis dropped from 113 for Konsentra to 34.
The
quantity of customers handled by taxis is a good indicator to estimate how expensive
is a solution. It is, above all, due to the fact that taxis are really expensive in Norway.
However, it only gives a trend because some solutions with fewer used taxis can be much
more expensive if the routes created for the buses are not well optimized.
If the focus is made from a customer point of view, results are worse than before. The
average waiting time (AWT) has been multiplied by two and the average extra in-vehicle
time went from 2 minutes to 13 minutes. The increase of this number was expected
because the only constraints in terms of time present in the model are the time windows.
Furthermore, these time windows impose only a total travel time - including waiting
time- between 45 and 75 minutes according to the age of the customer. In addition, as
the number of taxis dropped consequently, the vehicles handled more requests and that
caused more detours. Mechanically the extra in-vehicle time increases.
The quality of the initial solution has to be mentioned because it improves the objective
function by 26% regarding to the results Konsentra has. Then, the ALNS reduces the
cost by 2.1% during its 5 minutes run. The Figure 8.1 depicts the evolution of the best
solution value and the evolution of current and accepted solutions.
60 of 85
==PAGE:62==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 8.1: Evolution of current, accepted and best solutions in function of the iterations
number
The best solution often changes at the beginning, but then, the accepted solutions evolve
a lot but not the best solution. It seems that it is not necessary to run the ALNS longer
than 5 minutes because most of improvements are made at the beginning during the ﬁrst
iterations.
A run of 5 minutes seems also suﬃcient to get stable weights for destroy and repair
methods in the ALNS. The Figures 8.2 and 8.3 show the evolution of the weights for the
methods.
Figure 8.2: Evolution destroy weights in function of the iterations number
61 of 85
==PAGE:63==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 8.3: Evolution repair weights in function of the iterations number
The numerous improvements during the ﬁrst iterations lead to a high score for the
random destroy method (Destroy 1) and the ﬁrst repair function. The destroy method
3, as well as the repair method 2, also provided good results at the beginning. However,
as there was almost no more improvements, the weights went down to reach a common
value around 0.4.
Finally, results for the region AB are convincing. The method deployed has provided
a solution 28% better than the schedule used by Konsentra. The average travel time
however increased a lot with an increase of both waiting time away from home and the
extra in-vehicle time. However, as it will be explained later, a way to control these factor
is to impose smaller time windows if it is an issue for the company.
8.2
Results : region FOL
The ﬁrst part of the parameter tuning has concluded in a existence of common patterns
between requests but weaker than the previous dataset. However, objective values during
the parameter tuning give a reason to expect an improvement compared to Konsentra’s
schedule.
The Table 24 provides comparative results between Konsentra, the initial
solution and the ALNS.
KPI
Konsentra
Initial
ALNS
Gap Initial
Gap ALNS
Objective
356 226
201 521
194 781
-43.4%
-45.3%
Customers in buses
830
859
865
3.4%
4.2%
Customers in taxis
110
81
75
-26.3%
-31.8%
AEVT (minutes)
14
23,6
21,7
68.6%
55%
AWT (minutes)
6,43
13,1
13,8
104%
115%
Table 24: KPI for region FOL
62 of 85
==PAGE:64==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
This time the improvement is huge. After the ALNS, the objective has dropped of 45%
compared to the value got by Konsentra. The solution found at the end of the ALNS
reduces the number of taxis by one third - 75 taxis versus 110 for Konsentra. However,
the proportion of taxis removed is less important than the ﬁrst region. But, the savings
have probably been done on the optimization vehicles routes.
The KPIs analysis from a customer point of view is still favorable to Konsentra but the
gap is less signiﬁcant than for the ﬁrst region. The average extra in-vehicle is around
55% higher, the average waiting time is twice higher as well.
Once again, the ALNS has been initialized by a very good solution. It can be noticed in
Figure 8.4 that the best solution has not been improved often. However, after a while
without improvements two occurred in quick succession. Each improvement of solution
resulted in several thousands Norwegian Kroners (NOK) of savings.
Figure 8.4: Evolution of current, accepted and best solutions in function of the iterations
number
The running time of 5 minutes seems again relevant because even if some improvements
happened late, at the end there was no more improvement.
The Figures 8.5 and 8.6 depict the evolution of destroy and repair methods weights. This
time, weights have started to decrease from the beginning because only one improvement
has been noticed. The destroy function 1 and 4 did not provide good results. For the
destroy function 1, it was expected since the parameter tuning because the region FOL
was not sensitive to random destruction. However, the fourth method worked well in the
parameter tuning and did not provide any good result this time.
63 of 85
==PAGE:65==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 8.5: Evolution destroy weights in function of the iterations number
Figure 8.6: Evolution repair weights in function of the iterations number
The three ﬁrst repair methods worked better than the fourth repair method. The ﬁnal
weights are all close to 0.43 except repair method 4 which is a bit lower and has dropped
faster than the other approaches.
Finally, the method improved drastically the solution that Konsentra used by reducing
costs by 45%. Improvements have been made by big step from a good initial solution.
The ALNS algorithm has then improved by 2% the result. However, customers oriented
KPIs are still worse than what Konsentra proposes by they are better than for region
AB.
64 of 85
==PAGE:66==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
8.3
Results : region NROM
The dataset of NROM is the second biggest dataset among the four regions behind
OROM. It was concluded after the ﬁrst phase of the parameter tuning, that requests
from this region have weak but existent common patterns like requests within FOL. The
Table 25 highlights how good the ALNS perform regarding the solution of reference from
Konsentra.
KPI
Konsentra
Initial
ALNS
Gap Initial
Gap ALNS
Objective
412 251
253 001
249 067
-38.6%
-39.6%
Customers in buses
786
842
869
7.1%
10.6%
Customers in taxis
197
141
114
-28.4%
-42.1%
AEVT (minutes)
15.9
22.1
20.6
39.0%
29.6%
AWT (minutes)
3.1
14.9
15.6
380.6%
403.2%
Table 25: KPI for region NROM
The method based on K-mean clustering and heuristics has once again improved a lot the
solution used by Konsentra. The objective value lessened by 40%. This time the ALNS
part did not improve a lot the initial solution. However, the solution from the ALNS
removed almost 27 taxis compared to the initial solution. It reduces by 83 the number
of taxis if the comparison is made on Konstentra’s solution. Even if the extra in-vehicle
time is lower than 30% more from the Konsentra’s solution, the average waiting time has
been multiplied by 4 which is huge. It reached 15 minutes of waiting time away from
customers’ place.
The Figure 8.7 represents what was explained before. The best solution was almost never
improved except during a short number of iterations where it was improved several times.
Figure 8.7: Evolution of current, accepted and best solutions in function of the iterations
number
65 of 85
==PAGE:67==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
The accepted solution values were even not close to the best objective values.
This
reveals a weakness in the ALNS method. Perhaps, the initial solution was very good and
therefore hard to improve.
The Figures 8.8 and 8.9 show how diﬀerent the weights were during this ALNS compared
to the two ﬁrst regions. Furthermore, curves seem not having fully converged at the end
of the 5 minutes run. It can be explained by the fact that there were less iterations made
during this duration.
Figure 8.8: Evolution destroy weights in function of the iterations number
Figure 8.9: Evolution repair weights in function of the iterations number
Destroy methods 2 and 3 worked better than 1 and 4 while a good performance from
the destroy method 4 was more expected regarding the results during the parameter
66 of 85
==PAGE:68==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
tuning. Nevertheless, the repair method 4 was the most eﬃcient. Its weight increased
at the same time as the destroy 2 weight. It looks like the combination of both methods
worked well for this dataset. This example illustrates perfectly the importance to have
set up the same repair function with diﬀerent parameters values.
Finally, this third dataset was - like the two ﬁrst regions- improved by 40% by the
method developed during this report. This result underlines the eﬃciency of the method
compared to Konsentra’s. However, the average waiting time is still increased a lot and
cannot compete the time Konsentra reaches.
8.4
Results : region OROM
This region represents the biggest number of requests among the four regions. There are
1164 requests whereas the other datasets do not exceed 1000 requests. The silhouette
parameter tuning underlined weak common patterns between requests like the two previous
region FOL and NROM. The Table 26 provides the results and gaps between methods.
KPI
Konsentra
Initial
ALNS
Gap Initial
Gap ALNS
Objective
430 165
370 526
363 897
-13.8%
-15.4%
Customers in buses
891
992
902
11.3%
1.2%
Customers in taxis
273
172
262
-37.0%
-4.0%
AEVT (minutes)
14,8
21,9
21,6
48.0%
45.9%
AWT (minutes)
4,2
12,2
12,4
190.5%
195.2%
Table 26: KPI for region OROM
It results in smaller improvements than the three previous regions but the objective value
has been improved by 15.4%. This time, the ALNS worked quite well. It decreased the
costs by 1.6%. It must be noticed that the initial and ALNS solutions do not have the
same aspect at all. The solution after the ALNS is cheaper, but it uses 90 taxis more than
during the initial solution and only 11 less than Konsentra. The smaller improvement
encountered for this region could be explained by the size of the dataset.
The average extra in-vehicle is 46% higher than the value in Konsentra’s solution. In
comparison, the gap is a bit more important than the two previous regions FOL and
NROM but smaller than the ﬁrst region AB. However, the average waiting time of the
solution is three times longer than for Konsentra’s solution for a value of 12 minutes of
average waiting time. That represents a huge increase.
The plot of the best solution found within iterations reveals that all improvements have
been done at the beginning. Indeed, after 10 iterations no more improvement was noticed.
The accepted solutions kept moving without ﬁnding any better solutions. The Figure
8.10 depicts the curves of the current, the accepted and the best solutions along the
iterations.
67 of 85
==PAGE:69==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 8.10: Evolution of current, accepted and best solutions in function of the iterations
number
As expected during the parameter tuning section, the destroy function 2 and 3 got the
best scores. They contribute to the improvements of the beginning. The second repair
method provides good results at the beginning. Then, the fourth method which has seen
its weight dropping initially provides accepted solutions. Finally both destroy and repair
methods tend to converge to weights around 0.5. The Figures 8.11 and 8.12 depict the
evolution of weights along iteration for all these methods.
Figure 8.11: Evolution destroy weights in function of the iterations number
68 of 85
==PAGE:70==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 8.12: Evolution repair weights in function of the iterations number
Finally, even though the rate of improvement of the solution is lower than in previous
regions, the ALNS method has provided a solution 15% better than the current one used
by Konsentra. The average waiting time and the extra in-vehicle time are increased
signiﬁcantly regarding to what Konsentra manages to have. However, it still respects
time windows they impose, thus, it is not an issue. If that time becomes too important,
the reduction of time windows could be processed so that it would limit detours and
waiting times.
8.5
Synthesis
The results provided by the algorithm based on ALNS and K-mean clustering are very
satisfying.
Each Konsentra’s solution for a given region has been improved by 15%
to 45% as shown in the Table 27. That would represent considerable savings for the
company. It would all the more be proﬁtable that the part of taxis necessary to fulﬁll
the demand is drastically reduced in some regions. Thereby, the company would be less
impacted if taxis prices were about to increase at some point.
KPI
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Objective
-28.3%
-45.3%
-39.6%
-15.4%
Customers in buses
9.3%
4.2%
10.6%
1.2%
Customers in taxis
-69.9%
-31.8%
-42.1%
-4.0%
AEVT (minutes)
82.3%
55%
29.%
45.9%
AWT (minutes)
498.3%
115%
403.6%
195.2%
Table 27: Gap between solutions from the ALNS and Konsentra
The common perfectible point of these solutions is the average waiting time and the
69 of 85
==PAGE:71==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
extra in-vehicle time. In each region, this value has increased a lot regarding Konsentra
solution.
This can be explained by the fact that, as more people are handled by
minibuses, the average number of passengers increases and thereby itineraries are less
straight than it used to be. The algorithm tends to use the whole width of time windows.
However, the method which has been built is robust enough so that it can handled stricter
constraints about maximum travelling time - including the waiting time- if the current
solution is considered too binding from a customer point of view. In order to epitomize
this robustness, the method has been applied to the same datasets but with stricter
travel time thresholds. Indeed, currently children younger than 9 years old cannot travel
longer than 45 minutes, those between 9 and 12 have a maximum travel time of one hour
and the remaining passengers are limited to 75 minutes. These limits have been reduced
to respectively 40 minutes, 50 minutes and 60 minutes.
The result provided by the method is still signiﬁcantly better than Konsentra’s. The
following Table 28 gives the percentage of gap between the ALNS KPIs values with the
old time windows and the solution with the new thresholds.
KPI
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Objective
0.1%
3.1%
8.8%
5.6%
Customers in buses
-0.2%
-3.6%
-6.4%
-6.3%
Customers in taxis
5.9%
46.7%
49%
21.8%
AEVT (minutes)
-16%
-11.5%
-17.4%
-25.9%
AWT (minutes)
-21.9%
-20%
-34%
-18.5%
Table 28: Gaps from the ALNS solutions between old and new thresholds for time
windows
The objective values do not increase more than 9%. For the region AB, the value is almost
the same with more restricted time windows which gives a margin to the company to
strengthen its service level without increasing the operational costs.
Concerning the
average extra in-vehicle time and waiting time, these numbers have decreased a lot with
these new time windows constraints.
The customer convenience could have been part of the objective value so that an additional
cost would have penalized a too huge travel time. But, this example shows that customer
convenience constraints can be handle from the beginning in time windows constraints.
Then, the discussion is only done on operational costs. Furthermore, the run made with
stricter time windows shows the robustness of the method deployed. The objective values
did not explode and travelling time have been considerably reduced.
The fact that the region AB has globally provided better results than other regions could
be enlightened by the size of datasets. This region contains a smaller number of requests.
The ALNS iterations within 5 minutes conﬁrm that. Twice more iterations were ran with
region AB than with the others. The Table 29 details how many iterations have been
processed by the ALNS per region.
70 of 85
==PAGE:72==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
KPI
AB
FOL
NROM
OROM
Number of requests
854
940
983
1164
Iterations
317
158
142
142
Table 29: Number of iterations processed by the ALNS within 5 minutes per region
The gap is signiﬁcant between AB and the remaining regions. However, even though
the OROM database is much bigger than other datasets the number of iterations is not
lower.
Finally, even if the results lead to a huge decrease of objective functions value, tuning
an ALNS algorithm for each region separately could provide even better results. This
would requires to use requests from several days to set up the model and then test it on
other days. Otherwise, if the model was only tested on the same data, over-ﬁtting could
occur. The reason why this report has processed diﬀerently is that it was impossible
to generate distance matrices for several days for each region. Therefore, it has been
decided to achieve general settings in order to avoid this over-ﬁtting. Even if each region
has its own patterns, the combination of the 4 regions in the algorithm did not garble
the results too much.
71 of 85
==PAGE:73==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
9
Conclusion
This thesis aimed to develop a method to solve large scale dial-a-ride problem with
time windows (DARPTW) applied to public transportation. The problem was using
an heterogeneous ﬂeet of vehicles with diﬀerent types of capacities. In the context of
this thesis, capacities had two types: walking passengers and wheelchair customers.
Capacities were handled separately. Then, the method has been tested on real data from
a company called Konsentra. This company ensures on demand public transportation in
the region of Oslo in Norway.
The DARPTW is a NP-hard problem, therefore, a meta-heuristic was used to generate
the best feasible solution. The Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS) has been
processed. The heuristics composing the destroy and repair phases of the ALNS, as well
as the initial solution construction, were based on machine learning concepts. The time
horizon of a dataset was a day. This time horizon has been split into smaller periods. In
each period, if the number of requests was suﬃcient an unsupervised machine learning
approach was used : the K-mean clustering. Then, for these clusters, a parallel insertion
was ran in order to generate routes for vehicles.
The simulation made on Konsentra’s data provided eﬃcient results. Indeed, with an
ALNS running during 5 minutes, operational costs have been reduced by 32%, if the
general results is taken into account. The gap is signiﬁcant but has to be contextualized.
Some assumptions simplifying the problem have been made. Konsentra receives special
requests from customers which are very speciﬁc. Not only is it diﬃcult to generalize
them to other problems, but also it complicates the problem. Therefore, these requests
have been ignored and dealt with as normal requests. Such a decision can, furthermore,
be explained by the fact that they represented a minor part of the dataset. Nevertheless,
these assumptions would probably impair the quality of the ﬁnal solution obtained.
In order to measure the real gap between the ALNS and Konsentra’s solutions, it would
require to apply the schedule planned by the ALNS in real life and see if the decisions
and the procedure which were designed actually work. Indeed, when a model is applied
there is always a diﬀerence with real life. But real experiments would help to correct
or validate the model. For instance, the time spent for dropping-oﬀor picking-up a
customer is considered to be equal to a minute. This would need to be conﬁrmed or
adapted.
Furthermore, traﬃc was not taken into account, but perhaps, it would be
interesting to apply a security factor during rush hours so that the model would prevent
from traﬃc jams upstream.
Nevertheless, even though it is hard to measure how big is the gap between the current
solution and the solution elaborated with the method developed with ALNS, the solutions
which have been generated for each region have good aspects. The fact that the number
of taxis has dropped a lot is a signiﬁcant improvement. As mentioned before, even if
some solution with less requests handled by taxis than another solution with more taxis
are more expensive, the cost of the solution tends to increase with the number of taxis.
72 of 85
==PAGE:74==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
The robustness of the algorithm is another strong point of the approach. It has been
showed in the last part of the results section that, even with more constraining time
windows, the objective value did not increase a lot - less than 10% at most for the
example studied.
However, a weak point presented by solutions from the ALNS is that customers spend
in average more time in the vehicle and they wait much longer than what Konsentra
manages to do. This is in fact due to the width of time windows and the high thresholds
for total travel time. If the thresholds were lower, the average waiting and the extra
in-vehicle time would be lower as well. The restriction of time windows have also been
processed in order to show this aspect. When the time windows were reduced, the average
travel time dropped by around 20%. Furthermore, the model deﬁnes only focuses on
operational costs. Hence, the threshold constraints has to be set up upstream in function
of what the company considers acceptable for customers as maximum travel time.
Some aspects of the method were not be tuned during the parameter tuning because
they were considered out of the scope for time reasons. Indeed, it has been preferred to
focus on some parameters and run a proper parameter tuning rather than considering
all of the parameters and not being able to fairly test these parameters. For instance,
the order the vehicle were taken in priority could be changed. It has been decided that
the biggest vehicle was used ﬁrst. But it could have been interesting to try using the
cheaper vehicle per seat for example.
Another approach which has been ﬁxed during this report is the way to determine how
many clusters were needed in the ALNS part. In the initial solution the silhouette method
was used but during the ALNS the number of clusters was determined by the biggest
vehicle capacity. Perhaps, implementing a silhouette algorithm with a lower maximum
value of K could have been possible and could have led to better results.
The ALNS performed well because it was able to improve the initial results by a few
percents. However, it may be possible to have an ALNS even more eﬃcient by implementing
a diﬀerent way to reinsert the removed requests a bit diﬀerent than the one currently
used for generating the initial solution. That would help to diversify the range of solution
visited and thereby would increase the chance to ﬁnd a better solution.
Finally, another aspect to work on would be to make this algorithm being dynamic.
Indeed, in few seconds the method was able to generate an initial solution. As it has
been dealt with in the result section, the initial solution was already much better than
Konsentra’s schedule. This would deﬁnitely be an advantage for a transport company
because they could be able to honor requests at any time and therefore modify their
planning almost in real time.
73 of 85
==PAGE:75==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
References
[1] J.F. Cordeau, G. Desaulniers, J. Desrosiers, M.M. Solomon and F. Soumis. The VRP
with Time Windows. Les Cahiers du GERAD, G–99–13, February 1999.
[2] R. Baldacci, E. Bartolini and A. Mingozzi. An Exact Algorithm for the Pickup and
Delivery Problem with Time Windows. Operations Research,Vol. 59, No. 2, pp. 414-
426,March-April 2011.
[3] M.W.P. Savelsbergh. Local Search in Routing Problems with Time Windows. Annals
of Operations Research, 4:285–305, 1985.
[4] Y.Dumas, J.Desrosiers and F.Soumis. The Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time
Windows. Les cahiers du GERAD, G-89-17, May 1989.
[5] J.Desrosiers, Y.Dumas and F.Soumis. A Dynamic Programming Solution of the
Large-Scale Single-Vehicle Dial-a-Ride Problem with Time Windows. Les cahiers du
GERAD, G-84-12, January 1986.
[6] Bodin L., B. Golden, A. Assad and M. Ball. The Routing and Scheduling of Vehicles
and Crews - The State of the Art. Computers and Operations Research 10, 62-212,
1983.
[7] I. Ioachim,J.Desrosiers, M.M Solomon and D. Villeneuve. A Request Clustering
Algorithm for Door-to-Door Handicapped Transportation. Les cahiers du GERAD,
G-91-50, December 1991.
[8] Jacques Desrosiers, Yvan Dumas, Marius M. Solomon and François Soumis. Time
Constrained Routing and Scheduling. Operation Research and Management Science
Volume on Networks, North-Holland, Amsterdam, April 1992.
[9] Jean-Pierre Belisle, François Soumis, Serge Roy, Jacques Desrosiers, Yvan Dumas and
Jean-Marc Rousseau. The impact on vehicle routing of various operational rules of a
transportation system for handicapped persons. G-84-14, Montréal, Canada, October
1985.
[10] Y.Dumas,
J.Desrosiers and F.Soumis. Large Scale Multi-Vehicle Dial-a-ride
Problems. Les cahiers du GERAD, G-89-30, September 1989.
[11] J.Desrosiers, Y.Dumas, F.Soumis, S. Taillefer and D. Villeneuve. An Algorithm for
Mini-clustering in Handicapped Transport. Les cahiers du GERAD, G-91-02, January
1991.
[12] J.Desrosiers, F.Soumis and M. Desrochers. Routing with time windows by column
generation. Network 14, 545-365, 1984.
[13] M. Desrochers and F.Soumis. A reoptimization algorithm for the shortest path
problem with time windows. European Journal of Operation Research 35 242-254,
1988.
74 of 85
==PAGE:76==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
[14] Y.Dumas and J.Desrosiers. A Shortest Path Problem for vehicle Routing with Pick-
up, Delivery and Time Window. G-86-09(A), April 1986.
[15] William P. Nanry and J. Wesley Barnes. Solving the pickup and delivery problem
with time windows using reactive tabu search. Transportation Research Part B 34,
107-121, 2000.
[16] M. Solomon. Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems with time
window constraints. Operations Research 35, 254-265, 1987.
[17] Haibing Li and Andrew Lim. A Metaheuristic for Pickup and Delivery Problem with
Time Windows. International journal on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Tool, 2001.
[18] Jean-Franßcois Cordeau and Gilbert Laporte. A tabu search heuristic for the static
multi-vehicle dial-a-ride problem. Transportation Research Part B 37,579–594, 2003.
[19] Russel Bent and Pascal Van Hentenryck. A Two-Stage Hybrid Algorithm for Pickup
and Delivery Vehicle Routing Problems with Time Windows. Brown University, Box
1910 Providence, RI 02912, USA, 2003.
[20] Stefan Ropke and David Pisinger. An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic
for the Pickup and Delivery Problem with Time Windows. Transportation Science
40(4):455-472, 2006.
[21] Potvin J.-Y. and J.-M. Rousseau. A parallel route building algo- rithm for the vehicle
routing and scheduling problem with time windows. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 66 331–340,
1993.
[22] Fabien Lehuédé, Renaud Masson, Sophie N. Parragh, Olivier Péton and Fabien
Tricoir. A multi-criteria large neighbourhood search for the transportation of disabled
people. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 1–18, 2013.
[23] Giselher Pankratz. A Grouping Genetic Algorithm for the Pickup and Delivery
Problem
with
Time
Windows.
Department
of
Business
Administration
and
Economics, FernUniversität – University of Hagen, Hagen, Germany, 2005.
[24] Pasquale Carotenuto and Fabio Martis. A double dynamic fast algorithm to solve
multi-vehicle Dial a Ride Problem. Transportation Research Procedia 27,632–639,
2017.
[25] Jean-François Cordeau. A Branch-and-Cut Algorithm for the Dial-a-Ride Problem.
Operations Research 54(3):573-586, 2006.
[26] J.-F Cordeau, and G. Laporte. A tabu search heuristic for the static multi-vehicle
dial-a-ride problem. Transportation Res. B 37 579–594, 2003b.
[27] P. Bholowalia and A. Kumar. EBK-Means: A Clustering Technique based on Elbow
Method and K-Means in WSN. International Journal of Computer Applications (0975
– 8887) Volume 105 – No. 9, November 2014.
75 of 85
==PAGE:77==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
[28] T.M. Kodinariya and P.R. Makwana. Review on determining number of Cluster in
K-Means Clustering. International Journal of Advance Research in Computer Science
and Management Studies, Volume 1, Issue 6, November 2013.
[29] P.J. Rousseeuw. Silhouettes: A Graphical Aid to the Interpretation and Validation
of Cluster Analysis. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 20,53–65,
1987.
[30] A. Struyf, M. Hubert and P.J. Rousseeuw. Clustering in an Object-Oriented
Environment.
Department
of
Mathematics
and
Computer
Science,
U.I.A.,
Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Antwerp, Belgium.
[31] T. Herlau, M.N. Schmidt and M. Mørup. Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining. Course notes Spring 2018, version 2, section 16.2, February 20, 2018.
[32] D. Hartenstine. Distance an Metric Spaces. Math Circle, 2004.
[33] http://inrix.com/scorecard/ , 2018.
[34] L. Allemand. Le Transport à la Demande (TAD) en France: pistes de réﬂexion
pour fa- voriser son développement et optimiser son exploitation. Étude des cas du
Conseil Général du Rhône, Toulouse, Dax et Évreux. Gestion et management. dumas-
00506622, 2007.
[35] A. Passalacqua. Les taxis collectifs aux marges de la mobilité parisienne des années
1930. Transports urbains, n 117, juin, p. 28-32, 2010.
[36] E. Castex. Le développement du transport à la demande en France : la pérennité du
TAD à l’épreuve des réformes territoriales Dans Flux 2016/4 (N 106), pages 43 à 57,
2016.
76 of 85
==PAGE:78==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
10
Appendices
Cases for request insertion within a route after clustering
Figure 10.1: Case 2: Insertion of the new requests in ﬁrst position for pick-up node and
anywhere for drop-oﬀnode except ﬁrst and last one
Figure 10.2: Case 3: Insertion of the new requests in ﬁrst position for pick-up node and
last position for drop-oﬀnode
77 of 85
==PAGE:79==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 10.3: Case 4: Insertion of the new requests in last position for pick-up node and
ﬁrst position for drop-oﬀnode
Figure 10.4: Case 5: Insertion of the new requests in last position for pick-up node and
anywhere for drop-oﬀnode except ﬁrst and last one
78 of 85
==PAGE:80==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 10.5: Case 6: Insertion of the new requests in last position for both pick-up and
drop-oﬀnodes
Figure 10.6: Case 7: Insertion of the new requests anywhere for pick-up and drop-oﬀ
nodes except ﬁrst and last one
79 of 85
==PAGE:81==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Figure 10.7: Case 8: Insertion of the new requests anywhere for pick-up node and in ﬁrst
position for the drop-oﬀnode
Figure 10.8: Case 9: Insertion of the new requests anywhere for pick-up node and in last
position for the drop-oﬀnode
80 of 85
==PAGE:82==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Silhouette : initial clusters parameter tuning
Time slice
KAB
SAB
KFOL
SFOL
KNROM
SNROM
KOROM
SOROM
0
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
1
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
5
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
6
-
-
2
0.96
-
-
-
-
7
-
-
-
-
2
0.46
-
-
8
4
0.86
2
0.24
3
0.22
2
0.38
9
2
0.47
2
0.08
2
0.04
3
0.02
10
2
0.22
4
0.06
4
0.13
4
0.11
11
2
0.66
4
0.55
3
0.31
2
0.65
12
4
0.74
4
0.77
4
0.34
3
0.58
13
-
-
2
0.99
-
-
-
-
14
2
0.93
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
5
0.90
2
0.56
3
0.53
2
0.92
16
-
-
-
-
-
-
2
0.97
17
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
18
2
0.73
2
0.32
2
0.68
4
0.78
19
2
0.93
2
0.37
5
0.09
6
0.43
20
2
0.84
4
0.25
2
0.35
3
0.18
21
2
0.75
7
0.23
4
0.33
2
0.51
22
2
0.35
4
0.14
10
0.05
8
0.06
23
2
0.54
4
0.26
2
0.08
3
0.15
24
2
0.89
2
0.92
2
0.96
-
-
25
4
0.50
4
0.12
8
0.19
13
0.09
26
2
0.55
2
0.69
2
0.29
2
0.52
27
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
28
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
31
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
32
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
34
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
average S
-
0.68
-
0.44
-
0.32
-
0.42
Table 30: Results of the Silhouette algorithm parameter tuning for a 40 minutes time
slice length
81 of 85
==PAGE:83==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Time slice
KAB
SAB
KFOL
SFOL
KNROM
SNROM
KOROM
SOROM
0-9
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
10
-
-
2
0.63
2
0.93
2
0.59
11
2
0.90
3
0.43
3
0.22
4
0.17
12
11
0.54
2
0.04
9
0.09
2
0.03
13
2
0.38
2
0.02
3
0.02
3
0.01
14
3
0.38
2
0.08
2
0.07
2
0.39
15
2
0.76
2
0.59
7
0.36
-
-
16
5
0.59
3
0.69
3
0.47
2
0.72
17
-
-
2
-0.5
2
0.79
-
-
18
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
19
2
0.93
-
-
-
-
-
-
20
4
0.88
3
0.87
3
0.57
2
0.92
21
-
-
2
0.16
2
0.89
-
-
22
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
23
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
24
2
0.65
-
-
2
0.74
2
0.89
25
-
-
2
0.37
2
0.99
4
0.67
26
4
0.49
2
0.37
2
0.32
3
0.21
27
2
0.87
3
0.20
5
0.19
4
0.20
28
-
-
-
-
14
-0.0
14
-0.0
29
2
0.92
4
0.16
2
0.66
3
0.21
30
5
0.40
5
0.09
3
0.06
3
0.11
31
4
0.52
2
0.57
3
0.08
3
0.33
32
2
0.89
2
0.92
2
0.96
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
34
4
0.44
8
0.17
4
0.40
4
0.26
35
2
0.74
-
-
4
-0.2
3
0.33
36-47
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
average S
-
0.66
-
0.33
-
0.41
-
0.36
Table 31: Results of the Silhouette algorithm parameter tuning for a 30 minutes time
slice length
82 of 85
==PAGE:84==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Time slice
KAB
SAB
KFOL
SFOL
KNROM
SNROM
KOROM
SOROM
0-12
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
13
-
-
2
0.96
-
-
-
-
14
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
15
-
-
-
-
2
0.55
-
-
16
5
1
2
0.37
3
0.24
2
0.06
17
-
-
2
0.29
2
0.17
3
0.19
18
4
0.99
2
0.11
3
0.26
5
0.08
19
2
0.46
3
0.12
2
0.01
3
0.08
20
3
0.20
2
0.03
4
0.23
4
0.09
21
5
0.51
3
0.28
2
0.36
2
0.35
22
7
0.49
2
0.58
3
0.38
3
-0.3
23
3
0.43
2
0.77
2
0.96
-
-
24
2
-0.5
2
0.63
2
0.66
2
-0.5
25
3
0.92
2
0.98
3
0.48
-
-
26
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
27
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
28
2
0.95
-
-
-
-
-
-
29
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
30
3
0.84
2
0.84
3
0.99
-
-
31
-
-
2
0.42
3
0.78
-
-
32
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
33
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
34
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
35
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
36
2
0.65
-
-
-
-
-
-
37
-
-
6
-0.16
3
0.33
5
0.62
38
-
-
-
-
2
-0.5
3
0.99
39
2
0.93
2
0.37
5
0.10
2
0.27
40
2
0.84
4
0.17
2
0.35
2
0.42
41
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
42
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
43
2
0.75
7
0.23
3
0.44
2
0.51
44
5
0.63
2
0.36
2
0.13
6
0.07
45
2
0.49
2
0.15
8
0.04
7
0.04
46
2
0.65
2
0.17
5
0.03
2
0.16
47
2
0.77
2
0.51
14
0.10
3
0.79
48
2
0.89
2
0.92
2
0.96
-
-
49
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
50
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
51
4
0.50
5
0.09
7
0.24
7
0.14
52
2
0.75
2
0.69
2
0.29
2
0.52
53-71
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
average S
-
0.64
-
0.41
-
0.34
-
0.24
Table 32: Results of the Silhouette algorithm parameter tuning for a 20 minutes time
slice length
83 of 85
==PAGE:85==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Time slice
KAB
SAB
KFOL
SFOL
KNROM
SNROM
KOROM
SOROM
0-19
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20
-
-
-
-
2
0.55
-
-
21
-
-
2
0.63
-
-
2
0.52
22
2
0.92
2
0.75
2
0.41
2
0.59
23
-
-
2
0.17
2
0.13
4
0.39
24
3
0.99
2
0.18
2
0.15
3
0.14
25
8
0.53
2
0.11
2
0.05
2
0.03
26
7
0.29
2
0.03
2
0.05
2
0.03
27
5
0.32
2
0.07
2
0.16
2
0.10
28
5
0.51
2
0.18
2
0.36
2
0.35
29
2
0.76
-
-
2
0.62
2
-0.5
30
2
0.82
2
0.82
3
0.56
-
-
31
2
0.82
-
-
-
-
-
-
32
2
-0.5
2
0.63
2
0.26
2
-0.5
33
3
0.92
-
-
2
0.71
-
-
34
-
-
2
-0.5
2
0.79
-
-
35-37
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
38
2
0.93
-
-
-
-
-
-
39
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
40
-
-
-
-
2
0.99
-
-
41
2
0.49
-
-
2
-0.5
-
-
42
-
-
2
0.16
2
0.61
-
-
43-47
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
48
2
0.65
-
-
-
-
-
-
49
-
-
-
-
2
0.67
2
0.89
50
-
-
4
0.17
-
-
2
0.85
51
-
-
-
-
2
-0.5
2
0.99
52
2
0.94
2
0.41
2
0.44
4
0.45
53
2
0.68
4
0.17
2
0.19
2
0.18
54
2
0.87
4
0.15
4
0.23
2
0.41
55
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
56
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
57
-
-
-
-
14
-0.0
14
-0.0
58
2
0.64
2
0.52
4
0.28
3
0.23
59
2
0.59
2
0.37
2
0.42
2
0.29
60
4
0.61
2
0.17
3
0.09
9
0.04
61
4
0.63
5
0.13
2
0.14
3
0.48
62
2
0.64
2
0.21
3
0.07
2
0.39
63
2
0.77
2
0.41
2
0.69
2
0.93
64
2
0.89
-
-
-
-
-
-
65-67
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
68
3
0.47
14
-0.0
2
0.31
9
0.13
69
2
0.70
2
0.54
3
0.56
2
0.64
70
4
-0.2
-
-
4
-0.2
2
0.49
71-95
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
average S
-
0.62
-
0.27
-
0.30
-
0.33
Table 33: Results of the Silhouette algorithm parameter tuning for a 15 minutes time
slice length
84 of 85
==PAGE:86==
Machine learning for the optimization of on-demand public transport
Initial solution parameter tuning
60 min
40 min
30 min
20 min
15 min
µAB
159 925
158 564
159 668
161 681
165 596
µFOL
196 066
203 378
197 437
209 946
215 078
µNROM
253 042
261 247
266 843
284 023
280 577
µOROM
309 231
308 420
308 268
321 653
325 121
µGlobal
229 566
232 902
233 054
244 326
246 593
σAB
2 491
2 839
2 363
2 572
2 930
σFOL
3 210
6 981
3 741
3 994
5 070
σNROM
4 533
3 713
5 269
3 982
5 529
σOROM
8 393
4 938
5 512
4 867
7 592
σGlobal
4 657
4 618
4 222
3 853
5 280
Table 34:
Average results of the initial solution algorithm parameters according to
diﬀerent value of time slice length
85 of 85
