==PAGE:1==
Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
Bettina Roness Berg
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Dynamic asset allocation with use of Hidden Markov Model has in recent research
shown to outperform the more standard Strategic asset allocation with periodic
rebalancing. The regime switching models are able to match the behaviors of
the ﬁnancial market, and are well suited to match the moments of the ﬁnancial
series.
This thesis extends previous work by creating an ensemble method to leverage
the strengths of diﬀerent switching models, to investigate if this can improve
the prediction accuracy and have a quicker response to market changes and pro-
vide better long-term results.
The ensemble method combines the prediction
from three Hidden Markov Models, one GARCH(1,1) model and three Markov
Switching GARCH models.
The ensemble method, Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts is shown to add value
over the strategic asset allocation and the dynamic asset allocation with usage of
one of the Markov switching models on an American equity index, an American
bond index and a commodity index.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Jan Kloppenborg Møller for interesting dis-
cussion and help full guidance when needed.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Dynamic Asset Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Time horizon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Stylized facts and Markov-switching mixtures . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Regime-switching Asset Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Markov Switching GARCH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6
Thesis Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Index Data
11
2.1
S&P 500 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Bloomberg Barclays US Corporate Total Return Value Unhedged
USD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
The S&P GSCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Distributional Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Temporal Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.5.1
In-Sample Adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
The Experts
21
3.1
Hidden Markov Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.1
Baum - Welch algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.2
Decoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.3
Model Estimation HMM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
iv
3.2
GARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2.1
Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.2
Model Estimation GARCH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3
Markov Switching GARCH
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1
Parameter Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.3.2
Model Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4
Expert Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
The Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
43
4.1
Mixture of Experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.1
Gradient Descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.2
"Optimal Combination of Forecasts" . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2.1
HMME for detecting states in the ﬁnancial market . . . . .
49
4.2.2
Model Estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Strategic Asset Allocation
55
5.1
Scenario Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2
The Mean - CVaR Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6
Dynamic Asset Allocation
64
6.1
Decoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.2
In Sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.3
Out of Sample
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7
Discussion
70
7.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Bibliography
72
Appendix
78
7.2
R Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.2.1
Baum - Welch algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.2.2
Decoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.2.3
State Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Financial markets are highly irrational and its behavior changes abruptly. The
ability to detect if the market is stable or moving towards a shift of regime,
can be important in order to maximize return.
This is what we call Regime
Based Asset allocation (RBAA). The more normal approach today, is Strategic
Asset Allocation (SAA), where you have a set weight for each product that is
decided from a ﬁxed level of riskiness the investor is willing to take. Where an
investor with a higher willingness for risk could have more stocks in the portfolio
compared to one with a lower willingness.
The return is often following the
amount of risk that the portfolio is containing. The goal with using RBAA, is to
increase the weight of more risky assets in good times, and moving towards more
stable assets in unstable times. Thus, performing a more ﬂexible asset allocation,
where the losses are minimized and the returns are maximized, is giving a better
long-term performance. To my knowledge, the research in this ﬁeld, is so far
dominated by usage of Hidden Markov Models for detecting regimes in ﬁnancial
data. This is a probabilistic machine learning model that is using knowledge
about an observation and the previous state to determine the current state.
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Dynamic Asset Allocation
2
1.1
Dynamic Asset Allocation
Peter Nystrup’s PhD on regime-based asset allocation lists major studies on the
topic. The following literature review is based on his thesis [Nystrup(2018)].
In his asset allocation thesis, he describes how to divide a portfolio between major
asset classes. The most essential determinant of portfolio performance is asset
allocation ([?],[Ibbotson and Kaplan(2000)]).
Nystrup mentions that shifting economic scenarios can cause asset classes to diﬀer
signiﬁcantly, and because of that, no single asset class would overlook all economic
conditions. Traditional Strategic asset allocation approaches, do not adapt to
shifting economic scenarios. According to [Sun et al.(20006)Sun, Fan, Chen, Schouwenaars, and Al
traditional approaches attempt to develop static portfolios that ﬁt a range of dif-
ferent economic scenarios. If economic conditions are persistent, and strongly
linked to asset class performance, Dynamic asset allocation strategies should be
preferred over static weights. A dynamic strategy will take advantage of posi-
tive economic regimes, hold out against unfavorable economic regimes and reduce
potential drawdowns.
[Sun et al.(20006)Sun, Fan, Chen, Schouwenaars, and Albota] discuss the diﬀer-
ences between regime-based investments and tactical asset allocations (TAA).
They diﬀer from each other in several respects. TAA is meant for more of a
short-term period, with a higher frequency such as weekly or monthly, as well as
being driven by valuation considerations. Regime-based investing is for longer
time horizons, such as years, and is driven by changing economic fundamen-
tals. The latter has the ﬂexibility to accommodate changing economic conditions
within a benchmark-based investment policy, which can involve more than one
rebalancing within a given year. Regime-based investment is a middle ground
between strategic and tactical asset allocations.
As stated by [Dahlquist(2001)], strategic asset allocation is more suitable for
long-term purposes and is based on long-term views of asset class performance,
even though the forecasts are updated yearly.
The thesis also lists the point of view of Edwards and Manjrekar (2014) on the
topic.
Edwards and Manjrekar (2014) claim that SAA is less restricted than
DAA. DAA is more restricted by reason of the investment possibilities being
limited as compared to SAA. The process of investment is more complex in
dynamic real estate, forestry, private equity, etc.
Investments within illiquid
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Time horizon
3
classes require a longer time horizon. This is mentioned because unlisted asset
classes are gradually becoming more sought-after in the professional investors’
portfolios
Nystrup also discusses the intention of DAA not being about the ability to fore-
cast the next shift in regime or future market movement. Rather, the point is to
identify a shift as fast as possible with high credibility. Identifying a regime shift
quickly and with high credibility, gives an opportunity to beneﬁt from the per-
sistence in equilibrium returns and volatilities. Daily noise and market volatility,
can make it diﬃcult to see short-term volatilities. A mathematical model would
consequently be convenient to identify underlying structures in market data.
Fama (1970) suggests that even though the markets are eﬃcient, a dynamic
strategy would be proﬁtable. When prices in a market fully reﬂect accessible
information, the capital market concerned is eﬃcient. Market participants are
then precluded from making risk-free proﬁts based on accessible information,
limiting the possibilities for arbitrage.
Nystrup describes the term “fully reﬂect” as the existence of an equilibrium model
which might be stated either in terms of equilibrium prices or equilibrium ex-
pected returns. Trends may exist in eﬃcient markets, if the equilibrium expected
returns change over time.
1.2
Time horizon
According to Siegel (2007), [Timmermann(2000)] long-term investors should have
a higher proportion of risky assets in their portfolio than short-term investors.
The reason for this claim, is that time diversiﬁcation reduces risk. The aim after
a regime shift is to rebalance, hence, the time horizon does not matter. The time
horizon is assumed to be long enough for covering the expenses of the rebalancing
to make sense. The portfolio is optimized conditioned on being in the current
regime, with asset returns being assumed to follow a random walk within each
regime. The proportion of risky assets will depend on the current regime and
level of risk aversion, but not the time horizon. In other words, risky investments
are dependent on the current regime and on how much aversion there is for a
regime, the time horizon will not matter.
[Bulla(2011)] were among those who considered regime-switching asset allocation
on daily returns. They were among the ﬁrst to consider this. Wrong regime
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Stylized facts and Markov-switching mixtures
4
forecasts are reduced from a month to one trading day and the delay for discov-
ering and attending to a regime shift, is also reduced simply by switching to daily
data. A shorter response time is convenient, because it allows the same regime
to be decoded for several days before changing the allocation. This minimizes
the cost of trading on false signals.[Bulla(2011)] also discuss that the amount
of data available increases by using daily data for markets with a short history.
It is worth noting, that for many ﬁnancial indices monthly data with a much
longer history is available. The length of a data period should be long enough
for a ﬁnancial cycle to develop. According to Nystrup it is preferable for the
data period to include more than one cycle. A longer data horizon will be more
subject to question as to whether stationarity of the data-generating process can
be assumed.
Daily data presents some challenges as well. According to Campbell et al. (2007)
daily returns consist of noise and extreme observations. By using monthly data,
these challenges are not present because they are evened out. Campbell et al.
(2007) uses the following example ”given that returns are conditionally normal,
conditioned on a variance parameter that itself is random, then the Central Limit
Theorem applies to the resulting heavy-tailed unconditional distribution because
it has a ﬁnite variance and ﬁnite higher order moments.” Long-horizon returns
will be closer to the normal distribution than the short-horizon returns.
These challenges complicate the modeling and presumably, are the reason for
why it is more popular to use monthly data. The use of daily data also makes
the link to macroeconomic data more diﬃcult.
1.3
Stylized facts and Markov-switching mixtures
Cont (2001) argues that a composition of normal distributions arranges a bet-
ter ﬁt because of their ability to reproduce both the skewness and leptokurto-
sis. Hamilton (1989,1990) introduced the class of Markov-switching models to
the ﬁnancial econometrics. A hidden Markov model (HMM) is used to obtain
the distributional and temporal properties of ﬁnancial returns. The distribution
generates an observation, dependent on the conditions of an underlying and un-
observed Markov chain in an HMM. Even though the conditions are identiﬁed
through a statistical ﬁltering procedure, they may still be interpreted through
economic cycles (see e.g. Ahlgreen and Dahl 2010). Most of the stylized facts of
the daily return series introduced by Granger and Ding (1995a,b), were repro-
duced by Ryden et al (1998), where they used daily returns of the SP 500 stock
==PAGE:11==
1.4 Regime-switching Asset Allocation
5
index from 1928 to 1991. The persistence of the squared daily returns was the
only stylized fact they could not reproduce.
[Bulla(2011)] later showed that most of the stylized facts were reproduced as well
as, or even better than, the Gaussian HMMs, by an HMM with t-distributed
components. While at the same time, the persistence of the visited states and
robustness to outliers were increased. For daily returns of the SP 500 index from
1928 to 2007, he also showed that models with three or more states would match
better than models with two states.
Krintzman and Li (2010) did a diﬀerent approached in a discriminant analysis, to
show that ﬁnancial turbulence has been very persistent, and that risk-adjusted
returns have been substantially lower during turbulent periods, irrespective of
the source of turbulence. The study looked at monthly returns from 1980 to
2009 of 6 asset class indices, including both US and non-US stocks and bonds,
commodities and listed real estate.
Nystrup claims, that the observed persistence should make the serial correlation
in the classiﬁcation more preferable. An HMM makes it possible to include the
correlation between the assets in the classiﬁcation, because of the autocorrelation
being taken into account with a multivariate conditional distribution. A Markov
switching mixture model, that captures the stylized behavior of ﬁnancial returns,
should be useful as foundation for a regime-based asset allocation strategy.
1.4
Regime-switching Asset Allocation
Ang and Bekaert (2002) considered the impact of regime shifts on asset allo-
cation. They looked at monthly equity returns from several countries such as
Germany, the UK and the US from 1970 to 1997. They addressed more than two
variables per observation on regime-switching processes with two states.
The
costs of ignoring regime-switching were small for all-equity portfolios. The costs
were remarkably higher when a risk-free asset could be held. The main ﬁnding
of Ang and Bekaert (2002) showed that, during a regime switch, international
diversiﬁcation was still valuable even though the correlations and volatilities in
the bear market increased.
In a following study, Ang and Bekaert (2004) argued the analysis by addition-
ally including equity indices from around the world.
These monthly returns
were dated 1975 through 2000. They discovered, that a regime-shifting strategy
==PAGE:12==
1.4 Regime-switching Asset Allocation
6
seemed to overlook static strategies out-of-sample for global equity portfolios.
The authors also considered market timing, based on a regime-switching model
with transition probabilities, that depended on short-term interest rates. The in-
terest rate had a statistically noticeable inﬂuence on the switching’s probability,
because the probability for switching to a high volatility regime and staying in
it, increased when the interest rate rose. The main hedge for volatility, would be
the risk-free asset and not the bond investment, in an asset universe consisting
of stock indices, cash and a ten-year constant-maturity bond.
Bauer et al. (2004) did a study on monthly returns from 1976 to 2002. The
study was of a six-asset portfolio consisting of equities, bonds, commodities and
real estate. The study was performed using the multivariate outlier approach of
Chow et al. (1999). Observing changing correlations and volatilities among the
assets, they demonstrated (under the assumption of perfect foresight with regard
to the prevailing regime) a signiﬁcant information gain with the use of the regime-
switching strategy, instead of the standard mean-variance optimization strategy.
A substantial part of the positive excess return disappeared after accounting for
the transaction costs.
Amman and Verhofen (2006), estimated a multivariate regime-switching model
for the four-factor model of Carhart (2007). They used monthly data for the
four equity risk factors from 1927 to 2004. Their regime-switching model is very
similar to that of Ang and Bekaert (2002).
Their ﬁndings included two very
diﬀerent regimes with diﬀerent mean returns, volatilities and correlations. Their
key ﬁndings, included value stocks providing high returns in the high-variance
state, whereas momentum stocks and the market portfolio performed better in
the low-variance state.
A four-state Markov-switching autoregressive model for monthly returns on stocks,
bonds, and T-bills from 1954 to 1991 was estimated by Guidolin and Timmerman
(2007). Their ﬁndings showed, that optimal asset allocation diﬀered within the
regimes. Stock allocations monotonically increased, as the investment horizon
became longer in only one of four regimes. The remaining regimes featured ob-
servations of a downward sloping allocation to stocks. The economic importance
of accounting for the presence of regimes in asset returns in out-of-sample returns,
was conﬁrmed by Guidolin and Timmermann (2007).
[Bulla(2011)] made two-state hidden Markov models of daily returns of stock in-
dices from 1985 to 2006. The countries included were Germany, Japan and the
US. When tested out-of-sample they noticed a signiﬁcant variance reduction by
using a strategy of switching cash in the high variance regime. In terms of an-
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Regime-switching Asset Allocation
7
nual return after accounting for transaction costs, they also noticed all strategies
outperforming their respective index.
Kritzman et al. (2012) applied a two-state HM to forecast regimes in market
turbulence (as deﬁned by Chow et al. 1999), inﬂation, and economic growth.
A DAA strategy based on anticipated regimes was found by them to reduce
negative risk, as well as improving the balance of returns to value-at-risk (VaR)
relative to a static strategy out-of-sample when applied to stocks, bonds, and
cash. Monthly returns from 1973 to 2009 were considered in their analysis. They
argued that the break-even transaction cost would oﬀset the advantage of the
dynamic strategy, instead of assuming transaction costs. Zakamulin (2014) tested
two DAA strategies. These strategies were based on unexpected volatility being
the diﬀerence between the forecasted volatility using a GARCH(1,1) model and
the realized volatility. Zakamulin (2014) used the CBOE Market Volatility Index
(VIX) to refer to previous studies on implied volatility. Data from both daily
and monthly returns for the SP 500 and the DOW Jones Industrial Average
Index from 1950 through 2012 were included in the study.
The data showed
unexpected volatility being positively associated with expected future volatility
and negatively associated with expected future returns. The weight of stocks
relative to cash was changed gradually on a monthly basis based on the level of
unexpected volatility in the ﬁrst strategy. The other strategy was either all-in
stocks or all-in cash depending on whether the unexpected volatility was above
or below the historical average. Both of Zakamulin’s 2014 strategies appeared to
outperform static strategies out-of-sample.
When comparing the performance of dynamic and static strategies, considering
transaction costs is important. Frequent rebalancing can according to Bauer et
al. (2004) oﬀset the potential excess return of a dynamic strategy. Ang and
Bekaert (2002,2004), Guidolin and Timmermann (2007) and Zakamulin (2014)
have not accounted for the transaction costs.
Professional investors who can
implement dynamic strategies in a cost-eﬃcient way using ﬁnancial derivatives
such as futures or swaps have transaction costs that are likely to be lower than
those faced by private investors. The approach the accords best would be to
report the break-even transaction like Kritzman et al. (2012).
Out-of-sample testing is unfortunately neglected in many studies.
Testing a
model on the same data that it was ﬁtted to do not reveal its actual poten-
tial. According to Bauer et al (2004), investors do not have perfect foresight, and
that leads to the out-of-sample potential likely being lower than the in-sample
performance. Non-linear techniques often provide a quality in-sample ﬁt, but
still get surpassed by a random walk when used for out-of-sample forecasting.
==PAGE:14==
1.4 Regime-switching Asset Allocation
8
According to Dacco and Satchell’s study (1999) any small estimation error may
lead to the loss of advantage from knowing the correct model speciﬁcation. Hence
in terms of mean squared error out-of-sample, a good in-sample ﬁt, but no out-
performance, over a random walk does not necessarily imply that a model is
overﬁtting. Dacco and Satchell (1999) argued that performance should be eval-
uated by methods appropriate for the actual problem. The problem in this case
would be economic proﬁt or excess return. An example is listed from Ammann
and Verhofen (2006). Although the forecasting ability of the underlying model
was weak compared to a random walk, they found a regime-switching strategy
to be proﬁtable out-of-sample. An inadequate out-of-sample performance can be
an indication of the data-generating process being non-stationary. Ryden et al.
(1998) found that estimated HMMs varied considerably through the 63-year data
collection period they studied. Focusing on the most recent ﬁndings by applying
an adaptive estimation technique that allows the parameters to gradually change
during the sample period by will help address the parameters being varied. The
importance of this issue increases with longer data periods. For the other areas
within automatic regulation, adaptivity is often used (see e.g. Krstic et al. 1995).
Even though adaptivity is used within other areas of automatic modulation and
forecasting, it has not received the same attention within empirical ﬁnance (see
e.g. Pinson and Madsen 2012).
Among the studies referenced in Nystrup’s thesis, it was only Kritzman et al.
(2012) that did not determine regimes in asset prices. They forecasted the regimes
in important drivers of asset returns and then reallocated assets accordingly. The
outlook for the economy should be reﬂected in asset prices to the extent that it can
be predicted, if ﬁnancial markets are eﬃcient. This connection does not ﬁt the use
of macroeconomic data because of the delay in availability, low frequency of data
and because the data often is revised subsequently. Because of market data being
available in real time, ﬁnancial markets should be the ﬁrst to react to changes to
the economic outlook, creating strong arguments for modeling ﬁnancial returns
directly. Only [Bulla(2011)] considered daily rather than monthly returns.
Most of the studies listed in Nystrup’s thesis included a risk-free asset. Even
though a risk-free asset yields a volatility reduction, it does not explain what
return to expect on a risk-free asset. The performance of the dynamic switching
strategies will be diluted with a lower return on cash. Considering a negative
exposure to risky assets in the most turbulent regimes would be wise if they seem
to be underperforming during turbulent regimes. Most of the studies referenced
by Nystrup considered long-only strategies. Ang and Bekaert (2002,2004) and
Ammann and Verhofen (2006) were the only studies to consider short-position
studies. According to Nystrup, short positons may have restrictions preventing
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Markov Switching GARCH
9
the implementation of other strategies, nevertheless establishing the potential is
interesting even if only to know the cost of a long-only investment policy.
1.5
Markov Switching GARCH
The Markov Switching GARCH (MSGARCH) in the ﬁeld of Finance are dominat-
ing in use for forecasting risk related to return [Ardia et al.(2018)Ardia, Bluteau, Boudt, and Catan
Research have shown that standard deviation of the ﬁnancial return exhibit struc-
tural breaks, and that ignoring this can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the precision of
the forecasted volatility([Bauwens et al.(2014)Bauwens, Dufays, and Rombouts],
[Dufays(2018)], [Lamoureux and Lastrapes(1990)]).
As shown in [Ardia(2008)] and [Marcucci(2005)] where the risk prediction im-
proved by switching between return processes with changing parameters in time
according to a discrete hidden variable. The usage of Markov Switching model for
the hidden variables achieved quick adaption to variations in the unconditional
volatility level.
The MSGARCH have shown to be beniﬁcial to predicit risk in order increase
portfolio management [Wisner(2017)].
To my knowledge is there no research
that uses MSGARCH as state predictors for implementations of Dynamic Asset
Allocation.
1.6
Thesis Statement
The motivation for this Master thesis is then to use an ensemble method to detect
regimes in ﬁnancial data. The thought is to reduce the variance and bias of the
model by using the output from several models, and in that hopefully outperform
the strategic asset allocation and previous single HMM models.
he purpose of this thesis is to create an ensemble machine-learning model to
detect regimes in the ﬁnancial market, and compare the performance to both
previous RBAA models and the more standard strategic asset allocation.
The problem statement will be answered by fulﬁlling the following goals
==PAGE:16==
1.6 Thesis Statement
10
• Replicate previous models for Regime based asset allocation
• Create the Hidden Markov Models for diﬀerent distributions
• Build the ensemble model
• Evaluate the expected performance for an strategic asset allocation
• Implement the dynamic strategies
• Compare the three diﬀerent asset allocation strategies
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Index Data
The indices utilized for purposes of modeling the optimal portfolio are selected
due to their characteristics, where coherence, replicability and simplicity are key
features. The indices in question represent the relevant asset classes where eq-
uities are represented by the S&P 500, bonds by the Bloomberg Barclays US
Corporate Total Return Value Unhedged USD index and commodities by the
international Commodity Index. However simplistic, the relevant indices covers
the most relevant asset classes and could furthermore be both replicated (through
ETFs) and exchanged with other indices covering other regions and marketplaces
if necessary. The idea is thus not to accentuate the US market, but rather to
avoid issues where a bond index weighs a region diﬀerent than the chosen equity
index. Furthermore, the data period is a total of 26 years where the period rang-
ing from the start of 1993 until the end of 2012 is characterized as the in-sample
period, whereas the rest of the period (until end 2018) is the out-of-sample pe-
riod. The length of the relevant data period could be further discussed, but is
deemed adequate, where the 20 years in-sample should be explanatory for the six
years out-of-sample, although it could be discussed whether market data dated
20 years ago is explanatory for the market in the in-sample period.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 S&P 500
12
2.1
S&P 500
Figure 2.1: The
development
in
the
S&P
500,
in-
sample
(white)
and
out-of-sample (grey)
The S&P 500 is a market-capitalization-
weighted index of the 500 largest publicly
traded companies in the U.S. The index
utilizes a company’s shares which are con-
sidered “free ﬂoat” (shares that the public
can trade) and weighs the relevant stocks
in the index relative to their market cap-
italization.
The index is illustrated in
ﬁgure 2.1, which depicts the relevant in-
sample (white) and out-of-sample period
(grey).
The S&P 500 is a relatively diverse index;
ranging from tech-giants (Microsoft, Al-
phabet, etc.) to medicine manufacturers
(Johnson & Johnson, Pﬁzer, etc.). How-
ever, as depicted below, IT (19,9%), health
care (15,8%) and Financials (13,7%) are signiﬁcantly larger than the fourth
largest sector (Consumer Discretionary – 9,9%)(ﬁgure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: The weight f the diﬀer-
ent sectors in the S&P
500 at the end of 2018.
Although this skewness in sectors occur,
this is a typical issue for all bond indicies
found, where one could argue that S&P is
relatively diversiﬁed.
One dilemma that
arises is whether the MSCI World Index
rather should be utilized to capture a more
general approach.
However, the MSCI
World consists mainly of North American
stocks, due to the sheer size of the U.S.
stock exchanges.
The issue that would
then present itself, is the diﬀerent weight-
ing of regions when the relevant stock in-
dex is compared to the relevant bond index, thus the U.S. market is chosen to
secure coherence and simplicity. The model is however dynamic and diﬀerent
indices could later be applied.
The statistical summary of the S&P 500 is shown in table 2.1. The daily log-
return is left-skewed and highly leptokurtic, meaning that observations are ob-
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Bloomberg Barclays US Corporate Total Return Value Unhedged USD13
served more than 3 standard deviations from mean, in other words fat tails. The
annual Sharp Ratio (SR) is deﬁned as the risk-adjusted performance of the asset.
It was introduced by [Sharpe(1965)] and is found as the excess return divided
by the standard deviation. The risk free rate is neglected for the comparison
between the three indices, in that they all are denominated in USD. The annual
sharp ratio is of 0.34.
Mean
Std
Skewness
Kurtosis
Annual SR
ACF(1)
0.00032
0.0121
-0.223
8.39
0.34
-0.067
Table 2.1: Statistical summary for the in-sample daily S&P 500 log-returns
2.2
Bloomberg Barclays US Corporate Total Re-
turn Value Unhedged USD
Figure 2.3: The
development
in
the US Bond index,
in-sample (white) and
out-of-sample (grey)
The Bloomberg Barclays US Corporate
Total Return Value Unhedged USD (here-
after US Bond Index) measures the in-
vestment grade, ﬁxed-rate, taxable cor-
porate bond market.
The included se-
curities must be rated investment grade
(Baa3/BBB- or higher) and is evaluated
based on the middle rating of Moody‘s,
S&P and Fitch.
The minimum par
amount is deﬁned as USD 300 million,
where a ﬁxed rate coupon is utilized. Fur-
thermore, a minimum of one year until ma-
turity, is required to be included in the in-
dex. Thus, the index includes what could
be described as relatively robust bonds
traded in the U.S. The return of the in-
dex is depicted in ﬁgure 2.3, and shows a
steady increase which could be linked to
declining interest rates in the united states over the course of the period.
The bonds are further distributed by the sectors and rankings depicted in ﬁgure
2.4.
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Bloomberg Barclays US Corporate Total Return Value Unhedged USD14
(a) Ranking weight
(b) Sector weight
Figure 2.4: The
weights
of
the
diﬀerent
bond
rankings
and
sectors
[Bloomberg(2019)]
The statistical summary of the US bond index is shown in table 2.2. The US bond
index is more left-skewed compared to the S&P 500, but is not highly leptokurtic.
Therefore, the sharp ratio is also signiﬁcantly higher.
The in sample period has been exceptionally beneﬁcial for the bond market, where
it has been characterised by falling interest rates and low inﬂation. With negative
interest rates in Europe and historically low US interest rates it is unlikely that
the bullish environment or the bonds can continue forever, where the interest
rates and inﬂation most likely will start increasing at some point.
Mean
Std
Skewness
Kurtosis
Annual SR
ACF(1)
0.00027
0.0034
-0.313
2.459
1.289
-0.085
Table 2.2: Statistical summary for the in-sample daily log-returns of the US
Bond Index
==PAGE:21==
2.3 The S&P GSCI
15
2.3
The S&P GSCI
Figure 2.5: The
development
in
the
S&P
GSCI,
in-
sample
(white)
and
out-of-sample (grey)
The Standard & Poor’s Goldman Sachs
Commodity Index, is a leading measure
of the realizable returns in the commodi-
ties market.
It represent a long-only
investment in commodity futures, with
a wide spread across the spectrum of
commodities[Sachs(2019)]. The individual
commodities must fulﬁll the eligibility re-
quirements of a certain level of liquidity to
be curtain of investability in the underly-
ing futures markets.
At the end of 2018, the index was deﬁned
by 24 underlying future commodities. The
weight of the commodities is proportional
with the amount of the commodity ﬂowing
through the economy.
Figure 2.6: The weight f the diﬀer-
ent sectors in the S&P
GSCI at the end of
2018.
The statistical summary of the GSCI is
shown in table 2.2. Before the GFC, the
mean daily return of the GSCI was closer
to the average return of the S&P 500.
The turbulent periods give a higher stan-
dard deviation than the other two indices.
GSCI is left-skewed with a hint of lep-
tokurtic.
Combining commodities in the portfolio
have historically been beneﬁcial in that it
has displayed low or even negative correla-
tion to more traditional products as equity
and bonds [Perrucci and Benaben(2012)]. With the possibility of less bullish en-
vironment for the bonds in the future, it seems like an interesting contribution
to the portfolio.
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Distributional Properties
16
Mean
Std
Skewness
Kurtosis
Annual SR
ACF(1)
0.000137
0.0136
-0.261
3.29
0.051
-0.29
Table 2.3: Statistical summary for the in-sample daily log-returns of the GSCI
2.4
Distributional Properties
The indices development over time in the in sample period is visualised in ﬁgure
2.7 together with the United States 10-Year Bond Yield. The S&P 500 had a
positive trend until the dot-com bubble in 2000.
The continuous year where
characterised by turbulent period with an overall negative trend, before a new
upswing until the global ﬁnancial crises (GFC) in the end of 2007. Since then,
the index has had a positive trend with some smaller draw downs.
The Bond index has been the most stable of the indices, with a continuous growth
with some smaller stagnating periods until the maximum draw down during the
GFC. The performance of the bond index can be seen as a contrast to the 10
Year Bond yield, where the lack of the performance for the Bond index are more
or less only in periods where the US 10 year yield have increased. It is worth
mentioning that the US 10 year bond yield is at an all time low, where it cannot
be expected that it should continue falling in the same spead as for the past 20
years. Therefore, it is not expected that the bond index should continue with
this stable rate of return in the long run.
The S&P GSCI share some similarities with the S$P 500 index, where they are
often trending in the same direction.
But both in 1998 and 2006 the GSCI
had large drawdows, while the S&P 500 trended upwards. Both suﬀered from
setbacks in 2001 and 2008, where after 2008 the S$P 500 bounced fairly quick
back into a positive trend, while the GSCI have had some turbulent periods with
a slightly positive trend. When investigating the relation between the GSCI and
the interest rates, it is interesting to see that periods with large interest rate
increases, also are periods where the GSCI is doing well. From an diversiﬁcation
point of view, it could be an attractive supplement to the bonds, which have had
their drawdowns in periods of increasing interest rates.
Stationary
The indices are seen not to be stationary, where the mean is increasing and the pe-
riods have several local trends. Stationarity is obtained by a log-transformation,
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Distributional Properties
17
Figure 2.7: The in-sample development of the indices together with the yield
for the ten year US government bonds.
where the log return is calculated as,
rt = log(Pt) −log(Pt−1)
(2.1)
where Pt is the closing price on day t. The ﬁrst order Taylor approximation of
the log(x),
log(x) = log(1) + x −1
1!
−(x −1)2
2!
+ (x −1)3
3!
−...
(2.2)
Therefore, the Taylor approximation of the log return is,
log
 Pt
Pt−1

= log(1 + Rt) = log(1) + Rt −R2
t
2! + R3
t
3! + O(R4
t ) ≈Rt
(2.3)
The statistical summary of the daily log returns for the three indices are pre-
sented in table 2.4. The results for the Jarwue-Bera test strongly rejects the
null hypothesis that the data is normally distributed. The gain/loss asymmetry
of the index returns is a known phenomenon (Cont 2001), where the fat tails
of the indices return therefore will more often underestimate the frequency and
magnitude of drawdowns than positive extreme changes.
==PAGE:24==
2.5 Temporal Properties
18
S&P 500
USBI
S&P GSCI
Mean
0.00
0.00
0.00
Std
0.01
0.00
0.01
Skewness
-0.22
-0.31
-0.26
Kurtosis
8.39
2.46
3.29
Annual SR
0.34
1.28
0.05
ACF(1)
-0.07
-0.09
-0.30
JB-stat
14866.57
1342.46
2416.43
Table 2.4
2.5
Temporal Properties
Figure 2.8: The
Log
return
of
the
indices in-sample (white)
and out-of-sample (grey)
The log-transformations of the return
have yield stationary mean close to
zero, where in ﬁgure 2.8 it is seen to
ﬂuctuating around zero. The volatil-
ity of the log return is seen to vary
over time, where smaller price move-
ments tend to be followed by smaller
price movements and vice versa. This
characteristics is referred to as volatil-
ity clustering.
The indices autocorrelation for the
log-return, and the squared log return,
are calculated and shown in ﬁgure 2.9.
The dashed line represent the 95%
conﬁdent interval for the null hypno-
tise of independency.
From Madsen
2008, it is deﬁned that white noise
has an autocorrelation function that
is asymptotical normally distributed,
with mean zero and variance
1
T for
every lag beside lag zero. Therefore,
the 95% conﬁdent interval of the null
hypothesis can be approximated to
±2
√
T. The ﬁrst column is the auto-
correlation of the residuals, the auto-
correlation is seen to be signiﬁcant for
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Temporal Properties
19
Figure 2.9: The autocorrelation of the log-return and the squared log-return
for the three indices.
all three indices. The second column
is the autocorrelation of the squared
residuals.
It can be concluded from
the signiﬁcance level that all three indices have ARCH eﬀects, where the squared
log-return show signiﬁcant autocorrelation.
2.5.1
In-Sample Adjustment
The US Bond Index have as mentioned has exceptionally good conditions during
the in-sample period. Again it does not seem realistic that this can continue
on. The Bond index have outperformed both the stock and commodity index.
Historically the stocks and commodities have shown more attractive risk-return
relationships than the bonds. Therefore is it reasonable to thing that the sharp
ratio for the bond is is higher than it can be expected to be long term. One
==PAGE:26==
2.5 Temporal Properties
20
method to mitigate this issue could be to ﬁnd the change in interest in the in-
sample period and average duration of the index to remove the positive drift due
to the changes in interest rates. For the sake of this research, has it been decided
to follow the neutral assumption from [Nystrup(2014)] where the annual sharp
ratio is assumed to be close to equal for the equity and bond indices. This is
a naive approach where [Asness et al.(2012)Asness, Frazzini, and Heje Pedersen]
and [?] have both discussed that leverage aversion could be one reason why you
should not expect the same risk-adjusted return from bonds and equity in the
long run. However, for the aim of this research, where dynamic asset allocation
methods are compared, will it not favor the ensemble method over the previous
used regime methods.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
The Experts
A common biased assumption regarding ﬁnancial return is that it is normally
distributed. Return is generally skewed and leptokurtic, so a mixture of distri-
butions would be a better ﬁt. The distributions can be seen as diﬀerent states
of the ﬁnancial market, ex "bull" or "bear", where an unobserved Markov chain
describes the transition probabilities between the states. A hidden Markov model
(HMM) captures the distributions and the time series’ Markov chain by maxi-
mizing the likelihood with the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. HMM
is an unsupervised machine learning method in which the creator makes an as-
sumption about the underlying distributions of the mixture. The assumption of
a mixture of Gaussian distributions dominates the existing research. Financial
return is often leptokurtic, particularly in states representing periods with high
volatility. Therefore, two additional HMM models are included that assume that
either all of the underlying distributions have the Student’s t-distributed or that
one of the m states has the Student’s t-distribution.
Additionally, a generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH)
model is included, in which the level of conditional volatility is forecasted and
categorized as "bull" or "bear" with the use of logistic regression. The last expert
method is a combination of the previous two expert methods—Markov switching
and GARCH (MSGARCH). Here, it is assumed that conditional volatility is not
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
22
only aﬀected by shocks in return processes but could also change regimes.
These methods are focused on modeling stocks’ characteristics. The reason for
this is that stocks are often leaders in the economy and by including other indices,
this reduces the lag. Further, it is often also the largest contributor of risk in
a portfolio. This chapter compares the characteristics of each method using in-
sample data.
Further, an ensemble method, the hidden Markov mixture of experts (HMME),
is developed in the next chapter. Ensemble methods combine the output from
selected experts and return a weighted output.
This makes them robust and
stable classiﬁers. The mixture of experts (ME) is a soft ensemble method that
returns the probability of the ﬁnal classiﬁcation instead of a hard classiﬁcation
with output that has an either/or result. The speciﬁed ensemble method, HMME,
is then an ME with HMM, GARCH, and MSGARCH with diﬀerent distributional
assumptions as experts.
3.1
Hidden Markov Models
HMM is a dependent mixture model where the dependence between the mix-
tures is modeled by a underlying and unobserved Markov chain. The framework
refers to implementations from [Cappé et al.(2005)Cappé, Moulines, and Ryden],
[Yu(2009)] and [Zucchini and Macdonald(2018)]
An example is the Markov chain for the symbolic ﬁnancial states Bull and Bear,
visualized in ﬁgure 3.1.
γ11
γ22
(1 −γ11)
(1 −γ22)
Figure 3.1: Markov chain between Bull and Bear States with transition proba-
bilities γ11 and γ22
The switching behaviour of the hidden states has the implicit assumption that
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
23
the data result from a process that undergoes abrupt changes. A sequence of
discrete random variables {St : t ∈N} is a ﬁrst order Markov chain if it fulﬁls
the Markov Property,
Pr (St+1|St, St−1, . . . , S1) = Pr (St+1|St) ,
t = 2, 3, ...
(3.1)
The transition probability from state i to j is deﬁned as the conditional proba-
bility, Pr(Ss+t = j|Ss = i) = γij(t). The Markov Chain is homogeneous if it is
independent on time (s), otherwise in-homogeneous. Further has it a stationary
distribution δ iﬀΓδ = δ and δ1′ = 1 where δ is the initial distribution.
The number of distributions is deﬁned by the total number of states in the under-
lying Markov chain. If the Markov chain {St} has m states, we deﬁne {Xt} an m-
state HMM. Therefore we are looking at a 2-state HMM for the {"Bull","Bear"}
case.
The switching behaviour between the two states {"Bull","Bear"} in ﬁgure 3.1 is
governed by a 2 × 2 homogeneous transition probability matrix,
Γ =

γ11
1 −γ11
1 −γ22
γ22

The HMM uses the Markov Chain as the probability for transitioning from one
state to another, where the states are hidden. For each state there is a probability
distribution, that generates the observation at time t, that only depends on the
current state of the deﬁned Markov chain {St}.
Pr

Xt|X(t−1), S(t)
= Pr (Xt|St) ,
t ∈N
(3.2)
For the discrete observations the probability in equation 3.2 will be the probability
mass function for the distribution of state {St}. Also referred to as the state
dependant distributions of the model.
pi(x) = Pr (Xt = x|St = i)
(3.3)
HMM is a state-space model, where the state-space is ﬁnite.
Eq: 3.1 is the
state equation and Eq: 3.3 is the observation equation. The state-space is not
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
24
necessary perfectly separable, thus the observations can arise from more than one
state, in the space where the conditional distributions overlaps. This makes it
only possible to estimate the hidden state {St} from the observations.
X1
X2
X3
S1
S2
S3
Figure 3.2: The
state-dependent
process
Continuing with the Bull,Bear case, as-
suming both states follow Gaussian condi-
tional distributions deﬁned by the deﬁned
distributions,
Xt = µSt + ϵSt,
ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
St)
(3.4)
where
µSt =
(
µ1
if St = Bull
µ2
if St = Bear
σ2
St =
(
σ2
1
if St = Bull
σ2
2
if St = Bear
Γ =

γ11
1 −γ11
1 −γ22
γ22

Continuing with the example, given that the previous state is St−1 = Bull, the
probability for both states at time t will respectively be found by,
Pr(X = x, Bull|Bull) = Pr(Bull|Bull) · Pr(X = x|Bull)
= γ11 · pBull(x)
(3.5)
Pr(X = x, Bear|Bull) = Pr(Bear|Bull) · Pr(X = x|Bear)
= γ12 · pBear(x)
(3.6)
where the state dependent probabilities are found by pnorm.
[Rabiner(1989)] introduced the thought based on a tutorial by Jack Ferguson in
the 1960’s that the HMM should be deﬁned by three fundamental problems:
Problem 1 (Likelihood) Determine the likelihood of an observation sequence X(T )
given the parameters θ
Problem 2 (Decoding) Given the parameters θ and the observation sequence X(T )
determine the best hidden state sequence S(T )
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
25
Problem 3 (Learning)
Based on step 1 and 2 learn the HMM parameters θ
The tree fundamental problems are visualized as a process in ﬁgure 3.3. The
deﬁned parameters for the HMM is estimated by a Maximum Likelihood (ML)
method. The most common estimation is done by the Baum-Welch algorithm, a
special case of the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm.
Forward-Backward
Algorithm
The Baum-
Welch Algorithm
µ, σ...
Decoding
α & β
Initialize
θ
∆< crit
Figure 3.3: The HMM is a sequential process where the parameters are iterative
determine by the EM algorithm, where they are used as input in
the Decoding to ﬁnd the most likely sequence of states S(T )
3.1.1
Baum - Welch algorithm
The EM algorithm is known as Baum - Welch algorithm, this algorithm is design
to estimate the parameters of the HMM whose MC is homogeneous but not nec-
essarily stationary. i.e the model estimates the distribution parameters µ, σ, df,
the transition probabilities Γ and the initial distribution δ if it is not assumed
that the distribution is stationary.
The forward α and backwards β probabilities are used to evaluate the likelihood
of the observations x(T ) given the parameters. The probabilities is found by the
Forward-Backward Algorithm.
Forward-Backward Algorithm
Given an observation sequence x1, x2, ..., xT , the likelihood of observing x(T )
under an m-state HMM which has the transition probability Γ, initial distribution
δ and state-dependent probability distribution pi is denoted LT . The likelihood
given the parameters θ is calculated by equation 3.7
LT = Pr(X(T ) = x(T )|θ) = δP (x1)ΓP (x2) · · · ΓP (xT )1′
(3.7)
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
26
P is a diagonal matrix with the state dependant distributions eq: 3.3.
The
problem with the likelihood 3.7 is that it has a complexity of O(mT ) which is
not feasible to calculate for large sequences.
To mitigate this problem is the
forward-backward probabilities introduced.
The forward probability αt(i) is deﬁned as the elements of the likelihood,
αT =Pr(X(T ) = x(T )|θ) = δP (x1)ΓP (x2) · · · ΓP (xT )
(3.8)
i.e
αT 1′ = LT
(3.9)
The forward probability can be found by the recursive formula,
α1 = δP (x1)
αt = αt−1ΓP (xt)
(3.10)
αt is a joint probability of the observations by time t and the hidden state St. The
name "Forward Probability" is from that the joint probabilities are calculated by
recursion forward in time.
αt(i) = Pr(x(T ), St = i|θ)
(3.11)
In contradiction to αt(i), is the backward probability βt(i) a conditional prob-
ability, Pr(Xt+1 = xt+1, Xt+2 = xt+2, . . . , XT = xT |St = i), and it is found by
calculating backwards in time.
β′
t = ΓP (xt+1)ΓP (xt+2) · · · ΓP (xT )1′ =
 
T
Y
s=t+1
ΓP (xs)1′
!
(3.12)
It follows that for t = 1, 2, ..., T,
αt(i)βt(i) = Pr

X(T ) = x(T ), St = i | θ

(3.13)
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
27
By marginalizing the expression in 3.13 the likelihood of the observed data x(T )
is obtained,
Pr

X(T ) = x(T ) | θ

=
m
X
i=1
αt(i)βt(i) = αtβ′
t
(3.14)
The complexity issue with the likelihood 3.7 is now reduced from O(mT ) to
O(m2T) which is feasible.
The Expectation Maximization steps
The Expectation Maximisation is an iterative method for maximum likelihood
estimation for cases with missing information. It exploits the fact that event
if the likelihood of the observed data is not straight forward to maximize, the
complete-data log-likelihood is. Complete-data log-likelihood (CDLL) is the log-
likelihood of the underlying parameters for the observed and the missing data θ.
The process is visualized in the ﬁrst two steps in ﬁgure 3.3.
The CDLL is deﬁned by combining the log-likelihood of the observations x(T )
and the hidden states s(T ) is given by,
log

Pr

x(T ), s(T )
= log
 
δs1
T
Y
t=2
γst−1,st
T
Y
t=1
pst(xt)
!
= log δs1 +
T
X
t=2
log γst−1,st +
T
X
t=1
log pst
(3.15)
For HMM is it convenient to represent the sequence of states s(T ) and the
switches by the binary variables,
ui(t) = 1
iﬀ
st = i,
(t = 1, 2, ..., T)
i.e
vij(t) = 1
iﬀ
st−1 = i and st = j,
(t = 1, 2, ..., T)
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
28
Hence the CDLL can be deﬁned as,
log

Pr

x(T ), s(T )
=
m
X
i=1
ui(1) log δi
+
m
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
 T
X
t=2
vij(t)
!
log γij
+
m
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
ui(t) log pi(xt)
(3.16)
The EM algorithm replace the hard classiﬁcations for ui(t) and vij(t) by their
conditional expectations given the observations x(T ) and the current parameter
estimates θ,
ˆui = Pr

St = i | x(T ), θ

= αt(i)βt(i)
LT
(3.17)
and
ˆvij = Pr

St−1 = i, St = j | x(T )
= αt−1(i)γjkpk(xt)βt(j)
LT
(3.18)
This is the calculating expectations step, where the maximization step replace
the binary variables ui and vij by their conditional expectations ˆui and ˆvij for the
to maximize with respect to the initial distribution δ, the transition probabilities
Γ and the state-dependent parameters.
By further examination of equation 3.16 can we see that the expression is neatly
divided into three terms such that the optimization can be done individually
instead of as a multi-objective problem. The ﬁrst term depends solely on the
initial distribution δ, and the second term on the t.p Γ. The analytical solution
to the maximization is found to,
δi =
ˆui(1)
Pm
i=1 = ˆui(1)ˆui(1)
(3.19)
and
γij =
PT
t=2 ˆvij(t)
Pm
j=1
PT
t=2 ˆvij(t)
(3.20)
The maximization of the third term with respect to the state-dependent param-
eters can for some distributions be solved analytically, this is the case for the
conditional multivariate normal distributions where the third state is maximized
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
29
when,
ˆµi =
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)xt
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)
ˆΣi =
PT
t=1 ˆui(t) (xt −ˆµi) (xt −ˆµi)′
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)
(3.21)
For the conditional t-distribution are the calculations more complex, especially
for the number of degrees of freedom. The state-dependent parameters are found
as,
ˆµi =
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)w(k)
i
(t)xt
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)w(k)
i
(t)
,
ˆΣ(k+1)
i
=
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)w(k)
i
(t) (xt −ˆµi) (xt −ˆµi)′
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)
,
(3.22)
Where w(k)
i
(t) is an auxiliary variable,
w(k)
i
(t) =
ν(k)
i
+ 1
ν(k)
i
+ (xt −ˆµi) ˆΣ(k)−1
i
(xt −ˆµi)
(3.23)
For re-estimation of the degrees of freedom ν(k+1)
i
is not possible to do explicitly,
but is found as the unique solution to the equation,
1 −ψ
1
2ν(k)
i

+ log
1
2ν(k)
i

+ ψ
 
ν(k)
i
+ 1
2
!
−log
 
ν(k)
i
+ 1
2
!
+
1
PT
t=1 ˆui(t)
" T
X
t=1
ˆui(t)

log w(k)
i
(t) −w(k)
i
(t)
#
= 0
(3.24)
where ψ(z) 1 is the Digamma function. The fact that the function on the left-
hand side of equation 3.24 is monotonically increasing in ν(k)
i
the unique solution
can easily be found by e.g. bisection algorithm or quasi-Newton methods.
3.1.2
Decoding
After the Baum-Welch Algorithm has iterated until convergence and the model
parameters are found the last step of the HMM process (ﬁgure 3.3) is the de-
1ψ(z) = {∂Γ(z)/∂z}/Γ
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
30
coding process. Here the most likely states of the Markov Chain to give raise
to the observation sequence given the model parameters are determined. The
determination can be done locally, by determine the most likely state at time t,
or globally which determine the most likely sequence of states.
Local decoding
The determination of the most likely state of the Markov Chain at time t uses
the proposition of the forward and backward probability,
αt(i)βt(i) = Pr

X(T ) = x(T ), St = i

(3.25)
Consequently, the conditional distribution of St given the observations can be
obtained for i = 1, 2, ..., m as
Pr

St = i | X(T ) = x(T )
= Pr
 St = i, X(T ) = x(T )
Pr
 X(T ) = x(T )
= αt(i)βt(i)
LT
(3.26)
The most likely state is then found by maximizing the conditional probability
Pr
 St = i | X(T ) = x(T )
for each separate time t
i∗
t = argmax
i=1,..,m
Pr

St = i | X(T ) = x(T )
(3.27)
Given that the local decoding deﬁnes the most probable state for each time
separately, the resulting sequence of states might be impossible when considering
the transition probabilities.
Global decoding
With global decoding you look for the full sequence which maximize the condi-
tional probability
i(T )
∗
= argmax
s(T )
Pr

St = S(T ) | X(T ) = x(T )
(3.28)
The computational complexity with use of brute force for calculating equation
3.28 would involve mT function evaluations, which only will be feasible for small
T. To mitigate the problem a dynamic programming algorithm can be used to
globally decode the states, The Viterbi algorithm. The algorithm is similar to
the forward algorithm, ﬁnding the most probable path from one time to the next
step. Viterbi solves the sequence recursively, taking the most probable path to
the current time,
Vt(i) = argmax
s(t−1) Pr

S(t−1) = s(t−1), St = i, X(T ) = x(T )
(3.29)
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Hidden Markov Models
31
With the initial condition,
V1(i) = δipi(x1)
(3.30)
The sequence is found as,
Vt(j) =

argmax
i=1,...,m
Vt−1(i)γij

pj(xt)
(3.31)
3.1.3
Model Estimation HMM
The estimated HMM models are discrete in time, with three diﬀerent sets of
conditional distributions. The ﬁrst assumes that all states have a conditional
normal distribution, where the approach follows Ryden et al. (REF). The sec-
ond assumes a conditional normal distribution and one conditional t-distribution
for the state with the highest volatility, inspired by [Bulla(2011)]. The third as-
sumes that all states have a conditional t-distribution, following the approach of
[Nystrup(2014)].The model parameters are estimated by the implemented Baum-
Welch algorithm (Can be found in Appendix).
The structure of the estimated HMM models follows the same pattern. Therefore,
exploration of the models focuses on the example with two states, "Bull" and
"Bear", with conditional normal distributions. The example is also extended so
that three states are included. The estimated parameters for the two models can
be seen in table 3.2 The estimated parameters for all models can be found in
appendix.
m
Γ
µ
σ
δ
π
2
s1
0.9796
0.0204
0.00078
0.00717
1
0.69
s2
0.009791
0.9902
-0.00066
0.01856
0
0.31
3
s1
0.99
0.0099
0
0.000789
0.0010
1
0.48
s2
0.01966
0.9785
0.00178
-0.00046
0.0071
0
0.45
s3
0
0.043
0.957
-0.0933
0.018
0
0.07
Table 3.1: Estimated parameters for the HMMN with 2 and 3 states
The two-state model has one state with low volatility and a positive mean return
and one state with high volatility and a negative mean return. This implies that,
on average, turbulent periods are associated with a lower level of return. Both
states of the chain are very persistent, but State 1 is more frequent than State 2.
==PAGE:38==
3.2 GARCH
32
For the model that is extended to three states, the overall characteristics of
the original two states are preserved to some extent. The additional state has
higher variance and lower mean, where the transition between State 1 and State
3 only occurs through State 2. [Rydén et al.()Rydén, Teräsvirta, and Åsbrink]
and [Bulla(2011)] refer to the third state as an outlier state based on its high
volatility and low unconditional probability.
Decoded states
The decoded two-state HMM models are visualized in ﬁgure 3.4, where they are
decoded with the global decoding algorithm, the Viterbi algorithm. The states
are in line with the earlier ﬁnding; it is clear that the fat tails of the t-distributions
increase the persistence of the bull state, with fewer and shorter shifts between
the states. All models struggles with shifting back to the bull state when there
is not a rapid shift in the index value.
Figure 3.4: Decoded states for the S&P 500, where the blue marks the Bull
state and the grey marks the bear state
3.2
GARCH
As mentioned in section 2, the states of the ﬁnancial market are separated by
the level of variance in the underlying state probability distributions. A method
==PAGE:39==
3.2 GARCH
33
for modeling the volatility of the index is thus an interesting contribution to the
HMM models in the ﬁnal ensemble method.
In section 2, the returns were deﬁned as serially correlated. Therefore, to describe
this characteristic of volatility, Engle (1982) presented the autoregressive condi-
tional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) approach to better capture the time-varying
variance. The autoregressive model is an extension of the random walk model,
where the prediction takes previous terms into consideration. The variance is
then modeled by the ARCH method as a function of the residual errors from a
mean process, with the weights of previous observations treated as the parame-
ters to be estimated. The number of included prior residuals is deﬁned by the
parameter q . The ARCH(q) model deﬁnes the conditional variance for the time
series yt , in this case the log-return to the ﬁnancial index, as,
σ2
t = ω + a1y2
t−1 + · · · + aqy2
t−q
(3.32)
The variance is limited to be positive. In other words ω ≤0 and ai ≤0. It
is assumed that the time series has a mean equal to 0 and that the series is
stationary besides the changes in variance, meaning that there is no seasonal
trend or component. The ARCH(1) model is deﬁned as,
yt = σtϵt
(3.33)
with σ2
t = ω + a1y2
t−1 and ϵt ∼N(0, 1)iid.
The ARCH model was extended to the generalized autoregressive conditional
heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model by [Bollerslev(1986)]. Fan and Yao (2003)
indicated that the ARCH(p) model is best suited for ﬁnancial time series with
a large number of lags p, with the GARCH model serving as a better method
to model the variance. The GARCH model adds prior variance to Eq.3.32 The
number of included residuals is deﬁned by q, and the number of earlier variances
is deﬁned by p. GARCH has an adaptive learning mechanism and can be seen
as an ARCH model with a large p, since all past squared returns are included
in the earlier variances σ2
t−1. From the validated ARHC eﬀects for the indices
in section 2.5, with long persistence of the signiﬁcant autocorrelation would a
GARCH seem more suitable than an ARCH model.
==PAGE:40==
3.2 GARCH
34
The conditional variance for GARCH(p, q) is deﬁned as,
σ2
t = ω + a1y2
t−1 + · · · + aqy2
t−q + β1σ2
t−1 + · · · + βpσ2
t−p
(3.34)
The parameters of the GARCH model are estimated using ML estimation of the
assumed probability density function. For example, if the distribution is
L(θµ, θσ) =
T
Y
t=p+1
f(yt+1|θµ, θσ)
=
T
Y
t=p+1
1
q
2πσ2
t+1 (θσ)
exp
 
−1
2
yt+1 −µt−1 (θµ)
σt+1 (θσ)
2!
(3.35)
Where for an AR(1)-GARCH(1,1) model, the mean parameters θµ = (ψ0, ψ1)
and θσ = (ω, a, β).
Volatility is predicted with the GARCH(1,1) model.
Hansen and Lunde con-
ducted an extensive empirical study in which they tested a number of parametric
volatility models. They found no model that provided a signiﬁcantly better fore-
cast than the GARCH(1,1). Several studies disagree with this harsh conclusion
(Ghalanos (2013) and [Reschenhofer(2013)]), but for the current ensemble model,
GARCH(1,1) is suﬃcient.
To combine the methods, the output of GARCH(1,1) is changed to a categorical
response, where the state of the conditional volatility is found to be high or low.
The decision boundary is found by logistic regression (LR), a machine learning
method.
3.2.1
Logistic Regression
The binary classiﬁcation of the volatility is done with
LR is used to determine the binary classiﬁcation of volatility. The method was
ﬁrst applied in the ﬁeld of biology ([J. Reed and Berkson(2002)]Berkson; Wilson
Worcester, 1943), and later gain a repetition in the 1960s and 1970s and was intro-
duced to a large number of ﬁelds (e.g., Cox 1969; [Nelder and Wedderburn(1972)].
==PAGE:41==
3.2 GARCH
35
The method is now widely used and is a dominant method for binary classiﬁca-
tion. Like other regression methods, LR investigates relationships between in-
dependent variables and the response, with the response a categorical variable
in this case. The prediction is the sum of the weighted contribution of the in-
dependent variables, and the response is an estimated percentage of how likely
observation x is to be classiﬁed in the default class (e.g., the ﬁrst class). For
example, a simple LR equation with one dependent variable is,
c
Pr(x) =
exp (β0 + β1x)
1 + exp (β0 + β1x)
(3.36)
where β0 is the intercept term and β1 is the coeﬃcient for the single dependent
variable. For data sets with multiple attributes each attribute i would be assigned
a coeﬃcient βi. From Eq.3.36, the expression can be linearized to,
ln

Pr(x)
1 −Pr(x)

= b0 + b1x
(3.37)
where the linear relationship is deﬁned by the log-odds of the default class. Odds
are deﬁned as a ratio of the probability of the event occurring divided by the
probability of the event not occurring.
The β coeﬃcients are found by gradient descent, in which the class-belonging
probability is maximized for all linear combinations of the independent variables.
The decision boundary between the predicted two classes is not necessarily opti-
mized by selecting the cutoﬀwith the highest accuracy 2. For unbalanced data
sets, the accuracy would be high even when all observations are classiﬁed as the
majority class. Therefore, the cutoﬀpoint is found by the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve. This curve visualizes the trade-oﬀbetween sensitiv-
ity 3 and the speciﬁcity 4. Assuming equal importance for each measure, the
optimal cutoﬀpoint is the value that maximizes the two measures. The LR is
performed in R using the stats package.
2Accuracy=
T P +T N
T P +T N+F P +F N
3Sensitivity
T P
T P +F N
4Speciﬁcity
T N
F P +T N
==PAGE:42==
3.2 GARCH
36
3.2.2
Model Estimation GARCH
The GARCH(1,1) model is obtained by R package rugarch [Ghalanos(2019)], it
is assumed that the conditional distribution is normally distributed and have the
estimated parameters in table
GARCH(1,1)
µ
φ1
ω
a
β
0.00063
-0.0197
1.007e-06
0.080
0.914
Table 3.2
The rate of the eﬀects over time is a + β < 1, which means that the conditional
volatility is stationary. Further, the values of a and β indicate that the process
has high volatility, with a high weight for the previous return for the current
conditional volatility.
Figure 3.5: The probability of Bull
state for values of the
conditional volatility
Mentioned in the previous section, LR is
used to categorize the modeled conditional
volatility from the GARCH model into
states. LR works by maximizing the log-
odds through gradient descent, where the
usage of a cost function needs a true state
sequence. The true state sequence is fur-
ther elaborated in section 4.2.1 using the
exponential moving average is employed as
a guide to determine the state of the con-
ditional volatility.
LR is done using the R package stats,
where the relationship between the value
of the GARCH and the probability of be-
ing in a Bear state is visualized in ﬁgure
3.5. The cutoﬀpoint is found below 50% to compensate for the unbalanced data
set. The best balanced cut oﬀpoint is found to be at around 40% which yields
a cutoﬀwhen the conditional volatility exceeds 0.0126, ﬁgure 3.6b.
The states deﬁned by the cutoﬀpoint can be seen in ﬁgure 3.6a. The states seem
reasonable, with a higher stitching frequency than for the HMM models. It would
be advantageous to use the states from the GARCH models for early detection
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Markov Switching GARCH
37
(a) Decoded states by the threshold for
the GARCH
(b) The GARCH(1,1) model for S&P
500, the dashed line is the cutoﬀ
point at 0.0126
of switches, where the HMM, for instance, could sometimes be too persistent.
3.3
Markov Switching GARCH
The previous approach to predict regimes based on the conditional volatility
generate only limited dynamics in the variance [Pagan and Schwert(1990)] and
[Timmermann(2000)] since it only introduces time varying volatility by discrete
shifts in the parameter σ2.
The GARCH approach is an improvement of the ARCH method in that it in-
cludes feedback from the return processes and, as a result, can perceive shocks
in the estimation. However, it has been argued [Haas(2004)] that there could
be two sources of volatility persistence—from shock, as mentioned, and from
changes in regime, which would cause a shift in the unconditional variance.
[Lamoureux and Lastrapes(1990)] suggested that a Markov switching model is
suitable to identify the timing of shifts in unconditional variance, which gave rise
to the Markov switching GARCH (MSGARCH) method.
[Gray(1996)] developed a generalization of the MSGARCH model that is remi-
niscent of the HMM model in section 3.1. The hidden states are deﬁned by a
Markov chain, where each state has a single-regime GARCH model. The GARCH
parameters then change in time after a hidden Markov process.
==PAGE:44==
3.3 Markov Switching GARCH
38
Inspired by [Gray(1996)],[Haas(2004)] presented a new version of the MSGARCH
model that has the advantage of being analytical tractable. The model is an
extension of the model described in the previous section, where yt is a real number
and the log-return of the ﬁnancial index at time t. The log-return is assumed to
have mean of 0, where the general MSGARCH speciﬁcation is,
yt|(st = i, It−1) ∼D(0, hi,t, ϵi)
(3.38)
Where It−1 denotes the information set observed up to time t −1.
In other
words, It−1 = {yt−k, t > k > 0}. D(0, hi,t, ϵi) is a continuous distribution with
zero mean, time-dependent variance hi,t, and further shape parameters deﬁned
in the vector ϵi.
Further is it assumed that the hidden states st, which are deﬁned on the discrete
space {1, 2, ..., m} as in section 3.1,follow an unobserved ﬁrst-order irreducible ho-
mogeneous Markov chain. The transition probabilities follow the same properties
as in the HMM, the Markov Property in equation 3.1.
As for the deﬁnition in the previous section, given the parameterization of D(·)
the conditional variance is found by
E[y2
t |st = i, It−1] = hi,t
(3.39)
where hi,t is dependent not only of the information set I, but also the estimation
of the hidden state at time t. The conditional variance for the m diﬀerent states,
hi,t assumed in [Haas(2004)] to follow m separate GARCH processes,
hi,t = ωi + aiy2
t−1 + βihi,t−1
(3.40)
again to ensure positive variance is ωi > 0, ai ≤0 and βi ≤0. Further this
prevent volatility to grow to inﬁnity over time should ai + βi < 1.
[Haas(2004)] pointed out the intuitive reason of why it is sensible to have this
mixture of GARCH behaviour. We can imagine that the response to news could
be greater in a highly volatile market compared to a more stable market.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Markov Switching GARCH
39
3.3.1
Parameter Estimation
The parameters for the MSGARCH model are estimated by the ML method.
L (θ|IT ) =
T
Y
t=1
f (yt|θ, It−1)
(3.41)
where θ = (θ1, ϵ1, ..., θm, ϵm, Γ) are the model parameters for all m states, and
their transition probability.
The likelihood is thus deﬁned as the product of
the conditional densities f(·), of yt, given past observations It−1 and model
parametersθ.
The conditional densities of yt is;
f (yt|θ, It−1) =
m
X
i=1
m
X
j=1
γi,jzi,t−1fD (yt|st = j, θ, It−1)
(3.42)
where zi,t−1 = Pr (st−1 = i|θ, It−1) is the ﬁltered probability of state i at time
t −1.
The estimation of bθ is obtained by maximizing the log-likelihood. This is solved
by using the R package MSGARCH REF, where the Viterbi algorithm, along
with the HMM is also included to decode the hidden state sequence.
3.3.2
Model Estimation
The estimated MSGARCH models are of the same form as the HMM, where
the conditional distribution of the volatility is divided into normal distribution,
t-distribution, and one model with a mix, where one state is assumed to be t-
distributed and the rest are normally distributed. The parameters are estimated
by the ML that is mentioned in section 3.3.1.
As for the previous estimation of the HMM models, the model is explored by
focusing on the models where normal distribution is assumed and noting the
main diﬀerences between these models.
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Markov Switching GARCH
40
ω
a1
β1
ω
2
β2
P1
0.00
0.05
0.93
0.00
0.22
0.77
0.73
0.00
0.03
0.96
0.00
0.11
0.88
5.24
0.00
0.04
0.94
4.70
0.00
0.08
0.91
Table 3.3: Estimated parameters for the MSGARCH
The MSGARCH have several resemblances with the described HMM models.
The ﬁrst state also referred to as the Bull state, has a low a value with an higher
β value.
The rate of the eﬀect is decreasing over time, indicating stationary
conditional volatility. This is all so the case for the second state, the Bear state,
but here a and β signiﬁcantly increase and decrease, respectively, giving a high
vol-on-vol. This is also the case for the other two distributional assumptions.
The estimated parameters can be found in Appendix.
The MSGARCH model diﬀers from the HMM in terms of the transition proba-
bility. The Bear state is highly persistent, whereas the bull state has a relatively
lower γ11 value than the HMM models. This is only the case for the MSGARCH
model with a conditional normal distribution. For the other two cases, the states
are highly persistent.
For the three states, there are again some similar characteristics as the three-state
HMM. The two more extreme cases are linked together by the third state. The
states are persistent, but not to the same degree as the HMM.
Decoding the states
The states are decoded globally by the Viterbi algorithm. The models struggle
when classifying over longer periods, so the periods are run in batches to aid
in decoding the states.
Figure 3.7 shows the decoded state for the two-state
MSGARCH with diﬀerent conditional density assumptions.
The decoded states are similar, whereas for the HMM, the fat tails of the t-
distribution increase the persistence of the Bear state. An interesting aspect of
the MSGARCH is that it can detect switches more quickly compared to the HMM
The decoded states are similar, where as seen for the HMM, the fat tails of the
t-distribution increase the persistence of the Bear state. One interesting aspect
of the MSGARCh is that it is quicker to detect switches compared to the HMM.
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Expert Comparison
41
Figure 3.7: Globally decoded states of the MSGARCH models with use of the
Viterbi Algorithm. Blue deﬁnes Bull state, and grey Bear state
3.4
Expert Comparison
Before comparing the models, the model space is shirked. The models until now
have been looking at both two and three states. The averaging of the output
reduced the variance of the ensemble model, in some cases the combination will
also reduce the bias of the model [Rokach(2005)]. The increasing number of states
also increase the possibility of missclassiﬁed states. Since the third state is often
referred to as the outlier state, it seems suﬃcient to continue with 7 models only
diﬀerentiating between two states, Bull and Bear. For the model comparison, it
is important to remember that more complex models will often improve the ﬁt of
the model. Therefore, by only looking at maximizing the log likelihood, one can
overﬁt the model. Following the approach by [Zucchini and Macdonald(2018)],
penalized likelihood criteria is used to ﬁnd the best model that does not overﬁt
the data.
Two information criterias are used to compare the models, Akaike
information criterion (AIC),
AIC = −2 log(L) + 2p
(3.43)
and,
BIC = −2 log(L) + p log(T)
(3.44)
==PAGE:48==
3.4 Expert Comparison
42
Where L is the likelihood, p are the number of parameters and T are the number
of observations. Given that T > exp(2), BIC will favor less complex models than
AIC. The number of parameters, log-likelihood and information criteria for the
7 models, are summarised in table 3.4. Based in the information criteria, the
MSGARCH is in general preferred over the HMM and GARCH model. All 7
models are included in the HMME, where the weights are calculated in a rolling
window to frequently update the weights for each new observation.
Method
Distribution
No. parameters
log(L)
AIC
BIC
HMM
N
7
15987
-31964
-31931
Nt
8
16082
-32147
-32095
t
9
16113
-32210
-32158
AR(1)-GARCH(1,1)
5
16193
-32375
-32342
MSGARCH
N
8
16264
-32513
-32460
Nt
9
16282
-32546
-32487
t
10
16296
-32573
-32507
Table 3.4: The information criteria for the models with the corresponding num-
ber of observations and log-likelihood.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
The Hidden Markov Mixture
of Experts
The previous chapter deﬁned independent models. The concept here is to increase
the prediction power of the methods by combining them with weights that change
with the data that is input. The models are ensemble using the frame work for
the Mixture of Experts [Jacobs et al.(1991)Jacobs, Jordan, Nowlan, and Hinton]
4.1
Mixture of Experts
The ME is an ensemble method that combines multiple models to improve their
combined prediction power. The models included in the ensemble method are
called Experts. The ensemble method uses a divide and concur approach, where
the models’ predictions are assigned diﬀerent weights depending on the input
data. The weights are assigned by a gating network. The divide and concur ap-
proach leverages each model’s strengths, opening up the possibility of an ensemble
of specialists for each part of the input space. This characteristic is generally use-
ful in complex non-stationary time series [Yuksel et al.(2012)Yuksel, Wilson, and Gader]
==PAGE:50==
4.1 Mixture of Experts
44
Input
E1
E2
En
Gating
g1
g2
gn
ˆy1
ˆy2
ˆyn
ˆy =
nP
i=1
giˆyi
Figure 4.1: Mixture of Experts
The ME ensemble model is visual-
ized in ﬁgure 4.1.
The model com-
bine n models or experts Ei where
i ∈{1, 2, ..., n}. Each expert predict
an output based on the given input.
The input is run through the gating
network where weights or probability
measures for how likely Ei is to pre-
dict correct based on the input is cal-
culated, gi where i ∈{1, 2, ..., n}. This
gating network is a soft partitioning
of the input space, and deﬁnes the re-
gions where the individual expert pre-
dictions are trustworthy. The ﬁnal output ˆy can be seen as a weighted sum of
experts.
The usage of softer partitioning of the decision boundaries reduced the variance
compared to similar methods, such as random forest [Eschrich and Hall(2003)].
The selected cost function determines whether the experts should work together
towards the correct prediction or if they should become specialist on diﬀerent
areas of the input space.
Further can the ME model be generated by three diﬀerent assumptions,
1. Assume Expert Classiﬁers Ei are ﬁxed and ﬁnd gi to maximize the perfor-
mance of the ensemble model
2. Assume Gating network gi is ﬁxed ﬁnd Ei to maximize the performance of
the ensemble model
3. Tune both the experts Ei and gating network gi simultaneously
Linking the ensemble method to the given example from the previous chapter,
each model from chapter 3 would be an expert and predict the most likely se-
quence of states based on the given returns. The weights for each expert model
are found by a gating network, where the weights are deﬁned by two methods.
The ﬁrst is the gradient descent method, and the second uses a linear regres-
sion method to linearly combine the weights based on minimizing the MSE be-
tween the combined forecast and the measurement. Both approaches are used
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Mixture of Experts
45
to maximize prediction performance. The combination of HMM, GARCH, and
MSGARCH is deﬁned as the HMME.
4.1.1
Gradient Descent
θ0
θ1
θ2
θ3
θ∗
local
θ∗
0θ∗
1
θ∗
global
θ
f(θ)
Figure 4.2: Local and global minimum
from Gradient Descent de-
pendent of initial θ
Gradient descent is a learning and op-
timization algorithm that, through it-
erative movement in the direction of
the steepest descent (negative gradi-
ent) minimizes the given function f(x)
as quickly as possible.
The method
was invented by the French mathe-
matician Louis Augustin Cauchy in
1847 [Science(2018)].
The approach is used in situations
where there are no analytical solu-
tion for the optimization problem, and
thus it must be solved numerically.
GD is not a global minimizer, and, as
visualized in ﬁgure 4.2 is thus highly
sensitive to the initialization of the parameters. The best approach is thus to loop
the GD algorithm over diﬀerent initial parameter values and select the model that
yields the minimum value of f(x).
The pseudocode for the gradient descent algorithm is in algorithm 1. The input
values are the response Y , the initialisation of the parameters θ and the indepen-
dent variables X. The remaining three parameters are the learning rate η, the
tolerance level for the minimum change that is agreed upon for ﬁnding the local
minimum, and the number of maximum iterations.
The algorithm 1 is run until a convergence bound is met. This mean that the
change in cost function when changing the parameter θ is smaller than a pre-
deﬁned threshold or criteria. The learning rate η should also be small enough
so that the solutions do not exhibit oscillatory behavior that does not converge.
However, if it is too small the calculations are too time consuming.
For the case of using gi as weights for expert is prediction the values are found to
be positive and sum to 1. The ﬁrst problem is mitigated by setting the weight to
==PAGE:52==
4.1 Mixture of Experts
46
Algorithm 1: Gradient Descent
Input: Y, θ, X, η, tolerance, maxiterations
Result: θ
1 for i = 0; i < max iterations; i++ do
2
Costi ←f(X, Y )θ;
3
if ∥Costi −Costi−1∥< tolerance then
4
break ;
5
else
6
∇f(X, Y )θ ←
∂
∂θf(X, Y ) ;
7
for j=1; i <= length(θ); j++ do
8
θj ←θj −η · ∇f(X, Y )θj;
9
end
10
end
11 end
0 in the iteration if it is estimated to be a negative value. In the next iteration can
it then become positive again if that yields a lower cost. This is done by changing
the expression in line 8 of algorithm 1 to θj ←max{0, θj−η·∇f(X, Y )θj}. Where
the second is solved by normalizing the output θ.
4.1.2
"Optimal Combination of Forecasts"
The increasing number of methods and approaches in regards to forecast have
created an incentive to combine a weighted forecast. Bates and Granger originally
proposed the procedure for wind energy for two individual forecast. An extension
beyond two forecasts was done by [Nielsen et al.()Nielsen, Nielsen, Madsen, Pindado, and Marti],
where based on ﬁndings from [de Menezes et al.(2000)de Menezes, W. Bunn, and Taylor],
the covariance of the forecast error is used for ﬁnding the combined forecast that
minimize the mean squared error between the combined forecast and the mea-
surement.
The method assumes known bias and variance, they are both estimated by the
observed errors of the individual forecast errors in the in-sample data. The h-
step forecast for method j with the information at hand to time t is deﬁned as
ˆyj,t+h|t. The error of the individual forecast, ej,t−s|t−s−h = yt−s −ˆyj,t−s|t−s−h,
for s ∈{0, 1, 2, ...} are known. The estimated mean and covariance at time t for
horizon h are denoted ˆµ(h)
t
and ˆV (h)
t
. The h-step combined forecast ˆyc,t−h is
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
47
then found to,
ˆyc,t−h|t = ˆµ(h)
0,t +
J
X
j=1
ˆ
wj,t
(h)ˆyj,t+h|t
(4.1)
where
ˆ
wj,t
(h) is the weight to forecast j. The bias and covariance are re-estimated
in a rolling window.
The error of the combined forecast ec = y −ˆyc can be expressed on matrix from,
ec = −µ0 + uT
J e + wT Ae
(4.2)
where the sum of the weights are set to be 1. The weights are found by minimizing
the second moment of ec,
E[e2
c] = µ2
c + σ2
c
(4.3)
The closed form solution is found by diﬀerentiating equation 4.3 with respect to
µ0 and w,
µ0 =
J
X
j=1
wjµj
(4.4)
w = −(AVA)−1 AVuj
(4.5)
the last wight wj = 1 −1T w.
The method is implemented in R appendix ... where the weights are restricted to
be positive. This is done iteratively, where the most negative number is removed
and set to 0 for each iteration. This is done until all weights are larger or equal
to 0.
4.2
Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
HMME is an ME where the experts are HMM with diﬀerent distributional as-
sumptions, a MSGARCH and a GARCH(1,1) with states deﬁned by a volatility
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
48
threshold. In ﬁgure 4.3 are the experts Ei named with the corresponding model
the sequence of states ˆyi are generated by. HMM, MSGARCH and ME are all
Machine Learning methods that have been used for state prediction in previous
research. HMM and MSGARCH are unsupervised methods that have some bias
due to the distributional assumption that the ML methods are tuning the pa-
rameters towards. The goal of the ensemble is that the model gain ﬂexibility,
and can better mitigate observational cases that are hard to classify. By dividing
and conquering, the method leverage the strengths of each experts in the input
space, where the trustworthiness changes with the input.
Input
HMMN
HMMNt
HMMt
GARCH
MSGN
MSGNt
MSGt
Gating
g1
g2
g3
g4
g5
g6
g7
ˆy1
ˆy2
ˆy3
ˆy1
ˆy2
ˆy3
ˆy3
ˆy =
nP
i=1
giˆyi
Figure 4.3: Hidden Markov Mixture of
Experts
The HMME with ﬁxed experts can
train the gating network.
The ﬁrst
gating network uses discrete input
space, where the weights are found
by minimizing the Residual Sum of
Squares (RRS).
RSS =
T
X
i=1

yi −
m
X
j=1
wj,sˆyij


2
(4.6)
where ˆyij is the estimated state of ob-
servation i in method j. The weights
for method j in input space s, wj,s is
found by ﬁrst dividing the experts es-
timation for each input space. Then
is the RSS optimized by the method
explained in section 4.1.1. Where the
values of wj,s is found to minimize
the in sample prediction error of the
weighted output.
The second method uses continuous
input space where the weights are
found to minimize the error of the
combined forecast, section 4.1.2.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
49
4.2.1
HMME for detecting
states in the ﬁnancial mar-
ket
The two Gating networks are using
two diﬀerent approaches, which also requests some diﬀerent assumptions.
Weights from predicted states of the VIX
The ﬁrst learning algorithm for HMME, gradient descent section 4.1.1 has to
work towards an allegedly true state sequence S(T ) to calculate the RSS.
Given that the experts are build unsupervised, such a sequence has never been
deﬁned. The sequence is thus created, even though the decision about the best
way to created the sequence without being biased is diﬃcult. It is possible to
manually deﬁne the state of subsequences of the time series. However, to reduce
the subject deﬁnition of states, it was decided to ﬁnd a method to let the data
speak for itself. The weighted moving average (wMA eq: 4.7) is an extension
of the simple moving average, where the last observations is assigned a heavier
weight than observations in the distant past. The weights decrease linearly. This
makes it more sensitive towards trend changes compared to the simple moving
average.
wMA = XT × n + XT −1 × (n −1) + · · · + XT −n × 1
n(n+1)
2
(4.7)
The wMA has a signiﬁcant drawback, namely that it is a lagging indicator, mean-
ing that the dependence on prior data gives the wMA a time-lag before it can
reﬂect changes in the trend. For example, a stock price may move sharply before
a wMA detects the trend change. Shorter wMAs are more sensitive to changes,
but that also makes them more sensitive to noise.
Another closely related approach is the exponential moving average (eMA). In-
stead of linearly decreasing the weights to prior observations, the weights decrease
exponentially. This makes it more sensitive to trend changes, which can reduce
the time-lag. Laurini [Galbraith and Zernov(2006)] argued that the 50 bank days
are the length of extreme changes in the ﬁnancial market, where the exponential
moving average for the return of the equity index are set for the prior 50 bank
days. The deﬁned states are visualized in ﬁgure 4.4, where the blue areas have
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
50
a positive 50 days eMa, and the gray areas have a negative. It is important to
keep in mind that the approximation is done to give provide a sort of benchmark
for the combined prediction of the HMM models, and that is is not as crucial in
that each of the experts alone could have predicted the hidden state.
Figure 4.4: MSCI index for In-Sample data and states for positive and negative
wMA for 30 days
The return of the index is ﬁrst detected after a change has happened. Therefore,
to introduce some expectations to the market, the input for the gradient descent
gating network is deﬁned by the HMM predicted states of implicit volatility
(VIX). This is a measure of the stock market’s expectation of volatility, implied
by S&P 500 index options. It is commonly referred to as the fear index. By
deﬁning states of the VIX, we can dynamically change the assumed probability
distribution and transition probabilities to be more and less risk averse. Using
the implied volatility, the future is considered in the model, so when the expected
volatility in the market increases, the switching model can potentially be ready
before the change, which is in contrast to the case in which its ﬁrst reaction
occurs after the change in trend has already happened.
The algorithm can then be speciﬁed for the given case, where the input space is
deﬁned as the estimated states of the change in VIX over the same period as the
change in return. This is used as input for the Experts. The algorithm is deﬁned
by the steps in 3.Where the Y is the deﬁned true state sequence, Eis the experts,
X is the observations and VIX is the implied volatility.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
51
Algorithm 2: Hidden Markov Mixture of Expert Discrete Input Space Financial
market
Input: Y, E, X, V IX, η, tolerance, maxiterations
Result: s(t)
1 StatesV IX ←HMM(VIX);
2 for i ∈StatesV IX do
3
for j ∈1, 2, ..., m do
4
ˆyj ←Ej(Xi);
5
θj ←1
m;
6
end
7
gi ←GradientDescent(Y, ˆy, θ, maxiter, tolerence);
8
ˆy ←
m
P
j=1
gi,j · ˆyj
9 end
Wights from minimizing the estimation error
The second gating network uses the log-return and the associated return to the
states deﬁned by the experts as input. For the HMM models, the return is deﬁned
as the decoded states’ mean, while for the GARCH models, the forecasted residual
is used.
4.2.2
Model Estimation
The HMME model is run in batches, where the experts are estimated for a
period of 1,000 days, which is close to ﬁve years. For both methods, the weights
are calculated for each point in time using a rolling window. The ﬁrst method as
some interesting results where the weights in the low volatility state of the VIX
assignes weights to the normal distributed HMM and the GARCH model. For the
high volatility state of the VIX are the t distributions coming into play. This is
following the initial hypothesis of the divide and concur on implied volatility. The
method seems reasonable in the state predictions become less persistent than for
the single experts. But the computational complexity of the gradient decent and
the model estimations combined with the number of questionable assumptions
makes it undesirable to continue with the approach.
This is not a problem for the second method. The method is initialised with the
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
52
bias and covariance for the ﬁrst 1,034 observations. The resulting weights exhibit
interesting results, where we can clearly see that no one model dominates over the
entire time period. In ﬁgure 4.5, the magnitude for each weight is represented.
There are some complete changes of models at time to time, which makes the vi-
sualization poor. It is worth noticing that the models with Student t distribution
has zero, or close to zero, weights during the entire period. The GARCH model
is strongly represented in the beginning, where the HMMNt takes over as time
goes by. In the middle it is a shift of emphasis on the two remaining MSGARCH
models.
Figure 4.5: Weight development through the 4000 last observations in the in-
sample period
Due to the poor visualization, it could be of interest to group the models in
order to reduce the number of shifting factors. Therefore, the HMM and the
MSGARCH are grouped into two main models. The weight envolvment is visu-
alized in ﬁgure 4.6, together with the S&P 500 indices. There are no clear trends
in how the model shift between the models. The only observation, is that the
GARCH and the MSGARCH, are assigned weights in periods where there are
larger movements in one direction over a short period of time.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
53
Figure 4.6: The S&P 500 and the summed group weight by model, yellow for
the HMMs, green for the GARCH and blue for the MSGARCH.
Figure 4.7: States for the HMME, based on the experts states decoded by
Viterbi algorithm. Blue denotes the Bull state and grey the Bear
state.
In ﬁgure 4.7 the states for the HMME model with the second gating method are
found as a weighted product of the Viterbi´s decoded states of the experts.
The states seem to follow trends in the market. The combination of the models
creates more state switches, which will hopefully result in beneﬁcial excess real-
ized return. After the ﬁrst drop in 2003, the ensemble model was quick to switch
back to the Bull state compared to the HMM models. The inﬂuence of the other
models also reduces the persistence that has been observed in MSGARCH and
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Hidden Markov Mixture of Experts
54
HMM with a conditional t-distribution. It seems that the ensemble method is
working as desired, leveraging diﬀerent experts’ strengths.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Strategic Asset Allocation
Strategic asset allocation (SAA) is a long-term strategy that is based on the long-
term view of asset class performance. Compared to the discussed regime-based
asset allocation, SAA is the static allocation of weights to selected asset classes.
The goal of SAA is to create portfolios that are stable in time, where the portfolio
is often rebalanced every year, without major change.
Merton (1973) showed that even if the fractions for the classes are static, the
optimal allocation will be aﬀected by the possibility of uncertain changes in the
near future that will involve regime changes. Therefore, it can be beneﬁcial even
for SAA to use a regime-switching model to better describe the behavior of the
data.
Chow et al. (1999) used an empirical approach based on returns for eight asset
classes to show that a signiﬁcantly suboptimal portfolio could be created by
optimizing the full-sample covariance matrix. Following this, Kritzman and Li
(2010) extended the work to show that by including the conditional behavior
of assets, a portfolio that is more robust in the face of turbulent events can be
created, without limiting the upside in other market conditions.
The SAA is more a common approach for asset allocation, and the optimized
==PAGE:62==
5.1 Scenario Generation
56
portfolios performance is used as a benchmark for the new method with HMME
as foundation. The portfolios are optimized by looking at diﬀerent scenarios.
Scenario generation is discussed in section 5.1 before the discussion of the opti-
mization of portfolios using the CVar model in section 5.2. Last but not least,
portfolio performance is discussed for both in-sample and out-of-sample data in
section 5.3
5.1
Scenario Generation
The risk is often modeled by generating a large number of scenarios that can cap-
ture the range of variance in the parameters that aﬀect portfolio performance.
The representation of the uncertainty of the market is a cornerstone of risk man-
agement, and the method is used to raise awareness and not for forecasting.
Scenario generation can be done using three main approaches. In the ﬁrst method,
scenarios are created by bootstrapping historical data. The second method is
called moment matching (see e.g., Høyland Wallance, 2011) and entails generat-
ing scenarios through random sampling and accepting those that have statistical
moments that match the observed data. The third method, which is the one we
are extending, uses a theoretical model with parameter estimations of the his-
torical data to simulate the model to generate the scenarios. Each approach has
pros and cons. However, the aspect that made the decision for us is that basic
bootstrapping and moment matching are not able to reﬂect auto correlation in
the observation sequence. This is important, in that auto correlation can smooth
volatility and thus reduce the expectation of risk.
The time horizon for investment has been an important characteristic in some
research. A common belief is that risk is reduced if the holding period is longer,
which is also described as time diversiﬁcation. This is, of course, not the case
for every method, where, for instance, a random walk has the same risk over
the short and long term, whereas mean reversion increases the risk of assets for
long-term investors. Statistically, is it known that the probability of loss is never
zero, even if the time horizon is long.
The performance benchmark is set with a time horizon of one year. While this
reﬂects that the SAA long-term view is often updated every year, it is also possible
to change the asset weights (Dahlquit Harvey, 2001).
The use of regime-switching models is beneﬁcial to capture the time-varying
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Scenario Generation
57
behavior of variance, mean, and correlation.
An interesting aspect of regime
switches was illustrated by Sheik and Qiao (2010), who indicated that the corre-
lation seem to become stronger during regimes with high volatility, implying that
diversiﬁcation does not hedge when it is needed the most. Therefore, by assum-
ing linearity of the correlation, is it possible to underestimate the joint negative
return signiﬁcantly during a stressed market.
The theoretical model is based on the parameters estimated by the HMM model.
The number of states and state-dependent distributions are selected based on the
results from chapter 2.
The scenarios are generated by the following algorithm,
The theoretical model is based on the parameters estimated by the HMM model.
Where the number of states and state dependent distributions are selected based
on the result from chapter 4.
The scenarios are generated by the following algorithm,
Algorithm 3: Scenario generation from estimated parameter values
Input: µ, σ, Γ, δ, π, N, D
Result: Scenario
1 for j ∈1, 2, ..., N do
2
Scenario[1, j] ←sample S1 ∼π;
3
LnReturn[1, j] ←sample r ∼N
 µS1,j, σS1,j

;
4
for i ∈2, 3, ..., D do
5
Scenario[i, j] ←sample Si ∼ΓSi−1,j;
6
LnReturn[i, j] ←sample r ∼N
 µSi−1,j, σSi−1,j

;
7
end
8 end
Figure 5.1 visualize in grey 10 of the 10,000 scenarios generated, together with the
Maximum draw dawn, which is the larges relative .......(red). The 5%,25%,50%,75%
and the 95% quantiles are showed in black.
==PAGE:64==
5.2 The Mean - CVaR Model
58
Figure 5.1: Randomly selected 10 of the 10,000 generated scenarios (grey), to-
gether with the 5%,25%,50%,75% and the 95% quantiles (black)
and the MDD (red)
5.2
The Mean - CVaR Model
Asset allocation of ﬁnancial data that are leptokurtic and variance as a primary
quantiﬁer of risk can be ineﬀective since there is a linear relationship between
the desirable upside and undesirable downside movements. This non-normality
can hit especially hard with the downside risk of the allocation and is thus an
important factor when portfolios are created (Sheikh Qiao, 2010).
To mitigate this issue, the Mean-CVaR model was created as an alternative ap-
proach to the popular mean-variance problem that was introduced by Markowitz
(1952). The Conditional Value at risk
 CVaR(1−α)

is the average loss in the
(1 −α)% worst cases. CVaR is an extension of the VaR approach, where the
worst case cutoﬀpoint for the α-quantile of the loss distribution is deﬁned by
VaR. The incentive for CVaR is to calculate the expected shortfall for insurances.
Here, losses are the primary focus, and thus are by deﬁnition positive.
The Mean-CVaR model is not necessarily preferable only for cases with non-
normality. Bertsimas et al. (2014) showed that even for cases with normal or
elliptical asset distributions, the model eﬃciently computes the same optimal
weights as the mean variance, also without the computation of covariance matri-
ces, which can be problematic on some occasions.
The Mean - CVaR problem is deﬁned in 5.1, where the objective is a multi-
objective function that is maximizing the expected return (ER) while at the
==PAGE:65==
5.2 The Mean - CVaR Model
59
same time minimize the CVaR. The objective is a weighted sum of the two,
where the parameter λ measures the risk aversion deﬁning the trade-oﬀbetween
risk and return. For each value of λ between {0, 1} dose there exist a portfolio
with the minimum level of CVaR for the given level of ER. For the extreme cases
λ = 0 and λ = 1 will the maximum ER portfolio and minimum CVaR portfolio
be created respectively. To maintain some control over the two characteristics,
is it good practice to use λ = 0.001 and λ = 0.999 instead of the extreme integer
cases.
The expected return is deﬁned as the sum of weighted (xi) average return (¯ri)
for asset i over all scenarios.
rl
i is the return for asset i in scenario l, where
the scenario probability is pl.
yl
+ is the maximum of the loss exceeding the
Value at Risk(1−α) and zero. The discontinuity of yl
+ is found by splitting the
max{0, −PN
i=1 rl
ixi −V aR} into two conditions. The Conditional value at risk
is found as the VaR plus the average losses exceeding the VaR. The model is
implemented in R, and can be found in Appendix....
maximize
xi
(1 −λ)ER −λCV aR
subject to
ER =
N
X
i=1
¯rixi,
yl
+ +
N
X
i=1
rl
ixi + V aR ≥0
∀l ∈{1, . . . , S},
yl
+ ≥0
∀l ∈{1, . . . , S},
N
X
i
xi = 1,
CV aR = V aR +
PS
l=1 pl · yl
+
1 −α
,
xi ≥0
∀i ∈{1, . . . , N},
ER, CV aR, V aR ∈R.
(5.1)
The eﬃcient frontier is found by solving 5.1 with a sequence of λ values for the 10
000 scenarios generated in section 5.1. The frontier represents eﬃcient portfolios
at each level of risk and return. The portfolios are eﬃcient in that they have the
highest ER for their level of risk.
==PAGE:66==
5.3 Performance
60
(a) Eﬃcient frontier
(b) Portfolio Allocations
Figure 5.2: The eﬃcient frontier together with the eﬃcient portfolio allocations
based on the 10 000 simulations for one year horizon.
The eﬃcient frontier and the weights responsible for the eﬃcient portfolios are
visualized in ﬁgure 5.2. The least risk-avers portfolio consists only of the eq-
uity index S&P 500 and has a CVaR5% of 31.84% for a one year horizon. The
commodity index S&P GSCI is gradually increased until it reaches 20% with a
CVaR5% of 25.47%. After this point are all three assets in the portfolio, where
the weight of bonds is increasing and the other two assets are decreasing until
the minimum CVaR5% of 8.56% is reached. The indices have some diversiﬁcation
beneﬁts, where the minimum CVaR5% is found as a combination of the three,
with 10.96% allocation to the S&P 500, 81.52% to the USBI and 7.52% to the
S&P GSCI.
5.3
Performance
SAA is done for three levels of risk, where the combination of the asset are
selected to be on or close to the eﬃcient frontier. The weights and the portfolios
characteristics are outlined in table 5.1. Figure 5.4 is a frequency plot of the
10,000 simulated returns. The grey area marks the VaR, the red dashed line the
CVaR and the blue dashed line the expected return for each portfolio.
In Sample
The 15 year in sample performance is summarized by the realized return (RR),
the standard deviation, maximum drawdown, and the Sharpe ratio (SR) in table
5.2. The RR was aﬀected by a quick upswing in the market after an all period
low in the beginning of 2009, where all portfolios resulted in positive return after
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Performance
61
P
wS&P500
wUSBI
wGSCI
ER
CVaR5%
1
0.26
0.6
0.14
0.0275
0.105
2
0.5
0.27
0.23
0.0420
0.171
3
0.8
0
0.2
0.0580
0.255
Table 5.1: Portfolio characteristics based on the 10 000 scenarios with one year
horizon.
the 15 year period. The MDD compared to the CVaR5% is substantially diﬀerent,
even though it is reasonable to imagine that the losses can accumulate over time.
Both are measures for downside risk. It could be that the 5% quantile of the
CVaR5% is too broad an that the CVaR should be calculated for the 1% quantile
to get more conservative risk measurement.
P
RR
SD
MDD
SR
1
0.318
0.061
0.380
0.226
2
0.464
0.112
0.514
0.154
3
0.703
0.183
0.590
0.142
Table 5.2: Summary of portfolio performance and characteristics for the 15 year
in sample period
The previous result was with only initializing the static weights without rebalanc-
ing within the 20 year period. The norm is to rebalance the portfolio weights at
least once a year without making any other big changes [Nystrup et al.(2018)Nystrup, Hansen, and
Illustrated in ﬁgure ... for one of the portfolios, is it easy to see that the weights
are quickly drifting away from the ﬁxed static weights.
The procedure of rebalancing is used as a long term investment strategy, to
keep the risk level constant without any assumptions about the market regimes.
For optimizing the SAA would the weights be rebalanced continuously, but since
there are transaction costs for the rebalancing is it a trade oﬀbetween sub optimal
portfolio weights and the cost of rebalancing the portfolio to the static weights.
The portfolio performance will be measured with annually rebalancing to the
optimal static weights.
The annual rebalancing of the portfolios have positive eﬀect on the portfolio
performance, where the RR has increased and the MDD reduced for all three
portfolios. This increases the SR, and reduced the risk on long term.
==PAGE:68==
5.3 Performance
62
(a) w1 = (0.26, 0.6, 0.14)
(b) w2 = (0.5, 0.27, 0.23)
(c) w3 = (0.8, 0, 0.2)
Figure 5.3: The frequency plot of the three indices for the 10 000 simulations
for the one year horizon. The blue dashed line marks the expected
return, the red the CV ar5% and the grey area the V ar5%
Out of Sample
The out of sample performance of the annually rebalanced portfolios are sum-
maries in table 5.4. The out of sample period is not turbulent, where the static
allocation should perform well. The annualized realized return exceeds the ex-
pected return and the SR is signiﬁcantly increased for all portfolios. Portfolio 3
is performing exeptionally well in the out of sample period, where the S&P 500
have had a stable growth during the period.
==PAGE:69==
5.3 Performance
63
(a) w1 = (0.26, 0.6, 0.14)
(b) w2 = (0.5, 0.27, 0.23)
Figure 5.4: The weights development in portfolio 2 w = (0.5, 0.27, 0.23) with
and without rebalancing.
P
RR
SD
MDD
SR
1
0.401
0.06560325
0.343
0.343
2
0.560
0.118
0.492
0.231
3
0.757
0.178
0.588
0.173
Table 5.3: Summary of portfolio performance and characteristics for the 15 year
in sample period with annual rebalancing
P
RR
SD
MDD
SR
1
0.148
0.047
0.127
0.490
2
0.195
0.0813
0.207
0.346
3
0.381
0.114
0.213
0.484
Table 5.4: Summary of portfolio performance and characteristics for the 6 year
out of sample period with annual rebalancing
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 6
Dynamic Asset Allocation
The static asset allocation strategy implicit assumes that the ﬁnancial markets
will have positive returns in the long run, and that stocks will outperform bonds
in the long run. Unfortunately is this not always the case??. Therefore would
it be beneﬁcial to have dynamic asset allocation, where it takes advantage of
favorable economic regimes, and at the same time reduce potential drawdowns
in adverse economic regimes.
In contrast to previous studies that reduce the volatility by dynamically shifting
to cash in periods with high volatility, are the performance gain of DAA compared
to SAA from chapter 5 by fully invested portfolios without any risk-free asset.
In addition are the DAA performance for the ensemble method versus the single
methods compared.
The portfolios are based on the asset classes described in section ??, which are
stocks, bonds, and commodities. Mentioned in chapter 3 are the state prediction
based on the stock returns, and building on the ﬁndings in both chapters 3 and
4.
The parameter estimation are assuming that all observations have equal impor-
tance, regardless of the sample period. For longer periods is this not the case,
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Decoding
65
where (Rydén et al 1998, Bulla 2011, Nystrup et al 2016b) have all documented
that the parameters of the underlying process is not constant in time. The param-
eters are therefore estimated by batch learning [Khreich et al.(2012)Khreich, Granger, Miri, and Sa
6.1
Decoding
The states are decoded for the HMM and MSGARCH models by the methods
mentioned in section 3.1.2. Where the locally decoding determines the state st
with the highest likelihood for each time t, and globally uses the Viterbi algorithm
to determine the most likely sequence of states s(T ) given the observation sequence
x(T ).
Global decoding is often preferred over the local in that it take the transition
probabilities into considerations, and therefore always creating sequences that
have a possibility of arising compared to the local decoding that only looks at
one observation at a time. On the other hand does the local decoding reduce
the possibility of classiﬁcation. Demonstrated in Bulle et al. (2011) and Peter
Nystrup 2014, 50 000 simulated series of 252 observations was decoded both
locally and globally. The trend for both methods was that the miss classiﬁcation
error was increasing strongly in the beginning and the end of the series, to more
than 10%. Peter Nystrup 2014 found the global decoding to have a 2% - point
higher miss classiﬁcation on the 252 observation compared to the local decoding
method. This is important to keep in mind for the out of sample state prediction,
where the last observations play a central role.
Another characteristic of the global decoding is that it has fewer transitions be-
tween the states for the in sample data, compared to the smoothed local decoding
(table 6.1). If the transitions are not necessary could the switches cause great
losses either in asset value or in loss of potential value. This is of course the case
the if looking the other way around as well.
When looking at the diﬀerent models for the in sample transitions between the
two states can it seem like the fat tails of the t-distribution makes the models
more persistent compared to the normal distribution. The HMM models switch
more frequently than the MSGARCH models, this is something that we already
have observed by looking at the transition probabilities.
For the out of sample predictions, where only the past returns are known, would
it be better to use the local decoded states, but with a ﬁltering value to smooth
==PAGE:72==
6.2 In Sample
66
Local Decoding
Global Decoding
HmmN
42
28
HmmNt
32
26
Hmmt
26
26
GARCH
158
158
MSGARCHN
29
30
MSGARCHNt
25
20
MSGARCHt
13
12
Table 6.1: Number of transitions during the In sample period, with using both
global and local decoding
the number of switches. [Nystrup(2014)] used a 92% probability threshold as
ﬁltering. Meaning that the predicted state has to have conﬁdent on 92% before
the state is switched, otherwise is it set to the same as the previous decoded state.
The state sequence is highly sensitive towards the selected threshold probability.
It is a balance between having a to low threshold where unnecessary transitions
are included, and having it to high, where the regimes becom to persistence.
The predicted states from the smoothing probability is similar to to the Viterbi
decoded states in section 4.2.2.
6.2
In Sample
The performance on the in sample data is based on decoded states by the Viterbi
algorithm. In that the method uses both forward and backward probabilities,
is it dependent of perfect foresight of future returns, which is unrealistic. The
method can be seen as a upper boundary for the performance, and should be
positive for a strategy if it should ever be beneﬁcial in reality.
The in sample performance is measured between the 7 independent models, the
ensemble HMME and the SAA from the previous chapter 5.
The eﬃcient frontier for the two states are found by applying the CVaR model
from section 5.2 on 10 000 bootstrapped scenarios of 252 days from the returns
split by the states of the HMME. The scenarios are found by bootstrapping
in this case since the returns are assumed to be independent within each state
==PAGE:73==
6.2 In Sample
67
Figure 6.1: Predicted states of the HMME with the smoothed probability
threshold on 90%
[Nystrup(2014)]. The state dependent portfolio weights where found to be 100%
allocation to the bond index in state 2, and a diversiﬁcation between the three
assets in state 1 where S&P 500 accounts for 50% and the USBI and GCID
accounts for 25% each.
The in sample performance is found in table 6.2, where it is seen that the HMME
has improved the RR and the SR by reducing the variance. Both the markov
switching methods with conditional normal distribution performers good in the
in sample period.
Method
RR
SD
MDD
SR
HmmN
1.53
0.10
0.19
1.16
HmmNt
1.48
0.10
0.19
1.14
Hmmt
0.4
0.05
0.54
0.3
GARCH
0.74
0.04
0.24
0.51
MSGARCHN
1.55
0.10
0.19
1.00
MSGARCHNt
1.45
0.10
0.20
0.95
MSGARCHt
1.24
0.08
0.20
0.82
HMME
1.66
0.08
0.19
1.23
Table 6.2
==PAGE:74==
6.3 Out of Sample
68
Figure 6.2: The out-of-sample prediction of the states, where blue detects Bull
and grey Bear state
6.3
Out of Sample
The out of sample states are predicted by a rolling estimation of 1000 obser-
vations. The predicted states in the out-of-sample for the ensemble method is
visualized in ﬁgure 6.2. The threshold is set to the same as for the in sample
92%.
The portfolio performance for the diﬀerent dynamic asset allocation strategies is
summarised in table 6.3. The HMME outperform the risk avers Strategic asset
allocation strategies found in table 5.4.
For the high risk portfolio with 80%
weights equity and 20% commodities beat the DAA with 0.029.
This is not
strange in that the Bull state portfolio for the DAA was chosen with a low CVaR
and the Out of sample period is characterised by increasing indices.
Method
RR
SD
MDD
SR
HMMN
0.23
0.06
0.08
1.02
HMMNt
0.23
0.04
0.10
0.77
HMMt
0.27
0.05
0.08
0.91
GARCH
0.54
0.10
0.07
1.62
MSGARCHN
0.25
0.06
0.06
1.26
MSGARCHNt
0.28
0.05
0.06
1.01
MSGARCHt
0.30
0.06
0.08
1.00
HMME
0.35
0.07
0.08
1.17
Table 6.3
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Out of Sample
69
Figure 6.3: Predicted states for the GARCH model, Blue indicates Bull states,
while grey Bear states.
For the experts are the HMME outperformed by the GARCH model that yield
a realized return of 0.54, whereas the HMME realized a return of 0.35. when
taking a closer look at the state prediction in ﬁgure 6.3 can it be seen that the
positive market is beneﬁcial for the GARCH model that make rapid changes
in the market. Compared to the other models does it mentioned have a lower
threshold for switching, which in the In sample made it the poorest of the DDA
models, while in this case the best. Therefore are there some more risk linked to
the GARCH model.
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 7
Discussion
The thesis was inspired by Peter Nystrups Master PhD, thesis [Nystrup(2018)]
regarding dynamic asset allocation. The extensive discussion about model selec-
tion made me wonder, why not combine them. To increase the experts space a
GARCH(1,1) model was included together with three MSGARCH models. The
gating network was created by a closed form solution, based on the principles
of linear regression. The expert and the HMME model proved to be suitable to
describe the sudden changes in the ﬁnancial market. The models where purely
based on the S&P 500 equity index, where it says that the majority risk of the
portfolio is based on the equity, even though the allocation in this article could
be a combination of equity, bonds and commodities.
The Strategic asset allocation strategies with rebalancing was found at, or close
to, the eﬃcient frontier to three diﬀerent levels of risk aversion. The annual rebal-
ancing of the portfolios had a positive eﬀect on the realized return and sharp ratio,
from the lower MDD. For the out-of-sample period, the annual realized return
was higher than for the in-sample. The out-of-sample period was characterized
by a positive trend in the market.
The regime models where estimated in batches, where it is not realistic to assume
that the parameters are constant over the 20 year time period. The optimal asset
==PAGE:77==
7.1 Future Work
71
allocation for the two regimes where found at the eﬃcient frontier, where the Bull
case has some diversiﬁcation between the three assets with relatively low risk, and
the Bear has a 100 % allocation to bonds. Majority of the experts outperformed
the SAA for all three levels of risk where the HMME outperformed all the experts
by a minimum of 7.1% where both the HMM and MSGARCH with conditional
normal distribution had the best outcome of the experts.
For the characteristics of the out-of-sample period is not in favour for the dy-
namic asset allocation. The HMME is, though still outperform the SAA with
comparable risk aversion. For the experts the GARCH model outperformed the
HMME, where the HMME had higher persistence in the states than the GARCH.
The remaining 6 experts where outperformed by the HMME. Given that HMM is
dominating the state of the art for the dynamic asset allocation, it is seen to give
a signiﬁcantly increased performance by combining the method with diﬀerent
distributions and methods.
7.1
Future Work
The parameters are estimated adoptive by estimating them in batches. A further
analysis of better approaches to estimate the parameters could be beneﬁcial to
increase the predictability of the models.
The models are built to follow the equity index, when the correlation between
the indices are changing over time, it could be interesting to have a multivariate
model where changes in several of the indices are taken into consideration.
For this research a gating network has been established to test the concept in
simplicity. It is possible, with a more complex gating method, that a stronger
divide and concur approach could have a better eﬀect than the once seen in these
research. For instance, as seen in analysis where the HMM and MSGARCH are
good at keeping conservative measures, the states are more persistence. While
the GARCH is a good model to quickly switch when larger changes occurs in the
return. Thus, it could be good to ﬁrst separate the data based on the state of
the market, before the diﬀerent weights are assigned.
The ensemble method could potentially be improved by selectively include the
models by a more extensive examination before they are combined.
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
[Adams(1995)] D. Adams.
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy.
San Val,
1995. ISBN 9781417642595. URL http://books.google.com/books?id=
W-xMPgAACAAJ.
[Alexander(2009)] C. Alexander. Market Risk Analysis, Value at Risk Models.
Market Risk Analysis. Wiley, 2009.
ISBN 9780470745076.
URL https:
//books.google.dk/books?id=j5l82vMfcbQC.
[Ardia(2008)] D. Ardia. Financial Risk Management with Bayesian Estimation
of GARCH Models. Springer, 2008. ISBN 978-3-540-78657-3.
[Ardia et al.(2018)Ardia, Bluteau, Boudt, and Catania] D. Ardia, K. Bluteau,
K. Boudt, and L. Catania. Forecasting risk with markov-switching garch
models: A large-scale performance study. International Journal of Forecast-
ing, 34(4):733–747, 2018. ISSN 0169-2070. doi: 10.1016/j.ijforecast.2018.05.
004.
[Asness et al.(2012)Asness, Frazzini, and Heje Pedersen] C. Asness, A. Frazzini,
and L. Heje Pedersen. Leverage aversion and risk parity. Financial Analysts
Journal, 68(1):47–59, 2012. ISSN 0015-198X.
[Bauwens et al.(2014)Bauwens, Dufays, and Rombouts] L. Bauwens, A. Dufays,
and J. V. Rombouts. Marginal likelihood for Markov-switching and change-
point GARCH models.
Journal of Econometrics, 178(P3):508–522, 2014.
doi: 10.1016/j.jeconom.2013.08. URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/
econom/v178y2014ip3p508-522.html.
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[Bloomberg(2019)] Bloomberg.
US
Corporate
Index
.
https:
//data.bloomberglp.com/indices/sites/2/2016/08/
2017-08-08-Factsheet-US-Corporate.pdf,
2019.
[Online;
accessed
3-March-2019].
[Bollerslev(1986)] T. Bollerslev.
Generalized autoregressive conditional het-
eroskedasticity. JOURNAL OF ECONOMETRICS, 31:307–327, 1986.
[Bulla(2011)] J. Bulla.
Hidden markov models with t components. increased
persistence and other aspects.
Quantitative Finance,
11(3):459–475,
2011. doi: 10.1080/14697681003685563. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
14697681003685563.
[Cappé et al.(2005)Cappé, Moulines, and Ryden] O. Cappé, E. Moulines, and
T. Ryden. Inference in Hidden Markov Models (Springer Series in Statis-
tics). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. ISBN 0387402640.
[Dahlquist(2001)] H. C. R. Dahlquist, M. Global tactical asset allocation. Mar-
kets Quarterly, 56(1):6–14, 2001.
[de Menezes et al.(2000)de Menezes, W. Bunn, and Taylor] L. M. de Menezes,
D. W. Bunn, and J. W. Taylor. Review of guidelines for the use of com-
bined forecasts. European Journal of Operational Research, 120(1):190–204,
2000.
URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:ejores:v:120:
y:2000:i:1:p:190-204.
[Dufays(2018)] A. Dufays. Inﬁnite-state markov-switching for dynamic volatility.
Journal of Financial Econometrics, 14(2):418–460, 2018.
doi: 10.1016/j.
ijforecast.2018.05.004.
[Eschrich and Hall(2003)] S. Eschrich and L. O. Hall. Learning from soft parti-
tions of data: reducing the variance. In FUZZ-IEEE, 2003.
[Frazzini(2014)] P. L. H. Frazzini, A. Betting against beta. J. Financial Eco-
nomics, 1(111):1–25, 2014.
[Galbraith and Zernov(2006)] J. G. Galbraith and S. Zernov. Extreme Depen-
dence In The Nasdaq And S&P Composite Indexes. Departmental Working
Papers 2006-14, McGill University, Department of Economics, Sept. 2006.
URL https://ideas.repec.org/p/mcl/mclwop/2006-14.html.
[Ghalanos(2013)] A. Ghalanos. rugarch: Univariate GARCH models., 2013. R
package version 1.0-16.
[Ghalanos(2014)] A. Ghalanos. rugarch: Univariate GARCH models., 2014. R
package version 1.4-0.
==PAGE:80==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
74
[Ghalanos(2019)] A. Ghalanos. rugarch: Univariate GARCH models., 2019. R
package version 1.4-1.
[Gray(1996)] S. F. Gray. Modeling the conditional distribution of interest rates
as a regime-switching process. Journal of Financial Economics, 42(1):27–62,
1996. URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:jfinec:v:42:y:
1996:i:1:p:27-62.
[Haas(2004)] M. Haas.
A new approach to markov-switching garch models.
Journal of Financial Econometrics, 2(4):493–530, 2004.
URL https://
EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:jfinec:v:2:y:2004:i:4:p:493-530.
[Ibbotson and Kaplan(2000)] R. G. Ibbotson and P. D. Kaplan. Does asset al-
location policy explain 40, 90, or 100 percent of performance?
Financial
Analysts Journal, 56(1):26–33, 2000.
doi: 10.2469/faj.v56.n1.2327.
URL
https://doi.org/10.2469/faj.v56.n1.2327.
[J. Reed and Berkson(2002)] L. J. Reed and J. Berkson. The application of the
logistic function to experimental data. The Journal of Physical Chemistry,
33, 05 2002. doi: 10.1021/j150299a014.
[Jacobs et al.(1991)Jacobs, Jordan, Nowlan, and Hinton] R. A. Jacobs, M. I.
Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of local ex-
perts. Neural Comput., 3:79–87, 1991.
[Khreich et al.(2012)Khreich, Granger, Miri, and Sabourin] W.
Khreich,
E. Granger, A. Miri, and R. Sabourin.
A survey of techniques for
incremental
learning
of
hmm
parameters.
Inf.
Sci.,
197:105–130,
Aug. 2012.
ISSN 0020-0255.
doi:
10.1016/j.ins.2012.02.017.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2012.02.017.
[Lamoureux and Lastrapes(1990)] C. G. Lamoureux and W. Lastrapes.
Het-
eroskedasticity in stock return data: Volume versus garch eﬀects. Journal
of Finance, 45(1):221–29, 1990.
URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/
RePEc:bla:jfinan:v:45:y:1990:i:1:p:221-29.
[Linhart and Zucchini(1986)] H. Linhart and W. Zucchini. Model Selection. John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1986. ISBN 0-471-83722-9.
[Lütkebohle(2008)] I.
Lütkebohle.
BWorld
Robot
Control
Soft-
ware.
http://aiweb.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/content/
bworld-robot-control-software/, 2008.
[Online;
accessed 19-July-
2008].
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[Marcucci(2005)] J. Marcucci. Forecasting stock market volatility with regime-
switching garch models. Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics Econometrics, 9(4):
1–55, 2005. URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:bpj:sndecm:v:
9:y:2005:i:4:n:6.
[Nelder and Wedderburn(1972)] J. A. Nelder and R. W. M. Wedderburn. Gen-
eralized linear models.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A
(General), 135(3):370–384, 1972. ISSN 00359238. URL http://www.jstor.
org/stable/2344614.
[Nielsen et al.()Nielsen, Nielsen, Madsen, Pindado, and Marti] H.
A.
Nielsen,
T. S. Nielsen, H. Madsen, M. J. S. I. Pindado, and I. Marti.
Optimal
combination of wind power forecasts.
Wind Energy, 10(5):471–482.
doi:
10.1002/we.237.
URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1002/we.237.
[Nystrup(2014)] P. Nystrup. Regime-based asset allocation - do proﬁtable strate-
gies exist?
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Department
of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard Petersens Plads,
Building 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark, compute@compute.dtu.dk,
2014. URL http://www.compute.dtu.dk/English.aspx. DTU supervisor:
Henrik Madsen, hmad@dtu.dk, DTU Compute.
[Nystrup(2018)] P. Nystrup.
Dynamic Asset Allocation - Identifying Regime
Shifts in Financial Time Series to Build Robust Portfolios.
PhD thesis,
2018.
[Nystrup et al.(2018)Nystrup, Hansen, and Larsen] P. Nystrup, B. W. Hansen,
and H. O. Larsen. Dynamisk aktivallokering: Bør allokeringen ændres, når
markederne dykker? Finans/Invest, pages 28–35, 2018.
[Pagan and Schwert(1990)] A. Pagan and G. Schwert.
Alternative models for
conditional stock volatility. Journal of Econometrics, 45(1-2):267–290, 1990.
URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:econom:v:45:y:1990:
i:1-2:p:267-290.
[Perrucci and Benaben(2012)] S. Perrucci and B. Benaben. Inﬂation Sensitive
Assets: Instruments and Strategies. 2012.
[R Core Team(2013)] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statis-
tical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria,
2013. URL http://www.R-project.org/.
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
76
[Rabiner(1989)] L. R. Rabiner. A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected
applications in speech recognition.
In PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE,
pages 257–286, 1989.
[Reschenhofer(2013)] E. Reschenhofer. Does anyone need a garch(1,1)? Journal
of Finance and Accounting, 1(2):48–53, 2013. doi: 10.12691/jfa-1-2-2. URL
http://pubs.sciepub.com/jfa/1/2/2.
[Rokach(2005)] L. Rokach.
Ensemble Methods for Classiﬁers, pages 957–980.
Springer US, Boston, MA, 2005. ISBN 978-0-387-25465-4. doi: 10.1007/
0-387-25465-X_45. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-25465-X_45.
[Rydén et al.()Rydén, Teräsvirta, and Åsbrink] T.
Rydén,
T.
Teräsvirta,
and S. Åsbrink.
Stylized facts of daily return series and the hidden
markov model.
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 13(3):217–244.
doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1099-1255(199805/06)13:3<217::AID-JAE476>3.0.CO;2-V.
URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/%28SICI%
291099-1255%28199805/06%2913%3A3%3C217%3A%3AAID-JAE476%3E3.0.
CO%3B2-V.
[Sachs(2019)] G.
Sachs.
S&P
GSCI
Commodity
Index.
https:
//www.goldmansachs.com/what-we-do/securities/business-groups/
sts-folder/gsci/, 2019. [Online; accessed 3-March-2019].
[Science(2018)] O. O. D. Science.
Understanding the 3 primary types
of gradient descent, December 2018.
URL https://medium.com/@ODSC/
understanding-the-3-primary-types-of-gradient-descent-987590b2c36.
[Sharpe(1965)] W. Sharpe. Mutual fund performance. The Journal of Business,
39, 1965.
[Speelman(2016)] D. Speelman. Logistic regression, a conﬁrmatory technique for
comparisons in corpus linguistics, 2016.
[Sun et al.(20006)Sun, Fan, Chen, Schouwenaars, and Albota] W. Sun, A. Fan,
L. I. Chen, T. Schouwenaars, and M. A. Albota. Optimal rebalancing for
institutional portfolios. Journal of Portfolio Management, 32:33–43, 20006.
[Timmermann(2000)] A. Timmermann.
Density forecasting in economics and
ﬁnance.
Journal of Forecasting, 19(4):231–234, 2000.
doi:
10.1002/
1099-131X(200007)19:4<231::AID-FOR771>3.0.CO;2.
[Wisner(2017)] T. G. Wisner.
Covariance Estimation with Markov-Switching
Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity Models Applica-
tions to Portfolio Management. Master’s thesis, UCLA, 2017.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
[Yu(2009)] H.-T. Yu. S. frühwirth-schnatter (2006) ﬁnite mixture and markov
switching models.
Psychometrika, 74(3):559–560, Sep 2009.
ISSN 1860-
0980. doi: 10.1007/s11336-009-9121-4. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11336-009-9121-4.
[Yuksel et al.(2012)Yuksel, Wilson, and Gader] S.
Yuksel,
J.
Wilson,
and
P. Gader.
Twenty years of mixture of experts.
Neural Networks and
Learning Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 23:1177–1193, 08 2012.
doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2012.2200299.
[Zucchini and Macdonald(2018)] W. Zucchini and I. L. Macdonald.
Hidden
markov models for time series:
An introduction using r.
Journal of
Time Series Analysis, 39(1):105–106, 2018. doi: 10.1111/jtsa.12257. URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/jtsa.12257.
==PAGE:84==
Appendix
7.2
R Code
7.2.1
Baum - Welch algorithm
1
# Delta
2
statdist <- function(gamma){
3
m = dim(gamma)[1]
4
matrix(1,1,m) %*% solve(diag(1,m) - gamma + matrix(1,m,m))
5
}
6
7
N.HMM.lalphabeta <- function(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta=NULL)
8
{
9
if(is.null(delta))delta <-
solve(t(diag(m)-gamma+1),rep(1,m))
,→
10
11
n <- length(x)
12
lalpha <- lbeta <- matrix(NA,m,n)
13
allprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
14
15
for(i in 1:m){allprobs[,i] <-
dnorm(x,mean=mu[i],sd=sigma[i])}
,→
16
==PAGE:85==
R Code
79
17
foo
<- delta*allprobs[1,]
18
sumfoo
<- sum(foo)
19
lscale
<- log(sumfoo)
20
foo
<- foo/sumfoo
21
lalpha[,1] <- log(foo) + lscale
22
23
for (i in 2:n)
24
{
25
foo
<- foo%*%gamma*allprobs[i,]
26
sumfoo
<- sum(foo)
27
lscale
<- lscale+log(sumfoo)
28
foo
<- foo/sumfoo
29
lalpha[,i] <- log(foo)+lscale
30
}
31
lbeta[,n]
<- rep(0,m)
32
foo
<- rep(1/m,m)
33
lscale
<- log(m)
34
35
# Baklengs
36
for (i in (n - 1):1)
37
{
38
foo
<- gamma%*%(allprobs[i+1,]*foo)
39
lbeta[,i]
<- log(foo) + lscale
40
sumfoo <- sum(foo)
41
foo <- foo/sumfoo
42
lscale <- lscale + log(sumfoo)
43
}
44
list(la=lalpha,lb=lbeta)
45
}
46
47
N.HMM.EM <-
function(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta,maxiter=1000,tol=1e-6)
,→
48
{
49
maxiter = 1000
50
tol = 1e-6
51
crit = 0
52
n <- length(x)
53
mu.next <- mu
54
sigma.next <- sigma
55
gamma.next <- gamma
==PAGE:86==
R Code
80
56
delta.next <- delta
57
58
for (iter in 1:maxiter){
59
lallprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
60
for(i in 1:m){ lallprobs[,i] <-
log(dnorm(x,mu[i],sigma[i]))}
,→
61
62
fb
<-
N.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta=delta)
63
la
<-
fb$la
64
lb
<-
fb$lb
65
c
<-
max(la[,n])
66
llk <- c + log(sum(exp(la[,n] - c)))
67
for (j in 1:m)
68
{
69
for (k in 1:m)
70
{
71
gamma.next[j,k] <- gamma[j,k]*sum(exp(la[j,1:(n-1)]+
72
lallprobs[2:n,k]+lb[k,2:n]-llk))
73
}
74
mu.next[j] <- sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk)*x)/
75
sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk))
76
sigma.next[j] <- sqrt(sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk)
77
*(x-mu.next[j])^2)/
78
sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk)))
79
}
80
gamma.next <- gamma.next/apply(gamma.next,1,sum)
81
delta.next <- exp(la[,1]+lb[,1]-llk)
82
delta.next <- delta.next/sum(delta.next)
83
84
crit <- sum(abs(mu -mu.next)) +
85
sum(abs(sigma - sigma.next)) +
86
sum(abs(gamma - gamma.next)) +
87
sum(abs(delta - delta.next))
88
if(crit < tol)
89
{
90
np
<- m*m+m-1
91
AIC
<- -2*(llk-np)
92
BIC
<- -2*llk+np*log(n)
93
return(list(mu=mu,sigma=sigma,gamma=gamma,delta=delta,
94
mllk=-llk,AIC=AIC,BIC=BIC))
==PAGE:87==
R Code
81
95
}
96
mu
<- mu.next
97
sigma <- sigma.next
98
gamma <- gamma.next
99
delta <- delta.next
100
}
101
print(paste("No convergence after",maxiter,"iterations"))
102
NA }
1
#### Generating
####
2
#install.packages("tidyverse")
3
#install.packages("ggplot2")
4
#install.packages("ggpubr")
5
#install.packages("metRology",dependencies = TRUE)
6
library(ggplot2)
7
library(ggpubr)
8
library(metRology)
9
10
# Delta
11
statdist <- function(gamma){
12
m = dim(gamma)[1]
13
matrix(1,1,m) %*% solve(diag(1,m) - gamma + matrix(1,m,m))
14
}
15
16
# First m-1 regimes are of Norm-distribution and the last is
of t-distribution
,→
17
Nt.HMM.lalphabeta<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta =
NULL)
,→
18
{
19
if(is.null(delta))delta<-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma+1),rep(1,m))
20
21
n <- length(x)
22
23
lalpha <- lbeta <- matrix(NA,m,n)
24
allprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
25
26
for(j in 1:m)
27
{
28
if(j < m)
==PAGE:88==
R Code
82
29
allprobs[,j] <- dnorm(x,mu[j],sigma[j])
30
else
31
allprobs[,j] <- dt.scaled(x, nu, mean = mu[j], sd =
sigma[j])
,→
32
}
33
34
# Initialize the first probability
35
foo
<- delta*allprobs[1,]
36
sumfoo
<- sum(foo)
37
lscale
<- log(sumfoo)
38
foo
<- foo/sumfoo
39
lalpha[,1] <- log(foo)+lscale
40
41
# Loop trough to determine the next n-1 states forward
probabilities
,→
42
for (i in 2:n)
43
{
44
foo
<- foo%*%gamma*allprobs[i,]
45
sumfoo
<- sum(foo)
46
lscale
<- lscale+log(sumfoo)
47
foo
<- foo/sumfoo
48
lalpha[,i] <- log(foo)+lscale
49
}
50
51
lbeta[,n]
<- rep(0,m)
52
foo
<- rep(1/m,m)
53
lscale
<- log(m)
54
#Loop for backwards conditional probabilities
55
for (i in (n-1):1)
56
{
57
foo
<- gamma%*%(allprobs[i+1,]*foo)
58
lbeta[,i]
<- log(foo) + lscale
59
sumfoo <- sum(foo)
60
foo <- foo/sumfoo
61
lscale <- lscale+log(sumfoo)
62
}
63
list(la=lalpha,lb=lbeta)
64
}
65
66
## EM estimation of a t-HMM
==PAGE:89==
R Code
83
67
Nt.HMM.EM <-
function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta,maxiter=10000,tol=1e-6)
,→
68
{
69
maxiter = 10000
70
tol = 1e-6
71
n <- length(x)
72
mu.next <- mu
73
sigma.next <- sigma
74
gamma.next <- gamma
75
delta.next <- delta
76
nu.next <- nu
77
u = numeric(n)
78
temp <- rep(NA,maxiter)
79
# Trenger jeg denne?
80
llk.prev = 0
81
82
for(iter in 1:maxiter)
83
{
84
lallprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
85
86
for(j in 1:m){
87
if(j < m)
88
lallprobs[,j] <-
log(dnorm(x,mean=mu.next[j],sd=sigma.next[j]))
,→
89
else
90
lallprobs[,j] <-
log(dt.scaled(x,nu.next,mean=mu.next[j],sd=sigma.next[j]))
,→
91
}
92
93
fb <-
Nt.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu.next,sigma.next,nu.next,gamma.next,delta.next)
,→
94
la <- fb$la
95
lb <- fb$lb
96
c <- max(la[,n])
97
llk <- c + log(sum(exp(la[,n] - c)))
98
99
for(j in 1:m)
100
{
101
for(k in 1:m)
102
{
==PAGE:90==
R Code
84
103
gamma.next[j,k] <-
gamma[j,k]*sum(exp(la[j,1:(n-1)]+lallprobs[2:n,k]+lb[k,2:n]-llk))
,→
104
}
105
if(j < m){
106
mu.next[j]
<- sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk)%*%x)/
107
sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk))
108
sigma.next[j] <- sqrt(sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk)
109
*(x-mu.next[j])^2)/
110
sum(exp(la[j,]+lb[j,]-llk)))
111
}
112
else{
113
temp[iter] <- j
114
u = (nu.next + 1)/(nu.next + (x - mu.next[j])*(x -
mu.next[j])/sigma.next[j]^2)
,→
115
w = (exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk)*u)%*%x
116
z = exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk)%*%u
117
mu.next[j] = w/z
118
w = (exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk)*u*(x -
mu.next[j]))%*%(x - mu.next[j])
,→
119
sigma.next[j] = sqrt(w/z)
120
w = exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk)%*%(log(u) - u)
121
z = sum(exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk))
122
estimator = function(nu, frac){
123
-digamma(exp(nu)/2)+log(exp(nu)/2) + 1 + frac +
124
digamma((exp(nu) + 1)/2) - log((exp(nu) +
1)/2)
}
,→
125
126
nu.next = exp(uniroot(estimator, frac = w/z, lower =
127
log(0.01), upper =
log(500))$root)
,→
128
}
129
}
130
gamma.next = gamma.next/apply(gamma.next, 1, sum)
131
delta.next = exp(la[, 1] + lb[, 1] - llk)
132
delta.next = delta.next/sum(delta.next)
133
crit = llk - llk.prev
134
crit <- sum(abs(mu-mu.next)) +
135
sum(abs(sigma-sigma.next)) +
136
sum(abs(gamma-gamma.next)) +
137
sum(abs(delta-delta.next))
==PAGE:91==
R Code
85
138
139
if(crit < tol)
140
{
141
np = (m + 2)*m
142
AIC = -2*(llk - np)
143
BIC = -2*llk + np*log(n)
144
return(list(mu = mu.next, sigma = sigma.next, gamma =
gamma.next,
,→
145
delta = delta.next, nu = nu.next, iterations
= iter,
,→
146
mllk = -llk, AIC = AIC, BIC = BIC,crit =
crit,test=temp))
,→
147
}
148
mu = mu.next
149
sigma = sigma.next
150
gamma = gamma.next
151
delta = delta.next
152
nu = nu.next
153
llk.prev = llk
154
}
155
print(paste('No convergence after', maxiter, 'iterations'))
156
return(list(mu=mu,sigma=sigma, nu = nu ,gamma=gamma,
delta=delta, df=df,iterations=iter,mllk=llk,test=temp))
,→
157
}
1
#### Generating
####
2
#install.packages("tidyverse")
3
#install.packages("ggplot2")
4
#install.packages("ggpubr")
5
#install.packages("metRology",dependencies = TRUE)
6
library(ggplot2)
7
library(ggpubr)
8
library(metRology)
9
10
# Delta
11
statdist <- function(gamma){
12
m = dim(gamma)[1]
13
matrix(1,1,m) %*% solve(diag(1,m) - gamma + matrix(1,m,m))
14
}
==PAGE:92==
R Code
86
15
16
#Without skewness
17
18
# All regimes are of t-distribution
19
t.HMM.lalphabeta<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL)
20
{
21
if(is.null(delta))delta<-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma+1),rep(1,m))
22
n <- length(x)
23
lalpha <- lbeta <-matrix(NA,m,n)
24
allprobs
<- matrix(NA,n,m)
# <- NEW
25
26
for(i in 1:m){allprobs[,i] <- dt.scaled(x, nu[i], mean
= mu[i], sd = sigma[i])}
# <- NEW
,→
27
28
# Initialize the first probability
29
foo
<- delta*allprobs[1,]
30
sumfoo
<- sum(foo)
31
lscale
<- log(sumfoo)
32
foo
<- foo/sumfoo
33
lalpha[,1] <- log(foo)+lscale
34
35
# Loop trough to determine the next n-1 states forward
probabilities
,→
36
for (i in 2:n)
37
{
38
foo
<- foo%*%gamma*allprobs[i,]
39
sumfoo
<- sum(foo)
40
lscale
<- lscale+log(sumfoo)
41
foo
<- foo/sumfoo
42
lalpha[,i] <- log(foo)+lscale
43
}
44
45
lbeta[,n]
<- rep(0,m)
46
foo
<- rep(1/m,m)
47
lscale
<- log(m)
48
#Loop for backwards conditional probabilities
49
for (i in (n-1):1)
50
{
51
foo
<- gamma%*%(allprobs[i+1,]*foo)
52
lbeta[,i]
<- log(foo)+lscale
==PAGE:93==
R Code
87
53
sumfoo <- sum(foo)
54
foo <- foo/sumfoo
55
lscale <- lscale+log(sumfoo)
56
}
57
list(la=lalpha,lb=lbeta)
58
}
59
60
61
62
## EM estimation of a t-HMM
63
t.HMM.EM <-
function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta,maxiter=10000,tol=1e-6
,...)
,→
,→
64
{
65
n <- length(x)
66
mu.next <- mu
67
sigma.next <- sigma
68
gamma.next <- gamma
69
delta.next <- delta
70
nu.next <- nu
71
u = numeric(n)
72
llk.prev = 0
73
74
for(iter in 1:maxiter)
75
{
76
lallprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
77
for(i in 1:m){lallprobs[,i] <-
log(dt.scaled(x,nu.next[i],mu.next[i],sigma.next[i]))}
,→
78
#for(i in 1:m){lallprobs[,i] <-
log(dnorm(x,mu[i],sigma[i]))}
,→
79
fb <-
t.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu.next,sigma.next,nu.next,gamma.next,d
,→
80
la <- fb$la
81
lb <- fb$lb
82
c <- max(la[,n])
83
llk <- c + log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
84
85
for(j in 1:m)
86
{
87
for(k in 1:m)
==PAGE:94==
R Code
88
88
{
89
gamma.next[j,k] <-
gamma[j,k]*sum(exp(la[j,1:(n-1)]+lallprobs[2
,→
90
}
91
u = (nu.next[j] + 1)/(nu.next[j] + (x
- mu.next[j])*(x -
mu.next[j])/sigma.next[j]^2)
,→
,→
92
w = (exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] -
llk)*u)%*%x
,→
93
z = exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk) %*% u
94
mu.next[j] = w/z
95
w = (exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk)*u*(x
- mu.next[j]))%*%(x - mu.next[j])
,→
96
sigma.next[j] = sqrt(w/z)
97
w = exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] -
llk)%*%(log(u) - u)
,→
98
z = sum(exp(la[j, ] + lb[j, ] - llk))
99
estimator = function(nu,
frac){-digamma(exp(nu)/2)+log(exp(nu)/2)
+ 1 + frac +
,→
,→
100
digamma((exp(nu) + 1)/2) -
log((exp(nu) + 1)/2)
}
,→
101
nu.next[j] = exp(uniroot(estimator,
frac = w/z, lower =
,→
102
log(0.01), upper = log(500))$root)
103
}
104
gamma.next = gamma.next/apply(gamma.next, 1,
sum)
,→
105
delta.next = exp(la[, 1] + lb[, 1] - llk)
106
delta.next = delta.next/sum(delta.next)
107
#crit = llk - llk.prev
108
crit <- sum(abs(mu-mu.next)) +
109
sum(abs(sigma-sigma.next)) +
110
sum(abs(gamma-gamma.next)) +
111
sum(abs(delta-delta.next)) +
112
sum(abs(nu - nu.next))
113
if(crit < tol)
114
{
115
np = (m + 2)*m
116
AIC = -2*(llk - np)
==PAGE:95==
R Code
89
117
BIC = -2*llk + np*log(n)
118
return(list(mu = mu.next, sigma =
sigma.next, gamma = gamma.next,
,→
119
delta = delta.next, nu =
nu.next, iterations =
iter,
,→
,→
120
mllk = -llk, AIC = AIC, BIC =
BIC,crit = crit))
,→
121
}
122
mu = mu.next
123
sigma = sigma.next
124
gamma = gamma.next
125
delta = delta.next
126
nu = nu.next
127
llk.prev = llk
128
#if(print == T)
129
#
print(paste('Iteration', iter,
'LogLik', round(llk, 4)))
,→
130
}
131
print(paste('No convergence after', maxiter,
'iterations'))
,→
132
}
7.2.2
Decoding
1
pois.HMM.viterbi <-function(x,m,lambda ,gamma ,delta=NULL
,...)
,→
2
{
3
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
4
5
n <- length(x)
6
poisprobs <- outer(x,lambda ,dpois)
7
xi <- matrix(0,n,m)
8
foo <- delta*poisprobs [1,]
9
xi[1,] <- foo/sum(foo)
10
for (i in 2:n)
11
{
12
foo <- apply(xi[i-1,]*gamma ,2,max)*poisprobs[i,]
==PAGE:96==
R Code
90
13
xi[i,] <- foo/sum(foo)
14
}
15
iv <-numeric(n)
16
iv[n] <-which.max(xi[n,])
17
for (i in (n-1) :1)
18
iv[i] <- which.max(gamma[,iv[i+1]]* xi[i,])
19
iv
20
}
21
22
N.HMM.viterbi <-function(x,m,mu,sigma ,gamma ,delta=NULL ,...)
23
{
24
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
25
26
n <- length(x)
27
Nprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
28
for(i in 1:m){Nprobs[,i] <- dnorm(x,mean=mu[i],sd=sigma[i])}
29
xi <- matrix(0,n,m)
30
foo <- delta*Nprobs [1,]
31
xi[1,] <- foo/sum(foo)
32
for (i in 2:n)
33
{
34
foo <- apply(xi[i-1,]*gamma ,2,max)*Nprobs[i,]
35
xi[i,] <- foo/sum(foo)
36
}
37
iv <-numeric(n)
38
iv[n] <-which.max(xi[n,])
39
for (i in (n-1) :1)
40
iv[i] <- which.max(gamma[,iv[i+1]]* xi[i,])
41
iv
42
}
43
44
t.HMM.viterbi <-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma ,delta=NULL
,...)
,→
45
{
46
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m) - gamma +1),
rep(1,m))
,→
47
48
n <- length(x)
49
tprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
==PAGE:97==
R Code
91
50
for(i in 1:m){tprobs[,i] <- dt.scaled(x, nu[i], mean =
mu[i], sd = sigma[i])}
,→
51
xi <- matrix(0,n,m)
52
foo <- delta * tprobs [1,]
53
xi[1,] <- foo/sum(foo)
54
for (i in 2:n)
55
{
56
foo <- apply(xi[i-1,] * gamma,2,max)*tprobs[i,]
57
xi[i,] <- foo/sum(foo)
58
}
59
iv <-numeric(n)
60
iv[n] <- which.max(xi[n,])
61
for (i in (n-1) :1)
62
iv[i] <- which.max(gamma[,iv[i+1]]* xi[i,])
63
iv
64
}
65
66
Nt.HMM.viterbi <-function(x,m,mu,sigma ,nu,gamma ,delta=NULL
,...)
,→
67
{
68
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
69
sum <- 0
70
n <- length(x)
71
Ntprobs <- matrix(NA,n,m)
72
for(i in 1:m){
73
if(i < m)
74
Ntprobs[,i] <- dnorm(x,mean=mu[i],sd=sigma[i])
75
else
76
Ntprobs[,i] <- dt.scaled(x, nu, mean = mu[i], sd =
sigma[i])
,→
77
}
78
xi <- matrix(0,n,m)
79
foo <- delta*Ntprobs [1,]
80
xi[1,] <- foo/sum(foo)
81
for (i in 2:n)
82
{
83
foo <- apply(xi[i-1,]*gamma ,2,max)*Ntprobs[i,]
84
xi[i,] <- foo/sum(foo)
85
}
==PAGE:98==
R Code
92
86
iv <- numeric(n)
87
iv[n] <- which.max(xi[n,])
88
for (i in (n-1) :1)
89
iv[i] <- which.max(gamma[,iv[i+1]]* xi[i,])
90
iv
91
}
1
#Local decoding
2
3
N.HMM.state_probs <- function(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta=NULL
,...){
,→
4
if(is.null(delta)) delta
<- solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
5
n <- length(x)
6
fb <- N.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma ,gamma ,delta=delta)
7
la <- fb$la
8
lb <- fb$lb
9
c <- max(la[,n])
10
llk <- c + log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
11
stateprobs <- matrix(NA ,ncol=n,nrow=m)
12
for (i in 1:n) stateprobs[,i]<-exp(la[,i]+lb[,i]-llk)
13
stateprobs
14
}
15
16
N.HMM.local_decoding
<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta=NULL,...){
,→
17
stateprobs <-
N.HMM.state_probs(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta=delta)
,→
18
n
<- length(x)
19
ild <- rep(NA,n)
20
for (i in 1:n) ild[i] <- which.max(stateprobs[,i])
21
return(list(lds = ild , prob = stateprobs))
22
}
23
24
t.HMM.state_probs <- function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL
,...){
,→
25
if(is.null(delta)) delta
<- solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
26
n <- length(x)
==PAGE:99==
R Code
93
27
fb <- t.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma ,nu,gamma ,delta=delta)
28
la <- fb$la
29
lb <- fb$lb
30
c <- max(la[,n])
31
llk <- c + log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
32
stateprobs <- matrix(NA ,ncol=n,nrow=m)
33
for (i in 1:n) stateprobs[,i]<-exp(la[,i]+lb[,i]-llk)
34
stateprobs
35
}
36
37
t.HMM.local_decoding
<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL,...){
,→
38
stateprobs <-
t.HMM.state_probs(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=delta)
,→
39
n
<- length(x)
40
ild <- rep(NA,n)
41
for (i in 1:n) ild[i] <- which.max(stateprobs[,i])
42
return(list(lds = ild , prob = stateprobs))
43
}
44
45
46
Nt.HMM.state_probs <-
function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL ,...){
,→
47
if(is.null(delta)) delta
<- solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
48
n <- length(x)
49
fb <- Nt.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma ,nu,gamma ,delta=delta)
50
la <- fb$la
51
lb <- fb$lb
52
c <- max(la[,n])
53
llk <- c + log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
54
stateprobs <- matrix(NA ,ncol=n,nrow=m)
55
for (i in 1:n) stateprobs[,i]<-exp(la[,i]+lb[,i]-llk)
56
stateprobs
57
}
58
59
Nt.HMM.local_decoding
<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL,...){
,→
60
stateprobs <-
Nt.HMM.state_probs(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=delta)
,→
==PAGE:100==
R Code
94
61
n
<- length(x)
62
ild <- rep(NA,n)
63
for (i in 1:n) ild[i] <- which.max(stateprobs[,i])
64
return(list(lds = ild , prob = stateprobs))
65
}
7.2.3
State Prediction
1
N.HMM.state_prediction
<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma,delta=NULL ,H=1 ,...){
,→
2
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
3
n <- length(x)
4
fb <- N.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma,gamma ,delta=delta)
5
la <- fb$la
6
c <- max(la[,n])
7
llk <- c+log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
8
statepreds <- matrix(NA ,ncol=H,nrow=m)
9
foo1 <- exp(la[,n]-llk)
10
foo2 <- diag(m)
11
for (i in 1:H){
12
foo2 <- foo2 %*% gamma
13
statepreds[,i] <- foo1 %*% foo2
14
}
15
statepreds
16
}
17
18
19
Nt.HMM.state_prediction
<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL ,H=1 ,...){
,→
20
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
21
n <- length(x)
22
fb <- Nt.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma ,delta=delta)
23
la <- fb$la
24
c <- max(la[,n])
25
llk <- c+log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
26
statepreds <- matrix(NA ,ncol=H,nrow=m)
27
foo1 <- exp(la[,n]-llk)
==PAGE:101==
R Code
95
28
foo2 <- diag(m)
29
for (i in 1:H){
30
foo2 <- foo2 %*% gamma
31
statepreds[,i] <- foo1 %*% foo2
32
}
33
statepreds
34
}
35
36
t.HMM.state_prediction
<-function(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=NULL ,H=1 ,...){
,→
37
if(is.null(delta))delta <-solve(t(diag(m)-gamma
+1),rep(1,m))
,→
38
n <- length(x)
39
fb <- t.HMM.lalphabeta(x,m,mu,sigma,nu,gamma,delta=delta)
40
la <- fb$la
41
c <- max(la[,n])
42
llk <- c+log(sum(exp(la[,n]-c)))
43
statepreds <- matrix(NA ,ncol=H,nrow=m)
44
foo1 <- exp(la[,n]-llk)
45
foo2 <- diag(m)
46
for (i in 1:H){
47
foo2 <- foo2 %*% gamma
48
statepreds[,i] <- foo1 %*% foo2
49
}
50
statepreds
51
}
