==PAGE:1==
Master’s Programme in Aquatic Science and Technology
“The warming and freshening of the
Nordic Seas and the impact on ocean
circulation”
by
[Giovanna Albani s161181@student.dtu.dk]
Master’s Thesis (30 credits ECTS)
July 2019
Supervisor: Andre Visser
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This project investigates the potential eﬀect of Atlantic warming and Arctic freshen-
ing currents ﬂowing into the Nordic Seas region.The aim of this project is to evaluate
the stratiﬁcation intensity through the water column and to consider if possible vari-
ations during the last decades may inﬂuence deep-water formation. The crucial role
of this region and the strong inﬂuence on global scale, makes this location of great
interest in study of climatology and physical oceanography processes.Therefore, re-
lying on survey data of the water column from ICES and Argo ﬂoat, approximately
from the last 20 years, this study investigate the possible changes on the intensity of
stratiﬁcation and convection processes. The analysis on stratiﬁcation are compared
in potential energy anomaly and time variation along the last decades. Including
the possible eﬀect of these variations on mechanisms as deep water formation in the
Nordic Seas and carbon dioxide sequestration.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Outline of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theory
5
2.1
Theoretical background - History of AMOC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Conveyor Belt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Nordic Seas Basins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Deep water formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.4
Water Types and T-S Diagram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Theoretical Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Stratiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.2
Stommel Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Climate Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
Anomaly events . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.4.1
The Cold Blob
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Data
26
3.1
Source Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Methods
30
4.1
The Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
Potential energy anomaly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
What drives stratiﬁcation anomalies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.3
Basins selection criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.4
Data Analysis Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Empirical Analysis
35
5.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.1
Temperature Cycle in the Nordic Seas
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.2
Density Cycle in the Nordic Seas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.3
Maximal Potential Energy Anomaly (Φmax) in the Nordic Seas
40
5.1.4
Climatology Analysis for the Basins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.5
Annual potential energy anomaly Φ cycle of the Basins . . . .
48
5.1.6
Annual potential energy anomaly Φ cycle Temperature and
Salinity dependent in the Basins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2.1
The solubility Pump in the Nordic Seas . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Conclusion
56
2
==PAGE:4==
References
56
A (Appendix A title)
60
B (Appendix B title)
62
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Outline of the Thesis
The intention of this study is to analyse some main features of the ocean in the
Nordic Seas. With speciﬁc interest on identify possible triggers that can drive to
substantial climate change in the next future.
It includes a description on the
history of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and the gained
knowledge on oceanography discoveries in the last centuries. Through the theoretical
approach are explained the mathematical equation used in this study, followed by
the history of climate changes of our planet during the last 120.000 years and the
most recent anomaly event. After this section, the attention it is focused on methods
of the analysis, the analysis of the results and discussion.
4
==PAGE:6==
2
Theory
2.1
Theoretical background - History of AMOC
In the past centuries of oceanic expeditions the collection of data were used to de-
scribe the ocean circulation and its interaction with the atmosphere. During last
decades the attention was focus on reporting the variability of oceanic processes,
with the aim of developing a better description in global scale, therefore to gather
enough knowledge to predict annual and inter-annual variability (Stewart, 2008).
AMOC, Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, regards the overturning from
North to South, it is similar to the THC (Thermo-Haline Circulation) but the dif-
fusion results from turbulence of wind and tides and other physical sources. The
great importance of this circulation for the European climate has grown during its
observations and increasing discoveries. The intentions for a deeper understanding
has led to organize programs to monitor the circulation in large-scale.
Physical Oceanography is a ﬁeld of research where are involved many biological,
physical, chemical and geological variables co-acting in the environment. This sci-
ence is involving many subjects to gather more knowledge about oceans’ processes.
The oceans covers the largest surface of our planet but still are mostly undiscovered,
and mechanisms need to be explained. Over the history the ﬁrst observations re-
garding ocean characteristics and deep-water circulation were made in 1751, thanks
to Captain Henry Ellis. During his sailing along the Atlantic, Ellis was reporting
detailed description of his experiment trough the water column and his discovery
of regular decrease in temperature along depth. Through these observations was
found that temperature varies until a certain depth, after which it remains constant
(Richardson, 2008).
In the second half of the 18th century, were suggested the ﬁrst theories about
ocean circulation, Von Waitz (1755) based his proposal on surface observation of
salinity. Later in 1798, Benjamin Thompson described for the ﬁrst time the merid-
ional over-turning and the thermohaline circulation, based on Ellis’ observations
(Richardson, 2008). Between 1872-1876 the discoveries of the British Challenger Ex-
pedition suggested a new conceptual model based on a northward spreading of low
salinity intermediate water from high southern latitudes into the North Atlantic. Be-
low this water mass, higher salinity deep water was spreading from northern latitudes
southward across the equator (Warren, 1981). Additional expeditions conducted by
Wilhelm Brennecke across the Atlantic (1909-1921) conﬁrmed with schematic sketch
5
==PAGE:7==
the two symmetrical circulation cells, previously described by a conceptual model.
For the ﬁrst time, Brennecke showed an illustration of inter-hemispheric overturning
circulation in the Atlantic as the more realistic based on later studies (Richardson,
2008). In 1922, Merz and his student W¨ust assembled the best quality of hydro-
graphic data to draw a section through the Atlantic Ocean. Planning the Meteor
expedition survey, Merz (1925) constructed a circulation schematic delineated on
salinity contours, which for the ﬁrst time clearly explain the Atlantic Ocean inter-
hemispheric overturning circulation. The sketches by Brennecke (1921) and Merz
(1925) are based on the concept that subsurface water is formed at the surface and
moves along the ocean as layers of water masses which preserve peculiar physical
characteristics as temperature, salinity and density (Richardson, 2008). The German
Atlantic expedition of the Research Vessel Meteor was further carried out by W¨ust
(1949-1957) regarding the oceanography studies. Relevant reports and detailed de-
scriptions of the stations along Meteor expedition, revealed important aspects of
the today known as Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) – North
Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) ﬂowing southward, Antarctic Intermediate Water
(AAIW) and Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) ﬂowing northward (Spiess, 1985).
For the ﬁrst time were documented maps of water properties, their geostrophic veloc-
ity traced, and those tongues of water masses concentrated on the western boundary
(W¨ust, 1957 and Spiess, 1925). [edited in English by Emery ((W¨ust; Spiess, 1978;
1985)]
An important ﬁgure in the history of oceanography is the researcher Henry Stom-
mel, for the ﬁrst time he developed new concepts about deep water circulation of the
Atlantic (Stommel, 1957). Through his three-dimension schematic model, Stommel
clearly showed the continuous meridional overturning circulation in the Atlantic.
Considering the fact that both sinking, in the north, and upwelling water, in the
south, occur in limited areas connected by western boundary currents, Stommel
could suggest a schematic two-layer model. Making the superposition of deep layer
buoyancy-driven, thermohaline circulation and upper layer wind-driven and ther-
mocline circulation (Stommel; Richardson, 1957; 2008).
Figure 2.1: Total transports of the Atlantic Ocean in the surface layer (a), and bottom
layer (b). Including a superposition of the internal mode and wind-driven components.
The small circles indicate locations of sinking and upwelling water.
(Stommel, 1957)
6
==PAGE:8==
One important revelation by Stommel was that when deep cold water upwells
into warmer thermocline water in the south pole, in order to balance the downward
diﬀusion of heat then the NADW deep water must move northward towards its
source, to conserve the potential vorticity (Stommel, 1957).
Even if this model
revealed simpliﬁed respect to reality, it was the ﬁrst scketch of the Atlantic ocean
overturning based on thermocline and thermohaline circulations. Stommel did not
draw a schematic global model for the returning ﬂow, but after his proposal was
obvious to consider that the water upwelled into the Indian and Paciﬁc Ocean must
travel back to the Atlantic.
Figure 2.2: Schematic deep circulation of global ocean according to Stommel. The circu-
lation indicate poleward ﬂows in deep water and narrow swift western boundary currents
connecting the Antarctic and North Atlantic regions to the interior ﬂows. (Richardson,
2008)
2.1.1
Conveyor Belt
During the latest 80’s two researchers focused their studies on mapping a valuable
picture of the oceanic conveyor belt around the globe. Broeker in 1987 realized the
ﬁrst image of the conveyor belt, which got spread thanks to the visual and coloured
simple diagram. It describes cold and salty deep current in blue, ﬂowing southward
and then eastward diving into the Indian and Paciﬁc Oceans (Broecker et al., 1991).
7
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2.3: The Great Ocean Conveyor Belt by Broecker, 1987. (Broecker et al., 1991)
Consecutive studies identiﬁed upwelling areas, in which cold water transform
into warm shallow currents, in red. As previously suggested by Stommel, the path
followed by upper layer water moves to the northern North Atlantic, to maintain
the continuity with formation and export of NADW (Gordon, 1986). Even though
those diagrams give a clear idea of an interconnected ocean, they have limitations
and omit many relevant aspects of the circulation, such as the recycling of NADW
around the Antarctica to become Antarctic Bottom Water. Other limitations of
the simpliﬁed conveyor belt scheme are that it shows the upwelling and sinking
events in restricted areas; it oversimpliﬁes western boundary currents, ocean seasonal
ﬂuctuations and ocean eddies, omitting ocean gyres and the ﬂow through the Drake
Passage (Richardson, 2008).
In the following years Broecker published a paper to explain the scientiﬁc back-
ground of his schematic conveyor belt’s diagram from 1987, and exposed his new
idea. In which explained that changes in the Atlantic ocean conveyor belt were
responsible for the abrupt and large climatic changes, using as reference the one
experienced during the last ice age in the northern Atlantic basins (Broecker et al.,
1991).
Getting the right and detailed scheme of the overturning circulation needs accu-
rate knowledge about transformation of water layers and the ﬂow interconnection
between oceans. Many physical oceanographers refused to accept the schematic di-
agram of the conveyor belt by Broecker, because considered oversimpliﬁed. Even
today there are many controversies for drawing a clear path of ocean overturning,
due to the multiple variables acting on currents circulation. Nevertheless, thanks to
Gordon, Broecker and other scientists which started and tried with their intuition to
visualize aspects of the global overturning circulation. Today new research programs
are led to get a deeper understanding of ocean currents and to make reﬁnements
of conveyor belt’s schematic diagram. Taking in consideration the complexities of
ocean overturning circulation and the strict connection between ocean and atmo-
sphere.
Another signiﬁcant diagram of global circulation was developed by Gordon (1991),
8
==PAGE:10==
drawing a three-dimensional view from the perspective of the Southern Ocean. The
schematic ﬂow has the Southern Ocean placed at the center because it represent
the only location where the ocean is unobstructed by continental shelf, hence cur-
rents can ﬂow freely (Gordon, 1991). Vertical sections of the globe show clearly the
complicate system of water motions, including the upper, intermediate and lower
overturning cells and connections (Richardson, 2008).
Figure 2.4: The Great Ocean Conveyor Belt by Broecker, 1987. (Broecker et al., 1991)
Further study brought new schematic illustration about the thermohaline cir-
culation, Schmitz (1995) tried to include two, three and four layers in the vertical
mixing to describe more information regarding vertical movements, pathways, and
transport, but were more complicated to understand.
The three layer diagram
made by Schmitz in 1996, describes the overturning circulation of bottom, deep and
upper layer involving more complex circulation paths and water transformations.
Moreover, he improved the description of circulation currents adding details on the
transport ﬂux (Sverdrup [Sv =106m3/s]) (Schmitz Jr, 1996).
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.5: The Great Ocean Conveyor Belt by Broecker, 1987. (Broecker et al., 1991)
Thanks to these illustrations was possible to empathize the importance of the
Drake Passage, and the concept where water that eventually ﬂows northward ﬁrst
continues eastward. It ﬂows through the South Atlantic, loops in the Indian and
Paciﬁc Oceans, and then moves back westward around the tip of Africa, after having
changed its properties by atmosphere-ocean interactions and convection (Richard-
son, 2008).
2.1.2
Nordic Seas Basins
The Nordic Seas act as buﬀer zone, being in between the cold, fresh water from
the Arctic Ocean and the warm, salty water from the North Atlantic Ocean. This
area includes the Greenland, Iceland and Norwegian Seas and represents the main
connection between the North Atlantic and Arctic Oceans.
Oceanographic investigation of the North Atlantic started in the second half of
the 19th century, and the countries involved were mainly interested on developing
knowledge on marine ﬁsh stocks and biology (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005). Ex-
peditions from diﬀerent nations were investigating their region and started to cover
marginal zone of the Nordic Seas. Thanks to those, for the ﬁrst time water masses
of the Arctic and Atlantic were identiﬁed due to a diﬀerence in temperature at the
same depth. Moreover, it began the study on the topography of the region to im-
prove knowledge on how much it may inﬂuence water masses properties (Thomson,
1873). Further expeditions and investigations led from the Nordic countries brought
discoveries about sea currents present in the region, hence the possibility to draw
detailed bathymetric maps of the Nordic Seas. The main intrusion of Arctic Ocean
Deep Water in the Nordic Seas, it is found in the Fram Strait with a sill depth of
around 2600 m. But also, the shelf areas of the Barents Sea represent an important
connection between the Arctic Ocean and the Nordic Seas. In the southern part
the Greenland-Scotland Ridge, with the sills on the sides of the Faroe Bank Chanel
(around 850 m depth) and the Denmark Strait (around 620 m deep), forms the phys-
ical border to the North Atlantic (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005). As shown on the
map (ﬁgure xx) there are three main ridges that mark the Nordic Seas area: the
10
==PAGE:12==
Kolbeinsey Ridge that extends northwards from the North Icelandic shelf to the Jan
Mayen Fracture Zone, the Mohn Ridge characterized by many isolated elevations
and the Knipovich Ridge which it continues to the Fram Strait.
Figure 2.6: Bathymetric map of the Nordic Seas, showing transect of observations used in
other studies. (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005)
The bathymetry of the region divide the Nordic Seas in four basins, to the west
of the ridge are recognised two deep basins in the Greenland Sea. Separated by the
Greenlandic Fracture Zone, in the northern area is located a smaller and shallower
Boreas Basin (around 3200 [m] depth), in the southern part a bigger and larger
Greenland Basin (depth from 3400 to 3600 [m]). To the east zone of the ridge, the
Norwegian Sea has two basins. The Norwegian Basin, the largest and deepest of the
region, extending northward from the Iceland-Faroe Ridge and eastward from the
Iceland Plataeu to the continental slope of the Norwegian coast (main depth around
3200 and 3600 [m], but deepest area exceed 3800 [m]). The Lofoten Basin, located
to the north of the Norwegian Basin and the Vøring Plateau and the southeast of
the Mohn Ridge (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005).
The inﬂow of the North Atlantic Ocean occurs in three locations. The Faroe
current, which pass through the Iceland-Faroe Ridge, the Atlantic inﬂow, which en-
ters across the Faroe-Shetland Channel, and the North Icelandic Irminger Current.
On the western side, the Irminger Current carries Atlantic Water that encounters
11
==PAGE:13==
the Arctic waters and makes a bifurcation to the west of Iceland. When the Faroe
current ﬂows in it forms the Iceland-Faroe Front against the Arctic waters of East
Icelandic Current, and moves eastward. Some of this water merges with the major
Atlantic inﬂow, passing through the Faroe-Shetland Channel. However, the ma-
jority of the ﬂow continues into the Norwegian Basin until when it approaches the
Vøring Plateau and moves northwest, toward Jan Mayen Fracture Zone. A fraction
of this water recirculate in the eastern Norwegian Basin and another ﬂows into the
Icelandic Sea, but the largest portion continues northeast. It follows this path until
when reaches the Fram Straits where most of the ﬂow recirculates south, moving
parallel with the Arctic waters of the Greenland Sea and forming the Arctic Front.
The main inﬂow of warm and salty water into the Nordic Seas is the Atlantic in-
ﬂow through the Faroe-Shetland Channel, which ﬂows over the Scottish slope and
continues northwards along the Norwegian Continental Shelf (Mork and Blindheim,
2000). Reached the Northern region, a substantial part of this waters enters in the
Barents Sea, meanwhile the remaining portion continues Northwest into the West
Spitsbergen Current, and probably a small part goes into the Arctic Ocean.
Figure 2.7: Nordic Seas upper-layer circulation, dashed lines sign Arctic and Polar Water
paths and solid lines show Atlantic Water path. (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005)
The area of the Barents Sea it is of relevant interest because of the discovery
of dense bottom water developed (close to the freezing point and very salty) by
12
==PAGE:14==
rejection of brine during ice formation (Midttun, 1985). The bottom water from
the Barents Sea mixes with less dense water along its path toward the Norwegian
Sea, and in most cases it turns into intermediate deep water. Instead, dense bottom
water originated at Svalbard its closer to the Norwegian Sea and it mixes with
bottom waters of the Arctic Ocean.
The region of the Nordic Seas represent a
crucial region because is subjected to inﬂow of warm waters from the North Atlantic
Ocean and fresh waters from the Arctic Ocean. Receiving those inﬂows, the region
needs to be balanced by outﬂows, which mainly occurs through deep sills of the
Greenland-Scotland Ridge (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005).
Investigations on oceanographic circulation are needed to expand knowledge
about the physical mechanisms happening in certain regions, and the relation be-
tween ocean and atmosphere. As result of the studies in the Nordic Seas was possible
to deﬁne the circulation pattern within this region and the connection of the Arctic
Ocean and the North Atlantic Ocean, using physical parameters as Temperature,
Salinity, Dissolved Oxygen and Silicate. Another interesting comparison within the
Nordic Seas area shows that the Greenland Sea is the source of high oxygen con-
centration (colder and fresher water), extended to deepest levels thanks to winter
ventilation. Instead, the eastern Norwegian Sea is more stratiﬁed and the oxygen
concentration is lower in the upper layers than the intermediate waters (inﬂuence
from warm and salty Atlantic Water). For the same reason the amount of silicate
is lower in the Greenland Basin than the other areas, especially in deep waters.
Furthermore, observations from the latest decades on the Greenland Sea reveal a
decrease of dissolved oxygen and an increase of silicate. The reason for this can be
found on the rising inﬂow fraction of Arctic Ocean Deep Water, which has low oxy-
gen concentration and high silicate content (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005). The
consideration of those parameters is useful to deﬁne a clear distribution of the water
masses and develop a better understanding of the hydrographic characteristics and
changes.
2.1.3
Deep water formation
A simpliﬁed model of the global thermohaline circulation shows the main features
of surface and deep waters overturn, and the main regions of deep water forma-
tion. These regions are involved in convection processes, where sinking of cold and
relatively salty water masses is source of deep water.
The overﬂow of deep wa-
ters, together with upwelling and surface currents lead to the global overturning
of the oceans. Dense and cold water is replaced by the returning warm ﬂow led
by the diﬀerence in density, which maintains the balance and gives strength to the
global thermohaline circulation. This process takes place in four localized regions:
Greenland-Norwegian Sea and Labrador Sea, in the North Hemisphere, Ross Sea and
Weddell Sea, in the South Hemisphere, recent studies consider the Mediterranean
Sea another region of deep water formation(Rahmstorf, 2006). Some key factors
of the thermohaline circulation are: –Spreading of deep water currents (North At-
lantic Deep Water, NADW, and Antarctic Bottom Water, AABW) along the western
boundary suﬃcient to preserve mass conservation. Probably the meridional bound-
aries (North-South) and the associated western boundaries currents derives from a
diﬀerence of circulation between the ocean and the atmosphere (Stommel, 1957).
–Upwelling events occurring mainly in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC),
13
==PAGE:15==
in region subjected to Ekman divergence. –Surface water currents, which ﬂow back
toward the North, are needed to compensate the outﬂow of NADW.
A detailed description of the Northern Atlantic and Arctic circulation see in-
volved the Benguela Current oﬀSouth Africa via the Gulf of Stream and the North
Atlantic Current ﬂows into the Nordic Seas to balance the overﬂow of North At-
lantic Deep Water (originated for deep water formation) and Polar Water.The main
source for Polar Water is the East Greenland Current (EGC), which ﬂows southward
from the Fram Strait to the Greenland-Scotland Ridge (Blindheim and Osterhus,
2005).The overﬂow of cold and dense water descend towards the sills of Denmark
Strait and the Faroe-Shetland channel into the North Atlantic Ocean, this can be
considered the principal input for ventilation of deep ocean. Moreover, two impor-
tant area of the Nordic Seas are the Barents Sea fundamental in the process of deep
water formation and the connection with the Arctic Ocean, and the Labrador Sea
considered a crucial zone for the global climate system. In fact, due to its upper
and intermediate layers variations it can characterize, through its convective wa-
ter mode, the rate of the Atlantic gyre circulation (Curry and McCartney, 2001).
Across the bottom layers pass all deep waters that drive the AMOC, and on its mar-
gins ﬂow the two major freshwater sources from the Arctic Ocean and the Canadian
Arctic Archipelago. For these reasons the Labrador Sea, is considered a key point
implicated in model studying the possible slowdown or shutdown of the meridional
overturning circulation (Dickson et al., 2002).
Figure 2.8: The global Thermohaline circulation, circles indicate deep water formation
zones; upwelling and downwelling processes; showing Surface, Deep and Bottom ﬂows;
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) (Kuhlbrodt et al., 2007)
2.1.4
Water Types and T-S Diagram
A very simple and clear schematic ﬁgure of the Thermohaline Circulation of the
Atlantic shows the diﬀerent types of water masses involved in the circulation and
14
==PAGE:16==
their direction (2.8). The currents are driven by diﬀerence in density and tend to
stratify, where less dense and warmer waters ﬂoat, instead denser and cold waters
sink, this principle describes deep water convection. The thermohaline circulation
is strictly related with atmospheric processes, indeed the main factors that decrease
seawater density are heating and freshwater dilution (ice melting, runoﬀ, precipi-
tation). Vice-versa what increase seawater density are cooling, ice formation and
evaporation. Those processes aﬀect directly the upper layer characteristics and drive
changes on the vertical mixing. Leading to diﬀerence between velocity at the surface
(kilometers per hour) and depth (order of ≈10-20 Kilometer per year, depending
on the current) (Stewart, 2008). Water masses are formed as the results of those
climatic interactions across seawater and atmosphere. Once the water sinks, it con-
serve its density property, keeping a distinctive proﬁle of temperature and salinity
of a speciﬁc region. Therefore, it is possible to distinguish diﬀerent water types by
collecting Temperature and Salinity values through depth, and using Temperature-
Salinity (T-S) diagrams to deﬁne the unique shape of water masses. In T-S diagram
temperature and salinity are respectively on the y and x axis with lines of den-
sity isopycnals, expressed as sigma-t (because the range of variation is smaller in
the ocean). T-S diagram are a simple and clear tool to identify water masses, and
useful to visualize the typical shape of the major Atlantic water:
–Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) formed by sea ice freezing brine rejection)
and melting along the continental margins of Antarctica, it is the coldest and dens-
est; –North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) formed by winter mixing in the Labrador
Sea, and the Nordic Seas (mixture of North Atlantic water and the Arctic bottom
water), it represent the largest volume of deep water; –Antarctic Intermediate Wa-
ter (AAIW) formed by subduction in the Southern Ocean along the Antarctic con-
vergence zone; –Mediterranean Intermediate Water (MIW) formed by heating and
evaporation in the Mediterranean Sea, warm and salty, ﬂows into the Atlantic Ocean
and being denser than normal surface it forms a layer 1.5 km deep. Eventually it
moves northward where it becomes part of the NADW.
Figure of major water masses atlantic ocean section and T-S diagram
Dense deep water formation have large global inﬂuence in ocean circulation,
this water masses are characterized by high salinity, high oxygen and low nutrient
concentration. The NADW ﬂows southward around the depth of 2000 m, and it
is brought to the surface by Antarctic divergence mechanisms (surface waters move
horizontally away from each other) in which surface water are replaced by deep water
upwelling (Stewart, 2008). Also the Southern Ocean makes a signiﬁcant contribution
to global thermohaline circulation via the AABW fresh and frigid water that pours
from under the sea ice.
2.2
Theoretical Approach
2.2.1
Stratiﬁcation
The oceans are layered usually with warm and fresh water lying over cold and salty
waters, the degree of stratiﬁcation changes seasonally and long the latitude. The role
of friction in ﬂuid is an important key point to describe the stability of the ocean
ﬂows and changes in density or velocity.
Usually friction is not relevant within
the atmosphere and the ocean, but at boundaries the it becomes important. The
15
==PAGE:17==
molecular viscosity is the tendency of a ﬂuid to resist shear and it is important within
few millimeters of a boundary. Hence, the tendency of a boundary is transferred
with turbulence to the interior of the ﬂow (Stewart, 2008). The turbulence is given
by changes of non-dimensional Reynolds Number (Re), which is the ratio of non-
linear terms to viscous terms. As Reynolds number increase above 10 – 1000, those
terms are important in the ocean and means that the ﬂow becomes more turbulent
(Reynolds, 1883).
This short introduction about the turbulence resulted fundamental to introduce
the mixing processes in the oceans. The ocean has stable stratiﬁcation and the
vertical mixing requires more energy respect to horizontal mixing, because must
work against the buoyancy force. For this reason, horizontal mixing, which moves
along surface of constant density, is larger than vertical mixing named “diapycnal
mixing” (Stewart, 2008). However, the role of diapycnal mixing is relevant because
drives variations of water column and regulates the rate of water transport. The
ocean has a thermocline almost everywhere, which is constant at deeper level even
over decades. The characteristic steady-state of the thermocline requires a vertical
mixing between the layers to maintain the balance (Munk and Cartwright, 1966).
When the ﬂuid ﬂow has a large Reynolds number is unstable and turbulent, this
means that denser water lies on lighter water. Stratiﬁed waters are in condition
of static stability when less dense water lies above more dense water. The motion
in ﬂuids is led by the diﬀerence in density, therefore, when a particle is displaced
upwards and is heavier than the surrounding water, the buoyancy forces tend to pull
the particle down. Vice versa, when the particle displaced is lighter, the buoyancy
forces tend to pull it up, to its equilibrium position (Stewart, 2008).
The motion of particles and the concept of the energy necessary to move a particle
from its equilibrium, are fundamental points that can be used to understand the
motion of oceans and water masses circulation. Therefore, a ﬂuid element displaced
vertically and adiabatically in stratiﬁed ﬂuids, it will experience a buoyancy force
(F) proportional to the density diﬀerence between the surrounding water and the
ﬂuid element (Sverdrup et al., 1942), where the stability equation is:
E ≈−1
ρ
dρ
dz
(2.1)
where the approximation is valid for E > 50 ×10–8/m and is deﬁned as:
E > 0 STABLE
E = 0 NEUTRAL STABILITY
E < 0 UNSTABLE
The inﬂuence of stability is expressed as frequency (N) and is called Brunt-
Vaisala frequency or buoyancy frequency:
N 2 = −g E
(2.2)
The Brunt-Vaisala frequency is an important parameter to understand the dy-
namics of ﬂows with stratiﬁcation, it can be interpreted as the frequency of vertical
16
==PAGE:18==
motion that a ﬂuid parcel experiences when it is displaced from its equilibrium. In
stable condition, the more horizontal are the isopycnals, the higher is the Brunt-
Vaisaila frequency and more work is needed to break the stability.
Figure 2.9: Describes to the left potential density and on the right Brunt-V¨ais¨al¨a frequency
(cycles/h) for a proﬁle in the western North Paciﬁc. (Talley, 2011)
The general condition of stability in the ocean are dressed by some particular
conditions knowed as: Dynamic stability processes.
The tendency of the oceans is to create strong stratiﬁed states, instead turbu-
lent mixing processes are intermittent. One example of external unstable forcing is
the wind blowing force over the ocean. If the wind stress is strong enough it can
break the stability and create ocean waves. An additional criterion used to identify
instability in the ocean is the Richardson number:
Ri > 0.25 STABLE
Ri < 0.25 VELOCITY SHEAR ENHANCES TURBULENCE
When the Reynolds number is large and Richardson number is below 0.25 the cri-
teria for a turbulent system are met describe the conditions which are leading to a
vertical eddy viscosity and diﬀusivity (Moum and Caldwell, 1985).
Double diﬀusion
Other relevant points that need to be dressed, due to the interest on this study,
are the mixing processes between diﬀerent water bodies in the ocean. The process of
double diﬀusion involve four variations inﬂuenced by the two variables Temperature
and Salinity. –In some area of the ocean, there are condition in which less dense
water (warm and salty) overlies more dense water (cold and less salty) and the water
17
==PAGE:19==
column is still unstable. The instability occurs due to the molecular diﬀusion of heat
is (≈100 higher) much faster than the molecular diﬀusion of salt (Stewart, 2008).
This are the condition in which the process of salt ﬁngers happen. Heat diﬀuses
across the interface faster than salt and create a thin, cold, salty layer which sinks
and modiﬁes the density distribution of the water column. Being a thin layer, the
water sinks in ﬁngers towards the layer below and is called double diﬀusion because
involve two constituents diﬀuse across the interface (Stern, 1960). –The diﬀusive
convection is less common process and it is mostly found at high latitudes. Where a
colder thin less salty level lies over a warm salty level, the double diﬀusion leads to
a thin layer warm and less salty at the base of the upper layer. This thin water ﬂow
moves up and mixes with the colder upper water, a similar process happens in the
lower level. Those convective conditions on both layers bring to a sharpened interface
between water masses. For instance, in the Arctic sea were observed 2-10 m of thick
layers beneath the sea ice (Neal et al., 1969). –The other two variations describe
the most common features of water stratiﬁcation, one has cold and salty layer lies
over warmer less salty this are condition of instability and high mixing convection.
The second deﬁne the stability of stratiﬁed water in condition of equilibrium, where
warmer and less salty water lies over colder and salty water. These concepts are the
principles necessary to understand vertical mixing processes and to apply them on
large-scale mechanisms driving water types and their circulation.
2.2.2
Stommel Model
To learn about natural processes in the history of humankind it is fundamental to
make hypothesis and test it. Hence, be able to identify which are the speciﬁc prop-
erties leading that event and support those discoveries with scientiﬁc knowledge.
Hernry Stommel in 1961, proposed a model that wants to describe that the free
convection, between two interconnected reservoirs, happens due to diﬀerences in
density and he demonstrate that it occurs in two speciﬁc stable regimes. Therefore,
he wanted to ﬁnd some analogies to be able to explain the oceanic circulation. His
model is based on an idealized system which would help to simplify the full com-
plexity in nature. Starting from the assumption that sea-water density is dependent
by heating and cooling, two processes which lead to changes in temperature, and
by evaporation and precipitation, which changes the salinity (Stommel, 1961). The
idealized Stommel’s model describes two vessels connected by a large upper overﬂow
provided to maintain the same surface level, and at the bottom through a capillary
tube and by porous walls which permit transfer of heat and salt. In this condition
the ﬂow rate (q) would depend on the density diﬀerence between the two vessels
(ﬁg.xx)
18
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.10: The vessel experiment drawn by Stommel, where q is the rate ﬂow, with
temperature (T) and salinity (S) separated by porous walls whose temperature (T) and
salinity (S) are maintained constant. (Stommel, 1961)
Starting from the simple form of the equation of state and linear equation for
transfer of heat and salt, where T and S are regarded ﬁxed:
ρ = ρ0 (1 −αT + βS)
(2.3)
dT
dt = c (T −T ′)
(2.4)
dS
dt = d (S −S′)
(2.5)
Those equations can be made non-dimensional using:
τ=ct,
δ=d
c,
y=T ′
T ,
x=S′
S
ρ = ρ0[(1 + (αT)(−y + Rx)]
(2.6)
Where R= β S/αT, is a measure of the ratio of the eﬀect of salinity and temperature
on the density at the ﬁnal equilibrium state (x=1, y=1).
In the following equation, k represents the resistance in which the ﬂow q is directed
by a diﬀerence in density and moves from high toward low pressure, observing the
liner law:
kq = ρ1 −ρ2
(2.7)
The laws for the conservation of temperature and salinity are expressed as:
19
==PAGE:21==
dT
dt = c (T −T ′) −|2q|T
(2.8)
dS
dt = d (S −S′) −|2q|S
(2.9)
It is important to note that the ﬂux rate is an absolute value, this is because of
the exchange of properties is not inﬂuenced by the direction of the circulation.
Stommel showed through this model that when the equations are solved, is possible
to get three values which illustrate the equilibrium points.
Through the graph below, Stommel wanted to show those equilibrium points a, b
and c as results of his idealized model. In which a represent a stable node, c is a
stable spiral, and b is a saddle point, hence its state of equilibrium is very unstable.
Figure 2.11: The diagram made by Stommel of the three equilibrium points between Tem-
perature and Salinity. (Stommel, 1961)
To support his model Stommel stated that if in a simple convective system as the
one he designed, two diﬀerent equilibrium state can occur, there is a good probability
that similar situation could exist also in nature. Moreover, Stommel suggested the
possibility in which a system can break its equilibrium if it absorbs enough perturba-
tions. Therefore, a temporary unstable state will be followed by a new equilibrium,
through this statement Stommel has tipped before the evolution of what are known
as climate change.
20
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.12: The diagram describes the possible evolution of the NADW ﬂow under an
increasing freshwater forcing.
Highlight a bi-stable regime’ in which changes may lead
to the ’Stommel bifurcation’ or breaking point, where instability will search for a new
equilibrium (Rahmstorf, 2002)
2.3
Climate Change
Ocean circulation plays an active role in the global climate, being part of the
energy cycle transporting enormous amount of heat and the biogeochemical cy-
cles(Rahmstorf, 2002). Rahmstorf (2002) analysing the past 120.000 years of major
climate changes, tried to deﬁne a clearer role of ocean circulations during those
events. Palaeoclimatic study prove to be a fundamental source of investigation for
a better understanding on today climate change. The reconstruction of past ocean
circulation is based on sediment cores, which can give information on past temper-
atures and salinity from species abundance of fossil plankton, organic geochemistry,
trace-metal ratio, oxygen isotopes. Even if more diﬃcult, information about past
ventilation rates are obtained from indirect evidence of isotopes as 13C or radio-
chemical tracers (Elliot et al., 2002).
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.13: Schematic of the three modes of ocean circulation that prevailed during the
last glacial period. The ﬁrst on the top describes the interstadial mode, the second in the
middle represents the stadial mod and the last at the bottom the Heinrich mode. Across
a section of the Atlantic, where the shallow sill describes the area between Greenland and
Scottland. North Atlantic overturning is shown by the red line, Antarctic Bottom water
by the blue line. (Rahmstorf, 2002)
From these studies resulted that in the Atlantic prevailed three circulation modes,
named the interstadial mode (warm), stadial mode (cold) and Heinrich mode (oﬀ-
mode). Those modes describe the prevailing ocean circulations in the Atlantic during
the last glacial period (Fig. 2.13)(Alley and Clark, 1999). [explanation of the three
modes on the ﬁgure legend] Modelling past climate is an essential and powerful tech-
nique to explore quantitative hypothesis of historical climate dynamics. Numerical
models have some limitations regarding the level of complexity that can process
and the numbers of variables involved. Nowadays, climate models enhanced their
accuracy to realistic simulations about palaeoclimatic reconstructions on oceanic
and atmospheric conditions (Rahmstorf, 2002). An important challenge for recent
climate models is to take in consideration the concentration of greenhouse gases
emitted by the anthropogenic forcing.
Reliable palaeclimatic data from the past 120.000 yrs show the major climatic
changes, are the Dansgaard-Oeschger (D/O), because of their abrupt change in tem-
perature and their amplitude. These events are characterized by a rapid warming
by 5-10◦C within 30 yrs, followed by a slow cooling down lasting several centuries
and a rapid drop to stadial (cold) conditions (Rahmstorf, 2002). The second major
type of climatic changes are the Heinrich events, deﬁned as massive episodic iceberg
discharges up to 10 % of the ice sheet sliding into the ocean (Bond et al., 1992).
22
==PAGE:24==
Most likely, the explanation for this event is that the ice sheet grew to a critical
height, during the coldest (stadial mode) period. When it became unstable it could
break down spontaneously or triggered by small perturbations as temperature or
sea-level changes. Heinrich events lead to intense climatic eﬀects, one is the ice
sheet surge which increases the sea level and the subsequent slowdown or also the
shutdown of the Atlantic thermohaline circulation (Rahmstorf, 2002). One of the
possible explanation of the D/O events involve the bistability of the thermohaline
circulation found in Stommel’s model (Stommel, 1961). In which, during intersta-
dials mode (warm) the North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) formation was active
and shutdown during stadials mode (cold). Nevertheless, recent palaedata analysis
show the NADW formation was active during stadials mode and shut oﬀduring the
Heinrich events.
Figure 2.14: The possible changes in surface temperature caused by the shutdown of North
Atlantic Deep Water (NADW). From a ocean-atmosphere model, note the maximum cool-
ing over the North Atlantic. (Rahmstorf, 2002)
These events combined together explain the bipolar see-saw eﬀect, one is the tem-
perature see-saw resulting from the reduced interhemispheric heat transport by the
ocean, which results in a general cooling meanwhile the North is warming (Voelker
et al., 2002). Another, is the deep-water formation see-saw which describes an en-
hanced Southern Ocean Deep Water formation if NADW formation is reduced or
shut down (Stocker, 1998).An event which represent a typical see-saw eﬀect in the
Atlantic Ocean circulation, is the synchronous cooling of Antarctica (Antarctic cold
reversal) during the Bølling warming point, in the Northern Hemisphere. The major
inﬂow of meltwater did not shut down the NADW formation, probably because it
was mostly originated in the Southern Hemisphere, either the NADW was at the
intense interstadial mode (warm), which is relatively insensitive to freshwater forc-
ing (Rahmstorf, 2002).
23
==PAGE:25==
One of the last cold event is named the Younger Dryas (YD), which record as well
a warming in Antarctica, and due to meltwater inﬂow, NADW formation closed
down. This event has some characteristics which deﬁne it special, as the fact that it
was almost as cold as the previous Heinrich events even if the atmospheric condition
were having higher level of CO2 and the inland ice cover was reduced. Moreover, the
YD event was followed by a global re-advance of ice (evidence from New Zealand
and South America). For these reasons this event might involve more than variation
in ocean circulation, also a global forcing of solar origin(Renssen et al., 2000).
These theories support further discoveries and mechanisms from the latest glacia-
tion. The glacial inception are trigger by diﬀerent physical processes and most likely
acting together.There are three key factors that need to be considered for the global
warming or cooling in the history of the planet: the Milankovich cycles, related to
the Earth’s orbit around the Sun; the increase in CO2 concentration, leading to
a intense global warming, hence changes in ocean circulation; and the decrease of
albedo as consequence of ice melting(Rahmstorf, 2002).
2.4
Anomaly events
2.4.1
The Cold Blob
Robson (2016) refers to the Blue Blob, as ”A reversal of climate trends in the
North Atlantic since 2005”. Since the mid-1990s The North Atlantic subpolar gyre
increased its temperature, having a consistent impact on the climate in North Amer-
ica, Europe and Africa. Previous evidence suggested that the warming was led by
higher strength of the AMOC. However, recent studies show a cooling of the North
Atlantic Circulation, from 2005 (by
0.45 ◦C), ”reversing the previous warming
trend”. (Robson et al., 2016) This cooling is signiﬁcantly related with a reduction
in the strength of ocean heat transport, linked to the record low densities in the
deep Labrador Sea due to ocean warming 1995 and long-term freshening. Another
research tries to understand the cause and the possible connection between two ex-
treme climatic events in 2015. Exceptionally cold ocean surface temperature of the
North Atlantic and a summer heat wave over Central Europe, particularly hot. In
his study Duchez (2016) found a possible relationship between cold ocean temper-
ature anomalies and heat waves events. Despite this assumption, the hypothesis
needs to be validate with further analysis and deﬁne the drivers of this anomalous
event.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.15: Land and ocean temperature percentiles for 2015. In the period 1880–2015.
Regions with less than 80% coverage since 1880 are shaded gray. (Josey et al., 2018)
Combined to the Cold Blob in the North Atlantic Ocean a Hot Blob was recorded
in the North Paciﬁc between 2013-2015. Other mechanisms have been proposed to
describe the formation of the Atlantic Cold Blob, as changes in ocean circulation
related to the AMOC and its possible slowdown (Rahmstorf et al., 2015), the at-
mospheric forcing linked with North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) (Delworth et al.,
2016), and the melting of the Greenland ice cover (Schmittner et al., 2016).
A
most recent study propose a possible correlation within the two exceptional Blob
events in the Atlantic and the Paciﬁc, due to the coincidence on timing 2013-2015
(Liang et al., 2017). An explanation of this link is oﬀered by climate connectivity
and atmospheric circulation patterns across the two oceans. Most likely a possible
explanation for this extreme phenomena, it can be ﬁnd considering the interaction
of multiple forcing mechanisms within those mentioned previously.
25
==PAGE:27==
3
Data
3.1
Source Material
There is an increasing interest to get a better understanding of climate change and
extreme weather events in the atmosphere and in the oceans. The possibility to make
prediction and guide international actions, which can lead to better governments’
policies, are fundamental points to improve public awareness and socio-economic
actions.
Argo Float
Based on this reasons Argo is an international program using autonomous ﬂoats
to gather physical variables (temperature, salinity, currents, etc.) data worldwide
in open ocean (Source Argo.net). For this reason, Argo is sponsored by the World
Climate Research Programme’s CLIVAR, focused on CLImate VARiability and pre-
dictability and the Global Ocean Data Assimilation Experiment GODAE, interested
on demonstration of real-time operational ocean prediction. Another strength point
of Argo is the combination with satellites data and assimilated into ocean circu-
lation models to make detailed ocean forecast and global analysis, with relevant
applications on weather forecasting marine safety and transport, oﬀshore industry
and ﬁshery management (Source Argo.net).
The origins of Argo can be found in 1990-1997 when World Ocean Circulation Ex-
periment (WOCE) was set up to collect an unprecedent set of observations. The
idea was to use the new generation of satellites to monitor the ocean surface. From
this initial project new needs grew and lead to develop the ﬁrst Autonomous LA-
grangian Circulation Explores (ALACE), able to map currents below the surface
across the ocean and collecting temperature and salinity. Before this moment the
majority of ocean array came from research ship measurements and temperature
probes dropped from merchant ships. However, those observations were limited due
to sparse collection in time and space, depending on seasonality and accessibility
of the areas. The combination of those two researcher programs led to start Argo
ﬂoat project and now it is spread worldwide. An additional information is that the
oceanic research program was named Argo referring to the ship that Jason sailed to
ﬁnd the golden ﬂeece, in the Greek mythology (Source Argo.net).
First deployment was in 1999 and continue today at the rate of 800 ﬂoats per year
and has grown to be the major component of oceanic proﬁling system. Argo ﬂoats
26
==PAGE:28==
are autonomous battery-powered, which spend mostly of their time drifting at 1000
[m] depth after 8-10 [days] of drifting, ﬂoats descent to proﬁling until 2000 [m] depth
or more (for new ﬂoats system). Hence, ascent to the surface, recording salinity and
temperature (and other possible variables) in 10 [cm/s] (circa 6 hours) and then
transmit data to the satellites (6-12 [hours]). Once ﬁnished the transmission, the
bladder deﬂates, and the ﬂoat returns to its original density and sinks to repeat a
new cycle. The ﬂoats have a design life to make about 150 cycles meanings at least
4 years out in the ocean collecting data. The annual cost of Argo is 20. million ≈
25.000 per ﬂoat-lifetime).
Figure 3.1: Description of Argo ﬂoats cycle, during the collection and transmission of
data. Source Argo.net
In the last decades many countries joined the original program launched in 2000,
up to now 27 countries have deployed ﬂoats or assisted on their deployment world-
wide. Thanks to this project is possible to build a global array of 3000 proﬁling ﬂoats
through ice-free and deep ocean, roughly distributed every 3 nautical degrees (300
[Km]). Those ﬂoats provide 100.000 temperature/salinity T/S proﬁles, ocean cur-
rents and other physical variables per year. The data collected are available online as
free source within 24 hours, of their transmission from the ﬂoat and the automated
quality control (QC) via the Globe Data Assembly Centers (GDACs), one hosted in
France and another in California (Source argo.ucsd.edu). The accuracy of the data
is improved during their development reaching ± 0.005 [◦C] for temperature, ± 5 [m]
for depth, instead for the salinity the data delivered in real time can be aﬀected by
sensor drift error ± 0.01 [p.s.u.] After a second delayed mode correction, the salinity
errors are reduced (Source Argo.net). Argo ﬂoats represent the large global ocean
observing system and its availability as free source via internet make it good provider
27
==PAGE:29==
of high-quality data, on global scale. Moreover, there are diﬀerent ways to access
Argo data easily described on oﬃcial Argo website (http://www.argo.ucsd.edu) and
user’s guide. There are possibilities of downloading netCDF ﬁles from the GDACs,
selecting a group of ﬂoats within a certain region and time or looking at individual
ﬂoats data (http://www.argodatamgt.org/Access-to-data/Argo-data-selection).
The area of interest of this study is located in the Nordic Seas, the Argo ﬂoats
arrays available for this region date back to 2002 and the latest to the ﬁrst months
of 2019. Through the simple access to data on the Argo platform, it was possible
to select precisely the timeline, the coordinates, physical parameters (temperature,
salinity, oxygen, Chlorophyll) and the single vertical proﬁles or the whole time series
(ﬂoat trajectory). Once uploaded the area of interest with the speciﬁed character-
istic, it was possible to make directly the request to download the ﬁle in netCDF
Argo or Ascii csv format. Within few minutes the ﬁles were sent to the speciﬁed
mail, then were available to be handled.
ICES
The second source used was through ICES’ marine dataset, this online platform
has a well-established data centre, which manage and provide many observations
regarding the marine environment. The International Council for the Exploration
of the Sea ICES was founded in 1902 between 8 Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland,
Germany, The Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Russia and United Kingdom), but only
in 1964 received a legal foundation and full international status, reaching today the
contributors from 60 countries.
ICES is an intergovernmental marine science organization which aims to meeting
social needs for impartial evidence on the state and sustainable use of the oceans
[ices.dk]. More than 5.000 scientists from 700 marine institutes collaborate to ad-
vance and share scientiﬁc knowledge of marine ecosystems in the Atlantic Ocean,
extends into the Artic, the North Paciﬁc Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea and the
Black Sea. The higher covering of data is for the institute part of ICES network
as the Northeast Atlantic, Baltic Sea, Norwegian Sea and Greenland Sea. Those
dataset are organized on speciﬁc thematic under three main section Geography, Bi-
ology and Hydrochemistry. In the Hydrochemistry section it is possible to get high
resolution oceanographic data from CTD (device that measures Conductivity and
Temperature through Depth) stations. The following step consists on selecting the
period, the area and the parameters of interest to develop the research. Moreover,
there is the possibility to select the country who led the collection of data and the
research’s ship. Once submitted the request is managed in short time and sent by
mail in .csv format. Each country has its own area of data collection that must be
done yearly following precise protocols arranged by ICES commission, this approach
gives the possibility to combine easily the datasets coming from diﬀerent research’s
cruises.
In this study was decided to use the observations collected through CTD, from
the danish research vessel within the period 2000 and 2019. This timeline was cho-
sen because of the dataﬁle from ICES are combined with those collected from Argo
ﬂoats, which are available in the North Sea only from ≈2000. The idea of combin-
28
==PAGE:30==
ing datasets from two diﬀerent sources was meant to collect as much observations
possible over the area subject of study. The opportunity to combine those datasets
gives the opportunity to support its result with a consistent amount of information,
within an approximately short period of less than 20 years.
29
==PAGE:31==
4
Methods
4.1
The Approach
4.1.1
Potential energy anomaly
In this research the potential energy anomaly equation resulted suitable for the
analysis of models with which evaluate the intensity of stratiﬁcation and mixing
processes. The aim of this study is to identify the stratiﬁcation intensity in the
basins of the North Seas, and to analyse the physical mechanisms contributing this
process. In the analysis we take in consideration the freshwater inﬂuence, the eﬀect
of vertical convection through the water column and the forcing mechanisms due
to upwelling and downwelling. The potential energy equation is a powerful tool
to study the inﬂuence of stratiﬁcation and mixing events in diﬀerent context as
estuaries, coastal areas, and oceans.
In 1974, Simpson and Hunter used the potential energy anomaly to identify
fronts, stratiﬁcation and their occurrence in the western Irish Sea. According to
previous studies the potential energy anomaly was mainly related to tidal mixing
(Simpson and Hunter, 1974), continental shelf (Simpson et al., 1978) and estuarine
region (De Boer et al., 2008). Most studies developed vertical mixing models based
on potential energy anomaly, which considered the kinetic energy from tidal currents,
wind stress, and the amount of heat introduced into the water surface. The energy
anomaly equation is deﬁned using the symbol φ [J/m3], which represent the amount
of work per unit volume needed to bring complete vertical mixing in the water
column (Simpson et al., 1978).
φ = −1
h
R h
0 (¯ρ −ρ) gz dz
(4.1)
¯ρ = −1
h
R h
0 ρ z dz
(4.2)
Where the ρ represents the density in [Kg/m3] of each water layer and ¯ρ is the
averaged density, h is the depth [m] of the water column, z is the height [m] above
the bed and g is the gravitational acceleration (9.81 [m/s2]). The variability of the
potential energy anomaly is described as the energy balance during those phenomena
which lead to stratiﬁcation conditions (Frota et al., 2013) (i.e. tidal cycle, wind
stress, estuaries, physical mechanisms). Therefore, changes in φ are related to inputs
30
==PAGE:32==
and outputs of energy, as the absorption and release of heat energy on the surface
or inﬂow at diﬀerent salinity. Indeed, a stratiﬁed water column requires an amount
of energy φ > 0 [J/m3] to be mixed, instead a homogeneous water column has no
requirements of energy φ = 0 [J/m3]. This study focuses on identifying the energy
anomaly values (φ) derived from the variation of sea water density along depth,
which is a parameter dependent on temperature and salinity variations (Stommel,
1961). The equation (4.1) is used to identify the potential energy anomaly for each
basin of the Nordic Seas across the time-line from 2002 to 2018, for the majority
of the areas selected. In this case there was a speciﬁc interest on quantifying the
annual cycle of potential energy anomaly, and to identify possible changes in positive
or negative trends of the stratiﬁcation intensity along the time extension.
This
approach gives the opportunity to sketch potential eﬀects and to partly quantify the
forcing mechanisms implicated, such as freshwater inﬂow from ice melting, overﬂow
from the Arctic Ocean and the inﬂow from the North Atlantic.
4.1.2
What drives stratiﬁcation anomalies
To have a deeper understanding on which variable between Temperature and Salinity
aﬀects more Density, is necessary to start from the equation of state and Stommel’s
model. However, the diﬃculty to manage the equation of state of sea water brings
to approximate the equation in two cases, as simple as possible. One case follows
the linear approximation, and the second a non-linear approximation, retaining the
non-linear characteristics (isopycnals on T-S diagram) (Mamayev, 2010). The case
decided to use is the linear approximation, often used in analytical models, where
the equation of state is simpliﬁed as much to consider only the linear relationship
between density, temperature and salinity. This form of the linear equation of state,
is introduced by Stommel (1961,1962) and Lineikin (1962):
ρ = ρ0(1 −αT + βS)
(4.3)
In the equation ρ0 represent a constant value of density 1000 [Kg/m3], the con-
stant coeﬃcients of heat expansion is (α = −2 × 10−4) and saline contraction is
(β = 8 × 10−4). The linear equation does not reﬂect precisely the features of sea
water properties, but it may get closer enough to reality, especially if used to de-
scribe simple theoretical constructions (Mamayev, 2010). Moreover, there are linear
approximation equation, as Boussinesq approximation, in which is used only the
relationship between density and temperature.
ρ = ρ0(1 −αT)
(4.4)
The explanation can be attributed to the fact that molecular diﬀusion of heat is ≈
100 times faster than the molecular diﬀusion of salt (Stewart, 2008). Starting from
idealized conditions, present in the linear equation of state used by Stommel, the
linear equation was combined with the energy anomaly equation by Simpson (1978):
Φ = g/h
R h
0 (¯ρ −ρ)zdz
(4.5)
31
==PAGE:33==
Combination of Stommel and Simpson equations:
ΦT = −α
g/h
R h
0 ( ¯T −T)zdz
(4.6)
ΦS = β
g/h
R h
0 ( ¯S −S)zdz
(4.7)
Through these two equations derived from idealized conditions, was possible to
identify the weight of both variables on the characteristic development of potential
energy anomaly for each Nordic Seas Basins.
4.1.3
Basins selection criteria
The choice regarding the criteria of selection in the area studied reﬂects two main
parameters, which follows the natural structure of the basins in the Nordic Seas
and the ability of handling data on a speciﬁc region. The three main basins of the
Nordic Seas were divided in sub-basins for technical reasons such as to make easier
the analysis of results and the identiﬁcation of the forcing mechanisms involved.
Furthermore, with an evaluation in smaller-scale areas can be clear attribute the
likely causes, so compare and combine those with adjacent basins.
The Norwegian Basin, is one of the largest basin in the Nordic Seas and its salinity
varies between 34.9 [psu] (closer to the Iceland Plateau) and 35.2 [psu] (inﬂuence of
North Atlantic inﬂow) (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005). In this study was decided
to divide the area in three sub-basins, two located in the southern region subjected
to a major Atlantic current inﬂow and one in the northern-central area of the Nordic
Seas.
–The South-East Basin (SEB) has coordinate ([67.51 ◦N, 62.43 ◦S] latitude and
[-3.41 ◦W, 6.75 ◦E] longitude) and is located western from the Norwegian shelf.
–The South-East Basin 2 (SEB2) has coordinate ([66.72 ◦N, 61.58 ◦S] latitude
and [-11.16 ◦W, 0.30 ◦E] longitude) and is located closer to the Norwegian shelf.
–The Central Basin (CB) has coordinate ([71.53 ◦N, 67.21 ◦S] latitude and [-8.97
◦W, 1.07 ◦E] longitude) and it includes the Northern extension of the Norwegian
Basin.
The Lofoten Basin it develops on the Norther area and was divided in two sub-
basins, its salinity range is around 34.9 [psu] (closer to the Mohn Ridge) and 35.2
[psu] (on the side of the Norwegian shelf) (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005).
–The North-East Basin (NEB) has coordinate ([75.20 ◦N, 69.77 ◦S] latitude and
[-0.27 ◦W, 17.13 ◦E] longitude) and it extends over the northern section and involves
the surrounding surfaces subjected to Bearing Seas inﬂow.
– The North-East Basin 2 (NEB2) has coordinate ([70.02 ◦N, 66.13 ◦S] latitude
and [-0.18 ◦W, 16.76 ◦E] longitude) and it extends on the southern section of the
32
==PAGE:34==
basin, including part of the Vøring Plateau (along the Norwegian shelf).
The Greenland Basin it develops in the most North region of the Nordic Seas next to
the Greenland shelf, its salinity changes between 34.8 (inﬂuenced by the Greenlandic
Current and the Polar Water) and 35.1 (eﬀect of some extension by the Atlantic
Water) (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005).
– The North-West Basin (NWB) has coordinate ([77.78 ◦N, 71.78 ◦S] latitude and
[-14.71 ◦W, 5.08 ◦E] longitude) and it covers the entire Greenland Basin.
The Iceland Plateau is the last area selected for this study. Despite it has a diﬀerent
bathymetry compared to a basin, it was included because of the peculiarity of its
region. This area represents the connection between the East Greenlandic Current,
the Icelandic Current and the Norwegian Sea, which form a cyclonic gyre centred
approximately at 69.5 ◦N and 12 ◦W, with salinity around 33 and 34.9 [psu] (Blind-
heim and Osterhus, 2005).
– The South-West Basin (SWB) has coordinate ([70.82 ◦N, 65.41 ◦S] latitude and
[-17.48 ◦W, -7.12 ◦E] longitude) and it enclose the Icelandic Plateau.
MAP WITH THE AREA SELECTED
4.1.4
Data Analysis Tools
In the analysis of data were used two software: Ocean Data View (ODV) employed as
ﬁrst approach to visualise raw Argo ﬂoats dataset and then Matlab a programming
language to implement the analysis. Ocean Data View (ODV) is a software package
used for interactive analysis and visualization of oceanographic dataﬁles, time-series
or trajectories. ODV data and conﬁguration ﬁles are platform-independent, with
binary format providing dense storage and fast data access. The software has the
support for quality ﬂags, the data sets can be exchanged between diﬀerent systems,
and it can read, combine or import many oceanographic data formats (e.g. Argo,
World Ocean Database, World Ocean Atlas, World Ocean Circulation Experiment
‘WOCE’, SeaDataNet, ICES) (Schlitzer, 2015).
Moreover, ODV is available to be downloaded free of charge and worldwide users of
leading research institute use it as analysis and visualization tools (e.g. UNESCO
Ocean Teacher). In this speciﬁc case of study ODV was used as ﬁrst analysis tool of
netCDF ﬁles, from Argo and .csv format from ICES, from CTD bottles. The possi-
bility to combine diﬀerent formats of datasets in the same software, gave the chance
to arrange and display an overview of original data points or gridded ﬁelds. ODV
was used to choose domains in the Nordic Sea region, selecting speciﬁc coordinates
through one of the tools available.
This software has a good conﬁguration and advanced properties to organize, select
and visualize speciﬁc datasets of trajectories, cruise, physical and chemical water
properties, and the opportunity to derive new variables. Thanks to the use of this
software was possible to get a ﬁrst overview of the data using map projections and
displaying plot with diﬀerent variables.
After ODV analysis, was possible to understand which kind of approach outline to
33
==PAGE:35==
elaborate a model in the second phase of the analysis, using Matlab. The most
important following step consisted on clean the dataset and homogenize the in-
formation across the time of ≈16 years. Working with Matlab made possible to
implement and clean the code for each basin, and to develop the analysis for the
studied parameters of temperature, salinity, density and potential density anomaly.
34
==PAGE:36==
5
Empirical Analysis
5.1
Results
Analysis of Argo ﬂoats dataset on physical parameters as temperature and salinity
through matlab, enabled the possibility to visualize cleaner results.
Hence, the
opportunity to implement further analysis on the state of the water column and
visualize the seasonal cycles of each parameter, across the window of time from
2002 to 2018.
5.1.1
Temperature Cycle in the Nordic Seas
The seven Basins previously described, here are showing the Temperature trends of
the last 16 years, exception for the South West Basin (SWB) in which the time-data
are between 2006 and 2018. Due to technical limitation of data, the Argo ﬂoats
of SWB were available only from that period. As illustrated in the Figurexx each
basin has characteristics cycle variations in temperature [◦C] through depth (1000
[m]).
The Central Basin (CB), has clear temperature penetration along the year, reach-
ing the deepest point during the summer. Those periods are followed by more or
less intense mixing processes, which bring cold deep water to the surface. From
the chart it is possible to report a more intense deep water mixing to the surface
between 2015 and 2016, a period that coincide with the Cold Blob anomaly event.
After that event, are shown normal temperature cycles, but seems that temperature
has less compact diﬀusion along depth if compared with antecedent years.
In the North West Basin (NWB) the temperature cycles are not such deﬁned as
the other basins. This feature is mainly driven by the location of the basin, where
very cold water [between 0 and 4 ◦C] are dominant (inﬂow from the Arctic Ocean
and from ice melting). Likely, it is possible to consider that in the last decade the
temperature penetration became slightly higher, with narrow mixing processes.
The following charts describe the North East Basin (NEB) and the southern North
East Basin 2 (NEB2). Both have deﬁned temperature cycles along the years, the
only diﬀerence is on the more intense penetration of temperature in the southern
NEB2 than the NEB. In both basins there are no evidence of changes during the
last decade.
The South East Basin (SEB) is divided as well in SEB and SEB2 (closer to the
Norwegian shelf). The two basins have clear temperature cycles but in the SEB2
35
==PAGE:37==
are much more intense in depth and duration, sometimes having more than one cy-
cle connected preventing convective processes. Especially, during the period earlier
than 2012, when were recorded the most signiﬁcant temperature diﬀusion through
depth. Instead, lately are shown less substantial changes in temperature combined
with frequents narrows mixing mechanisms, up to the surface.
The last basin presented is the South West Basin (SWB), which is the only region
having data from 2006. As explained earlier, this basin has diﬀerent characteristic
compared to the other because it covers the Icelandic Plateau. Starting from this
precondition the graph displays an evident, even if light, increase on deeper temper-
ature diﬀusion, against the cold water of the East Greenland Current (EGC).
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.1: Temperature Cycle from surface to 1000 m depth (2002 to 2018), of the stud-
ied basins: Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB,
Second North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin
SEB2, South West Basin SWB (from 2006-2018).
37
==PAGE:39==
5.1.2
Density Cycle in the Nordic Seas
The sea water potential density (pdensw) [Kg/m3] of water masses was derived using
the relative Salinity (S) [psu], Temperature (T) [◦C], Pressure (Z) [db] (depth) and
a speciﬁed reference pressure (PR)[db] in Matlab.
ρ = pdensw(S, T, Z, PR)
(5.1)
The results of this analysis are shown in the Figure xx.
Overall, the basins
present a lighter (less dense) water on top of denser water. This explains the shape
of density distribution through depth driven by its parameters temperature (ﬁg-
urexx) and salinity (Appendix xx). One important information contained in these
charts is the separation and combination of diﬀerent water masses, shown in all
basins. Water masses at diﬀerent density are not mixed together, but those create
a limit between them which mark the distinction. These mechanisms are evident
for some basins more than others. Especially in the NWB, the cold water from the
Arctic and ice melting represent the majority of the water mass and it is remarkable
separated from the upper layer. On top of it a thin lighter layer of less dense water
probably delineate a mild extension of North Atlantic Water (NAW) intrusion from
the South.
In the SEB2, it is very clear the distinction between water masses, in this case the
NAW plays a fundamental role because of the closer locations of access into the
Nordic Seas. The densest and cold water stays on the bottom and in between this
and the surface layer is visible an evident water mass layer. Coming from the North
Atlantic, warmer and saltier more heavy of surface water but less dense of cold deep
water.
Also in the SWB, are clearly shown the interactions between three water masses, the
largest amount is represented by the cold deep water moving towards the Greenland
East Current. A small intermediate portion is inﬂuenced by the NAW entering from
the Denmark Strait (across Greenland and Iceland), and the upper layer are the
surface water subjected to seasonal heat. In this last chart, during 2017 is visible a
’limited/narrow’ intrusion a great depth (600 - 1000 m) but it represent most likely
a wrong expression of data from Argo ﬂoat. For this reason that area has not been
taken in consideration in the analysis. In general, all basins describe deﬁned sea-
sonal cycles, speciﬁc for each region and diﬀerent intensity of convective phenomena
at particular depth.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.2: Density Cycle from surface to 1000 m depth (2002 to 2018), of the stud-
ied basins: Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB,
Second North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin
SEB2, South West Basin SWB (from 2006-2018).
39
==PAGE:41==
5.1.3
Maximal Potential Energy Anomaly (Φmax) in the Nordic
Seas
From this section are explained the main results of this research on the maximum
potential energy anomaly Φmax calculated in the basins studied. The ﬁrst group
of graphics describe the evolution of Φmax [J/m3] along the time series from 2002
to 2018. Mostly all graphs are showing a constant or slightly positive trend as the
NEB (p-value = 0.078). In general, they are not statistically signiﬁcant. Only in
the SWB basin the Φmax has signiﬁcant changes during the last 12 years (2006 -
2018). The trend-line shows a positive slope with p-value = 0.0047 (statistically
signiﬁcant when p-value ≤0.05). Therefore, it can be that the SWB is displaying
relevant increasing variation on Φmax intensiﬁcation. But also diﬀerently from the
other basins is skipping 4 years from 2002 to 2005, which can change the consistency
of the result. Moreover, the SWB is covering the region of the Icelandic Plateau
and represent a crucial role being the connection between East Greenland Current,
Iceland Current and Norwegian Seas.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.3: Trendline of Φmax from each year (2002 to 2018), of the studied basins:
Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB, Second
North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin SEB2,
South West Basin SWB (from 2006-2018).
41
==PAGE:43==
Maximal Potential Energy Anomaly Shift
Through these analysis it was decided to visualize a possible variation on the month
of maximal expression of Φmax along the time series. Hence, demonstrate if the
stratiﬁcation events were occurring early or delay during the year, and comparing it
with data from past 16 years (12 years for the SWB). Generally, the results do not
show a relevant change statistically consistent. The trends are essentially constant,
and a slightly positive tendency is present in the SWB, but this time without a
signiﬁcant p-value.
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.4:
Trend-line of Φmax shift on months of maximum stratiﬁcation level, of
the studied basins: Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin
NEB, Second North East Basin NEB2, South East Basin SEB, Second South
East Basin SEB2, South West Basin SWB (from 2006-2018).
43
==PAGE:45==
Maximal Potential Energy Anomaly duration
This last section of graphs regards the duration in [days] of each Φmax in the past
years (2002 - 2018), to evidence any possible tendency on the possible delay of strat-
iﬁcation events. In the analysis to calculate the extension time of every stratiﬁcation
event, was considered the Φmax/2 and the time (in days) passed in between those
dates. When the duration in days was obtained and plotted, the trend-line could
visualize the general tendency in each basin. Diﬀerently from the previous graphs,
the data here resulted more spread, showing some slightly positive (CB, NWB,
NEB, NEB2 SEB2, SWB) and one negative (SEB) trends, but no one of them has
a statistically signiﬁcant weight for the analysis.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.5:
Duration in days of the stratiﬁcation (2002 to 2018), of the studied
basins:
Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB,
Second North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin
SEB2, South West Basin SWB (from 2006-2018).
45
==PAGE:47==
5.1.4
Climatology Analysis for the Basins
In this part of the results are presented the climatology variation in the diﬀerent
basins. The following distribution curve in ﬁgure xx, represent the annual cycles of
each basin, using the Φ monthly average of every year combined with their standard
deviation (STD). As shown in the charts, normally the biggest STD corresponds to
the peak of Φ, occurring at the maximum stratiﬁcation period during the summer
and early autumn. Respectively, the basins can be separated in those that have a
smoother monthly distribution (NEB and NWB) having a Φ 80 [J/m3]. The basins
that have an intermediate evolution (CB, NEB2 and SWB) with Φ 100 [J/m3], and
the basins (SEB and SEB2) that record a sharp distribution having Φ 140 [J/m3].
Those outcomes can be explained considering the location of the basins, for instance,
the NEB and NWB are those that receive the highest cold and freshwater inﬂuence
from the Artctic Ocean, the Bearing Sea and ice melting. On the other hand, the
southern basins, SEB and SEB2 get the strongest rate of the NAW inﬂow, because
closer to its pathways into the Nordic Seas.
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.6: Monthly average of each year (2002 to 2018) and relative standard deviation, of
the studied basins: Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin
NEB, Second North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East
Basin SEB2, South West Basin SWB (from 2006-2018).
47
==PAGE:49==
5.1.5
Annual potential energy anomaly Φ cycle of the Basins
The plots in the ﬁgurexx represent a simple and clear way to visualize the annual
cycle of potential energy anomaly Φ [J/m3]. Each basin presented shows the infor-
mation of the Argo ﬂoats data after were made homogeneous and cleaner, removing
the outliers found using the function box-plot in Matlab (Appendix xx). Moreover,
in these graphs are displayed some gap of data which were not used during the
analysis. Speciﬁcally, in the basin NWB there is an evident lack of information be-
tween the end of 2003 and the entire 2004. Instead in the SWB the data from 2005
were not taken in consideration, because the year was almost ﬁnished and without
consistent information about Φ of 2005. It is possible to identify some diﬀerence
between graphs, related to their basin location. For instance, the NWB is the one
with less deﬁned Φ cycles, most likely due to the consistent inﬂuence of Arctic Ocean
waters and ice melting. As previously explained the cold, fresher and dense water
represent the biggest amount in this area and convective process mislead stratiﬁca-
tion to form. For the same reason the value of Φ are lower compared to the other
basins. The highest Φ level are reached in the southern areas the SEB and SEB2,
where stratiﬁcation events occurs easily due to the diﬀerence in temperature and
the presence of NAW, saltier and warmer water intruded into the Nordic Seas.
48
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.7: Φ cycles across the years 2002 to 2018, of the studied basins: Central Basin
CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB, Second North East Basin
NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin SEB2, South West Basin
SWB (from 2005-2018).
49
==PAGE:51==
5.1.6
Annual potential energy anomaly Φ cycle Tempera-
ture and Salinity dependent in the Basins
The potential energy anomalies are mostly temperature dependent, because of the
faster molecular diﬀusion of heat compared to salinity. However, it is interesting to
take a closer look to have more clear how those interact to obtain/reach the ﬁnal Φ
value. Therefore, understand when one takes over the other to balance the results.
The following graphics, even if obtained by idealized condition, can give a general
description of the stratiﬁcation evolution along Temperature ΦT and Salinity ΦS.
From a ﬁrst look on the graphs is clear to see that salinity has a lower impact, having
a ΦS [J/m3] scale in some basins 10 times smaller in comparison with temperature.
For instance, in the CB basin the stratiﬁcation is dominated by temperature ΦT
and occasionally the role of salinity ΦS becomes important. Up to 2011 Salinity was
destabilizing due to the inﬂuence of the NAW, warm and salty. After 2011 were
recorded episodic stabilizing salinity intrusions, probably explained by the inﬂuence
of periodic EGC waters (East Greenland Current), cold and fresh. Especially in some
basins (CB and NWB), were found episodic negative values of ΦT which correspond
to positive peaks in ΦS (exactly at the same time) to stabilize the conditions. It
means that cold water overlies at the surface over warmer water, this not common
condition leads to diﬀuse convection processes (or double diﬀusion) which destabilize
the water column. These explanation can be applied for the other basins, where the
source of cold and fresh water varies depending on the location. Hence, in the NWB
the negative values of ΦT are showing destabilization from warm and salty water of
the North Atlantic that reached the Nordic region. At this point to compensate and
stabilize the condition intrusion of fresh cold water ﬂows from the Arctic Ocean.
In SWB the evolution is more stable, being mostly inﬂuenced by cold and fresher
water by EGC and ice melting. The ΦS graph shows that in 2018 was registered a
slightly higher peak of freshwater intrusion.
The basins located in the East section have a more stable evolution but present
constant episodic intrusion. Pulse in the Nordic regions (NEB and NEB2) are mainly
driven by cold and fresh water from the Bearing Sea and ice melting, instead in the
Southern area (SEB and SEB2) are driven by destabilizing inﬂow of warm and salty
water from the North Atlantic.
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.8: Φ Temperature cycles across the years 2002 to 2018, of the studied basins:
Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB, Second
North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin SEB2,
South West Basin SWB (from 2005-2018).
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.9: Φ Temperature cycles across the years 2002 to 2018, of the studied basins:
Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB, Second
North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin SEB2,
South West Basin SWB (from 2005-2018).
52
==PAGE:54==
5.2
Discussion
In the Nordic Seas, changes in the maximal potential energy anomaly (Φmax), re-
sulted not consistent to demonstrate a variation in intensity of the stratiﬁcation.
Overall, a small variation in Φmax intensity was identiﬁed only for two basins, the
SWB and NEB, which show a positive trend during the last years of the dataset.
These two basin are subject to increased freshwater inﬂow, respectively from the East
Greenland Current (EGC) and the Bearing Sea. Those are also the major areas that
carry sea-ice. In particular, the EGC represents the largest and most concentrated
meridional ice ﬂow in the world (Blindheim and Osterhus, 2005).
Nevertheless,
what drives potential energy anomaly is a combination of conditions involving the
ocean, the bathymetry and the atmosphere. For this reason it is diﬃcult to identify
what causes a major stratiﬁcation in those basins than adjacent. The results of this
study demonstrate a variation during an extended time period of the stratiﬁcation,
Φmax. Also this time, the variation is not consistent, but it is possible to evaluate a
slightly positive trend in various basins. These small changes support the evidence
of climatic variations in the Nordic Seas. Despite the fact that the window of time
studied was short (≈16 years), it was long enough to demonstrate some changes on
Nordic Seas water stratiﬁcation.
The key point in this study is in the delay of the stratiﬁcation. Extended duration
of these conditions can be considered ﬁrst small signals of further and most consis-
tent future changes, strictly related to ocean mixing and stratiﬁcation. Moreover,
these results support observations of the increasing freshening of the upper-layer,
expanding eastward from the western basins. A longer evolution of potential energy
anomaly can lead to important changes of the actual equilibrium conditions in the
Nordic Seas. The prospects to these considerations aﬀect processes as deep water
formation and the conveyor belt AMOC.
As known, the polar regions are a source of deep water formation. Because of ice
production and rejection of salt, the surrounding water gets saltier at low temper-
ature, its density increases and it sinks. This process is essential to initiate deep
water currents and to originate the ﬂow of the conveyor belt. The NAW ﬂows into
the Nordic Seas as extension of the warm Gulf Stream creats a mild climate across
North Europe. But a bigger amount of NAW intrusion into the Nordic Seas may
increase the stratiﬁcation and heat the Arctic Ocean, leading to ice melting and ex-
changes of heat at the sea surface. The action of these factors together can explain
the events happening in the Nordic Seas. An increased fresh water inﬂow due to
a stronger EGC, fed by the Arctic Ocean overﬂow, ice melting and higher rate of
rainfall can rise the stratiﬁcation for longer periods. Therefore, when the surface
becomes fresher, despite the water cooling down,it is not dense and salty enough to
sink and to initiate deep water formation. This scenario describes what can happen
in the SWB, where even with heavy ice formation the water will not sink and, as a
consequence, one of the main sources of deep water formation and ocean circulation
can slowdown or even shutdown.
The conveyor belt is a large-scale ﬂow originated by the overﬂow of deep water for-
mation. If this process stops, the Atlantic Meridional Overturn Circulation (AMOC)
and the NAW inﬂow can slow or even shut down. On the other hand, these theo-
retical scenarios may lead to another event of cooling of the Nordic Seas, and the
possibility to recover deep water formation and reinforce again the conveyor belt.
53
==PAGE:55==
Other studies consider that the reduced deep water formation in the Greenlandic Sea
can be supplied by deep Arctic water. This prospect would transform, in around 20
years, the Greenland Sea deep water properties similar to the Arctic Ocean (Blind-
heim and Osterhus, 2005).
The ocean-atmosphere interactions are responsible for regional changes in water
masses distribution, from local range to large-scale. In the Nordic Seas the varia-
tion of water properties are related to many factors, which either act together or
compensate each other. Some research suggested that the distribution and duration
of the freshening in the Nordic Seas, is associated with high NAO (North Atlantic
Oscillation) index and strengthening of westerlies winds (Blindheim and Osterhus,
2005). [A high NAO index leads to increased westerlies and brings cool summer
followed by mild/wet winters in Central Europe. Instead with low NAO index the
westerlies are suppressed, North Europe suﬀers cold and dry winters and storms and
rainfall increase in South Europe and North Africa.]
5.2.1
The solubility Pump in the Nordic Seas
This study focuses on the regional scale of the Nordic Seas because of its fundamen-
tal role on ocean circulation and it may make easier to identify other changes on
global scale. Strengthening of the westerlies is concurrent in time with freshening of
sea water and a strong increase in global mean temperatures, which are most likely
related to the increased greenhouse gas forcing. The changes observed in the Nordic
Seas through this study and previous research during the last decades, support the
growing evidence of climate change and the human foot print on CO2 emissions.
The interactions between atmosphere and ocean play an active role on the climate
and ocean circulation. The two surfaces have strong connection exchanging heat
and gases, driving the convection of ocean surface through wind stress and other
forcing mechanisms. The solubility pump together with the biological pump, are
between those processes that act together removing CO2 from the atmosphere. The
oceans contain 50 times more carbon than the atmosphere and they have slowed
down the rate of climate change by absorbing around the 30% of human emissions
(L´evy et al., 2013).
The carbon absorbed from the atmosphere by deep ocean takes hundreds of years to
reenter in the surface and it occurs through dissolution, depending on the concentra-
tion gradient of CO2 between the two surface. The solubility of carbon is promoted
in cold and saline water. Therefore, the high latitudes of the Nordic Seas represent
a key spot for the carbon transport to deep ocean. In this physical-chemical process,
also the wind trends are an important forcing mechanism that determines the rate
of exchange at the ocean-atmosphere interface. The solubility of carbon in the cold
and salty water causes an increase in its density, and the heavy water sinks down
exporting CO2 to deep ocean. [check the word draft for the representative picture
of the solubility pump]
Taking in consideration these forcing mechanism of the solubility pump, it is pos-
sible to describe some variations that may occur due to the changing conditions of
the Nordic Seas. The freshening of sea water and the extension of the duration of
stratiﬁcation in certain basins compared to others, will most likely aﬀect also the
carbon solubility pump. Since the solubility is a function of temperature (T), salin-
ity (S) and pressure (P), changes in these variables will inﬂuence the absorption rate
54
==PAGE:56==
of carbon into the ocean.
Solubility = f(S, T, P)
(5.2)
Therefore, longer periods of stratiﬁed waters that are warmer at the surface and
more fresh, may decrease considerably the CO2 exchanging rate into deep water
during the year. Moreover, connected to this event, there is the anthropogenic CO2
emission, which is continuously rising, since the beginning of the industrial era. The
constant increase of carbon dioxide compared to the other carbonate compounds
involved in the chemistry of the solubility pump (HCO3−and CO2−
3 ) can lead to
a saturation of the ocean carbon sink (L´evy et al., 2013). Indeed, it can induce a
decrease of ocean carbonate ion content because of lower pH, and reduce the buﬀer
capacity of sea water. The concurrence of these phenomena as ocean acidiﬁcation
and warming represent further forcing to dramatic impacts on physical and biological
systems in the ocean.
55
==PAGE:57==
6
Conclusion
In 1961, Stommel described through his model the importance of tipping points on
a system in equilibrium and its connection to climate changes.The cooperation of
all mechanisms, considered in this study, act together to the actual state of climate
changes, now and the near future. What drives climate changes is a combination of
variables which together lead to change in the climatology and the current equilib-
rium, that the planet reached after the last big change. Through the history of the
planet, many cycles shaped and led the earth to always new equilibrium points. This
time, the human presence has to be taken in consideration between those forcing
mechanisms that lead changes. Being part of the ‘problem’ can seem scaring, but it
shakes the human awareness about our role on the planet. The possibility to reach a
better understanding of the processes that deﬁne the environment in which we live,
can give to us the awareness of our choices inline with the environment. This study
is an example on a possible approach to evaluate climate changes from regional
scale to large-scale. Taking in consideration the atmosphere-ocean ﬂuxes and the
impacts of ocean mechanisms on a range of time. The results of the the analysis are
not conclusive, with relatively weak variation in the potential energy anomaly and
changes in deep circulation can be diﬃcult to be evaluate from the extension of time
considered and other sources of errors. Nevertheless, the observed small variations,
that have been observed in the last decades, in the Nordic Seas, support the evi-
dence of changes in future climate. Among diﬀerent future scenarios, these changes
can persist or amplify in the next decades under the eﬀects of global warming and
we may facing a slowdown of the AMOC or other changes, especially, in the Nordic
Seas. In any scenario, continuous research and monitoring of the oceans and the
North regions result essential to improve future analysis and models.
56
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
R. B. Alley and P. U. Clark. The deglaciation of the northern hemisphere: a global
perspective. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 27(1):149–182, 1999.
J. Blindheim and S. Osterhus. The nordic seas, main oceanographic features. Geo-
physical Monograph-American Geophysical Union, 158:11, 2005.
G. Bond, H. Heinrich, W. Broecker, L. Labeyrie, J. McManus, J. Andrews, S. Huon,
R. Jantschik, S. Clasen, C. Simet, et al. Evidence for massive discharges of icebergs
into the north atlantic ocean during the last glacial period. Nature, 360(6401):
245, 1992.
W. S. Broecker et al. The great ocean conveyor. Oceanography, 4(2):79–89, 1991.
R. G. Curry and M. S. McCartney. Ocean gyre circulation changes associated with
the north atlantic oscillation. Journal of Physical Oceanography, 31(12):3374–
3400, 2001.
G. J. De Boer, J. D. Pietrzak, and J. C. Winterwerp. Using the potential energy
anomaly equation to investigate tidal straining and advection of stratiﬁcation in
a region of freshwater inﬂuence. Ocean Modelling, 22(1-2):1–11, 2008.
T. L. Delworth, F. Zeng, G. A. Vecchi, X. Yang, L. Zhang, and R. Zhang. The north
atlantic oscillation as a driver of rapid climate change in the northern hemisphere.
Nature Geoscience, 9(7):509, 2016.
B. Dickson, I. Yashayaev, J. Meincke, B. Turrell, S. Dye, and J. Holfort. Rapid
freshening of the deep north atlantic ocean over the past four decades. Nature,
416(6883):832, 2002.
M. Elliot, L. Labeyrie, and J.-C. Duplessy. Changes in north atlantic deep-water
formation associated with the dansgaard–oeschger temperature oscillations (60–10
ka). Quaternary Science Reviews, 21(10):1153–1165, 2002.
F. F. Frota, B. P. Paiva, and C. A. F. Schettini. Intra-tidal variation of stratiﬁcation
in a semi-arid estuary under the impact of ﬂow regulation. Brazilian Journal of
Oceanography, 61(1):23–33, 2013.
A. L. Gordon. Interocean exchange of thermocline water. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Oceans, 91(C4):5037–5046, 1986.
A. L. Gordon. The role of thermohaline circulation in global climate change. 1991.
57
==PAGE:59==
S. A. Josey, J. J.-M. Hirschi, B. Sinha, A. Duchez, J. P. Grist, and R. Marsh.
The recent atlantic cold anomaly: Causes, consequences, and related phenomena.
Annual review of marine science, 10:475–501, 2018.
T. Kuhlbrodt, A. Griesel, M. Montoya, A. Levermann, M. Hofmann, and S. Rahm-
storf. On the driving processes of the atlantic meridional overturning circulation.
Reviews of Geophysics, 45(2), 2007.
M. L´evy, L. Bopp, P. Karleskind, L. Resplandy, C. ´Eth´e, and F. Pinsard. Physical
pathways for carbon transfers between the surface mixed layer and the ocean
interior. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 27(4):1001–1012, 2013.
Y.-C. Liang, J.-Y. Yu, E. S. Saltzman, and F. Wang. Linking the tropical northern
hemisphere pattern to the paciﬁc warm blob and atlantic cold blob. Journal of
Climate, 30(22):9041–9057, 2017.
O. I. Mamayev. Temperature-salinity analysis of world ocean waters, volume 11.
Elsevier, 2010.
L. Midttun. Formation of dense bottom water in the barents sea. Deep Sea Research
Part A. Oceanographic Research Papers, 32(10):1233–1241, 1985.
K. A. Mork and J. Blindheim. Variations in the atlantic inﬂow to the nordic seas,
1955–1996.
Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 47(6):
1035–1057, 2000.
J. Moum and D. Caldwell. Local inﬂuences on shear-ﬂow turbulence in the equatorial
ocean. Science, 230(4723):315–316, 1985.
W. H. Munk and D. E. Cartwright. Tidal spectroscopy and prediction. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, 259(1105):533–581, 1966.
V. T. Neal, S. Neshyba, and W. Denner. Thermal stratiﬁcation in the arctic ocean.
Science, 166(3903):373–374, 1969.
S. Rahmstorf. Ocean circulation and climate during the past 120,000 years. Nature,
419(6903):207, 2002.
S. Rahmstorf. Thermohaline ocean circulation. Encyclopedia of quaternary sciences,
5, 2006.
S. Rahmstorf, J. E. Box, G. Feulner, M. E. Mann, A. Robinson, S. Rutherford, and
E. J. Schaﬀernicht.
Exceptional twentieth-century slowdown in atlantic ocean
overturning circulation. Nature climate change, 5(5):475, 2015.
H. Renssen, B. van Geel, J. van der Plicht, and M. Magny. Reduced solar activity
as a trigger for the start of the younger dryas?
Quaternary International, 68:
373–383, 2000.
O. Reynolds. Xxix. an experimental investigation of the circumstances which de-
termine whether the motion of water shall be direct or sinuous, and of the law of
resistance in parallel channels. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal society of
London, (174):935–982, 1883.
58
==PAGE:60==
P. L. Richardson. On the history of meridional overturning circulation schematic
diagrams. Progress in Oceanography, 76(4):466–486, 2008.
J. Robson, P. Ortega, and R. Sutton. A reversal of climatic trends in the north
atlantic since 2005. Nature Geoscience, 9(7):513, 2016.
R. Schlitzer. Ocean data view, odv. awi. de, 2015.
A. Schmittner, P. Bakker, R. Beadling, J. Lenaerts, S. Mernild, O. Saenko, and
D. Swingedouw. Greenland ice sheet melting inﬂuence on the north atlantic. US
CLIVAR Variations, 14(2):32–37, 2016.
W. J. Schmitz Jr.
On the world ocean circulation. volume 1. some global fea-
tures/north atlantic circulation. Technical report, WOODS HOLE OCEANO-
GRAPHIC INSTITUTION MA, 1996.
J. Simpson and J. Hunter. Fronts in the irish sea. Nature, 250(5465):404, 1974.
J. Simpson, C. Allen, and N. Morris. Fronts on the continental shelf. Journal of
Geophysical Research: Oceans, 83(C9):4607–4614, 1978.
F. Spiess. The Meteor Expedition: Scientiﬁc Results of the German Atlantic Expe-
dition, 1925-1927. Amerind Publishing Company, 1985.
M. E. Stern. The “salt-fountain” and thermohaline convection. Tellus, 12(2):172–
175, 1960.
R. H. Stewart. Introduction to physical oceanography. Texas A & M University
College Station, 2008.
T. F. Stocker. The seesaw eﬀect. Science, 282(5386):61–62, 1998.
H. Stommel. A survey of ocean current theory. Deep Sea Research (1953), 4:149–184,
1957.
H. Stommel. Thermohaline convection with two stable regimes of ﬂow. Tellus, 13
(2):224–230, 1961.
H. U. Sverdrup, M. W. Johnson, R. H. Fleming, et al. The Oceans: Their physics,
chemistry, and general biology, volume 7. Prentice-Hall New York, 1942.
L. D. Talley. Descriptive physical oceanography: an introduction. Academic press,
2011.
C. W. Thomson. The Depths of the Sea: An Account of the General Results of the
Dredging Cruises of HMSS” Porcupine” and” Lightning” During the Summers of
1868, 1869, and 1870... Macmillan, 1873.
A. H. Voelker et al. Global distribution of centennial-scale records for marine isotope
stage (mis) 3: a database. Quaternary Science Reviews, 21(10):1185–1212, 2002.
B. Warren. Deep circulation in the world ocean. in; warren, ba. and wunsch, c.(eds),
evolution of physical oceanography, 1981.
G. W¨ust. Stratosphere of the Atlantic Ocean, volume 6. Amerind Company Pvt.,
1978.
59
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
(Appendix A title)
60
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.1: Salinity Cycle from surface to 1000 m depth (2002 to 2018), of the stud-
ied basins: Central Basin CB, North West Basin NWB, North East Basin NEB,
Second North East Basin NEB2, South Eat Basin SEB, Second South East Basin
SEB2, South West Basin SWB (from 2005-2018).
61
==PAGE:63==
Appendix B
(Appendix B title)
62
