==PAGE:1==
 
T E C H N I C A L  U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  D E N M A R K  
D E P A R T M E N T  O F  A P P L I E D  M A T H E M A T I C S  A N D  C O M P U T E R  S C I E N C E  
U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  C O P E N H A G E N  
F A C U L T Y  O F  H E A L T H  A N D  M E D I C A L  S C I E N C E S  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
Alessandro Montemurro 
Deep Learning in Electrocardiography 
Automatic Extraction of Features from Electrocardiogram 
Supervisor: Jan Madsen 
Co-Supervisor: Jørgen K. Kanters 
Submitted on June 28, 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
2 
Name of department: 
Department of Biomedical Sciences 
 
Author(s): 
Alessandro Montemurro 
 
Title and subtitle: 
Deep Learning in Electrocardiography. Automatic Features Extraction 
from ECG 
 
Topic description: 
Temporal Convolutional Networks are used to automatically learn 
features from electrocardiograms and do classification based on the 
extracted features. 
 
Supervisor: 
Professor, Jan Madsen, Department of Applied Mathematics and 
Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark 
 
Co-Supervisor: 
Associate Professor Jørgen K. Kanters, Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Laboratory of Experimental Cardiology 
 
Submitted on 
June 28, 2019 
 
 
 
This article is submitted as partial fulfillment of the Master of Science program in Mathematical 
Modelling and Computation at the Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations: 
AUC: 
Area Under Curve 
BMI: 
Body Mass Index 
BP: 
Blood Pressure 
CAM: 
Class Activation Map 
ECG:  
Electrocardiogram 
GAP: 
Global Average Pooling 
HR: 
Heart Rate 
KNN: 
k-Nearest Neighbor 
LVH: 
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 
MFC: 
Most Frequent Classifier 
RF: 
Random Forest 
ROC: 
Receiver Operating Curve 
SLI: 
Sokolow-Lyon Index 
SVM: 
Support Vector Machine 
TCN: 
Temporal Convolutional Network 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
3 
Abstract 
 
BACKGROUND: Electrocardiogram (ECG) can be done using automated algorithms. Many of 
these methods use machine learning and use heuristics and hand-crafted features as predictors. 
This might represent a disadvantage because it might not be trivial to select the appropriate feature 
to carry out accurate classification.  This problem can be avoided with an approach where the 
algorithm is given the raw ECG time series as an input. Rather than a manual feature extraction, 
the algorithm learns itself the relevant features from the raw signal.  
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to analyze to what extent raw ECG signals can be used for 
diagnostics and classification using deep learning. 
METHODS: 6667 individuals from the Inter99 population study were included (51% female, 
mean age 46.3±8.0). The model used Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN). 10 seconds 
recording of lead V5 (sampling rate 500 Hz) was fed into the network. The ending part of the 
network consisted of a fully connected layer, where the extracted features were used to carry out 
the classification. To prevent bias due to the unbalance of the data set, the classes were weighted 
by the number of occurrences. We predicted the following classes: sinus bradycardia, fast heart 
rate (heart rate > 90), gender and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Furthermore, an attention 
map is built, such that it is possible to go from the output back to the input and understand which 
part of the ECG the network looked at to classify the specific ECG. 
RESULTS: The best classification accuracy was achieved with sinus bradycardia, where 98% of 
the observations were correctly classified. Fast heart rate reached 98% accuracy. LVH 
classification resulted in 91% accuracy; gender got an accuracy of 87%. 
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that convoluted networks can be used on raw ECG 
signals to avoid manual features to correctly classify ECG signals. 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
4 
 
ABSTRACT 
3 
1. INTRODUCTION 
6 
1.1. Cardiac Electrophysiology 
6 
1.1.1. Heart Anatomy 
6 
1.1.2. Heart Actions 
7 
1.1.3. Electrocardiogram 
7 
1.1.4. Heart Rhythms 
9 
1.2. Artificial Neural Networks 
9 
1.2.1. Convolutional Neural Networks 
11 
1.2.2. Neural Networks for classification 
14 
1.2.3. Training and testing 
15 
2. METHODS 
17 
2.1. Populations 
17 
2.2. Dilated Convolutions 
17 
2.3. Class Activation Map 
19 
2.4. Network Architecture 
21 
2.5. Experimental Setup 
24 
3. RESULTS 
27 
3.1 Sinus Bradycardia 
27 
3.2. Fast Heart Rate 
28 
3.3. Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 
29 
3.4. Gender 
31 
4. DISCUSSION 
33 
4.1. Class Activation Maps 
35 
4.2. Limitations 
38 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
5 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
39 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
40 
APPENDIX 
42 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
1. Introduction 
 
 
6 
1. Introduction 
Electrocardiogram (ECG) classification covers an important role in anomaly detection in 
the heart. Due to the large amount of available data, healthcare systems are adopting 
automated classification methods. These algorithms are built upon machine learning 
techniques and use heuristics and hand-crafted features as predictors. Examples of such 
features are gender, age, BMI, blood pressure, cardiac troponin levels, and so on.  Manually 
extracted features might represent a disadvantage since there is the possibility not to find 
the most meaningful features to carry out an accurate classification. It might happen that the 
algorithm doesn’t show a good performance; the cause could be that the chosen model is 
not the best one for the problem to be solved. Another possible explanation is that the data 
given to the model are not informative enough and are not really correlated with the specific 
variable to predict. The problem of selecting the most appropriate set of features can be 
avoided by using a so-called end-to-end approach: the algorithm is given only the raw ECG 
voltage data as input. Rather than a manual features extraction, the algorithm learns itself 
some abstract but relevant features with high predictive power. 
 
The objective of this study is to understand if artificial neural networks are able to learn 
something from ECGs and carry out classification. In particular, we want to avoid defining 
hand-crafted features and let the neural network learn the most relevant features by itself. 
Furthermore, we want to visualize the extracted features. This can be done by studying the 
parts of the input that were given high attention by the network during the classification.  
 
1.1. Cardiac Electrophysiology 
1.1.1. Heart Anatomy 
The heart is a cone-shaped muscle located in the thoracic cavity. Its dimension varies with 
the body size and it is approximately as big as a closed fist. The heart is surrounded by a 
membrane called pericardium. Internally, the heart is divided into four chambers – two on 
the left and two on the right. The atria are placed on the upper part of the heart, while the 
lower chambers are called ventricles. The atria receive blood returning to heart; the 
==PAGE:7==
1. Introduction 
 
 
7 
ventricles receive blood from the atria and contracts to pump the blood out of the heart, into 
the arteries.  
1.1.2. Heart Actions 
The four heart chambers function coordinately. Their action is synchronized such that when 
atria contraction -called atrial systole- takes place, there is the ventricular diastole, i.e., the 
ventricles relax. In the same fashion, when ventricles contract (ventricular systole), the atria 
relax (atrial diastole). An interval in which both atria and ventricles are relaxed follows and 
the cycle starts over again. These phases constitute a heartbeat, also known as the cardiac 
cycle. 
 
Contraction and relaxation of the heart muscle are caused by an electric current that passes 
through the heart fibers. The sinoatrial node is a region in the right atrium that is capable 
of auto-generating an impulse. This impulse is then spread in the heart through a system of 
fibers. The resting state of the heart cells, also called myocytes, is polarized. The excess of 
potassium ions (K+) outside the cell membrane and of sodium ions (Na+) inside cause a 
potential difference. This voltage causes the myocyte to depolarize, with consequent 
contraction of the muscle.  
1.1.3. Electrocardiogram 
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a recording of the electrical activity of the heart. Precisely, 
it records the electrical changes in the heart during the different events in the cardiac cycle. 
Figure 1: The 12 leads of a standard ECG along with the positions and the names of the leads. 
==PAGE:8==
1. Introduction 
 
 
8 
The ECG is recorded by placing electrodes on the surface of the chest and limbs. It is 
possible to detect the ECG pattern from the surface of the body since body fluids can 
conduct electrical currents.  
A standard ECG shows 12 tracings recorded from different angles, called leads. There are 
8 principal leads; four additional leads are derived from the main ones. Figure 1 shows the 
positioning of the electrodes and the corresponding lead name.  
 
A normal heartbeat presents many deflections, called waves. Figure 2 shows a schematic 
tracing of a cardiac cycle.  
When the myocytes are in their resting state, i.e., polarized, there is no detection of a 
difference in potential. The heart cycle starts when the sinoatrial node generated a cardiac 
impulse. The atria depolarize and this cause an upward deflection on the ECG, the P wave, 
that lasts less than <80 ms. The P wave detection is rapidly followed by the contraction of 
the atria. Once the contraction is finished, the cells return to their resting state and the ECG 
shows a plateau phase where the action potential is at its baseline. The interval between the 
beginning of the P wave and the beginning of the QRS complex is known as the PR segment 
(120-200 ms). 
After the atrial contraction, the impulse spreads to the ventricles, that rapidly depolarize. 
This causes a big change to be recorded on the ECG, the QRS complex, that is 80-100 ms 
long. The amplitude of this complex is bigger than the other waves because the walls of the 
ventricles are thicker than the walls of the atria. This causes the atrial repolarization to be 
hidden. The QRS complex is recorded just prior to the contraction of the ventricle walls. 
Figure 2: Schematic representation of the ECG of a heart in a normal sinus rhythm. 
==PAGE:9==
1. Introduction 
 
 
9 
When the ventricular fibers repolarize, a slow, upwards wave is recorded, the T wave (160 
ms). The baseline interval between the QRS complex and the T wave is called ST segment. 
The ST segment is recorded while the ventricles are contracting. It is sometimes possible to 
notice a small wave after the T wave, the U wave, that corresponds to the relaxation of the 
papillary muscles. One cycle is now completed, and it starts over again. The duration from 
the initial impulse of the sinoatrial node until the repolarization of the ventricles is 
approximately 225 ms. 
1.1.4. Heart Rhythms 
A normal resting heart rate (HR) for an adult is between 60 and 90 beats per minute (bpm). 
When the HR is lower than 60, the condition is called bradycardia, while if HR is higher 
than 90 it is said tachycardia. 
The term sinus rhythm indicates a cardiac cycle that starts in the sinoatrial node, with the 
generation of an impulse. In the ECG, a sinus rhythm always shows a correctly oriented P 
wave. We talk about sinus bradycardia when the HR is less than 60 but there is sinus 
rhythm. Similarly, sinus tachycardia is characterized by an HR greater than 90 and the 
presence of P wave.  
The rhythm is said junctional when the depolarization of the cardiac muscle doesn’t begin 
in the S-A node but in the atrioventricular node, in the “junction” between ventricles and 
atria. Because the impulse does not go through the atria walls, the ECG is characterized by 
the absence of the P wave. 
1.2. Artificial Neural Networks 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) were originally designed by Warren McCulloch and 
Walter Pits (Pitts & McCulloch, 1943) to give a mathematical model of neuronal activity.  
Today, with the advent of powerful computers and an always growing amount of data, 
neural networks are used for the most diverse applications.  
As described later in this section, ANN can be seen as function-approximation methods. 
The strength relies on the fact that neural networks are able to exploit relations between 
input and output that are highly non-linear. The universal approximation theorem (Csáji, 
2001) proved that it is possible to approximate every function (thus, solve every task) with 
a single layer neural network, as long as the number of hidden units is large enough. 
 
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction 
 
 
10 
Figure 3 shows a schematic representation of a neural network. The data array, denoted by 
𝑥0, 𝑥1, … , 𝑥𝐷, is fed into the network through the input layer. The data points are then 
combined with a weighted sum. This weighted linear combination is passed through a non-
linear function h to generate the hidden layer. Finally, the output is computed by combining 
the hidden layer with a new set of parameters and passing it through a non-linearity. A 
network that has a structure as the one described is called feed-forward neural network or 
fully connected neural network, to indicate that all the neurons are inter-connected. 
 
The function h used to generate the hidden and output layers is called the activation function. 
Following the biological inspiration of neural networks, the activation function wants to  
represent the rate of action potential firing a neuron (Hodgkin & Huxley, 1952). With the  
general term activation, it is meant the value that a certain neuron assumes, after being 
activated. Non-linear activation functions help improving the learning capacity of the 
network, making it possible to model non-linear relations in the data; this would not be 
possible because the combination of the neurons is only linear. The use of non-linearities 
also improves the robustness of the model (Johansen, et al., 2016). 
 The choice of such function depends on the specific tasked to be solved. A broadly used 
activation function is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), defined as ReLU (z) = max (0, z). 
Another function that is often used on the output layer is the sigmoid function 𝜎(𝑧) =
1  / (1 + 𝑒−𝑧). Figure 4 shows the ReLU and sigmoid function plots. ReLU function is used 
Figure 3: Schematic representation of a feed-forward neural network with one hidden layer. (Bishop, 2007) 
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction 
 
 
11 
thanks to is computational efficiency; sigmoid is used in classification tasks to squeeze a 
real number into the interval [0,1], such that it can be interpreted as a class probability.  
1.2.1. Convolutional Neural Networks 
Common machine learning algorithms, as well as feed-forward neural networks, work fine 
for regression or classification as long as we give some features as input. In case we are 
working, for instance, with signals or images, these features have to be manually extracted. 
Based on the domain knowledge, we assume that the features we decide to use as predictors 
are the optimal ones to have an accurate prediction. However, in some situations, this 
approach doesn’t work because we might be unable to identify those features that highly 
correlated with the output and that guarantee a good performance.  
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) overcome this problem by learning themselves 
the features to extract and use. A CNN consists of a number of convolutional layers that 
transform the input with convolutions; the output of the convolutional layers is then fed into 
a fully connected neural network. CNNs are usually referred to as features extractors 
because the actual classification is made by the fully connected layer using the convolved 
input as a predictor. In this sense, we can think of the convolved input as the set of features 
that the CNN extracted 
 
The building block of a convolutional layer is the convolution operation between the input 
and the convolutional filter. The idea behind the convolution is that, given a filter, also called 
kernel, we overlap it onto the signal ad we compute the sum of the element-wise product 
between the filter and the overlapped part of the input. This generates one number. Then the 
filter is slid on the input and convolutions are computed. The convolution finishes when the 
entire input has been convolved with this sliding filter. Hence, the filter is scanning the input 
Figure 4: ReLU (left) and sigmoid (right) function: the two most popular choices for the activation functions. 
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction 
 
 
12 
to find some patterns. Figure 5 shows an example of a 2D convolution along with the 
procedure to compute the output.  
 
In the 1D case, if 𝑥(𝑡) is the input sequence and 𝑓: 0,1, . . 𝑘−1 →𝑅 is a kernel, the (discrete) 
convolution is given by 
𝐹(𝑡) = (𝑥∗𝑓)(𝑡) = ∑𝑓(𝑖)
𝑘−1
𝑖=0
⋅𝑥𝑡−𝑖. 
F is the sought feature map extracted by the CNN. In each convolutional layer, it is possible 
to choose how many channels the layer should have. If a layer has a back of n filters, the 
input is convolved in parallel with n different filters and we will end up with n different 
feature maps. Hence, the network can learn multiple features from the input signal. This 
ensures that the network is able to extract as many information as possible to carry out an 
accurate classification.  
Even if the extracted features are abstract and non-easily interpretable, their optimality has 
to do with the fact that they are extracted while minimizing an error function. Thus, the final 
set of features is the set that minimizes the error.  
 
It is worth mention that CNNs solve also another problem where other approaches fail. 
CNNs can incorporate inside the model the correlation between a point and its neighbors. 
In case the input is a 1D signal, this means that the CNN successfully models the time 
Figure 5: Convolution operation of a 2D array with a 3x3 filter. The computations that produced the 
output are shown. 
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction 
 
 
13 
dependencies present in the input. This is possible because the convolutional filters 
transform together entire parts of the signals. Specifically, the weights of the network are 
shared between the points that are convolved with the same filter. Other methods fail 
because, even if the input is a time series, each time point is considered independently from 
the surrounding points.   
 
The following example shows how CNN act. For the sake of visualization, a CNN with 2D 
input (image) is described. However, convolution operation can be defined for input with 
arbitrary dimension, as long as the convolutional filter has the same dimension of the input. 
Consider the picture in Figure 6. A CNN was trained to classify cats according to their breed. 
The network had many convolutional layers; the first convolutional layer had 9 filters. The 
picture shows the input image along with the nine filters of the first convolutional layer. We 
can see that each filter focused on different parts of the input. For instance, filter 4 spotted 
the muzzle, filter 9 highlighted the eyes and filter 2 focused on the ears. Note that the 
network learnt itself to find the parts of the input that can be used to classify the image. In 
this sense, the convolutional filters can be seen as extracted features.  
 
 
 
Figure 6: Example of convolutional filters from a 2D CNN. The input picture is the one on the left. On the right 
panel, nine filters from the first convolutional layer are shown. Each filter focuses on specific parts of the image: 
the eyes, the muzzle, the edges, and so on. These features are learnt by the network alone. 
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction 
 
 
14 
POOLING 
It is common practice to add a pooling layer after the convolutions. Essentially, the pooling 
operation progressively reduces the dimension of the convolution output. CNNs may have 
global or local pooling layers. In both cases, the dimension is shrunk by combining a set of 
neurons. In the local pooling, we set a number n of neurons and the can average their values 
(average pooling) or take the maximum (max pooling). Note that local pooling can be seen 
as a downsampling method.  
In global pooling, the entire output of the convolution is combined into one number. Thus, 
the output of the global pooling layer will be a vector with a number of elements equal to 
the number of channels in the convolutional layer. Global pooling layer is useful between 
the last convolutional layer at the first dense layer, when the multiple channels must be 
somehow merged and flattened. In global average pooing (GAP), each channel is combined 
by averaging it, whereas in global max pooling the maximum is taken.  
1.2.2. Neural Networks for classification 
Consider a classification problem where the input has to be mapped into a set of classes 𝐶, 
where 𝐶 has 𝑚 elements, i.e., the problem has 𝑚 classes. Given an input, we want to 
quantify the probability that the input belongs to a specific class 𝑐 ∈𝐶. With neural 
networks, we generate a vector of probabilities where each entry represents the probability 
that the observation belongs to that specific class. The final classification is made by picking 
the class with the higher probability among the others. 
 
Consider an input 𝑥 and let 𝑐 ∈𝐶 be the class to be predicted. The goal of the classification 
is to quantify the probability that the input belongs to class c. A vector of predicted class 
probabilities 𝑦∈𝑅𝑚 is generated. Note that each class in 𝐶 will be assigned a probability: 
[𝑦]
𝑗represents the probability that the observation belongs to the class 𝑐𝑗. 
Given a neural network method NN with a set of parameters Θ, the probabilities vector is 
given by 
y = σ(NN(𝑥; Θ )) 
and the predicted class is then given by 𝑐= max (𝑦). 
Creating a good model that is capable of correctly classifying the input is thus equivalent to 
the maximization of the conditional probability of the class, given the input: 
𝑃(𝑦= 𝑦𝑐|𝑥). 
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction 
 
 
15 
 
Note that, from the above definition, a neural network can be seen as a function 
approximation method, where the function to approximate maps the input into its class.  
 
1.2.3. Training and testing 
Once the best architecture is designed according to the data and the task, the model has to 
be fitted to data. In general, a machine learning/deep learning algorithm consists of different 
phases. First, the neural network has to learn from data and then its performance should be 
assessed on new, unseen data. For this purpose, the dataset is split into two subsets, the 
training and test set. The first set is used to train the algorithm, the latter to evaluate the 
model and assess its performance. As a rule of thumb, two-thirds of the dataset goes into the 
training set, the remaining part constitutes the test set.  
 
Before starting with the description of the training and testing, some definitions should be 
given. When the size of the dataset is too big that cannot be handled by a computer at once 
because of memory issues, it is useful to divide the data into smaller sets, called batches. 
The batches are given one by one to the network and the weights are updated. Once all the 
batches are passed through the network once, then one epoch is completed. The algorithm 
is trained for multiple epochs: the dataset is passed through the same network multiple times. 
In this way, we avoid the underfitting, i.e., a situation where the network is not really able 
to learn anything from the data. However, when the number of epochs is too large, it leads 
overfitting: the model is too specific for the particular data used in the training and it is not 
able to generalize. Unfortunately, there is no rule to decide the optimal number of epochs.  
 
TRAINING: The training set is split into small batches. The batch size is usually 32 but can 
be smaller or larger, depending on how big each input is. The first batch is passed through 
the network; at the beginning, the weights of the network are randomly initialized. The 
output for each input in the batch is computed. This phase is classed forward pass. Note 
that the output of the network is the sought prediction. It is now possible to compare the 
prediction and the ground truth; the error of such prediction can be computed, once a suitable 
error function is chosen. Note that, in the training phase, the network is given both the input 
and the ground truth because it has to learn relations between input and output.  
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction 
 
 
16 
The next step is to update the weights of the network. This is done in the backward pass, 
where the error is propagated back to the input to understand which neurons caused the error 
to increase. Neurons that led to an increase in the error are under-weighted. This is the basic 
idea of the backpropagation algorithm. Because this algorithm involves complex 
derivatives calculations, numerical methods, known as optimizers, have to be used. The 
optimizer tries to find the absolute minimum of the error functions in an iterative way: it 
takes small steps on the error function in the steepest downhill direction. The size of a step 
is called the learning rate of the optimizer. Too high learning rate might cause the learning 
jump over the minimum; too small learning rate might cause the optimizer to be stuck in a 
local minimum.   
Once the weights are updated, the second batch is fed in the network, the prediction is 
output, the error is computed, and the weights are updated again. This is done for all the 
batches and for multiple epochs.  
Note that, in the case that a CNN is being trained, the optimization is made both on the 
weights of the network and the convolutional filters. Also in the case of the filters, they are 
updated such that there is a decrease in the error. The final configuration of the filters is the 
optimal one and this guarantees that the CNN extracted exactly the best set of features for 
the specific task to be solved (because the error reaches its minimum). 
 
TESTING: After the model is trained, a set of weights for the network is obtained. We now 
need to assess the performance of the model by feeding new data, that the model hasn’t seen 
during the training. For this purpose, the test set is used, and the model is not given the 
ground truth. The test set is divided into batches and each batch is passed through the 
network. Once the prediction is made, the error is computed by comparing prediction and 
ground truth; this gives the final performance of the model. The evaluation stops here; 
hence, the evaluation only has a forward pass and doesn’t have the backward phase because 
we don’t need to update the weights. It is important that the test set is completely 
independent of the training set. The network should be always evaluated on never seen data 
to assess its ability to generalize to new data.  
 
 
==PAGE:17==
2. Methods 
 
 
17 
2. Methods 
2.1. Populations 
The dataset used in this study was obtained from the Inter99 study population (Jørgensen T, 
2003). The Inter99 dataset collected data about randomly chosen, free-living Danish people. 
A total of 6667 individuals were included. The subjects were aged between 30 and 60 and 
51% of the population was female. 
Resting 12-leads digital 10-seconds electrocardiogram was recorded for all the subjects. 
Automatic measurements were obtained using the Marquette 12SL software (v.241, GE 
Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA). The sampling frequency was 500 Hz; hence, each 
recording is 5000 samples long. Automatic measurements included heart-rate, peaks 
amplitudes or QRS durations; other features were derived from such measurements, such as 
the Sokolow-Lyon index (Sokolow & Lyon, 1949) for the assessment of the left ventricular 
hypertrophy. The 12SL algorithm also generated a median electrocardiogram, obtained by 
averaging the PQRST segments in the long 10-seconds ECG. The median ECG is 1.2-
seconds long, with 600 samples. 
 
2.2. Dilated Convolutions 
As described in the Introduction, an ordinary convolution is able to consider a history size 
that increases linearly with the depth of the network. This might represent a disadvantage 
because one should adopt a larger filter to consider a bigger portion of the input. This can 
be time and computation costly, especially for those situations where a long history is 
needed to make an accurate prediction. This problem can be avoided using dilated 
convolutions (Oord, et al., 2016). Developed for semantic segmentation (Yu & Koltun, 
2016), dilated convolutions enable the network to have a bigger history size, the so-called 
receptive field.  
Dilated convolutions differ from simple convolutions because the filter is convolved with 
elements of the input that are not contiguous in time. The dilation rate d of the convolution 
is defined as the number of elements that can be skipped when convolving the filter and the 
input. 
==PAGE:18==
2. Methods 
 
 
18 
 
Figure 7 shows an example of a dilated convolutions with different dilations rates and filter 
size k = 3. Note that when dilated and ordinary convolutions are equivalent. When d = 1, 
the filter of size 3 in convolved with three contiguous elements of the input. Note that dilated 
and ordinary convolutions are equivalent in this case. When d = 2, the filter is convolved 
with every second element of the hidden layer; this means that a filter of size 3 can cover 5 
elements of the input. When d = 4, the filter is convolved with every fourth element of the 
hidden layer, such that the filter covers 9 elements of the input. Thus, in dilated convolution, 
it is possible to insert a fixed step or hole between two adjacent elements in the input. In 
general, when using a filter with size k and dilation rate d, the receptive field of the 
convolution is (𝑘−1)𝑑. Using a large dilation rate enables an output at a top level to be 
representative for a bigger portion of the input. As suggested in (Oord, et al., 2016), d can 
be increased with the depth of the network (i.e., 𝑑= 𝑂(2𝑖)); in this way, the receptive field 
increases exponentially. Furthermore, because each convolutional layer has multiple filters, 
we are sure that none of the samples will be skipped: each point will be “hit” by at least one 
convolution. 
 
More formally, if 𝑥(𝑡) is an 1D input sequence and 𝑓: 0,1, . . 𝑘−1 →𝑅 is a filter, the dilated 
convolution operation is given by 
Figure 7: Dilated convolutions with d = 1, 2, 4 and filter size k = 3. The blue lines represent the 
convolution operation. 
==PAGE:19==
2. Methods 
 
 
19 
𝐹(𝑡) = (𝑥∗𝑑𝑓)(𝑡) = ∑𝑓(𝑖)
𝑘−1
𝑖=0
⋅𝑥𝑡−𝑑⋅𝑖 
Where d is the dilation rate, k is the size of the filter and 𝑡 − 𝑑 ⋅𝑖 indicates that we are 
looking back in the past. 
Dilated convolution can be used in CNNs by simply substituting ordinary convolutions with 
dilated ones. Note that the network will now have another hyperparameter to tune, the 
dilation rate.  
2.3. Class Activation Map 
In this section, a Class Activation Map (CAM) is defined and the mathematical formulation 
is derived. A class activation map is an array with the same size of the input, and, for each 
point of the input, it tells how important that point was for the overall classification. CAMs 
are able to identify those regions of the inputs that were the most relevant; in other words, 
they spot the region of the input that the network looked at. Note that CAM is specific for 
each category in the classification; hence, a CAM for a particular class indicates the 
discriminative input region used by the CNN to identify that category. 
CAM can be visualized for all the convolutional layers in the network. However, as Zhou 
et al. (2016) suggest, they work better if the layer to be visualized in the convolutional layer 
that precedes the dense layer.  
 
The intuitions behind Class Activation Map is to use the convolutional layer before the 
dense layer to extract the information that is completely lost when going from the 
convolutional, ‘pre-dense’ layer to the fully connected layer. The information that is lost is 
not used by the network in the actual classification phase. Only the parts of the signal that 
are kept between these two layers carry relevant information.  
Figure 8 shows a 2D example of how CAMs work. The aim of the classification is to classify 
dogs according to their breed. To accomplish the task, the network has to first localize the 
dog and then carry out classification on the breed. The network used for the classification 
consists of some convolutional layers. After that, global average pooling layer gives the 
spatial average of the feature map of each unit at the last convolutional layer. The final 
output is then generated making a weighted combination of these values. The CAM, given 
as a heatmap, shows how the dog is localized in the input picture. For each unit, the attention 
==PAGE:20==
2. Methods 
 
 
20 
map is generated with a weighted sum of the feature maps of the last convolutional layer. 
The attention associated with weight 𝑤1 shows that the importance is given to the boy’s face  
rather than to the dog; thus, 𝑤1 will be given a low value. Similarly, 𝑤2 will have a high 
value because the corresponding map focuses on the dog’s face and tail. 
 
Formally, consider an input 𝑥(𝑡) with t ∈ 𝑅. Let 𝑓𝑘(𝑡) be the activation of unit k in the last 
convolutional layer at time t. For each unit k, the global average pooling operation is given 
by 
𝐹𝑘= ∑𝑓𝑘(𝑡)
𝑡
; 
Note that the global average pooling is given by a time average since the sum is over the 
time t.  
Let’s consider a binary classification example, where the class can be either 0 or 1. For a 
given class c  ∈{0,1}, the class scores are defined as  𝑆𝑐= ∑𝑤𝑘
𝑐𝐹𝑘
𝑘
, where 𝑤𝑘
𝑐 is the weight 
to class c for unit k. In other words, 𝑤𝑘
𝑐 is the importance of 𝐹𝑘 for class c. Note that the 
class score is given by a sum over the units k; thus, we are summing the contributions that 
each unit gave in the overall classification for class c. Lastly, the probability of class c is 
given by the class score 𝑆𝑐 passed through a sigmoid function: 
 
Figure 8: Class Activation Mapping. The highlighted regions are the class-specific discriminative regions. (Zhou et 
al., 2016) 
==PAGE:21==
2. Methods 
 
 
21 
Pc = σ(𝑆𝑐) =
1
1 + eSc. 
 
Given the probabilities of the classes, we want to identify which parts of the input 
determined the classification of the specific input.  
Merging the definitions of 𝑆𝑐 and 𝐹𝑘, we obtain 
 
𝑆𝑐= ∑wk
c𝑓𝑘(𝑡)
𝑡
= ∑∑𝑤𝑘
𝑐𝑓𝑘(𝑡)
𝑡
𝑘
= ∑𝑀𝑐(𝑡)
𝑘
 
 
where 𝑀𝑐(𝑡) = ∑𝑤𝑘 
𝑐𝑓𝑘(𝑡)
𝑘
, called Class Activation Map for class c, can be interpreted as 
the importance of the activation at time t leading to the classification of the input to class c. 
We see that the score for the class c is given by the sum over all the units k of all the 
activation maps at time t. Hence, we are able to define a mapping from the output to the 
input that tells the parts of the input that where strongly activated and that led to the 
assignment of the input to class c. By upsampling the CAM to the size of the original input 
signal, it is possible to identify the signal regions most relevant to the particular class.   
 
2.4. Network Architecture 
With Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN), we will refer to a 1-dimensional CNN with 
dilated convolutions instead of ordinary convolution. 
 
Figure 9 depicts the network architecture used for the classification. The main parts of the 
network are: 
• Input layer: The ECG is fed into the network; 
• Convolution + Pooling block: The ECG is convolved and down-sampled multiple 
time. The network is now learning the features; 
• Fully connected layer: the extracted features are combined; 
• Output layer: the probabilities of the two classes are computed and the final 
classification is made. 
The input layer consists of a number of input neurons equal to the number of samples in the 
ECG. The core part of the network consists of a block that is repeated 5 times sequentially, 
==PAGE:22==
2. Methods 
 
 
22 
with different values for the hyperparameters, i.e., filter size, number of filters, dilation rate, 
and so on.  
Each block starts with a convolutional layer; the filter size k varies in the interval [3,15], 
while the number of filters is between 16 and 64. Also, the dilation rate d changes with the 
depth of the network, between 3 and 10. After the convolution, a max pooling layer is 
applied with rate 2; in other words, the signal is down-sampled by a factor 2. In this phase, 
the network is actually learning some abstract representation of the electrocardiogram. The 
hidden convolutional layers are an alternative representation of the ECG. During the training 
phase, the network learns itself how to convolve and combine inputs to generate these 
hidden representations of the ECGs.  
The size k of the convolutional filter tells how many samples of the ECG are considered in 
one single convolution operation. Ideally, it would be appropriate to use a filter that is large 
enough to capture a significant portion of the ECG, e.g., the entire QRS complex or T-wave. 
In practice, this is not computationally optimal. For instance, the QRS duration is between 
80 and 100 milliseconds. If the sampling frequency is 500 Hz, it corresponds to 50 samples. 
Convolutions with filter size equal to 50 can be computationally hard, considering that each 
bank of convolutions has up to 64 filters and that multiple convolutional layers are stacked 
sequentially. It is because of this unfeasible problem that dilated convolutions come into 
action. 
After the five convolutional blocks, Global Average Pooling function is applied, and the 
convolutional filters are combined into a one-dimensional vector. The terminal part of the 
network consists of a fully connected layer with 128 units. In this part of the network, the 
information carried by the global average pooling vector is combined.  
Because the network was built for binary classification, the output consists of two neurons, 
one for each class. Each of these neurons contains a real number, that represents the 
activation of that neuron. Since we want to obtain a class probability, first we need to 
squeeze the output into the interval (0,1) with the sigmoid function. This finally gives the 
probabilities of the two classes. The final decision is made by thresholding the output of the 
sigmoid.  
 
A detailed description of the network, with all the values for the hyperparameters, is given 
in Table 1. 
 
==PAGE:23==
2. Methods 
 
 
23 
 
Figure 9: TCN architecture used in this study. The input consists of lead V5 of the ECG. The input is 
convolved and pooled multiple times in sequence to extract the features. The output of the last convolution 
is then flattened with a global average pooling layer. A fully connected layer is then used to make the 
actual computation. 
==PAGE:24==
2. Methods 
 
 
24 
2.5. Experimental Setup 
The dataset was split into training and test set, respectively two thirds and one-third of the 
entire size. The model was trained on the first set and the generalizability was evaluated on 
the test set. The network was trained for 200 epochs using mini batches of size 64.  
The TCN was trained using Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with learning rate ϵ >
 0. In this study, the learning rate was obtained by grid searching in the interval from 10-4 to 
10-1, where the best convergence in training was given by ϵ = 1.5 ⋅10−3. 
During the training phase, the network was optimized by minimizing a categorical cross-
entropy loss function: 
 
𝐿(y, ŷ) = −y ̂ log(y) −(1 −ŷ) log(1 −y) 
 
Layer name 
Details 
Input 
5000x1 
Conv1d_1 
n = 64, k = 15, d = 3 
MaxPooling 
Pooling_factor =  2 
Conv1d_2 
n = 64, k = 15, d = 5 
MaxPooling 
Pooling_factor =  2 
Conv1d_3 
n = 32, k = 7, d = 7 
MaxPooling 
Pooling_factor =  2 
Conv1d_4 
n = 32, k = 5, d = 9 
MaxPooling 
Pooling_factor =  2 
Conv1d_5 
n = 16, k = 3, d = 10 
MaxPooling 
Pooling_factor =  2 
GlobalAveragePooling 
- 
Dense_1 
128 
Sigmoid 
- 
Output 
0/1 
Total parameters 
4,929,986 
Table 1: Detailed description of the network architecture, layer by layer, along with the values for the hyperparameters. n 
is the number of convolutional filters, k is the size and d is the dilation rate. 
==PAGE:25==
2. Methods 
 
 
25 
where y is the ground truth and 𝑦̂ is the model prediction. Note that cross-entropy function 
is given by the negative log-likelihood function.  
Simard et al. (2003) showed that using cross-entropy for classification tasks instead of the 
sum-of-squares error function, the training was faster, and the model exhibited improved 
generalization.  
 
To take into account eventually skewed (or unbalanced) classes in the classification, it is 
useful to weight, during the training only, the loss function according to the class 
frequencies. This is done by defining a dictionary that assigns a weight to each class. 
Intuitively, giving high weight to elements of an under-represented class, the network is told 
to pay more attention to those samples.  
Also, the accuracy metrics of the classifier is corrected to avoid bias due to the unbalanced 
datasets. Instead of common accuracy, balanced accuracy, i.e., an average of the true 
positive rate for both classes, is used: 
 
Balanced accuracy = 1
2 (
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁+
𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃). 
 
Another metrics used to assess the performance of the classifier is the F1 score (van 
Rijsbergen, 1979). F1 score is defined as a weighted average of precision and recall. F1 
score can have values in the interval [0, 1]. The higher the score, the better the performance 
of the classifier. 
 
All the models were written in Python v.3.6.8. The networks were built and configured using 
the deep learning framework Keras1 v.2.2.4. TensorFlow2 v.1.13.1 backend was used to 
compile the CUDA (a GPU interpretable language) code. Visualization of attention 
                                                 
 
 
1 Keras: The Python Deep Learning Library, Chollet F (2015). https://keras.io 
2 TensorFlow: A System for Large Scale Machine Learning, Abadi M et al. (2015). 
https://tensorflow.org 
 
==PAGE:26==
2. Methods 
 
 
26 
mappings was made with the Keras library Keras-vis3. The training was performed on an 
NVIDIA® GTX GeForce 1050 graphic card. 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
3 Keras-vis: Neural Networks Visualization Toolkit for Keras, Kotikalapudi et al. (2017).                  
https://github.com/raghakot/keras-vis 
==PAGE:27==
3. Results 
 
 
27 
3. Results 
In this section, the results of the experiments are described. The specific TCN architecture 
used in the tests is described in Section 2.4. The TCN approach has been tested with four 
different binary classification tasks: sinus bradycardia, fast heart rate, left ventricular 
hypertrophy, and gender. For each of the targets to be predicted, a new network was trained. 
For all the mentioned experiments, only lead V5 is fed into the network as input. For each 
classification task, the performance is measured with balanced accuracy, F1 score and 
confusion matrix. The Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) and Area Under Curve (AUC) 
(Woods & Bowyer, 1994) are also computed.  
All the presented results refer to a test set with size 2200 and drawn randomly from the 
original dataset. The test set is independent of the training set, i.e., there is no intersection 
between the two. 
 
 
A benchmark experiment is carried out to compare our TCN approach with a variety of 
classifiers, such as Logistic Regression (LR), Random Forest (RF) (Svetnik V, 2003), k-
Nearest Neighbors (KNN) (Peterson, 2009) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) (Marti A. 
Hearst, 1998). In the benchmark experiments, features extracted from the signal are used to 
make the classification. The accuracy of the trivial classifier that assigns each observation 
to the most frequent class is also given.  
3.1 Sinus Bradycardia 
The TCN for sinus bradycardia classification was trained and validated on the 10-seconds 
long ECG recording. The test set was composed of 553 positive and 1648 negative subjects. 
The classes weight was set to 3:1, i.e., one positive observation was weighted three times 
higher than a negative observation. 
 
TNC classifier achieved a balanced accuracy of 98.0% and an F1 score of 0.97. Figure 10 
shows the confusion matrix and the ROC curve. As shown in the confusion matrix, there 
were a total of 21 misclassifications: 8 false positives and 13 false negatives. The heart rates 
(in beats per minute) for the misclassified ECGs were: 
• False Positive HR =  [56  58  59  59  60  61  62  68]; 
• False Negative HR = [44  45  49  53  56  58  58  59  59  59  59  59  59]. 
==PAGE:28==
3. Results 
 
 
28 
Table 2 shows the results of the benchmark experiment. The benchmark classifiers were 
trained using QRS, QT, and PR durations.  
 
CLF 
ACC 
AUC 
TCN 
0.98 
0.99 
LR 
0.81 
0.89 
RF 
0.8 
0.83 
KNN 
0.74 
0.7 
SVM 
0.74 
0.5 
MFC 
0.74 
0.5 
         Table 2: Classification accuracy and AUC for sinus bradycardia detection. 
3.2. Fast Heart Rate 
Recall that, in this study, the definition of fast heart rate is HR > 90. Rhythm ECG recordings 
were used to train the network for fast heart rate detection. 
The support of the positive class, i.e., the number of positive observations for this 
classification task was 81 out of 2200. Due to the higher frequency of the negative class, a 
positive observation was given 10 times more importance than a negative observation. 
Results are reported in Figure 11. 
Only nine ECGs were misclassified. Specifically, the three false positives had heart rate 89, 
89 and 88 bpm; the false negatives instead were 91, 100 104, 106, 108 and 111 bpm. 
Figure 10: Confusion matrix and ROC curve for Sinus Bradycardia classification. The blue dashed line represents the 
ROC of a random classifier. 
==PAGE:29==
3. Results 
 
 
29 
The baseline models were trained using gender, BMI, QRS, QT, and PR intervals. The 
results are reported in Table 3.  
 
CLF 
ACC 
AUC 
TCN 
0.97 
0.98 
LR 
0.5 
0.5 
RF 
0.58 
0.5 
KNN 
0.69 
0.5 
SVM 
0.5 
0.5 
MFC 
0.97 
0.5 
Table 3: Classification report for fast HR classification. 
3.3. Left Ventricular Hypertrophy  
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy (LVH) is defined as the enlargement and thickening of the 
walls of the left ventricle. The criterion to assess LVH uses the Sokolow-Lyon index 
(Sokolow & Lyon, 1949). The index is defined as SLI = SV1 + max {RV5, RV6}. If SLI > 
3500, then the subject is LVH positive, with the left ventricle wall that is thicker than 35mm.  
 
The algorithm for LVH classification was trained using median lead V5 of the ECGs. LVH 
positive class was highly under-represented in the dataset: less than 2% of the subjects in 
the test set was positive for LVH. To overcome this issue, the weight for the LVH positive 
class was set to 20. The confusion matrix and the ROC curve are shown in Figure 12.  
Figure 11: Confusion matrix and ROC curve for Fast HR classification with TCN. 
==PAGE:30==
3. Results 
 
 
30 
 
                                   Figure 12: Confusion matrix and ROC curve LVH classification with TCN. 
 
Figure 13 shows the distribution of SL index for false positives. 339 observations were 
classified as positive even if they were negative. The median value of the Sokolow-Lion 
index for this subset is 2793. Only one ECG was classified as negative, but it was positive; 
its SL index was 3583. 
 
The benchmark experiments accuracy and AUC are given in Table 4. The covariates used 
in these experiments were gender, BMI, QT, QRS, and PR intervals. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Histogram of Sokolow Lyon index for the observations that were classified as 
positive by TCN but that are negative. 
==PAGE:31==
3. Results 
 
 
31 
CLF 
ACC 
AUC 
TCN 
0.91 
0.97 
LR 
0.51 
0.60 
RF 
0.50 
0.55 
KNN 
0.50 
0.53 
SVM 
0.5 
0.58 
MFC 
0.98 
0.5 
                                                                  Table 4: Results for LVH classification. 
 
3.4. Gender 
Gender was balanced in the dataset. Thus, there was no need to balance the classes and to 
use balanced metrics for classifier performance. The gender classifier was trained on median 
ECGs.  
The test accuracy of the TCN classifier was 86.7%; F1 score was 0.86 and AUC was 0.93. 
Figure 14 shows the confusion matrix and ROC curve for this classification task. 
 The baseline model for gender detection is  
 
Gender ∼BMI + QT + QRS + Qpeak,V5 + Rpeak,V5 + Speak,V5 + Tpeak,V5. 
 
The accuracy and the AUC for the benchmark experiments are listed in Table 5. 
 
Figure 14: Confusion matrix and ROC curve for gender detection with TCN. 
==PAGE:32==
3. Results 
 
 
32 
CLF 
ACC 
AUC 
TCN 
0.87 
0.93 
LR 
0.76 
0.84 
RF 
0.75 
0.83 
KNN 
0.64 
0.69 
SVM 
0.51 
0.5 
MFC 
0.51 
0.5 
 
                           Table 5: Classification results for gender experiment. 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
4. Discussion 
 
 
33 
4. Discussion 
In the present study, the classification of 6667 ECGs was made using a novel approach that 
uses convolutional neural networks. The raw voltage data is the only input of the classifier 
and no other variables are needed. 
The main findings are as follow; firstly, the classification with TCN has good performance (in 
terms of accuracy and F1) for all the experiments we made. This implies that the deep learning 
approach is successful: the voltage data only can be used for the classification and the 
convolutions are capable of extracting the features from ECGs. Secondly, we can “open the 
black box” of neural networks, comprehend the learning process of the network and understand 
the mechanism according to which the TCN classifies. This can be done by having a look at 
the regions of the input that the TCN finds particularly correlated with the output to predict.  
 
 
Sinus Bradycardia 
 
An advantage in this experiment was that the dataset was fairly balanced. Most of the false 
negative ECG had an HR of 59. Since bradycardia is defined as HR<60, it is understandable 
that the network classified them as negative because their HR is borderline. A similar 
discussion can be made about the false positive, where the HR was slightly above 60. 
 
Figure 15 shows an example of a false positive ECG. GE algorithm classified this ECG as 
junctional bradycardia. Even if the signal is noisy, the P wave is visible both in the median 
and in the long ECG. Since the HR is 44 an there is a correctly oriented P wave, that ECG 
has sinus bradycardia. This ECG shows that there might be a problem with the ground truth 
used to train the network. Hence, for this specific example, even if the ground truth is wrong, 
the TCN classified this ECG correctly. Indeed, the network might look for the presence of 
a P wave to assess that there is sinus rhythm.   
As shown in Table 1, TCN has the highest accuracy among the classifier of the benchmark. 
Linear regression and random forest are able to get a pretty high accuracy; KNN and SVM 
can’t be better than random, in fact, their accuracy is 74%, that is the frequency of the 
negative class. 
==PAGE:34==
4. Discussion 
 
 
34 
 
Fast HR 
Even if the big majority of ECG is negative, the TCN managed to model fast HR and 
correctly classified almost all the ECGs. As shown in the confusion matrix in Figure 9, there 
were only 3 false positives and 6 false negatives. All the false positives had an HR of 89 
bpm. It is clear that these ECG can be considered borderline because the threshold for fast 
HR is 90 bpm. 
Because of the high unbalance of the dataset (only the 3% of the observations were positive), 
all the benchmark classifiers are not able to distinguish between positive and negative class 
and will assign all the observations to the negative class. This is equivalent to randomly 
guess the outcome. This is also shown by the accuracy of the models, that is not significantly 
higher than 0.5. 
 
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 
From Figure 11 we see that the distribution of the Sokolow-Lyon index for false positives is 
very sparse. There are many cases in which the TCN fails in distinguishing clearly between 
positives and negatives. Because the positive class is much less frequent, class weights are 
used. By setting the weight of the positive class to 20 and the one for the negative class to 1, it 
seems that the positive class is now overestimated, in fact, the number of false positive 
Figure 15: Example of an false positive ECG. According to the 12SL algorithm, this ECG has junctional bradycardia; 
according to the TCN, it has sinus bradycardia. The ECG is bradycardic because the HR is 44. There is actually a sinus 
rhythm because of the presence of the P wave. The ground truth is wrong for this ECG. 
==PAGE:35==
4. Discussion 
 
 
35 
observations is very high (339) compared to the false negatives. At the same times, if we 
decrease the positive weight, then the overall accuracy decreases. 
It is worth mentioning that, according to the Sokolow-Lyon index definition, leads V1, V5 , and 
V6 are needed to identify an ECG as LVH positive or negative. However, the TCN is only 
given lead V5 and it is still able to classify with an accuracy of 98%. The explanation could be 
that the network identified another region of lead medial lead V5 that carries information about 
LVH. 
Regarding the benchmark experiments reported in Table 3, note that, except TCN, the other 
classifiers are able to beat the random, in fact, all of them have a balanced accuracy of 0.5. 
The most frequent classifier has an accuracy of 0.98 only because 98% of the observations 
were negative; the AUC has, in fact, a value of 0.5. 
 
Gender 
Gender detection is the task where TCN struggles the most, in fact, its accuracy is around 
87%, that is much lower than the other classifications.  
However, the neural network is more successful than other classifiers: as shown in Table 4, 
TCN accuracy is 10% higher than the best baseline model. Logistic regression and random 
forest are able to detect some differences in gender. The other classifiers cannot perform 
significantly better than random guessing.  
 
4.1. Class Activation Maps 
In this section, the attention mappings obtained with class activation map are plotted and 
discussed. As described in Section 2.3, a CAM can be generated for every convolutional layer. 
In the following examples, the pre-dense convolutional layer was be used for visualization. The 
reason for this choice is that the results are much more interpretable and the convolutional layer 
before the dense layer exactly the information needed for the classification. The following 
attention maps were generated using the sinus bradycardia model. The CAMs are given as a 
color map of the background in the ECG plots. The red regions are in correspondence of the 
parts of the ECG where the network paid attention, while the yellow ones are the parts that 
were not held important.  
Consider the ECG in Figure 16. It is an example of an ECG with sinus bradycardia and the 
TCN classified it correctly. The background is mostly yellow, with some red regions. It’s easy 
to see that the attention map consists mainly of some bands that are approximately 200 samples 
==PAGE:36==
4. Discussion 
 
 
36 
wide. Moreover, we can see that there are also some very narrow spots that were given 
importance by the network; these spots correspond to only one sample and are represented by 
the red vertical lines.  We notice that these lines “scan” the ECG: they start from the onset of 
the P wave and then they move forward, going through the QRS complex and the T wave. The 
last line is in correspondence of the T wave peak. The interpretation of such lines could be that 
the network is scanning the ECG and is trying to learn what is a cardiac cycle, how long it is 
and it’s trying to somehow quantify the HR. On the other hand, the wide bands suggest that the 
network is focusing on the interval between T and P waves. This is not surprising and it mimics 
the action that a physician would take. Sinus bradycardia is characterized by the presence of a 
P wave and there shouldn’t be atrial activity before the P wave. The TCN seems to check these 
two things: the bands check that the tracing between T an P wave is flat. Moreover, the bands 
slide until they capture the P wave. Thus, the way the network learns how to detect sinus 
bradycardia is the following. The HR is extrapolated with narrow lines that scan the entire 
ECG. Then the TCN checks that there is actually a P wave and that there are no atrial flutters 
before the P wave. This way of assessing sinus bradycardia mimics the action that a physician 
would take 
Figure 10 
Figure 16: Attention mapping with CAM for a sinus bradycardia positive case. The background gives the importance of 
the portions in the ECG. The yellow regions are not considered by the network; the parts of the ECG in correspondence to 
the red bands are the parts where the network looked at.  
==PAGE:37==
4. Discussion 
 
 
37 
Note that, because the CAM is specific for each class, all the ECGs with sinus bradycardia 
have a similar pattern, that is, the ECG is scanned with very narrow lines and the most of the 
attention is given to the part of the ECG between the T and the P wave. 
For the sinus bradycardia negative ECGs, the attention is basically zero everywhere, except in 
the narrow lines used by the TCN to scan the ECG (see Appendix A, Figure A1). 
It is useful to notice that, even if the network is trying to extract the HR from the ECG, it 
doesn’t simply threshold the HR to classify according to bradycardia positive or negative. In 
fact, in the test set, there are some ECGs that are sinus bradycardia positive but with HR>60. 
Another strength of the TCN approach is that it is able to understand which parts of the ECG 
are abnormal. Consider the two ECGs in Figure 17. On the left, there is a bradycardic ECG 
with sinus rhythm. In the middle of the recording, there is a region where, probably because of 
noise, the baseline is higher than the rest. The TCN understood this abnormality and skipped 
that beat: no attention is given to the TP segment. The ECG on the right is a case of atrial 
fibrillation. Atrial fibrillation is characterized by fluctuations between QRS complexes. From 
the attention plot we see that, even if the classification of this ECG was uncertain, the attention 
was given to the long pause between the QRS complexes in the middle of the ECG. This is the 
way a human cardiologist would assess atrial fibrillation from the ECG: looking at the long 
pauses between QRS complexes. 
 
For the other classification tasks, the CAM plots didn’t have a clear interpretation and further 
investigation is needed. See Appendix A for more CAM plots.    
Figure 17: CAM for two abnormal ECGs. Noise in the ECG (Left) and atrial fibrillation (right). In the case of the noise 
recording, the network skipped the part of the ECG with abnormal baseline. In the case of atrial fibrillation, the most relevant 
part of the ECG is the long pause between the two QRS complexes. 
==PAGE:38==
4. Discussion 
 
 
38 
4.2. Limitations 
Due to memory constraints, it was not possible to implement a model that could handle all 
the 12 leads as input. This is a limitation of the model because we are giving only V5 but it 
might be that the information needed to solve the task is in a lead that is different from V5. 
 
The example reported in Figure 17 highlights a weakness of the model: the labeling of the 
data. As previously said, deep learning algorithms need both input data and the ground truth 
for the classification so that they can efficiently learn to map the input into the output. It is 
clear that, in order to have a good performance, the ground truth should be correct. In this 
study, the labels for the data were obtained with the 12SL algorithm. This represents a 
limitation of the model because the ground truth given by the software is still a prediction 
and could be incorrect. TCN algorithm showed that, in some cases, it successfully classified 
the ECGs even if the ground truth was wrong. However, this situation should be avoided 
because it could lower the model performance. Since a manual annotation of all the ECGs 
is unfeasible because of the big amount of data, other solutions should be found. An idea 
would be to get the labels from different software for the same ECGs; the final ground truth 
is given by a majority vote. 
Another limitation of the model is represented by the unbalance of the dataset. We tried to 
handle unbalanced classes using weighted loss and balanced accuracy. However, these 
approaches do not completely solve the problem. As seen for LVH example, because there 
is a too big difference between positive and negative cases, it is not possible to find a balance 
between positive and negative classes weights. The positive class is either under or over-
represented. This results in a high number of false positive ECGs.  
The problem of high unbalance is generally found when dealing with diagnostic data. Unless 
one doesn’t have a dataset designed for a specific disease, the frequency of normal ECGs 
will be much higher than the frequency for ECGs with a disease that has a low incidence. 
A possible solution to this problem would be generating data to feed into the neural networks 
with, for instance, General Adversarial Networks (GAN) (Goodfellow, et al., 2014). Given 
a set of data, GANs learn to generate new data with the same statistics and characteristics 
of the original data.  In the case of ECGs, a GAN could be designed to generate a big number 
of ECGs with specific diseases. These artificial replicas would then be fed into the network 
together with normal ECGs and the dataset would be balanced. 
 
==PAGE:39==
5. Conclusions 
 
 
39 
5. Conclusions 
This study showed that TCNs, and in general neural networks with convolutions, are capable 
of learning features from ECGs, avoiding manual features engineering. The performance of 
such classifier is much better than machine learning algorithms that use manually extracted 
features and pre-coded rules. Moreover, the use of dilated convolutions instead of ordinary 
convolutions makes the training of the network faster and less computationally expensive. 
These findings have been proven trying different classification tasks with the same network 
architecture and the results were consistent across tasks.  
This study also showed that Class Activation Maps can be used to understand which part of  
the input the network is using to carry out an accurate classification and visualize the attention 
over the input. 
 
Future works might include training TCN on diagnostic data. This would help, for instance, to 
an early diagnose of myocardial infarction or atrial fibrillation. 
This aim can be achieved when the available data regarding a specific diagnosis will be 
abundant enough to have a statistically significant model. Moreover, a class activation map 
could be built on top of the classification model to have an insight on the parts of the ECG that 
carried the information about the disease.  
Another point that is worth working on is the development of a unique model that is capable 
of handling different diagnoses. This algorithm could be, for instance, embedded on the ECG 
machines and it would give a diagnosis while the ECG is being recorded. Not only this would 
help with early diagnoses, but it would guide the process of definition of new features that can 
be used in the analysis of ECGs. 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
Bibliography 
 
 
40 
Bibliography 
Bishop, C. M. (2007). Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer. Retrieved 6 
15, 2019 
Csáji, B. C. (2001). Approximation with Neural Networks. Faculty of Science, Eötvös 
Loránd University, Hungary. 
Goodfellow, I. J., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., . . . 
Bengio, Y. (2014). Generative Adversarial Nets. Retrieved 6 24, 2019, from 
http://papers.nips.cc/paper/5423-generative-adversarial-nets 
Hodgkin, A. L., & Huxley, A. F. (1952). A quantitative description of membrane current 
and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. Journal of Physiology, 500 
- 544. 
Johansen, A. R., Jin, J., Maszczyk, T., Dauwels, J., Cash, S. S., & Westover, M. B. (2016). 
Epileptiform spike detection via convolutional neural networks. Retrieved 6 15, 
2019, from http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/icassp/icassp2016.html 
Jørgensen T, B.-J. K. (2003). A randomized non-pharmacological intervention study for 
prevention of ischaemic heart disease: Baseline results Inter99 (1). European 
Journal of Preventive Cardiology, 377-386. 
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2015). Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. arXiv: 
Learning. Retrieved 6 18, 2019, from https://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.6980.pdf 
Marti A. Hearst, S. T. (1998). Support vector machines. Intelligent Systems and their 
Applications, IEEE, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 18–28. 
McCulloch, W. S., & Pitts, W. (1988). A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in nervous 
activity. 
Retrieved 
6 
15, 
2019, 
from 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/bf02478259 
Mills, N. L. (2017). Abstract 18724: Machine Learning to Predict the Likelihood of Acute 
Myocardial 
Infarction. 
Circulation. 
Retrieved 
6 
15, 
2019, 
from 
https://ahajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1161/circ.136.suppl_1.18724 
Oord, A. v., Dieleman, S., Zen, H., Simonyan, K., Vinyals, O., Graves, A., . . . Kavukcuoglu, 
K. (2016). WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio. arXiv: Sound, 125. 
Retrieved 5 28, 2019, from https://arxiv.org/pdf/1609.03499 
Peterson, L. E. (2009). K-Nearest Neighbor. Scholarpedia, 1883. 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
41 
Pitts, W., & McCulloch, W. (1943). A Logical Calculus of Ideas Immanent in Nervous 
Activity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, 5(4), 115–133. Retrieved 6 15, 2019 
Simard, P. Y., Steinkraus, D. W., & Platt, J. (2003). Best Practices for Convolutional Neural 
Networks Applied to Visual Document Analysis – Microsoft Research. Proceedings 
of the Seventh International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 1. 
Retrieved 6 11, 2019, from https://microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/best-
practices-for-convolutional-neural-networks-applied-to-visual-document-analysis 
Sokolow, M., & Lyon, T. P. (1949). The ventricular complex in left ventricular hypertrophy 
as obtained by unipolar precordial and limb leads. American Heart Journal, 161 - 
186. 
Stosic, D., Stosic, D., Zanchettin, C., Ludermir, T. B., & Stosic, B. (2017). QRNN: $q$ -
Generalized Random Neural Network. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 
28(2), 
383-390. 
Retrieved 
5 
28, 
2019, 
from 
http://dblp.uni-
trier.de/db/journals/tnn/tnn28.html 
Svetnik V, L. A. (2003). Random Forest: a classification and regression tool for compound 
classification and qsar modeling. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer 
Science, Vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1954-1958. 
van Rijsbergen, C. J. (1979). Information Retrieval. Butterworth-Heinemann. Retrieved 6 
15, 2019, from http://www.dcs.gla.ac.uk/Keith/Preface.html 
Woods, K. S., & Bowyer, K. W. (1994). Generating ROC curves for artificial neural 
networks. Retrieved 6 12, 2019, from http://lcc.uma.es/~jja/recidiva/048.pdf 
Yu, F., & Koltun, V. (2016). Multi-Scale Context Aggregation by Dilated Convolutions. 
arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Retrieved 5 28, 2019, from 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.07122.pdf 
Zhou, B., Khosla, A., Lapedriza, A., Oliva, A., & Torralba, A. (2016). Learning Deep 
Features for Discriminative Localization. arXiv: Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition, 
2921-2929. 
Retrieved 
5 
31, 
2019, 
from 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1512.04150.pdf 
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
 
 
42 
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
This appendix contains some attention plots for all the classifications analyzed in this study.  
Sinus Bradycardia 
With sinus bradycardia, the class activation maps for positive and negative classes are 
different. The two plots in Figure A1 show a positive and negative example. The behaviors 
of the CAMs presented in these two plots are representative for the entire dataset. 
 
 
Figure A1: (Top) Negative example of sinus bradycardia. The attention is zero almost everywhere, except the red lines 
that “scan” the ECG. In the positive example (bottom) there are wider bands that focus on the presence of the P wave. 
==PAGE:43==
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
 
 
43 
Fast HR 
Negative and positive examples of ECG with fast HR are reported in the following Figure. 
Note that the behavior of the CAM for the two classes is essentially the same. 
 
 
 
 
Figure A2: CAMs for fast HR detection. In the top panel, the ECG has an HR < 90. The CAM consists of many bands 
that move on the ECG, from the P wave to the T wave. In the case of fast HR (bottom panel), the behavior of the CAM is 
basically the same but the ECG is scanned multiple times because there are more cardiac cycles within the 10 seconds. 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
 
 
44 
Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 
For LVH, two positives and two negatives ECGs are shown. Note that the CAM is not 
consistent in the positive or negative class: the network is not focusing every time on the 
same parts of the ECG (as in sinus bradycardia).  Note that the following plots do not have 
the same y-axis. 
 
 
Figure A3: Negative examples of LVH. In the top panel, the network seems to focus on some narrow bands around the 
QRS complex and on a wider band after the T wave. In the bottom panel, the network seems to give importance mostly at 
the ST segment. 
==PAGE:45==
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
Figure A4: Positive examples of LVH. For the ECG in the top panel, the TCN looked at the Q onset. Instead in the bottom 
example, the importance was given to the T onset, until the T peak. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
 
 
46 
Gender 
Recall that the accuracy for gender classification was 87%. This is an important point to 
notice because, as a consequence of the not perfect classification, CAM will not be able to 
define a different pattern for Males and Females.  
 
 
 
 
Figure A5: Two examples of female ECG. The CAM does not focus on a specific and defined part of the ECG but has 
many spots here and there on the median waves. 
==PAGE:47==
Appendix A. Class Activation Maps plots 
 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6: Male ECGs. As in the female examples, the CAM consists of many narrow bands and the CAM is very 
different from ECG to ECG. 
 
