==PAGE:1==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Computational Catalysis:
Modelling the Reactivity of VOx/TiO2
DeNOx Systems
Oliver Sørensen Siig
Master Thesis under supervision from:
Associate Professor Niels Engholm Henriksen (DTU)
Principal Scientist Hanne Falsig (Haldor Topsøe)
Principal Scientist Søren Birk Rasmussen (Haldor Topsøe)
2nd of July 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the properties of Vanadium/Anatase Selective Catalytic Reduction
system through the use of Density Functional Theory. Several different anatase surfaces are
designed, all based on actual anatase terminations that can be observed experimentally.
Active sites consisting of adsorbed VO3H units are systemically designed, using a Genetic
Algorithm for structure screening. The effects of factors such as coverage and dimerization
is thoroughly assessed for different surface terminations of anatase, and it is found that the
stability of VO3H on the 001-edge is significantly impacted with increasing coverage, while sta-
bility on the perpendicular 100-edge is largely unaffected. In addition to a comparison of the
thermodynamic stability of species, a microkinetic model is derived, based solely on partition
functions and reactor conditions such as pressure and temperature.
Using a machine learning method to identify the transition state in the VO3H reduction re-
action, the microkinetic model can be used to evaluate the rate of this step and in this way
compare the reactivity at different anatase edge terminations and different vanadium structures.
Ultimately, a transition state was identified on a newly discovered step structure of anatase
and the reaction path was mapped. The microkinetic model was used to estimate the rate
of reduction for a different VO3H/anatase structure and the results were found to be well in
agreement with previous rate estimates for this reaction.
Page 1 of 85
==PAGE:3==
Resumé
Dette speciale undesøger et vanadium/anatas (TiO2)-baseret system der bruges til fjernelse
af nitrøse gasser, der opstår i forbindelse med iltrige forbrændingsreaktioner. Denne metode
kaldes Selektiv Katalytisk Reduktion. Systemet undersøges ved brug af computermodellering,
nærmere bestemt Density Functional Theory til at beskrive systemets egenskaber indgående
ud fra realistiske modelsystemer.
SCR fungerer ved hjælp af en række vanadiumadsorbater der sidder som enkelte reaktive sites
på en anatasoverflade. Disse blev modelleret ud fra en Genetisk Algoritme der iterativt foreslår
og forbedrer strukturmodeller baseret på stabilitet.
Efterfølgende blev disse analyseret systematisk, og der blev fundet en reaktionsvej for det ene
af systemerne, en monomer på et trappe-site, ligesom de forskellige deltrin af dette samt andre
systemer blev analyseret.
En del af denne analyse bestod i at udvikle en model der, baseret på tilstandsummer for
reaktanter og produkter, kunne beskrive de enkelte systemers reaktivitet. Denne model blev
målt imod et hastigsudtryk fundet i et andet SCR system, og med god overenstemmelse mellem
de to metoder.
Page 2 of 85
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The basis for this master thesis has been conducted as computational modelling of a system
from heterogenous catalysis. The thesis has been carried out from January 2019 to June 2019
at the Department of Chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark in cooperation with
Haldor Topsøe A/S, Lyngby.
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Niels E. Henriksen for his support and interesting
discussions about the theories and models that make up the very foundation of the molecular
models applied in this project. I would also like to thank my second supervisor Hanne Falsig for
her trust in me when I proposed this collaboration and for all the time and effort put into this
project and spent deliberating on results. Further, I would like to thank Søren B. Rasmussen
for his attention to detail and to the link between model and experiment, providing a set of
fresh eye and perspective on my findings.
Finally I would like to thank my girlfriend Camilla as well as my friends and family for their
constant support and ability put up with my enthusiasm with yet another indistinguishable
drawing of spheres.
Page 3 of 85
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Theory
12
1.1
Catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.1.1
Vanadium-based Selective Catalytic Reduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Structural characteristics of the V-SCR catalyst sites . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2
Density Functional Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.2.1
Application of DFT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.3
Transition State Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2
Method
24
2.1
GPAW - Using the DFT Calculator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.1.1
Density of States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2
ASE Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.1
Optimizing lattice constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2.2
Cutting surfaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.3
Calculating vibrational frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.4
Genetic Algorithm Structure Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.3
Nudge Elastic Band - Locating the Transition State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.4
Machine Learning NEB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Full Microkinetic Model of Reactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.5.1
NH3 Adsorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.5.2
Vanadium Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3
Results and Discussion
38
3.1
System Design: Defining Accurate Model Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.1.1
Surface Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Oxygenation of step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.2
Comparison of model systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2
Vanadium Deposition: Creating the Active Site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.1
GA Benchmark: VO3H on the 001-edge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Comments on the structure of VO3H on the 001-edge . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2.2
Vanadium Oxide on the 100-edge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Polymeric vanadium on the 100 edge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.2.3
VO3H deposition on 001/100 double-step site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.3
Reactivity Estimates: Investigating the RDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.3.1
NH3 Adsorption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.3.2
Locating the transition state of the RDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Page 4 of 85
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
3.3.3
Stability and structure of the reduced state
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.3.4
Reaction Rate from TST model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Bibliography
67
A Coordinate files
73
Double step anatase structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
VO3H on step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
NONH3 TS on step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
VO3H on the 100-edge of anatase - Structure 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
VO3H on the 100-edge of anatase - Structure 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Page 5 of 85
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1
Schematic showing a possible future scenario with a society based on clean energy
produced through electrocatalysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1
Diagram of the ammonia synthesis showing the catalyzed and non-catalyzed
pathways. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.2
Diagram of a stoichiometric reaction mechanism describing the the Standard
(blue) and Fast (black) SCR reaction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3
Possible anatase structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1
Comparison of the classic NEB and ML NEB methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1
Crude initial version of step, cut from anatase with all atoms still in bulk grid
positions. Screenshot from ASE GUI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Step structures obtained from TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Anatase model systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4
The VO3H distorted octahedral in unit cells of different size. . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5
Illustrations of the monomeric VO3H adsorbates on the 100 edge of anatase,
showing structure and bond lengths.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6
Polymeric VO3H adsorbates on the 100-edge of anatase, from GA search. . . . .
51
3.7
Images showing the position of the tetrehedral VO3H group adsorbed on a step
structure discovered in anatase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.8
Illustrations of NH3 adsorbates on VO3H and 2VO3H . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.9
Transition state for the reduction of VO3H on an anatase step . . . . . . . . . .
59
3.10 Energy diagram for the V-SCR reduction mechanism on an anatase step
. . . .
60
3.11 DOS plots of initial and reduced vanadium sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
Page 6 of 85
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables
3.1
Comparison of experimental and computed lattice constants for bulk anatase
and vanadium oxide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Angles between titanium atoms in the top 3 layers of the step plateau . . . . . .
41
3.3
Energy differences of oxygen adsorption to top step site . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.4
Energetics of Monomeric VO3H Deposition on the 100-edge
. . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.5
Energetics of Polymeric VO3H Deposition on the 100-edge . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.6
Energetics of Monomeric VO3H Deposition on the Step Site
. . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.7
Overview of VO3H Deposition on Model Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Page 7 of 85
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
DFT Density Functional Theory
DoS
Density of States
ER
Eley-Rideal
FD
Finite Difference
GA
Genetic Algorithm
HO
Harmonic Oscillator
LCAO Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals
LH
Langmuir-Hinshelwoodwood
MLNEB Machine Learning Nudging Elastic Band
NEB Nudge Elastic Band
PAW Projector Augmented Wave
PDoS Projected Density of States
PW
Plane Wave
RDS
Rate Determining Step
SCR
Selective Catalytic Reduction
TS
Transition State
ZPE
Zero Point Energy
PES
Potential Energy Surface
TST
Transition State Theory
Page 8 of 85
==PAGE:10==
Introduction
According to the Cambridge English Dictionary catalysis is ”the process of making a chemical
reaction happen more quickly by using a catalyst”[1], although that is perhaps not of much help
to the uninitiated, and even leaves out a crucial bit of information: Catalysis is a process, where
a catalyst increases the rate of a reaction, often quite substantially, without the catalyst itself
being consumed in the process. This means that the compound or structure can complete same
reaction over and over, possible millions of times without continuous addition of new catalyst
material.
The first application that springs to mind, for people who are not familiar with the field at
least, is the catalyst filtering the exhaust of a car, but the utility of catalysis goes way beyond
this. Because of catalysis, we are now able to feed billions more through the artificial fertilizers
produced through the nitrogen-fixation in the Haber-Bosch process. Because of catalysis, we
can efficiently remove unwanted pollutants as for example sulfur from crude oil and other fuels,
preventing acid rain that would otherwise cause deforestation and damaging ecosystems. Be-
cause of catalysis, the air we breathe is cleaner, with filters in heavy machinery, power plants
and factories. These are just a few examples from one field of catalysis, heterogeneous cataly-
sis. It is estimated that 85 % to 90 % of all products in the chemical industry are produced in
catalytic processes, most of it from heterogeneous catalysis [2].
In another field, biological catalysis, nature has a much longer history of using catalysts, in
the form of enzymes, for a range of important processes including photosynthesis, digestion of
foods and DNA replication naming just a few. As a testament to the significance of this branch
of catalysis (half of) the Nobel Prize in Chemistry is currently held by Francis H. Arnold for
her work on the directed evolution of enzymes [3].
It is in other words, already difficult to live without catalysis and it might get even more difficult
in the future; catalysis is predicted to have a significant impact in areas such as harvest and
storage of energy from sustainable sources, synthetic fuel production and CO2 removal, possibly
coupled together [4]. All areas which are key to overcoming the environmental challenges we
are facing and create a cleaner, more sustainable society.
In order to realize all or just some of this many potential application, the fundamental under-
standing of catalytic systems is crucial; Factors affecting their structure, stability, resistance to
poisoning etc. This requires understanding of the full system, from reactor to atomic site. With
the constant increase in computing power, more and more tools become available to describe
molecular systems and increasingly large systems can be modelled effectively.
Page 9 of 85
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1: Schematic showing a possible future scenario with a society based on clean energy
produced through electrocatalysis. Taken from [4].
One of the key properties to investigate is the reactivity of the catalyst, even in model systems.
This report focuses of the Selective Catalytic Reduction system, used to remove NOx gasses
from combustion processes such as vehicles and power plants. Manufacturers are faced with
increasingly strict limits on emissions creating the need for a constantly improving understand-
ing of the system.
At the same time, this project allows for a systematic investigation of a heterogeneous catalyst
in cooperation with a market leader in catalysis, with high transferability to other catalytic
systems through the investigated and developed tools and models.
Page 10 of 85
==PAGE:12==
Aim
The aim of this project is to examine reaction rates of the rate determining step(s) (RDS) in
heterogeneous catalysis. Through the use of DFT (Density Functional Theory) simulations,
barriers on sites with different molecular geometry on a catalyst of industrial interest will be
studied. Reaction rates will be calculated using Transition State Theory. It is well known
that sites on different facets can have vastly different reactivity, and through proposed reaction
mechanisms for a TiO2 (anatase) based SCR (Selective Catalytic Reduction) catalyst doped
with vanadium oxide, the RDS can be identified and investigated. SCR is a means of converting
nitrogen oxides, also referred to as NOx, with the aid of a catalyst into N2, and H2O. Emissions
of the poisonous NOx gasses from industrial plants and diesel engines has been subject to in-
creasing scrutiny from legislatures in many countries in recent years and even more so following
the global controversy surrounding emissions from diesel engines. In this respect, the SCR
catalysts are a fundamentally important tool in improving the DeNOx process. Identifying the
most reactive sites provides a better understanding of the overall reactivity of a given catalyst
and could lead to a strategy for better catalyst design.
Oliver Sørensen Siig
Date
Page 11 of 85
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Chapter 1
Theory
1.1
Catalysis
The way catalysts achieve the increase in reaction rate as mention in the introduction, is through
a lowering of the reaction barrier, often approximated by the activation energy Ea of the reac-
tion, which have a drastic effect on the kinetics of the reaction. Although the pathway of the
catalyzed reaction often becomes more complex and involves more steps than the non-catalyzed
reaction, this reduction of Ea is what dominates in the kinetic picture. As the initial and final
states are the same, but only the path to the final state is different, the thermodynamics of the
reaction/system remains the same.
An example of a catalyzed vs. an non-catalyzed reaction path is given in Figure 1.1, showing
the pathways for the Haber-Bosch process mentioned above. As the Figure shows, the single
endothermic step in the non-catalyzed pathway has a much higher reaction barrier than any of
the 4 endothermic steps in the catalyzed pathway, making it very kinetically unfavorable.
Figure 1.1: Diagram of the ammonia synthesis showing the catalyzed and non-catalyzed
pathways. Energies are given in kcal/mol. Diagram taken from [5].
Page 12 of 85
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
The high complexity of the pathways of catalyzed reactions means that it can often be difficult
to gain detailed insights into the nature of the intermediate species. This is further complicated
by the number of different time and length scales one must take into consideration when trying
to characterize and improve catalysts. Typically in heterogeneous catalysis liquid or gaseous
compounds are passed over a solid catalyst surface where the reaction occurs. The catalyst pel-
let can either contain a surface that is catalytically active on its own, or nanoparticles adsorbed
on an inactive support [6]. In either way, the rate increases with the available surface area,
which often results in highly porous materials that nonetheless often need to sustain extreme
conditions in terms of temperature and pressure in large reactor facilities. The Bosch Haber
process is a somewhat extreme example of this, with pressures above 15 MPa and temperatures
above 400 ◦C [7]. It should be noted though that the pellets used for this are typically not very
porous and are in fact more reminiscent of gravel.
This naturally requires a lot of cooperation between different fields working in development,
testing and characterization everything from the catalytically active compounds, over the sup-
port material and full size pellet to the reactor facility. This report is mainly concerned with
shortest of both time and length scales; modelling of single reaction steps on the active site.
This happens on a nanometer scale and within a time frame of a few picoseconds, something
that can be very difficult to capture with experimental characterization. Some techniques such
as electron microscopy does provide good structural insights though, while highly sophisticated
X-Ray diffraction equipment such as the FemtoMAX beamline at the MAX IV in Lund [8]
or the LCLS at SLAC on Stanford [9] promises femtosecond resolution. The latter two are
by no means easily accessible though and often the dynamics are modelled computationally
and compared to data from reactivity experiments, using lab characterization and molecular
modelling as complimentary techniques.
1.1.1
Vanadium-based Selective Catalytic Reduction
The catalytic process examined in this report is known as Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR).
While a selective reduction of some species occurs in a number of different processes, SCR usu-
ally refers to the reduction of nitrogen oxides, NOx gasses, to form N2 and H2O. The NOx gases
are an unwanted byproduct of high temperature combustion in excess oxygen (lean-burning),
forming NOx from the N2 and O2 present in the air.
Although different techniques exist, as for example systems based on Cu- or Fe-zeolites [10],
the most common setup is a vanadium doped titania-based system, typically with anatase [2].
This system is injected with ammonia, or a derivative such as urea, with the reduction of NO
and NO2 proceeding according to reaction (1.1.1) and (1.1.2) for pure NO or a mixture of NO
and NO2 respectively. Although the full system is not catalytic per se as NH3 is consumed
in the process, thus requiring a steady flow of ’fresh’ NH3, the solid state component, i.e. the
V-on-Ti, does regenerate after a full reaction cycle.
4 NH3 + 4 NO + O2 −−→4 N2 + 6 H2O
Standard SCR
(1.1.1)
4 NH3 + 2 NO + 2 NO2 −−→4 N2 + 6 H2O
Fast SCR
(1.1.2)
Page 13 of 85
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Traditionally, this SCR system has been used in large-scale stationary facilities such as power
plants, but has also been used in the automotive industry for almost 15 years [11]. With the
recent focus on NOx emission in diesel engines, particularly after the emission scandals in the
automotive industry, research into SCR is necessary in order to comply with increasingly strict
emission control requirements.
In this respect, fundamental understanding of what governs the reactivity is key to both mak-
ing general improvements to the method itself, but also to tailor the method to the widely
different reaction conditions in stationary and mobile units; The former typically runs at high
temperatures under steady-state conditions making it relatively simple to adjust the ammonia
addition. In vehicles, both temperature and exhaust amount can vary significantly just over
the course of a small ride and the catalyst material must work over a much larger interval of
temperatures and flows. As the space and weight requirements are significantly stricter in the
mobile units, this must be done in a more compact unit than the traditional units used in power
plants. Understanding the reaction mechanism and what factors determine the kinetics of the
crucial steps paves the way for more compact and/or efficient units.
Despite of the popularity of the V-SCR system, the reaction mechanism has been widely dis-
cussed and a number of different mechanisms has been proposed, most suggesting rates gov-
erned by either Langmuir-Hinshelwoodwood (LH) or Eley-Rideal (ER) kinetics [12]. A full,
stoichiometric reaction mechanism describing both the Standard and Fast SCR reactions has
recently been proposed [13], illustrated in Figure 1.2. The mechanism can be divided into two
parts with step A −−→F involving a reduction of vanadium by NH3 and NO and a reoxidation
by NO2 or O2. This incorporates both kinetic models, suggesting that LH kinetics determine
the rate of Standard SCR at low temperatures, in an H2O desorption step, while ER kinetics
determine the rate of Standard SCR at high temperatures and Fast SCR at all temperatures.
The ER mechanism often involves radicals also in this step; a reaction between an adsorbed
NH3 and a NO radical from the gas phase. This is also a good example of the qualitative
Sabatier Principle, describing the rate of a reaction as a function of adsorbate bond strength:
At low temperature the adsorbed H2O in the reoxidation step is bonded too strongly to the
surface, making its desorption the Rate Determining Step (RDS). At higher temperatures, the
reactants do not bind strong enough to the surface, making this the RDS. Typically, in diesel
engines, a Diesel Oxidation Catalyst is present upstream of the SCR catalyst, oxidizing NO
to NO2 [14], in which case the Fast SCR reaction is the dominant one and thus also the ER
mechanism.
Structural characteristics of the V-SCR catalyst sites
As described above, the catalyst is made up of vanadium oxides adsorbed on an anatase sup-
port. Due to the crystal structure of anatase, there is a variety of possible surfaces present in
different ratios and thus a variety of possible surface sites. One way to describe these different
terminations of the anatase bulk structure is through the use of crystal planes described by
Miller Indices. Simply put the Miller Indices describe the vectors or points along which the
crystals can be cut, creating crystal planes corresponding to terminations. As an example, the
Miller Index (111) corresponds to a plane going through the points (1,0,0), (0,1,0) and (0,0,1)
Page 14 of 85
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Figure 1.2: Diagram of a stoichiometric reaction mechanism describing the
the Standard (blue) and Fast (black) SCR reaction.
Red molecules are molecules that are consumed in the process and green molecules are the
molecules produced in the process.
For Fast SCR and at high temperatures step B −−→
D‡ −−→E is the RDS, while step F −−→I is the RDS in Standard SCR at low temperatures.
Diagram taken from [13].
or, equivalently, a plane normal to the vector ⃗v = (1, 1, 1) [15]. The smallest non-repeating
unit of anatase contains 1, 1 and 4 units of TiO2 in the x-, y- and z-directions respectively, and
the (1,0,0) and (0,1,0) surfaces are identical while the (0,0,1) surface is different from the other
two. The 101-edge is the most thermodynamically stable, but it is possible to direct the crystal
growth towards high ratios of less stable but desirable terminations using hydrogen fluoride or
other methods [16], [17]. An illustration of different possible morphologies of anatase crystals
is shown in Figure 1.3a. In addition to the simple truncations of the bulk structure, a number
of defects can be present from e.g. surface rearrangements and at the interface of two different
edges. Recently, such a surface structure has been identified at the interface of the 010- and
001-edges. Here, a number of step sites are present, going down 1-2 layers per step, separated
by plateaus of the 001-edge. A TEM image of the double steps is presented in Figure 1.3b.
Page 15 of 85
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
(a) Anatase morphologies. Illustration from [17].
(b) TEM-image of a double step structure of
anatase. From [18].
Figure 1.3: Possible anatase structures
Images showing possible terminations of an anatase crystal. (a) shows possible morpholo-
gies of anatase evolved from a crystal dominated by the most stable 101-edges, while (b)
shows step structures identified at the 001/010 edge interface.
Page 16 of 85
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
1.2
Density Functional Theory
The modelling software employed in this report is derived from fundamental quantum me-
chanical theories, with some important approximations. One of the keys to describing any
system within this framework is the wavefunction. While this wavefunction provides a full
description of the dynamics of a state of a given system/particle, it does not correspond to any
traditional measurable physical quantity. However, according to the Born Interpretation, the
square modulus of the wavefunction, |ψ2|, corresponds to the probability density of the particle.
Integrating over a volume dτ gives the probability of finding the particle in this volume [19].
Furthermore, the wavefunction is crucial in a wide variety of applications. One example, one of
the cornerstones of quantum mechanics is the Time-Indepedent Schrödinger Equation (TISE),
initially proposed by Erwin Schrödinger in 1926. For a particle in a 3-dimensional cartesian
system, TISE is given as:
−ℏ2
2m∇2 + V (x, y, z)ψ = Eψ
(1.2.1)
Where ∇2 =
∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2 is a Laplacian operator, V is the potential energy, ℏis the
Planck constant, h divided by 2π while m is the particle mass. ψ is the particle wavefunction,
describing the state of the system with E being the energy associated with the state ψ. For the
general case of a system with N particles and several accessible states and associated energies
the TISE can be written as:
ˆHψi (⃗x1, ..., ⃗xN) = Eiψi (⃗x1, ..., ⃗xN)
(1.2.2)
With ⃗x1, ..., ⃗xN being vectors with coordinates of all particles from particle 1 to N, ψi corre-
sponds to state i and Ei the energy of that exact state. This is a simple eigenvalue equation
with each eigenfunction, ψi yielding a specific eigenvalue Ei.
ˆH is the total energy operator,
known as the Hamilton operator, which varies in formulation depending on the system. For a
molecule with M nuclei and N electrons free of any external magnetic or electric field, the full
Hamiltonian in a.u.1 becomes [20]:
ˆH = −1
2
N
∑
p=1
∇2
p −1
2
N
∑
A=1
1
mA
∇2
A −
N
∑
p=1
M
∑
A=1
ZA
|⃗rp −⃗RA|
+
N
∑
p=1
N
∑
q>p
1
|⃗rp −⃗rq| +
M
∑
A=1
M
∑
B>A
ZAZB
|⃗RA −⃗RB|
= ˆTelec(⃗r) + ˆTnuc(⃗R) + ˆVext(⃗r, ⃗R) + ˆVelec(⃗r) + ˆVnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.3)
With A, B being nuclei indexes and p, q as electron indexes. mA and ZA is the mass, respec-
tively the number of protons in nuclei A. ⃗rk and ⃗Rk are vectors containing the coordinates of
electrons and nuclei. The definitions in the second line refers to the fact that the first term is
classical expression for the kinetic energy of the electron, denoted ˆTelec, the second is the same
but for nuclei, ˆTnuc. The third term describes the coulombic interaction potentials between: (i)
An electron p and a nuclei A, ˆVext, (ii) two electrons p and q, ˆVelec, and (iii) two nuclei A and
B, ˆVnuc. The motivation for the subscript ’ext’ in the attraction between nuclei and electrons
has to do with the separation of the Hamiltonian into electronic and nucleic contributions and
will be explained below. As the Hamiltonian is written here, it is a many-body problem that
1Setting ℏ= me = e = 1, where me is electron mass and e is elementary charge.
Page 17 of 85
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
quickly becomes impossible to solve exactly. This is in fact the case for any systems larger than
the hydrogen atom.
One of the most important simplifications to this system is the Born-Oppenheimer approxi-
mation, which assumes that the positions of the nuclei is independent of the movement of the
electrons. This assumption is based on the fact that the nuclei are several orders of magnitude
heavier than the electrons. As a consequence, ˆVext is now only a function of ⃗r, while ⃗R is now
merely a parameter in ˆVext. This is also the reasoning behind the ’ext’-notion; looking only at
the electronic system, the nuclei enters the equation merely as a constant field of fixed charges.
Additionally, these are the only parameters external to the system as ˆTelec and ˆVelec only depend
on electron coordinates. Similarly, the wavefunctions are split into a product of the nuclear
wavefunctions and the electronic wavefunctions, the latter taking ⃗R as a parameter. In total:
ˆH = ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R) + ˆHnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.4)
ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R) = ˆTelec(⃗r) + ˆVext(⃗r; ⃗R) + ˆVelec(⃗r)
(1.2.5)
ˆHnuc(⃗R) = + ˆTnuc(⃗R) + ˆVnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.6)
ψ(⃗r, ⃗R) = ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R) · ψnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.7)
Dropping the subscript ’i’, leaving it implicit that this holds for any pair of state ψi and
corresponding energy Ei. Inserting this into (1.2.2) (for any given state i) it is found that:
ˆHψ(⃗r, ⃗R) = Eψ(⃗r, ⃗R)
(1.2.8)
(
ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R) + ˆHnuc(⃗R)
)
ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R) = Eψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.9)
ψnuc(⃗R) ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R)ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R) + ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R) ˆHnuc(⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R) = Eψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.10)
(1.2.11)
Dividing both sides by ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R) and subtracting the nuclear contribution gives:
ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R)ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)
ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)
= E −
ˆHnuc(⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R)
ψnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.12)
As the RHS is only a function of ⃗R, the LHS is set equal a ’constant’ (constant in ⃗r!), ε(⃗R):
ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R)ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)
ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)
= ε(⃗R)
(1.2.13)
ˆHelec( ⃗
r; R)ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R) = ε(⃗R)ψelec(⃗r; ⃗R)
(1.2.14)
Essentially reproducing the TISE, but with electronic states and energies only. Setting the
RHS equal to the same ε(⃗R), now a function ⃗R the total energy can be found:
E −
ˆHnuc(⃗R)ψnuc(⃗R)
ψnuc(⃗R)
= ε(⃗R)
(1.2.15)
(
ˆHnuc(⃗R) + ε(⃗R)
)
ψnuc(⃗R) = Eψnuc(⃗R)
(1.2.16)
Page 18 of 85
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
Here, it becomes apparent, that the electronic energy ε(⃗R) essentially acts as a potential energy
surface, adjusting its value as the nuclei move around. This approach is what form the basis of
the iterative solving approach employed in molecular modelling; (1) the electronic Schrödinger
equation is solved for a fixed set of nuclei, (2) this gives an electronic energy ε(⃗R) which is then
used to (3) solve for the nuclear positions and total energy before loading the coordinates into
(1). This loop goes on according to some optimization scheme until convergence is reached by
satisfying certain criteria.
However, in order to solve the electronic Schrödinger equation given in (1.2.5), the terms of
this must be evaluated. Of the three terms in ˆHelec only Vext is system specific as it contains
information about the nuclei with the parameters ZA and ⃗RA. The remaining two are universal;
distributing equal and indistinguishable particles across a volume, maximizing kinetic energy
and miniziming charge repulsion. The first Hohenberg-Kohn Theorem proved that this Vext
can be uniquely determined by the ground state electron density, ρ0(⃗r) and that Vext uniquely
determines ˆHelec [21]. The electron density is proportional to the probability density integrated
over all possible spins and the coordinates of all but one of the electrons, corresponding to
the probability of finding electron ’i’ within the volume element d⃗ri.
As the electrons are
indistinguishable, N times this value gives the probability of finding any of N electrons with the
volume element d⃗ri, thus reducing the 3N variables of the wavefunction to just 3 for the electron
density. In addition to the description of ˆHelec from Vext, an energy minimization functional
was proposed [22]:
E0[ρ0] =
∫
ρ0Vext dr +F[ρ0]
(1.2.17)
In which the functional F[ρ] searches for the ground state electron density through a minimza-
tion of the ’universal’ parts of the Hamiltonian, ˆTelec and ˆVelec. While this still does not have
any exact solution, the Kohn-Sham Equations defined F[ρ] as [23]:
F[ρ] = TS[ρ] + J[ρ] + EXC[ρ]
(1.2.18)
With TS[ρ] defined as the kinetic energy of a non-interacting system, J[ρ] being the electron-
electron Coulomb interaction and EXC[ρ] simply a collection of the errors made in the assump-
tions about the classical behavior of the kinetic and electrostatic energy. Of these three, it is of
course the latter which is non trivial to solve as it includes electronic effects such as exchange
and correlation effects and self-interaction. While (1.2.18) is in theory an exact solution using
the coordinates of just one single particle, EXC[ρ] is unknown and must be approximated. It is
the approximation of this term, often split into separate approximations of exchange and cor-
relation effects, that has lead to the design of a wide variety of competing and complimentary
functionals.
1.2.1
Application of DFT
In order to utilize Density Functional Theory (DFT) in an efficient and meaningful manner
it is important to be aware of the design choices made, often choosing between efficiency and
accuracy. One of the most significant choices is the choice of the exchange and correlation
functional(s). Generally they can be grouped into five different levels with increasing sophis-
tication and accuracy, but also computational costs, according to the so-called Jacob’s ladder
Page 19 of 85
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
[24]. The levels range from simply using the electron density, ρ(⃗r) at given positions (Local
Density Approximation), over models that incorporate the first derivative of the density, ∇ρ(⃗r)
to methods that include full expressions for the exchange energy (’exact exchange’) and unoc-
cupied orbitals. This report uses functionals from the second rung of the Jacob’s ladder for
computational efficiency.
Furthermore, two general approaches exist when designing new functionals, regardless of so-
phistication. One approach relies on imposing constraints on the exact density functional based
on analytical observation, with approximations to reduce complexity. The PBE functional [25],
coined ’the first parameter-free GGA’ and its revisions [26], [27] are notable examples of this
approach. Another approach, relies on parameterization of variables, fitting the functional to
perform well against one or a number of different data sets with relevant properties in such as
structural or energetic data. A famous or, according to some, infamous example of this is the
class of Minnesota Functionals, which are fitted to upwards of 60 different parameters [28].
An example of a parameterized functional often used in catalysis is the BEEF-vdW functional.
The functional is constructed by fitting a number of Legendre Polynomials to test data sets
involving energies of formation and reaction of molecules, including barriers, as well as solid
state properties and chemisorption on solids.
According to the authors this is particularly
robust as they have applied machine-learning methods to avoid the pitfalls of overfitting and
biased/arbitrary weighing of data sets [29]. Another important feature of this functional is
that is includes van der Waals dispersion interactions which is crucial in describing the stability
of physiosorbed molecules. Finally, the search for functionals produces an entire ensemble of
functionals that are minimized according to a cost-function, which selects the best functional.
Potentially, and most likely, there will be a range of different functionals that perform nearly
as well as the optimum. By comparing the energy difference of two states, obtained with the
optimum functional, to energy differences estimated from the suboptimal ensemble, one can
get an estimate of how well the states are described by the BEEF-vdW functional, known as a
Bayesian Error Estimate [30]. The BEEF-vdW functional is used throughout this report.
Page 20 of 85
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
1.3
Transition State Theory
In order to get an accurate description of site reactivity of different surface geometries, it is cru-
cial to have a solid framework in place to describe the kinetics and energetics of these systems.
While much information can be extracted from the relative stabilities of various structures pre-
sented throughout this report, the reaction barriers that exist between some of these structures
often plays an equally important role for the overall reactivity of the reaction step. Several
theories that describe the reaction rate exists, such as the empirical Arrhenius equation [31]
and the crude Collision Theory model [2].
Building on these early models, and guiding the reaction rate theory towards a more strin-
gent theoretical description, Henry Eyring, and concurrently also Meredith Gwynne Evans and
Michael Polanyi, proposed another theory describing the reaction rate, a theory now known as
Transition State Theory (TST)[32]. Essential to this theory is the identification of an activated
complex residing exactly on the saddle point of a potential energy surface (PES) defined by one
(or more) reactants and products. Going from reactant to product, all intermediary states are
assumed to lie along a minimum energy path, with highest lying state exactly on the stationary
point, thus representing the barrier of the reaction [33]. This transition state (TS) is assumed
to behave as a free particle in the direction described by the minimum energy path, known as
the reaction coordinate, although only motion in the forward direction is allowed.
Given a reaction described by TST of A + B forming AB over a transition state AB‡2, the
reaction scheme can be written as:
A + B
k1
−−→
←−−
k−1 AB‡
k2
−−→AB
(1.3.1)
Where ‡ denotes the transition state, and only the reactants are in equilibrium with the tran-
sition state, as TST does not allow for recrossings of the reaction barrier. As AB‡ is not a
stable intermediate and should be written as [AB]‡, however to avoid confusion it with the
concentration, introduced below, the square brackets are dropped, leaving it implicit that the
‡ denotes an unstable species.
Considering the simple case, where A, B and AB are ideal gasses and/or liquids, the equilibrium
constant for the first reaction can be written as:
K‡ =
[
AB‡]
[A][B] =
NAB‡/V
(NA/V ) (NB/V ) =
QAB‡/V
(QA/V ) (QB/V )e−E0/kBT
[
AB‡]
= K‡[A][B]
(1.3.2)
Where [X], NX and QX, X = {A, B, AB‡} are concentrations, no. of particles and molec-
ular partition functions, while V is the reaction volume.
The term e−E0/kBT appears from
introducing an energy correction, such that each system/molecule is evaluated relative to their
2Strictly speaking all intermediary states/configurations between A + B and AB can be characterized as
transition states. Throughout this report however, the term transition state refers to the particular transition
state residing on the saddle point of the PES.
Page 21 of 85
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
respective Zero Point Energy (ZPE). This is subtracted again outside of the partition func-
tions, with E0 = Ecl + EZPE,AB‡ −(EZPE,A + EZPE,B), where Ecl is the classical barrier height,
Ecl = EAB‡ −(EA + EB). kB is the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. Systematic
derivations of the relationship between particle numbers and molecular partition functions are
given in sections 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, albeit for slightly different systems.
Under the Rigid Rotor-Harmonic Approximation, molecular partition functions can be split
into four different parts [34]:
Q = QtransQvibQrotQelec
(1.3.3)
These are defined as:
Qtrans =
(2πmkBT
h
)3/2
V
(1.3.4)
Qvib =
s
∏
i=1
(
1 −e−hνi/kBT)−1
(1.3.5)
Qrot,linear = 8π2IkBT
σh2
(1.3.6)
Qrot,non−linear = π1/2
σ
√
8πIAkBT/h2√
8πIBkBT/h2√
8πICkBT/h2
(1.3.7)
Qelec =
s
∑
i=1
ωe,ie−(Ei,cl−E0,cl)/kBT ≈ωe,0
(1.3.8)
Where m and V in (1.3.4) is the particle mass and reaction volume. νi in (1.3.5) is a molecu-
lar vibrational frequency. In (1.3.6) and (1.3.7) the I’s are moments of inertia while σ is the
symmetry number of the particle. For a diatomic molecule, the moment of inertia is given as
[I = µr2 (1.3.9)], with µ being the reduced mass and r the inter-atomic distance. Finally, ωe,0
in (1.3.8) is the degeneracy of the electronic ground state and Ei,cl is the ground state energy
of each electronic level.
The rate of formation of AB is given as the concentration of AB‡,
[
AB‡]
, divided by the time
it takes to pass through the saddle point.
This passing time is the length of the reaction
coordinate, l, that defines the saddle point, divided by the velocity of AB‡ in the positive
direction (defined as the z-direction here) of the reaction coordinate, v+,z
AB‡:
Rate = d[AB]
dt
=
[
AB‡]
l/v+,z
AB‡
=
v+,z
AB‡
l
K‡[A][B] (using (1.3.2))
(1.3.10)
v+,z
AB‡ is estimated from the 1D Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution as v+,z
AB‡ =
( kBT
2πm
)1/2
,
with m being the mass of AB‡. The rate constant, kTST, of the reaction is then:
kTST =
( kBT
2πm
)1/2 1
l
QAB‡/V
(QA/V ) (QB/V )e−E0/kBT
(1.3.11)
with the total rate given as kTST[A][B]. The partition function of the TS is different from a
’usual’ partition, as it contains an unrestricted vibration at the saddle point, corresponding to
Page 22 of 85
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 1. THEORY
free motion along the reaction coordinate. Treating this degree of freedom as a free translation
within the saddle-point region l, the molecular partition function of the TS can be written as
[33]:
QAB‡ =
(2πmkBT
h
)1/2
l · Q′
AB‡
(1.3.12)
Using the 1D version of (1.3.4), with the apostrophe in Q′
AB‡/V explicitly indicating that the
degree of freedom along the reaction coordinate has been ’pulled out’ of the total molecular
partition function. Inserting (1.3.12) into (1.3.11) yields the microscopic expression for kTST:
kTST =
( kBT
2πm
)1/2 1
l
(2πmkBT
h
)1/2
l
Q′
AB‡/V
(QA/V ) (QB/V )e−E0/kBT
= kBT
h
Q′
AB‡/V
(QA/V ) (QB/V )e−E0/kBT
(1.3.13)
Page 23 of 85
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Chapter 2
Method
For this project a range of different software packages and programs were used.
The used software is summarized below with a short description of its function:
PuTTY v0.70
Open Source SSH Client used to access the hpc clusters provided by
Haldor Topsøe A/S, where all computations were performed [35].
ASE v3.16.2
Atomic Simulation Environment, interprets simulation data to manipulate
and visualize molecules [36].
Xming v6.9.0.31 X11 forwarding software, used to open visualization of simulation data
from hpc via ASE on a local machine [37].
GPAW v1.4.0
Grid-based DFT code based on the Projector-Augmented Wave method.
Used to perform all computations [38].
VMD v1.9.3
Visual Molecular Dynamics, used to manipulate surface images and create
high resolution graphics along with POV-Ray [39].
POV-Ray v3.7.0 Persistence of Vision Ray-tracer, used to export images from VMD in
high quality [40].
2.1
GPAW - Using the DFT Calculator
When performing DFT simulations, there is a number of different design choices to be made
in order to represent the system at hand in the best way possible in terms of accuracy and
efficiency in addition to the functional discussed in section 1.2.1. Another important choice is
how expand the wavefunctions. These vary considerably in shape, depending on the distance
to nucleus, with oscillations and nodal points close to the nuclei and a smooth vanishing profile
further from the nuclei. This makes them hard to model precisely when expanded onto a basis
set. The GPAW software package used in this report contains three different ways of treating
the wavefunction:
LCAO The first model is the well known Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO).
This method expands the wavefunction onto a set of localized atomic orbitals, collectively
known as a basis set. Different basis sets exist with varying degrees of sophistication.
As an initial approximations, all 3 methods rely in the atomic orbitals to describe the
wavefunction.
Generally, atomic orbitals describe chemical bonding of molecules well
through orbital tail overlaps, but struggles with long-range interactions and delocalized
Page 24 of 85
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
effects. In GPAW it is implemented as a crude model, used to get faster but less accurate
results. This is possibly owed to a relatively small basis set compared to the other methods
[41].
FD The finite difference (FD) approach expands the wavefunctions onto a 3-dimensional real-
space grid, essentially evaluating the wavefunctions in a number of points separated by a
constant grid-spacing. It is known as the finite difference method because non-local be-
havior, such as the gradient introduced in the non-interacting kinetic energy, is evaluated
using the finite difference method for the point in question and a number of neighbor-
ing points. The number of basis sets can either be set by supplying a grid spacing or
specifying the number of grid points directly. The model is particularly useful for larger
systems that require parallelization over several CPU’s, as the real-space grid saves the
Fourier transforms required in the PW method described below [38].
PW The final method is the Plane Wave (PW) method which expands the wavefunction onto
a number of plane waves, given as ⃗G expi ⃗G⃗r, where ⃗G is a reciprocal lattice vector of the
unit cell. The number of basis functions is chosen through an energy restriction, Ecut, on
⃗G, given as 1
2
⃗G

2
< Ecut.
In all 3 cases though, the true wavefunction is still either very expensive to model close to the
nuclei, or fails to predict long-range behavior. This is addressed by so-called pseudopotentials,
where the atomic nuclei are regarded as perturbations of a free electron gas. These represent
the smooth, long range and bonding parts of the wavefunction quite well but often fail at pro-
ducing the correct shape, and in some cases even magnitude, close to the nuclei [42]. An effort
to link the pseudopotentials and atomic orbitals, with their complimentary description of the
wavefunction, has been made with the Projector-Augmented Wave (PAW) method. Here, the
core states are fixed to the reference shapes of atomic orbitals from spherical harmonics. The
all-electron wavefunctions are expanded onto a basis set of smooth wavefunctions, pseudopo-
tentials, through a linear transformation. All numerical simulations are carried out, before the
pseudopotentials are transformed back to the all-electron wavefunctions [43].
This report mainly uses the FD-method for high-accuracy calculations that parallelize well.
The PW and LCAO methods were also used for some parts however; PW to determine the unit
cell parameters of relevant bulk structures and LCAO to perform fast structural relaxations
in the GA screening process. Both methods are described in the method section. In addition
to the wave function expansion, other parameters had to be chosen as well, both for the elec-
tronic structure optimization and for the atomic structure. For the electronic optimization, the
parameters were chosen based on a previous examination of a VO3H-on-anatase system [44].
This includes a Fermi temperature of T = 0.1 eV
kB
while 2x2x1 Monkhorst-Pack k-points were
used to sample the Brillouin Zone of the reciprocal lattice [45] in most cases. In the case of
the double step 2x1x1 k-points were used. The convergence criteria was set to a max force on
an atom of 0.05 eV/Å while using a slightly smaller grid spacing of 0.18 Å, corresponding to a
larger basis set and higher accuracy. For structure optimizations BFGS and FIRE was used,
the latter expected to more robust in terms of finding the global minimum, but also slower to
converge [46]. Running a structural relaxation produces a log file showing energies of all eval-
uated structures, and output file with information from the calculator including e.g. all forces
Page 25 of 85
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
on atoms and energies of each electronic step. Finally, a trajectory file is produced showing all
evaluated structures.
2.1.1
Density of States
Using GPAW it is also possible to compute the Density of States (DoS), describing the number
of electronic state at a given energy [47]:
ρ(ε) =
∑
n
⟨ψn|ψn⟩δ(ε −εn)
(2.1.1)
Where ρ(ε) is the DoS as a function of energy, psin is the wavefunction, which is an eigenstate,
and εn is the energy of that state. The brackets is the Dirac notation, corresponding to the
integral over the square modulus of the wavefunction. The delta-function at the end takes the
value 0 for all ε ̸= εn and 1 for ε = εn, essentially ’picking’ out the function value at εn upon
integration.
This density of states can be projected onto a set of atomic orbitals, to estimate the occupation
of said orbitals. This is referred to as Projected Density of States (PDoS). This is given as the
density below the Fermi Level, below which the orbital is likely to be occupied [48]. The PDoS
for an atomic orbital i is given as:
ρi(ε) =
∑
n
⟨ψn|i⟩⟨|ψn⟩δ(ε −εn)
(2.1.2)
With ρi(ε) being the DoS of a specific orbital on a specific atom as a function of energy
and ρ(ε) = ∑
i ρi(ε).
In GPAW the PDoS and corresponding energy can be found using
the command ”get_orbital_ldos(a=#,angular=orb)”, with a specifying the atom number and
angular the desired orbital1.
2.2
ASE Modules
The ASE package includes a wide range of different modules with various utility. A description
of the most important ones used in this project is summarized in the paragraphs below.
2.2.1
Optimizing lattice constants
Using the plane wave method, it is possible to calculate the stress tensor acting on the crystal
and from this the optimal lattice constants minimizing the stress [49]. This is directly included
in the ASE environment with two options; purely optimizing the lattice constants, i.e. cell-size,
by minimizing the stress tensor, using the module StrainFilter, and optimizing cell size
and atomic positions simultaneously, with the module UnitCellFilter. Both methods were
tested and yielded similar results.
1Angular momentum quantum number given as s, p, d, etc.
Page 26 of 85
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
2.2.2
Cutting surfaces
One of the more simple tools, is the ASE build module which allows for simple manipulations
of an unit cell. This includes a surface specifically created for designing different trunctations
of the bulk structure. Here, the Miller indices of the desired surface is specified along with the
desired number of layers. The surface module then ’cuts’ a surface along the Miller indices,
creating infinite slabs with the desired termination. After this 10 Å of vacuum in the z-direction
was added to each side of the slab, to ensure that the slabs do not interact under periodic
boundary conditions.
2.2.3
Calculating vibrational frequencies
An important property of the system is the vibrational frequencies. These are useful both in
determining the kinetics and thermodynamics of the system and because they can be measured
experimentally, bridging modelled and true systems.
The vibrations are small oscillations
around the equilibrium bond length(s) of two or more atoms. The rate of oscillations is denoted
the frequency of vibration. In DFT, the vibrations can be estimated from a Taylor expansion of
the energy around the equilibrium positions of a system of N atoms, ⃗r0 = (r1,eq, r2,eq, ..., r3N,eq.
A second order expansion of the Taylor series of the ground state energy around ⃗r0, known as
the Harmonic Approximation, is given as:
E = E0 + 1
2
3N
∑
i=1
3N
∑
j=1
ˆHij

⃗x=0 xixj
(2.2.1)
With ⃗x being a vector of the displacement from equilibrium positions and xi, xj components
of this vector. Note that the first derivative, 2nd term of a Taylor series expansion, is zero
as the equilibrium bond lengths are at an energy minimum by definition.
ˆHij is the Hessian
matrix ˆHij =
∂2E
∂xi∂xj
, which is used by the BFGS method in the search for an energy optimum.
This can be estimated using the FD approximations.
Diagonalizing this using the atomic
displacements produces 3N eigenvalues λ, with the vibrational frequency given as νi =
√
λi/2π.
[50]
In ASE, with the vibrations module, the variation of atomic displacement can be computed
automatically. Specifying only an atomic system and a fixed displacement d, all atoms are
displaced +/-d in each direction and each eigenvalue of the Hessian is reported.
2.2.4
Genetic Algorithm Structure Search
Searching for the most stable structure in a system can be a tedious task and knowledge about
previous systems or chemical properties can inadvertently introduce bias in the structures pro-
posed by ’manual’ design. This report explores a different path, using the Genetic Algorithm
(GA) approach [51] to suggest new structures of mono- and polymeric VO3H groups on anatase
surfaces. This method is implemented in ASE with the ga module. The method uses a quasi-
random algorithm to introduce unbaised structure suggestions that probe all areas of the PES.
Initial, unrelaxed structures are produced by a random scrambling of adsorbate atoms, with
only a few restrictions on inter-atomic distances and height above the surface, that can be made
Page 27 of 85
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
user specific. These are relaxed using a computationally cheap calculator setup using LCAO in
this case.
Once the initially proposed 30-35 structures have been relaxed they are added to a ’population’
of structures. The GA suggests new structures by pairing two structures from the population,
dividing them by a plane through the center of mass and taking half of each, possibly adding
or removing atoms to maintain the correct stoichiometry. To avoid getting stuck at a local
minimum, a number of ’mutations’ are introduced to perturb the system, such a random per-
mutations, translations or mirroring of parts of the structure. If this final result is more stable
than the any of the structures in the population this structure is added and the least stable
structure is removed from the population. The method is considered to have converged when
all or at least a significant portion of the population consists of structures that are essentially
identical both in terms of energy and geometry. To improve efficiency, but maintain accuracy
a two-step procedure was employed, where the LCAO mode was used for the initial relaxations,
while subsequently refining all structurally different systems within an energy threshold using
the FD method.
The algorithm was implemented in two different ways; both as a single job on a single node
running 28 simulations in parallel on 28 CPU’s, and as a number of batch jobs run in parallel,
each running 1 simulation on 3-6 CPU’s. The former is used for small systems where 1 CPU
for each job was sufficient while the latter is used for larger systems. Both are based on the
scripts suggested on the ASE ga web page [52]. The script used for batch submission of several
jobs has been adapted to automatically submit new jobs as soon as the previous finished to
run the method with full automation. This was done by implementing a queuing script that
searched through the job list to find the number of jobs and their individual job id. This is
placed on hold until one of the simulations finishes, prompting it to run and start the batch
script, creating a new job if too few jobs are running. An advantage of the parallel job method
is that it allows for a variable allocation of resources, as adjusting the number of jobs running
is a simple as changing a single variable in the batch job script.
2.3
Nudge Elastic Band - Locating the Transition State
The Nudge Elastic Band (NEB) method used to determine the MEP to locate the TS and with
this, the (classical) barrier height [53]. The method was initially described by Jónsson et al. [54]
and since then a number of improvements have been made e.g. relating to interpolation and
saddle-point/TS localization [55], [56]. The basic idea behind the method is easy to picture:
A series of structures are produced by interpolating between an initial and a final state, creating
a number of intermediate geometries along a path between the two stable states. This can be
done in different ways but often a simple linear interpolation is sufficient. In order to keep all
the unstable intermediate structures from relaxing to either the initial or final state, or a local
minimum on the path, the images are connected by spring constants, like pearls on a string or
points on an elastic band, keeping them on a path between initial and final. In this system,
the force on a given structure i is then:
Fi = −∇V (Ri) + ki+1 (Ri+1 −ri) −ki (Ri −Ri−1) = −∇V (Ri) + Fi,spring
(2.3.1)
Page 28 of 85
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Where ∇V (ri) is the gradient of the PES, Ri is a position vector and ki is a spring constant.
In early versions of this elastic band method, choosing the right spring constant was a challenge
and easily gave rise to errors; if the spring force is too high the structures will favor pull on
each other to the degree where the are forces away from the MEP. If it is too loose however,
the images may very well lie on the MEP, but none of them are close to the TS, as the spring
force is not sufficient to drag it to the top of the MEP. Looking at the forces, the gradient of
the PES will push the atoms towards the MEP as it has a minimum perpendicular to the MEP.
It will however also push images from away from the TS and down towards the initial or final
state, as the gradient is positive along the MEP. The spring forces on the other hand will do
just the opposite; the spring constant pulls the images towards a relatively even distribution
of structures across the MEP. However, with a too high spring constant, the images will ’cut
corners’ to be closer to each other even if that means straying from the MEP.
With the NEB method a relatively simple mitigation of this was introduced, based on the
tangent to the path, which can be estimated using the positions of neighboring atoms or in
more sophisticated schemes [57]. With this, the components of the total force that do not
contribute to locating the TS are projected out; namely the component of the PES gradient
which is parallel to the path and the components of the spring forces that are perpendicular to
the MEP. This gives a new expression for the force acting on i:
Fi,NEB = −∇V (Ri)|⊥+ Fi,springτ∥τ∥
(2.3.2)
Noting that exactly on the MEP, the gradient of the PES perpendicular to the MEP, ∇V (Ri)|⊥
is 0, as the structure is at a local minimum perpendicular to the MEP at any points of this.
What is left, is then the parallel components of the spring forces, which ’nudge’ the structures
towards the TS until they are all in equilibrium.
This method is implemented in ASE and GPAW with the NEB class. The user can specify a
number of N intermediate structures and N · k computer cores, and then GPAW will automat-
ically be allocated the same resources for each of the structure calculations. The NEB method
has been used as a stand-alone method for optimizing MEP’s of the RDS. Furthermore, it is
part of the underlying machinery of another method used to determine MEP’s and TS’; the
Machine-Learning NEB (ML-NEB), which is described below.
2.4
Machine Learning NEB
One issue with the traditional NEB method described above, is that it requires a significant
number of structural relaxations to locate the TS. Furthermore, a large number of these op-
timizations are in regions that are far from the TS making them much less relevant, but just
a computationally heavy to determine. In an attempt to circumvent this inefficient resource
allocation and make good, fast predictions of the TS, a new model has been proposed based on
machine learning methods and surrogate energy surfaces, coined ML-NEB [58].
Briefly explained, the method constructs a surrogate PES by essentially probing the real PES
and performing single point calculations on this. Then, an optimum path on the surrogate
Page 29 of 85
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
model is found using the original NEB method, a process that is much faster on the crude
surrogate model than in the full potential. An image from this path is then evaluated with yet
a single-point calculation on the real PES. Although the surrogate PES is initially a very poor
descriptor for the real PES, it is trained with both structural information as well as function
values and gradients (forces) for the true potential, which is then compared to the predictions
by the model. The surrogate model now quickly becomes more sophisticated, becoming a better
and better approximation of the real PES. A feature of the Gaussian process regression model
used for this model is that they naturally include an uncertainty estimate. This is used to pick
out the worst described parts of the surrogate for improvement. In the end, only the TS is
relaxed below an energy threshold, focusing computational power on the state of interest, while
affirming the overall robustness of the model by also converging the uncertainty estimate down
below a specific threshold. A comparison of the working principle behind ’classic’ NEB and
ML-NEB is provided in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Comparison of the classic NEB and ML NEB methods.
Performance of the two methods on the 2D Müller-Brown PES. The illustration shows the
different approach of the two methods; the classic NEB evaluates the entire path on the real
PES, performing a high number of force evaluations, while the ML NEB model probes points
of interest on a model PES of increasing sophistication after each force evaluation. In this
case, the ML NEB model uses significantly fewer force evaluations on the true PES, although
the cost of training the model and evaluation on the surrogate PES should also be taken into
consideration. Illustration taken from [58].
Page 30 of 85
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
2.5
Full Microkinetic Model of Reactivity
The reduction of the vanadium(V) surface site to vanadium (IV) is assumed to occur as follows
[13]:
A
NO(g) + NH3(g) +⋆V
k+
1
−−→
←−−
k−
1
B
NO(g) + NH3⋆V
k+
2
−−−→
←−−−
(k−
2 )
F
H⋆IV + N2(g) + H2O(g)
(2.5.1)
Where ⋆denotes a reaction site and X⋆an adsorption of species X onto the site. The k’s are
rate constants associated with the reaction step, while roman numeral specifies the vanadium
oxidation state. Note that NO(g) does not take part in the first reaction but is merely included
to keep the stoichiometry of the overall reaction. The bold letters are references to the species
identified by Arnarson et.al [13].
The overall rate of reaction consequently depends on two reaction steps:
(i) Adsorption of NH3 onto the active site.
(ii) Reaction of adsorbed NH3 with gaseous NO.
In order to describe the overall rate of reaction (2.5.1) within a statistical mechanical framework,
it is necessary to observe the various species and the partition functions associated with these.
The two reaction steps are treated below and ultimately combined into a single model describing
the overall rate of reaction.
2.5.1
NH3 Adsorption
The first step in the mechanism for the reduction of vanadium is the adsorption of NH3 onto
a site near vanadium. Is it assumed that the rate determining step is the hydrogen deposition
and vanadium reduction in the second step, and this first step is assumed to be in a quasi-
equilibrium, i.e. k−
1 ≫k2, thus described by the equilibrium constant:
K1 = k+
1
k−
1
(2.5.2)
Using the rate constants given in (2.5.1). Below, macro- and microscopic models for the ad-
sorption are derived and compared.
Macroscopic model
Under the quasi-equilibrium assumption, the rate expression for adsorption becomes:
r1 = pNH3k+
1 θ⋆−k−
1 θNH3 = pNH3k+
1 (1 −θNH3) −k−
1 θNH3 ≈0
(2.5.3)
⇒θNH3
(
k−
1 + pNH3k+
1
)
= pNH3k+
1
(2.5.4)
With the NH3 coverage given as:
θNH3 =
pNH3k+
1
k−
1 + pNH3k+
1
(2.5.5)
=
pNH3K1
1 + pNH3K1
with K1 = k+
1
k−
1
=
θNH3
pNH3 (1 −θNH3)
(2.5.6)
Essentially producing the Langmuir Adsorption Isotherm as a result.
Page 31 of 85
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Microscopic model
Rather than describing this equilibrium in terms of the macroscopic quantities given above, it
can also be described by the partition functions associated with each molecular state. These
broadly speaking describe the freedom of the system, and can thus be used to find for instance
the free energy. For a system consisting of N indistinguishable particles in the gaseous phase,
the canonical partition function is given as [34]:
Qgas(Ngas, V, T) = qgas(V, T)Ngas
Ngas!
(2.5.7)
Where q is the partition function(s) of each individual molecule. The partition function is
”normalized” by N! as is it possible to construct N! identical systems by ’swapping’ identical
particles, reducing the degrees of freedom in the system. The corresponding canonical partition
function for a system consisting of N indistinguishable particles adsorbed on M sites, the
equivalent to the canonical partition function becomes [2]:
Qads(Nads, M, T) =
M!
Nads!(M −Nads)!qads(T)Nads
(2.5.8)
While this does look quite similar to the gas phase, one may identify the fraction as a binomial
coefficient describing the number of ways to pick N sites (for the N particles) from the total M
number of sites.
Crucially, it is possible to use the equilibrium condition to relate the two, seeing as at equilibrium
the total chemical potential is 0, i.e.:
∑
i
µi = 0
(2.5.9)
⇓
µNH3,ads −µNH3,gas ⇔µNH3,ads = µNH3,gas
(2.5.10)
Furthermore, the chemical potential is related to the canonical ensemble as:
µ = −kBT ∂ln(Q)
∂N
(2.5.11)
Inserting (2.5.7) into (2.5.11) it is found that:
µgas = −kBT
∂ln
(qgas(V, T)Ngas
Ngas!
)
∂Ngas
= −kBT
(∂Ngas · ln(qgas(V, T))
∂Ngas
−∂ln(Ngas!)
∂Ngas
)
≈−kBT
(∂Ngas · ln(qgas(V, T))
∂Ngas
−∂(Ngas ln(Ngas) −Ngas)
∂Ngas
)
= −kBT
(
ln(qgas(V, T)) −(ln(Ngas) + Ngas
Ngas −1)
)
= −kBT ln
(qgas(V, T)
Ngas
)
(2.5.12)
Page 32 of 85
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Using Stirling’s Approximation: ln(N!) ≈N · ln(N) −N (2.5.13) in the approximation.
Similarly, for the canonical for the adsorbed state:
µads = −kBT
∂ln
(
M!
Nads!(M −Nads)!qads(T)Nads
)
∂Nads
= −kBT
∂
(
ln
(qads(T)Nads
Nads!
)
+ ln
(
M!
(M −Nads)!
))
∂Nads
≈−kBT
(
ln
(qads(T)
Nads
)
+ ∂ln(M!)
∂Nads
−∂ln((M −Nads)!)
∂Nads
)
using (2.5.12)
≈−kBT
(
ln
(qads(T)
Nads
)
−∂((M −Nads) ln(M −Nads) −(M −Nads))
∂Nads
)
using (2.5.13)
= −kBT
(
ln
(qads(T)
Nads
)
−
(
(M −Nads)∂ln(M −Nads)
∂Nads
+ ∂(M −Nads)
∂Nads
ln(M −Nads)
−∂(M −Nads)
∂Nads
))
= −kBT
(
ln
(qads(T)
Nads
)
−
((M −Nads)
(M −Nads)
∂(M −Nads)
∂Nads
−ln(M −Nads) + 1
))
= −kBT
(
ln
(qads(T)
Nads
)
−(−1 −ln(M −Nads) + 1)
)
= −kBT
(
ln
(qads(T)
Nads
)
+ ln(M −Nads)
)
= −kBT ln
((M −Nads)qads(T)
Nads
)
(2.5.14)
Interestingly, this result is quite similar to that of the gas phase, except for the extra term of
(M −Nads).
Finally, inserting (2.5.12) and (2.5.2) into (2.5.10) a relationship between particle numbers and
Page 33 of 85
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
partition functions of the gaseous and adsorbed ammonia is found:
µNH3,ads = µNH3,gas
(2.5.15)
⇕
−kBT ln
((M −NNH3,ads)qNH3,ads(T)
NNH3,ads
)
= −kBT ln
(qNH3,gas(V, T)
NNH3,gas
)
(2.5.16)
⇕
(M −NNH3,ads)qNH3,ads(T)
NNH3,ads
= qNH3,gas(V, T)
NNH3,gas
(2.5.17)
⇕
(M −NNH3,ads) qNH3,ads(T)
qNH3,gas(V, T) = NNH3,ads
NNH3,gas
(2.5.18)
⇕
(M −NNH3,ads)
M
qNH3,ads(T)
qNH3,gas(V, T)/V = NNH3,ads/M
NNH3,gas/V
(2.5.19)
⇕
(1 −θNH3)
qNH3,ads(T)
qNH3,gas(V, T)/V =
θNH3
[NNH3,gas] =
θNH3
pNH3/kBT
(2.5.20)
⇕
qNH3,ads(T)/kBT
qNH3,gas(V, T)/V =
θNH3
pNH3 (1 −θNH3) ≡K1
(2.5.21)
⇕
θNH3 =
pNH3/kBT · qNH3,ads(T)
pNH3/kBT · qNH3,gas(V, T)/V + qNH3,ads(T) (2.5.22)
=
pNH3χ(T)
1 + pNH3χ(T), with χ = qNH3,ads(T)/kBT
qNH3,gas(V, T)/V
(2.5.23)
Where the equilibrium constant has been defined as (2.5.21) with micro- and macroscopic
quantities on the RHS and LHS respectively. It is worth noting that the macroscopic definitions
of both K1 and θNH3 are equal to the one given in (2.5.6) for χ(T) = K1.
2.5.2
Vanadium Reduction
The second step of the reaction involves the deposition of a proton on the active site, reducing
the site in the process. Once again, this reaction step can be analyzed from a macro- and
microscopic point of view.
Macroscopic Model
Following (2.5.1), the rate equation for the formation of reduced sites (denoted θH) is:
dθH
dt = pNOk+
2 θNH3 −pN2pH2Ok−
2 θH
(2.5.24)
Page 34 of 85
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Assuming that Reaction 2 is irreversible, i.e. γ ≪12 or k−
2 ≈0, the rate of reduction, and thus
overall rate of reaction, can be rewritten as:
dθH
dt = pNOk+
2 θNH3 = pNOk+
2 pNH3K1
1 + pNH3K1
using (2.5.6)
(2.5.25)
Which defines the overall rate of reaction, based on the partial pressures of NO(g) and NH3(g)
and, indirectly, on the coverage of adsorbed NH3.
Microscopic Model
Once again, it is also possible to describe the reaction step within a microscopic framework,
in this case using TST. Previous studies by Arnarson et al.[59] have shown, that reaction 2
occurs through an adsorbed NONH3 TS. Using this knowledge, it is possible to construct a
more detailed reaction step for this reaction, in accordance with (1.3.1):
NO(g) + NH3⋆V
k+
2a
−−→
←−−
k−
2a
NONH3
‡⋆
k2b
−−→H⋆IV + N2(g) + H2O(g)
(2.5.26)
Using similar notation as previously and splitting reaction 2 in two steps; 2a & 2b. The oxida-
tion state of the transition state is not included, but is between that of the product and reactant.
Accordingly, reaction 2a is essentially an adsorption reaction of NO onto the active site, where
the transition state is localized onto a single site, as the catalyst consists of a number of isolated
sites located as monomeric or polymeric vanadium oxides on top of a titanium oxide surface.
In this case, the partition function for the transition state has the same general form as that
of any other adsorbed species:
Q‡(N‡, Mfree,‡, T) =
Mfree,‡!
N‡!(Mfree,‡ −N‡)!q‡(T)N‡
(2.5.27)
The notation Mfree,‡ arises from the fact that there is a total of M = Mfree + NNH3,ads + N‡
sites. From these, the number of possible sites Mfree,‡ of which we must pick ”N‡” sites, is
given as:
Mfree,‡ = M −NNH3,ads
(2.5.28)
As we cannot pick a site already occupied by NH3. Similarly, for NH3:
Mfree,NH3,ads = M −N‡
(2.5.29)
As with the adsorbed NH3 in , chemical potential of the TS is then given as:
µ‡ = −kBT ln
(([M −NNH3,ads] −N‡)q‡(T)
N‡
)
(2.5.30)
2This has previously been shown to be a good approximation [44] for this reaction. γ denotes the ’reversibility’
given as the rate of the backwards reaction, over the rate of the forwards reaction.
Page 35 of 85
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Using (2.5.9) it is found that:
∑
i
µi = µ‡ −(µNH3,ads + µNO,gas) = 0
(2.5.31)
⇕
µ‡ = µNH3,ads + µNO,gas
(2.5.32)
⇓
−kBT ln
(([M −NNH3,ads] −N‡)q‡(T)
N‡
)
= −kBT ln
(([M −N‡] −NNH3,ads)qNH3,ads(T)
NNH3,ads
)
−kBT ln
(qNO,gas(V, T)
NNO,gas
)
(2.5.33)
⇕
([M −NNH3,ads] −N‡)q‡(T)
N‡
= ([M −N‡] −NNH3,ads)qNH3,ads(T)
NNH3,ads
· qNO,gas(V, T)
NNO,gas
(2.5.34)
⇕
([Mtot −NNH3,ads] −N‡)q‡(T)
N‡
= ([Mtot −N‡] −NNH3,ads)qNH3,ads(T)
NNH3,ads
· qNO,gas(V, T)
NNO,gas
(2.5.35)
⇕
q‡(T)
N‡
= qNH3,ads(T)
NNH3,ads
· qNO,gas(V, T)
NNO,gas
(2.5.36)
⇕
q‡(T)
qNH3,ads(T)qNO,gas(V, T) =
N‡
NNH3,adsNNO,gas
(2.5.37)
⇓
q‡(T)/M
qNH3,ads(T)/M · qNO,gas(V, T)/V =
N‡/M
NNH3,ads/M · NNO,gas/V
(2.5.38)
⇕
q‡(T)
qNH3,ads(T) · qNO,gas(V, T)/V =
θ‡
θNH3 · [NNO,gas] =
θ‡
θNH3 · pNO/kBT
(2.5.39)
⇕
q‡(T)/kBT
qNH3,ads(T) · qNO,gas(V, T)/V =
θ‡
pNOθNH3
≡K‡
(2.5.40)
Thus, according to reaction 2b, the rate of formation of reduced sites becomes:
dθH
dt = k2bθ‡ = ν‡K‡pNOθNH3,ads = k2b
q‡(T)/kBT
qNH3,ads(T) · qNO,gas(V, T)/V pNOθNH3
(2.5.41)
Page 36 of 85
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 2. METHOD
Noting that with the expression for θNH3 given in (2.5.6) the reaction expression becomes:
dθH
dt = k2bK‡=2apNO
pNH3K1
1 + pNH3K1
= k+
2 pNOpNH3K1
1 + pNH3K1
(2.5.42)
For k+
2 = k2bK2a, which is exactly the same result as in (2.5.25).
Looking at the derived expression for the rate constant in (1.3.13), this equivalent to k2bK2a,
and thus kTST for the reduction step is given as:
kTST = kBT
h
q′
‡(T)/kBT
qNH3,ads(T) · qNO,gas(V, T)/V e−E0/kBT
(2.5.43)
= 1
h
q′
‡(T)
qNH3,ads(T) · qNO,gas(V, T)/V e−E0/kBT
(2.5.44)
Where q′
‡(T) is the partition function for the TS, without the degree of freedom along the
reaction coordinate.
With this result and the adsorption equilibrium constant given in (2.5.6) it is possible to cal-
culate rate based only on the partition functions of the participating molecules and adsorbates
as well as the pressures of NH3(g) and NO(g). In doing so, all the adsorbates will be evaluated
according to the Harmonic Oscillator (HO) Approximation, treating all degrees of freedom as
vibrations [2].
Page 37 of 85
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
This chapter will report, analyze and discuss the findings related to the different subprojects
involving the surface/active site design and reactivity estimates. Similar to the previous chap-
ter, this chapter will treat the outcomes of each subproject independently for comparison of
the different systems. As the project included evaluation of a substantial number of potential
structures, particularly in the GA structure search, a large portion of these will not be pre-
sented in this report and in some cases only the energies of the structures will be reported.
Coordinates of the most stable structures are given in A. Unless otherwise stated, the reported
energies are internal energies, i.e. enthalpy at 0 K and thus does not include entropy or ZPE.
Energy of formation or reaction ∆E is calculated as ∆Eij = ∑
f Ef −∑
i Ei, with f and i
denoting final and initial state(s) respectively.
3.1
System Design: Defining Accurate Model Surfaces
In order to compare the reactivity of various possible surface geometries, these must be chosen
such that they accurately represent structures found in the reaction environment. All the inves-
tigated surfaces in this report are in essence different terminations of a bulk anatase structure,
with the addition of a number of adsorbed atoms on specific sites. Consequently, the first step
was to optimize a bulk anatase structure. The structure of anatase is well known, and from
the open crystallographic database http://www.crystallography.net an anatase structure from
a neutron powder diffraction was obtained [60]. Here the experimental lattice constants were
found to be a = b = 3.7845 Å and c = 9.5143 Å.
Usually, good (atomic) structural convergence for similar systems is achieved with an energy
cutoff of 500 eV [61] and has been used in other investigations of V/TiO2 systems [62]. The
stress tensor however, is derived from the total energy, which often requires a higher cutoff [61],
so to ensure a sufficient number of plane waves, a cutoff of 800 eV was used. A sampling of
(8 × 8 × 2) k-points was used, as the cell is significantly longer in the z-direction, described by
lattice constant c. The cell was relaxed to a maximum force of 0.005 eV/Å on each atom using
the UnitCellFilter module.
Although the cell generally retained its dimensions in the x/y direction with a = b = 3.803 Å,
some deformation occurred in the z-direction with c = 9.750 Å. Using the StrainFilter
Page 38 of 85
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
module, more k-points (10 × 10 × 4) or a cutoff of 1000 eV did not have any significant impact,
but resulted in cell heights of 10.102 Å, 9.738 Å and 9.747 Å respectively. As the error compared
to the experimental values did not significantly improve using any other method, and this error
was only around 2.5 %, the first unit cell was used in all further analysis.
In addition to anatase, an optimization of a V2O5 unit cell from single crystal x-ray diffraction
was performed [63]. This was done using the same approach, only with (4 × 8 × 8) k-points
instead. Subsequent to the unit cell optimizations, structure optimizations were carried out for
both species, using the calculator setup described in the method section. Results for both bulk
structures are summarized in Table 3.1 below:
Table 3.1: Comparison of experimental and computed lattice constants for bulk anatase
and vanadium oxide
TiO2 (anatase)
V2O5
a [Å]
Experimental
3.7845
11.512
Computed
3.803
11.700
Error
0.48%
1.63%
b [Å]
Experimental
3.7845
3.564
Computed
3.803
3.608
Error
0.48%
1.23%
c [Å]
Experimental
9.5143
4.368
Computed
9.750
4.422
Error
2.48%
1.24%
Energy [eV]
(per unit)
-97.61
-219.59
3.1.1
Surface Designs
As described in section 1.1.1, it is possible to design an anatase crystal such that it contains
a wide range of surfaces, ’edges’, and different ratios of these. Furthermore, these can contain
edge defects as for example the newly discovered steps present at the interface of the 001 and
100 edges [18]. Stoichiometric slabs of the 100 and 001 edges were designed directly from the
surface module. The 100 edge was designed to be 5 layers deep, and with unit cell surface
dimensions of 9.747 Å × 11.410 Å, containing a total of 30 titanium and 60 oxygen. The bot-
tom 3 layers were fixed to replicate bulk conditions. The titanium in the top (and bottom)
layer each coordinate to 5 oxygen, leaving them undercoordinated relative to the bulk structure.
The ’infinite slab’ of the 001 edge was constructed with 4 layers and surface dimensions of
7.607 Å × 7.607 Å, containing 16 titanium and 32 oxygen. The bottom 2 layers were fixed and
similarly to the 100 edge the top layer of titanium is undercoordinated.
Designing an accurate model of a step site proved to be a bit more challenging; although several
different steps are present, it was not possible to model any of these from a simple cut along
a set of Miller indices from a single unit cell. For simplicity, this report focuses only on the
’double step’ described by STM and TEM [18]; a step down through 2 rows of the 001 edge
Page 39 of 85
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
of anatase (c/2), with a width of approximately 11 a (or b) per 2 steps. This was modelled
by extending the anatase unit cell 11 times in the b-direction and cutting the crystal with the
surface module along the 011 Miller Index of the new unit cell, to produce the correct ge-
ometry at the cell boundaries, and adding 10 Å vacuum on both sides of the step. Some units
of TiO2 was removed manually until the model looked similar to the TEM images and the step
was extended 3 times in the a-direction to give the step and plateau some width. This left a
model system with cell dimensions of 11.410 Å × 42.964 Å (a × b) with a total of 162 titanium
and 324 oxygen.
With a total of more than 6000 electrons, this initial system is far too large to model within
the required time and precision. To mitigate this, the unit cell was cut in half such that it
only included a single of the steps and the bottom layer was removed. To maintain the correct
structure across the cell boundary the cell was shifted −a/2, giving cell surface dimensions of
11.410 Å × 21.482 Å, α = 99.46°. This stoichiometric model consists of 60 titanium and 120
oxygen; half of these fixed in their bulk positions. As with the other surfaces, the titanium
in the top and bottom layer are undercoordinated with oxygen. The exposed titanium at the
top of the step is undercoordinated, with each titanium coordinating to just 4 oxygen. An
illustration of the step from ASE GUI is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Crude initial version of step, cut from anatase with all atoms still in bulk grid
positions. Screenshot from ASE GUI.
From the microscopy investigations of the step structure it was concluded, that the step itself
was not a simple cut of the 001-edge but instead must contain extra units of adsorbed TiO2
[18], although the STM and TEM images give conflicting information as to the exact structure
Page 40 of 85
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
of the step. And it is true, that in comparison to the clean 001-edge, a notable difference in
both the height of the terminating atoms and the angle of these with the layers below can be
observed, corresponding to both horizontal and vertical displacement.
As a first approximation however, the simple model from the 001-edge was relaxed and com-
pared to the TEM images. As the visual comparison in Figure 3.2 shows, the reconstruction
that occurs upon relaxation does to some extent in fact resemble the structure identified using
TEM. Although the plateau between the steps has larger height variations in the TEM image
than in the DFT model, the horizontal restructuring of the top layer, compared to the layers
below, is quite well represented in the DFT model as indicated with the reported angles in
Table 3.2. As mentioned, there is some discrepancy between the STM and TEM images, and
the TEM images themselves are not explicitly clear with regards to the structure. Looking at
the step, it is possible that the smearing identified as a single atom above Atom 1 in Figure 3.2b
could be more than one atom, corresponding to an extra unit of adsorbed/rearranged TiO2.
That being said, as a model system, the structure found with DFT represents the ’true’ system
quite well and reproduce the most significant features of the step site and plateau.
Table 3.2: Angles between titanium atoms in the top 3 layers of the step plateau
Surface
Atom:
Bulk/cut
Computed
Measured
1
142.0°
127.9°
123°
2
142.0°
133.5°
127°
3
142.0°
142.3°
145°
4
142.0°
147.3°
165°
5
142.0°
160.5°
157°
Table of Ti-Ti-Ti angles between the 1st, 2nd and 3rd layer of the step plateau shown
in Figure 3.1 and 3.2. The angle reported is shown in green in Figure 3.2b and atom
numbering follows the numbering in same figure. Bulk/cut angles are from the initial
(unrelaxed) structure shown in Figure 3.1. Computed angles are from the relaxed DFT
structure and measured angles are found from image 3.2b using a simple online tool. As
TEM offers only a 2D representation of the structure, the bulk and computed angles are
calculated from the atomic positions projected onto the yz-plane, i.e. taking only y- and
z-coordinates of the atoms.
Oxygenation of step
As mentioned, the top layer of titanium atoms on the anatase step structure are considerably
undercoordinated compared to bulk anatase. This caused some problems in the GA search for
stable vanadium adsorbates as described in section 3.2.3 and prompted a search for the equi-
librium oxygen adsorption level. The changes in internal energy with increasing oxygenation
of the top of the step are shown in Table 3.3. As there is an entropy loss associated with the
oxygen adsorption, the results show that there will be a potential adsorption of no more than
½O2 per 3 Ti on the top step. This equilibrated model was used in the GA search for VO3H
Page 41 of 85
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) TEM image of double step
(b) TEM image of double step showing the
anatase grid
(c) Double step structure from DFT
(d) Double step structure from DFT showing the
anatase grid
Figure 3.2: Step structures obtained from TEM ((a)-(b)) and DFT ((c)-(d)).
The TEM image from [18] showing the titanium positions of the step sties is compared to a
structural relaxation performed in DFT of a model system designed to represent the step.
The structure based on the DFT model shows the titanium atoms of the unit cell plotted
as dotted spheres using VMD, for comparison with the TEM. Both methods show a side
view of the 001-edge. To better visualize the structural similarities and differences Ti-Ti
’bonds’ are drawn in red in image (b) and (d), to show the deformation of the surface from
the bulk anatase grid. The numbers in image (b) refer to the numbering used in Table
3.2, and the green angle indicates the reported angle between the 1st, 2nd and 3rd layer
of the surface.
Page 42 of 85
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
adsorption sites.
Table 3.3: Energy differences of oxygen adsorption to top step site
Step oxidation
0 →1⁄3
1⁄3 →2⁄3
2⁄3 →3⁄3
ΔE [eV]
-0.57
0.79
1.06
Energy change associated with the adsorption of an additional oxygen to the step. Calcu-
lated relative to O2(g). As the adsorption involves an entropy loss that is not accounted
for, the actual stability, ∆Gads, will be lower.
3.1.2
Comparison of model systems
Looking at the designed model systems, illustrated together in Figure 3.3, it is clear that each of
proposed model systems are structurally different. While all the structures are essentially flat
in the direction going into the plane, defined as the y-direction, the height (z) varies along the
x-direction in both the 100-edge and step structure. The steps on the 100-edge and the double
step are significantly different though; while the double step contains a large plateau and well
separated open steps going down, the steps going down on the 100-edge are only separated
from an upwards step by a thin stripe of atoms, forming narrow plateaus and valleys on the
surface rather than open steps. Furthermore, the double step has a height of 4.9 Å, while the
surface of the 100-edge only varies with 1.7 Å.
While the structures are all planar in the y-direction, and for the 001-edge in the x-direction
as well, the planes are significantly different; the 100-edge plateaus are organized in zig-zag
patterns, Ti atoms separated by 3.09 Å and 3.19 Å for the valleys and plateaus respectively.
The 001-edge and step plateaus are arranged in parallel, rectangular patterns, however while
the 001-edge is square with a Ti-Ti separation of 3.80 Å, the contraction of the step plateau in
the x-direction leads to Ti-Ti separations of (3.50 ± 0.05) Å, while retaining the 3.80 Å in the
y-direction.
Together these structural characteristics of the different model systems should ensure that a
wide variety of unique potential adsorption sites are available and thus potentially facilitate
adsorption of structurally different vanadium oxide species.
3.2
Vanadium Deposition: Creating the Active Site
Following the selection and construction of the model systems, consisting of different anatase
terminations found in anatase crystals, the next step in understanding the reactivity of the
VOx/TiO2 DeNOx system is the describing the deposition of units of vanadium oxide onto
the anatase surface. The 001-edge and the thermodynamically most stable 101-edge has has
Page 43 of 85
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Illustration of model system with double step
(b) Illustration of model system of 001-edge
(c) Illustration of model system of 100-edge
Figure 3.3: Anatase model systems
.
Illustrations of relaxed structures of the 3 model systems investigated in this report. As the
images show, the systems have significant structural differences, including a wide variety of
facets, steps and plateaus. The top layer of atoms are highlighted to give a better view of
the structure. The axes are chosen such that the x-axis is horizontal, the z-axis is vertical
and the y-axis points into the viewing plane, although at angle for visualization purposes.
Page 44 of 85
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
already been studied extensively [64]–[67]. This includes a full reaction mechanism on the 001-
edge [13]. This is not the case for the 100-edge or the newly discovered step, although some
VOx adsorbates on the 100-edge has previously been described [65]. This report has made use
of the GA approach to suggest the sites and structures of the vanadium deposition. The results
obtained with the GA in previous studies of the 001 are compared to the 100 and step model
systems.
3.2.1
GA Benchmark: VO3H on the 001-edge
Although previous studies of the 001-edge has been carried out, the first part of search for VOx
adsorbates was a GA search for a VO3H monomer on the (7.607 Å × 7.607 Å) unit cell of the
001-edge, corresponding to a coverage of 1.7 V/nm2. This was done as a way to benchmark
the GA, including the calculator options provided, and ensure that the setup could converge
towards the structure believed to be most stable on the 001-edge.
The ’distorted octahedral’ [64] was found already as the 8th relaxed structure. The GA was
continued for a period of time, until it was clear that the structures converged towards the dis-
torted octahedral, with 17 of the 107 evaluated structures relaxing to versions of the distorted
octahedral. Refining the structure with the FD-method gave an adsorption energy of −1.51 eV,
similar to earlier reported values. The structure is shown in Figure 3.4a, along with the same
structure, but in a larger (11.410 Å × 7.607 Å) unit cell with a coverage of 1.2 V/nm2 and an
adsorption energy of −2.65 eV. The large difference in stability as a function of the coverage
is similar to the trend found in the previous investigation of the distorted octahedral.
This successful implementation of the GA prompted a similar structure search on first the
100-edge and subsequently on the step.
Comments on the structure of VO3H on the 001-edge
It has previously been reported, that the VO3H adsorbs to the 001-surface as a so-called dis-
torted octahedral, indicating some extent of coordination with a bulk oxygen below the adsorbate
[64]. This is also the terminology that this report has used to describe the adsorbate. Upon
closer investigation of the species produced in the the GA, it does however seem there might
be little coordination to the bulk oxygen even the highest coverage. Examining the structures
produced by the GA, there are 4 versions of the distorted octahedral, all very close in energy
even after FD refinement, with an energy difference of just 3 meV from most to least stable.
Measuring the O––V–O(bulk) angle, this varies from 160.7° to 168.8°, without apparently af-
fecting the bonding/stability.
The Ti-O(bulk) distance also varies from 2.825 Å to 2.930 Å
without impacting stability. Last but not least, the V––O distance seems to be completely
unaffected by the distance to and angle with the bulk oxygen; in all 4 versions, and even with
the larger unit cell, the V––O only varies from 1.587 Å to 1.588 Å. If there was any significant
coordination to the bulk oxygen, some degree of trans influence would be expected, where the
electron donating bulk oxygen would induce an elongation of the V––O bond as it occupies the
same orbital.
Page 45 of 85
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) VO3H in small unit cell, side view
(b) VO3H viewed at an angle
(c) VO3H in large unit cell, side view
(d) VO3H viewed at an angle
Figure 3.4: The VO3H distorted octahedral in unit cells of different size.
Page 46 of 85
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In larger structures (i.e. lower coverages), it is clear that this ’effect’ seems to wear off. This
can for example be seen in the larger unit cell of the 001-edge, shown in Figure 3.4d, with a
O–Ti–O angle of just 143°. One factor that does seem to play a major role though, is the
number of anatase rows available in the x-direction per unit vanadium: In the large unit cell
there are 3 rows per unit vanadium, allowing both of the rows involved in Ti–O–V coordina-
tion to rearrange towards the 3rd row, leaving room for the vanadium to adsorb in a flat square
pyramidal structure between two titanium rows, using the bulk oxygens found between the two
rows. In the small unit cell there are only two rows available per vanadium, both coordinating
to said vanadium. This does not provide nearly as much room for restructuring, leaving the
vanadium oxide unable to adsorb as a flat square pyramidal structure on top of two widened
rows of anatase, adsorbing instead at an angle, with the bulk oxygens maintaining the anatase
grid and staying closer to their bulk positions.
3.2.2
Vanadium Oxide on the 100-edge
Another GA search was performed with a VO3H monomer on a (9.747 Å × 11.410 Å) 100-edge
unit cell, corresponding to a coverage of 0.9 V/nm2. This produced a total of 82 different struc-
tures.
Unlike the GA run on the 001-surface this GA resulted in a number of markedly different
structures nearly equal in adsorption energy, with a distorted octahedral once again being the
most stable according to the GA. However, as there were several structures with comparable
stability, all (7) structures within 0.6 eV of the one predicted to be the most stable by the GA
were optimized with the FD calculator to get more accurate stabilities. This proved to have
quite a large effect on the relative stabilities of the VO3H species; the most stable being a
trigonal pyramidal structure, shown in Figure 3.5e.
This is not particularly surprising, as the choices for the GA calculator have been made to im-
prove the efficiency of the relaxations and not necessarily the accuracy of the energetics. This
has been addressed previously in a test of the GA method, where changing from the LCAO
to the FD method (as well as the XC-functional in their case) had a significant impact on the
ordering of the structures [68]. The test goes on to conclude, that while this 2-step approach
does have an impact on the energies, it does not significantly affect the local minimum identified
by the GA, i.e. the structure.
The energies of the 7 structures, calculated with both LCAO and FD, are shown in Table
3.4, including the ’error’ defined as the difference in LCAO energy to Structure 1 subtracted
the difference in FD energy. As the results show, the least stable, according to the LCAO
method, of the included structures becomes the most stable with the FD method, with the
LCAO method ’underbinding’ by 0.72 eV. Finally, uncertainty estimates for the 3 of the most
stable structures are provided from the BEEF Ensemble module.
Although Structure 1 is slightly more stable than Structure 2, Structure 2 was selected for
further analysis as it retains the proton a Ti–O–V oxygen rather than adsorbing the proton
in the bulk on a Ti–O–Ti oxygen. As the proton is expected to be involved in the reaction
mechanism, in the form of a Brønsted acid site on vanadium [13], Structure 2 will give a better
Page 47 of 85
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Structure 2 side view
(b) Structure 2 angle
(c) Structure 4 side view
(d) Structure 4 angle
(e) Structure 7 side view
(f) Structure 7 angle
Figure 3.5: Illustrations of the monomeric VO3H adsorbates on the 100 edge of anatase,
showing structure and bond lengths.
Page 48 of 85
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 3.4: Energetics of Monomeric VO3H Deposition on the 100-edge
#
ELCAO[eV]
Erel,LCAO[eV]
EFD[eV]
Erel,FD[eV]
GA
Error[eV]
∆Eads[eV]
1
-2950.20
-
-3036.39
-
-
-0.37
2
-2949.94
0.26
-3036.32
0.07
-0.18
−0.29 ± 0.17
3
-2949.86
0.34
-3036.12
0.27
-0.07
-0.09
4
-2949.76
0.44
-3036.55
-0.16
-0.60
−0.52 ± 0.08
5
-2949.74
0.46
-3036.16
0.24
-0.22
-0.13
6
-2949.72
0.48
-3036.11
0.28
-0.20
-0.08
7
-2949.66
0.55
-3036.57
-0.17
-0.72
−0.54 ± 0.25
Energies of the most stable unique adsorbates of VO3H on the 100-edge, found via the GA
method. The GA ranks the adsorbates according to their LCAO energy and these are later
refined using the FD method. Relative stabilities are calculated relative to the most stable
species according to the GA/LCAO calculations, i.e. (En −E0). The ’GA Error’ is the
difference in stability between the LCAO and FD calculations and the adsorption energy
is calculated as ∆Eads = EVO3H, ads−
(
E⋆+ 1
2H2O + 1
2V2O5
)
. Uncertainty estimates on the
adsorption energy have been calculated for selected structures, with the BEEF Ensemble.
description of the reactivity of a vanadium site.
In addition to Structure 2, Structure 4 was also chosen for further analysis. While Structure
7 is potentially the most stable, the vanadium seems undercoordinated to the extent that this
structure is not believed to be present if additional oxygen/water is available. As Structure 7
is thus not assumed to be a realistic model of a vanadium site, it was not used for any further
investigation. Results from the vanadium dimer below supports this claim.
This gives to different model systems of VO3H on anatase 100; A square pyramidal / octahedral
structure, very similar to the one found on the 001 edge and a tetrahedral structure with two
’free’1 oxygen atoms. In terms of stability they are both significantly less stable than the square
pyramidal found on the 001, adsorbing with a ∆E of −0.29 eV and −0.52 eV for structure 2
& 4 respectively. Taking into account that this does not take into account the entropy loss
from adsorbing water (1/2H2O(g) per VO3H), it is possible that quite few of these sites will be
present at reaction conditions.
Interestingly though, it seems that, contrary to the 001-edge, there is no negative effect on
stability going towards higher vanadium coverages. Relaxing the structures in a smaller unit
cell of (9.747 Å × 7.606 Å), giving a coverage of 1.3 V/nm2, results in a ∆E of −0.23 eV and
−0.51 eV for structure 2 & 4 respectively. At a later stage of the project, structures with an
even higher vanadium coverage was investigated as well. This was, in part, due to the fact that
the monomers were not particularly stable, but also because polymeric vanadium has been
shown to improve reactivity on the 101-edge of anatase in V-SCR [67].
1As in, not coordinating to the bulk titanium. One oxygen is bonding to a proton, the other forms a vanadyl.
Page 49 of 85
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Polymeric vanadium on the 100 edge
The polymeric vanadium was modelled as 2 units of VO3H in the same (9.747 Å × 7.606 Å)
unit cell, corresponding to a coverage of 2.7 V/nm2 using the GA method. Running the GA
with 2 units of vanadium oxide had previously been attempted on the 001-edge, but failed to
reach convergence [44]. In this case it did take significantly longer compared to the other GA
optimization, but ultimately produced a total of 211 structures, until the structures converged
to a point where the 12 most stable structures were near-identical. The 7 most stable unique
structures were refined with FD, and the results are shown in Table 3.5. As the results show,
the polymeric species are significantly more stable than the monomeric sites, with comparable
uncertainties on the calculations.
Table 3.5: Energetics of Polymeric VO3H Deposition on the 100-edge
#
ELCAO
Erel,LCAO
EFD
Erel,FD
GA
Error
∆Eads (per V)
1
-2127.45
-
-2190.26
-
-
−0.91 ± 0.14
2
-2127.24
0.21
-2190.40
-0.13
-0.34
−0.97 ± 0.20
3
-2126.96
0.49
-2190.64
-0.38
-0.87
−1.10 ± 0.10
4
-2126.87
0.58
-2190.10
0.17
-0.42
-0.82
5
-2126.74
0.70
-2190.12
0.14
-0.57
-0.84
6
-2126.74
0.71
-2190.03
0.24
-0.47
-0.79
7
-2126.74
0.71
-2189.75
0.51
-0.20
-0.65
Energies, given in eV, of the most stable unique adsorbates of 2 units of VO3H on the 100-
edge, found via the GA method. The reported values are from the GA search with LCAO
and subsequent refinement with FD. A detailed description of the different energetics can
be found in Table 3.4. Adsorption energies are given per vanadium, for direct comparison
with the monomeric structures. As with the previous GA, the LCAO energies are not quite
on spot in terms of the relative stabilies, rather in this case ∆Eads,3 > ∆Eads,2 > ∆Eads,1.
Looking at the structures, provided in Figure 3.6, they are quite reminiscent of the monomeric
structures identified; essentially just combining 1 unit of the top-adsorbed vanadia, monomer
7, with 1 unit from monomer 7, 2 & 4 for polymer 1, 2 & 3 respectively. In all cases, the
vanadium in monomer 7 now includes a V––O oxygen bonded on top of the vanadium, utilizing
extra oxygens from shared Ti–O–V oxygens, which could explain part of the better stability.
Notably though, polymer 1, containing 2 top-adsorbed vanadyls does not appear to be more
stable than the two others, perhaps even slightly less stable. Regardless of whether this is case,
it is clear that the distorted octahedral, first identified on the 001-edge, appears to be just as
stable in its polymeric form as any of the other identified polymers on the 100-edge and more
stable than any of the monomers. None of the structures identified on the 100-edge are as
stable as the distorted octahedral on the 001-edge however.
Page 50 of 85
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Structure 1 of 2VO3H on 100, side
(b) Structure 1 viewed at an angle
(c) Structure 2 of 2VO3H on 100, side
(d) Structure 2 viewed at an angle
(e) Structure 3 of 2VO3H on 100, side
(f) Structure 3 viewed at an angle
Figure 3.6: Polymeric VO3H adsorbates on the 100-edge of anatase, from GA search.
Page 51 of 85
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.2.3
VO3H deposition on 001/100 double-step site
The final part of the search for active sites was carried out on the proposed ’double step’ struc-
ture. The GA was carried out with single unit of VO3H, corresponding to a coverage of a 1:3,
V:Ti ratio in the y-direction2. Even for an LCAO calculation with single VO3H using only the
Γ-point, the optimizations were significantly more costly than in the other systems, and the
method struggled to produced stable VO3H units.
Initially, the GA was carried out on the oxygen-free, i.e. 4-coordinated titanium, step site. The
GA was allowed to deposit the VO3H across the entire step as well as the plateau, checking
whether adsorption would happen preferentially on the step, given the alternative of a 001-
plateau/surface. Neither of these happened; instead the VO3H decomposed when structures
were ’spliced’, leaving the vanadium with just a few of the oxygens and adsorbing 1-2 oxygen
atoms on the step, not coordinating to the vanadium. After going through 272 structures the
most stable ’VO3H’ was in fact a VO2 adsorbed at the bottom of the step, while the remaining
2 oxygens and the proton adsorbed at the top of the step. This made it quite clear, that the
step site too undercoordinated with oxygen.
Instead, an alternative stoichiometric model was proposed, where all titanium atoms were
5-coordinated with oxygen, while some of the titanium in the bottom ’bulk’ layer was only
4-coordinated, while maintaining correct boundary conditions. Unfortunately this did not lead
to any significant improvements of the results; after evaluating 70 structures all of the 30 most
stable structures involved the formation of a dioxygen site rather than just the single oxygen
atoms coordinating to vanadium or titanium as seen in all other structures. This was taken as
evidence that this second system contained more oxygen than would realistically be present on
an actual catalyst. This was what prompted the search for an equilibrium step structure in the
presence of O2 as described in Section 3.1.1, with a 1:3, O:Ti ration on the step.
This 3rd attempt at a search for probable vanadium oxide sites finally proved successful: The
screening involved 152 structures and this time several of the most stable structures resembled
to ’normal’ vanadium oxide monomers, although there were still examples of both dioxygen
formation as well as single-atom deposition of oxygens on the step. The GA was allowed to
continue until the 10 most stable structures were essentially identical in structure and energy.
FD refining of the most stable unique structures was performed, with results summarized in
Table 3.6.
The structures were all tetrahedral, one containing a dioxygen, with 1-2 oxygens adsorbed on
the top of the step and 0-2 on the bottom of step. No stable structures were found on the
001-plateau. In fact, an attempt to manually reconstruct the ’distorted octahedral’ on the 001-
plateau showed that this structure was significantly less stable (> 2 eV with LCAO) - despite
being closer to a true octahedral structure with a O––V–O angle of 176.0°. This results fits
well with the trend observed on the 001-edge, predicting that the stability is a function of the
potential to restructure the top layer. In this case the top layer is already compressed by the
step formation, forcing it to adsorb at an angle going into the top layer.
2As the step cell contains a large plateau, the ’usual’ coverage given as V/nm2 is not a useful unit, when
comparing to the other surfaces. The 1:3, V:Ti ratio corresponds to 1.5 times the small unit cell of the 001-edge.
Page 52 of 85
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 3.6: Energetics of Monomeric VO3H Deposition on the Step Site
#
ELCAO[eV]
Erel,LCAO[eV]
EFD[eV]
Erel,FD[eV]
GA
Error[eV]
∆Eads[eV]
1
-5826.42
-
-5974.21
-
-
-3.08
2
-5826.28
0.14
-5973.75
0.47
0.33
-2.61
3
-5825.87
0.55
-5973.49
0.72
0.17
-2.36
4
-5825.35
1.07
-5972.83
1.38
0.31
-1.70
5
-5825.26
1.17
-5973.62
0.60
-0.57
-2.48
Energies of the most stable unique adsorbates of VO3H on the step site, found via the
GA method. The reported values are from the GA search with LCAO and subsequent
refinement with FD. A detailed description of the different energetics can be found in
Table 3.4. In this case, Structure 1 is significantly more stable than the other structures
found, and proved to be even more stable than the GA predicted, relative to the others,
except for structure 5 which is essentially the same structure with a different protonation.
As the results show, the first structure, a tetrahedral with a single vanadyl, is significantly
more stable than the rest. It is worth noting though, that several of the reported structures
are remarkably stable compared to the 100-edge structures. Part of this can be attributed to
the fact that the first 3 structures all protonate the ’free’ oxygen adsorbed on the step, i.e. an
artefact of the step design3. Relaxing a model of structure 1 where the proton coordinates to
a V–O–Ti oxygen still display very stable adsorption with ∆Eads,1 = −2.49 eV, comparable
to the most stable VO3H structure in this report so far, at the 001-edge (1.2 V/nm2) with
∆Eads,001 = −2.65 eV.
As a final manual ’correction’ to the structure found with the GA, the extra oxygen that was
previously added, in part as a means to support the GA in its structure search, was removed
again. Although it is possible that some extra oxygen will be present at the step, this un-
dercoordinated oxygen can introduce some unwanted charge effect, as the coordination to the
proton showed for example. Furthermore, the oxygens that only coordinate to titanium are
not expected to take part in the reaction mechanism, and this report is focused entirely on
the activity that vanadium contributes with and not that of the bulk/surface anatase. Last
but not least, all other model systems in this report are stoichiometric models of anatase with
one or more adsorbed units of VO3H. Deviating from this in one model by ’equilibrating’ with
oxygen, but not doing so in the remaining models could introduce a systematic error over- or
underestimating the reactivity of this surface compared to the others.
After removing the extra oxygen and relaxing the structure once again, the step site of VO3H
ended up with Eads,step = −2.69 eV. A row of step site structure was removed to create a
smaller unit cell with a 1:2, V:Ti ratio and the same structure was relaxed in this new system
with Eads,step = −1.89 eV, following the same trend as the one observed on the 001-edge, where
3In the presence of even small amounts of water, which is inherently assumed with the VO3H structure, it
is likely that this oxygen will already be protonated by excess water. The stability gain from an adsorption of
1
2 O2(g) + 1
2 H2O(g) on the step supports this claim.
Page 53 of 85
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) VO3H on full model of anatase step
(b) VO3H on step, at an angle
Figure 3.7: Images showing the position of the tetrehedral VO3H group adsorbed on a step
structure discovered in anatase.
a site in a smaller (higher coverage) system is associated with a relative loss of stability.
An illustration of the structure is provided in Figure 3.7. Noticeably, the V––O bond length of
1.60 Å is quite close, 0.01 Å longer, to the bond length found for the distoreted octahedral on
both the 001- and 100-edge. In general, it is only the bond lengths in the ’double dangling’
structure on 100 that deviate significantly from the above distances.
Table 3.7: Overview of VO3H Deposition on Model Systems
High coverage
Low coverage
001
100
Step
001
100
Step
VO3H (MM)
∆Eads [eV]
−1.51
±0.27
−0.52
±0.08
−1.89
±0.22
−2.65
±0.39
−0.52
±0.08
−2.69
±0.33
CoverageV/nm2
1.7
1.3
1.3⋆
1.2
0.9
0.9⋆
VO3H (PM)
∆Eads [eV]
−1.09
±0.18
−1.09
±0.10
⋆V/nm
−1.36
±0.16
⋆V/nm
Coverage V/nm2
3.5
2.7
2.3
Adsorption energies of monomeric (MM) and polymeric (PM) units ofVO3H on different
anatase surfaces. The adsorption energies are given per unit VO3H. The coverage on the
step is given relative to the width of the step, giving it a dimension 1/length rather than
the unit 1/length2 given for all other adsorbates.
An overview of the obtained results, in terms of adsorption energies of VO3H, given per unit
VO3H, is provided in Table 3.7, listing the energy of the most stable structure found in each
system. As previously discussed, there is generally a loss of stability as coverage of the monomer
is increased, although this does not occur at the least stable 100-edge. This makes the 100-edge
relatively more stable at higher coverage compared to the other two. In absolute terms the
Page 54 of 85
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
VO3H adsorbates are still less stable at the 100-edge compared to the other surfaces. As an
extension to the polymer search, GA’s were run for both unit cell sizes of the 001-edge anatase
structure. As the results show, the polymeric VO3H on the 100-edge is just as stable as the ones
on the 001-edge in the ’hich coverage’ region, although it should be noted, that the coverage
is slightly lower on the 100-edge. For adsorption of 1 VO3H at the 100-edge, the value for
the ’double dangling’ vanadyl is reported rather than the top-adsorbed tetrahedral as this was
discarded from the results as well as any further analysis as mentioned above.
3.3
Reactivity Estimates: Investigating the RDS
The third and final part of this project involved the approximation of reaction rates, and thus
reactivity, from the proposed active sites on the 100-edge and the step, described in the previous
section. This is done through careful analysis of the reaction steps involved in the vanadium
reduction leading up to the RDS according to the reaction mechanism proposed for the 001-
edge [59]. See also Figure 1.2 on page 15 for a diagram of the full mechanism. The reaction
step involved in the re-oxidation of vanadium, believed to be rate determining in Standard SCR
at low temperatures (350 K), has not been investigated here and is beyond the scope of this
investigation. The different reaction steps will be addressed individually to compare e.g. type
type of adsorption in each structure with their respective energetics and, for the RDS, kinetics.
The RDS is expected to proceed as a reaction between adsorbed NH3 and NO(g) as described
earlier, see also (2.5.1) on page 31. The first step was analyzing the precursor to this this
reaction; the adsorption of NH3.
3.3.1
NH3 Adsorption
On the anatase 001-edge, NH3 adsorbed onto the Brønsted acid site of the VO3H group, i.e.
the proton, essentially forming an NH4
+ adsorbate without reducing the vanadium. The same
behavior was expected in the other model systems and NH3 was placed in the vicinity of the
proton, before doing a structural relaxation. This produced a variety of different results, with
some quite clear trends in terms of the way the NH3 adsorbs and how strongly it adsorbs.
On the 100-edge two different types of adsorption occurred: On the double dangling vanadyl,
the NH3 steals a proton to form NH4
+, adsorbing in the ’valley’ of the 100-edge, with weak
coordination to 2 bulk oxygens and the vanadyl previously coordinating to the hydrogen with
a ∆Eads = −0.71 eV. This NH4
+ formation is exactly what one would expect from the NH3
adsorption on 001. On Structure 2, which has the same distorted octahedral structure as the
structure on 001, a different type of adsorption is observed. In this case, the NH3 adsorbs above
the Brønsted acid site, but does not form NH4
+ and the adsorption is significantly weaker with
∆Eads = −0.40 eV. Considering the entropy loss at temperatures above 350 K, this hardly
corresponds to any adsorption at all.
On the tetrahedral on the anatase step site, the NH3 adsorption once again led to the formation
of NH4
+, in this case diffusing even further away from the VO3H group than on the 001- and
100-edges, coordinating to bulk oxygen atoms on the 001-plateau of the step unit cell. The
Page 55 of 85
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(a) Distorted octahedral side view
(b) Rotated view
(c) Dimer with octahedral side view
(d) Rotated view
(e) Second dimer side view
(f) Rotated view
Figure 3.8: Illustrations of NH3 adsorbates on VO3H and 2VO3H
NH3 species either adsorbing near the Brønsted acid site or deprotonating
the site, forming adsorbed NH4
+
Page 56 of 85
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
step structure produced the most stable ammonia adsorbate with a ∆Eads = −1.23 eV. It is
possible however, that part of this is due to proton deficient oxygens, which also caused some
problems in the GA structure design. Even if this has some effect on the result, it is still clear
that the ammonia adsorption on the step is just as stable and perhaps even more stable than
on the distorted octahedral on the 001-edge and the double dangling vanadyl on 100-edge.
Although the full reduction pathway has not been mapped for any of the polymeric vanadium
species, the stability of the NH3 adsorption has been investigated on the V–O–Ti-bonded
protons on 2 of the 3 most stable structures. The 3rd most stable structure, Structure 1, only
contains bulk-bonded protons, so in that case the NH3 adsorption was investigated on a tita-
nium Brønsted acid site. These all have some common characteristics, as they all deprotonate
the Brønsted acid site to form NH4
+, but all stay in the vicinity of the site. In Structure 1,
the ammonia stays in the valley close to the bulk. In 2 the ammonia adsorbs on top of the
plateau, coordinating to a V–O–Ti oxygen as well as a V––O oxygen, the two bonded to dif-
ferent vanadia. Finally, in Structure 3 the NH3 adsorbs above the valley coordinating to two
V–O–Ti also bonded to different vanadia.
The adsorption energies were found to be ∆Eads ={−1.06 eV, −0.78 eV, −0.81 eV} for Struc-
ture 1, 2 & 3 respectively. In other words, it seems that the extra unit of VO3H present in the
dimers have some stabilizing effect on the NH3 adsorption, relative to the monomers. In this
case however, the titanium Brøndsted acid sites appear even more favorable than the vanadium
Brøndsted acid sites.
Looking at Structure 2 & 3 in Figure 3.8, these are quite distinct as they are the first reported
adsorbates of NH3/NH4
+ on V/Ti, where the nitrogen group has been found to coordinate to
several VO3H groups simultaneously in its most stable configuration. This is a feature that of
course only possible to model with polymers of very high-coverage monomers but nonetheless
a discovery that could prove quite significant. During the reduction, the NH4
+ needs to donate
both a proton and a hydrogen when reacting with NO(g) to form NONH2 and reduce one of
the vanadia. These doubly coordinated adsorbates could possibly be a simple way to facilitate
that. A more detailed description of the pathway of polymeric vanadia has not been undertaken
in this report, but should remain an area of interest in future investigations of this reaction.
3.3.2
Locating the transition state of the RDS
In order to get a good description of the transition state between two (meta-)stable states, it
is important that these two are well defined. In this case, the reaction involves an adsorbed
NH3 reacting with a gas-phase, or very weakly adsorbed, NO to form NONH2(g), which spon-
taneously decomposes to N2(g)+H2O(g), after donating a hydrogen to a VO3H group, reducing
the vanadium. This required an initial structure with a NO molecule ’adsorbed’ close to the
ammonia adsorbates and a final structure consisting of the original vanadium species with the
addition of an extra hydrogen as well as the NONH2 intermediate placed a few Å above the
active site. Crucially, as the reduction of vanadium leads to an unpaired electron in the valence
d-orbital of vanadium, and NO also contains an unpaired electron in one of its π⋆-orbitals,
these calculations were carried out with spin polarization, non-paired that is. For this final
part, three different structures have been investigated: The distorted octahedral of VO3H on
Page 57 of 85
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the anatase 100-edge (”Structure 2”), the double dangling vanadyl of VO3H on the anatase
100-edge (”Structure 4”) and finally, the tetrahedral of VO3H adsorbed onto a double step
structure identified at the 001/100 interface of anatase.
Spin polarization doubles the computing power needed and in addition to this, it proved to
by quite difficult to get the degenerate NO radical to converge even when loosely observed
to the surface. Generally, the NO seems to adsorb quite weakly on the surface with adsorp-
tion energies of ∆E =−0.08 eV and −0.54 eV for the square-planar and double-dangling VO3H
structures on the 100-edge of anatase and ∆E = −0.30 eV for the tetrahedral VO3H structure
on the double step. The NO retains its charge and magnetic moment, adsorbing in a weak
physiosorbed state rather than reacting directly with the surface to lose it single unpaired elec-
tron or gain another. For the ’final’ states, i.e. the unstable NONH2 intermediate, there is
no clear trend with ∆E =−0.22 eV, 0.63 eV and 0.83 eV for the distorted octahedral, double
dangling vanadyl and tetrahedral VO3H structures respectively.
In the search for the transition state the MLNEB method was used to find the MEP. In some
cases, particularly the double dangling vanadyl on anatase 100 and the tetrahedral on the
double step, the NH4
+ adsorbate was rather far from the active site on VO3H. In this case a
manual path was specified, given a trajectory file, to improve the initial guess for the MEP. In
both cases it was still problematic however, as the long path introduced a higher uncertainty
and they were instead started at metastable states, identified as local minima on the surface.
Optimizing the trajectory to these metastable states showed no significant barriers. Mapping
the path to the final state proved to be far more challenging in all three cases. First of all, the
reaction pathway was inevitably quite long, as the reaction involves moving from one site to
another to deposit a hydrogen. It is possible, that the NH3/NH4
+ coordinates to both sites at
the same time, so the initial states were chosen as adsorbates onto one of the sites.
Running a full precision calculation with FD and spin polarization did not converge even with
the supposedly more efficient NEB method. In fact, the uncertainty on the path generally
remained so high, that the machine learning algorithm was not able to find an optimized path
on the surrogate PES. Instead, the method ended up evaluating points on non-optimized paths
without significantly reducing uncertainty. Additionally, while it is true that this method will
almost inevitably use fewer full precision force evaluations, the surrogate model ended up con-
suming significantly more computing time than the actual force evaluations. Particularly after
evaluating >50 or so structures, the method used more than 75 % of the time doing model train-
ing and surrogate PES path evaluations. Finally, at some point the job tasks were randomly
terminated after a specific number of force evaluations/training points, but whether this was
an issue with the model or the hardware was not identified. No converged paths were found
with the MLNEB method using the full calculator in this project.
Part of the reason why the method initially failed probably had to do with the complexity of
the vanadium system as well; whereas many surface reactions occur on relatively smooth PES’s
with for example single metals or alloys, the VO3H reduction involves a rough PES in the form
of the single protruding VO3H group and a large number of components with several protons,
an unpaired electron and a radical in the form of NO(g), with multiple bonds being formed and
Page 58 of 85
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
broken in the RDS. Furthermore, the complexity of the system was not accounted for in way
the MLNEB calculation was set up. Initially, standard parameters were used, but given the
complexity, a higher uncertainty in model should have been allowed. The acquisition function
that chooses which point to evaluate was also set to only evaluate the image with the largest
uncertainty until this had converged. Here, it could possibly have been useful to alternate
between this and evaluating the highest-lying images.
(a) Side-view of the TS
(b) Rotated view of TS with bond lengths
Figure 3.9: Transition state for the reduction of VO3H on an anatase step
The transition state of the reaction between NH3 and NO on VO3H is shown, both from the
side and at angle with bond lengths of the bonds being formed/broken in the reaction step.
It appears from the figure, that the NH4
+ is coordinating to two oxygen sites simultaneously
while the bond to NO i starting to form.
With the above considerations in mind, another attempt was made using the cheaper LCAO
method, this time with a higher maximum uncertainty, a different acquisition function and
spin pairing to speed up the calculation. This is of course a crude approximation for a reaction
step that involves an electron transfer from a radical but it still gives an idea about the barriers
that can be expected as well as structural information about the possible transition state. This
worked with varying success, but did produce some results, most importantly in the form of an
optimized path for the reduction of the tetrahedral VO3H on the step site to VO3H2. The TS
for this reaction is shown in Figure 3.9 With the LCAO method, an energy difference of 1.15 eV
is predicted between the initial state and the TS. This is significantly higher than the barrier
height of 0.59 eV found in VO3H on the 001-edge of anatase. Given that the final state of the
reaction on the step is 0.83 eV, a barrier of 1.15 eV does not seem unreasonable though. A full
energy diagram for the reduction of VO3H and the anatase step site is given in Figure 3.10. At
this point, this is the only possible TS that has been identified in either of the 3 structures.
As the path shows, most of the steps are stable, also beyond what entropy would account for,
although the NO adsorption is most likely not, and the transition state has a significant barrier.
Page 59 of 85
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 3.10: Energy diagram for the V-SCR reduction mechanism on an
anatase step
This figure shows the relative stabilities of the reaction steps involved in the
reduction part of a V-SCR mechanism, with energies of the individual steps.
The green color denotes transition states.
Page 60 of 85
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.3.3
Stability and structure of the reduced state
The final state in the reduction mechanism is the reduced vanadium oxide, VO3H2.
Al-
though a TS was only identified for the tetrahedral VO3H on the step, it is still possible
to evaluate and compare the reduced VO3H2 species on the different surfaces.
First, the
energy gain from the reduction, can be evaluated as ∆Ered = EVO3H2,ads + EH2O + EN2 −
(EVO3H,ads + ENH3 + ENO)=−3.33 eV, −3.00 eV and −2.42 eV for the distorted octahedral, the
’double dangling vanadyl’, (now no longer a vanadyl) and the tetrahedral. All reduction step
are highly stable, which is not surprising given the gas phase products. The VO3H2 on the step
site does seem to be significantly less stable than the other two. What is most surprising is
however, that the double dangling structure does not appear to have any magnetic moment in
the calculation, indicating that no reduction takes place, at least not on the vanadium. This is
quite unexpected, as transfer of a hydrogen from NH3 should mean that there is an unpaired
electron somewhere. To check whether this electron is somehow occupying the d-orbital of
vanadium, or one of the bulk titanium atoms, A DoS plot of the initial and ’reduced’ vanadium
was produced and compared to the DoS of the distorted octahedral and tetrahedral vanadium.
These are shown together in Figure 3.11.
As the DOS plots show, there is a clear difference between the DOS of the double vanadyl
and the two others; for both the distorted octahedral and the tetrahedral, the additional of an
extra electron from the hydrogen shifts the Fermi-level which introduces asymmetric density,
with ”spin-up” density below the Fermi-level, corresponding to occupation of the d-orbital by
an unpaired electron. This does not happen in the double dangling structure. Although the
Fermi-level is shifted the same electron density still remains above the Fermi-level. Curiously,
the d-bands of the neighboring titanium show that they are not occupied either. It is thus not
clear what happens with the electron, but this failure to reduce the vanadium site does not
seem very physically sound, making the results obtained less credible than in the other systems
at least.
Page 61 of 85
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 3.11: DOS plots of initial and reduced vanadium sites
Page 62 of 85
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.3.4
Reaction Rate from TST model
The obtained transition described in the previous section should be viewed as crude estimates
of these, and no analysis of the vibrational frequencies of these has been computed. It is still
possible however, to check the validity of the model by comparing the rate found using this
model to the rate obtained with thermodynamic properties in [59]. This only requires knowl-
edge about vibrations and energies of adsorbates, given in the supplementary material of above
article, and readily available properties of the gas phase species.
First, a minor correction should be introduced in the model, more specifically in the description
of the NH3 adsorption, governed by K1 in (2.5.21):
K1 ≡
θNH3
pNH3 (1 −θNH3) = qNH3,ads(T)/kBT
qNH3,gas(V, T)/V = QNH3,ads(T)/kBT
QNH3,gas(V, T)/V e−E0,ads/kBT
(3.3.1)
This reaction is modelled as an adsorption of NH3 onto a chemically inert surface, and the
change in degrees of freedom is not accounted for in the model, which is customary to assume
in adsorption reactions [2]. However, in this case, as the analysis of this reaction step has
shown, NH3(g) does react with the Brønsted acid site, forming an NH4
+ and deprotonating an
oxygen. This corresponds to a reaction between an adsorbed OH and NH3(g), which makes
this reaction similar to the equilibrium for the TS, (??):
K‡ ≡
θ‡
pNOθNH3
=
q‡(T)/kBT
qNH3,ads(T) · qNO,gas(V, T)/V =
Q‡(T)/kBT
QNH3,ads(T) · QNO,gas(V, T)/V e−E0,‡/kBT
(3.3.2)
Only for the NH3 adsorption, θf = θNH3 rather than θ‡, θi = θ⋆= 1 −θNH3 rather than θNH3
and pi = pNH3 rather than pNO, and similarly for the partition function. The subscripts i and
f denote initial and final states. (3.3.1) now becomes:
K1 ≡
θNH3,ads
pNH3 (1 −θNH3) =
QNH3,ads(T)/kBT
Q⋆,ads(T) · QNH3,gas(V, T)/V e−E0,ads/kBT
(3.3.3)
Which now includes the degrees of freedom for the surface. It is however assumed that the
degrees of freedom for the rest of the surface does not change, taking only the degrees of freedom
for OH in the initial adsorbed state and OH and NH3 or O– and NH4
+ in the final adsorbed
state. The contributions to the total molecular partition functions are found using (1.3.4)-
(1.3.8). In these definitions, the energy difference between the ZPE’s is evaluated outside the
Page 63 of 85
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
partition functions, in the term:
Qtrans =
1
Qtrans,NH3,gas
=
(
h
2π (mN + 3mH) kBT
)3/2 1
V
(3.3.4)
Qvib =
Qvib,NH3,ads
Qvib,⋆Qvib,NH3,gas
=
6
∏
i=1
(1 −exp (−hνi,⋆/kBT))
6
∏
i=1
(1 −exp (−hνi,NH3,gas/kBT))
18
∏
i=1
(1 −exp (−hνi,NH3,ads/kBT))
(3.3.5)
Qrot =
1
Qrot,NH3,gas
=
σ
π1/2√
8πIAkBT/h2√
8πIBkBT/h2√
8πICkBT/h2
(3.3.6)
Qelec =
Qelec,NH3, ads
Qelec,⋆Qelec,NH3,gas
=
≈ωe,0,NH3, ads
ωe,0,⋆ωe,0,NH3, gas
= 1
(3.3.7)
With ˜νNH3,gas = {950 cm−1, 1627 cm−1, 1627 cm−1, 3337 cm−1, 3444 cm−1, 3444 cm−1}[69], using
ν = ˜νc to convert to frequency, c being the speed of light. For the rotational partition function
σ = 3, IA,NH3 = IB,NH3 = 4.4128 × 10−47 kg m2 and IC,NH3 = 2.8059 × 10−47 kg m2 [19]. The ad-
sorbed molecules contain 3N vibrational degrees of freedom while NH3(g) contains 3N −6 = 6
vibrational degrees of freedom.
For the final reaction, the partition functions become:
Qtrans =
1
Qtrans,NO,gas
=
(
h
2π (mN + mO) kBT
)3/2 1
V
(3.3.8)
Qvib =
Q′
vib,‡
Qvib,NH3,adsQvib,NO,gas
=
(1 −exp (−hνi,NO/kBT))
18
∏
i=1
(1 −exp (−hνi,NH3,ads/kBT))
23
∏
i=1
(
1 −exp (−hνi,‡/kBT)
)
(3.3.9)
Qrot =
1
Qrot,NO
=
σh2
8π2INOkBT
(3.3.10)
Qelec =
Qelec,‡
Qelec,NH3,adsQelec,NO,gas
≈
ωe,0,‡
ωe,0,NH3, adsωe,0,NH3, gas
= 1
(3.3.11)
Here, ˜νNO,gas = 1875 cm−1 [70] while the moment of inertia for a linear rotor is given as I = µr2
as in (1.3.9). The NO molecule has a double degeneracy, as it contains one unpaired electron in
one of its two empty p-orbitals, while the vanadium has a 5-fold degeneracy with one unpaired
electron in a d-orbital. It is assumed that the TS has a degeneracy of 2, with some electron
density occupying one of the the p-orbitals in NO. This gives at total contribution from Qelec
of a factor 1.
The energy difference between the ZPE’s of each state, E0 is found as Ecl + ∑
f ZPEf −
∑
i ZPEi, with Ecl being the classical barrier height, i.e. the difference between the ground
Page 64 of 85
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
state energies computed by DFT, and ZPEk = ∑s
k
1
2h˜νkc, with k = {i, f} being all vibrations
of initial and final states respectively.
Will full expressions for kTST(T) and K1(T), the overall rate of the reaction can be determined
at different temperatures according to (2.5.25) (with k+
2 = kTST):
Rate = dθH
dt = kTST(T)pNOpNH3K1
1 + pNH3K1
(3.3.12)
At 500 K, K1 = 1.90 × 10−7 Pa−1 and kTST = 4.58 × 10−5 Pa−1 s−1.
With pNO = pNH3 = 500 ppm, ptot = 1 bar = 10 × 105 Pa, the rate of reaction is Rate =
2.18 × 10−8 s−1.
The estimated rate from the article is quite close, at about 3 × 10−8 s−1. This indicates that the
rate expressions derived here, describes the same type of behavior in terms of reactivity as the
expression based on thermodynamic properties used in the article. In this case however, one is
able to estimate the rate based on the partition functions of the system explicitly. This includes
a greater level of detail and wider applicability, as one can for example compare individual,
relative contributions to the total molecular partition function for similar systems, such as the
class of SCR systems investigated in this report. If more transition states are located and
analyzed in the remaining systems, this could potentially lead to a better understanding of the
relationship between structure, stability and reactivity in V-SCR systems.
Page 65 of 85
==PAGE:67==
CONCLUSION
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to be able to examine the reaction rates of the rate determining steps
in heterogeneous catalysis, focusing on the vanadium SCR system. To enable a thorough con-
cise analysis of the system, a range of tools has been used to address the topic in a systematic
and unbiased way. A series of novel structures has been proposed using a Genetic Algorithm
model in combination with Density Functional Theory. Trends relating to coverage and dimer-
ization has been explored, with significant variations across the different surfaces investigated,
underlining that different surfaces can have markedly different properties and thus also large
variations in expected reactivity.
Using Transition State Theory, a full microkinetic model was derived for the expected rate
determining step, solely based on the internal degrees of freedom of participating molecules
and adsorbates. This model was used to estimate the rate of a V-SCR reduction pathway and
produced results well in agreement with the models initially proposed to describe the system.
From the structural analysis of the different systems, a number of potentially important struc-
tural features can be observed, such as the effect of anatase surface restructuring on the stability
of VO3H adsorbates and the stabilizing effect of the NH4
+ formation on the adsorption of NH3.
From the wide range of different coordination geometries of vanadium, it also seems that re-
gardless of the coordination number, the vanadyl retains a characteristic value of ≈1.59 Å.
Finally, a full reaction path was described for the reduction of a VO3H adsorbed on a newly
discovered step site of anatase, the 001-/100- edge interface. A detailed analysis of this, as
well as the novel polymeric VO3H species found on the 100-edge, are two potential avenues for
future studies of this system. This can easily be coupled with the microkinetic model developed,
for an accurate description of the reactivities of the individual systems as well as comparative
studies og several systems.
Page 66 of 85
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bibliography
[1]
E. Walter, Cambridge advanced learners’ dictionary. Cambridge University Press, 2008,
1799 pages.
[2]
I. Chorkendorff and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of modern catalysis and kinetics,
2nd. Wiley-VCH, 2007, 457 pages.
[3]
Nobel Media AB 2019, Frances H. Arnold – Facts – 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/2018/arnold/facts/ (accessed Jun. 20, 2019).
[4]
Z. W. She, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov, and T. F.
Jaramillo, “Combining theory and experiment in electrocatalysis: Insights into materials
design,” Science, vol. 355, no. 6321, 2017. doi: 10.1126/science.aad4998.
[5]
G. Ertl, “Surface Science and Catalysis—Studies on the Mechanism of Ammonia Synthe-
sis: The P. H. Emmett Award Address,” Catalysis Reviews, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 201–223,
Jan. 1980. doi: 10.1080/03602458008067533.
[6]
J. K. Nørskov, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, and T. Bligaard, Fundamental Concepts in
Heterogeneous Catalysis. 2014, 196 pages.
[7]
M. Appl, “Ammonia, 2. Production Processes,” in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial
Chemistry, Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Oct. 2011. doi:
10.1002/14356007.o02_o11.
[8]
FemtoMAX - MAX IV. [Online]. Available: https://www.maxiv.lu.se/accelerators-
beamlines/beamlines/femtomax/ (accessed May 22, 2019).
[9]
Stanford University, Linac Coherent Light Source | SLAC National Accelerator Labora-
tory. [Online]. Available: https://lcls.slac.stanford.edu/ (accessed May 22, 2019).
[10]
M. Colombo, I. Nova, and E. Tronconi, “A comparative study of the NH3-SCR reactions
over a Cu-zeolite and a Fe-zeolite catalyst,” Catalysis Today, vol. 151, no. 3-4, pp. 223–
230, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.cattod.2010.01.010.
[11]
I. Nova and E. Tronconi, Urea-SCR Technology for deNOx After Treatment of Diesel
Exhausts, I. Nova and E. Tronconi, Eds., ser. Fundamental and Applied Catalysis. New
York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, 716 pages.
[12]
J. Zhang, X. Li, P. Chen, and B. Zhu, “Research status and prospect on vanadium-based
catalysts for NH 3 -SCR denitration,” Materials, vol. 11, no. 9, 2018. doi: 10.3390/
ma11091632.
Page 67 of 85
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13]
L. Arnarson, H. Falsig, S. B. Rasmussen, J. V. Lauritsen, and P. G. Moses, “A complete
reaction mechanism for standard and fast selective catalytic reduction of nitrogen oxides
on low coverage VO x /TiO 2 (0 0 1) catalysts,” Journal of Catalysis, vol. 346, pp. 188–
197, Feb. 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.jcat.2016.12.017.
[14]
P. Forzatti, L. Lietti, I. Nova, and E. Tronconi, “Diesel NOx aftertreatment catalytic
technologies: Analogies in LNT and SCR catalytic chemistry,” Catalysis Today, vol. 151,
no. 3-4, pp. 202–211, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.cattod.2010.02.025.
[15]
L. Smart and E. Moore, Solid State Chemistry: An Introduction, 4th. 2016, 2016, 494
pages.
[16]
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, et al., “Anatase TiO2
single crystals with a large percentage of reactive facets,” Nature, vol. 453, no. 7195,
pp. 638–641, May 2008. doi: 10.1038/nature06964.
[17]
C. Z. Wen, H. B. Jiang, S. Z. Qiao, H. G. Yang, and G. Q. ( Lu, “Synthesis of high-reactive
facets dominated anatase TiO2,” Journal of Materials Chemistry, vol. 21, no. 20, p. 7052,
2011. doi: 10.1039/c1jm00068c.
[18]
M. Ek, I. Beinik, A. Bruix, S. Wendt, J. V. Lauritsen, and S. Helveg, “Step edge structures
on the anatase TiO2 (001) surface studied by atomic-resolution TEM and STM,” Faraday
Discussions, vol. 208, pp. 325–338, 2018. doi: 10.1039/C7FD00222J.
[19]
P. Atkins and J. de Paula, Atkins’ Physical chemistry. Oxford University Press, 2014,
1008 pages.
[20]
W. Koch and M. C. Holthausen, A Chemist’s Guide to Density Functional Theory. Wiley,
2001.
[21]
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, “Inhomogeneous Electron Gas,” Phys. Rev., vol. 136, no. 3B,
B864–B871, Nov. 1964. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864.
[22]
Á. Nagy, “Density functional. Theory and application to atoms and molecules,” Physics
Reports, vol. 298, no. 1, pp. 1–79, 1998. doi: 10.1016/S0370-1573(97)00083-5.
[23]
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, “Self-Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Correlation
Effects,” Phys. Rev., vol. 140, no. 4A, A1133–A1138, Nov. 1965. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.
140.A1133.
[24]
J. P. Perdew, “Jacob’s ladder of density functional approximations for the exchange-
correlation energy,” AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 577, no. August 2001, pp. 1–20,
2001. doi: 10.1063/1.1390175.
[25]
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, “Generalized Gradient Approximation Made
Simple,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 77, no. 18, pp. 3865–3868, Oct. 1996. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.77.3865.
[26]
Y. Zhang and W. Yang, “Comment on “Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Sim-
ple”,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 890–890, Jan. 1998. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.80.890.
[27]
B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen, and J. K. Nørskov, “Improved adsorption energetics within
density-functional theory using revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functionals,” Physical
Review B, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 7413–7421, Mar. 1999. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.59.7413.
Page 68 of 85
==PAGE:70==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[28]
N. Mardirossian and M. Head-Gordon, “How Accurate Are the Minnesota Density Func-
tionals for Noncovalent Interactions, Isomerization Energies, Thermochemistry, and Bar-
rier Heights Involving Molecules Composed of Main-Group Elements?” Journal of Chem-
ical Theory and Computation, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 4303–4325, 2016. doi: 10.1021/acs.jctc.
6b00637.
[29]
J. Wellendorff, K. T. Lundgaard, A. Møgelhøj, V. Petzold, D. D. Landis, J. K. Nørskov,
et al., “Density functionals for surface science: Exchange-correlation model development
with Bayesian error estimation,” Physical Review B, vol. 85, no. 23, p. 235 149, Jun. 2012.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.85.235149.
[30]
J. J. Mortensen, K. Kaasbjerg, S. L. Frederiksen, J. K. Nørskov, J. P. Sethna, and K. W.
Jacobsen, “Bayesian error estimation in density-functional theory,” Physical Review Let-
ters, vol. 95, no. 21, pp. 1–4, 2005. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.95.216401.
[31]
A. Cooksy, Physical Chemistry: Thermodynamics, Statistical Mechanics, & Kinetics. 2014,
540 pages.
[32]
K. J. Laidler and M. C. King, “The development of transition-state theory,” Journal of
Physical Chemistry, vol. 87, no. 15, pp. 2657–2664, 1983. doi: 10.1021/j100238a002.
[33]
N. E. Henriksen and F. Y. Hansen, Theories of Molecular Reaction Dynamics. Oxford
University Press, Jan. 2008.
[34]
D. A. McQuarrie, Statistical Mechanics. New York, NY: Harper & Row, 1973.
[35]
S. Tatham, PuTTY, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/
~sgtatham/putty/ (accessed Sep. 23, 2018).
[36]
A. Hjorth Larsen, J. Jørgen Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E. Castelli, R. Christensen, M.
Dułak, et al., “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library for working with
atoms,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 29, no. 27, p. 273 002, Jul. 2017. doi:
10.1088/1361-648X/aa680e.
[37]
C. Harrison, Xming X Server, 2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.straightrunning.
com/XmingNotes/ (accessed May 23, 2017).
[38]
J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen, and K. W. Jacobsen, “Real-space grid implementation
of the projector augmented wave method,” Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and
Materials Physics, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1–11, 2005. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.71.035109.
[39]
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, “VMD: Visual molecular dynamics,” Journal
of Molecular Graphics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 33–38, Feb. 1996. doi: 10.1016/0263-7855(96)
00018-5.
[40]
Persistence of Vision Pty. Ltd., Persistence of Vision Raytracer, Williamstown, Victoria,
2004.
[41]
A. H. Larsen, M. Vanin, J. J. Mortensen, K. S. Thygesen, and K. W. Jacobsen, “Lo-
calized atomic basis set in the projector augmented wave method,” Physical Review B -
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, vol. 80, no. 19, pp. 1–10, 2009. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.80.195112.
[42]
J. M. Carlsson, Pseudopotentials: From Ultrahard to Ultrasoft, 2007. [Online]. Available:
http://www.tcm.phy.cam.ac.uk/castep/CASTEP_talks_07/carlsson2.pdf (accessed
Nov. 25, 2018).
Page 69 of 85
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[43]
J. Enkovaara, C. Rostgaard, J. J. Mortensen, J. Chen, M. Dułak, L. Ferrighi, et al.,
“Electronic structure calculations with GPAW: a real-space implementation of the pro-
jector augmented-wave method,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, vol. 22, no. 25,
p. 253 202, Jun. 2010. doi: 10.1088/0953-8984/22/25/253202.
[44]
L. Arnarson, “Selective Catalytic Reduction Over VOx/TiO2 Catalysts Studied with
DFT,” PhD thesis, Aarhus University Denmark, 2016, p. 233.
[45]
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, “Special points for Brillouin-zone integrations,” Physical
Review B, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 5188–5192, Jun. 1976. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.13.5188.
[46]
E. Bitzek, P. Koskinen, F. Gähler, M. Moseler, and P. Gumbsch, “Structural relaxation
made simple,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 97, no. 17, pp. 1–4, 2006. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.97.170201.
[47]
G. developers, Density Of States — GPAW. [Online]. Available: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.
dk/gpaw/documentation/pdos/pdos.html (accessed May 20, 2019).
[48]
C. E. Housecroft and A. G. Sharpe, Inorganic Chemistry, 4th Edition, 4th. Pearson, 2012,
1256 pages.
[49]
O. H. Nielsen and R. M. Martin, “First-Principles Calculation of Stress,” Physical Review
Letters, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 697–700, Feb. 1983. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.50.697.
[50]
D. S. Sholl and J. A. Steckel, Density Functional Theory. Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., Mar. 2009.
[51]
L. B. Vilhelmsen and B. Hammer, “A genetic algorithm for first principles global structure
optimization of supported nano structures,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 141,
no. 4, p. 044 711, Jul. 2014. doi: 10.1063/1.4886337.
[52]
ASE-developers, Optimization with a Genetic Algorithm — ASE documentation. [Online].
Available: https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/tutorials/ga/ga_optimize.html (accessed
Feb. 11, 2019).
[53]
O.-P. Koistinen, F. B. Dagbjartsdóttir, V. Ásgeirsson, A. Vehtari, and H. Jónsson, “Nudged
elastic band calculations accelerated with Gaussian process regression,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics, vol. 147, no. 15, p. 152 720, Oct. 2017. doi: 10.1063/1.4986787.
[54]
H. Jónsson, G. Mills, and K. W. Jacobsen, “Nudged elastic band method for finding
minimum energy paths of transitions,” in Classical and Quantum Dynamics in Con-
densed Phase Simulations, World Scientific, Jun. 1998, pp. 385–404. doi: 10 . 1142 /
9789812839664_0016.
[55]
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga, and H. Jónsson, “Climbing image nudged elastic band
method for finding saddle points and minimum energy paths,” Journal of Chemical
Physics, vol. 113, no. 22, pp. 9901–9904, 2000. doi: 10.1063/1.1329672.
[56]
S. Smidstrup, A. Pedersen, K. Stokbro, and H. Jónsson, “Improved initial guess for min-
imum energy path calculations,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 140, no. 21,
p. 214 106, Jun. 2014. doi: 10.1063/1.4878664.
[57]
G. Henkelman and H. Jónsson, “Improved tangent estimate in the nudged elastic band
method for finding minimum energy paths and saddle points,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics, vol. 113, no. 22, pp. 9978–9985, Dec. 2000. doi: 10.1063/1.1323224.
Page 70 of 85
==PAGE:72==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[58]
J. A. Garrido Torres, P. C. Jennings, M. H. Hansen, J. R. Boes, and T. Bligaard, “Low-
Scaling Algorithm for Nudged Elastic Band Calculations Using a Surrogate Machine
Learning Model,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 122, no. 15, pp. 1–6, 2019. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.122.156001.
[59]
L. Arnarson, H. Falsig, S. B. Rasmussen, J. V. Lauritsen, and P. G. Moses, “The reaction
mechanism for the SCR process on monomer V5+sites and the effect of modified Brønsted
acidity,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 18, no. 25, pp. 17 071–17 080, 2016.
doi: 10.1039/c6cp02274j.
[60]
C. J. Howard, T. M. Sabine, and F. Dickson, “Structural and thermal parameters for
rutile and anatase,” Acta Crystallographica Section B, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 462–468, 1991.
doi: 10.1107/S010876819100335X.
[61]
B. S. Kulkarni, S. Krishnamurty, and S. Pal, “Influence of plane wave cut-off on structural
and electronic properties in Sn-BEA and Ti-BEA zeolite water molecule interaction,”
Chemical Physics Letters, vol. 484, no. 4-6, pp. 374–379, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.cplett.
2009.11.041.
[62]
M. Xu, S. Wang, and H. Wang, “A reconstructed anatase (001)-1 × 4 surface and its
reactivity,” Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, vol. 19, no. 25, pp. 16 615–16 620, 2017.
doi: 10.1039/C7CP03457A.
[63]
R. Enjalbert and J. Galy, “A refinement of the structure of V2O5,” Acta Crystallographica
Section C Crystal Structure Communications, vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 1467–1469, Nov. 1986.
doi: 10.1107/S0108270186091825.
[64]
L. Arnarson, S. B. Rasmussen, H. Falsig, J. V. Lauritsen, and P. G. Moses, “Coexistence
of Square Pyramidal Structures of Oxo Vanadium (+5) and (+4) Species over Low-
Coverage VOX/TiO2 (101) and (001) Anatase Catalysts,” Journal of Physical Chemistry
C, vol. 119, no. 41, pp. 23 445–23 452, 2015. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b06132.
[65]
Y.-J. Du, Z. H. Li, and K.-N. Fan, “Periodic density functional theory studies of the
VOx/TiO2 (anatase) catalysts: Structure and stability of monomeric species,” Surface
Science, vol. 606, no. 11-12, pp. 956–964, Jun. 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.susc.2012.02.016.
[66]
H. Fu, Z. Duan, and G. Henkelman, “Computational Study of Structure and Reactivity
of Oligomeric Vanadia Clusters Supported on Anatase and Rutile TiO<inf>2</inf>
Surfaces,” Journal of Physical Chemistry C, vol. 119, no. 27, pp. 15 160–15 167, 2015.
doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b02486.
[67]
G. He, Z. Lian, Y. Yu, Y. Yang, K. Liu, X. Shi, et al., “Polymeric vanadyl species deter-
mine the low-temperature activity of V-based catalysts for the SCR of NOx with NH3,”
Science Advances, vol. 4, no. 11, eaau4637, 2018. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aau4637.
[68]
L. B. Vilhelmsen and B. Hammer, “Systematic Study of Au6 to Au12 Gold Clusters on
MgO(100) F Centers Using Density-Functional Theory,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 108,
no. 12, p. 126 101, Mar. 2012. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.126101.
[69]
T. Shimanouchi, Tables of molecular vibrational frequencies. Consolidated volume I. Wash-
ington D.C.: National Bureau of Standards, 1972, 160 pages.
Page 71 of 85
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[70]
J. W. Johns, J. Reid, and D. W. Lepard, “The vibration-rotation fundamental of NO,”
Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 155–162, 1977. doi: 10.1016/0022-
2852(77)90368-X.
Page 72 of 85
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
Appendix A
Coordinate files
Double step anatase structure
180
Lattice=”11.4095 0.0 0.0 -1.90158 21.4819 0.0
0.0 0.0 29.277” Properties=species:S:1:pos:R:3
Ti 1.899 1.255 12.657
Ti 0.000 1.858 10.233
O 0.002 1.359 12.225
O -0.005 -0.287 17.873
O 1.902 1.762 10.647
Ti -0.002 1.459 17.742
Ti 1.911 5.009 13.411
Ti 0.000 5.563 11.096
Ti 1.876 2.670 15.483
O 1.836 4.407 15.698
O 0.015 4.922 13.005
O 1.883 1.955 17.935
O 1.921 2.979 13.625
O 1.902 5.466 11.510
O -0.017 2.183 16.021
Ti 1.893 9.372 14.610
Ti 0.000 9.268 11.959
Ti 2.006 6.522 16.155
O 0.000 9.285 14.031
O 1.994 6.576 14.270
O 1.902 9.171 12.373
O -0.112 6.327 16.692
Ti 1.913 12.816 15.181
Ti 0.000 12.972 12.822
O 0.005 12.976 14.803
O 1.918 11.041 15.466
O 1.902 12.876 13.236
Ti 1.900 16.170 16.032
Ti 0.000 16.677 13.685
O 0.000 14.921 12.840
O 0.001 16.344 15.632
O 1.902 15.474 10.466
O 1.908 14.392 16.347
O 1.902 16.581 14.099
Ti 1.891 19.533 16.810
Ti -0.005 20.367 14.569
O 0.000 18.626 13.703
O -0.008 19.762 16.485
O 1.902 19.179 11.329
O 1.891 17.763 17.164
O 1.891 20.125 14.973
Ti 0.000 19.082 11.743
Ti 0.000 15.378 10.880
Ti 0.000 11.673 10.017
O 0.000 17.134 11.726
O 0.000 13.429 10.863
O 0.000 11.216 11.977
O 0.000 7.512 11.114
O 0.000 3.807 10.251
O 1.902 11.769 9.603
Ti 0.000 7.968 9.154
Ti 0.000 4.263 8.291
O 1.902 8.064 8.740
O 1.902 4.359 7.877
O 0.000 9.724 10.000
O 0.000 6.019 9.137
Ti 5.706 1.247 12.667
Ti 3.803 1.858 10.233
O 3.807 1.373 12.224
Page 73 of 85
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
O 3.803 -0.267 17.861
O 5.705 1.762 10.647
Ti 3.802 1.482 17.743
Ti 5.717 5.015 13.397
Ti 3.803 5.563 11.096
Ti 5.677 2.697 15.480
O 5.643 4.425 15.708
O 3.816 4.926 13.005
O 5.679 1.974 17.952
O 5.720 2.988 13.627
O 5.705 5.466 11.510
O 3.781 2.210 16.022
Ti 5.690 9.384 14.599
Ti 3.803 9.268 11.959
Ti 5.817 6.535 16.149
O 3.800 9.271 14.036
O 5.797 6.583 14.262
O 5.705 9.171 12.373
O 3.685 6.322 16.687
Ti 5.705 12.819 15.180
Ti 3.803 12.972 12.822
O 3.804 12.992 14.805
O 5.692 11.046 15.464
O 5.705 12.876 13.236
Ti 5.706 16.166 16.023
Ti 3.803 16.677 13.685
O 3.803 14.921 12.840
O 3.801 16.356 15.635
O 5.705 15.474 10.466
O 5.704 14.389 16.346
O 5.705 16.581 14.099
Ti 5.684 19.539 16.796
Ti 3.785 20.369 14.566
O 3.803 18.626 13.703
O 3.789 19.757 16.476
O 5.705 19.179 11.329
O 5.707 17.767 17.145
O 5.688 20.120 14.965
Ti 3.803 19.082 11.743
Ti 3.803 15.378 10.880
Ti 3.803 11.673 10.017
O 3.803 17.134 11.726
O 3.803 13.429 10.863
O 3.803 11.216 11.977
O 3.803 7.512 11.114
O 3.803 3.807 10.251
O 5.705 11.769 9.603
Ti 3.803 7.968 9.154
Ti 3.803 4.263 8.291
O 5.705 8.064 8.740
O 5.705 4.359 7.877
O 3.803 9.724 10.000
O 3.803 6.019 9.137
Ti 9.505 1.236 12.666
Ti 7.606 1.858 10.233
O 7.605 1.365 12.224
O 7.580 -0.264 17.867
O 9.508 1.762 10.647
Ti 7.589 1.483 17.743
Ti 9.518 4.997 13.401
Ti 7.606 5.563 11.096
Ti 9.487 2.672 15.497
O 9.453 4.403 15.714
O 7.620 4.916 13.004
O 9.492 1.947 17.917
O 9.527 2.972 13.634
O 9.508 5.466 11.510
O 7.574 2.208 16.023
Ti 9.498 9.384 14.590
Ti 7.606 9.268 11.959
Ti 9.617 6.525 16.153
O 7.601 9.289 14.033
O 9.591 6.561 14.268
O 9.508 9.171 12.373
O 7.497 6.336 16.687
Ti 9.514 12.814 15.175
Ti 7.606 12.972 12.822
O 7.608 12.974 14.802
O 9.502 11.039 15.465
O 9.508 12.876 13.236
Ti 9.507 16.162 16.016
Ti 7.606 16.677 13.685
O 7.606 14.921 12.840
O 7.604 16.338 15.629
O 9.508 15.474 10.466
O 9.511 14.385 16.332
O 9.508 16.581 14.099
Ti 9.506 19.530 16.798
Ti 7.595 20.361 14.595
O 7.606 18.626 13.703
Page 74 of 85
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
O 7.595 19.778 16.484
O 9.508 19.179 11.329
O 9.498 17.760 17.141
O 9.503 20.126 14.971
Ti 7.607 19.082 11.743
Ti 7.607 15.378 10.880
Ti 7.607 11.673 10.017
O 7.607 17.134 11.726
O 7.607 13.429 10.863
O 7.607 11.216 11.977
O 7.607 7.512 11.114
O 7.607 3.807 10.251
O 9.508 11.769 9.603
Ti 7.607 7.968 9.154
Ti 7.607 4.263 8.291
O 9.508 8.064 8.740
O 9.508 4.359 7.877
O 7.607 9.724 10.000
O 7.607 6.019 9.137
O 7.607 2.314 8.274
O 3.803 2.314 8.274
O 0.000 2.314 8.274
O 9.504 -0.646 12.565
O 5.702 -0.646 12.574
O 1.909 -0.644 12.571
O 9.483 8.384 16.069
O 5.666 8.396 16.089
O 1.857 8.387 16.097
O 7.578 22.213 14.615
O 3.788 22.223 14.618
O -0.012 22.219 14.613
Page 75 of 85
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
VO3H on step
185
Lattice=”11.4095 0.0 0.0 -1.90158 21.48184 0.0
0.0 0.0 29.27729” Properties=species:S:1:pos:R:3
Ti 1.892 1.277 12.644
Ti 0.000 1.858 10.233
O 0.000 1.333 12.198
O -0.098 -0.326 17.827
O 1.902 1.762 10.647
Ti -0.077 1.420 17.533
Ti 1.890 5.018 13.445
Ti 0.000 5.563 11.096
Ti 1.849 2.637 15.467
O 1.740 4.407 15.561
O -0.002 4.942 13.000
O 1.732 1.929 17.539
O 1.948 2.972 13.551
O 1.902 5.466 11.510
O -0.092 2.154 15.799
Ti 1.907 9.327 14.636
Ti 0.000 9.268 11.959
Ti 1.569 6.469 16.233
O 0.011 9.271 14.041
O 1.821 6.581 14.329
O 1.902 9.171 12.373
O -0.148 6.302 16.730
Ti 1.910 12.809 15.187
Ti 0.000 12.972 12.822
O 0.004 12.941 14.808
O 1.918 10.993 15.447
O 1.902 12.876 13.236
Ti 1.898 16.211 16.030
Ti 0.000 16.677 13.685
O 0.000 14.921 12.840
O -0.002 16.324 15.625
O 1.902 15.474 10.466
O 1.904 14.389 16.309
O 1.902 16.581 14.099
Ti 1.885 19.658 16.862
Ti 0.012 20.376 14.549
O 0.000 18.626 13.703
O -0.016 19.787 16.481
O 1.902 19.179 11.329
O 1.883 17.828 17.110
O 1.892 20.178 14.999
Ti 0.000 19.082 11.743
Ti 0.000 15.378 10.880
Ti 0.000 11.673 10.017
O 0.000 17.134 11.726
O 0.000 13.429 10.863
O 0.000 11.216 11.977
O 0.000 7.512 11.114
O 0.000 3.807 10.251
O 1.902 11.769 9.603
Ti 0.000 7.968 9.154
Ti 0.000 4.263 8.291
O 1.902 8.064 8.740
O 1.902 4.359 7.877
O 0.000 9.724 10.000
O 0.000 6.019 9.137
Ti 5.686 1.259 12.672
Ti 3.803 1.858 10.233
O 3.812 1.342 12.200
O 3.795 -0.141 17.901
O 5.705 1.762 10.647
Ti 3.804 1.681 17.732
Ti 5.702 5.028 13.419
Ti 3.803 5.563 11.096
Ti 5.687 2.707 15.481
O 5.636 4.489 15.677
O 3.814 5.046 13.068
O 5.822 1.950 17.559
O 5.696 3.018 13.598
O 5.705 5.466 11.510
O 3.780 2.327 15.966
Ti 5.708 9.276 14.635
Ti 3.803 9.268 11.959
Ti 6.134 6.458 16.196
O 3.814 9.186 14.066
O 5.948 6.589 14.316
O 5.705 9.171 12.373
O 5.462 5.775 18.139
Ti 5.705 12.771 15.180
Ti 3.803 12.972 12.822
O 3.807 12.923 14.807
O 5.701 10.946 15.432
O 5.705 12.876 13.236
Ti 5.707 16.141 16.011
Ti 3.803 16.677 13.685
O 3.803 14.921 12.840
Page 76 of 85
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
O 3.803 16.325 15.622
O 5.705 15.474 10.466
O 5.698 14.332 16.314
O 5.705 16.581 14.099
Ti 5.689 19.513 16.753
Ti 3.782 20.379 14.561
O 3.803 18.626 13.703
O 3.792 19.778 16.479
O 5.705 19.179 11.329
O 5.692 17.724 17.110
O 5.684 20.139 14.942
Ti 3.803 19.082 11.743
Ti 3.803 15.378 10.880
Ti 3.803 11.673 10.017
O 3.803 17.134 11.726
O 3.803 13.429 10.863
O 3.803 11.216 11.977
O 3.803 7.512 11.114
O 3.803 3.807 10.251
O 5.705 11.769 9.603
Ti 3.803 7.968 9.154
Ti 3.803 4.263 8.291
O 5.705 8.064 8.740
O 5.705 4.359 7.877
O 3.803 9.724 10.000
O 3.803 6.019 9.137
Ti 9.485 1.214 12.618
Ti 7.606 1.858 10.233
O 7.596 1.335 12.202
O 7.665 -0.303 17.776
O 9.508 1.762 10.647
Ti 7.644 1.442 17.518
Ti 9.504 5.012 13.385
Ti 7.606 5.563 11.096
Ti 9.493 2.707 15.334
O 9.518 4.479 15.494
O 7.619 4.920 13.002
O 9.486 2.028 17.746
O 9.512 2.981 13.489
O 9.508 5.466 11.510
O 7.635 2.262 15.815
Ti 9.519 9.414 14.559
Ti 7.606 9.268 11.959
Ti 9.571 6.596 15.989
O 7.598 9.229 14.051
O 9.540 6.684 14.161
O 9.508 9.171 12.373
O 7.830 6.334 16.698
Ti 9.512 12.827 15.180
Ti 7.606 12.972 12.822
O 7.599 12.932 14.802
O 9.500 11.035 15.450
O 9.508 12.876 13.236
Ti 9.508 16.160 16.019
Ti 7.606 16.677 13.685
O 7.606 14.921 12.840
O 7.606 16.301 15.622
O 9.508 15.474 10.466
O 9.508 14.360 16.341
O 9.508 16.581 14.099
Ti 9.508 19.520 16.777
Ti 7.612 20.356 14.568
O 7.606 18.626 13.703
O 7.599 19.689 16.413
O 9.508 19.179 11.329
O 9.508 17.730 17.133
O 9.511 20.159 14.953
Ti 7.607 19.082 11.743
Ti 7.607 15.378 10.880
Ti 7.607 11.673 10.017
O 7.607 17.134 11.726
O 7.607 13.429 10.863
O 7.607 11.216 11.977
O 7.607 7.512 11.114
O 7.607 3.807 10.251
O 9.508 11.769 9.603
Ti 7.607 7.968 9.154
Ti 7.607 4.263 8.291
O 9.508 8.064 8.740
O 9.508 4.359 7.877
O 7.607 9.724 10.000
O 7.607 6.019 9.137
O 7.607 2.314 8.274
O 3.803 2.314 8.274
O 0.000 2.314 8.274
O 9.520 -0.664 12.539
O 5.697 -0.647 12.581
O 1.913 -0.656 12.573
O 9.553 8.426 16.072
O 5.676 8.238 16.186
Page 77 of 85
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
O 1.876 8.301 16.151
O 7.551 22.213 14.567
O 3.772 22.253 14.605
O 0.002 22.238 14.587
V 3.796 5.046 18.761
O 2.701 5.830 17.647
O 3.587 5.594 20.247
O 3.776 3.262 18.819
H 6.026 6.130 18.839
Page 78 of 85
==PAGE:80==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
NONH3 TS on step
191
Lattice=”11.4095 0.0 0.0 -1.90158 21.48187 0.0
0.0 0.0 29.27729” Properties=species:S:1:pos:R:3
Ti 1.907 1.307 12.706
Ti 0.000 1.858 10.233
O 0.007 1.363 12.233
O -0.105 -0.359 17.916
O 1.902 1.762 10.647
Ti -0.075 1.411 17.594
Ti 1.897 5.104 13.487
Ti 0.000 5.563 11.096
Ti 1.887 2.722 15.555
O 1.911 4.527 15.741
O -0.001 4.986 13.047
O 1.755 1.920 17.585
O 1.928 3.065 13.646
O 1.902 5.466 11.510
O -0.077 2.242 15.862
Ti 1.899 9.274 14.657
Ti 0.000 9.268 11.959
Ti 1.556 6.505 16.349
O 0.009 9.223 14.056
O 1.739 6.695 14.400
O 1.902 9.171 12.373
O -0.164 6.320 16.860
Ti 1.898 12.804 15.223
Ti 0.000 12.972 12.822
O 0.003 13.026 14.835
O 1.881 10.963 15.473
O 1.902 12.876 13.236
Ti 1.904 16.186 16.074
Ti 0.000 16.677 13.685
O 0.000 14.921 12.840
O 0.004 16.312 15.644
O 1.902 15.474 10.466
O 1.926 14.359 16.396
O 1.902 16.581 14.099
Ti 1.902 19.604 16.936
Ti 0.013 20.394 14.586
O 0.000 18.626 13.703
O -0.001 19.758 16.524
O 1.902 19.179 11.329
O 1.906 17.771 17.218
O 1.905 20.162 15.049
Ti 0.000 19.082 11.743
Ti 0.000 15.378 10.880
Ti 0.000 11.673 10.017
O 0.000 17.134 11.726
O 0.000 13.429 10.863
O 0.000 11.216 11.977
O 0.000 7.512 11.114
O 0.000 3.807 10.251
O 1.902 11.769 9.603
Ti 0.000 7.968 9.154
Ti 0.000 4.263 8.291
O 1.902 8.064 8.740
O 1.902 4.359 7.877
O 0.000 9.724 10.000
O 0.000 6.019 9.137
Ti 5.703 1.312 12.695
Ti 3.803 1.858 10.233
O 3.806 1.383 12.235
O 3.801 -0.240 18.037
O 5.705 1.762 10.647
Ti 3.805 1.582 17.782
Ti 5.715 5.101 13.497
Ti 3.803 5.563 11.096
Ti 5.716 2.683 15.542
O 5.677 4.532 15.655
O 3.810 5.156 13.115
O 5.837 1.920 17.591
O 5.698 3.053 13.626
O 5.705 5.466 11.510
O 3.806 2.319 16.015
Ti 5.700 9.201 14.683
Ti 3.803 9.268 11.959
Ti 6.105 6.439 16.310
O 3.809 9.175 14.080
O 5.919 6.715 14.389
O 5.705 9.171 12.373
O 5.309 5.707 18.089
Ti 5.708 12.758 15.215
Ti 3.803 12.972 12.822
O 3.805 12.900 14.825
O 5.725 10.917 15.466
O 5.705 12.876 13.236
Ti 5.703 16.123 16.061
Ti 3.803 16.677 13.685
O 3.803 14.921 12.840
Page 79 of 85
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
O 3.804 16.321 15.646
O 5.705 15.474 10.466
O 5.680 14.311 16.394
O 5.705 16.581 14.099
Ti 5.706 19.468 16.849
Ti 3.795 20.388 14.582
O 3.803 18.626 13.703
O 3.813 19.765 16.531
O 5.705 19.179 11.329
O 5.681 17.667 17.245
O 5.700 20.138 15.009
Ti 3.803 19.082 11.743
Ti 3.803 15.378 10.880
Ti 3.803 11.673 10.017
O 3.803 17.134 11.726
O 3.803 13.429 10.863
O 3.803 11.216 11.977
O 3.803 7.512 11.114
O 3.803 3.807 10.251
O 5.705 11.769 9.603
Ti 3.803 7.968 9.154
Ti 3.803 4.263 8.291
O 5.705 8.064 8.740
O 5.705 4.359 7.877
O 3.803 9.724 10.000
O 3.803 6.019 9.137
Ti 9.509 1.255 12.648
Ti 7.606 1.858 10.233
O 7.603 1.361 12.224
O 7.735 -0.353 17.894
O 9.508 1.762 10.647
Ti 7.686 1.436 17.606
Ti 9.509 5.108 13.447
Ti 7.606 5.563 11.096
Ti 9.508 2.750 15.357
O 9.517 4.567 15.502
O 7.614 4.989 13.050
O 9.514 2.064 17.871
O 9.511 3.037 13.505
O 9.508 5.466 11.510
O 7.679 2.271 15.884
Ti 9.504 9.359 14.594
Ti 7.606 9.268 11.959
Ti 9.550 6.628 16.087
O 7.595 9.214 14.069
O 9.523 6.810 14.212
O 9.508 9.171 12.373
O 7.820 6.320 16.828
Ti 9.509 12.843 15.221
Ti 7.606 12.972 12.822
O 7.602 13.015 14.831
O 9.500 11.034 15.463
O 9.508 12.876 13.236
Ti 9.509 16.154 16.073
Ti 7.606 16.677 13.685
O 7.606 14.921 12.840
O 7.603 16.309 15.648
O 9.508 15.474 10.466
O 9.508 14.355 16.447
O 9.508 16.581 14.099
Ti 9.516 19.483 16.860
Ti 7.611 20.369 14.581
O 7.606 18.626 13.703
O 7.609 19.586 16.443
O 9.508 19.179 11.329
O 9.544 17.673 17.261
O 9.517 20.157 15.017
Ti 7.607 19.082 11.743
Ti 7.607 15.378 10.880
Ti 7.607 11.673 10.017
O 7.607 17.134 11.726
O 7.607 13.429 10.863
O 7.607 11.216 11.977
O 7.607 7.512 11.114
O 7.607 3.807 10.251
O 9.508 11.769 9.603
Ti 7.607 7.968 9.154
Ti 7.607 4.263 8.291
O 9.508 8.064 8.740
O 9.508 4.359 7.877
O 7.607 9.724 10.000
O 7.607 6.019 9.137
O 7.607 2.314 8.274
O 3.803 2.314 8.274
O 0.000 2.314 8.274
O 9.517 -0.646 12.583
O 5.695 -0.626 12.615
O 1.919 -0.624 12.608
O 9.518 8.472 16.207
O 5.627 8.241 16.335
Page 80 of 85
==PAGE:82==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
O 1.927 8.339 16.283
O 7.582 22.253 14.627
O 3.803 22.282 14.657
O 0.028 22.280 14.654
V 3.740 4.869 18.968
O 2.622 6.117 18.029
O 3.640 5.352 20.529
O 3.754 3.057 18.993
H 5.163 6.615 18.606
N 4.200 7.833 19.383
H 3.202 7.105 18.593
H 3.602 8.229 20.197
H 4.635 8.724 18.921
O 6.452 6.562 20.412
N 5.500 7.268 20.829
Page 81 of 85
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
VO3H on the 100-edge of anatase -
Structure 2
95
Lattice=”9.74749 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.4095 0.0 0.0
0.0 33.3118” Properties=species:S:1:pos:R:3
Ti 7.094 1.397 11.602
Ti 2.220 3.299 13.504
Ti 9.531 1.397 13.504
Ti 4.657 3.299 11.602
O 9.106 1.397 11.602
O 4.233 3.299 13.504
O 1.796 1.397 13.504
O 6.669 3.299 11.602
O 2.646 3.299 11.602
O 7.519 1.397 13.504
O 0.209 3.299 13.504
O 5.082 1.397 11.602
Ti 7.094 1.397 15.406
Ti 2.306 3.295 17.304
Ti 9.565 1.430 17.346
Ti 4.657 3.299 15.406
O 9.106 1.397 15.406
O 4.252 3.419 17.317
O 1.766 1.402 17.130
O 6.669 3.299 15.406
O 2.646 3.299 15.406
O 7.459 1.391 17.288
O 0.196 3.319 17.335
O 5.082 1.397 15.406
Ti 7.225 1.406 19.086
Ti 4.768 3.307 19.371
O 9.039 1.417 19.185
O 6.761 3.307 19.496
O 2.656 2.809 19.149
O 5.184 1.382 18.959
Ti 7.094 5.201 11.602
Ti 2.220 7.102 13.504
Ti 9.531 5.201 13.504
Ti 4.657 7.102 11.602
O 9.106 5.201 11.602
O 4.233 7.102 13.504
O 1.796 5.201 13.504
O 6.669 7.102 11.602
O 2.646 7.102 11.602
O 7.519 5.201 13.504
O 0.209 7.102 13.504
O 5.082 5.201 11.602
Ti 7.094 5.201 15.406
Ti 2.225 7.119 17.410
Ti 9.580 5.184 17.395
Ti 4.657 7.102 15.406
O 9.106 5.201 15.406
O 4.376 7.102 17.314
O 1.825 5.184 17.439
O 6.669 7.102 15.406
O 2.646 7.102 15.406
O 7.403 5.220 17.327
O 0.268 7.113 17.345
O 5.082 5.201 15.406
Ti 7.215 5.251 19.126
Ti 4.606 7.119 19.114
O 9.011 5.215 19.227
O 6.781 7.117 19.491
O 2.804 7.120 19.230
O 5.044 5.223 19.466
Ti 7.094 9.004 11.602
Ti 2.220 10.905 13.504
Ti 9.531 9.004 13.504
Ti 4.657 10.905 11.602
O 9.106 9.004 11.602
O 4.233 10.905 13.504
O 1.796 9.004 13.504
O 6.669 10.905 11.602
O 2.646 10.905 11.602
O 7.519 9.004 13.504
O 0.209 10.905 13.504
O 5.082 9.004 11.602
Ti 7.094 9.004 15.406
Ti 2.260 10.967 17.314
Ti 9.582 9.048 17.394
Ti 4.657 10.905 15.406
O 9.106 9.004 15.406
O 4.265 10.771 17.323
O 1.826 9.042 17.430
O 6.669 10.905 15.406
O 2.646 10.905 15.406
O 7.402 9.016 17.324
O 0.218 10.910 17.344
O 5.082 9.004 15.406
Ti 7.212 8.985 19.125
Page 82 of 85
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
Ti 4.728 10.917 19.212
O 9.014 9.010 19.217
O 6.748 10.912 19.517
O 2.748 11.406 19.199
O 5.051 9.003 19.424
V 2.909 1.499 20.456
O 1.686 1.522 21.466
O 4.234 2.696 21.028
O 4.183 0.010 21.119
H 4.864 0.355 21.713
Page 83 of 85
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
VO3H on the 100-edge of anatase -
Structure 4
95
Lattice=”9.74749 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.409509 0.0 0.0
0.0 33.3118” Properties=species:S:1:pos:R:3
Ti 7.096 0.922 11.514
Ti 2.222 2.824 13.416
Ti 9.533 0.922 13.416
Ti 4.659 2.824 11.514
O 9.108 0.922 11.514
O 4.235 2.824 13.416
O 1.797 0.922 13.416
O 6.671 2.824 11.514
O 2.648 2.824 11.514
O 7.521 0.922 13.416
O 0.211 2.824 13.416
O 5.084 0.922 11.514
Ti 7.096 0.922 15.317
Ti 2.225 2.842 17.315
Ti 9.574 0.930 17.291
Ti 4.659 2.824 15.317
O 9.108 0.922 15.317
O 4.363 2.801 17.217
O 1.822 0.931 17.281
O 6.671 2.824 15.317
O 2.648 2.824 15.317
O 7.416 0.943 17.222
O 0.246 2.834 17.261
O 5.084 0.922 15.317
Ti 7.220 0.959 19.027
Ti 4.603 2.793 19.020
O 9.028 0.941 19.112
O 6.782 2.839 19.375
O 2.792 2.843 19.127
O 5.055 0.940 19.366
Ti 7.096 4.726 11.514
Ti 2.222 6.627 13.416
Ti 9.533 4.726 13.416
Ti 4.659 6.627 11.514
O 9.108 4.726 11.514
O 4.235 6.627 13.416
O 1.797 4.726 13.416
O 6.671 6.627 11.514
O 2.648 6.627 11.514
O 7.521 4.726 13.416
O 0.211 6.627 13.416
O 5.084 4.726 11.514
Ti 7.096 4.726 15.317
Ti 2.315 6.639 17.214
Ti 9.569 4.748 17.289
Ti 4.659 6.627 15.317
O 9.108 4.726 15.317
O 4.233 6.622 17.271
O 1.809 4.748 17.263
O 6.671 6.627 15.317
O 2.648 6.627 15.317
O 7.413 4.723 17.220
O 0.186 6.632 17.234
O 5.084 4.726 15.317
Ti 7.207 4.709 19.020
Ti 4.735 6.593 19.352
O 9.009 4.745 19.115
O 6.706 6.641 19.378
O 2.565 6.676 19.186
O 5.051 4.698 19.296
Ti 7.096 8.529 11.514
Ti 2.222 10.430 13.416
Ti 9.533 8.529 13.416
Ti 4.659 10.430 11.514
O 9.108 8.529 11.514
O 4.235 10.430 13.416
O 1.797 8.529 13.416
O 6.671 10.430 11.514
O 2.648 10.430 11.514
O 7.521 8.529 13.416
O 0.211 10.430 13.416
O 5.084 8.529 11.514
Ti 7.096 8.529 15.317
Ti 2.224 10.434 17.294
Ti 9.561 8.490 17.296
Ti 4.659 10.430 15.317
O 9.108 8.529 15.317
O 4.352 10.474 17.208
O 1.807 8.525 17.260
O 6.671 10.430 15.317
O 2.648 10.430 15.317
O 7.407 8.556 17.217
O 0.254 10.440 17.260
O 5.084 8.529 15.317
Ti 7.179 8.601 19.015
Page 84 of 85
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX A. COORDINATE FILES
Ti 4.623 10.441 19.007
O 9.001 8.521 19.108
O 6.788 10.469 19.380
O 2.806 10.401 19.146
O 5.088 8.601 19.239
V 2.410 6.990 20.956
O 4.197 6.752 21.122
O 1.559 5.930 21.799
O 1.825 8.645 21.328
H 2.087 9.335 20.686
Page 85 of 85
