==PAGE:1==
Effect on band gap of ligand-
exchange in solution processed
CZTS thin films, analyzed through
PES study
July 2019
Master's thesis
Master's thesis
Arianna Guglielminotti
2019
Arianna Guglielminotti
NTNU
Norwegian University of
Science and Technology
Faculty of Natural Sciences
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Effect on band gap of ligand-exchange in
solution processed CZTS thin films,
analyzed through PES study
Arianna Guglielminotti
Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering
Submission date: July 2019
Supervisor:
Justin Wells
Co-supervisor:
Jens Wenzel Andreasen, DTU
Christian Rein, DTU
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Department of Physics
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
As this arduous journey called "Master Thesis" is approaching to an end, I can’t but look back
at the hard moments I spent dealing with my own struggles and negative emotions, and be satis-
ﬁed of myself and my achievements. However, I know I would not have been successful in what I
believe turned out to be a success, without a long series of people that helped me along the way.
For the academic support, I have to thank my NTNU supervisor Prof. Justin Wells for his
kindness and interest in my work. Thank you for being a good listener, for the motivational
talks, and for all the great experiences that I lived by being part of your group. I am very
grateful for the opportunity I had to spend time at the ASTRID2 synchrotron on my personal
project, and I will never forget your magical additions to my thesis project.
I also want to thank my DTU supervisor Prof. Jens Wenzel Andreasen for accepting the posi-
tion, and for being my reference with all the DTU bureaucracy from the other side of the North
Sea.
There would be no thesis without the endless help of Dr. Rajesh Kumar Chellappan. You
introduced me to the fascinating world of experimental physics by teaching me all the labora-
tory secrets, by providing all the support to my project, by taking me to beamtime, and by
reminding me that new knowledge in science necessarily involves many failures.
To the founder of my interest in CZTS, Dr. Christian Rein, goes all my gratitude. We have
been working together for almost two years, and under your guidance I met surface chemistry
and possibly understood my future directions. Thank you for always been present and active
in my project, and for your constant reliability.
A special thanks goes to the beam line scientist Zheshen Li. Thank you for the time spent in
explaining the theory of resonance, for your support in the acquisition of the data, and for the
help in understanding the results. My time in Aarhus has been a life-learning experience also
because of you.
Last but deﬁnitively not least, goes the thanks to my friends and my family. To my friends in
Denmark, whom I met just one year ago, but mean the world to me. Thanks for cheering me
up in my loneliness, for bringing joy when we are together, and for minimizing the struggles
of the thesis semester. To my boyfriend, the one and only that could stand and understand
my life revelations along this past year, and whom promised with his aﬀection to deal with my
diﬃcult state of mind for the years to come. I owe you a big apology, but you will owe me yours
when the time for your thesis will come. And ﬁnally, thanks to my family, for a very-needed
economical support, but mostly for believing in me even when I was about to stop doing it, for
teaching me the values that I want to spread in the world, and for allowing me to take my time
to understand what I want to be.
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
In this work, Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES) was employed to analyse elemental composition
and energy band gap of Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) stabilized nanoink deposited ﬁlms, with the aim of
understanding the behavior and eﬀects of the ligand-nanoparticle (NP) interface. Samples were
prepared with 1-dodecanethiol (S2−anions), thiostannate complex (Sn2S6 4−anions) and oley-
lamine (C-chains) coatings. The results of X-ray photoemission (XPS) analysis were necessary
in order to understand the contribution of ligands to the overall signal, and to detect possible
secondary phases. XPS conclusions helped to determine the relative size of the ligands with
respect to the electron mean free path, as well as the presence of Cu3SnS4 (CTS) phase at the
outer surface of the NPs and the existence of consistent sulfoxide compounds in the deposited
layer. Ultraviolet photoemission (UPS) and Inverse photoemission (IPES) provided insights
to the energy band gap of the diﬀerent ﬁlms, showing the insulating behavior of the capping
agents. All the samples underwent thermal treatment, in order to understand, by evaporation
of the capping agents, the dipole-induced behavior of the presence of ligands at the NP surface.
The presence of dipoles due to S2−and Sn2S6 4−ligands is supposed to induce a shift of all
NP energy states to higher binding energies. The main challenge encountered when performing
PES on the drop-casted samples regarded high charging of the material, even if the substrate
consisted of Si-doped wafers. Such response gave more credit to the hypothesis of the insulat-
ing eﬀect of the ligands. A high-crystallinity CZTS sample was provided by the DTU Fotonik
department, and used as benchmark for the analysis of the valence band (VB) of the material,
as well as for the peak energies of CZTS core levels. Resonance photoeemission (RPES) was
performed over the crystalline sample at the beamline MATline at ASTRID2 synchrotron in
Aarhus University. Results of the RPES analysis provided supporting information about the
elemental contribution to the VB of the material: the energy states closer to the VB maximum
seemed to be associated to Cu and S, as resonance was observed at photon energies crossing
the Cu 3p and S 2p absorption edges.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Kesterite Solar Cell
4
2.1
Device design and working principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Non-idealities in the material
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Production Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Surface Science of Nanoparticles
10
3.1
Colloidal nanocrystal synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Structure of the NP-ligand interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Bonding at the NP-ligand interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Colloidal stabilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.3
Metal-ligand interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Ligand exchange reactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Surface ligands and nanocrystal electronic structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Characterization of the NP surface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
20
4.1
Basic principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Three-Step Model and Mean Free Path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy (IPES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.5
Resonance Photoelectron Spectroscopy (RPES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.6
X-ray sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.6.1
X-ray Tube
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6.2
Synchrotron radiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Experiment
36
5.1
Sample Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Vacuum System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2.3
Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy (IPES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3.1
XPS spectrum peak ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3.2
Elemental Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Resonance Spectroscopy (RPES)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.1
ASTRID2 and MATline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.4.2
Beamtime data analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:8==
6
Results and Discussion
44
6.1
Crystalline sample - RPES analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.1
Elemental composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.2
RPES results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Solution processed samples - PES analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2.1
Elemental composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2.2
Band Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Conclusion
66
==PAGE:9==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
1 Introduction
1
Introduction
As the current global energy demand increases to the terawatt magnitude, renewable energy
sources acquire more and more importance in order to limit the environmental impact of energy
production. In this panorama, solar cells become one of the most attractive renewable energy
technologies. As a matter of fact the amount of energy arriving on Earth from the sun is gi-
gantic (≈10 000 times the current energy consumption of the human species), and converting
it eﬃciently is necessary both to fulﬁll the energy demand and to mitigate the production of
CO2 and the increasing temperature in the atmosphere [1].
Shockley and Queisser published a paper in 1961 [2], in which they introduce the now famous
Shockley-Queisser limit curve showed in Figure 1 by the black line. They theorized the max-
imum theoretical power conversion eﬃciency of a single junction solar cell as a function of
its bandgap, assuming AM 1.5 solar spectrum and unconcentrated sunlight. Figure 1 shows
diﬀerent solar cells technologies in their record eﬃciencies at February 2018.
c-Si
GaAs
GaInP
CIGS
mic-Si
InP
CdTe
perovskite
CZTSSe
nc-Si
Dye/TiO2
organic
a-Si:H
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Bandgap (eV)
Efficiency (%)
75 %
50 %
perovskite 
QDs
Figure 1: Theoretical Shockley-Queisser power conversion eﬃciency limit as a function of
bandgap (black line). The blue line and the green line represent the 75 % and 50 % of the
theoretical limit. The record eﬃciencies for diﬀerent materials are plotted for the corresponding
band gaps, revised February 2018. The colors of the dots, representing the diﬀerent technolo-
gies, depend on the diﬀerence of their record eﬃciency to the theoretical maximum: blue -
above 75 % of the S-Q limit, green - between 50 % and 75 %, red - below 50 %. Adapted from
reference 3.
Page 1 of 67
==PAGE:10==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
1 Introduction
Although silicon based solar cells still make up for the majority of the market, thin ﬁlm solar
cells are under development as their characteristics demonstrate the potential to reduce pro-
duction costs for both materials and fabrication processes, and improved eﬃciency. This class
of photovoltaics can be formed by stacks of thin coatings made of diﬀerent materials, on top of
a substrate. The absorber layer can then be chosen from a series of materials that, compared to
silicon, absorb light more strongly being direct bandgap semiconductors [4]. Technologies based
on compounds such as CdTe and CuInxGa1-xSe2 (CIGS) have shown promising eﬃciency (22.1
% and 22.6 % respective record eﬃciency on the laboratory scale [4]), but the toxicity of Cd
and scarcity of In, Ga and Te become important obstacles to mass production [5] [6]. Other
thin ﬁlm technologies that have seen an exponential interest are perovskites, but they show
major issues regarding their stability. Kesterite photovoltaics utilizing Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS),
Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) and Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) have emerged as a promising alternative
to CIGS, through the introduction of nontoxic and earth abundant elemental composition and
their suitable optical properties for solar energy harvesting. The presence of Se should be taken
in consideration (as it is fairly scarce) when projecting this technology to mass production, as
well as the use of Cd in the n-type layer of the solar cell, generally composed of CdS. Non-toxic
oxide buﬀer layers (Zn,Sn)O have been already substituted to CdS and showed improved eﬃ-
ciency due to the enhanced band alignment [7]. The record laboratory eﬃciency achieved for
CZTS solar cells is 9.1% and for CZTSSe 12.6% [4].
Among all the techniques for deposition of CZTS, solution-processed deposition methods have
high potential in reducing fabrication costs by high-throughput roll-to-roll manufacturing [8].
A major advantage of this technique is that diﬀerent synthetic routes allow tunable composition
of the nanoparticles (NPs) prior to the deposition step. CZTS nanocrystals (NCs)-based inks
and molecular inks have been successfully utilized to fabricate solar cells with >8% eﬃciency,
achieved however after annealing the ﬁlms at high temperatures under a sulphur atmosphere [8].
To avoid the annealing step, surface ligand chemistry plays a vital role as deposition of NCs
thin ﬁlms with well-passivated surfaces is critical for an eﬃcient extraction of photogenerated
charge carriers. All nanomaterials are characterized by a large surface-to-volume ratio that
makes their surfaces the dominant player in many physical and chemical processes. Surface
ligands - molecules that bind to the surface - are an essential component to material synthe-
sis, processing and application, as they form a "capping" layer that saturates dangling bonds,
screens the particle from its environment, and controls nucleation and growth kinetics during
synthesis [9]. Ligands can inﬂuence also the optical and electrical properties of the NCs. In re-
cent years, eﬀort has been put in exchanging long insulating native ligands with shorter organic
and inorganic ligands to decrease the distance between NCs and eﬀectively passivate the surface.
The interest of this thesis experiment lies in understanding the eﬀects of diﬀerent ligands on
the band gap of the CZTS NPs thin ﬁlm. Multiple samples were prepared and provided by
Page 2 of 67
==PAGE:11==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
1 Introduction
Christian Rein, Postdoctoral Researcher at DTU Energy, and analyzed through Photoemis-
sion Spectroscopy (PES) techniques. The samples diﬀered in the ligands, while the NPs, later
undergoing ligand-exchange operations, belonged to the same batch.
All the samples were
characterized by X-ray Photoemission (XPS) to measure elemental composition, and combined
Ultraviolet Photoemission (UPS) and Inverse Photoemission (IPES) to calculated the band gap
of the deposited material. The samples underwent thermal treatment of 200 ◦C for one hour,
and the changes of behavior in the spectra before and after the treatment were addressed to
the partial loss of ligands on the surface. Moreover, this thesis work contains also some further
analysis on the structure of the valence band of CZTS, performed through Resonance Photoe-
mission (RPES) at the Aarhus MatLine beamline on an highly crystalline sample, provided
by the DTU Fotonik department. Results of this experiment increased knowledge about the
elemental contribution to the valence band of the material, and provided a reference for the
NPs results.
This thesis report is articulated in other six chapters. The ﬁrst part of the report aims at
providing the reader with background information on kesterite solar cells (Chapter 2), as well as
basic theory on surface science and interface behavior of NPs (Chapter 3) and physics principles
of PES techniques (Chapter 4). In the second part, experiment details on samples and facilities
adopted will be presented (Chapter 5), and the results introduced and discussed (Chapter 6).
A summary of the key discoveries and future outlook can be found in the conclusive Chapter
7.
Page 3 of 67
==PAGE:12==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
2 Kesterite Solar Cell
2
Kesterite Solar Cell
From a crystallographic point of view, CZTS can be obtained by the zincblende structure of ZnS,
by keeping the S anion in its positions and replacing Zn cations with Cu and Sn maintaining
charge neutrality. The material belongs to the compound AI
2BIICIVXVI
4
family (considering A
= Cu, B = Zn, C = Sn, X = S) [10]. The atoms in the structure are arranged in two possible
existing phases, with similar formation energy: kesterite and stannite. Both the structures have
a ccp array of anions with cations occupying one half of the tetrahedral voids [10]. However, the
kesterite structure, represented in Figure 2, has been found to be the most favourable [4] [10].
The kesterite structure is characterized by a cell that is pseudocubic (2a = c). The Cu atoms
are in the separate positions 2a (0,0,0) and 2c (0,1/2,1/4). The Zn, Sn and S atoms are in
positions 2d (1/2,0,1/4),2b (1/2,1/2,0) and and 8g (0.7560, 0.7566, 0.8722). More details on
the crystal structure of kesterite and stannite can be found in reference 11.
Cu
Sn
Zn
S
Figure 2: Unit cell of the kesterite type structure.
Kesterite crystallizes in a pseudocubic
structure (2a = c). The big yellow sphere represent S anions, while the smaller are the cations
(Cu-orange, Zn-green, Sn-blue). Adapted from reference 11.
Even if the stoichiometric ratio of Cu, Zn, Sn and S elements is 2:1:1:4, most of the samples
synthesized are non-stoichiometric. Research has been done in order to visualize the distribu-
tion of solar cell eﬃciencies depending on the Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn ratios. It was possible
to notice that all the cells with eﬃciency higher than 8% had Cu/(Zn+Sn) and Zn/Sn ratios
around 0.8 and 1.25 respectively [12]. For this reason, an empirical rule for the synthesis of
CZTS is that the material needs to be Cu-poor and Zn-rich. Two main causes are addressed
Page 4 of 67
==PAGE:13==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
2 Kesterite Solar Cell
for the non-stoichiometry of CZTS, meaning the easy coexistence of secondary phases and the
high concentration of point defects and defect clusters. Their eﬀect on band gap and eﬃciency
will be further exploited in the Chapter 2.2. It is however of high importance to realize that
due to the presence of mostly accepting defects, this material is intrinsically p-type.
The band gap of real CZTS material has been measured to be 1.4-1.6 eV depending on the dis-
order in the structure. However, the theoretical analysis sees the band gap at 1.5 eV [4]. It has
been shown through "ﬁrst-principles"modelling that the valence band (VB) of CZTS consists
primarily of antibonding states of hybridized Cu 3d and S 3p orbitals, whereas the conduction
band (CB) consists of the antibonding states of hybridized Sn 5s and S 3p orbitals [13]. The
Shockley-Queisser limit deﬁnes which is the maximum theoretical eﬃciency achievable for a
single-junction solar cell with absorber material of a certain band gap, considering temperature
of the cell and the illuminating spectrum. For a standard AM 1.5 solar spectrum, a semicon-
ductor with band gap of 1.1-1.5 eV has a maximum theoretical eﬃciency of 32-35%. In theory,
CZTS is a perfect candidate to be an absorber material for a solar cell. The highest eﬃciency
so far reached for a thin-ﬁlm CZTS(e) family solar cell is 12.6% by IBM using toxic hydrazine
solution, with low S content S/(S+Se) ≈0.3 and bandgap of 1.13 eV [4] [14].
2.1
Device design and working principles
The development of CZTS solar cells started in Japan: until 2008 only a few research groups in
the country and one in Stuttgart were investing eﬀort in understanding the potentiality of this
material [15]. Katagiri proposed to recreate the typical CIGS device architecture for CZTS solar
cells. Figure 3 shows the CIGS structure after the absorber layer is substituted by CZTS. The
solar cell is a p-n planar heterojunction: the "heterointerface" occurs at the interface between
CZTS and CdS layers. Light carrying more than 1.5 eV is absorbed by the p-n junction, as
the energy gap Eg of CZTS corresponds to this value. However, CdS has higher Eg, ≈2.4 eV,
therefore photons carrying energy between 1.5 eV and 2.4 eV can be absorbed only by CZTS.
Also ZnO and ZnO:Al contribute to the production of photoelectrons: the generation of carriers
in these materials occurs at photon energies higher than 3.3 eV, value corresponding to their
Eg [16].
The three n-type layers serve several purposes. The CdS layer forms an high crystallographic
quality heterojunction with the absorber, facilitating carrier collection [16]. Moreover, it acts as
diﬀusion barrier layer for Al, or any other element used as dopant in ZnO, and as a sputter dam-
age protection (the standard technique used to deposit ZnO). The transparent conductive oxide
(TCO) layer is typically formed by a thin layer of intrinsic ZnO followed by a thicker layer of
Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) or Al-doped ZnO. The former is generally needed as shunt protection
together with CdS, and for growth initiation of ZnO:Al. This last layer is the highly doped n-
type material that allows the p-n junction formation and the carrier transport to the metal grid.
Page 5 of 67
==PAGE:14==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
2 Kesterite Solar Cell
antireflective coating 
contact grid
lateral transport 
window
buffer
light absorber
back contact
substrate
soda lime glass
Mo
CZTS
CdS
ZnO
ZnO:Al
p
n
n
n-
e-
h+
V
load
MgF2
Figure 3: Structure of a typical CZTS solar cell. The symbols e−and h+ show the photogener-
ation of the electron-hole pair and their separation/transport to the respective metal contacts.
The symbols n and p show the doping of the layers.
MgF2 is typically deposited on high-performing devices as an anti-reﬂection coating [16]. When
CZTS is annealed on top of Mo substrate, MoS2 forms and gaseous S with high partial pressure
must always be supplied during the annealing process to ensure that CZTS does not decompose.
Electrons and holes need to be collected at two separate contacts in the solar cells for a net
current to ﬂow into the external load. This process must initially work under short circuit
conditions. The driving force behind charge separation and transport towards the respective
contacts can be found in the electrochemical potential gradients of holes and electrons, i.e.
in their quasi-Fermi levels. A quasi-Fermi level is a term used to describe the Fermi level in
the case of electron and hole populations displaced from equilibrium. Such displacement can
be caused by the application of an external voltage or by exposure to light, which alters the
populations of electrons in the conduction band and valence band. For the electron-hole pairs
generated within the depletion region of the p-n heterojunction (see Figure 4), separation is
ensured by the built-in electrostatic potential gradient formed across the p-n junction when the
junction is formed. The width of the depletion region depends in general on the thickness as
well as the doping density and relative permittivity of CZTS, CdS, and ZnO. In state-of-the-art
CZTS solar cells, the depletion region extends about 180-200 nm from the p-n junction into
CZTS [4]. The short circuit current Jsc deﬁnes how well the solar cell is working under the
Page 6 of 67
==PAGE:15==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
2 Kesterite Solar Cell
condition of no external load. To produce work and so electrical power, the photogenerated
current must ﬂow against an applied voltage that acts as a reducing agent over the built-in
potential of the cell. As forward bias increases, the point when current is consumed instead of
generated can be reached. This turning value of external load is called open circuit voltage Voc.
In general, the photogenerated current can be considered as the diﬀerence between the short
circuit value and the diode current, or recombination current. Moreover, parasitic resistance
causes further losses.
Fermi level
Mo
CZTS
CdS
ZnO
ZnO:Al
Contact 
grid
valence band 
conduction band 
vacuum level
back contact region
bulk
depletion 
region
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
built in 
potential
??
+
+
+
??
+
3
2
1
ii
iii
i
iv
A. back contact barrier
B. work function (Ф)
C. ionization potential
D. electron affinity
E. band bending in CZTS
F. band bending in CdS
G. band gap
1. back contact recombination
2. bulk SHR recombination
3. interface recombination
i. deep (bulk) defect
ii. shallow (bulk) defect
iii. compensated defect cluster
iv. interface defects
Figure 4: Illustrative representation of a band diagram of a CZTS solar cell. On the x-axis, the
architecture of the cell is developed, while the y-axis represents energy. The diﬀerent legends
report defects, recombination mechanisms and deﬁnitions name of energy diﬀerences [4].
2.2
Non-idealities in the material
As already stated, the highest recorded eﬃciencies for CZTS solar cells were measured in non-
stoichiometric ratios. It was shown that CZTS could exist as a non-stoichiometric phase when
the overall stoichiometry (i.e., CZTS plus any other phases) was characterized by Cu/(Zn+Sn)
= 0.79 and Zn/Sn = 1.19, which meant a 6% absolute deviation in Zn and Cu content from
the stoichiometric point. However, non-stoichiometry results always in ZnS segregation. ZnS
is the least harmful secondary phase, as it has large band gap. Lower band gap phases, such
as CuxS, SnS, Cu2SnS3, are much more dangerous for the Voc as they can trap free carriers due
Page 7 of 67
==PAGE:16==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
2 Kesterite Solar Cell
to the potential well they form with the VB or CB of CZTS.
Point defects and defect clusters are other non-idealities that can have important eﬀects on the
performance of CZTS solar cells. Shallow defects are deﬁned to be the ones lying within 0.2 eV
from the VB or CB edges. The closer in energy the defect lies with respect to band edges, and
the larger its volume density is, the more free carriers it adds to the speciﬁc band and the more
it tends to move the Fermi level and dope CZTS p-type or n-type. Therefore, shallow defects
determine the doping density in CZTS, CdS, ZnO, ZnO:Al, and cause structural disorder in
the kesterite structure of CTZS. Deep defects lie closer to the middle of the band gap and can
cause Shockley-Read-Hall recombination in the CZTS bulk. These two types of defects may
be isolated or form clusters consisting of a combination of acceptors and donors with net zero
charge. Generally, isolated defects produce the eﬀects previously described, while clusters can
locally change the band edge positions in the material, modifying its properties [12]. Figure 4
shows also the energy position of the defects in the band gap of CZTS. The intrinsic p-type
behavior of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric CZTS is given by the point defects CuZn and
VCu respectively. The ﬁrst has ionization level deeper than the vacancy but in stoichiometric
samples it is present with higher density, producing high hole population and obstruct n-type
doping. Under Cu-poor Zn-rich kesterites, VCu becomes the dominant point defect and con-
tributes to the p-type conductivity [12].
Grain boundaries (GBs) in kesterite absorbers exhibit benign electronic properties in Cu-poor
and Zn-rich CZTS and CZTSSe solar cells [6]: GBs seem to act as electron ﬂow channels rather
than dominant recombination centers, due to higher positive surface potentials at the GBs
compared to the bulk of the grains, and charge separation is then enhanced. This eﬀect might
result from the thermodynamically favourable formation of the [VCu+ZnCu] defect clusters in
Cu-poor Zn-rich conditions, that decreases both the valence and conduction band edge energies
relative to the kesterite bulk. This could lead to the potential barrier that repels holes from
GBs and attracts electrons [17].
2.3
Production Methods
This section is based on reference 18, which oﬀers a good overview of thin ﬁlm deposition meth-
ods, and their relevance to solar cell applications.
The ﬁrst thin ﬁlms of CZTS were prepared by Ito and Nakazawa in 1988 by an atom beam sput-
tering method. Sputter deposition involves ejecting material from a "target" that is a source
onto a "substrate": sputtered atoms ejected from the target can ballistically ﬂy from the target
in straight lines and impact energetically on the substrates. Spray pyrolysis is potentially a
low-cost method suitable for large areas in which precursor solutions are sprayed at a heated
substrate, with following solvent evaporation. Various metallorganic compounds or metal salts
Page 8 of 67
==PAGE:17==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
2 Kesterite Solar Cell
dissolved in aqueous or organic solvents can be used as precursor solution in spray pyrolysis
process. Generally, thin ﬁlm deposited by pyrolysis method have shown contamination by im-
purities such as CuxS, ZnS, CuSnS3. Electron beam evaporation method is a vacuum deposition
process. An electron beam, produced by heating a tungsten ﬁlament in the electron gun, is
directed toward a target material. The kinetic energy of the electrons is then transferred to
the material in the form of thermal energy that makes the target to evaporate. The e-beam
deposition method is really eﬃcient for the control of stoichiometry in alloy ﬁlms and its usage
has been investigated for the growth of CZTS with following sulphurization. Photo-chemical
deposition has been employed to produce CZTS thin ﬁlms. With this technique, the substrate is
exposed to one or more volatile precursors, which react thanks to illumination on the substrate
surface to produce the desired deposit. Sulﬁdes of Cu, Zn and Sn were formed only in the
regions irradiated with deep UV light. Examples of ﬁlm deposition by pulsed laser deposition
and sputtering methods have also been attempted and recalled in the review. Chemical vapour
deposition (CVD) is a well-known method for the deposition of high quality thin ﬁlms for
various applications (bio-medical applications, electronic materials for lasers, displays, sensors,
batteries and solar cells), but its application for the deposition of CZTS has been reported only
recently, probably due to the diﬃculties in ﬁnding the suitable precursor for the deposition of
this complicated quaternary system.
Non-vacuum techniques should be preferred to large scale vacuum techniques for their poten-
tial lower production cost. However, the cost of the process depends on many factors, as yield,
eﬃciency, energy consumption, raw material cost, environmental friendliness and safety. Elec-
trochemical deposition has certain advantages in terms of low-cost, and its potential for large
area deposition has already been proven for deposition of CIGS and CdTe absorber layers.
CZTS ﬁlms were made from metallic layers, Cu, Zn and Sn, electrochemically deposited us-
ing a conventional 3-electrode cell with a platinum counter electrode and Ag/AgCl reference
electrode, then annealed in sulfur atmosphere to form CZTS ﬁlms at 550 ◦C. Other methods
include sol-gel and soft-solution methods. In the latter, a substrate is covered with a solution
of precursor of dispersed nanoparticles, and the ﬁlm is obtained after subsequent thermal or
chemical treatment. Generally, solution methods include spray coating, spin coating, and drop-
casting. For the sake of this project, solution methods will be used to produce the analyzed
samples. Further details on the interaction between nanoparticles and the solution environment
will be given in the next chapter.
Page 9 of 67
==PAGE:18==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
3
Surface Science of Nanoparticles
The surface of a bulk solid is characterized by a small percentage of atoms compared to the
much larger amount of atoms present in the bulk volume. For this reason, the broken chemical
bonds present at the interface with the exterior contribute to a minimal extent to material
properties. However, the surface-to-volume ratio scales inversely with linear dimension. This
results in the role of surface becoming more dominant as size shrinks. At nanoscale, surfaces
can signiﬁcantly alter properties and generate completely new eﬀects. Applying traditional
surface science to nanoscale can give basic understanding of the matter, although the small size
complicates the picture. Thanks to surface science it is known that large crystals can lower
their energy by moving surface atoms away from lattice sites (process known as surface recon-
struction), dangling bonds introduce new electronic states, and foreign molecules (surfactants
or adsorbates) can alter the energy and reactivity of a crystal surface. There are also some
useful analogies that help in the study of nanoparticles (NPs) properties. For example, the
chemical bond between NP surface atom and surfactant molecule resembles the behavior of
metal ion and ligand in coordination complexes. Ligands around NPs form a "capping" layer
that can be rationally designed to tune the properties of functional nanomaterials. Surface
ligands saturate dangling bonds, screen the particle from its environment and control synthesis
kinetics. Ligands also inﬂuence optical and electronic properties of NPs, and provide steric or
electrostatic stabilization required for synthesis, processing and speciﬁc applications. Ligand
exchange introduces the possibility of extending the versatility of NP materials, as it allows the
replacement of synthesis optimized ligands with application-targeted species. Such applications
can include sensors, LEDs, lasers, biomedical research and solar cells [9].
3.1
Colloidal nanocrystal synthesis
Colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) have an inorganic core that is stabilized by a layer of surface sur-
factants. From the point of view of the synthesis, colloidal inorganic NCs exhibit preparation
strategies similar in many ways to those employed for artiﬁcial organic polymers. For syn-
thetic polymers, preparative methods at disposal allow to deﬁne the mean number of monomer
units in a polymer and the variance of this number, and to build complex topologies join-
ing or branching of simpler macromolecules. A wide number of methods have been proposed
to tailor the synthesis of NCs with well deﬁned structures, like coprecipitation in aqueous
phase, hydrothermal/solvothermal synthesis and surfactant-controlled growth in a hot organic
solvent [19]. Reference 18 provides an overview on diﬀerent synthetic routes used for the pro-
duction of CZTS NPs.
A synthesis system for colloidal NCs consists of three components: precursors, organic sur-
factants and solvents. The process starts with heating to a suﬃciently high temperature the
reaction medium, so that precursors chemically transform into active species (monomers). The
Page 10 of 67
==PAGE:19==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
monomers form the NCs initial "seed" in a process called nucleation: the precursors react to form
a supersaturation of monomers followed by a burst of NCs nuclei. Their following growth hap-
pens by incorporation of additional monomers still present in the reaction medium. Choosing
an appropriate temperature for the synthesis is decisive in determining the optimal conditions
for NC growth: the temperature has to be hot enough to allow rearrangment of atoms and
annealing within a growing NC over the course of synthesis. However, the nano-scale brings
some beneﬁts due to scaling laws of properties of solids in the nanometre regime: small crystals
need a lower melting temperature, since the liquid phase has lower surface energy than a solid
with facets, edges and corners. The eﬀects can be signiﬁcant, reducing the melting temper-
ature up to half for a NC of 2-3 nm in diameter with respect to the corresponding bulk solid [19].
Growth is greatly aﬀected by the presence of surfactant molecules in the reaction medium. It
has been seen that a large reduction in melting temperature increases in the range of inorganic
NCs that can be grown at temperatures where common organic molecules are stable, which is
around 200-400 ◦C. Organic surfactant molecules in the growing medium are chosen for their
propensity to adhere to a growing crystal. The energy with which the surfactant molecule
adhere to the surface of a growing NC is an extremely important parameter inﬂuencing crystal
growth. The adhesion energy needs to be such that it allows dynamic solvation at the growth
temperature: the surfactant needs to be able to exchange on and oﬀthe growing crystal so
that regions of the NC surface are transiently accessible for growth, yet entire crystals are on
average monolayer-protected to block aggregation [19].
Another feature of modern synthesis methods is the ability to produce NCs with a relatively
narrow size distribution. To better understand the concepts involved here, it is important to
introduce the dependence of the growth rate on the NC radius (Figure 5). Very small crystals
are unstable owing to their large fraction of surface atoms: this is explained by the dependence
of surface energy on size, and the growth rate appears to be negative. Larger crystals are stable
and grow. The zero-crossing point occurs at the critical size, where crystal do not grow nor
shrink. This point depends on the monomer concentration, with larger critical size favoured by
low monomer concentration. The peak in growth rate arises because increasing the radius of
large crystals requires the incorporation of many more atoms than does increasing the radius of
smaller crystals. These considerations explain why a slow growth rate produces equilibrated and
nearly round crystals but also very broad size distributions, due to the concomitant shrinking
of small crystals while large ones grow. There is a way to recover a narrow size distribution
also in case of low monomer concentration. This approach is called "size-distribution focusing",
and it is based on the fact that small crystals grow more rapidly than larger ones if monomers
concentrations are suﬃciently high. If, considering a case of slow growth as previously described,
the monomer concentration is abruptly increased by a secondary injection of precursor, the
critical size will shift to a smaller value, as it depends only on the concentration. If this shift
Page 11 of 67
==PAGE:20==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
is large enough, all the NC nuclei will have size larger than the critical size. Therefore, the
distribution will spontaneously narrow, or "focus" [19].
0
+
-
Growth rate (a.u.)
Size
Initial average size
Critical
size
High monomer concentration
Low monomer concentration
Figure 5: Schematic representation of the dependency of growth rate on size of the nanocrys-
tals. A critical size exists at any given monomer concentration. When the concentration is
high, the critical size is small so that all the particles grow. In such a case, smaller particles
grow faster than larger ones and the size distribution appears nearly monodispersed. If the
monomer concentration is lower, small nanocrystals are depleted as larger ones grow and the
size distribution broadens. Figure based on reference 19.
3.2
Structure of the NP-ligand interface
In general, synthesis of CZTS NPs is most commonly carried out in the organic, non-polar
solvent oleylamine (OLA). Similar solvents bear long-chain carbon ligands as stabilizers, and
are therefore hydrophobic. The NPs ink is then prepared with organic solvents, that are gen-
erally expensive and toxic. Moreover, when CZTS ﬁlms are produced the stabilizers are left
behind as hydrocarbon impurities, acting as an insulating barrier that negatively aﬀects the
eﬃciency [20]. Solutions to such problem could be found in multiple approaches such as increase
NP size (minimizing surface/volume ratio) or synthesizing through solution-based methods as
hot-injection and solvothermal CZTS NPs ligand-free so that they can be dispersed in envi-
ronmentally friendly polar solvents. In recent years the study of ligand exchange has become
of higher interest, to eﬃciently passivate the surface and to result in surface-binding species
better suited to the end application of the NPs [8].
Ligand exchange reactions extend the
versatility of NC materials by allowing replacement of ligands optimized for synthesis with
Page 12 of 67
==PAGE:21==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
application-targeted species including organic or inorganic ions, clusters and polymers.
3.2.1
Bonding at the NP-ligand interface
The NPs are typically synthesized in a solution containing surface ligands with an anchoring
headgroup tethered to the NP surface and a hydrocarbon tail directed away from it (Figure
6 (a)). The shape that the inorganic core assumes tries to minimize the surface energy and
facet-speciﬁc energy of broken bonds, and typically NPs display a polyhedral core [9]. For
example, Au and PbS NCs often adopt a cuboctahedral shape terminated by (111) and (100)
planes (Figure 6 (b)). The capping layer around the NP gathers as a self-assembled monolayer.
The interaction between organic/inorganic interfaces in NPs can be understood by considering
extended Au (111) and (100) surfaces, covered by n-alkanethiolate pattern (Figure 6 (c)):
between sulfur and gold atoms a strong interaction (∽2 eV) drives the free surfactant molecule
to bind to the metal surface, while a weaker van der Waals interaction between hydrocarbon
tails (∽0.07 eV per CH2 group) induces dense packing in the organic overlayer. For ﬂat surfaces,
surfactant molecules arrange in a crystalline order over the underlying substrate, with sulfur
typically occupying the three-fold sites and alkyl tails tilted of 30◦from the surface normal. NC
surfaces however don’t behave like extended surfaces, and their vertex and edge sites provide
extra volume for the carbon chains. This results in a higher capping-layer coverage, due to the
relaxing competition for space between alkyl tails. Moreover, open space in the NC capping
layer allows penetration of solvent molecules or ligand chains of neighbouring NCs.
3.2.2
Colloidal stabilization
Some functionalities of the surface ligands have been already expressed in Chapter 3.1. In
addition, surface ligands allow control over the aggregation of nanocrystals: when exposed to a
good solvent for a given type of surface ligand, NCs disperse in solution. There are two diﬀer-
ent mechanism of colloidal stabilization, steric and electrostatic, that provide complementary
approaches to the stabilization of NC dispersions in polar or non-polar solvents (Figure 7 (a)).
Sterically stabilized NPs are, for example, NPs coated with a layer of hydrocarbon chains. A
good solvent implies a negative free energy of chain-solvent mixing, so that hydrocarbon chains
repel one another without overlapping the ligand coronas and stabilizing the dispersion. Typical
good solvents for hydrocarbon-capped NPs are nonpolar liquids (hexane, toluene, chloroform),
while non-solvents are polar (ethanol, acetone, acetonitrile). Colloidal NPs can also be stabilized
electrostatically through absorption of charged species to their surface: the NP surface charge
is balanced by oppositely charged ions located in a diﬀuse region around the particle. Good
solvents for electrostatically stabilized NPs are generally polar solvents with high dielectric
constant ϵ (for example formamide, ϵ ≈110).
Figure 7 (b) shows the dependence of the
interaction potential U on the interparticle distance r for good and non-solvent: in general, U
Page 13 of 67
==PAGE:22==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
PbS
Au
(111)
(100)
Au
S
C
H
a)
b)
c)
Figure 6: (a) Calculated atomic structure of a PbS 5-nm NC capped in oleic acid; (b) Binding
pattern of sulfur headgroups on Au (111) and (100) surfaces; (c) Illustration of the capping
monolayer of hexadecanethiol molecules adsorbed to Au(111) surface: hydrocarbon chains are
fully extended and tilted with respect to the surface normal. Adapted from reference 9.
is purely repulsive for NPs in a good solvent, whereas in a non-solvent attractive interaction
becomes dominant at an intermediate distance of neighbouring NPs.
3.2.3
Metal-ligand interactions
The interaction between NP core and ligand headgroup can be explained using the classiﬁca-
tion of covalent bonds. Such classiﬁcation has been adapted to NCs from metal coordination
complexes [21]. Three classes of interaction metal-ligands can be deﬁned depending on two
parameters: number of electrons involved, and the identity of donor and acceptor groups. A
classiﬁcation of ligand binding motifs is showed in the case of CdSe NPs in Figure 8. L-type
ligands are neutral 2-electron donors with a lone electron pair that datively coordinates surface
metal atoms. Examples are found in amines (RNH2), phosphines (R3P) and phospine oxides
(R3PO). X-type ligands can be neutral radicals binding neutral surface sites (each with an un-
paired electron), or more commonly monovalent ions binding oppositely charged sites at the NC
surface. The last typology are the Z-type ligands: these ligands act as two-electron acceptors.
Page 14 of 67
==PAGE:23==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
STERIC
ELECTROSTATIC
Good solvent
Non-solvent 
or vacuum
Repulsion
Atttraction
0
r
U(r)
a)
b)
Figure 7: (a) Illustration of an interacting pair of NPs in case of steric stabilization (hydrocarbon
surface ligands) and electrostatic stabilization (ionic surface ligands); (b) Interaction potential
U dependency of interparticle distance r in case of good and non-solvents. A good solvent
shows pure repulsion between the NPs, while attractive forces are established at an intermediate
distance in the case of a non-solvent. Adapted from reference 9.
3.3
Ligand exchange reactions
Surface ligands with L- or X- type headgroups and hydrocarbon tails allow very good control
over nucleation and growth of NPs. However, such ligands might need to be replaced with other
surface-binding species better suited for the end application. It is necessary that a bound ligand
desorbs from the NC before a new one may enter from solution to attach to the surface. In case
of nonpolar solvents, all species involved in the reaction should be electrically neutral, meaning
that a direct exchange between X- and L-type is highly unfavourable in such environments due
to neutrality disturbance. L-type ligands would rapidly adsorb and desorb from the NP surface
at room temperature, while X-type ligands remain tightly bound because of the electrostatic
penalty for charging induced by self-desorption of X-type ligands. The use of polar solvents
lifts the requirement for neutrally NPs surfaces, allowing additional ligand exchange pathways.
Diﬀerent types of ligands have been found as convenient replacement of insulating organic lig-
ands. For example, many molecular metal chalcogenide complexes (MCCs) can enable strong
electronic coupling in NC solids [22]. The MCC ligands contain main group or transition metals
bound to the NC surface through chalcogenide bridges. Many MCCs can be synthesized by
Page 15 of 67
==PAGE:24==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
Cd (3-coord)
X
X
X
Cd (2-coord)
L
Cd (2- or 3-coord)
Z  (MX2)
Se (3-coord)
Cd
Se
Z-type
Neutral acceptor
L-type
Neutral donor
X-type
Terminates lattice
Bound ion pair
RCOO-
RS-
Cl-
HO-
AsS3
3-
N+ …………..I-
RNH2
R3P
R3PO
Pb(RCOO)2
CdCl2
Figure 8: Possible metal-ligand bonds at the surface of CdSe NPs. Anionic X-type ligands bind
to surface cations to restore charge neutrality. Neutral L-type electron donor ligands with lone
pair datively coordinates at surface metal atoms. Neutral Z-type electron acceptor ligands bind
to electron-rich undercoordinated Se atoms. Adapted from reference 9.
dissolution of bulk main group or transition metal chalcogenides in hydrazine. Excess chalco-
gen is usually added to form soluble anionic species such as thiostannate ligand Sn2S64−with
hydrazinium (N2H5+) as the counter ion. MCCs can be converted into semiconducting phases
by gentle heat treatments, generating inorganic nanocrystal solids. For example, Sn2S64−neu-
tralized by volatile hydrazinium counterions decomposes at 180 ◦C: (N2H5)4Sn2S6 −→SnS2 +
4N2H4 = 2H2S. If nonvolatile or carbon-containing impurities are not present, SnS2 phase crys-
tallizes into pure electronic-grade semiconductor [22]. The presence of foreign metal ions in a
close proximity to the NP surface in the case of MCC ligands is considered to have possible
eﬀects on the chemical and physical properties of the NPs. For example, metal ions from MCC
ligands can participate in redox processes (as the case of Sn2S64−ligands, that can switch be-
tween SnIV and SnII oxidation states). These complications could be avoided by introducing
metal-free inorganic ligands, such as chalcogenides and hydrochalcogenides (S2−, HS−, Se2−,
HSe−, Te2−, and HTe−), mixed chalcogenides (TeS32−), as well as OH−and NH2−[23].
The ligand-exchange process is performed in solution-phase, and it consents to prepare inks
composed of smaller inorganic ligand-capped NPs in a single step. The method is shown in
Figure 9: native ligand-capped CZTS NPs are dispersed in chloroform and then mixed with
Page 16 of 67
==PAGE:25==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
ammonium sulﬁde in formamide (FA), followed by stirring of the mixture, resulting in the
transformation of S2−-capped CZTS NPs to the FA phase.
stirring
CZTS
S2-
CZTS
(NH4)2S
+ 
FA
OLA-CZTS
+ 
CHCl3
OLA
+ 
CHCl3
S2--CZTS
+ 
FA
Figure 9: Scheme showing the process of solution-phase ligand exchange. Native-ligand capped
CZTS NPs undergo ligand exchange when the chloroform mixture they are dispersed in is
mixed with ammonium sulﬁde in formamide (FA). After stirring, the NPs are covered in S2−
ions. Adapted from reference 8.
3.4
Surface ligands and nanocrystal electronic structure
Optical, electrical, magnetic and catalytic properties of NPs can be directly inﬂuenced and
tailored by surface ligands. Such eﬀects can be explained, for example, by considering semicon-
ductor quantum dots (QDs). QD ﬁlms allow bandgap tuning through the quantum size eﬀect,
as valence and conduction bands are split into discrete, quantum-conﬁned states. However, the
broken bonds at the surface of the QD contribute with a set of electronic states lying between
highest occupied and lowest unoccupied quantum-conﬁned orbitals of the QD (Figure 10 (a)).
This imperfect passivation of the surface promotes non-radiative recombination of charge car-
riers that can be detrimental for the performance of devices based on such QDs: such states
behave as traps for electrons and holes [9] [24]. By bonding to the NP surface atom, the ligand
generally passivates the surface forming a new set of molecular orbitals with bonding (σ) and
antibonding (σ∗) character: the strong covalent bond between surface atom and ligand shifts
the energy of σ- and σ∗- orbitals outside the bandgap, removing possible trap states.
Page 17 of 67
==PAGE:26==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
1s(e)
1s3/2(h)
CB
VB
Passivated Se
HOMO
Electron-
donating 
ligand
Passivated Cd
LUMO
Electron-
accepting 
ligand
σ
σ
σ*
E
a)
1s(e)
1s(h)
Energy (eV)
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
b)
EDT - PbS
TBAI - PbS
c)
σ*
Figure 10: (a) Simpliﬁed molecular orbital diagram of a CdSe QD showing that the energies of
Cd and Se surface states (red levels) are pushed away from the bandgap in presence of ligand
binding. Adapted from 9; (b) Surface ligands inﬂuence the energy of the highest occupied
and lowest unoccupied states of PbS quantum dots, for the following ligands: bromide, thio-
cyanate, benzenedithiol, 3-mercaptopropionic acid and benzenethiol. Adapted from 25: VB
maximum was measured by UPS, while the CB minimum was determined combining UPS re-
sults, optical absorption spectrum results and the Coulombic stabilization energy of the conﬁned
electron and hole theorized by Brus; (c) Surface-bound molecules shift QD energy level(leading
to p- or n-type behaviour) by inducing variable surface dipoles. Tetrabutylammonium iodide
(TBAI) treated Pb NPs show n-type behaviour, while ethanedithiol (EDT) renders PbS p-type.
Adapted from 26.
The absolute energy of QD electronic states can also be aﬀected by the presence of ligands. In
Figure 10 (b), the 1s(h) (HOMO) and 1s(e) (LUMO) states of PbS QDs, measured with UPS,
are shown [25]. Then capped with diﬀerent ligands, both HOMO and LUMO shift, and the
observed variation is large enough to be compared to the energy bandgap itself. This eﬀect
is caused by electrostatic forces generating at the interface between ligand and QD surface
(Figure 10 (c)). When a surface dipole is established at the surface of the QD, the electric ﬁeld
potential shifts all energy levels up, if the dipole points toward the NP center, or down in the
opposite case. This electronic reconstruction results in an overall n- or p-type behavior of the
NPs when integrated in optoelectronic devices [26].
Page 18 of 67
==PAGE:27==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
3 Surface Science of Nanoparticles
3.5
Characterization of the NP surface
Experimental study of NPs surfaces becomes very challenging, due to the nanometre dimensions
and heterogeneity of the surfaces. No technique that provides atomic-resolution reconstruction
is now available for the study of the NC capping layer. However, diﬀerent experimental meth-
ods can be applied to obtain complementary information about the capping layer structure,
the NP-ligand bonding, and interaction between ligand molecules and surrounding environ-
ment [27] [28]. The major questions about the interface that can be answered by spectroscopic,
scattering, imaging and computational techniques can be divided in the following components:
(i) what is the composition and structure of the ligand molecules?; (ii) how is the chemical bonds
between ligands and NP surface?; (iii) and what are the eﬀective properties of the whole capping
layer, such as geometry at the interface, eﬀective thickness, density and dielectric constant [28]?
Reference 9 oﬀers a summary of useful techniques.
Vibrational spectroscopy has found its
utility in characterizing the structure of ligand molecules. The width and position of infrared
resonances, obtained with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), can be used
to investigate chain conformations and molecular order of the capping layer. Raman spec-
troscopy is particularly useful for characterizing inorganic ligands with heavy atoms vibrating
at low frequencies. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) has been used to study the eﬀec-
tive thickness of the NP capping layer. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) allows
real-space imaging of NPs and, in some cases, their surface ligands, and ﬁnds its advantage in
the ability to examine NPs at a single-particle level. Computational techniques, like Density
functional theory (DFT), can partially compensate for diﬃculties associated with experimen-
tal probing of NP surfaces. DFT is used to model electronic interactions between diﬀerent NPs
facets and ligands. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy can be used to measure the chemi-
cal environment at the interface between NP and ligand. Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spec-
troscopy has been already introduced before as useful technique in the study of the valence
band of QDs, while Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy can provide helpful information
for the understanding of the conduction band. For the purpose of this thesis, photoelectron
spectroscopy (PES) has been applied to the study of CZTS NPs, and in the following chapter
some theory about PES will be given.
Page 19 of 67
==PAGE:28==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
4
Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
This section is based on references 29, 30 and 31.
4.1
Basic principles
Spectroscopy techniques play a vital role in the understanding of the internal structure of mate-
rials. Their powerful usefulness stands in the ability to record responses of diﬀerent interactions
between speciﬁc radiation and matter. The techniques can be classiﬁed depending on the type
or frequency of the incident radiation used or the nature of the interaction of the radiation
with matter. In the latter case, some examples could be absorption spectroscopy, when the
absorption spectrum of a material is studied, or emission spectroscopy, when the emitted radi-
ation of particles from a material is the main interest. Here photoelectron spectroscopy (PES)
and Auger electron spectroscopy come to hand when emitted radiation is composed of electrons.
In a general photoelectron spectroscopy system, the sample is illuminated by a radiation of
suitable energy which ejects photoelectrons, then guided by electron optics into an electron en-
ergy analyzer which sorts electrons by means of their energy. Figure 11 (a) shows schematically
the typical PES set up.
The ejection of photoelectrons is made possible by a phenomenon called the photoelectric eﬀect,
discovered by Hertz in 1887: when a material is illuminated with a light source with suitable
frequency, electrons from occupied energy levels are ejected with some kinetic energy. In PES,
the illuminating radiation carries comparable energy to the one required to remove electrons
from energy states of the material.
By studying the kinetic energy of the emitted electron, it is possible to obtain information
about the energy levels from which it has been extracted. Depending on the occupied orbital
from which it is ejected, the electron will posses a speciﬁc threshold frequency, ν0, that deﬁnes
its binding energy, EB. When an incoming radiation with frequency ν greater than ν0 hits the
material, photoelectrons are ejected with kinetic energy Ekin given by Einstein’s equation:
Ekin = hν −hν0 −φ = hν −EB −φ
(1)
where φ is the work function of the material. However, the analyser possesses a diﬀerent work
function φA, that is generally diﬀerent from the one of the sample material. Equation 1 can
be modiﬁed taking in consideration this diﬀerence: when a conductive connection between the
sample and the analyser is provided, their Fermi levels align, resulting in a diﬀerence in measured
kinetic energy Ekin,A with respect to Ekin by the diﬀerence in work functions. Equation 1 can
Page 20 of 67
==PAGE:29==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
hω
hω
core level
vacuum level
Fermi level
valence band
SAMPLE
SPECTRUM
Ф
E
EVAC
EF
EB
EF
N(E)
N(E)
Ekin
θ
ψ
sample
hω
A
Photon source
e-
_
+
Ekin(θ,ψ,p,σ)
detector
a)
b)
Figure 11: (a) Schematic PES set up: excited electrons are analyzed with respect to their kinetic
energy Ekin and their momentum p. The directions of ⃗p are obtained from θ and ψ, which are
the polar and azimuth angles under which the electron leaves the surface; (b) Relation between
the energy levels in a solid and the electron energy distribution produced by photon of energy
hν. The abscissa for the photoelectron spectrum (Ekin = 0) corresponds to the vacuum level.
Solids are characterized by core levels and valence band, and PES provides information on the
energy distribution in a material. In a metal, EF is found at the top of the valence band and
has work function φ of separation from the vacuum level. Figure based on reference 31.
then be rewritten:
EB = hν −Ekin,A −φA
(2)
The principle of PES is shown in Figure 11 (b), where the relationship between the energy
levels of a solid and the electron energy distribution produced by photoemission is showed.
The attractiveness of PES resides in the fact that the properties of the photoelectrons basically
reﬂect the electronic eigen states of the investigated system. Depending on the energy levels that
want to be studied in the material, one can distinguish between Ultraviolet Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (UPS), mainly for the (angle resolved) investigation of valence band states
(ARPES), and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), which provides information
on the core-level states at higher binding energies. Two diﬀerent types of excitation sources
are available under laboratory conditions and allow the distinction of the previous techniques,
namely UV line spectra of discharge lamps for energies in the range of approximately 10–50 eV,
Page 21 of 67
==PAGE:30==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
generally with noble gases like helium (He Iα: 21.23 eV, He IIα: 40.82 eV), and the characteristic
lines from the X-ray source, for which the most commonly used anode materials are aluminum
(Al-Kα1,2 : 1486.6 eV) and magnesium (Mg-Kα1,2 : 1253.6 eV) [31]. Other materials can of
course be used in anodes, like in the case of the system used in laboratory for this thesis, where
the XPS setup has yttrium and magnesium anodes.
4.2
Three-Step Model and Mean Free Path
The photoemission process is generally described through the so called three-step model: ﬁrst
the photoelectron is ejected from the orbital thanks to the photoelectric eﬀect, then it travels
through the solid up to the surface, possibly losing some energy due to inelastic scattering, and
ﬁnally it is emitted into vacuum (Figure 12).
+
EF
EVAC
ΔEVB
hω
hω
ΔEVB valence band
secon-
daries
Ф
surface
vacuum
crystal
transport to 
the surface
penetration 
through the 
surface
photoexcitation 
of the electron
1
2
3
_
_
hω
solid material
vacuum
_
1
2
3
a)
b)
Figure 12: (a) Three-step model for photoemission process; (b) (1) photoexcitation of electron,
(2) transport of electron towards the surface with concomitant production of secondaries, (3)
penetration through the surface barrier and escape into vacuum.
To be able to reach the detector, the electron needs to travel through the sample without
losing much of its energy due to inelastic collisions and ﬁnally overcome the energy barrier
at the surface. For this reason, the electrons possessing kinetic energy to reach the detector
are divided in primary electrons, which suﬀer no inelastic losses, and secondary electrons, that
underwent multiple scatterings. For PES purposes, primary electrons are of key interest to
analyze the electronic structure of the material. The intensity of the primary electrons having
Page 22 of 67
==PAGE:31==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
certain energy Ekin, Ip(Ekin, hν), can be obtained in terms of three functions that represent
the probabilities of each step of the three-step model: the photoexcited electron distribution
P(Ekin, hν), the transmission function T(Ekin, hν), and the escape function D(Ekin).
Ip(Ekin, hν) = P(Ekin, hν) × T(Ekin, hν) × D(Ekin)
(3)
P(Ekin, hν) is related to the probability of exciting the electron from low-energy occupied states
to unoccupied high-energy vacant states. Giving λe(Ekin) to be the electron inelastic mean-
free path and λph(hν) the attenuation length of photons, the transmission function T(Ekin, hν)
representing the inelastic scattering probability is given by:
T(Ekin, hν) =
λe(Ekin)/λph(hν)
1 + λe(Ekin)/λph(hν)
(4)
T(Ekin, hν) can also be expressed by the absorption coeﬃcient α(hν), considering that α(hν)
equals the inverse of λph(hν). As λe(Ekin) in solids is very short for a wide range of Ekin, PES
is a rather surface sensitive technique. The purpose of PES is to detect primary electrons to
obtain information about the material structure, but some photoelectrons during their way to
the surface might experience electron-electron, electron-phonon or electron-impurity interac-
tions, which the ﬁrst is the main cause of energy loss. Generally, λe(Ekin) shows the minimum
value at energy corresponding to interband transition. The parameter λe(Ekin) should then
depend on the material itself, but it has been demonstrated that for most materials it follows a
"universal curve", depicted in Figure 13, where the minimum happens in the range of 20-100 eV
with values often close to 2-5 Å, and as the energy of electrons increases the value is still below
50 Å. For energies below the minimum, the value of λe(Ekin) increases as well. With so small
values of inelastic free path, it is possible to probe only a few atomic layers and for this reason
PES is a very surface sensitive technique and ultra-high vacuum is necessary (to avoid further
collisions of the emitted electrons with gas molecules in the chamber, and keep the sample clean
from additional impurities). Moreover, as the intensity of the detected photoelectrons decreases
exponentially by z/λ cos θ, where z is the depth in the sample and θ the angle of emission, one
can deﬁne the information depth (ID), identiﬁed with the specimen thickness from which a
speciﬁed percentage (generally 95% or 99%) of the detected signal originates. It is important
to know what is the extension of the ID in order to probe homogeneous samples over depths of
up to at least the ID, otherwise alternative analytical strategy should be considered [32].
After the electrons reach the surface without undergoing any energy loss, they still need to
overcome the potential energy barrier EF + φ. Assuming that the excited photoelectrons move
like plane waves, one can deﬁne the condition of the escape cone perpendicular to the surface
of the material, from which the electrons are able to escape to vacuum. An opening angle θ
Page 23 of 67
==PAGE:32==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
Au
Au
Au
Au
Au
Au
Au
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Se
Se
Al
Al
C
C
C
Si
W
W
Mo
Mo
Mo
Ag
Ge
Be
Be
Be
Be
Be
Be
P
W
Hg
Ni
Fe
100
50
10
5
5
10
50
100
500
1000
2000
Mean free path (Å)
Electron energy (eV)
theory
Figure 13: Electron mean free path as a function of electron energy for various elements,
adapted from reference 33.
relative to the normal to the surface can be obtained from the following equation:
cos θ =
φ + EF
Ekin
1/2
(5)
Electrons approaching the surface with energy smaller than EF + φ will not escape the surface.
The escape function of electrons having energy greater than EF + φ will then depend on the
angle θ: when perpendicular to the surface, electrons will have the highest chance to escape,
and the least when parallel.
D(Ekin) =





1
2[1 −cos θ]
for
Ekin > EF + φ
0
otherwise
(6)
4.3
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
The spectrum shown previously in Figure 11 (b) does not represent truthfully how a real PES
spectrum looks like. In addition to photoemission peaks, there are diﬀerent processes happen-
ing at the same moment that produce diﬀerent features. It is important when analysing an
XPS spectrum to recognize all the peaks and by which speciﬁc process they are caused.
Page 24 of 67
==PAGE:33==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
The ﬁrst of all these eﬀects is the background. A broad signal is created by electrons that are
inelastically scattered before reaching the analyzer. This phenomenon generates an increasing
intensity in the background as scanning for higher binding energies (and so lower kinetic energy)
of the photoemitted electrons.
Of more interest are secondary features visible relative to the background or in general some
speciﬁc characteristics of the XPS peaks:
1. Auger peaks - When a photon carries high energy, a diﬀerent emission process can
occur, and an Auger electron can be detected. These electrons are produced when the
energy released by the relaxation of an higher shell to a vacancy in a lower one, is given
to another electron that leaves the atom with a kinetic energy equal to the diﬀerence
in energy of the two shells. The kinetic energy of the electrons are independent on the
energy of the incoming probe as they depend only on the orbit conﬁguration of the atom,
and give as well information on the composition of the sample. Figure 14 illustrates the
Auger process compared to direct photoemission;
VB
1s
EF
Direct Photoemission
2s
3s
L2,3
L1
K
EVAC
photoelectron
VB
1s
EF
Auger process
2s
3s
L2,3
L1
K
EVAC
Auger electron
a)
b)
Figure 14: Schematic diagram of the emission process of (a) a photoelectron compared to (b)
an Auger electron. Auger electrons are produced when a vacancy created by a photon in a core
level gets ﬁlled by and electron from an higher shell. The energy diﬀerence between the two
shells is given in kinetic energy to an outer shell electron that is then emitted. The kinetic
energy of the Auger electron is then independent from the incoming photon energy.
Page 25 of 67
==PAGE:34==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
2. Chemical shifts - XPS is a powerful tool because it does not only provide information
about the element composition of the sample, but also about the conﬁguration of the
chemical bonds in which the atoms occur. This eﬀect can be recognized through what are
called "chemical shifts", as they result in a shift in binding energy depending on the bond.
The main contributor to this eﬀect is the change in electrostatic screening of core orbitals.
Explained with the diﬀerence between the binding energy of the 1s level in lithium Li as
pure metal and the same metal but in oxide form (Figure 15): when considering pure Li,
the conduction electrons of the higher levels (2s) of Li atoms screen the nucleus and the
binding energy for the 1s results lower than in the case of the oxide, where the electrons
from the 2s are used to create the bond with oxygen, and the positive charge of the nucleus
attracts more strongly the close 1s electrons. The spectrum for Li1s will show then two
separated peaks for Li metal and Li oxide;
Li - metal
Li2O
2s density
1s2
1s2
1s2
1s2
1s2
1s2
Li
Li
O
2s2
2p6
EB
Li - metal
Li2O
a)
b)
c)
EF
Figure 15: (a) Li - metal: 2s electrons form a band, and their wave function is therefore only
partly at the site of a particular atom; (b) Li2O: each Li atom donates its 2s electron totally
to the 2p shell of O such that a closed 2p6 conﬁguration is obtained. Li 2s electron has no part
of its wavefunction near the Li atom. The 1s electron of Li therefore feels a stronger Coulomb
interaction with the Li nucleus than in the case of Li-metal, where the 1s2 shell is screened
by the 2s valence band; (c) PES spectrum representing the chemical shift of Li 1s in case of
Li-metal and Li2O.
3. Spin-orbit splitting - Due to spin-orbit coupling, shifts in atomic energy levels arise
and this feature is detected in XPS. For each shell, the total angular momentum, given
Page 26 of 67
==PAGE:35==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
by j = |l ± s|, where l is the orbital angular momentum and s the spin, can take two
diﬀerent values. In XPS spectrum, this results in two peaks called "doublet pair". The
ratio between the intensities of the two peaks are given by
r = 2(l + s) + 1
2(l −s) + 1
(7)
meaning that for orbitals p, the intensities would appear in ratio 2:1, and in orbitals d in
3:2.
4. Plasmon and satellite peaks - Satellite peaks can be detected in case of a non perfectly
monochromated incoming probe. This causes a shift of energy with respect to the main
spectral line. Plasmon peaks arise from the loss of energy due to plasmon excitation:
plasmons can be "intrisic", when the photohole deexcites, or "extrinsic", when plasmons
are excited along the path of the photoelectron from bulk to surface of solid.
4.4
Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy (IPES)
PES techniques have the eﬀective potential to analyze the structure of occupied states of a
material. Inverse Photoemission Spectroscopy (IPES) can be considered as a comple-
mentary technique to UPS in order to determine the band gap of a specimen. In fact, in IPES
monochromatic electrons are impinged onto the solid and accommodated in the relatively high
energy part of the unoccupied electronic states. When these electrons relax to the lower energy
part of the unoccupied states, they emit photons. The energy of the incoming electron Ei and
and the energy level at which it relaxes to Ef, diﬀer then of the amount carried by the emitted
photon:
Ei = Ef + hν
(8)
The binding energy EB of the electron can then be identiﬁed by the diﬀerence in energy between
Ef and the Fermi energy EF.
The term "inverse" derives from the fact that in normal PES the mechanism sees a photon-in
and electron-out while for IPES the process is reversed. IPES can be measured in a wide energy
range. There are two diﬀerent detection methods for the emitted photons. The ﬁrst method,
called isochromat spectroscopy (BIS - Bremsstrahlung Isochromat Spectroscopy), is set with
constant detected photon energy hν while scanning the excitation electron energy. The second
method, spectrograph mode or IPES, obtains the spectrum of emitted photons at a deﬁned
incident electron energy. For the sake of this experiment, only isochromat spectroscopy will be
considered, even if the analysis will be referred to as IPES. However, the diﬀerence between the
two methods is shown in Figure 16.
The yield of IPES is generally really low compared to PES and it can be expressed through
Page 27 of 67
==PAGE:36==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
E
Ei
EVAC
EF
Ef
E
Ei
EVAC
EF
Ef
hω0
hω1
hω2
hω3
ΔE
ΔE
hω0
IPES
BIS
a)
b)
Figure 16: Illustration of the diﬀerence between the (a) IPES and (b) BIS methods: in IPES
the spectrum is recorded by keeping the energy of the incident electrons constant at the value
Ei, while in BIS mode the energy of the detected photons is set and the excitation electron
energy scanned over a range.
R, the ratio of the inverse photoemission cross-section to the photoemission cross-section. R
is inversely related to the ratio of the square of the wavelength of the emitted particle and the
photon:
R = | λe
λph
|2
(9)
In the UV energy range characteristic of inverse photoemission, the ratio R in Equation 9
typically has a value of 1 × 10−5. It is precisely for this reason and for its limited resolution
(0.3 eV at best) that the development of the technique as a viable spectroscopy has so lagged
behind the development of PES [31] [34] .
4.5
Resonance Photoelectron Spectroscopy (RPES)
Resonance Photoemission Spectroscopy (RPES) is a technique that ﬁnds its usefulness in the
investigation of VB features in solids. In RPES photoemission is produced with a photon of an
energy hν very close to the absorption threshold of a core level. The direct PE of the VB electron
can interfere with Auger core-valence-valence (CVV) decay electron that are emitted in a Super
Koster-Kronig Auger process. In the CVV Super Koster-Kronig Auger process a two hole state
Page 28 of 67
==PAGE:37==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
is produced in the VB. Figure 17 shows the diﬀerence between direct photoemission and Super
Koster-Kronig Auger process. Considering the case of metallic Ni, the direct photoemission
process occurs from the valence electrons: a photon excites an electron from the 3d band and
brings it to the vacuum with kinetic energy Ekin, 3p63d9 + hν −→3p63d8 + e−[Ekin]. In the
recombination process, a photon ﬁrst promotes a 3p electron to be excited to the VB of Ni (3d
level), then the extra electron decades back from 3d to 3p states, emitting another VB electron
with Ekin, 3p63d9 + hν −→3p53d10 −→3p63d9 + e−[Ekin]. The Super Koster-Kronig Auger
process therefore overlaps with the direct photoemission for photon energies equal (or in the
range) of a core level transition. The eﬀect of this overlapping is an increase in the signal, as
more electrons are excited to the same kinetic energy but by diﬀerent processes.
Ekin = hω
VB
3p
EF
Direct Photoemission
3d
EVAC
Ekin = hω
Super Koster-Kronig Auger process
a)
b)
hω
hω
VB
3p
EF
3d
EVAC
hω
hω
1
2
2
Figure 17: (a) Direct and (b) resonant photoemission processes at photon energy hν equal to
an admitted level transition of the material. In the direct PE, and electron is emitted from the
VB of the material to vacuum. The resonance process articulates in 2 steps: (1), an electron is
excited from the Ni3p into the Ni3d state, while later (2) it decades back to Ni3p by emitting
a Ni3d electron. Both processes lead to the emission of a 3d electron and have same initial and
ﬁnal state.
RPES is a powerful technique as it enables the discrimination of active and inactive orbital
contribution to the VB of materials by exciting speciﬁc level transitions. RPES can also be
used to characterize intermediate band gap materials, by probing the orbital character of the
dopant species [35].
Page 29 of 67
==PAGE:38==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
4.6
X-ray sources
The quality of an X-ray beam is determined by several aspects of the X-ray source that produces
it. First of all there is the number of photons emitted per second, and next the collimation
of the beam. This describes how much the beam is spread out and diverges as it propagates.
Third, it is important to deﬁne how large the source area is: the smaller this area is, the smaller
the X-ray beam can be focused to obtain a correspondingly small image size. Last, there is the
spectral distribution of the X-ray source: some sources produce smooth spectra, others have
peaks at certain photon energies. When making comparison between sources is then important
to deﬁne the range of photon energies that contribute to the measured intensity. The photon
energy range is chosen by convention to be 0.1 % of the relative energy bandwidth (BW) [36].
All these aspects can be combined into a single quantity, called the brilliance B:
B =
photons/s
(mrad2)(mm2 × sourcearea)(0.1%BW)
(10)
The peak brilliance of X-ray sources has grown tremendously since the discovery of X-rays in
1895, and this evolution is shown in Figure 18.
Relative peak brilliance (first X-ray tube = 1)
Year
1875
1900
1925
1950
1975
2000
2025
1
103
1010
1015
1020
1025
1020
synchrotron 
radiation sources
free-electron lasers
3. generation
2. generation
1. generation
modern X-ray tubes
first X-ray tube
Figure 18: Schematic diagram showing the evolution in relative peak brilliance of X-ray sources
compared to the ﬁrst X-ray tube in 1895. Adapted from reference 37.
Since the synchrotron radiation was ﬁrst detected in 1947 at Cornell, three generations have
been deﬁned. The ﬁrst generation synchrotron-radiation is termed "parasitic" as X-rays pro-
Page 30 of 67
==PAGE:39==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
duced as byproduct of particle-physics experiments were used. A second generation of X-ray
sources was established in the early 1970s, while after the appearance in the early 1990s of the
undulators, a much more brilliant third generation of sources established. A new generation of
X-ray sources is now on the rise: the X-ray free-electron lasers (FELs) [37].
4.6.1
X-ray Tube
The X-ray tubes that are used in laboratories are result of only marginal technical improve-
ments compared to the ﬁrst tube invented by W.D. Coolidge in 1912. Coolidge from General
Electric Research Laboratories in New York developed a device where electrons were produced
by a glowing ﬁlament and subsequently accelerated towards a water-cooled metal anode (Fig-
ure 19 (a)). High voltage and current could be independently varied, and the limitation of
intensity was only determined by the cooling eﬃciency.
The X-rays emitted from electron
impinging on a metal anode generate a spectrum, characterized by two components.
One,
known as bremsstrahlung radiation, represents the continuous part due to decelerated electrons
in the metal: such continuum has a peak corresponding to the high voltage applied to the
tube. Superimposed to the bremsstrahlung radiation there is a sharp line spectrum generated
by ﬂuorescence: when an electron collides with a metal atom, an atomic electron from an inner
shell can be removed and a vacancy created. An electron from an outer shell relaxes into the
vacancy producing a characteristic X-ray with energy equal to the diﬀerence in energy of the
two shells (Figure 19 (b) and (c)).
Major drawbacks of X-ray tubes are the generation of satellite peaks and the untunability of the
lines. Satellite lines at slightly shifted energies to the main peak originate from simultaneously
ionised shells in the atom. When a vacancy in an inner shell, for example a K-shell, is ﬁlled
by an electron from an L-shell, a new vacancy is generated in the L-shell and the the total
energy of the shell is shifted. The impossibility of tuning of the X-ray source derives from the
fact that the energy of the produced X-rays depends on the anode material and can not be
independently chosen. Synchrotron sources do not have these drawbacks, and have a brilliance
which is enormously higher than that of standard laboratory sources.
4.6.2
Synchrotron radiation
This section is based on references 38.
Synchrotron radiation facilities are characterized by their ability to produce highly parallel and
narrow beams of x-rays with high intensity. A schematic illustration of a synchrotron source is
shown in Figure 20.
A synchrotron consists of ﬁve main components. These are:
1. The electron source, generating electrons normally by thermionic emission from a hot
Page 31 of 67
==PAGE:40==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
anode
electrons
cathode
filament
water 
cooling
X-rays
Log (intensity)
Energy
Kα
Kβ
M
L
K
Kα
Kβ
a)
b)
c)
Figure 19: (a) Schematic diagram of Coolidge X-ray tube: a ﬁlament is heated and emits
electrons, that accelerate towards a metal anode thanks to an applied high-voltage, and char-
acteristic X-rays are produced; (b) Typical spectrum of an X-ray tube, showing continuum
background, given by bremsstrahlung radiation, and discrete spectral lines; (c) Illustration of
the generation of spectral lines: X-rays are generated during the relaxations of electrons of
outer shells to lower-energy shell vacancies. Kα transition originates from transition between L
and K shells, while Kβ between M and K. Adapted from reference 36.
ﬁlament. Such electrons are accelerated using a particle accelerator to about 100 MeV. In
Figure 20, a linear accelerator (LINAC) is proposed as particle accelerator. Electrons are
constantly lost in the machine due to collision with residual gas particles in the storage
ring, therefore a regular supply is required;
2. the booster ring, where electrons coming from the LINAC are further accelerated and
periodically injected into the storage ring to maintain a speciﬁed ring current. The supply
generally is performed when the current drops to 1 - 1/e ≈70 % of the initial current;
3. The storage ring, where electrons are contained and maintained in a closed path by using
an array of magnets. The magnets are generally of three types: dipole or bending magnets
cause the electrons to change their path and follow a closed path; quadrupole magnets
are used to focus the electron beam to compensate for Coulomb repulsion between the
electrons; sextupole magnets correct for chromatic aberrations that arise from the focusing
of the quadrupoles. The ring is structured so that bending magnets are placed in arc
sections, while in straight sections insertion devices generate the most intense synchrotron
Page 32 of 67
==PAGE:41==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
booster 
ring
bending 
magnets
storage 
ring
LINAC
e-gun
RF
insertion 
device
front end
optics
experimental 
hutch
beamline
e-
Figure 20: Schematic representation of the most important components of a synchrotron source.
Electrons are emitted by a source (for example a ﬁlament in a e-gun) and accelerated by a
linear accelerator (LINAC) into an evacuated booster ring. After being further accelerated
in this ring, the electrons pass into the storage ring, where they maintain a closed trajectory
thanks to bending magnets at arc sections. Insertion devices (wigglers, undulators, and bending
magnets) generate X-rays tangential to the ring, forming the beamlines. A radio frequency
source replenishes the energy lost by the electrons after emitting radiation.
Adapted from
reference 38.
radiation;
4. The radio frequency supply (RF), that replenish the loss of energy that electrons lose
in the storage ring due to collision and radiation emission;
5. The beamlines, that can be found along the axes of insertion devices and tangentially
to bending magnets. The ﬁrst section of a beamline is called "front end" and has diﬀerent
functions: it isolates the beam and storage vacuums; it monitors the position of the
photon beam; it deﬁnes the angular acceptance of the synchrotron radiation thanks to
apertures. The beam is normally focused and/or monochromated in the optics hutch,
before it enters the experimental hutch.
Insertion device radiation
As previously stated, synchrotrons are characterized by the use of insertion devices (IDs),
Page 33 of 67
==PAGE:42==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
placed in the straight sections between the bending-magnet arc segments. For example, the
synchrotron operated in this thesis, ASTRID2, is provided of multipole wiggler to produce a
usable energy range from 20 eV to 700 eV. Such design results in a very small emittance of 12
nm and a beam size of less than 200 × 25 microns in the straight sections.
The brilliance and ﬂuxes produced by IDs are signiﬁcantly higher than bending magnets. The
working principle of IDs is that electrons are forced to oscillate on a plane during their path
in the ring. Such oscillations are caused by a set of magnets, generating magnetic ﬁelds that
point alternatively up and down (see Figure 21).
Figure 21: A schematic diagram of an insertion device. The angular spread in radiation is given
in the horizontal and vertical plane by θh and θv, respectively. Adapted from 38.
IDs can be distinguished in two types depending on the degree to which the electrons are forced
to deviate from a straight path, wigglers and undulators. To describe the diﬀerence between
these two typologies, some basic theory about synchrotron radiation from relativistic electrons
moving along a circular arc must be given. Electromagnetic radiation emitted by acceleration
of a charged particle travelling at velocities that are small compared to the speed of light is
isotropic, while in relativistic regime the generated beam of light radiates in the same direction
as the electron motion. The features of the radiation can be described by two parameters: the
angular frequency ω0 (that is, the number of radians turned by the electrons per second), and
on the kinetic energy of the electrons in the storage ring ϵ, given by the dimensionless parameter
known as the Lorentz factor:
γ =
ϵ
mc2
(11)
The natural opening angle of the narrow radiation cone in the plane perpendicular to the
Page 34 of 67
==PAGE:43==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
4 Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES)
storage ring is θ, that is proportional to 1/γ. For typical ring energies of 1–8 GeV, is equal
to 0.5–0.06 milliradians (mrad), respectively (1 mrad is approximately equal to 0.057 ◦) [38].
The parameter γ helps to deﬁne the diﬀerence between ID types. For angular excursions larger
than the natural opening angle γ−1, the radiation cones from each "wiggle" do not overlap and
therefore the intensities are added and the ID is referred to as a wiggler. When excursions are
instead in the order of γ−1, the ID is referred to as an undulator. In this case, the radiation
cones overlap and interfere with one another. The ﬁeld amplitudes are added vectorially, which
means that the phase diﬀerence from each contribution is included.
Page 35 of 67
==PAGE:44==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
5
Experiment
5.1
Sample Preparation
Diﬀerent NP-samples have been provided by Dr. Christian Rein from DTU. Details on the syn-
thesis of the NPs can be found in reference 39. The NPs were produced using a novel approach to
synthesis at room-temperature, so that it could be applied to direct roll-to-roll(R2R)-synthesis.
Synthesis of CZTS NPs is often performed at a minimum of 200 ◦C, to activate monomer
precursors and to avoid the formation of secondary phases. Moreover, CZTS NPs can be fur-
ther improved with annealing under sulfur atmosphere at around 550 ◦C. These temperatures
are however not compatible with R2R substrates, as they melt at temperatures above 120 ◦C.
The NPs produced resulted with narrow size distribution and average size around 6 nm, with
copper-poor and Zn-rich compositions (Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.8 and Zn/Sn = 1.2 - 1.3). The
method allowed also to avoid binary phases formation, such as SnS and CuxS. However, the
presence of cubic ZnS or Cu2SnS3 could not be excluded, due to the similarity of their XRD
patterns to that of CZTS-phase. Bandgap for the NPs was derived from UV-Vis reﬂectance
curves for diﬀerent reaction times. The bandgap was determined to be ≈1.73-1.83 eV for
reaction times between 5 and 25 minutes.
The synthetized NPs were used in ligand exchange reactions to obtain inks with which form
diﬀerent absorber layers by drop casting on Si-doped substrates. Technical details, provided
by C.R., of the three samples studied in this thesis, can be found in Table 1. Through Raman
spectroscopy, it was possible to ﬁnd that OLA functionalization promoted the formation of
CuxS, while thiostannate (NH4)2Sn2S6 samples showed the presence of SnS2 grains. The 1-
dodecanethiol sample resulted in no evident presence of secondary phases.
Table 1: Information about the solution processed samples.
Sample name
Original name
Ligands
Possible Secondary Phases
A
055_WB
1-dodecanethiol
-
B
055_WC
thiostannate complex
SnS2 grains
C
055_WE
OLA
CuxS and OLA
The crystalline sample used to perform RPES analysis was instead provided by the PhD can-
didate Mungunshagai Gansukh of the Department of DTU Fotonik. The absorber layer was
deposited by sputtering deposition under sulphur atmosphere on a Mo-coated glass substrate.
The sample did not undergo any post-annealing treatment.
5.2
Vacuum System
This section is based on selected fragments of reference 40.
Page 36 of 67
==PAGE:45==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
Figure 22 shows the simpliﬁed system set up present in the laboratory and used for the photoe-
mission analysis. Main components of the system are three chambers: load lock, preparation
chamber and main chamber. The ﬁrst is used to insert the samples and can be quickly vented
and pumped down to a medium/high vacuum (up to 1 × 10−8 mbar). The load lock and the
preparation chamber can both host thermal evaporators for sample preparations, but none of
this equipment was used in this thesis. IPES measurement were performed in the preparation
chamber, where also thermal annealing was executed. All the other experiments were conducted
in the main chamber, where the highest vacuum is reached (up to 1 × 10−10 mbar).
For PES experiments ultra-high vacuum is required. In order to obtain such conditions in the
chambers, a pumping system needs to be developed. Rotary vane pumps, or more commonly
called roughing pumps, are necessary to establish vacuum at the order of 1 × 10−3 mbar. This
type of pumps operate by repeatedly enclosing a gas volume from the chamber and pumping it
out through an exhaust outlet. In the current system, one rotary pump is employed for load lock
and preparation chamber while another serves the main chamber only. A third rotary pump is
connected the helium lamp to perform UPS. Vacuum up to 1 × 10−10 mbar can be obtained
by means of turbomolecular pumps. This type of pumps can only operate in molecular ﬂow
regime, where gas molecule have higher probability of colliding with chamber walls rather than
other gas molecules. Molecular ﬂow regime establishes at pressures lower than 1 × 10−3, while
for higher values the gas atoms collide mostly with each other in a typical laminar ﬂow regime.
Turbomolecular pumps can not perform in laminar ﬂow and need therefore to be backed up by a
roughing pump. Turbomolecular pumps use a quickly rotating turbine with blades that forces
gas atoms through a speciﬁc direction due to momentum transfer. This system is provided
by three turbomolecular pumps, supported by the previously mentioned rotary pumps. Ion
pumps can be additional to the system. This kind of pumps captures the molecules and do
not exhaust the gas. The working principle is that by applying a strong electric ﬁeld, gas atoms
are ionized and accelerated towards electrodes where they are captured. Two ion pumps are
present in the system, in the preparation and main chamber. One last type of pump is present
in the system, the titanium sublimation pump. This pump is placed at the bottom of the
main chamber. A titanium ﬁlament is excited so that titanium ions are emitted in the chamber.
Titanium is a very reactive element and forms solid compounds with diﬀerent gas atoms, that
then collide with the pump’s walls, decreasing the pressure of the chamber.
5.2.1
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS in this system is performed using an XR-50 gun from SPECS and has two anodes: Mg
Kα1/2 and Y Lα1 with photon energies, respectively, of 1253.6 eV and 1922.6 eV. For the pur-
poses of the experiment, only the magnesium anode was used. It is important to state that this
source is not monochromated, and it can result in satellite lines due to most importantly Mg
Kα3 shifted of 8.4 eV from main line. The working principle of the gun is really simple: high
Page 37 of 67
==PAGE:46==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
Load lock
Preparation
chamber
to analyzer
Manipulator
Electron 
gun
Photon
detector
IPES
Turbo pump
Rotary pump
Ion pump
Main
chamber
Helium 
lamp
X-ray 
gun
Rotary pump
Turbo pump
Rotary pump
Ion pump
Sublimation pump
Turbo pump
PES
Figure 22: Schematic diagram of vacuum system in the laboratory used for photoemission
analysis. The diagram shows the chambers composing the laboratory system and the pumps
that operate on each section of the line. The most important chambers are the preparation
chamber, where thermal annealing and IPES are performed, and the main chamber, where XPS
and UPS spectra are measured.
voltage is applied between the cathode/ﬁlament and the anode, electrons are emitted from the
ﬁrst and travel towards the anode, colliding at high speed and emitting photons [41].
To perform XPS the gun must be manually moved close to the sample and the titanium subli-
mation pump turned oﬀ. An initial scan over a wide range of binding energy (from 0 to 1200 eV)
was recorded, in order to determine the elemental composition of the sample and the presence
of contaminants. For wide scans, the pass energy that electrons are required to have in order
to pass through the hemispherical electron energy analyzer (HEEA) is kept higher (around 50
eV) as this also sets the energy resolution of the measurements. For narrow scans, the pass
energy was lowered to 20 eV to improve resolution. Narrow scans were taken for each element
at the core level showing higher intensity on the widescan (speciﬁcally S 2p, Sn 3d, Cu 2p and
Zn 2p, and 1s for both C and O) in order to perform a quantitative analysis. XPS peak ﬁtting
procedure is explained in section 5.3.
It is important to mention that the sample needs to be grounded. In case the sample isn’t
properly connected to ground, there is the possibility of charging eﬀects: in such a case, the
Page 38 of 67
==PAGE:47==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
spectrum could shift at higher binding energies (this is valid also for the other PES techniques).
Before the analysis of the samples mentioned in the ﬁrst part of Chapter 5, other samples were
prepared with the same NPs and ligands of Sample A and B, but on a glass substrate coated
with Mo. Such samples showed extreme charging eﬀects: for XPS core levels the shifts were
around + 30 eV.
5.2.2
Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectroscopy (UPS)
UPS was performed with a UVS 10/35 UV discharge lamp from SPECS. Helium gas is let in
in a quartz capillary, where the discharge is ignited: the generated plasma emits UV light at
characteristic wavelengths of helium, whose most important are the HeIα (21.22 eV) and HeIIα
(40.82 eV) lines. To connect the UV lamp to the main chamber on a windowless path, there is
an evacuating system of two stages diﬀerential pumping composed of a rotary and turbo pump.
The emitted lines can be selected by adjusting the gas pressure in the discharge capillary. HeIα
line originates from unionized He atoms and the HeIIα from singly ionized ones. When the
pressure is lower, electrons from the plasma have longer mean free path and can be therefore
accelerated at higher speeds, ionising more gas atoms.
For this reason, the HeIIα fraction
increases as pressure lowers. For the experiment, only HeIα line was used. The spectrum was
obtained by running a series of scans ranging over the energies 0 - 12 eV.
5.2.3
Inverse Photoelectron Spectroscopy (IPES)
IPES in isochromat mode was performed with a PSP Vacuum Technology.
The source is
designed to produce an electron beam from a heated barium oxide BaO cathode, which emits
at approximately 1100 K to 1200 K. The source has a low energy spread of approx 0.25 eV
(FWHM) in the range 5 to 50 eV beam energy [42]. The IPES detector is a bandpass detector
designed to detect photons of approximately 9.5 ± 0.5 eV energy. The detector includes a
SrF2 window prior to a Ta cone coated with NaCl. Behind the Ta cone, an electron multiplier
is placed. The SrF2 window acts as a low pass ﬁlter as it only allows low energy photons
to pass through (below 10 eV). Such photons will produce photoelectrons from the surface of
the Ta: only the high energy photons will produce photoelectrons (the coating then acts as a
high pass ﬁlter). The electron multiplier, or channeltron, ampliﬁes electrons produced on the
photocatode [42].
5.3
Data Analysis
5.3.1
XPS spectrum peak ﬁtting
Peak ﬁtting is a signiﬁcant part of XPS data analysis. Chemical shifts already provide indis-
pensable knowledge about the elemental composition of the sample, but only by ﬁtting the
spectrum it is possible to calculate the relative abundance of the elements and of the phases in
Page 39 of 67
==PAGE:48==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
which they are present.
The energy distribution spectrum in PES is characterized by spectral functions, which take in
account all the possible excitation processes happening in the sample of interest. In most of the
cases, these spectral functions can be represented by a set of peaks. Typically, peak shapes are
modelled mathematically by a convolution of independent Lorentzian and Gaussian functions,
giving the so-called Voigt proﬁle [43]. The Lorentzian contribution is due to the limited lifetime
of the core hole state, while the Gaussian broadening is mostly due to line shape of the exciting
X-rays from an X-ray spectromter, and may also be related to thermal excitation processes.
Chemical, structural and electronic (by dopants) inhomogeneities in the surrounding of the
emitting atoms often also contribute to the Gaussian broadening [44].
The mathematical generation of a Voigt proﬁle is generally time consuming, therefore approx-
imations have been employed in XPS spectra ﬁtting.
A comparative study has shown the
potentiality of product and sum of Gaussian and Lorentzian functions as an alternative to the
convolution, where it was found that the sum function is superior to the product, particularly
in low-noise spectra [44].
For the sake of this thesis project, the intensity proﬁle I of the
XPS spectrum has been approximated by the sum of Gaussian and Lorenzian functions (whose
mixing ratio is deﬁned by Mh), as shown in Equation 12:
I(x, h, µ, σ, Mh) = Mh
h
σ
√
2π exp[−1
2(x −µ
σ
)2] + (1 −Mh)h
π
1
2σ
(x −µ)2 + (1
2σ)2
(12)
In Equation 12, Guassian and Lorentzian are expressed in their normalized form, meaning that
the integral of Equation 13 and 14 equals 1, multiplied by the factor h. The parameters µ and
σ refer to the center of the symmetric functions and the width respectively.
G(x, h, µ, σ) =
h
σ
√
2π exp[−1
2(x −µ
σ
)2]
(13)
L(x, h, µ, σ) = h
π
1
2σ
(x −µ)2 + (1
2σ)2
(14)
Z +∞
−∞L(x)dx = h
(15)
The shape of a photoelectron line carries a great quantity of information but unfortunately,
such lines are superimposed on a rather high and strongly structured background. It becomes
necessary to remove the assumed contribution due to inelastic scattering from the spectrum
to obtain a background-free line shape. The background main contribution can be attributed
to energy loss processes, distinguished between extrinsic (occurring away from the emitting
atomic center, through the response of the loosely bound electrons to the probing electron it-
self) and intrinsic (occurring in the close vicinity of the emitting atomic center, through the
Page 40 of 67
==PAGE:49==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
response of the core hole of the photoemission process) [45]. The ﬁrst method putting the back-
ground into relation with the measured spectra was suggested by Shirley (details about theory
and practical applications can be found in reference 46). Several background determination
techniques have been developed for handling XPS spectra and became popular for being very
easy to implement: this type of technique does not require any preliminary knowledge of the
peak shape and the correction can be carried our before the ﬁtting procedure. However, this
approach causes systematic errors in the following spectrum determination. In this thesis, a
diﬀerent approach described in reference 47 has been considered: this method allows to ﬁt the
background simultaneously with the photopeaks, to get a more accurate peak area and position
determination. In details, the background has been modelled by the sum of linear functions
and error functions. The error functions have been deﬁned so that each center of symmetry
corresponds to the center of one Voigt function. The parameters a and b in Equation 16 deﬁne
the amplitude and the slope at x = µ of the error function respectively.
f(x, µ, a, b) = a
exp((x −µ)b)
1 + exp((x −µ)b)
(16)
The analysis of XPS spectra is performed comparing experimentally recorded spectral intensity
distribution with a theoretical model curve. The set of peak model parameters ⃗p (h, µ, σ,
Mh, a, b, and slope coeﬃcient of the linear function), are determined iteratively by a non-
linear parameter estimation routine, with the goal of minimizing the reduced chi-square χ2∗
parameter, deﬁned in the Marquardt-Levenberg algorithm [44] as
χ2∗(⃗p) =
1
N −P
N
X
i=1
[M(i) −S(i, ⃗p)]2
M(i)
(17)
where M(i) represents the measured spectrum recorded at N energy values corresponding to
channel i, S(i, ⃗p) the model curve and P the independent parameters of the model function.
The normalized residuals R(i) are included in the presentation of the data together with the
optimized model curve S(i, ⃗p), as it will be possible to see in Chapter 6:
R(i) = S(i, ⃗p) −M(i)
q
M(i)
(18)
For the purpose of this work, the ﬁtting model has been created using the software Excel.
5.3.2
Elemental Ratio
From the XPS ﬁtting, the ratio of elements present in the sample can be calculated and diﬀer-
entiated between the diﬀerent phases in which the element is present. The measured data are
given in number of photoelectrons detected, "counts", over scanned binding energy EB. The
counts are a direct measure related to the intensity of the signal, and have been normalized
over the number of scan performed to collect the spectrum. Assuming an homogeneous volume
Page 41 of 67
==PAGE:50==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
from which the signal generates, the number of photoelectrons Ii produced by the core levels
of the element i can be described by the following equation:
Ii ∝qiσi
(19)
where qi is the quantity of the speciﬁc element i and σi the photoionization cross-section of the
element i at the energy of the X-ray source. Values for the cross-sections σ for the detected ele-
ments can be found in reference 48, "Atomic Calculation of Photoionization Cross-Sections and
Asymmetry Parameters", while peak positions for typical compounds can be found in 49 and 50.
5.4
Resonance Spectroscopy (RPES)
5.4.1
ASTRID2 and MATline
The RPES experiments on a CZTS crystalline sample were carried out at the ASTRID2 syn-
chrothron at ISA, Aarhus University, using the MATline beamline.
The storage ring ASTRID2 with a circumference of 45.7 m is placed next to ASTRID, the
older synchrothron, that is used as booster for the newer facility. ASTRID2 has a hexagonal
structure with 4 straight sections for magnetic insertion devices. There are currently four beam-
lines from insertion devices on ASTRID2 together with three beamlines from bending magnets.
ASTRID2 operates at 580 MeV and is optimised for photon energies from the visible to around
1 keV. ASTRID is used as an injector for ASTRID2, accelerating 100 MeV electron beams from
the microtron pre-injector, to 580 MeV, to allow full energy top-up of ASTRID2. The system
generates the radiation thanks to a multipole wiggler. For further details on ASTRID2, its
parameters and its structure, it is suggested to follow reference 51.
The MATline is speciﬁcally used for material science and surface physics purposes, as it is char-
acterized by an UHV environment to perform surface science techniques. The main components
of the line systems are a Scienta electron energy analyser and a SX-700 monochromator [52].
Such monochromator system operates plane grating optics and allows to perform experiments
with photon energies ranging from 40 eV to 700 eV.
5.4.2
Beamtime data analysis
For the purposes of the experiment, on the crystalline sample XPS was also performed to control
composition and impurities of the sample. The sample was mounted on a tantalum conductive
sample holder, placed in vertical position. Therefore, two tantalum wires clipped the sample
on the sides to keep it in position during the measurements. For the widescan, the photon
energy was set at 620 eV, pass energy at 60 eV, and the binding energy scanned from 0 to 570
Page 42 of 67
==PAGE:51==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
5 Experiment
eV. Narrow scans were also performed at pass energy of 20 eV. The detected core levels were
recorded at diﬀerent photon energies: as the monochromator crystal can be aligned so that
only a speciﬁc energy of the sychrothron radiation can be selected as probe, for each element
the photon energy at which the cross section for the speciﬁc core level resulted the highest was
taken to perform the narrow scan. The detected core levels resulted to be O 1s, Sn 3d, C 1s, S
2p, Cu 3p and Zn 3p. All data sets were normalized by number of scans and by beam current:
due to the necessity of topping up the current in the ring, the beam current oscillates and its
value can be recorded simultaneously with the emitted electrons count. The beam current value
was around 181 ± 2 mA in all the measurements. For the ﬁtting of the spectra, the procedure
explained in Chapter 5.3 has been followed.
The collection of RPES measurements was the main activity at the MATline.
Before the
analysis, the sample was sputtered with Ar at 500 eV for 10 minutes, followed by annealing.
In order to visualize the resonance behavior in the VB region, the VB (from -1 to 12 eV)
was collected for photon energies ranging from 40 to 200 eV, with a step of 0.5 eV. The data
have been normalized to take in consideration the variation of photon ﬂux as photon energy
increases, following this procedure:
- Given i the photon energy and j the binding energy EB in a VB scan, the measurement at a
speciﬁc EB j for a speciﬁc photon energy i is deﬁned M(i, j);
- Per each photon energy j, all the counts in a VB scan were added in a unique number, deﬁned
S(j):
S(j) =
i=12
X
i=−1
M(i, j)
(20)
-Each M(i, j) is then divided by the corresponding S(j).
By using this method for the normalization, for every VB scan the total sum of the intensities
adds up to 1. This method was used in order to remove the eﬀect of the photon ﬂux and
increased signal with increase of photon energy. The normalized data were plotted in a 2D
image and 3D diagram to visualize resonance eﬀects.
Page 43 of 67
==PAGE:52==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
6
Results and Discussion
In this section, the main experimental results will be presented and discussed. The results
regarding the crystalline sample will be presented ﬁrst, as its characteristics can be used as
reference for the solution processed thin ﬁlms.
These last ones will be compared in their
electronic structure and composition further in the chapter.
6.1
Crystalline sample - RPES analysis
The crystalline sample was prepared with the goal of analysing the VB of CZTS and using it as
a benchmark for the experiments on the dropcasted samples. Nevertheless, prior composition
characterization was performed, and here reported. It is important to notice that the glass sub-
strate made the analysis extremely challenging, due to charging eﬀects. The glass insulates the
absorber layer from the tantalum sample holder. Good results have been obtained supposedly
thanks to the front clipping tantalum wires. For next experiments, it is suggested to prepare
CZTS crystalline absorber layer on conductive substrates.
6.1.1
Elemental composition
-30
20
70
120
170
220
270
320
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Normalized Counts
Binding Energy (eV)
SP1 - widescan
after sputtering (annealed)
-30
20
70
120
170
220
270
320
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Normalized Counts
Binding Energy (eV)
SP1 - widescan
before sputtering
after sputtering
before sputtering
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Binding Energy (eV)
O 1s
Sn 3d
Aug S
C 1s
S 2p
Aug O
Zn 3p
Cu 3p
Sn 4d
Aug Sn
Widescan
CZTS crystalline
Figure 23: XPS widescan measured on the CZTS crystalline sample, before and after the
sputtering procedure for the removal of the surface impurities. The spectra have been shifted
upwards for clarity.
Figure 23 shows the XPS widescan of the crystalline sample, before and after the sputtering
Page 44 of 67
==PAGE:53==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
procedure, performed to remove surface contaminants. A decrease in the intensity of the O 1s
and C 1s peaks is clearly visible, together with an increase in the signal for Sn 3d and S 2p.
The core levels for S, Cu and Zn are highlighted on the widescan, but are however very small
compared to the high intensity ones like O 1s and Sn 3d.
Narrow XPS scans of the O 1s, Sn 3d, C 1s, S 2p, Zn 3p, and Cu 3p core levels were per-
formed. The ﬁtting analysis has shown very high percentage of oxygen and carbon on the
crystal surface, compared to the quantity recorded for the CZTS elements, suggesting that the
sputtering process was not very eﬀective. Longer sputtering times are suggested for future
work on similar samples. The high-resolution XPS spectra after background subtraction for S,
Sn, Cu and Zn are shown in Figure 24. The Sn 3d5/2, Zn 3p, and Cu 3p peaks can be easily
ﬁtted by a single Voigt function, therefore associated to the kesterite phase. The S 2p proﬁle
appears peculiar, with the contribution of at least 3 phases. Comparing the peak energies to
literature [50] [53] [54], the main peak (species A) can be attributed to the CZTS phase, while
the two smaller peaks at around 166.7 and 169.2 eV seem to be related to sulfoxide and sulfate
phases respectively. It is important to remind that selenium might be present on the sample as
impurity. Such statement derives from analysis on the RPES data that will be shown later on.
Selenium contamination in the analysis chamber has been conﬁrmed by the MATline staﬀ, as
produced in previously performed experiments. Selenium signal might have not been detected
due to the overlap of Se 3p core level with S 2p. Moreover, Se might have been also present as an
impurity in the crystal structure from the synthesis process: Se could easily substitute S atoms
in the CZTS structure, forming the sulfur-selenium alloy CZTSSe. In such a case however, a
chemical shift in the core levels of Cu, Zn and Sn should also be visible. Table 2 shows an
overview of the ﬁtting results over the crystalline CZTS sample. Sulfur coming from the CZTS
phase emerges as the most present element at the surface of the sample. High percentage of Sn
is also detected. In contrast with the optimal Cu/(Zn+Sn) = 0.8 and Zn/Sn = 1.25 for bulk
crystalline CZTS samples (see Chapter 2), on the surface of this sample the same ratios give
values Cu/(Zn+Sn) = 0.49 ± 0.01 and Zn/Sn = 0.14 ± 0.01. It seems important to recall that
the sample underwent sputtering procedure. Such practice might have altered the surface con-
formation of the sample, allowing diﬀerent crystalline layers to be detected without maintaining
the true elemental composition ratio. Therefore, it is not easy to determine the reason for the
high presence of Sn at the surface compared to Cu or Zn. Very interesting are also the high
abundance of sulfoxide and sulfate phases on the surface. It is not known whether such phases
were present before the sputtering procedure, or if they formed on the surface after sputtering
and post-annealing processes. Sulphur evaporation could have occurred at the post-annealing
temperature (200 ◦C), and the atoms reacted with oxygen and carbon impurities at the surface.
Page 45 of 67
==PAGE:54==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
157
159
161
163
165
167
169
171
173
Normalized counts
S 2p 
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
480
482
484
486
488
490
Normalized counts
Sn 3d5/2
-0.1
0
0.1
480
482
484
486
488
490
Binding energy (eV)
Data
Data
Sn 3d5/2
(A) S 2p3/2
(B) S 2p3/2
Fitting
Residuals
Residuals
a)
b)
-0.5
0
0.5
157
159
161
163
165
167
169
171
173
Binding energy (eV)
(C) S 2p3/2
-0.1
0
0.1
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
Binding energy (eV)
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
Normalized counts
Zn 3p
Data
Zn 3p3/2
Zn 3p1/2
Fitting
Residuals
c)
d)
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
71
73
75
77
79
81
Normalized counts
Cu 3p 
Data
Cu 3p3/2
Cu 3p1/2
Fitting
Residuals
-0.1
0
0.1
71
73
75
77
79
81
Binding energy (eV)
Figure 24: Narrow XPS scans in the case of crystalline CZTS, for the core levels a) Sn 3d5/2,
b) S 2p, c) Zn 3p and d) Cu 3p. The raw data (black lines) are compared with the ﬁtting curve
(red lines). For each core level, the diﬀerent contributions to the ﬁtting model are shown. Sn,
Zn and Cu spectra can be described by one species contribution. The S 2p spectrum shows
the presence of 3 chemical bonds: species A at around 161.5 is considered to be relative to the
CZTS phase, species B relative to sulfoxide species, and species C to sulfate phase. Residuals
for Sn and S show an imprecise ﬁt of the peaks: this might arise from a possible asymmetry of
the peak or a wrong estimation of the Lorentzian to Gaussian ratio in the Voigt proﬁle.
Page 46 of 67
==PAGE:55==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Table 2: Overview of the ﬁtting results of the detected phases for the crystalline CZTS sample.
The error on the peak energies resulted to be < 0.01 eV for all the peaks, and < 0.03 % on the
relative abundance values.
Element
Phase
Orbital
Energy (eV)
Relative abundance (%)
CZTS
3d5/2
485.6
10.6
Sn
3d3/2
494.2
CZTS
2p3/2
161.5
70.3
2p1/2
162.7
sulfoxide
2p3/2
166.7
8.2
2p1/2
167.9
sulfate
2p3/2
169.2
3.4
S
2p1/2
170.4
CZTS
3p3/2
88.3
1.5
Zn
3p1/2
91.2
CZTS
3p3/2
74.7
6.0
Cu
3p1/2
77.2
6.1.2
RPES results
Figure 25 (a) shows the 2D representation of the RPES analysis results. The intensity of the
detected signal (maximum intensity - yellow, minimum intensity - black) is plotted as a function
of photon energy, recorded for values ranging from 40 to 200 eV, and binding energy, scanned
from -1 to 12 eV. Figure 25 (b) displays schematically the key features obtainable from the
RPES 2D plot.
The features have been numbered from 1 to 7, and will be further exploited:
1. The black line represents the VB maximum dependency with photon energy. A closer
look to the feature is shown in Figure 26. It is possible to notice how this value shifts
toward smaller energies, ﬁnding its maximum in correspondence of the resonance feature
attributed to the transition from S 2p to a not-fully-occupied outer hybridized orbital (red
line). For energies below 162 eV, the VB maximum shifts from around 2.5 eV (photon
energy = 40 eV) to 1.2 eV (photon energy around 162 eV). At VB maximum line assumes
a vertical edge for photon energies above 162 eV: this feature implies the contribution
to the S 2p transition on the VB maximum, as for photon energies below 162 eV the
transition is not able to happen. There is however another shoulder in the VB maximum
line, approximately happening in correspondence of the photon energy that allows the
excitation of Cu 3p electron (see Number 2).
2. This ﬁrst high-intensity peak at binding energy around 2.7 eV is attributed to the tran-
sition of Cu 3p electrons to an hybridized valence orbital.
Considering pure Cu, its
electronic conﬁguration, 4s13d10, is described by having a fully occupied 3d state, and
Page 47 of 67
==PAGE:56==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Max
Min
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
Photon Energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Binding Energy (eV)
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
Photon Energy (eV)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Binding Energy (eV)
a)
b)
Zn 3d
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 25: (a) 2D plot of RPES results on a CZTS crystalline sample. The intensity (max
- yellow, min - black) is given as function of photon and binding energy (eV); (b) schematic
representation of key features present in the RPES 2D plot: 1) VB maximum, 2) resonance
due to transition Cu 3p −→4s, 3) unknown resonance, probably given by Se impurity present
in the vacuum chamber, 4) supposedly, this resonance peak corresponds to transition to the O
2p orbital, 5) the bold line corresponds to a data-normalization eﬀect due to the resonance of
the transition from the S 2p orbital, while the dashed line results from resonance from second
order radiation, 6) same eﬀects considered in the previous feature, but due to resonance from
transition Cu 3p −→4s (this eﬀect is not very visible from this ﬁgure, but its presence was
determined at higher magniﬁcation), 7) Zn 3d core level.
half ﬁlled 4s orbital. RPES analysis on transition metals has shown the impossibility of
the transition of 3p electrons of copper to 3d orbital, due to the complete ﬁlling of the
latter [55], while 3p to 4s transition should be allowed at energy around 73 eV. However,
in the case of a composite material like CZTS, it is believed that the valence band of the
material is formed by the unoccupied orbitals of Cu hybridized with the S 3p level [13].
The energy of the transition from Cu 3p to the hybridized orbital can therefore change
from 73 eV. From the experiment, such transition seems to be allowed for energies above
64 eV (blue line).
3. In the 2D plot it is possible to see other two less intense peaks at binding energy around
4.1 eV (3) and 5.3 eV (4). The ﬁrst starts to appear for energies slightly above 50 eV. The
origin of this feature is unknown. From the XPS widescan spectrum, no other transition
metal impurities that could be responsible for such peak were detected. One possible
Page 48 of 67
==PAGE:57==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Photon Energy (eV)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
0.0
Binding Energy (eV)
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Photon Energy (eV)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
2.0
0.0
Binding Energy (eV)
Valence 
Band 
Maximum
a)
b)
Figure 26: (a) 2D plot of RPES results on a CZTS crystalline sample - close look at the
VB maximum edge; (b) Schematic representation of the key features of the 2D plot: the VB
maximum line shows two elbows at resonance energies corresponding for the transition from
the Cu 3p shell (blue line) and from the S 2p shell (red line). The dashed lines highlight RPES
eﬀects due to second order light in the synchrotron radiation.
cause of the feature could be addressed to the selenium contamination, as the Se 3d
orbital corresponds to energies around 53 eV.
4. The feature 4 was attributed to O 2p valence states. It is not possible to deﬁne from
which photon energy the feature develops (due to technical limits of the beamline), as
from the data it is only possible to see its decay. However, it seems reasonable to associate
the feature to the O 2s to 2p transition (O 2p core level corresponds to energies around 22
eV for diﬀerent transition metal oxides). Such feature conﬁrmed the presence of oxygen
in the crystal structure. To help the visualization of how the peaks 2, 3 and 4 appear
and fade out at diﬀerent energies, the normalized VB spectra for photon energies 40 eV,
70 eV, 100 eV and 180 eV are compared in Figure 27.
5. The bold red line in feature 5 can be addressed as an artifact resulting from the normal-
ization of the RPES data, explained in Chapter 5.4.2. Such normalization was necessary
in order to cancel out the eﬀect of the increasing photon ﬂux, causing the recorded signal
to monotonically increase. In correspondence of feature 5 in the RPES data plot, it is
possible to see a shrinkage at the Cu peak and an enlargement at the Zn peak. The reason
Page 49 of 67
==PAGE:58==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
-1
1
3
5
7
9
11
Axis Title
Axis TitleBinding Energy (eV)
Binding Energy (eV)
-1.0
1.0
3.0
5.0
7.0
9.0
11.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.0
Normalized Intensity
A
B
C
D
40 eV
70 eV
100 eV
180 eV
Figure 27: Comparison of normalized VB spectra recorded for the photon energy 40, 70, 100
and 180 eV. Four peaks are highlighted by the letters A-D. Peak A is considered to be result
of the electrons excited from the Cu 3p level: such peak is absent in VB spectra recorded at
photon energies below the transition energy (around 64 eV), while becomes more dominant as
photon energy increases. Peak B is supposed to be result of Se contamination. Its contribution
in the VB spectrum is visible starting from energies slightly above 50 eV, but as photon energy
increases, peak A becomes dominant. Peak C is caused by excited electron from O 2s orbital
to O 2p. As photon energy increases, the cross section of O 2p monotonically decreases and
the peak fades out. Peak D corresponds to Zn 3d core level: the cross section of Zn 3d in the
photon energy range 40-200 eV does not change consistently as it is maintained in the order of
1 × 101, and the relative increase of the peak is due to the normalization method.
why this eﬀect is generated can be visualized with the aid of Figure 28. The normaliza-
tion forces the area under the recorded spectrum for each photon energy to be equal to 1.
Therefore, in the case of an abrupt increase in the Zn signal, the normalization drags the
lower-intensity features to even smaller values to compensate for the high-intensity peak.
The dashed red line indicates a series of small additional peaks considered to generate
from second order synchrotron radiation. It is well known that monochromators often
allow the passage of higher-order radiation, meaning that if the selected photon energy
equals hν, radiation with energy 2hν will also be present but with much lower intensity.
Figure 29 shows the eﬀect of second-order radiation on an XPS spectra. When the pho-
tons carry energy hν just at the core level energy S 2p (around 162 eV - blue line), the
excitation is allowed. The electrons excited from the ﬁrst-order beam will have energy
Ekin = hν−EB(S 2p) = 162−162 = 0 eV. In the XPS spectra it is possible to see the S 2p
Page 50 of 67
==PAGE:59==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
core level at binding energy 162 eV (purposely out of proportion in Figure 29). Moreover,
a second-order radiation with energy 2hν = 320 eV excites electrons from the S 2p core
level. Such electrons will be ejected with Ekin = 2hν −EB(S 2p) = 324 −162 = 162 eV.
However, the analyzer records only the kinetic energy and does not possess any informa-
tion on the actual energy of the incoming photon. The analysis system only knows the
photon energy requested to the monochromator, so the second-order peak appears at the
Fermi level, as EB = hν −Ekin = 162 −162 = 0 eV. In Figure 29, the green line repre-
sents the case of hν = 142 eV. When the photon energy is below the transition energy,
no S 2p electrons are excited by the ﬁrst order light (S 2p peak missing). However, the
second-order radiation has enough energy to allow the excitation, as 2hν = 284 eV. The
electrons will be emitted with Ekin = 2hν −EB(S 2p) = 284−162 = 122 eV, and recorded
on the spectrum at binding energy corresponding to EB = hν −Ekin = 142 −122 = 20
eV. The second-order generated peak shifts of 1 eV towards the Fermi level as photon
energy is increased of 1 eV, coinciding with Ef when hν equals the core level energy. This
explanation justiﬁes the appearance of the feature identiﬁed by the dashed red line: the
line was found to have slope of about -1, expected for second-order light excitation.
Zn 3d
VB
Binding Energy (eV)
Normalized intensity
Area = 1
Figure 28: Eﬀect due to data normalization. In order to limit the eﬀects of increasing photon
ﬂux and therefore higher recorded signal, a normalization over the RPES data was performed
such that the area underneath the spectrum was forced to be 1. However, in the case of an
abrupt increase in the higher-intensity features, like the peak Zn 3d, smaller features would be
further decreased for compensation.
Page 51 of 67
==PAGE:60==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Second-order
radiation effect
S 2p
162 eV
Ef
hν = 162 eV
hν = 142 eV
Normalized intensity
Binding Energy (eV)
Figure 29: Schematic representation of the appearance on the XPS spectra of second-order
radiation light generated eﬀects. When the photon energy of the incoming radiation hν equals
the energy at which the S 2p electrons are excited (blue line), the second-order light with energy
2hν = 324 eV excites S 2p electrons to Ekin = 162 eV, which are detected at the Fermi level
(EB = hν −Ekin = 162 −162 = 0 eV). When the photon energy is below the S 2p transition
(green line), such excitation is not allowed (peak disappears), but the second-order light has
enough energy to excite some electrons from the S 2p core level. In the case of hν = 142 eV,
the second-order light excited electrons will have Ekin = 284 −162 = 122 eV and detected at
EB = hν −Ekin = 142 −122 = 20 eV.
6. The feature 6 on the RPES data plot can be described in the same way as the feature 5,
but it is result of the excitation of electrons from the Cu 3p core level.
7. The most intense peak in the RPES data plot is deﬁned by the feature 7, and represents
the Zn 3d core level.
In conclusion, the RPES analysis helped in the understanding of the diﬀerent contributions at
the edge of the VB. The states at the VB seem to be related to the transitions from Cu 3p and
S 2p. Such deduction can be justiﬁed by the appearance of a bright peak at around 2.7 eV, that
develops when the sample is excited with photon energies around the Cu 3p transition, and by
the VB maximum moving from 2.5 eV to 1.2 eV in correspondence with the S 2p transition
at 162 eV. The VB maximum line presents two "elbows", occurring at the Cu 3p and S 2p
transition energies: supposedly, when exciting the sample with photon energies between 73
and 162 eV, Cu is responsible for the VB maximum state, while for photon energies above 162
Page 52 of 67
==PAGE:61==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
eV, S excites to new energy states closer to the Fermi level. The resonant behavior of Cu 3p
and S 2p transitions is also accompanied by the presence of smaller additional peaks due to
resonance from second order radiation. Such peaks generate a visible feature on the RPES
2D plot, highlighted by dashed lines in Figure 25. Such lines appear with a slope of -1 in the
photon energy vs. binding energy plot, justiﬁed by the theoretical behavior of the second-order
excitation.
6.2
Solution processed samples - PES analysis
The solution processed samples were studied to understand the ligands dependency over the
band gap of the CZTS absorber layer. From previous experiments conducted by Dr Christian
Rein, several ligands resulted to eﬀectively coordinate with CZTS NPs in diﬀerent solution
environments. Interest of this thesis project was understanding and comparing the coordination
eﬀects on the NPs bandgap of three ligands: oleylamine (OLA), characterized by long carbon
chains and generally referred as "native ligand" as used in synthesis procedures, used in sample
C, was confronted with the performance of 1-dodecanethiol (S2−) and thiostannate complex
(Sn2S6 4−) in samples A and B respectively. For such analysis, the samples composition was
investigated through XPS, and the results can be found in Chapter 6.2.1. XPS results were not
only eﬀective in providing information on the composition, but also in giving a relative scale
of the surface ligands to the electron mean free path. The VB and CB were estimated through
combined UPS and IPES results. Thermal treatment was applied to the samples in order to
test the eﬀects of ligands evaporation on the band gap. The results of the study on the energy
band gap of the three sample can be found in Chapter 6.2.2.
6.2.1
Elemental composition
Out of all the drop-casted samples, sample A (S2−ligands) is the only one that was analyzed
at the MATline, while the study on sample B (Sn2S6 4−ligands) and sample C (OLA-capped)
was performed at the facilities of NTNU. The obtained results over the composition will be
reported separately for each sample.
Sample A - S2−ligands
The widescans for before and after the thermal treatment are shown in Figure 30. Some features
that can be observed include the presence of silicon signal from the substrate, implicating the
poor coverage of the wafer by the NPs ﬁlm, and the reduction of C signal opposed to the
increase of O, Sn and Cu signal after the thermal treatment. The increase of O signal can
indicate O as a structural element and not as an impurity like C. Moreover, no signal from Zn
is detected, neither before nor after the annealing process.
Page 53 of 67
==PAGE:62==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
-100
100
300
500
700
900
1100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Counts
Binding Energy (eV)
-100
100
300
500
700
900
1100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Counts
Binding Energy (eV)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Binding Energy (eV)
Widescan
Sample A – S2- ligands
after annealing
before annealing
Sn 4d
Cu 3p
Aug O
Si 2p
Cu 3s
Si 2s
S 2p
Aug Sn
S 2s
C 1s
Aug C
Aug C
Aug S
Sn 3d
O 1s
Figure 30: XPS widescan measured on the CZTS drop-casted sample A (S2−ligands), before
and after the annealing treatment. The spectra have been shifted upwards for clarity.
Table 3: Overview of the ﬁtting results of the detected phases for the drop-casted sample A
(S2−ligands).The error on the peak energies resulted to be < 0.01 eV for all the peaks, and <
0.005 % on the relative abundance values.
Element
Phase
Orbital
Energy (eV)
Relative abundance (%)
before annealing
after annealing
IV (ligands-bond)
3d5/2
485.9
0.03
0.06
3d3/2
494.5
V (CTS)
3d5/2
487.2
0.01
0.04
Sn
3d3/2
495.8
CTS
2p3/2
161.6
11.3
38.53
2p1/2
162.8
ligands
2p3/2
166.4
86.7
57.68
2p1/2
167.6
sulfate
2p3/2
168.8
1.67
3.36
S
2p1/2
170.0
CTS
3p3/2
75.1
0.11
0.33
Cu
3p1/2
77.5
Page 54 of 67
==PAGE:63==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
480
482
484
486
488
490
Normalized counts
Sn 3d5/2
-0.1
0
0.1
480
482
484
486
488
490
Binding energy (eV)
-0.1
0
0.1
480
482
484
486
488
490
Binding 
before annealing
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
480
482
484
486
488
490
Sn 3d 200C 
a)
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
155
160
165
170
175
Normalized counts
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
155
160
165
170
175
after annealing
S 2p 
after annealing
before annealing
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
155
160
165
170
175
Binding energy (eV)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
155
160
165
170
175
Binding energy (eV)
Data
S 2p3/2 (CTS)
S 2p3/2 (ligand)
Fitting
Residuals
S 2p3/2 (sulfate)
Fitting
SnIV (ligand)
Residuals
SnV (CTS)
b)
Normalized counts
Data
c)
Cu 3p
after annealing
before annealing
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
69
71
73
75
77
79
81
83
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
69
71
73
75
77
79
81
83
Normalized counts
Fitting
Cu 3p3/2
Residuals
Cu 3p1/2
Data
-0.1
0
0.1
69
71
73
75
77
79
81
83
Binding energy (eV)
-0.1
0
0.1
69
71
73
75
77
79
81
83
Binding energy (eV)
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
Normalized counts
Binding energy (eV)
Sn 4p
Zn 3p
d)
after annealing
before annealing
Data
Figure 31: Narrow XPS scans for the solution processed Sample A (S2−ligands), for the core
levels a) Sn 3d5/2, b) S 2p, e) Cu 3p and d) Zn 3p. The raw data (black lines) are compared
with the ﬁtting curve (red lines), and the before- and after-annealing conditions are confronted.
For each core level, the diﬀerent contributions to the ﬁtting model are shown.
Page 55 of 67
==PAGE:64==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Figure 31 shows the high-resolution XPS spectra after background subtraction for the Sn 3d5/2,
S 2p, Cu 3p and Zn 3p core levels, and Table 3 the overview on the ﬁtting results. The XPS
results before and after the thermal treatment wanted to be confronted as well. One ﬁrst con-
sideration can be made on the absence of Zn signal. Such result might arise from two causes:
ﬁrst, Zn has very high aﬃnity with the ligands that completely passivate Zn-sites and so cover
Zn from being detected, or second, Zn is actually absent from the NP surface, that is therefore
characterized by CTS (Cu3SnS4) phase. This second cause is supposed to be the most probable,
considering also the asymmetry on the Sn 3d peak. In the case of Sn 3d, the higher binding
energy peak might be given by a compound where Sn is present with a 5+ oxidation state,
like Cu3SnS4. In such compound, both Cu and S are present with the same oxidation state
as CZTS, therefore their peaks do not shift dramatically from the CZTS reference positions.
As Cu is represented by the presence of one species only, it is presumed that the entire NPs is
constituted of CTS. The lower energy peak in the Sn 3d spectrum is instead considered arising
from the 4+ oxidation state of Sn atoms bonding to sulfur-ligands. The fact that the relative
abundance of the two diﬀerent Sn species changes with the annealing, can conﬁrm the hypothe-
sis just exposed: the CTS phase increases in signal after thermal treatment due to evaporation
of surface ligands. Another consideration that can be made on the XPS results is the very low
signal of Sn and Cu compared to S. Most of S detected is considered to come from the S2−
ligands. The ﬁrst peak at around 161.6 eV can be reconnected to the CTS phase. The second
peak, at higher binding energies, might come from the ligands. The electrons carried by the
S2−ligands must be donated to a surface uncoordinated site to passivate it, leaving the 2p
electrons less shielded by the outer orbitals. Also, the S2−anions form a strong covalent bond
with the surface sites [9]. The second peak is conﬁrmed to belong to S2−ligands also by the
complete change of spectra of S 2p core level after the annealing step: ligands evaporate and
more CTS phase is detected. It is reasonable that S is the most detected element also in the
CTS phase, as the S2−ligands do not coordinate with the S atoms on the surface of the NP, but
with the positive charged metal sites [23]. It is not possible to say whether the surface ligands
coordinate better with Cu or with Sn sites, as the percentage of these elements on the surface
of the NP might diﬀer from the bulk. A serious amount of S in sulfate state is present at the
surface, and its relative abundance increases with annealing. One last examination wants to
explain the reasons why in the Zn 3p spectrum the signal from the Sn 4p peak seems to decrease
with the annealing step. Such result might arise from charging of the sample. The acquisition
system adds up all the counts for all the scans performed on the same kinetic energy window.
To obtain a better spectra, the number of scans after the annealing was increased of more than
10 scans. In case of charging of the sample, the number of detected electrons decreases with
scans. However, when normalizing, the total count sum has been divided for the total number
of scans. The result of normalization would justify the decrease in the normalized peak intensity
in the after-annealing case.
Page 56 of 67
==PAGE:65==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Sample B - Sn2S6 4−ligands
The analysis of sample B (Sn2S6 4−ligands) was performed at NTNU, probing the material
with a Mg-anode gun at energy 1253.6 eV. In contrast to sample A, which was annealed in
the same position of the XPS experiment, sample B had to be moved to another chamber for
the thermal treatment. It was not possible to probe the same exact area before and after the
annealing step to evaluate any change in composition. Therefore, XPS results will be given
only for the sample before undergoing annealing.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Counts
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Normalized counts
Binding Energy (eV)
S 2s
C 1s
Aug S
O 1s
Widescan
Zn 3p
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Binding Energy (eV)
Sn 3d
Sn 4d
Sn 4p
Aug Zn
Aug Cu
Aug O
Aug Sn
Cu 3p
Aug C
Sample B – Sn2S6
4-
ligands
Sample C – OLA ligands
Figure 32: XPS widescan measured on the CZTS drop-casted sample B (Sn2S6 4−ligands)
and sample C (OLA-capping), before the annealing treatment. The spectra have been shifted
upwards for clarity. Important feature to show is the abruptly decreasing background at binding
energies above 1000 eV, due to charging of the sample. The charging is considered to be an
eﬀect of the insulating behavior of the ligands.
The widescans before thermal treatment for sample B and C is shown in Figure 32. The main
feature that wants to be discussed is the decreasing background after EB = 1000 eV. This
eﬀect might result from poor alignment between the position of sample in the chamber and the
electron lenses system, or by charging of the material. It is believed that the ligands might in-
sulate the diﬀerent NPs from each other, so that charges accumulate and generate an electrical
ﬁeld that blocks low kinetic energy electrons from leaving the sample. Such event might also
determine alteration of the real data: the signal from Zn 2p is produced at low kinetic energies
(EB ≈1020 eV), and might not be fully detected due to insulating behavior of the ligands. It
Page 57 of 67
==PAGE:66==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
is also possible to see that Si signal is not detected, meaning a nice coverage of the substrate.
The narrow scans results are shown in Figure 33 and Table 4. Interesting outcomes include:
- the shift of all the peaks of around +1 eV with respect to sample A, symptom of charging of
the sample;
- the visibility of Zn, probably due to the mean free path of the emitted electrons and shorter
ligand molecules;
- the broader peaks with respect to the ones obtained with the synchrotron radiation;
- the lower percentage of S and Sn than expected.
Since NPs are covered in Sn2S6 4−ligands, it was assumed that higher values of relative abun-
dance of Sn and S would be measured, and that both spectra would be described by the presence
of diﬀerent chemical bonds. However, Sn 3d5/2 can be described by CZTS species only, and
S 2p spectrum shows CZTS and sulfate peaks. The detection of only CZTS phase in Sn and
S conﬁrms the ability of the Mg gun photons to probe deeper in the sample. Moreover, the
ligand size can be assumed to be smaller than the mean free path. High presence of oxygen is
detected as well, supposedly from the sulfate phase. Although the NPs have been conﬁrmed
previously to be Cu-poor Zn-rich, higher percentage of Cu results from XPS to be present at
the surface, giving credit to the hypothesis that the outer surface is made of CTS phase and
Zn is present in the bulk. No other secondary phase was detected, as for example SnS2 grains.
Table 4: Overview of the ﬁtting results of the detected phases for the drop-casted sample B
(Sn2S6 4−ligands).The error on the peak energies resulted to be < 0.01 eV for all the peaks,
and < 0.03 % on the relative abundance values.
Element
Phase
Orbital
Energy (eV)
Relative abundance (%)
CZTS
2p3/2
162.9
31.53
2p1/2
164.1
sulfate
2p3/2
169.9
5.30
S
2p1/2
171.1
CZTS
3d5/2
487.9
23.43
Sn
3d3/2
496.3
Cu
CZTS
2p3/2
933.2
32.59
Zn
CZTS
2p3/2
1023.0
7.15
Page 58 of 67
==PAGE:67==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
-5
5
15
25
35
45
55
157
162
167
172
Normalized counts
Data
S 2p3/2 (sulfate)
Residuals
a)
b)
S 2p
S 2p3/2 (CZTS)
Fitting
-1
0
1
157
159
161
163
165
167
169
171
173
175
Binding energy (eV)
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
483
488
493
498
503
Normalized counts
Data
Residuals
Sn 3d3/2 
Sn 3d5/2
-1
0
1
483
488
493
498
503
Binding energy (eV)
Sn 3d
c)
d)
Cu 2p3/2
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
926
929
932
935
938
941
Normalized counts
Data
Residuals
Cu 2p3/2 
-1
0
1
926
929
932
935
938
941
Binding energy (eV)
-30
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
1015
1018
1021
1024
1027
1030
Normalized counts
-1
0
1
1015
1018
1021
1024
1027
1030
Binding energy (eV)
Data
Residuals
Zn 2p3/2 
Zn 2p3/2
Figure 33: Narrow XPS scans for the solution processed Sample B (Sn2S6 4−ligands), for the
core levels a) S 2p, b) Sn 3d, e) Cu 2p3/2 and d) Zn 2p3/2. The raw data (black lines) are
compared with the ﬁtting model results. All the spectra seem to be described by the presence
of one single phase (CZTS). S 2p spectra shows also the contribution of some sulfate presence.
Page 59 of 67
==PAGE:68==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Sample C - OLA ligands
As previously stated, the widescan of sample C (OLA-capping) shows charging behavior, as for
high binding energies the count rate greatly decreases. By performing widescan on diﬀerent
areas of the surface, the sample resulted quite heterogeneous. An high signal for the O 1s and
C 1s core level is detected. The signiﬁcant signal of oxygen is justiﬁed by a likewise high signal
of sulfate phase (see Figure 34, where the results for the high-resolution scans are displayed).
Extremely high amounts of C are explained by the carbon content of the OLA molecules. In
general, very low counts are observed for the CZTS elements compared to previous samples,
due to the very high presence of C on the surface. Although Zn content is found to be less
than 1/30 of the C content, it appears to be present in quite high percentages compared to
the other metals, and at least in 2 phases, as shown by the asymmetry of its spectrum. As
the NPs are believed to present mostly Cu at the surface, the lower binding energy peak in
the Zn spectrum is hardly believed coming from CZTS. This peak might be explained by the
existence of secondary phases of organometallic nature [50]. The higher binding energy peak
might be originated from CZTS in case of high charging of the sample. However, such charging
behavior is not seen in other peaks. CZTS signal might also be overlapping with the ﬁrst peak,
and therefore not resolved as singular phase. At this energy also compounds with Zn and S
could be expected [50]. It is not clear which kind of Zn compounds are present on the sample
and which their origin is. The S spectrum shows the usual sulfate and CZTS peaks, plus a
secondary phase at energy around 164.6 eV, addressed to a possible organometallic compound.
Values found in literature for CuxS report S 2p at lower binding energy (around 162.3 eV [50]),
therefore this peak was not attributed to this possible secondary phase. Moreover, the ﬁt-
ting procedure for Cu 2p peak resulted quite challenging due to the low counts and the high
noise. The relative abundance of the diﬀerent species does not help in the visualization of which
secondary phases Zn and S could be part of, or if they appear together in an impurity compound.
Page 60 of 67
==PAGE:69==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
a)
b)
Sn 3d
-5
0
5
10
15
20
155
160
165
170
175
180
Normalized counts
S 2p
Data
S 2p3/2 (organometallic)
S 2p3/2 (CZTS)
Fitting
S 2p3/2 (sulfate)
Residuals
-1
0
1
155
160
165
170
175
180
Binding energy (eV)
-20
0
20
40
60
80
480
485
490
495
500
505
Normalized counts
-1
0
1
480
485
490
495
500
505
Binding energy (eV)
Data
Residuals
Sn 3d3/2 
Sn 3d5/2
c)
d)
Cu 2p3/2
Data
Residuals
Cu 2p3/2 
Zn 2p3/2
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
925
930
935
940
945
Normalized counts
-1
0
1
925
930
935
940
945
Binding energy (eV)
-20
10
40
70
100
130
160
190
220
1019
1021
1023
1025
1027
1029
1031
Normalzied counts
Data
Residuals
Zn 2p3/2 (organometallic 1)
-1
0
1
1019
1021
1023
1025
1027
1029
1031
Binding energy (eV)
Zn 2p3/2 (organometallic 2)
Figure 34: High resolution XPS scans for the solution processed Sample C (OLA ligands), for
the core levels a) S 2p, b) Sn 3d, e) Cu 2p3/2 and d) Zn 2p3/2. The raw data (black lines) are
compared with the ﬁtting model results.
Page 61 of 67
==PAGE:70==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
Table 5: Overview of the ﬁtting results of the detected phases for the drop casted sample C
(OLA ligands).The error on the peak energies resulted to be < 0.01 eV for all the peaks, and
< 0.03 % on therelative abundance values.
Element
Phase
Orbital
Energy (eV)
Relative abundance (%)
CZTS
2p3/2
162.5
8.38
2p1/2
163.7
organometallic
2p3/2
164.6
4.67
2p1/2
165.8
sulfate
2p3/2
170.8
28.88
S
2p1/2
172.0
CZTS
3d5/2
488.3
13.24
Sn
3d3/2
496.8
Cu
CZTS
2p3/2
933.4
6.18
organometallic 1
2p3/2
1023.9
31.20
Zn
organometallic 2
2p3/2
1026.2
7.45
6.2.2
Band Gap
The band gaps of the NPs were determined from combined UPS and IPES spectra. However,
for sample A (S2−ligands) only a VB study was performed, due to the absence of an IPES
system at the synchrotron beamline. For all the samples, the analysis were performed before
and after thermal treatment in order to estimate the eﬀect of ligand-induced dipoles over the
energy states of the material.
Sample A - S2−ligands
Figure 35 shows the VB for sample A before and after the thermal treatment, recorded at
photon energy of 140 eV. The VB maximum was determined by the intersection of the linear
ﬁtting of the data and the x-axis (same procedure was applied to CB minimum in IPES data).
The main noticeable feature in the spectra is the broad peak at around -3 eV. From RPES
results, such peculiarity can be attributed to the transition from Cu 3p orbital. The peak
moves from -3.1 to -3.4 eV after the thermal treatment. The same behavior is shown by the VB
maximum, that shifts to more negative binding energies. This behavior can be explained by the
loss of S2−anions from the surface. The VB max shift has electrostatic origins, as the surface
atom-to-ligand molecule generates an electric dipole, as previously explained in Chapter 3.4.
S2−anions around the NP surface are presumed to create a dipole pointing outwards, and by
losing a fraction of ligands due to evaporation, the total VB moves at lower binding energies.
The VB max EV is seen to change from -1.808 ± 0.001 eV to -1.994 ± 0.001 eV after annealing
(the EV and EC values for all the samples are reported in Table 6). Furthermore, the VB spectra
show a slow rise from the Fermi level, instead of a sharp one starting at the VB maximum:
this eﬀect might be caused by the non-complete passivation of the surface, which introduces
Page 62 of 67
==PAGE:71==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
allowed states in the band gap. It is also important to notice that the photon energy at which
the VB was recorded is below the transition energy for the S 2p core level, supposed to be the
one responsible for the VB maximum from RPES results.
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Binding Energy (eV)
Normalized counts 
after annealing
before annealing
EV
Figure 35: UPS spectra of the solution processed sample A (S2−ligands), before and after
annealing procedure, and linear ﬁtting for the estimation of VB maximum EV . The broad
peaks at around 3 eV are attributed to transition from Cu 3p. The increase of counts could be
explained by evaporation of S ligands from the surface, uncovering CTS underneath. Another
eﬀect of the evaporation of ligands is the shift of EV to lower binding energy, due to the presence
of less dipoles around the NPs surfaces: EV moves from -1.808 ± 0.001 eV to -1.994 ± 0.001
eV after annealing.
Sample B - Sn2S6 4−ligands
UPS analysis for samples B (Sn2S6 4−ligands) and C (OLA-capping) was performed in the
NTNU Surface Lab, together with IPES study. It is important to inform that both these anal-
ysis resulted quite diﬃcult to perform due to the insulating behavior of the samples. UPS and
IPES happened to be extremely challenging, as it was not possible to collect more than 1-3
scans at a time before the sample would charge. Therefore, the experiments occurred to be
very time consuming, as the samples needed to be let discharge after every collection.
Figure 36 shows the CB and VB spectra for sample B before and after the thermal treatment.
Sn2S6 4−capping displays the same dipole behavior as the case of S2−ligands: after annealing
the band gap shifts entirely to lower binding energies. The absolute value of the energy gap,
given by the diﬀerence between the CB minimum EC and EV (2.463 ± 0.002 eV before annealing
Page 63 of 67
==PAGE:72==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
and 2.654 ± 0.002 eV after annealing), changes after the treatment. Such change is driven by
EV shifting of around -0.5 eV, combined with EC shifting of -0.25 eV. It is interesting however
to see a change in the value of the band gap, as the eﬀect of the dipoles around the NP should
shift all the energy states at the same time. It could be possible that, due to the presence of
the ligands at the surface, UPS and IPES also give signal from empty states of the ligands,
closer to the Fermi level, that "disappear" as ligands are evaporated. In general, the measured
band gap is higher than the theoretical CZTS single crystal (around 1.5 eV) and higher than
the measured band gap on the same NPs through UV-vis (1.73-1.83 eV): this outcomes can be
justiﬁed by the structural defects of the NPs and the insulating eﬀect of the ligands.
-4
1
6
11
16
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Normalized counts
Binding energy (eV)
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Binding energy (eV)
EV
EC
after annealing
before annealing
Energy Band Gap 
Sample B (Sn2S6
4- ligands)
Figure 36: UPS and IPES spectra of the solution processed sample B (Sn2S6 4−ligands), before
and after annealing procedure, and linear ﬁtting for the estimation of VB maximum EV and
CB minimum EC. The eﬀect of ligand evaporation results in a shift of band edges to lower
binding energies.
Sample C - OLA ligands
Figure 37 shows the CB and VB spectra for sample C before and after the thermal treatment.
OLA capping seems to show the opposite dipole behavior with respect to the case of S2−
ligands: after annealing the band gap shifts entirely to higher binding energies. However, this
behavior might not be addressed to the dipole eﬀect, as much as to the presence of insulating
C-chains that thanks to thermal annealing are partially removed and let some signal to come
from the actual NPs. This hypothesis can be conﬁrmed by the absence in the UPS spectra
of any common feature related to Cu 3p transition. For this same reason, EV is at very low
binding energy and the sample behaves like an insulator. As annealing is performed, more
Page 64 of 67
==PAGE:73==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
6 Results and Discussion
states between -2 and -5 eV are detected, showing partial removal of the ligands. EC does not
seem to change signiﬁcantly.
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-10
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
Binding energy (eV)
-3
-1
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Normalized counts
Binding energy (eV)
EV
EC
after annealing
before annealing
Energy Band Gap 
Sample C (OLA ligands)
Figure 37: UPS and IPES spectra of the solution processed sample B (OLA ligands), before
and after annealing procedure, and linear ﬁtting for the estimation of VB maximum EV and
CB minimum EC. The eﬀect of ligand evaporation results in a shift of band edges to higher
binding energies.
Table 6: Overview of the measured VB maximum EV , CB minimum EC and bandgap for the
three solution processed samples, before and after the annealing step. EV and EC are given
with an error ± 0.001 eV.
Sample
Annealing
EV (eV)
EC (eV)
Band gap (eV)
before
- 1.808
-
-
A (S2−)
after
-1.994
-
-
before
-1.197
1.266
2.463
B (Sn2S6 4−)
after
-1.721
0.933
2.654
before
-4.348
0.346
4.694
C (OLA)
after
-3.569
0.430
3.999
Page 65 of 67
==PAGE:74==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
7 Conclusion
7
Conclusion
The aim of the presented work concerned the study of the feasibility of PES techniques in the
analysis of the composition, chemical environments and energy band gap of solution-processed
NPs CZTS thin ﬁlms. The samples were prepared by drop-casting on Si-doped substrates. The
same synthetized NPs were stabilized in diﬀerent solutions by various ligands. Three samples
were compared (S2−, Sn2S6 4−, and OLA ligands) through the results of XPS, UPS and IPES
analysis. An high-crystallinity sample of CZTS was also provided. Its composition and VB were
investigated at the MATline beamline. RPES was performed in order to provide a benchmark
for the understanding of the VB features in the drop-casted samples.
RPES study helped in the understanding of the diﬀerent contributions at the edge of the VB.
The states at the VB edge seem to be related to the transitions from Cu 3p and S 2p orbitals.
For photon energies between 40 and 162 eV, the VB maximum shifted from around 2.5 to 1.2
eV from the Fermi level. For energies greater than 162 eV (S 2p transition), the VB maximum
seemed to keep a constant value at around 1.2 eV. The elemental composition of the crystalline
sample revealed high presence of S at the surface, existing also in sulfate and sulfoxide phases.
The ratios Cu/(Zn+Sn) and Zn/Sn appeared much lower (0.49 ± 0.01 and 0.14 ± 0.01) than the
experimental optimal for bulk CZTS (0.8 and 1.25), due to the high presence of Sn compared
to Cu and Zn at the surface. The sample was however sputtered, and subsequently annealed,
to remove surface contaminants: the procedure might have altered the surface conformation,
letting diﬀerent atomic layers to be visible, and might also have been responsible for the for-
mation of sulfoxide and sulfate phases. Nevertheless, longer sputtering times ( > 10 min at 500
eV with Ar) are suggested for this type of sample, for a more eﬃcient impurity removal. The
peak positions for the kesterite phase in the crystalline sample were also used as reference for
the thin ﬁlm XPS results.
Chemical composition analysis on the thin ﬁlm with S2−ligands allowed to understand that
the NPs are probably characterized by CTS phase at the surface, and Zn diﬀusing into the
bulk. This result is conﬁrmed by the absence of signal from Zn, the presence of two chemical
shifts in the Sn peak (attributed to the two oxidation states, IV for Sn atoms bonding to ligand
molecules, and V for Sn in CTS phase), the description of Cu 3p by one phase only, the asym-
metric shape of the S spectrum and its change after annealing: the S 2p peak shows the clear
presence of two phases, one addressed to ligands, as after annealing is abruptly decreased, and
one to CTS phase. The element composition of sample B and C gave also further details on
the length scale of the ligands: for sample B, the Sn2S6 4−ligands are considered short enough
so that the detected signal originates from beneath the CTS surface (as Zn is also detected),
and the only identiﬁed impurity is addressed to sulfate compounds, while OLA-ligands (sample
C) produce an extremely high C signal covering completely the NPs surface from which the
detected signal is much lower. Due to the low counts and high signal-to-noise ratio in the case
Page 66 of 67
==PAGE:75==
Solar Cells Systems and Materials: Master Thesis Project
7 Conclusion
of OLA ligands, it was not possible to determine whether there was presence of the secondary
phase CuxS on the surface. However, Zn seemed to appear abundantly in organometallic com-
pounds.
UPS and IPES investigations resulted challenging due to sample charging. This eﬀect was
attributed to the insulating behavior of the ligands, conﬁrmed also by the shift in peak energy
in XPS spectra. Having a conductive substrate seemed not enough to avoid accumulation of
charge. Nevertheless, using glass or insulating substrates is highly discouraged for this type of
technique. UPS results seemed also be aﬀected by the size of the ligands: in the case of short
molecules, the same VB peak attributed to Cu 3p transition was visible, while for longer carbon
chains the VB maximum was found at very low binding energies, suggesting that the detected
signal was caused by the ligand molecules and not by the NPs. Thermal treatment was also
performed on the ﬁlms to understand the dipole behavior at the ligand-surface interface. For
S2−and Sn2S6 4−ligands, the dipole is supposed to be pointing outwards: the eﬀect should be
a shift of all the energy states of the NP towards higher binding energies. By letting evaporate
a fraction of the ligands, the VB maximum shifts and its direction can be addressed to the loss
of dipoles at the surface. For the case of OLA-capping, however, such dipole-induced behavior
can not be conﬁrmed, as the spectra are thought of being representative of the energy states
of the ligand molecules and not of the NPs. In all cases, the measured band gaps (around 2.5
eV for Sn2S6 4−ligands, and > 4 eV for OLA-capped NPs) resulted higher than the previously
estimated values through UV-vis (1.73-1.83 eV), conﬁrming the insulating eﬀect of the ligands
at the surface of the NPs.
PES techniques showed interesting applications in the study of CZTS ligand-capped NPs. Due
to high surface sensitivity, the interface between ligand and NP was studied in its chemical
environment and electronic properties. Moreover, as the ligand molecule size can be in the
same order as the electron mean free path, one can probe the capping agent, the NPs deeper
under the surface or the real interface. For future work, a more comprehensive study on CZTS
NPs thin ﬁlms could combine the interface results of PES techniques with complementary
information from other methods, to exploit the structure of the ligands as well as the geometry
of the NPs and the arrangement patterns of the capping layer on the surface. Moreover, PES
techniques resulted eﬀective in providing information about the eﬀect of ligands on the NPs
band gap, and such knowledge and methods could be used in the tailoring of CZTS NPs band
gap by trying other commonly used stabilizers.
Page 67 of 67
==PAGE:76==
References
[1] A. Luque, S. Hegedus Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, John Wiley &
Sons, (2011)
[2] W. Shockley, H.J. Queisser Detailed Balance Limit of Eﬃciency of p-n Junction Solar Cells,
Journal of Applied Physics, (1961), pp. 510-519
[3] A. Polman, M. Knight, E.C. Garnett, B. Ehrler, and W.C. Sinke Photovoltaic materials:
present eﬃciencies and future challenges, Science, (15 April 2016)
[4] A. Crovetto Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells: physics and technology by alternative tracks, PhD The-
sis, Technical University of Denmark, (31 August 2016)
[5] H. Zhou et al. CZTS nanocrystals: a promising approach for next generation thin ﬁlm
photovoltaics, Energy and Environmental Science, (25 July 2013)
[6] X. Liu et al. The current status and future prospects of kesterite solar cells: a brief review,
Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, (28 January 2016)
[7] C. Platzer-Björkman et al. Reduced interface recombination in Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells with
atomic layer deposition Zn1−xSnxOy buﬀer layers, Applied Physics Letters, (14 December
2015)
[8] L. Korala et al. Ligand-Exchanged CZTS Nanocrystal Thin Films: Does Nanocrystal Surface
Passivation Eﬀectively Improve Photovoltaic Performance?, Chemistry of Materials, Vol. 29,
pp. 6621-6629 (27 June 2017)
[9] M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon, D. W. Talapin The surface science of nanocrystals, Nature
Materials, (22 January 2016)
[10] S. Schorr The crystal structure of kesterite type compounds: a neutron and X-ray diﬀraction
study, Solar Energy Materials & Solar Cells, (15 February 2011)
[11] S.R. Hall, J.T. Szymański, J.M. Stewart Kesterite, Cu2(Zn,Fe)SnS4, and stannite,
Cu2(Fe,Zn)SnS4, structurally similar but diﬀerent minerals, Canadian Mineralogist, Vol.
16, pp. 131-137 (1978)
[12] S. Chen, A. Walsh, X. Gong, S. Wei Classiﬁcation of Lattice Defects in the Kesterite
Earth-Abundant Solar Cells Absorber, Advanced Materials, Vol. 25, pp. 1522-1539 (2013)
[13] C. Persson, R. Chen, H. Zhao, M. Kumar, D. Huang Electronic Structure and Optical
Properties from First-Principles Modeling, In. Copper Zinc Tin Sulﬁde-Based Thin-Film
Solar Cells, John Wiley & Sons, (2015)
==PAGE:77==
[14] W. Li et al. Recent Progress in Solution-Processed Copper-Chalcogenide Thin Film Solar
Cells, Energy Technology, Vol. 6, pp. 46-59 (2018)
[15] H. Katagiri et al. Development of CZTS-based thin ﬁlm solar cells, Thin Solid Films, (8
November 2008)
[16] M. T. Winkler et al. Optical designs that improve the eﬃciency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar
cells, Enegy & Environmental Science, Vol. 7, pp. 1029-1036 (2014)
[17] A. Polizzotti, I. L. Repins, R. Nou, S-H. Wei, D. B. Mitzi The state and future prospects
of kesterite photovoltaics, Energy & Environmental Science, (22 August 2013)
[18] K. Ramasamy, M. A. Malik, P. O’Brien Routes to copper zinc tin sulde Cu2ZnSnS4 a
potential material for solar cells, Chemical Communications, (30 March 2012)
[19] Y.Yin, A. P. Alivisatos Colloidal nanocrystal synthesis and the organic-inorganic interface,
Nature, (29 September 2005)
[20] N. Mirbagheri et al. Synthesis of ligand-free CZTS nanoparticles via a facile hot injection
route, Nanotechnology, (23 March 2016)
[21] J. Owen The coordination chemistry of nanocrystal surfaces, Science, (6 February 2015)
[22] M.V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele, D.V. Talapin Colloidal Nanocrystals with Molecular Metal
Chalcogenide Surface Ligands, Science, (12 June 2009)
[23] A. Nag et al. Metal-free Inorganic Ligands for Colloidal Nanocrystals: S 2−, HS −, Se
2−, HSe −, Te 2−, HTe −, TeS3 2−, OH −, and NH2 −as Surface Ligands, Journal of the
American Chemical Society, (17 June 2011)
[24] A.H. Ip et al. Hybrid passivated colloidal quantum dot solids, Nature Nanotechnology, (29
July 2012)
[25] P.R. Brown et al. Energy Level Modiﬁcation in Lead Sulﬁde Quantum Dot Thin Films
through Ligand Exchange, ACS Nano, (13 May 2014)
[26] D.J. Milliron The surface plays a core role, Nature Materials, Vol. 13, p. 772-773 (2014)
[27] M.T. Frederick et al. Surface-Ampliﬁed Ligand Disorder in CdSe Quantum Dots Deter-
mined by Electron and Coherent Vibrational Spectroscopies, Journal of the American Chem-
ical Society, (12 April 2011)
[28] A.J. Morris-Cohen Chemical, Structural, and Quantitative Analysis of the Ligand Shells
of Colloidal Quantum Dots, Chemistry of Materials, (30 August 2012)
==PAGE:78==
[29] J. Kumar Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Fundamental Principles and Applications, In. Hand-
book of Materials Characterization, Springer Nature, (2018)
[30] S. Suga, A. Sekiyama Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Bulk and Surface Electronic Structures,
Springer Series in Optical Sciences, Vol. 176, pp. 1-396 (2014)
[31] S. Hüfner Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Principles And Applications, Springer Verlag, (2003)
[32] A. Jablonski, C. J. Powell Information depth and the mean escape depth in Auger electron
spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology
A, Vol. 1, pp. 274-283 (2003)
[33] A. Zangwill "Clean Surfaces". In Physics at Surfaces, Cambridge University Press, pp. 5-6
(1998)
[34] P. D. Johnson Chapter 13 - Inverse Photoemission, Studies in Surface Science and Catal-
ysis, Vol. 74, pp. 509-552 (1992)
[35] F. Mazzola, M. Nematollahi, Z.S. Li, S. Cooil, X. Yang, T.W. Reenaas, J.W. Wells Reso-
nant photoemission spectroscopy for intermediate band materials, Applied Physics Letters,
(11 November 2015)
[36] J. Als-Nielsen, D. McMorrow Elements of Modern X-ray Physics, Second Edition, John
Wiley & Sons, (18 March 2011)
[37] A. Madsen, H. Sinn Europe enters the extreme X-ray era, CernCourier, (10 July 2017)
[38] P. Willmott An introduction to synchrotron radiation: Techniques and applications, John
Wiley & Sons, (13 June 2011), pp. 39-86
[39] C. Rein, S. Engberg, J.W. Andreasen Stable, carbon-free inks of Cu2ZnSnS4 nanoparticles
synthesized at room temperature designed fro roll-to-roll fabrication of solar cell absorber
layers, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, (7 February 2019)
[40] D. Hoﬀman, B. Singh, J. H. Thomas Handbook of Vacuum Science and Technology, Aca-
demic Press, (1998)
[41] M. Jorge User Guide - NyNalos
[42] PSP Vacuum Technology IPES Electron System: Instruction Manual
[43] V. Jain, M. C. Biesinger, M. R. Linford The Gaussian-Lorentzian Sum, Product, and
Convolution (Voigt) functions in the context of peak ﬁtting X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS) narrow scans, Applied Surface Science, (29 March 2018)
==PAGE:79==
[44] R. Hesse, P. Streubel, R. Szargan Product or sum: comparative tests of Voigt, and product
or sum of Gaussian and Lorentzian functions in the ﬁtting of synthetic Voigt-based X-ray
photoelectron spectra, Surface and Interface analysis, (9 January 2007)
[45] J. Vegh On analyzing the intrinsic processes through the Shirley background correction
procedure, Surface Science, (25 January 2005)
[46] J. Vegh The Shirley background revised, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy, (18 January
2006)
[47] J. Vegh The Analytical Form of the Shirley-type Background, Journal of Electron Spec-
troscopy and Related Phenomena, (27 May 1988)
[48] WebCrossSections - ELETTRA Atomic Calculation of Photoionization Cross-Sections and
Asymmetry Parameters
url:
https://vuo.elettra.eu/services/elements/WebElements.html
[49] J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol, K. D. Bomben Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy, Perkin-Elmer Corporation, (1992)
[50] National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Database
url:
https://srdata.nist.gov/xps/Default.aspx
[51] ISA, Centre for Storage Ring Facilities, Aarhus ASTRID2 – The Ultimate Synchrotron
Radiation Source
url:
http://www.isa.au.dk/facilities/astrid2/astrid2.asp
[52] ISA, Centre for Storage Ring Facilities, Aarhus AU-MATLINE on ASTRID2
url:
http://www.isa.au.dk/facilities/astrid2/beamlines/AU-matline.asp
[53] L. Qiu, K. Zou, G. Xu Investigation on the sulfur state and phase transformation of spent
and regenerated S-zorb sorbents using XPS and XRD, Applied Surface Science, (20 Decem-
ber 2012)
[54] D. Tang, K. Sun, F. Liu, Y. Lai An alternative route towards low-cost Cu2ZnSnS4 thin ﬁlm
solar cells, Surface & Coatings Technology, (30 April 2013)
[55] R. Bruhn, B. Sonntag, H.W. Wolﬀ3p excitations of atomic and metallic Fe, Co, Ni and
Cu, Journal of Physics B - Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, (20 June 1978)
