==PAGE:1==
May 15, 2019
Traﬃc accident analysis with neuro-fuzzy modeling
Analyse af traﬁkulykker med neuro-fuzzy modeling
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
Author 1
Supervisor 1
Name:
Cathrine Corﬁtzen
Name:
Mette Møller
Student ID:
s133840
Supervisor 1.1
Master:
Cand.Polyt.Transport and Logistic
Name:
Kira Hyldekær Janstrup
Copenhagen Business School (CBS)
Author 2
Supervisor 2
Name:
Caroline Corﬁtzen
Name:
Raghava Rao Mukkamala
Student ID:
s93090
Master:
Cand.Merc.Mat
Page number: 62 (excl. reference and appendix)
Word count: 32,125
MASTER THESIS
Denmark’s Technical University and Copenhagen Business School
==PAGE:2==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Acknowledgment
We want to express our sincere gratitude to our supervisors from DTU and CBS, respectively. A thank
for the great collaboration and possibility of the excellent distributed meetings the last months. We
are grateful for the help and guidance towards the goal of this project. Additionally, a thank for the
possibility to accomplish this project under unfamiliar circumstances.
Furthermore, we would like to thank Jesper Lillelund from MOE for introducing this topic, and the
related problematic behind.
==PAGE:3==
PREFACE
Preface
This master’s thesis is a collaboration with Copenhagen Business School (CBS) and Denmark’s Tech-
nical University (DTU). The collaboration between DTU and CBS was an unfamiliar process, but will,
in the best possible way, meet the requirements for both DTU and CBS.
The two chapters on traﬃc safety (chapter 3) and mathematical approaches (chapter 4) will represent
the main requirements for each university. Chapter 3 provides insight into traﬃc safety within the
borders of Denmark, and based on this, provides the reader with knowledge of accidents development
and their consequences. Chapter 4 provides insight into the theory behind the mathematical models
and goes through all the primarily steps necessary to understand and perform the three used models
in detail.
==PAGE:4==
ABSTRACT - ENGLISH
Abstract
Each day, a small share of the Danish population, are involved in traﬃc accidents, which have both
social and economic consequences. Sometimes an accident results in a fatality, however, most people
survive with either no or few injuries. This leads to the purpose of this project, which studies the
relationship between the severity of an accident and the related traﬃc factors in Denmark.
One
research question motivates the study; which factors aﬀect the severity outcome, given a car accident?
Based on previous studies and knowledge, three hypotheses are formulated for this project regarding
personal, element, and geographical factors. These previous studies results anticipate that younger
men, old cars, small cars, and longer distances to hospitals increase the risk of being involved in
personal injury accidents compared to material damage accidents.
To examine the problem formulation, a data set containing accidents between 2013 and 2017 where a
least one car was involved has been compiled from police records. The data set contains information
about the driver, element, surrounding and the geographical.
Additionally, data contains a text-
description, concerning a written detailed summary of the accidents, with more in-depth objective
information. This text-description is used to analyze the unobservable factor inattention. The project’s
hypotheses are studied using a neuro-fuzzy modeling approach. Neuro-fuzzy modeling is a combination
of neural network and fuzzy logic that contains the advantages of incorporating both categorical and
numerical factors as well as studying patterns in data without expert knowledge, based upon a learning
process. For one perspective, a neural network is completed, although it is limited by only taking
numerical factors into account. However, this network is highly complex and accurately studies the
underlying patterns. As a second perspective, the decision tree is used, as this method handles both
categorical and numerical factors equally. The decision tree is able to specify the categorical factors
that have an impact on the outcome, which the neural network cannot.
The neuro-fuzzy modeling approach, unfortunately, did not show any useful analytic results due to
an incomplete implementation of the code. Nevertheless, the model is accurate and present human-
friendly results, as well as handle complex data; this model would be the right approach for severity
modeling. However, two other models; the decision tree and the neural network, was chosen to support
the neuro-fuzzy model, though they ended being the most meaningful models with useful results.
Furthermore, all three hypotheses can be conﬁrmed with the mathematical models as well as with
descriptive analysis. The ﬁrst hypothesis concerning personal characteristics is conﬁrmed, since a
higher risk is related when the number of people in an accident increases. The second hypothesis
concerning element characteristics is conﬁrmed by two factors; a vulnerable road user and the number
of elements. A vulnerable road user and a reduced number of elements involved in accidents increase
the risk of personal injury accidents. The third hypothesis concerning geographical location is
conﬁrmed by four factors; distance to hospitals, a speed limit of 80 km/h, a higher population density
and the regions in Denmark.
These factors increase the risk of being involved in personal injury
accidents. Based on the mathematical result was four scenarios formulated concerning the number of
elements as well as the number of people involved in an accident. Scenario 1 and 3 showed signiﬁcant
relations regarding personal injury accidents, why these were investigated further. The ﬁrst scenario,
which involved one and two elements and one or two people, was primarily vulnerable road user
accidents. For this scenario, the preventive action involved a new intersection design, which focused
on the cyclist. The third scenario, which involved one and two elements and three or more people, was
primarily two vehicle accidents. For this scenario, the preventive action involved a new intersection
design, as crossing caused a higher risk of personal injury accidents.
==PAGE:5==
RESUME
Resume
Hver dag er en lille andel af den danske befolkning, involveret i en ulykke, hvilket har b˚ade sociale og
økonomiske konsekvenser. De ﬂeste ulykker resulterer ofte i ingen eller mindre personskader, dog er
der enkelte ulykker som ender med døden til følge. Dette leder til form˚alet med dette projekt, nemlig
at undersøge forholdet mellem en ulykkes alvorlighedsgrad og de relateret traﬁkale faktorer i Danmark.
Undersøgelsen er motiveret af følgende problemstilling; hvilket faktorer har en betydning for udfaldet
af en ulykke? Baseret p˚a tidligere studier og viden indenfor omr˚adet, er tre hypoteser opstillet, som
beskriver føreren, elementet og de geograﬁske faktorer. Baseret p˚a tidligere studiers resultat er det
konkluderet at yngre men, ældre og sm˚a biler samt en længere afstand til det nærmeste hospital, øger
risikoen for en personskade ulykke i forhold til en materiel skade ulykke.
For at undersøge disse hypoteser, er et datasæt indsamlet fra politiets registreringer, som indeholder
alle traﬁkulykker i perioden mellem 2013 og 2017, hvori kun ulykker med mindst 1 personbil indg˚ar.
Datasættet indeholder informationer omkring føreren, bilen, omgivelserne samt de geograﬁske faktorer,
hvor af en af disse faktorer inkluderet, adskiller sig fra resten. Dette er en tekst-beskrivende faktor
lavet af politiet, som indeholder et detaljeret referat af ulykken og dens udfald. Denne tekst-beskrivelse
er benyttet til at analysere den ikke observerbare faktor, uopmærksomhed. Projektets tre hypoteser
er undersøgt ved brug af en neuro-fuzzy model. Neuron-fuzzy er en kombination af neural network
og fuzzy-logic, der kan inkorporer b˚ade kategoriske og numeriske faktorer, samt undersøge mønstre
i data baseret p˚a en læringsproces, uden behov for tidligere viden p˚a omr˚adet. Neural network er
samtidigt undersøgt, bevidst om at de kun kan implementere de numeriske faktorer, dog er modellen
mere kompleks og kan derved undersøge den bagvedliggende struktur mere nøjagtigt. Yderligere er den
matematiske model decision tree undersøgt, da denne model kan implementeres med b˚ade kategoriske
og numeriske variable. Decision tree har derfor mulighed for at angive betydningen af de kategoriske
variable i forhold til en ulykkes udfald, hvilket neural network ikke er i stand til.
Neuro-fuzzy modellen viste desværre ingen nyttige analytiske resultater p˚a grund af en ikke fuldt ud-
viklet implementering af koden. Da modellen er kompleks, præcis og let for mennesker at fortolke p˚a,
ville denne model være en god tilgang til modellering af alvorlighedsgraden af ulykker. To tilsvarende
matematiske modeller, nemlig decision tree og neural network, blev valgt til at støtte op om Neuro-
fuzzy, dog endte de to modeller med at være de mest kvaliﬁcerede med delvis enighed i resultaterne.
Desuden blev det set, at alle tre hypoteser kunne bekræftes med de matematiske modeller samt den
beskrivende analyse. Den første hypotese vedrørende personkarakteristik blev bekræftet, da en
højere risiko er relateret til et stigende antal personer i ulykken. Den anden hypotese vedrørende
element-karakteristik blev bekræftet af to faktorer; bløde traﬁkanter og antal elementer. Bløde traﬁkan-
ter og f˚a elementer i en ulykke øger risikoen for personskadeulykker. Den tredje hypotese vedrørende
geograﬁsk placering, blev bekræftet af ﬁre faktorer; afstand til hospital, en hastighedsgrænse p˚a 80
km/t, større befolkningstæthed og region. Disse ﬁre faktorer medførte en forøget risiko for at være
involveret i en personskade ulykke. P˚a baggrund af de matematiske resultater blev ﬁre scenarier op-
stillet omhandlende antal elementer samt personer. Da scenarie 1 og 3 viste betydelig relation til
personskade ulykker, blev disse undersøgt nærmere. Scenario 1 involverede 1 og 2 elementer, samt 1
eller 2 personer, som viste sig at være ulykker med hovedsageligt bløde traﬁkanter. Til dette scenarie
blev der indført en forebyggende foranstaltning i form af et nyt krydsdesign, der fokuserede p˚a især
cyklister. Scenarie 3 involverede 1 og 2 elementer, samt plus 3 personer, som viste sig at være ulykker
med hovedsageligt to køretøjer. Til dette scenario var ligeledes en forebyggende foranstaltning et nyt
krydsdesign, da krydsninger af elementer var særligt udsatte for personskader.
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem formulation and focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Project structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Road traﬃc accidents
6
2.1
Conceptual framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Development of accidents
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Traﬃc safety
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Mathematical approaches
13
3.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Fuzzy logic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
The neuro-fuzzy model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Decision tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Data analysis process
27
4.1
Data structure and focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Descriptive data results
34
5.1
Results from text-description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Descriptive results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Mathematical results
47
6.1
Neuro-fuzzy modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Decision tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.4
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.5
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Discussion
54
7.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2
Mathematical approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.3
Preventive actions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Conclusion
62
References
63
Appendix
66
Page 1 of 66
==PAGE:7==
1. INTRODUCTION
1
Introduction
Traﬃc accidents are a global problem, leading to around 1.24 million fatalities annually.
For the
world’s youngest drivers, traﬃc accidents are the leading cause of death. If this trend is not reversed,
the World Road Association believes that the seventh most signiﬁcant cause of death in 2030 will be
due to traﬃc accidents [WRA, 1909b]. The World Road Association is an international community,
that shares knowledge about the global road network. The community consists of 140 countries, which
collectively aim to achieve the same goal, namely, to increase road safety worldwide [WRA, 1909a].
Denmark’s most comparable countries, concerning road network and traﬃc safety, lay within the
European Union. The European Commission for Mobility and Transport have formulated a common
target for all roads in the EU, which is to decrease the number of fatal traﬃc accidents by half, from
2010 to 2020. In 2010 the number of fatalities in the EU was around 31,500, which must be reduced
to 15,750 in 2020, in order to reach the desired goal of a 50% reduction. In 2017, the reduction so
far was 20%, however, far from the 50% goal. This goal is based upon all countries in the EU, but in
order to achieve it, the individual countries must also strive for the 50% reduction. At the beginning
of the twenty-ﬁrst century, total fatalities in the EU was decreasing, though this reduction ceased in
2013; since then, the total number of fatalities has been almost unchanged. The unchanged number of
fatalities makes the achievement of 50% by 2020 doubtful. Looking at Denmark alone, the country is
placed sixth overall and has reduced the number of fatalities by 31%, which is better than the overall
performance in the EU [European-Commission, 2017]. This performance above the average may be
due to Danish welfare society, which spends money and resources on optimizing traﬃc safety and
thereby increases safety on a daily basis [Venstre-Traﬁc, 2018].
Each day, a small share of the Danish population, are involved in traﬃc accidents, a circumstance
with both social and economic consequences. Sometimes, an accident results in a fatality; however,
most people survive with either no or fewer injuries. People who survive an accident with either no,
light or severe injuries are at risk of sustaining permanent injuries, both physical and mental, which
can be harder to overcome. A Danish saying states that ”an accident rarely comes alone,” meaning
that people can be aﬀected for the rest of their lives, after being involved in an accident, and it can
take days, weeks or months to recover. An accident will impact not only on the lives of the people
involved but most likely also aﬀect their close family, friends, and colleges, who must be positive and
supportive if the accident results in injuries. If, on the other hand, the outcome of an accident is death,
the deceased’s relatives will experience grief, and their lives will be permanently altered. The above
is an example of a social consequence, whereas the economic consequences relate more to the state,
since rescuers, police oﬃcers, hospitals and nurses are all aﬀected by the situation. Besides social
and economic consequences, an accident might also aﬀect the traﬃc ﬂow, according to its severity.
For light accidents causing no injuries, this disruption can take seconds or minutes to overcome. Most
accidents can be managed by pulling onto the hard shoulder to exchange information and quickly move
on, which should have a minimal impact on the traﬃc ﬂow. However, when more severe accidents
occur, roads may be closed, or rescuers can block several lanes, minimizing the driving area, which
can take minutes or hours to overcome. When this happens, it can completely stop the ﬂow in the
traﬃc, which can create delays for hundreds of people and constitutes a social consequence of a traﬃc
accident. So, owing to the social and economic consequences, it would be beneﬁcial to avoid all types
of traﬃc accidents completely; however, if the accident has occurred, it can be beneﬁcial to look at
the factors that may minimize the negative consequences of an accident.
1.1
Background
The internet does not contain many studies, within the area of accidents outcome; however, previous
studies from the Technical University of Denmark investigate accidents within the ﬁelds of cars and
motor vehicles, bicycles and rural areas. These studies are presented further in the following three
bullets, in which factors regarding the severity is described:
(1) The ﬁrst study from 2010 to 2014 shows that new cars are associated with less severe accidents
and that it would, therefore, be beneﬁcial for society to exchange old cars for new ones. Exchanging
could reduce the number of drivers killed by 50%, more severe accidents by 33% and lighter injuries
by almost 14%. Furthermore, it shows that driving a motor vehicle with a higher total weight reduces
Page 2 of 66
==PAGE:8==
1. INTRODUCTION
the risk of a more severe accident when compared to cars with a lower total weight. Additionally, men
are at lower risk of severe accidents than women. Likewise, older people are more likely to be involved
in a severe accident compared to young people. [Rich et al., 2013]
(2) The second study from 2007 to 2011 investigated the severity of accidents involving cyclists in
Denmark. This subject is highly relevant as Denmark is among the nations with most cyclists; more-
over, it is relevant for this research as both cars and cyclist accidents are common. The study shows
that children and the elderly are more at risk of severe accidents, while the use of a helmet reduces
the severity of accidents involving cyclists. Furthermore, it shows that roads with a speed limit above
70-80 km/h, as well as slippery roads, are risk factors for cyclists, while a bike lane and population
density decrease this risk [Kaplan et al., 2014]
(3) The third study from 2007 to 2011 investigates the risk factors associated with low-volume rural
roads in Denmark. This study shows that the severity of an accident increases when alcohol, non-use
of seat-belts, vulnerable road users and heavy vehicles are involved, as well as speed limits of 80-90
km/h. Additionally, it shows that accidents occurring far from a hospital have a more severe outcome.
Accidents happening more than 40 kilometers away from a hospital are 32% more likely to cause severe
injuries and 40% more likely to result in death, when, comparing accidents closer to hospitals. [Prato
et al., 2014]
The aforementioned is one of the leading motivations for this project, which aims to identify these
factors, with the highest inﬂuence on accident outcomes; either a personal injury or material damage.
The present research aims to help reduce the number of injuries, either by ensuring only material
damage accidents or completely avoiding accidents. Personal injuries are deﬁned as anything from a
broken bone to worst-case, death. Material damage, on the other hand, refers to accidents where only
the car has been marked, meaning anything from minor to a destroyed car. The goal of ﬁnding the
most inﬂuential factors is formulated, in order to reduce the severity of accident outcomes, hopefully
reducing the number of personal injuries in Denmark. This topic was chosen to be investigated since
internet searches show that the severity modeling is less common in Denmark than frequency modeling.
1.2
Problem formulation and focus
This project’s main research question is as follows:
- What factors aﬀect the severity, of a car accident?
This problem statement will be the focus of this project. Furthermore, the following three hypotheses
have been formulated:
1. Personal characteristics have an impact on the outcome of a traﬃc accident;
2. Element characteristics have an impact on the outcome of a traﬃc accident;
3. The likelihood of personal injury accidents depends on the geographical location.
Personal characteristics related to a persons age, gender, behavior and the number of persons involved
in the accident.
Likewise, do element characteristics relate to the element type, age, weight and
the number of elements involved in the accident. Geographic location relates to region, distance to
hospital, population density, speed limit, and road design. The hypotheses are carefully selected based
on knowledge and previous studies in the area.
The ﬁrst hypothesis is based on the idea that less driving experience and higher maximum tolerance
of risk in the traﬃc may contribute to accidents. In general, men are more frequently involved in
traﬃc accidents, based on knowledge from previous studies [Road-Directorate, 2016]. The second
hypothesis is based on that older cars are more likely to be involved in more severe accidents,
compared to newer and safer cars, as the technology in newer cars has changed signiﬁcantly, the
recent years [Rich et al., 2013]. Concerning car weight, large cars are safer, but this only applies if
the accident involves two vehicles. A vulnerable road user (pedestrian, cyclist or motorcyclist) is at
higher risk of personal injury accidents from a large car compared with a small one. The diﬀerence is
due to the assumption that a vulnerable road user will be thrown over the car when the car is small,
Page 3 of 66
==PAGE:9==
1. INTRODUCTION
whereas if the same accident took place with a large car, the vulnerable road user would be thrown
underneath the car instead, making the accident more severe. The third hypothesis is formulated
based on a long distance to the nearest hospital from the accident, is more exposed to severe accidents,
compared to those accidents located close to emergency hospitals. The three hypotheses are tested
to see whether they can be conﬁrmed or disproved. This is completed by descriptive analysis, as well
as the mathematical model, neuro-fuzzy modeling. The analyzed data is gathered from police records
between 2013 and 2017. Owing to the data complexity, mathematical models are completed in order
to ﬁnd signiﬁcant patterns and thereby an increased possibility to ﬁnd useful and eligible analytic
results. A hypothesis is proved if one of the characteristics shows to have an inﬂuence on the severity
outcome.
The project’s focus points are as follows:
- Limited to Denmark;
- Minimum one car in the accident;
- Accident outcome is taken to be the most severe outcome of all involved;
- Period is 2013 to 2017;
- Two possible outcome: material damage and personal injury
1.3
Methodology
One way to describe the overall methodology is by using the research onion [Saunders and Tosey, 2013].
This method provides a deeper understanding of the scientiﬁc theory and the kind of data used. The
method consists of six layers, each representing a level of detail. With each peeled layer, the researcher
comes one step closer to knowing the research methodology. How to progress the research, as well
as how to collect data and describe the underlying philosophical considerations, is revealed as these
layers are peeled, describing the focus of this project. The overall philosophies used in this research are
ontology and epistemology, as these focus on learning what reality is, and then trying to understand
how the world operates. This project uses the philosophy of positivism, as this research study has one
research question and three hypotheses. Furthermore, other researchers may ﬁnd the same outcome,
which supports positivism. The underlying theories are known in advance, meaning this project takes
a deductive approach to investigating hypotheses and the research question. The theories used are
the mathematical methods neuro-fuzzy modeling, neural network, and decision tree, which are already
existing theories. To achieve the investigation, three strategies are used; case study, action research,
and archival research, as these, focus on real-life problems. The choices of the research mainly operate
on quantitative data, collected by the police, based upon an accident, containing measurable data
points. However, this project will also investigate a qualitative collected factor, from the police record,
containing a police description of the accident. This constitutes a multi-method as quantitative data
being the dominant choice. Regarding the time horizon, this study uses a longitudinal design, as
it studies factors over a longer period. The last layer focuses on the techniques and procedure of
collecting the relevant data. As this study aims to investigate the severity of a traﬃc accident, both
quantitative and qualitative data sets are gathered from police records, Statistics Denmark, Danish
regions and the Danish Map Supply. This combination of data is considered to constitute the best
possible description of the severity of accidents in Denmark.
1.4
Project structure
Chapter 2 provides insight into Denmark’s road network, its users and traﬃc safety. It covers the
development of vehicles, as well as the number of traﬃc accidents, that occur. Furthermore, it will
investigate the cost incurred when an accident involving personal injury.
Chapter 3 provides insight into the neuro-fuzzy modeling, as well as background theory on neural
network and fuzzy logic. Additionally, a theoretical description of the decision tree is giving, used to
compare the signiﬁcant factors found, which also applies to the neural network.
Page 4 of 66
==PAGE:10==
1. INTRODUCTION
Chapter 4 provides insight into how the data were processed and prepared to ﬁt this project. Further-
more, it provides a presentation of the factors extracted from the police records and the additional
few factors from other sources.
Chapter 5 ﬁrst presents the results from the text-description factor gathered from the police records
are provided. Second, descriptive results are presented to provide insight into how the factors are
related to the severity outcome of a traﬃc accident.
Chapter 6 provides the results from the three mathematical methods; the neuro-fuzzy modeling, the
neural network and the decision tree. This section oﬀers answers regarding to which model to use
when predicting the severity of traﬃc accidents, and which methods have been most eﬀective in
providing the best traﬃc insights into an accident. In addition four scenarios is established based on
the mathematical results to provide more eﬀective preventive actions.
Chapter 7 presents ﬁrst, a short discussion regarding descriptive results. Second, the mathematical
results are discussed and validated based on real-life accidents between 2013 and 2017. Third, the
signiﬁcant scenarios are explained, to determine future actions in more detail.
Fourth, an overall
preventive strategy is introduced and discussed based on the previous results.
Chapter 8 focuses on formulating a conclusion about severity modeling based on this project.
Page 5 of 66
==PAGE:11==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
2
Road traﬃc accidents
This section provides insight into Denmark’s road network, its users and traﬃc safety. It covers the
development of vehicles, as well as the number of traﬃc accidents, that occur. Furthermore, it will
investigate the cost incurred when an accident involving personal injury.
2.1
Conceptual framework
Concerning this project’s ﬁeld of research, many theories are relevant. These theories describe the
motivating factors for the investigation into the severity of an accident.
One theory relating to this ﬁeld of investigation is the domino theory [Saxena, 2017]. The domino
theory originated in 1931 and described the occurrence of an accident using multiple domino pieces to
symbolize the traﬃc factors, which in the end lead to the accident. Furthermore, the theory explains
that preventing one of these domino pieces from falling onto the next domino piece can prevent an
accident from happening. The theory describes ﬁve main domino pieces, which all lead to injury from
an accident: (1) the social environment, (2) fault of the person, (3) accident conditions (weather, road
type, etc.), (4) accident, (5) personal injury.
The ﬁrst piece of the chain is the social environment, which describes how humans diﬀer in the way
we act toward others, which often depends on the environment. Some people are helpful and able to
empathize with others, while others are not good at looking beyond their own situation. Some people
are highly emotional, while others do not care for people other than themselves. This is the ﬁrst
domino piece in the chain, which falls into the next domino piece when compassion toward others is
low. The second piece is the fault of the person, which describes how some people ﬁnd themselves in
dangerous situations deliberately or otherwise. This could be, unintentional, for example when a driver
with no experience, drives into a dangerous situation without knowing it. Alternatively, it could be
through drunk driving, where the person puts him- or herself in danger by driving under the inﬂuence
of alcohol, knowing that this will increase the risk of an accident. This domino piece falls when the
driver gets into these dangerous situations. The third piece of the chain is an accident condition,
which refers to the diﬀerent factors, that can cause an accident, such as inattention or driving too
quickly. The fourth domino piece refers to the actual happening of an accident, while the ﬁfth
piece refers to a personal injury. This theory describes an accident in a one-dimensional way, which
is a non-complex example, whereas accidents are often based upon multiple factors and causes, which
can be diﬃcult to explain with a clear line. Nevertheless, the primary goal of this theory is to describe
how many factors and causes combined may increase the risk of an accident, and by removing one
or several factors, it is possible to prevent an accident. In this project, the third domino piece is
investigated, though not to prevent an accident, but rather to prevent injuries caused by accident. So,
in the hypothetical situation in which an accident has occurred, the goal is to prevent the accident
domino piece from knocking down the personal injury piece and thereby prevent injuries.
A second theory is the risk homeostasis theory, which describes how people adjust their behavior
according to their maximum tolerance for risk. Risk tolerance diﬀers from person to person depending
on the driver’s self-conﬁdence and previous driving experience. An example could be a young man
who likes to drive at high speeds, which puts him at high risk compared to a person driving slowly,
who would be at relatively low risk. The theory explains how some signiﬁcant factors might not be
signiﬁcant for all people in traﬃc since this depends on their maximum risk tolerance. If, for example,
the result shows that the accident situation is a highly signiﬁcant factor, this could not be generalized
to all people, since the driver’s risk tolerance inﬂuence how he or she enters a roundabout. For example,
people with a higher risk tolerance will most likely enter a roundabout more aggressively, compared to
a person with lower risk tolerance, and therefore increase the probability of a personal injury accident
[Saxena, 2017]. This theory indicates that beyond every traﬃc safety analysis, the person’s behavior,
conﬁdence, previous driving experience, and other factors, play a signiﬁcant role in analyzing safety,
which is unobserved.
The ﬁrst theory is related to the problem formulation and motivates the importance of looking into
the factors, inﬂuencing the outcome of an accident. The second theory denotes that future conclusions
cannot be generalized to the entire Danish population, as the risk tolerance is correlated with accident
factors.
Page 6 of 66
==PAGE:12==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
2.2
Development of accidents
A higher traﬃc volume can increase the risk of accidents, as more cars on the road can conﬂict with
each other. The total traﬃc volume in Denmark increased by 60% between 1990 and 2017 [Road-
Directorate, 2018a]. The increase in traﬃc volume can be explained by the fact that more people
move to the countryside.
Today many people seek to escape urban environments and are willing
to endure a longer trip to work to do so [Bruun, 2018]. This generates more cars, as living in the
countryside makes it even more likely for people, to have one or more cars, as public transport can
be inaccessible. People can become dependent on having a car to pick up children, attend leisure
activities, shop, etc. However, in some situations, in which people can easily access public transport,
they may still prefer cars. First, this may be due to the poor condition of the cycle paths in smaller
cities, which makes people feel unsafe, even if a cycle path exists. Second, the countryside are often
very dark at night due to lack of street lights, and third, the public transport options are often limited,
which again makes the car an easier choice.
The following ﬁgure can partially explain the increase in traﬃc volume. This ﬁgure 2.1 shows how the
total number of motor vehicles has increased, an increase mostly accounted for by cars from 1998 to
2017. The space between the line and the bars describes trucks and other motor vehicles, which make
up a smaller proportion of the total.
 -
 1,000,000
 2,000,000
 3,000,000
 4,000,000
Cars
Total motor vehicle
Figure 2.1: Distribution of cars among all motor vehicles [Road-Directorate, 2018b]
In 1998, the proportion of cars was around 80%, decreasing to 79% in 2017. However, this proportion
is still high and almost unchanged. The increase in cars and motor vehicles is consistent with traﬃc
volume, as when more cars are registered in Denmark the volume, cost and kilometers driven will
automatically increase. However, not all cars have experienced the same positive growth in recent
years; smaller cars are the best-selling cars since they are cheap, which makes it possible for people of
lesser means to own a car. A small car does not mean worse design or comfort since all types of cars
have experienced signiﬁcant design and comfort improvements in recent years, which makes cars the
preferable mode of transportation for many [Berlingske, 2013].
Additionally, it is interesting to study the development of personal injuries between 1998 and 2017,
based on police records from Statistics Denmark [Statistics-Denmark, 2017b]. Figure 2.2 shows that
the number of personal injuries, in general, has been signiﬁcantly decreasing since 1998. However,
when looking at the number of people killed in traﬃc accidents, this number represents around 6%
of all personal injuries and has not changed since 1998. In 1998, 261 people were killed, whereas this
number in 2017 was 99. While this is a decrease, deaths still account for 6% of all personal injuries in
2017, the same as in 1998. The number of people killed in traﬃc, was at its lowest level in 2015, with
74 fatalities, which has not been possible to maintain.
Page 7 of 66
==PAGE:13==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
0
1000
2000
Killed
Severe
Lighter
Figure 2.2: Personal injuries from 1998 to 2017
Additionally, the ﬁgure shows that the development of lighter accidents is unchanged for several years
from 1998 but then decreases between 2004 and 2012, after which it again seems to remain unchanged.
The actions can explain the signiﬁcant decrease between 2004 and 2012 and preventative measure
taken at the beginning of 2000, as several campaigns came to existence to inform people about this
signiﬁcant problem [Transport-Safety-Council, 2018]. Furthermore, no diﬀerence between the severe
injury in 2013 and 2017 is seen, nor between 1998 and 2003.
This section supports this project’s problem statement, as the increasing number of cars does not
aﬀect the number of traﬃc accidents negatively. The higher traﬃc volume which could have led to
more personal injuries has had the opposite eﬀect. This can be accounted for by the fact that a higher
traﬃc volume on the roads leads cars to travel at a slower speed than the road’s original speed limit,
thereby reducing the number of severe accidents as well as the total number of accidents [Klingenberg,
2017]. However, as the higher volume has not decreased the total amount of accidents to zero, it is
worthwhile to determine what factors inﬂuence the severity of the accidents that do occur.
2.3
Traﬃc safety
The Danish Road Safety Commission, part of the Ministry of Transport, Building, and Housing in
Denmark and responsible for reducing the number of traﬃc accidents, has established a national action
plan until 2020. This plan contains ten focus areas, which are chosen by the Danish Road Safety
Commission, in relation to optimizing traﬃc safety. One of the ten focus areas within the national
plan is young drivers up to 24 years old. The Road Safety Commission target for 2020 speciﬁes that
the number of personal injuries must not exceed a maximum of 2,100 [Road-Safety-Commission, 2013].
However, the overall vision for the traﬃc commission is that every accident is one accident too many, a
conclusion reached through collaboration between public, private and civil society. The purpose of the
collaboration is to reduce the number of traﬃc accidents, as well as the severity of accidents that do
occur. The plan is implemented through policy, control, lectures, and campaigns, as the commission
knows that for this goal to be achieved, it is necessary to spend resources and time. When studying
the total number of people killed in 2017, the target was not reached as 3,318 drivers were involved in
personal injury accidents [Statistics-Denmark, 2017b].
This goal reinforces the problem statement for this project, as the target number of injuries is still
far from the actual number, which indicates that further investigation is necessary to obtain better
results. This focus area supports the ﬁrst hypothesis, as it focuses on personal characteristics. The
action plan states further that heavy vehicles reduce the risk of death and injury in an accident.
However, this is an assumption of the Danish Road Safety Commission and is not elaborated upon.
The aforementioned assumption, therefore, supports the second hypothesis. The third hypothesis is
not included in the action plan, presumably because the location of an accident is less signiﬁcant in
relation to reducing the number of accidents.
Maximum risk
Several previous studies show that behavioral factors seem to play a signiﬁcant role in the outcome
of a traﬃc accident [Transport-Safety-Council, 2019]. The theory of risk homeostasis supports this,
describing the risk tolerance people has in traﬃc, cf. section 2.1. People know that driving while being
tired or inattentive may increase their risk of being involved in an accident, but still many choose to
drive, despite being aware of the increased risk. This can be explained by the previous theory, as
Page 8 of 66
==PAGE:14==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
people’s maximum tolerance of risk in the traﬃc, is so high that the prospect of increased risk from
driving while tired or inattentive, does not change their behavior. However, for the population of
Denmark, it is assumed that they have a good insight into those factors inﬂuencing traﬃc accidents,
which in most situations cause people to avoid these factors and thereby a possible traﬃc accident.
This is for example seen when people are invited to a party, where it is sometimes noted in the
invitation, that they should ﬁnd a way to arrive and leave without a car, thus addressing a high-risk
factor in advance. However, should a person show up in a car and think that he or she, after a few
drinks, is in a state to drive home, people will most likely stop him or her before it is too late and
order a taxi. This example shows that people’s knowledge about risk factors is high, though if all
people displayed this insight, fewer accidents would properly occur.
People who are willing to take major risks will often overlook these insights and thus increase the
danger to themselves and others on the road.
This supports the ﬁrst hypothesis, as the driver’s
maximum risk tolerance is a personal characteristic. The person’s maximum risk tolerance describes
traﬃc behavior, which in cases of high risk is very likely to cause inattention.
Kilometers driven
A study from the road directorate [Road-Directorate, 2016], shows that the number of men involved
in traﬃc accidents is twice as high, like that of women.
Whether this is due to men being more
aggressive in their driving behavior or men in general driving more kilometers than women, it is
diﬃcult to determine. However, an analysis developed by DTU transport in 2013 investigates the
traﬃc behavior among women and men, shows that men drive 29 km per day on average, whereas
women only 16 km per day [DTU-Transport, 2013b]. This diﬀerence can be explained by men and
women’s diﬀerent choices of profession, as men usually use 45% of their transportation time going to
and from work, where women only use around 25%. For example, under 10% of Danish women works
as craftspeople or carpenters, and therefore few women need to drive around as much concerning their
work [byg.tek, 2018]. Furthermore, higher education makes people even more specialized, and this
can result in longer travel time as the range of jobs decreases, and people forced to travel longer to
and from work [DTU-Transport, 2013a]. Regarding this, men are typically more highly educated than
women, which also leads to men driving more than women [Berlingske, 2019]. However, when looking
at the proportion of transportation time devoted to leisure, it is seen that women use almost 47% of
their total transportation time for leisure, men only around 35%.
As men drive more kilometers than women, is it assumed that men are at higher risk of being involved
in a personal injury accident, due to more driver experience and thereby higher tolerance of risk. This
supports the ﬁrst hypothesis, as the risk of tolerance might be diﬀerent between genders.
Safety development for cars
Car safety has seen signiﬁcant developments over the last few years [FDM, 2019b]. Previous research
support this, showing that newer cars are safer than older cars [Rich et al., 2013]. One new technology
is the automatic emergency brake, which stops the car if it gets too close to another vehicle [FDM,
2019b]. This technology could ameliorate many material damage accidents, as the technology mostly
works at low speeds, but for some new cars, it can work at higher speeds. The overall target in relation
to technological development is to reduce all types of accident and not only material damage. Some
accidents are associated with inattention, where the driver may end up in the wrong lane, which is
addressed by the new technology called the lane assistant [FDM, 2019b]. This technology warns the
driver when he is crossing the line or turning the steering wheel, which is likely to prevent many
accidents caused by inattention. Some newer cars also contain long automatic lights and the ability
to spot objects in the blind spot, called the blind spot information system, which warns the driver if
there are other objects in the blind spots of the car [Bilbasen, 2019].
The above refers only to a small proportion of the new technologies associated with newer cars. If
all the cars driving on Danish roads today featured these kinds of technologies, the traﬃc accident
pattern would presumably to be completely diﬀerent. However, only a small proportion of cars have
these kinds of technologies installed, meaning it is still necessary to study which factors could lead to
a reduction in accidents involving ordinary cars.
A leading car manufacturer in terms of car safety is Volvo. They have the goal of ensuring that no one
is killed or severely injured in a Volvo produced after 2020 [Volvo-Car, 2019]. The driver of a Volvo
Page 9 of 66
==PAGE:15==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
produced after 2020 will, therefore, sit in a car surrounded by new technology, aiming to minimize the
risk of an accident. One new technology Volvo is installing in the new cars is run-oﬀroad protection.
This technology register if the cars run oﬀthe road and immediately tightens the seat-belts to keep
the passengers safe. Moreover, it is diﬃcult to encounter this situation, as Volvo is also installing lane
assistant technology.
The fact that car manufacturers have begun to develop new and safer technologies will most likely
cause the number of traﬃc accidents in the future to decrease. However, even if an accident happens,
there will be an expectation of fewer personal injuries sustained. Since a signiﬁcant diﬀerence can be
seen between the technology installed in new and old cars, the second hypothesis is supported, as this
may inﬂuence to severity outcome.
Hospital distance
When people call 112, they are put in contact with the police, and as soon as they know it concerns
a personal injury, the call is redirected to AMK. AMK stands for emergency medical coordination (in
Danish) and refers to a person who advises and helps the person who called to provide ﬁrst aid. Based
on this, it is possible to help the injured person and provide help from the start. The person behind
AMK will be on the telephone until the ambulance has reached the location of the accident, to take
over [RegionMidtjylland, 2012].
Research from a website containing information for the Danish Regions indicates that more than 90%
of ambulances, reach the location of the accident within 15 minutes [Danish-Regions, 2019]. This
applies to all ﬁve Danish regions, and 30% of the time the ambulance arrives within 5 minutes. The
region of North Jutland is the region, with the lowest share of ambulances arriving within 15 minutes,
though the proportion of ambulances that arrive within 15 minutes is 91,8%, which is a high lower
range. This proportion is quite high, which indicates that ambulances in Denmark generally arrive at
the scene quickly.
When the accident is under control, the rescuer transports the injured person to the nearest emergency
hospital. The minute the ambulance leaves the accident scene; they call the emergency hospital to
explain what to expect on their arrival. There are 21 emergency hospitals in Denmark, which will be
the destination for the ambulance when an accident has occurred [Danish-Regions, 2019]. When more
severe accidents happen, every minute counts and a long trip from the accident location to the nearest
emergency hospital may have serious consequences.
At the hospital, the hospital staﬀis ready when the ambulance arrives, having prepared the optimal
equipment to help the injured person [JydskeVestkysten et al., 2012]. However, whether this trip from
the accident location to the nearest hospital aﬀects the severity of the accident is unknown.
This section indicates that ambulances in Denmark usually arrive at injury accidents within 15 minutes,
and thus have the opportunity to provide eﬀective ﬁrst aid. However, not many studies are based on
the distance from the accident location to the nearest emergency hospital and how this distance aﬀects
the outcome of the accident. This supports the third hypothesis since the location of an accident can,
therefore, have a signiﬁcant impact.
Cost of accidents
When an accident occurs in Denmark, it often incurs social expenses, where the amount depends on
the severity of the accident. Social expenses can be divided into several categories; [DTU-transport,
2018]:
• Police and paramedics
• Medical treatment
• Material damage expenses
• Production loss
• Societal loss
These ﬁve categories of social expenses, are estimated and maintained by DTU transport and present
the expenses related to traﬃc accidents, as well as welfare costs [DTU-transport, 2018]. Both police
and paramedics are present at personal injury accidents to gain control of the situation, whereas for
Page 10 of 66
==PAGE:16==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
material damage only the police need to be present. If an accident results in personal injury, the injured
person needs medical treatment, which is also an expense. No matter the severity of the accident,
there will always be material damage expenses, which can vary in amount depending on severity. If a
more severe personal injury occurs, this may lead to functionality loss which causes production loss in
the society, since the person is not functional as before the accident. The last category deﬁnes societal
loss, which intends to estimate the value of a lost human life. There are many questions related to
the cost of human life, the most pertinent being ethics. However, the cost of human life is based on
a statistical life, which deﬁnes a person’s willingness to pay for a reduction in the risk of dying and
is reported as DKK 31,000,000 [Economic-Councils, 2016]. The accidents are based on police records,
and under-reporting has been taken into consideration. Under-reporting refers to the fact that not
all accidents are known by the police, which can create an inconsistency between records and reality.
This is taken accounted for in the transport economy unit prices, as the number of police recorded
fatalities is multiplied by 1, severe accidents are multiplied by 2.23, and less severe accidents by 10.38;
however, under-reporting will be discussed more detailed in chapter 7.
On average, a traﬃc accident involving personal injuries has a signiﬁcantly higher social cost compared
to material damage accidents. The table below presents this diﬀerence in greater details:
Table 2.1: Social expenses for road accidents, [DTU-transport, 2018]
DKK. per
Reported traﬃc accident
Reported traﬃc accident with personal injury
Person-related expenses
356,639
955,366
Material damage
773,681
2,072,542
Welfare loss
1,700,832
4,556,201
Total
2,831,152
7,584,110
The social expense values used in this section are from 2018, as these are closest to the analyzed
period from 2013 to 2017. Concerning personal injury prices, a study from DTU transport estimates
1.3 people in each accident sustain injuries, and that injury accidents correspond to 37% of total traﬃc
accidents. 37% is the estimated proportion of injury accidents in Denmark, which is used to calculate
the aforementioned costs. The table shows that the average cost of a traﬃc accident diﬀers from the
accidents involving injuries by nearly DKK 5,000,000. This diﬀerence indicates how important it is to
decrease the number of injury accidents, as their cost is extremely high, and even a small reduction in
the number of injury accidents can make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
The other 63% of all accidents are estimated to cause only material damage, which is also included
in the average price of an accident. In the average price, it can be argued that a material damage
accident only costs around DKK 773,000, as there is no injury and therefore no expenses for welfare
losses and medical treatment. If this is argued, the diﬀerence between material damage accidents and
injury accidents is calculated to be around DKK 7, 500, 000 −773, 000 = 6, 700, 000. This diﬀerence
supports the rationale of this project, as ﬁnding the factors that cause injury accidents can reduce
social expenses enormously.
The above notation of an injury accident is calculated as an average price, though the cost of an
injury accident varies signiﬁcantly, depending on severity. The severity of an injury can be divided
into three categories, namely light, severe and deadly. The price of an accident involving a person
who was killed corresponds to DKK 34,000,000, a severe injury DKK 5,300,000 and a light injury
DKK 676,000, meaning that money can be saved by having only light accidents rather than severe or
death ones [DTU-transport, 2018]. Though, as this project identiﬁes the factors having a signiﬁcant
impact on overall personal injury accidents, there will not be any separation within the personal injury
accidents.
This section supports the motivation for the entire project’s purpose since a reduction in total expenses
is signiﬁcant for Danish society.
Severity modeling
Optimizing traﬃc safety based on accident data can be done in two ways; frequency modeling and
severity modeling. Frequency modeling investigates the number of accidents occurring on the roads
and studies those factors that cause an accident. For frequency modeling, methods such as Poisson,
negative binomial and neural networks are used. These models use count data, which is a statistical
Page 11 of 66
==PAGE:17==
2. ROAD TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS
data type that can only take non-negative integer values. For severity modeling, binary, ordinal or
nominal outcome models are used, as these all describe a discrete outcome. Frequency and severity
modeling needs to be treated with diﬀerent approaches, as one factor that may be signiﬁcant for
reducing the number of accidents may not be signiﬁcant for reducing the severity of accidents [Møller
and Janstrup, 2017a]. Looking into previous research in the ﬁeld of accident severity modeling in
Denmark, it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd a large number of articles on this subject. Moreover, when looking into
the research in this ﬁeld, it is often simpliﬁed to deal with only one type of element, one type of road
design, or single vehicle accidents, as this is more manageable. However, the focus of this project is
a minimum of one car involved in the selected traﬃc accidents, which gives a broader perspective on
the possible factors involved. For both the frequency modeling and the severity modeling, analysis is
based upon a period in the past, which can create variable uncertainty since the variables can change
signiﬁcantly due to changes in the environment or the general structure of the road network [Møller
and Janstrup, 2017b]. This project optimizes traﬃc safety using a nontraditional method for Danish
severity modeling called neuro-fuzzy modeling. This method is a combination of neural network and
fuzzy logic. Both of these methods try to incorporate how the human brain works. Fuzzy logic and
neural network are in a sense related, as they are both soft computing tools. This means they both use
mathematical tools that incorporate uncertain and imprecise data that expect an approximate result.
Hard computing, on the other hand, is based upon exact data with no uncertainty, meaning no errors
or bias in the data collection, which leads to more accurate results.
The use of neuro-fuzzy modeling compared to the above presented traditional models, is due to its
algorithm possibility to investigate complex data, although it describes the result human-friendly, in
which reasonable interpretations are possible.
Partial conclusion The section showed that traﬃc volume in Denmark has been increasing the
recent years. However, this increase was not seen to have a negative eﬀect on severe accidents. The
beneﬁt of investigating traﬃc-related factors is the possibility of reducing the number of accidents,
but also social expenses by DKK 6, 700, 000 for one single personal injury accident. Additionally, the
section explained that men in general drive greater distances than women, which is partly due to their
professions. This increases their risk of being involved in an accident, compared to that of women. The
result relates to personal characteristics and supports the ﬁrst hypothesis. Besides, more cars today
are produced with traﬃc-safe technology, which causes signiﬁcant variation in the safety level of cars
on Danish roads. Furthermore, it was stated that in almost 92 % of all cases, the ambulance arrived
within 15 minutes. The time from the accident location to the emergency hospital is less described in
the literature and is therefore relevant to investigate under the third hypothesis.
Page 12 of 66
==PAGE:18==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
3
Mathematical approaches
This section provides insight into the neuro-fuzzy modeling, as well as background theory on neural
network and fuzzy logic. Additionally, a theoretical description of the decision tree is giving, used to
compare the signiﬁcant factors found, which also applies to the neural network.
3.1
Methodology
This project’s primary research model is the neuro-fuzzy, although the neural network will be completed
to bring the neuro-fuzzy into perspective. This is done because the neuro-fuzzy model can operate on
both numerical and non-ordered nominal categorical factors; whereas, the neural network is limited to
numerical factors only. Regarding the neural network, it was decided not to transform the categorical
factors into numerical factors by adding dummy-factors, since this increases the number of factors and
make complex data even more complex. Therefore, only the numerical factors were considered, which
will give insight into the measurable numerical factors from the police records. The neural network
was performed by a forward selection, where factors were included in the model if the model’s overall
error decreases. The ﬁrst factor added to the model was chosen based upon expert knowledge. In the
process of selecting the factors, the network was kept non-complex, meaning one hidden layer with
three neurons. The network structure was changed when the most signiﬁcant factors were found, to
see if more or less hidden layers or neurons, would change the performance of the network signiﬁcantly.
In addition to the neuro-fuzzy model and the neural network, a decision tree was completed, as this
model performs on both numerical and categorical factors. The decision tree is straight forward, easy
to incorporate and human-friendly. Neuro-fuzzy modeling can, therefore, be seen as a combination
of the advantages of both the neural network and decision tree, as it contains structure learning and
parameter optimization as well as a straightforward human learning approach. This is why the neural
network and the decision tree was chosen to provide a perspective, as the outcome and implementation,
do not vary signiﬁcantly from the neuro-fuzzy model.
Supervised learning
The decision tree is, as the neural network, a supervised learning method, where the purpose is to ﬁnd
a function that describes the relationship between an outcome variable and some explanatory factors,
such as f(x) = y. Here, y is the target factor, x is the explanatory factor, and f is the function that
links the explanatory factor to the target variable, meaning that x is independent of y, but y is not
dependent on x. The main idea in supervised learning is to ﬁnd the function f, for which the decision
tree and the neural network have diﬀerent approaches. Finding this function, f means that a splitting
process is done to train and test the methods. One splitting method is the 80/20 method. The 80/20
method means that 80% of the full data set is used for training the model, while the remaining 20% is
used for testing the model. For small data sets, the 80/20 splitting method is a good idea, though if
the data set becomes extremely large and contains many observations, the test data will contain many
unnecessary test examples. The more examples the training data contains, the better the model will
perform, as the model will get more examples of possible outcomes. With this said, there is no correct
way to split up the data since it depends on the size of data and the analysis. Regarding this project,
the 90/10 approach is used as the test data set contains around 5,400 accidents (10%). This should
give a good indication of the model’s performance.
3.2
Neural network
The neural network is a supervised classiﬁcation method, that arises from the biology, but is widely
used in ﬁelds such as economics, marketing, and the engineering profession. In these ﬁelds, the method
has been used for stock forecasting, target marketing and prediction of traﬃc safety ([Beck, 2018a],
p.224).
The idea of the neural network arises from the human brain and has its inspiration in the way the
human brain works and acts. Besides our heart, the brain is the central part of us humans. The
brain takes inputs from our ﬁve senses; sight, smell, taste, hearing, and feeling, which are then used
to recognize objects, colors, and sounds. This is possible because the brain contains neurons that
transport the observed information from one neuron to another, and thereby we humans capture the
Page 13 of 66
==PAGE:19==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
observed information. The brain contains around 100 billion neurons, which are a kind of nerve cell
that transports observed signals. ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran, 2017], p.30).
When the human brain looks at a picture, for example, of a horse, we know it is a horse because of our
previous experience and knowledge about how a horse should look. However, what if a computer saw
an image of a horse? The average horse is tall, has four legs, a nose, a tail, two spiky ears, and so on,
but these characteristics are also perfect descriptions of a cow or a large dog. This makes it diﬃcult
for a computer to describe an animal based on the animal’s characteristics. This is where the human
brain shines, as we can easily look at an image and see whether it is a horse, a cow, or a dog. When we
see a picture of a horse, we use our eyes, knowledge, and logical sense to see the shape of the animal.
This is because our hidden inner-stored layers in the brain contain neurons, which aim to transform
the observed image into usable information. Although, this process is hard to tell a computer that
can only measure observable elements.
The neural network algorithm rises from the basis of the above theory, where some input data via
some hidden layers and weights provide the best estimate for a target variable.
As described, the neural network inspiration comes from the brain. Similarly, the neural network has
neurons whose primary purpose is to transport input data through a learning network and thereby
predict a target factor based on the explanatory factors. This learning network of neurons is the
foundation of the neural network and is built up around three main layers called the input, hidden,
and output layers.
All the layers contain one or more neurons depending on the complexity and
accuracy of the network. A neural network is also referred to as a multi-layer perception if multiple
hidden layers are presented. In machine learning a perception is a classiﬁcation algorithm that linear
classiﬁes either 0/1 or true/false and predict based on a linear separator ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran,
2017],p.170). A neural network is built upon this idea, although the neural network contains multiple
perceptions.
On the below graph, a simple network is visualized by an input, hidden, and an output layer with two,
one, and one neuron within, respectively.
Figure 3.1: Example of a simple Neural Network
The grey input layer in ﬁgure 3.1 above is built based on one layer containing one or several neurons,
depending on the number of explanatory factors associated with the data. After the input layer comes
the central part of the network, the hidden layer described by the yellow neuron in ﬁgure 3.1. The
hidden layer can contain several numbers of layers and neurons and is selected by the user. However,
the more layers and neurons there are, the more accurate the model becomes, as the networks become
larger and are able to consider several patterns. The hidden layers can be seen as a subsection of the
previous layer, where each neuron describes a larger division of the input factors. Last, is the orange
output layer, which contains one layer with neurons equal to the number of categories in the predicted
target factor. The three layers are connected by some weights w1,w2 and w3, which represent how
large an eﬀect each neuron from the previous layer has on the neurons in the next layer. The two last
neurons in ﬁgure 3.1 above is described by a z and a value. The z value represents a non-active value,
that is calculated based upon a weighted sum of the previous layer plus the threshold. The a value,
Page 14 of 66
==PAGE:20==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
on the other hand, represents an activation value, describing the temporary predicted value, and is
calculated based upon a non-linear activation function, which is described in more detail in section
3.2. The threshold is used in the calculation of z on the ﬁgure 3.1 above, and indicates a reference
line for the calculation, which gives the network a better ability to predict. The calculation of the z
and a value will be described in greater detail in the following section.
The input layer does not contain an activation value a, though a normalization is often required
regarding the explanatory factors as the data units will then be eliminated. The input values from the
explanatory factors can be normalized using the following min-max scaling method ([Viaburro and
Venkateswaran, 2017],p.112-113):
Xnorm =
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
(3.1)
This normalization is based upon the maximum and minimum of the factor and is a widely used trans-
formation method. The normalization eliminates the data units, as well as high inﬂuence observations
that might be outliers, and therefore have a high residual and decrease the factor spread. Residuals far
away from the mean value indicate some error or rarity in the model since the residuals are calculated
as predicted values subtracted the actual value. A high residual is, therefore, an incorrect prediction
of one of the data examples, because of a rare example or incorrectly measured data. Normalizing
these reduces their eﬀect. The high residuals, therefore, will not have the same eﬀect as before the
normalization ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran, 2017], p.224-225).
Activation function
As mentioned in the previous section, each neuron from the ﬁrst hidden layer and throughout the
rest of the network contains a value called the activation, represented as the a value on the ﬁgure
3.1 above. This value originates from the non-activated z value by applying a sigmoid function. The
sigmoid function is not the only possible activation function, although it is the function used in the
project as it is the most widely used, compared to other functions such as the binary feature, which
maps the original value onto 0 and 1. The sigmoid, on the other hand, map the values from 0 and 1 and
everything in between. The activation value, therefore, becomes a value in-between 0 and 1, indicating
the probability of ending up in one of the target categories. The sigmoid function is a sigmoidal curve
function formed as an s-shape with the following equation ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran, 2017],p.46):
S(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(3.2)
By inserting any value in x, the activation value S(x) will be in the range between 0 and 1. In relation
to this project, where the outcome has been converted to 0 for material damage and 1 for personal
injury accident, the outcome of the above equation 3.2 will become the probability of a personal injury
accident.
The sigmoid function is a special case of the logistic function [xaktly, 2012]:
S(x) =
L
1 + e−k(x−x0)
(3.3)
The diﬀerence between the two functions lies in the exponential value and the numerator. The sigmoid
function in equation 3.2 is a special case of the logistic function in equation 3.3, where L equals 1, k
equals 1 and x0 equals 0. The shape of the two functions is the same, and the numerator determines
in which interval the curve must remain inside on the y-axis. Here, the logistic regression includes
an L, referring to the max values of the interval. The sigmoid function has an L equal to 1, as the
outcome is a probability, that can only lie between 0 and 1. The k parameter, on the other hand, is
the controller of how steeply the slope decreases or increases around the origin. Lastly, x0 is equal
to 0 in the sigmoid function, indicating where on the x-axis the slope should increase. The logistic
function, therefore, is more complex than the sigmoid function and cannot be used due to the outcome
assumption between 0 and 1. Another relatable function is the ordinary linear function ([Viaburro
and Venkateswaran, 2017], p.42):
f(x) = y
(3.4)
Page 15 of 66
==PAGE:21==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
The linear function is a straight line, indicating a linear relationship between the input and output.
This function would not be possible, as the relationship between the input and output is assumed to
non-linear, a requirement that the sigmoid function meets.
Propagation
Neural networks can be applied using several forms of learning techniques to build the network, though
only the simplest techniques will be taken into account in this project. The chosen method is non-
complex and is divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part is called forward propagation and is deﬁned
by the red parts in the ﬂowchart 3.2 below. Forward propagation involves going through the entire
network without looking back until the predicted outcome is found for all example in the training
set. Hereafter the model will look back, adjust, and thereby optimize the network. This part is called
backpropagation, which is deﬁned by the green parts of the ﬂowchart below.
Figure 3.2: Flowchart of the neural network process
When the explanatory factor is giving to the input layer the ﬁrst process of the network forward
propagation will start.
Here, the input values will be linked to the ﬁrst hidden layer with some
weights indicating each neurons eﬀect, from which the value of each neuron in the hidden layer can be
calculated. A large weight between two neurons indicates a strong connection and will either have a
positive or negative eﬀect on the neurons’ value depending on the weight’s sign.
Assume two neurons in the input layer: x1 and x2 which deﬁnes two input factors. Assume further one
hidden layer with one neuron. The ﬁrst non-activated value z belonging to the neuron in the hidden
layer can then be calculated as ([Fuller, 1995],p.8):
z = w1x1 + w2x2 + b
(3.5)
Here, w indicates the weights connecting the two neurons in the input layer to the neuron in the hidden
layer, x is the value from the input layer, and b is the threshold. The threshold b will contain either
a positive or negative value. A threshold on minus b indicates that the weighted sum of the previous
layer neurons must be greater than b for the neuron to be further active. The above non-activated
value z can take any value between minus and plus inﬁnity, which is mapped into the range between
zero and one by the activation function 3.2. After the activation value, a is calculated in the hidden
layer; the network moves on to the output layer, which works in the exact same way.
Page 16 of 66
==PAGE:22==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
The above example keeps the explanation simple, but this is rarely how a real-world neural network
is built. A network increases in weight, inputs, and neurons as it becomes more complex, but using a
notation in matrix form can keep it simple and manageable. Assume a network with n neurons in the
input layer, k neurons in the hidden layer and one training example, the non-activated vector for the
neurons in the hidden layer can then be calculated by:


z1
z2
.
zk

=


w0,0
w0,1
.
w0,n
w1,0
w1,1
.
w1,n
.
.
.
.
wk,0
wk,1
.
wk,n

∗


x1
x2
.
xn

+


b1
b2
.
bk


(3.6)
From which the activation vector can be obtained:


a1
a2
.
ak

=


S(z1)
S(z2)
.
S(zk)


(3.7)
In matrix form, this becomes:
z = W ∗x + b
(3.8)
a = S(z)
(3.9)
Here, a represents a kx1 vector containing all the activation’s from the ﬁrst hidden layer and x is an
nx1 vector containing all the values from the input layer. W is a kxn matrix containing all the weights
between the input layer and the ﬁrst hidden layer. The S-function indicates the sigmoid function, and
b is a kx1 vector containing the threshold from the network’s hidden layer. The same calculations
apply for the output layer, with the activation value indicating the ﬁnal predicted target value.
The ﬁrst time the network runs through the training examples, each weight and bias are randomly
chosen. This will most likely cause the ﬁrst classiﬁcation to have a large square error between the
predicted and actual value, but this will always be the case after the ﬁrst run, as the network has
not yet learned anything. This is why the second part of the neural network takes place after all the
training examples have been put through the network. The second part is called backpropagation and
is the core of the neural network, that aims to ﬁnd the weights and biases that minimize the cost
function. The cost function is deﬁned as the mean squared error between the predicted value and the
actual value based on the whole training data set ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran, 2017],p.115):
Cost =
Pn
i=1(ypredict −yactual)n
2n
(3.10)
The parameter n equals the total number of examples in the training set, while ypredict is the value
predicted by the network and yactual is the actual value. Equation 3.10 represents the average squared
error based on all the training examples, obtained after all training examples have been put through
the network. So, for each single training example, the network stores the squared error, and after
that take the average value for all these training examples. The Cost from equation 3.10 indicates the
network’s performance and describes how well the network performs or how far the network is from
being well-predicting. Meaning that a cost value close to 0, indicates an accurate model with good
predictions concerning the true value.
Assume a one-dimensional network containing one weight and a convex cost function; the main purpose
is to ﬁnd the cost functions gradient, which describes how the weight should be changed, to achieve a
better performance, in the next run throughout the entire training set. The cost function will form a
convex curve describing the average performance of the network based on the network’s weight. The
goal is to ﬁnd the point on the curve, where the cost function is at a minimum, as this point indicates
the smallest possible error or the best possible combination of weights in the network (if more than one
weight was assumed). This is completed by the gradient descent method, which uses the slope of the
cost curve to determine whether the weight should be increased or decreased to ﬁnd the minimum. If
the slope at the speciﬁed point is positive, the weight must be moved to the left towards the minimum,
Page 17 of 66
==PAGE:23==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
and vice versa if the slope is negative.
To recap the process, the models run through all the training examples, and trough that, obtain the
average squared error. Hereafter, the average squared error is used to ﬁnd the gradient of the cost
function from where the weight can be adjusted to approach the minimum point. This procedure is
repeated, and the weight slowly approaches a minimum, which will describe the optimal network for
future predictions.
Approaching the assumed global minimum is only applicable when the cost function is assumed to be
convex since a convex function only has one possible minimum. In real life, this is often not the case,
as it is not guaranteed that the approximate minimum, will be the smallest possible minimum for cost
function since the gradient descent methods will ﬁnd the nearest possible minimum and not be able to
cross any hill on the curve to reach another minimum. The minimum found in a non-convex function
is therefore conditional on the random value given to the weight at the very ﬁrst run ([Viaburro and
Venkateswaran, 2017], p.56). Although assuming a convex cost function, only one possible minimum
can occur, and the found minimum will always be the one and only.
Assuming only one weight in the network is a non-complex described example, but the only change
when adding more weight to the network is using the gradient for multiple derivatives instead of
ﬁnding a single slope from one derivative. The weight and biases will, therefore, be represented by
a vector w, and instead of ﬁnding the slope in one-dimension based on one weight, all the weights
form n-dimensions, where the idea is to ﬁnd the direction in which, the cost-function decreases most
quickly. The direction of the gradient with the steepest increase indicates the direction in which the
weight should be changed to approach the maximum. Therefore, the negative of a gradient is found,
which when will give the direction in which the gradient decreases the most. The following equation
gives the gradient of the weight and biases vector:
−∇C(w, b) =


−∂C
∂w1
−∂C
∂b1
.
−∂C
∂wL
−∂C
∂bL


(3.11)
This gradient contains several derivatives and describes how the network approaches the minimum in
n-dimensions.
Upon the above-explained gradient descent method, the weights and thresholds can be optimized and
adjusted. Assume only one weight in the network; the new and optimized weight is calculated as
follow:
wnew = wold ∗α ∗
∂C
∂wold
(3.12)
In the above equation, α indicates the learning rate, which describes how fast the network should go in
the right direction when adjusting the factors. In the beginning, a high learning rate can be eﬀective to
use, though as the weights approach the minimum, a smaller learning rate is preferred to approach the
minimum as close as possible. This is not possible when taken large steps. The diﬀerentiation part of
equation3.12 is a bit more complicated since the cost function does not contain weights, and therefore
the chain rule is required. This is relevant for calculating
∂C
∂wold , since the cost (C) is a function of
the activation value aL where aL is a function of the previous layer’s activation function aL−1. The
deviation part
∂C
∂wold of equation 3.12, can therefore be written as the following equation.
∂C0
∂wL
old
= ∂zL
∂wL
old
∗∂aL
∂zL ∗∂C0
∂aL
(3.13)
Here, the values for z, a, and C0 are given separately by the following equation:
z = w ∗aL−1 + b
(3.14)
aL = S(zL)
(3.15)
Page 18 of 66
==PAGE:24==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
C0 = (aL −y)2
(3.16)
The zL value is the non-activated value in layer L, which is given by the previous layer activation
value, the connected weights, and the threshold. The aL and aL−1 value indicate the activation value
transformed by the sigmoid function respectively in layer L and the cost C0 describes the cost function
containing a y value indicating the actual value, whereas aL is the predicted value. The above three
equation 3.14, 3.15, and 3.16 is used to calculated the equation 3.13. The third part of equation 3.13
above is given as follows:
∂C0
∂wL
old
= 2(aL −y)
(3.17)
The second part is:
∂aL
∂zL = S′(zL)
(3.18)
The ﬁrst part is:
∂zL
∂wL
old
= aL−1
(3.19)
Together, these three parts become:
∂C0
∂wL
old
= ∂zL
∂wL
old
∗∂aL
∂zL ∗∂C0
∂aL = aL−1 ∗S′(zL) ∗2(aL −y)
(3.20)
This can be put into equation 3.12 to calculate the updated weight. Likewise, the weights in the
network, the threshold are updated according to the same rules.
To recap: the entire neural network is run through ﬁrst, which is called forward propagation. It reaches
a result, and this result is compared to the actual values, and a squared error is obtained. This is
done for all the training examples available in the training set, after which the average squared error
is calculated. The gradient vector is then found, which contains all the weights and thresholds from
the network, and the steepest decrease is found. From this, the weights and thresholds are adjusted.
This is called backpropagation. After the adjustment is completed, the process is carried out again,
until a minimum is approached.
The methods described above are completed using gradient descent in the backpropagation, which is
preferred when the training set is minimal. The gradient descent runs through the whole data set before
making any adjustment to the weights and threshold, which is a demanding task with a large training
set.
Making this less demanding, a method called the stochastic descent gradient was developed,
originating from the gradient descent method. The stochastic descent gradient is based upon the same
procedure, though instead of going through the entire whole training set, the training set is divided
into smaller random sets from which the cost value is calculated, and the weights and threshold are
adjusted after each sample by the average of the performance of the sample. The stochastic gradient
method is almost equal to the gradient method:
∇C ≈1
m
m
X
j=1
∇CXj
(3.21)
Here, ∇C deﬁnes the gradient and contains all the derivatives of the weights and biases, and m is the
randomly chosen training sample. Formula 3.21 describes how the gradient descent method based on
the whole training set is approximately equal to the stochastic gradient descent average. This means
that the overall network contains several cost functions, and the minimum is approached using several
diﬀerent cost functions. This approach will contain fewer training examples in each sample, and most
likely make the ﬁrst adjustments inaccurately, as their basis for adjustment is based on fewer examples
than in the gradient descent method. The gradient descent method will approach the minimum in a
straight line, whereas the stochastic gradient descent method will approach the minimum overall but
might take steps in the wrong direction. This is recommended with large data sets because of the
methods speed compared to gradient descent, and the stochastic descent gradient is therefore used in
this project ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran, 2017], p.56).
Page 19 of 66
==PAGE:25==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
3.3
Fuzzy logic
Fuzzy logic is a logical approach, where more than two diﬀerent outcomes can occur in the range
between 0 and 1. Fuzzy logic was invented by computer scientist LotﬁA. Zadeh in 1965. Zadeh was
an American computer science professor at the University of California who, in his work on decision
and system analysis, needed to expand the crisp set theory and make the theory more like the human
brain ([Fuller, 1995], p.5).
Fuzzy logic diﬀers from ordinary crisp theory, where only a binary outcome is possible, and crisp set
theory has its advantages when only two categories are possible, such as gender. Fuzzy logic, on the
other hand, is a more advanced mathematical logic theory, that is used in situations where a traditional
0/1 outcome, is not suﬃciently comprehensive. If it is uncertain whether an observation should be 0
or 1, fuzzy logic is recommended, since values between 0 and 1 can be assigned. This provides more
accurate results for uncertain observations. Based on this, fuzzy logic is widely used regarding data
with imperfect information. Imperfect information is a description of biased data, which describes a
situation where the mean of the sample being examined does not equal the mean of the population.
Biased data can occur from poorly or incorrectly measured data, which can create noise in the results.
Fuzzy logic is recommended for use over crisp logic, since more accurate results may be achieved in
a situation where a factor contains more than two categories. If, for example, a measured numerical
factor describes the weight of a vehicle that has been involved in a traﬃc accident, and both crisp
logic and fuzzy logic theory are taken into account, the diﬀerent can be visualized as in ﬁgure 3.3:
Figure 3.3: Crisp set theory vs. fuzzy set theory
On the left-hand side in ﬁgure 3.3 crisp set theory can be seen, and fuzzy set theory can be seen on the
right-hand side. Both ﬁgures contain a square called the universe, representing all possible weights of
a vehicle involved in an accident. In the universe, is a darker blue circle, which describes a subset of
the universe and contains all the heavy vehicles called a fuzzy set. The two ﬁgures also contain three
observations each, which represent vehicles from three ﬁctive accidents. These three observations x1,
x2, and x3 will be deﬁned diﬀerently in relation to the two theories. In crisp set theory, the three
observations are given by the following membership function:
µH : X −→{0, 1}
(3.22)
In this formula, µH is the membership function, for the subset of heavy vehicles and three observations
x1, x2 and x3 are deﬁned by X. The observations x1 and x2 give the outcome value 1, since both lie
within the border of the subset of heavy vehicles. x3 lies outside the subset, meaning that it is not
a heavy vehicle, and will, therefore, be interpreted as lighter. This sounds sensible, but what if the
measurements of the car are not correct or there is some uncertainty about the measurements? In this
case, it is not sensible to draw a line between a heavy vehicle and a lighter vehicle, since many vehicles
may lie in between these two categories. Fuzzy set theory is based on this problem and solves it by
incorporating a degree of membership, represented by the dotted line in the fuzzy set ﬁgure. This
dotted line represents a smoother transition between the subset and the universe in ﬁgure 3.3, meaning
that no line can divide data. The degree of membership can be seen as a probability describing the
probability of being in a speciﬁc fuzzy set.
Page 20 of 66
==PAGE:26==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
The notation of fuzzy set membership is given as ([Fuller, 1995],p.13):
µH : X −→[0, 1]
(3.23)
This notation looks a lot like equation 3.22 for crisp set theory. The diﬀerence lies in the brackets, in
which all values between zero and one is possible. A fuzzy set is not only represented by its membership
function; it is represented by the observation and the belonging membership degree. A fuzzy set in an
ordered pair is deﬁned as ([Fuller, 1995],p.14):
H = {(x, µH(x))|x ∈X}
(3.24)
Here, H deﬁnes a fuzzy set in ordered pairs regarding all three observation in the heavy vehicle
subset and describes two components; the x-element and the degree of membership µH(x). The above
notation could be given as the following fuzzy set in ordered pairs:
H = {{x1, 0.9}, {x2, 0.2}, {x3, 0}}
(3.25)
Here, each unique pair deﬁnes a degree of membership in the heavy vehicle subset, which is an indica-
tion of the position of the subset in relation to the center. The observation x2 lies near the dotted line
in ﬁgure 3.3 above, and refers to a vehicle that has a small chance of being a heavy vehicle, whereas
x3 is clearly outside the heavy vehicle subset, indicating no degree of membership. The diﬀerence
between crisp set theory and fuzzy set theory can especially be seen in observation x2. In crisp set
theory, x2 would be deﬁned as a heavy vehicle like observation x1, but fuzzy set theory incorporates
that the possibility of x2 being a heavy vehicle is small.
In the above example, the weight of the vehicle was giving one fuzzy set, namely the heavy vehicle
fuzzy set. This is just one out of several possible fuzzy sets based on the vehicle weight factor. Some
other possible fuzzy sets to be drawn from the vehicle weight factor are those of small vehicles and
medium-size vehicles. If these two fuzzy sets were added into the universe of car weights, the car
weight factor would consist of three fuzzy sets, each describing a speciﬁc range of weights. An example
of this situation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4 below.
Figure 3.4: Linguistic factor with fuzzy sets
In this case, each fuzzy set is deﬁned by a speciﬁc weight range and contain a degree of membership
in that speciﬁc subset of the vehicle universe. The ﬁgure 3.4 above presents a linguistic factor ([Fuller,
1995],p.65). A linguistic factor is based upon a transformation from a numerical factor into some
fuzzy set categories, which could be small, medium, and heavy size vehicles as seen above. The three
categories will overlap each other since no sharp line can deﬁne a small, medium, or heavy vehicle.
This represents uncertainty about whether the vehicle is small/medium or medium/large. A triangular
membership function represents the above three fuzzy sets. A triangular membership function for a
Page 21 of 66
==PAGE:27==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
fuzzy set is given by the following formula ([Nauck and Kruse, 1999],p.322):
µH(x) =
(
x−a
b−a
if
x ∈[a, b)
c−x
c−b
if
x ∈[b, c)
0
otherwise
(3.26)
Here, x represents the input observation, a and c deﬁne the two boundaries, and b describes the point,
where the membership function equals 1. Other membership functions such as the trapezoidal and
Gaussian functions could also be applied, which would describe the degree of membership diﬀerently in
relation to their design. However, the triangular membership function is the most widely used and is,
therefore, the only one considered in this project [Nauck and Kruse, 1999]. In the case where the input
factor is categorical, and the content of the categorical factor is non-ordered, a triangular membership
function cannot be presented, as nominal categories cannot be ordered by numbers.
Instead, the
degree of membership will for each category describe how likely the category is to be true. Assume for
example a factor describing element type involved in an accident, that contains the categories vehicle,
heavy vehicle, vulnerable road user, and other. The degree of membership into the element fuzzy set
could then be given by:
E = {{Vehicle, 0}, {Heavy Vehcile, 1}, {Vulnerable road user, 0}, {Other, 0}}
(3.27)
The above notation states that the element type involved in the ﬁctive accident is a heavy vehicle,
which often can be measured reasonably accurately. In other situations where a factor such as weather
is used to describe an accident, the degree of membership in the diﬀerent categories might be more
ambiguous. The above notation is used when categorical factors are presented to the model [Nauck,
1999].
Fuzzy logic is mostly used with fuzzy systems, the purpose of which is to classify based upon expert
knowledge [by Robert Babuska, ]. A fuzzy system can be described by three main operations; fuzziﬁ-
cation, inference engine, and defuzziﬁcation. The purpose of the fuzziﬁcation part is to transform the
input factors from crisp sets to fuzzy sets, which creates a linguistic factor for each input and can be
represented in a ﬁgure such as 3.4. The inference engine part is formed upon learning if-then rules,
which are based on expert knowledge in the ﬁeld of study. The if-then rules can be listed as follows:
- IF car weight IS small THEN severity of accident IS personal injury
The ﬁrst part of the if-then rule is called the antecedent, where car weight is an explanatory factor
with a related fuzzy set of small. The second part of the rule is called consequence, where severity
of accident is the target variable that the model tries to predict with a related fuzzy set of personal
injury.
Car weight and severity of accident are referred to as linguistic factors, where small and
personal injury are the related fuzzy sets and are referred to as linguistic values.
The above rule depends on only one factor, though it is possible to combine multiple rules. When
adding another factor describing the distance to a hospital with a related fuzzy set called close, the
rules can be given as follows:
- IF car weight IS small AND hospital distance IS close THEN severity of accident IS unharmed
This rule combines two fuzzy sets from two diﬀerent linguistic factors in order to describe the outcome.
The outcome from the above rule can then be found based on the Mamdani controller, which uses
a min-max method. This min-max method ﬁnds the minimum degree of membership between the
antecedent of the rule, which then forms the outcome degree of membership in the injuries fuzzy
set. When multiple rules are dependent, the method ﬁrst ﬁnds the minimum from the speciﬁc rule’s
antecedent. After, a maximum degree of membership between the minimums can be found to describe
the degree of injury. Upon the degree of membership into the injury fuzzy set, an outcome can be
obtained by turning the fuzzy value into a crisp value, called defuzziﬁcation. Fuzzy systems will not
be discussed any further in this section, as a deeper interpretation of fuzzy systems is irrelevant for
this project.
Page 22 of 66
==PAGE:28==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
3.4
The neuro-fuzzy model
Neuro-fuzzy modeling arises as neural network visualization is often described as a black box since
the algorithm quickly becomes hard to read and interpret. This makes the neural network diﬃcult to
learn from. On the other hand, fuzzy systems are ideal for learning in relation to the if-then rules,
but have some drawbacks, as all rules are created based upon knowledge. Combining the two methods
creates a method that can predict an outcome, by the use of if-then rules.
The neuro-fuzzy model is built upon the neural network structure, with an input layer, a hidden
layer, and an output layer; thus the rules and linguistic factors take inspiration from Fuzzy system.
This combination makes it possible to incorporate non-ordered nominal categorical factors. This is a
signiﬁcant advantage of the fuzzy system that does not apply to the neural network.
Several neuro-fuzzy modeling approaches exist in the literature, but the neuro-fuzzy classiﬁcation will
be described in more detail here [Nauck and Kruse, 1999]. This method is motivated by the Mamdani
approach and aims to ﬁnd patterns in data and obtain several if-then rules that can provide a deeper
understanding of the outcome of an accident.
To explain neuro-fuzzy classiﬁcation more in-depth, assume two linguistic factors vehicle weight and
hospital distance, where vehicle weight contains two fuzzy sets light and heavy, and hospital distance
contains close and far away. All of which have triangular membership functions. The following four
rules can be obtained as both linguistic factors contain two fuzzy sets, which gives four if-then rules.
Table 3.1: The four if-then rules obtained
If-Then Rules
Close
Far away
Light vehicle
Material Damage
Material Damage
Heavy vehicle
Material Damage
Personal Injuries
Here light, heavy, close, far away, unharmed and personal injuries are fuzzy subsets belonging to the
respective linguistic factors. The neuro-fuzzy model structure can, by these two factors be visualized
in the ﬂowchart3.5 below:
Figure 3.5: Flowchart of a neuro-fuzzy modeling
The network starts by obtaining the ordinary inputs factors vehicle weight and hospital distance, which
are described as the ﬁrst input layer. The ﬁrst layer has a linear transformation, which means that
the input into the ﬁrst layer is the same as the input into the second layer. The second layer converts
the input factors into linguistic factors, which is called fuzziﬁcation. The outcome of the fuzziﬁcation
is four fuzzy sets; light, heavy, close and far away. These four fuzzy sets each contain a degree of
membership µ, which describes how likely the observed information is to belong to that particular
fuzzy set. This degree of membership is the input into the third layer, where the output is a minimum
of the four if-then rules accented. The four outputs from the third layer, therefore are as follows:
R1 = min{µLight, µClose}
(3.28)
Page 23 of 66
==PAGE:29==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
R2 = min{µLight, µF arAway}
(3.29)
R3 = min{µHeavy, µClose}
(3.30)
R4 = min{minHeavy, µF ar−away}
(3.31)
These four minimums are the obtained outcomes values from the third layer into the fourth layer,
called the fuzzy inference. The fourth layer, fuzzy inference, contains the four rules consequence, from
which an outcome can be calculated in the ﬁfth layer. The outcome is calculated based upon the four
Ri values and the consequence of the rules with, for example, the center of gravity method. This
method uses the area underneath the fuzzy set output, in which a crisp output can be obtained based
on all the rules. This process is called defuzziﬁcation, which aims to transform a fuzzy set output
into a crisp set output. The ﬁnal result obtained from this process is the eﬀective and best-explaining
rules, from the third layer, as these rules will explain which fuzzy set are the main sets when explaining
injury accidents. The if-then rules in the third layer, therefore, are the central part of neuro-fuzzy
classiﬁcation where accurate rules cause accurate results [Nauck and Kruse, 1999].
The rules are generated based upon a structure-oriented approach, the purpose of which is to ﬁnd
the fuzzy rules in the beginning for the neuro-fuzzy classiﬁcation. The process starts by transforming
all factors into linguistic ones, which results in multiple fuzzy sets. Upon these fuzzy sets, diﬀerent
patterns can be obtained from data, which creates a rule accented for each pattern [Auck et al., 1998].
After the rules are found, the result can be tuned by a parameter tuning process, called simple heuristic
learning. Simple heuristic learning is a method that adjusts the membership function’s interval range
as well as the number of fuzzy sets in relation to the numerical factor. In the case of categorical
factors, the tuning process might reorder the categories in order to list signiﬁcant categories close to
each other, or it might combine several categories [by Etienne Jodoin and Reyes, 2006]. The fuzzy
set with the smallest degree of membership in a pattern, will either be increased or decreased to
obtain small changes in the classiﬁcation.
If one fuzzy set is adjusted, it will aﬀect all the rules
that use the same fuzzy set in their rule [Nauck and Kruse, 1999]. This procedure aims to create
fewer misclassiﬁcation errors and can be compared to backpropagation in the neural network, where
a gradient descent method is used. Backpropagation adjusts the weights and thresholds, whereas this
tuning process adjusts the fuzzy set interval ranges.
3.5
Decision tree
Neuro-fuzzy model is this project’s primary analytically approach, due to the algorithm’s combination
of neural network and fuzzy logic. This combination studies data in an alternative way compared to
using only one of the algorithms. However, would other supervised learning methods be able to achieve
the same results? To answer this question, a decision tree is chosen to be the comparative method for
neuro-fuzzy modeling. The decision tree algorithm is good for categorical factors, which the data in
this project contains a lot of as well as visualizing the result for easy interpretation of the result.
Regarding the decision tree, two methods occur in the literature; regression tree and classiﬁcation
tree. The diﬀerence between these two methods lays in the predicted target factor. The regression tree
assumes a quantitative (numerical) response factor, whereas the classiﬁcation tree assumes a qualitative
(categorical) response ([Kishore, 2018],p.94). Since this project is only focusing on a learning algorithm
where a qualitative response is assumed or can be incorporated, the classiﬁcation tree is the only
method being studied in this project.
The decision tree, or more precisely the classiﬁcation tree is widely used to classify data based upon
a categorical target factor known in advance. This method is widely used because it is simple to
understand and makes no assumptions about data and therefore no assumption about linearity. This
means that the target factor and the independent factors do not need to have a linear relationship.
A decision tree classiﬁes through some binary rules, which creates a tree with a root node, terminal
nodes, and branches. The root node represents the ﬁrst split in data and is based upon the factor
Page 24 of 66
==PAGE:30==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
that in the best way explains the variance in data. After that, the tree grows using the following
most signiﬁcant factors and is connected by branches that link the root node to the terminal node.
The terminal node deﬁnes the category of the target factor and is the tree’s predicted value. The
advantages of the decision tree are its simple algorithm, its clear visualization of the result, and the
possibility to incorporate both categorical and numerical explanatory factors.
Recursive partitioning
Recursive partitioning is a method used to form the decision tree from the top root node to the bottom
terminal node. The algorithm starts from the root node, with all the given factors and observations
available in the training set and grows its way down to the bottom of the tree until it meets it barrage,
which often is set manually or if no more splits are possible.
The ﬁrst step in the algorithm is to ﬁnd the root node, A, which is the factor with the greatest
signiﬁcance and the one that most clearly divides the data into two pure parts. These two parts will
be placed into two terminal nodes, Aleft and Aright, which originate from the root node A. The split
will be pure or homogeneous if the two terminal nodes Aleft and Aright contain only observations
within one category of the target factor. If the extraction provides observations from both target
categories, it will be impure, assuming only a binary target factor. This will have consequences for
future predictions since little homogeneity means less credibility and predictions are more random.
The impurity can be measured by the Gini index, which by equation 3.32 calculates how impure the
split is. The smaller the Gini Index is, the better the split. Assuming a binary target factor, the Gini
index forAleft or Aright splitting nodes is given by the following equation ([Kishore, 2018],p.79):
GAright = 1 −(p2
true + p2
false)
(3.32)
GAleft = 1 −(p2
true + p2
false)
(3.33)
This equation describes the probability of a misclassiﬁcation between the two classes true/false in one
of the two terminal nodes. GAright and GAleft indicate the Gini index after splitting and will be small
when the purity of a split is high. The proportion measures pfalse and ptrue describes the proportion
of the data in that particular class. It can take on value between 0 and 1, where a p equal to 1 indicates
a perfect pure split.
From GAright and GAleft the Gini index for node A before splitting can be calculated as ([Kishore,
2018],p.81):
GA = GAright ∗(nAright
nA
) + GAleft ∗(nAleft
nA
)
(3.34)
Here, GA represents the Gini index for the node before splitting, which is based upon both GAright and
GAleft. The factor with the smallest GA will be the factor used for splitting the data. The algorithm,
therefore, starts ﬁnding the factors with the smallest Gini index GA and based on this factor, perform
the tree’s ﬁrst split. After this split, the tree will now contain a root node A and two terminal nodes
Aleft and Aright. Based on these two separately, the algorithm will now ﬁnd the factor that splits
the Aleft into some other terminal nodes Aleft,left and Aleft,right and do the same to split Aright into
Aright,left and Aright,right. This procedure stops when no observations are left or set manually by the
user in reaction to a minimum number of observations in the terminal node ([Kishore, 2018],p.84):
Pruned decision tree
After the recursive partitioning process has formed a decision tree, it happens quite often that too
many unnecessary splits overﬁt the tree, and therefore a high not correct accuracy may occur. In
this case, pruning can be used to reduce the number of splits without reducing the performance and
accuracy of the model ([Therneau and Atkinson, 2018], p.12). The pruning method used in this project
is post-pruning, where the whole tree is created and then cut where the splits no longer provide value
to the model’s performance. The main goal of post-pruning is to ﬁnd the number of splits in the tree
at which the model will no longer provide better results with more splits. This number of splits is
found by the cross-validation error, which can be completed by diﬀerent numbers of folds, but the most
standard number of folds is 10. This indicates splitting the training data into ten random subsets.
The ﬁrst of the ten subsets will be used as a test set and kept out of the learning process, while the
Page 25 of 66
==PAGE:31==
3. MATHEMATICAL APPROACHES
remaining nine subsets will be used for training. After this, the cross-validation error is calculated
based on the squared diﬀerence between the predicted outcome and the actual outcome. This cross-
validation error is stored, and a new iteration is completed, using the second subset as a test set.
This process goes on for all subsets and yields an average cross-validation errors based upon these ten
folds. The cross-validation will be completed for all the possible sizes of the tree and is represented
by a complexity parameter. The complexity parameter with the smallest cross-validation error will be
the optimal size tree. The complexity parameter is a stopping-criteria measure and can be seen as a
threshold. If the tree does not increase its overall performance by at least the complexity parameter,
the model will stop growing the tree. A large tree will, therefore, have a small complexity parameter
and vice versa ([Therneau and Atkinson, 2018],p. 13-14).
Comparison methods
Decision tree and the neural network will be compared based on the confusion matrix, which is a
2x2 matrix showing the performance of a model. The model shows the predicted versus actual values
based on the test set. The predicted target factor is assumed to binary and contains two categories:
positive and negative. The confusion matrix will be as shown in table 3.2:
Table 3.2: Confusion matrix
Predicted True
Predicted False
Actual True
TP
FN
Actual False
FP
TN
In the above confusion matrix, the matrix divides the predicted values into four categories based upon
the actual values. The top left cell TP represent true-positive, which indicates all correct predictions
into the positive category. The bottom right cell TN describes the true-negative, which is all correct
predictions into the negative category. Opposite is the cell FN and FP, respectively presenting the
false-negative and false-positive prediction, which is the predictions that fall into the wrong categories.
False-negative describes the predictions that should have been put into the positive category but
instead was put into the negative category. The same goes for false-positive, but vice versa ([Viaburro
and Venkateswaran, 2017], p.94). From the confusion matrix, it is possible to calculate the accuracy
of the predictions, which will tell how well the model predicts observations. This accuracy (ACC) is
calculated using the following formula:
ACC = TP + TN
P + N
=
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
(3.35)
In the above formula, a ACC value close to 1 means that the selected supervised learning method
can describe and predict data perfect based on the training examples ([Viaburro and Venkateswaran,
2017], p.97).
Partial conclusion
This section provides insight into the mathematical models used, to identify what factors play a
signiﬁcant role in traﬃc accidents. The primary information from this section is that fuzzy logic is
a favorable approach to use regarding traﬃc accident data, as this kind of data often operates with
uncertainty due to lack of detail.
The neuro-fuzzy model takes this into account using linguistic
factors and if-then rules, which form the structure of the neuro-fuzzy network.
The results from
the neuro-fuzzy model have a human-friendly interpretation simplicity as the result is described by
if-then rules. These rules make it easier to learn what factors play a signiﬁcant role in the severity
outcome of traﬃc accidents. The decision tree has some of the same useful features, but the decision
tree often overﬁts data and can be signiﬁcantly aﬀected by outliers, though this can be improved
by pruning. The neural network, on the other hand, is a diﬃcult method to use when the goal is
to explain an outcome, although backpropagation is an extremely useful application, that causes the
neural network to perform well when analyzing complex functions. The neural network is therefore
also a favorable method to use when predicting the severity of an accident, as traﬃc data are often
quite complex. However, neuro-fuzzy modeling incorporates most of the above features, which makes
this model preferable.
Page 26 of 66
==PAGE:32==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
4
Data analysis process
This section provides insight into how the data were processed and prepared to ﬁt this project. Fur-
thermore, it provides a presentation of the factors extracted from the police records and the additional
few factors from other sources.
4.1
Data structure and focus
Figure 4.1 depicts the overall structure of the process used to gather and prepare the data considered
in this project.
STEP 1
STEP 2
STEP 3
STEP 4
STEP 5
SETP 6
Police data
Danish Map 
Supply
Statistics Denmark
Webpage for 
Danish regions
Person 
Level
Regions
Parish   
Population
Emergency 
hospitals
Combining data
Neuro Fuzzy 
Method
Neural Network   
Desicion Tree
Police text 
description
Data preparation                                    
* Transposing factors                                                                                           
* Reducing the number of categories 
in the categorical factors                                          
* Deleting missing data points
Accident 
Level
Element 
Level
Comparison
Descriptive 
statistics
Figure 4.1: Project structure
As can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1 data were collected from police records, Statistics Denmark, the Danish
Map Supply and information for the Danish regions. The data process is described in greater detail
later in this chapter. The areas of focus in the police records are listed below:
- Denmark in the period between 2013 and 2017;
- Cars as either element 1 or 2;
- Focusing on driver(s);
Page 27 of 66
==PAGE:33==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
- Accident-level data;
- Element-level data for both parts 1 and 2;
- Person-level data for part 1;
- Outcomes, focusing only on either personal injury or material damage.
4.2
Data collection
The data obtained from police records represent the largest share of the total data set. These records
are collected when an accident occurs in Denmark, as the police will be called to the location of an
accident to write a detailed record. A manual describes how these records are to be ﬁlled out, which
ensures that the records are consistent in format. The manual establishes how the general description
of accidents is carried out, information concerning the elements and people involved, and a description
of the surroundings. The manual features both categorical and numerical columns. Some records are
very detailed, whereas others are less informative. The level of detail is often dependent on the severity
outcome, as more severe accidents tend to be described in great detail, whereas the opposite is true
for less severe accidents. When records are recorded, they are displayed in the police system named
POLSAS and, when the police label them as ﬁnished, they are sent to the system, Vejman. Vejman
is a road management system used by both municipalities and the state; both the road directory and
municipalities have access to this system and can edit records to ensure the best possible accuracy.
Often, it is the municipalities themselves, that are in charge of correcting and editing accident records.
However, should the severity of an accident extend to a personal injury, all correcting and editing
will go through the road directory for a quality and accuracy check. These processes indicate the
importance of the police providing a well-written record, as records will be read by many people, who
may attempt to analyze the accidents down to the smallest detail [Road-Directorate, 2017].
From these records, both quantitative and qualitative data from 2013 and 2017 were gathered. Qual-
itative data were obtained from a brief descriptive text that police oﬃcers are required to ﬁll out
concerning each accident. The text-descriptive contains written sentences by police, of their objective
viewpoint on an accident. This will provide information on any aspects of an accident that were not
included in the manual. In addition to this are the quantitative factors, which are ﬁlled out for each
accident, including information about the driver, elements, the surroundings and the geographical lo-
cation, which are highly relevant to this project, as some of these factors may have a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on the severity outcome of accidents.
Figure 4.2 below presents the 17 numerical and categorical factors gathered from police records. The
focus is on car accidents, which means that the factor element has been sorted to be a car in either
element 1 or 2; this was done due to the high proportion of cars among the total number of motor
vehicles, cf. section 2. This means that either part 1 or 2 is a car when looking in the data set and can
be involved with all other types of motor vehicles, objects or vulnerable road users. The 17 factors
presented in ﬁgure 4.2 are the unchanged data found from police records and are separated into grey
color = element-level, blue color = person-level and brown color= accident-level.
Sex
Promille
No. People
Belt
Age
Total
Weight
Registration
Date
No.
Elements
Weekday
Weather
Time of
Day
Speed
Limit
Road
design
Main
Situation
Light
Element 2
Element 1
Accident
Date
Figure 4.2: factors gathered from police records
Page 28 of 66
==PAGE:34==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
As noted previously, ﬁgure 4.2 shows how the 17 factors are separated between levels. In general,
the factors within the police records are divided into three levels; accident-level, element-level, and
person-level, all of which diﬀer in terms of the information that they provide regarding an accident.
The levels can be seen as a triangle in ﬁgure 4.3, in which the top of the triangle contains accident-level
information. This type of information is the most commonly used, as this information rarely contain
a lack of detail. Accident-level contain information on the surrounding, element type, accident type,
etc. In the middle of the triangle is the element-level, which describes the elements in the accidents
in a more detailed way, including the brand, model and age of the motor vehicle(s) involved. At the
bottom of the triangle is the person-level, which contains the most detailed information. The person-
level describe the person(s) involved in each element(s) and describes the person(s) involved in term
of age, gender, damages, etc.
ACCIDENT-LEVEL 
PERSON-LEVEL 
ELEMENT-LEVEL 
Figure 4.3: Triangle of information level
Both the element- and person-level contain more lack of data, as it is not always the police’s top priority
to ﬁll these out, particularly not for cases involving light material damage, whereas for accidents
involving personal injury the completion rate is almost 100%. It was decided to include all of these
three levels in this project, as they explain traﬃc accidents in the best possible way.
Information concerning the population of each parish in Denmark was extracted from Statistics Den-
mark [Statistics-Denmark, 2017a]. The term parish is old and describes a geographical area in Denmark
in which, a church exists. Parishes were chosen instead of municipalities because parishes are divided
into smaller parts. Choosing municipalities instead of parishes would have led to a certain degree of
inaccuracy, due to the larger geographical areas of the former. Additionally, information was obtained
from the Danish Map Supply, which details the size of each parish and provides knowledge about
the ﬁve Danish regions. Both the population and geographical parish areas were imported into the
open-source geographical information software QGIS, in which the data were combined to create two
new factors. The region for each accident was determined through spatial analysis, which makes it
possible to locate a point in a polygon layer based on geographical data. When performing spatial
analysis, QGIS assigns an extra column for each accident, in which the speciﬁc region is presented.
This means that all accidents were allocated to one of the ﬁve Danish regions.
The last data source is a website that provides information about Danish emergency hospitals [Jo-
hansen, 2019]. In Denmark, there are 21 emergency hospitals, which are positioned to cover the country
in a well-distributed way. These 21 emergency hospitals were manually deﬁned in QGIS among all
recorded accidents. A function within QGIS estimate the nearest hospital to an accident and generates
the corresponding distance in kilometer. From this, the distance was obtained, which was included as
a numerical factor.
The process of collecting the data led to diﬀerent data sets, each of which contains diﬀerent information
about each accident. An accident from the police records is given a speciﬁc ID-number that follows
only this one accident. In addition, the speciﬁc location of this accident is known in the form of x and
y coordinates. These coordinates have been used to place all accidents on a Danish map in QGIS.
The factors not included in the police records, therefore, must be linked via a chosen method to the
speciﬁc accident ID-number. QGIS is a useful tool regarding this, as it can link factors such as density,
Page 29 of 66
==PAGE:35==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
region, etc., to the speciﬁc ID-number. The program R is used to left-join the factors on to the police
records.
The data were collected from the sources mentioned above and contain information on traﬃc accident
records in Denmark between 2013 and 2017. The data set contains both numerical and categorical
factors, as well as the text-descriptions performed by the police. Each of the factors in the ﬁnal data
set was carefully selected based on intuition and knowledge of vehicle accidents in Denmark, as well
as previous studies. From this, a full data set is obtained, which make the data ready for editing and
changes. These factors were chosen as these were estimated to aﬀect the severity outcome and thereby
to have the potential to indicate whether the established hypotheses can be proved or disproved.
4.3
Data preparation
Deciding how factors should be included often depends on the mathematical models being used; this
project uses the neuro-fuzzy modeling as the primary mathematical model. The neuro-fuzzy model
can include both numerical and categorical factors. To obtain a useful result, it is essential that the
explanatory factors are clearly deﬁned, since the quality of these factors, deﬁnes the quality of the
outcome.
The factors presented in ﬁgure 4.2, which were taken from police records, have been modiﬁed and
adapted to suit the purpose of this thesis. Data on accident level can be included as they are, as there
is only one row for each accident. However, this does not apply for both the element- and person-level.
Both of these levels contain a row for each element or person involved in the accident; as a result, the
data have been transposed to only contain one row as with the accident-level. This approach makes
it possible to obtain a data set containing one row for each accident and thereby create useful factors
with one row describing an accident. Most of these factors are consistent with how the police factors
are deﬁned, as the police factors are often well-deﬁned. This means that the names of the factors
used in this thesis match those of the obtained from the police. However, it is worth noting that the
subcategories within each factor are not shown in ﬁgure 4.2, as the police parameters contain more
subcategories than necessary for this project. For example, one factor, the element type, contains up
to 90 subcategories in the police records, which is why it was decided to merge these subcategories.
Merging the subcategories is done by reducing the 90 subcategories down to four, namely vulnerable
road users, vehicle, heavy vehicle and other, whereby all of these 90 subcategories match one of these
four new subcategories.
Table 4.1 shows how the factors in person-, element, and accident-level respectively, have been modiﬁed
to ﬁt this project.
Table 4.1: Preparation of factors from Figure 4.2
Parameters
factors
Parameters
factors
Time of day
−→
Time
No. People
−→
No. People
Weekday
−→
Weekday
Alcohol
−→
Alcohol P.1
Main situation
−→
Accident sit.
Gender
−→
Gender P.1
Speed limit
−→
Speed limit
Age
−→
Age P.1
Element 1
−→
Element P.1
Belt
−→
Safety equipment P.1
Element 2
−→
Element P.2
Reg. Date
−→
Motor vehicle age P.1
Road design
−→
Road design
Motor vehicle age P.2
Weather
−→
Weather
Total weight
−→
Motor vehicle weight P.1
Accident date
−→
Season
Motor vehicle weight P.2
Daylight
−→
Light condition
No. Elements
−→
No. Elements
Table 4.1 indicates that, as mentioned previously, most factors match the police record expressions.
A small number of factors have an additional meaning, beyond that which is literally stated, as these
factors have hidden descriptions in their expression. For example, the speed limit indicates the speed
limit of a speciﬁc road, but it can also express the road-type namely city road, country road, highway,
etc. This means that it is possible to extract further knowledge from these factors. In addition, motor
Page 30 of 66
==PAGE:36==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
vehicle age was determined by subtracting the registrations date in Denmark from the date of the
accident, which gives the exact age of the motor vehicle when the accident occurred. Likewise, the
date of an accident was used to extract the season in which it occurred (spring, summer, autumn or
winter). The manner in which all of these factors were divided and is presented in the descriptive
result chapter, cf chapter 5.2. The factor accident situation was found from the main situation factor
in the police records, which is divided into nine categories; however, it was decided to divide this factor
into fewer categories for this project:
Number
Main situation
Accident Situation
0
Solo
−→
Solo
1
Straight and same direction
−→
Same direction
2
Straight and diﬀerent direction
−→
Diﬀerent direction
3
Same direction with turn
−→
Turn
4
Diﬀerent direction with turn
−→
Crossing
5
Crossing without turn
−→
Crossing
6
Crossing with turn
−→
Crossing
7
Acc. with parked vehicle
−→
Parked
8
Acc. with pedestrian
−→
Pedestrian
9
Animal, object etc.
−→
Solo
The above presented show that the accident situation further in this project, contain subcategories as;
solo, crossing, same and diﬀerent direction, turn, parked and pedestrian. The additional factors were
also modiﬁed, as in the above example, although not all are represented in this section. Appendix
A provides more information concerning the remaining factor and the modiﬁcation that was made to
them. Up to this point, the focus has been on the numerical and categorical factors gathered from the
police records; however, there remains a text-description that needs to be modiﬁed. The police records
contain a text-box in which descriptions of accidents are provided; it is intriguing to determine which
words are repeated most frequently in these descriptions. The words in this description have been
separated to contain only one word in each column. However, some words such as connecting words
and adjectives were omitted, as they would otherwise have been the most repeated, which is not the
purpose of this word ﬁnding. Furthermore, it was also decided to remove words such as north, west,
south, and east, as these also appear frequently; however, before they were removed, a word count was
done for all four words, which found that they were all repeated at an equal rate. Had the words not
been repeated at an equal rate, it would have been a sign that one or more of the four directions are
more exposed to traﬃc accidents, but this was found not to be the case. Another word that is known
to be frequently repeated is ”Drove,” which is why this word was also excluded from the list. It was
decided to exclude these familiar words, as the purpose of the word extraction process was to identify
the most common and hopefully surprising words in this records.
All available factors from the police records were included in the data collecting process, though not
all factors were subsequently included, as they were less relevant to this project’s purpose and due to
missing observations. It was decided to exclude the factor speed estimation due to missing information;
this also applies for collision point. While these two factors may have high importance in terms of
severity outcome, due to the missing observations, they were not included. The factor, maneuver, is
excluded based on the fact that it is not relevant, as the factor accident situation incorporates this
information. In addition, it was decided to exclude all data concerning part 2 of the person-level
information, as this features many missing observations. Furthermore, had motor vehicle weight and
age been deleted, although it would have been possible to add several more accidents to the data set,
as these factors are less detailed. However, since these two factors are of high importance concerning
the purpose of this project, it was chosen to keep them in the data set, although data were reduced
by 10%. This reduction is assumed not to inﬂuence the number of personal injury accidents, as these
accidents are often described in detail.
When the four data sources were combined, the ﬁnal data set consisted of 24 useful factors. As can
be seen in ﬁgure 4.4, these 24 factors are divided into four information categories; element, personal,
geographic and surroundings.
Page 31 of 66
==PAGE:37==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
Sex 
part 1
Age  
part 1
Alcohol 
part 1
Safety 
Equip. 
part 1
No. 
People
Inattention
Season
Time
Weather Weekday
Light 
Condition
Accident 
Situation
Element 
part 1
Weight 
part 1
Age 
part 1
No. 
Element
Element 
part 2
Weight 
part 1
Age 
part 2
SEVERITY
Personal factors
Surrounding factors
Geographical factors
Element factors
Region
Speed 
Limit
Distance 
Hospital
Population 
Density
Road 
Design
Figure 4.4: factors to be included
These 24 factors are the ﬁnal obtained factors and are all included to obtain a better understanding
of this project’s area of investigation. Likewise is these variables obtained for contribution to the
development of future road safety solutions by identifying the most signiﬁcant factors. The 24 fac-
tors are equally distributed between numerical (12) and categorical (12). The categorical factors are
characterized in a nominal form, which means that they cannot be ordered. The element, personal
and geographic categories contain internal factors, all of which are inﬂuential, meaning that potential
changes can be made to the factors in relation to increasing traﬃc safety. The opposite applies to the
category surroundings, which contains external factors that have little or no possibility of changing.
The full data set obtained from the four sources contained 78,740 accidents, which are presented in
ﬁgure 4.5 below.
Denmark
Accidents in the period 2013 - 2017
BORNHOLM
Figure 4.5: Accidents happening between 2013 and 2017 involving a car
Page 32 of 66
==PAGE:38==
4. DATA ANALYSIS PROCESS
From this ﬁgure, it can be seen that the accidents that occurred in Denmark, during this period plot
the boundaries of the country, as well as bridges above water and the country’s small islands. All
of these 78,740 accidents will not be further included in this project, as some factors had missing
observations. Since an analysis provides the best result when the information rate is 100%, it was
chosen to delete those accidents, that had missing observations. Hereafter, the new data set contained
54,169 accidents, all of which had occurred over the ﬁve years. This is a reduction of 31% but was
done to obtain the most accurate results.
4.4
Software
The primary mathematical approach, neuro-fuzzy modeling, was completed in the program Python,
as it features the best implementation of neuro-fuzzy modeling. Due to the authors’ limited experience
with Python, the other two mathematical models, the neural networks and the decision trees, were
applied in R (see Appendix B). The neural network was completed using the neuralnet package, which
has the backpropagation method implemented, as well as diﬀerent types of activation functions. The
package gives the user the ability to create diﬀerent types of network structures, with the number of
hidden layers and neurons being determined by the user [Fritsch et al., 2019]. Besides, the NeuralNet-
Tools package was also used, as it provides a plot of the importance of the factors used in a network,
which makes it easier for humans to interpret the results from the neural network [Beck, 2018b]. The
decision tree was completed using the rpart package, as it provides a great deal of ﬂexibility when
building a tree, as well as tools for pruning and plotting [Therneau and Atkinson, 2018]. R is a free
program that is available on the Internet. It was decided to visualize the accident data with Tableau,
as this program oﬀers several useful visualization tools, and it diﬀers in design from other statistical
programs such as R. Tableau is not free, although it does provide free licenses to students globally.
Partial conclusion
This section provided insight into the collection and pre-processing of the data used to create the ﬁnal
data set subsequently investigated in this project. The ﬁnal data set, which contains 54,169 accidents
that occurred between 2013 and 2017, is used to test the three hypotheses. Information about these
accidents is obtained from 12 categorical, and 12 is numerical factors, and are a combination of the
three levels from the police records; accident-, person- and element-level
The 24 factors are further divided into four primary categories; surroundings, geographical, driver and
element-related information, in order to make the information they provide, more manageable.
Page 33 of 66
==PAGE:39==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
5
Descriptive data results
This section ﬁrst presents the results from the text-description factor gathered from the police records
are provided. Second, descriptive results are presented to provide insight into how the factors are
related to the severity outcome of a traﬃc accident.
5.1
Results from text-description
This section only takes into account the factor from the police text description, that is provided in
order for the police to write notes and additional information concerning the accident scene. This
factor may provide important insight with regard to the accident outcome. The police records give the
most important information about an accident, the people and the elements involved in it. Though
things as talking in phone, having a bad day, busy getting the kids before the kindergarten closes, are
things that the mathematical analysis will not take into account, as these are not measurable. Though
this information could give much insight into why an accident occurs and be a signiﬁcant factor when
looking at the severity of an accident.
Figure 5.1 shows the 25 most popular words used by the police text-description. This ﬁgure is com-
pleted by Tableau’s feature called pivot data, which count all words in the data set, and list the word
in one line with the number of times the word is represented in data [Tableau, 2019]. From this is the
25 most used words by the police sorted and visualized. The average text-description from the police
contain 53 words; whereas the largest number of words is 194 and the smallest is one.
Figure 5.1: Word extracted from the brief’s description in the police reports
The 25 most repeated words from ﬁgure 5.1 can be considered as both surprising and not. From
Tableau it was noted that words such as car, damage and direction, are among the most repeated.
This is not surprising, as, for example, cars make up a large proportion of the total number of motor
vehicles, which is why they may be particularly likely to be involved in traﬃc accidents. One of the
surprising terms is personal injury, as the proportion of accident involving personal injury is quite
small compared to those involving material damage.
However, this can be explained by the fact
that the term personal injury is used not only in accidents involving injuries but also those involving
material damage. In accidents involving material damage, it is important for the police oﬃcer(s) to
state that no injury had happened, even though it is already shown in the accident type, which contain
information concerning the severity of an accident. Another two terms which are seen to be repeated
are speed and km/h, which is not surprising, as these words often appear when a vehicle’s speed is
mentioned. These terms do not necessarily mean that a person has been speeding; they are also used
when the police need to state, for example, that the person has been traveling, for example, at a speed
of 40 km/h in a 50 km/h zone.
Page 34 of 66
==PAGE:40==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
One surprising word to be seen from the word count is the word, overlook, as this word reﬂects inat-
tention among drivers. The interesting aspect when extracting the words from the brief descriptions
provided by the police was intriguing to see how frequently a word such a mobile phone was repeated.
Often, it is diﬃcult for police oﬃcers to determine whether a driver was inattentive while driving, and
this parameter is not included in the standard procedure. The goal behind extracting these words
from the brief descriptions was to determine whether speciﬁc terms could be put into a box of the same
concept. Of particular interest was the concept, inattention, which was mentioned in diﬀerent ways.
Inattention is usually not a measurable parameter, which why it is particularly interesting. Several
words can be placed under the same concept inattention, which can be seen in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Words included in the term, Inattention
It was decided that these words all represented the term inattention. When an accident for which one
of these words is included the accident was labeled TRUE, and FALSE if it featured none. This way
made it was possible to separate accidents with inattention, from those with no. Inattention among
drivers can be extremely hard for the police to measure, as people often do not mention if they were
distracted by mobile phone etc. because they know it is wrong. In addition, the ﬁne from having used
a phone when driving will only increase, which is also seen as a reason why people would not mention
it.
Studying only inattentive accidents present that 56% of all accidents have speciﬁed some kind of
inattention. However, when investigating whether inattention aﬀects the severity outcome, the study
shows no diﬀerence in material or injury accidents concerning inattention. That means when being
in an accident; the outcome does not seem to change whether the driver was inattentive or not.
Although, inattention is said to describe many of the accidents occurring, which is why any preventive
actions against inattention can reduce the number of accidents signiﬁcantly. Preventive action against
inattention is discussed later in chapter 7.
Figure 5.3 present the development of the accidents with inattention.
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
5000
5500
6000
6500
Number
5.572
6.019
6.122
6.392
6.343
Figure 5.3: Development of accidents with inattention
Page 35 of 66
==PAGE:41==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
Inattention is seen as a signiﬁcant problem among drivers today, as 56% of all the happened accident
had some kind of inattention involved. Figure 5.3 show a remarkable development among accidents
with inattention involved when driving, and seen as an increasing problem. In section 7 will a possible
solution be presented against inattentive drivers.
Despite the factor, inattention was shown in this section; the factor is still incorporated in the math-
ematical models. The factor, however, is not expected to present any signiﬁcant results in the mathe-
matical models, as it did not inﬂuence the severity outcome based on this section.
5.2
Descriptive results
This section provides a detailed insight into the ﬁnal data sets results obtained from analyzing the
data set. Results are presented by graphs, pie charts, etc. to give the best possible overview. For
more details than the below section presents, referees to appendix C in chapter 8.
The ﬁnal data set is a sample of the population; it accounts for nearly 70% of all of the accidents that
were recorded between 2013 to 2017. The development of accidents over the ﬁve years is shown in
ﬁgure 5.4 below.
 2013
 2013
 2013
 2014
 2014
 2014
 2015
 2015
 2015
 2016
 2016
 2016
 2017
 2017
 2017
0
500
1000
1500
Number of Records
Figure 5.4: Development of accidents in the analyzed period
Figure 5.4 shows that the number of material damage accidents increased slightly. However, when con-
sidering accidents that involved injury accidents, the development was stable and almost unchanged,
which supports the importance of this project. Given that several preventative actions intended to
promote road safety in Denmark have been implemented, this trend is not as expected [Transport-
Safety-Council, 2018].
The goal of this project is to identify factors that relate to accidents outcome, which is why the
information concerning the severity of accident outcomes can be obtained from police records. It was
decided to determine whether accidents resulted in injury accidents or material damage accidents.
Reducing the number of injury accidents completely is unrealistic, which is why it was decided to
consider the factors that may have the potential to reduce the risk of injury accidents. Figure 5.5
shows the distribution of accidents outcomes among 54,169 accidents.
Material Damage
84%
Personal Injury
16%
Figure 5.5: Accident outcome
Figure 5.5 shows that injury accidents correspond to 16%.
This 16% vary in the injury degree,
ranging from minor injuries such as concussion to a more severe outcome or even death. Furthermore,
it indicates that 84% of accidents resulted in material damage. From this it can be determined that
Page 36 of 66
==PAGE:42==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
only a small number of accidents resulted in injury accidents; however, this number is still too high,
as one injury accident is one too much.
The following section presents descriptive results, which are divided among the four categories identi-
ﬁed in chapter 5.2; personal, element, geographic and surrounding. The factors are distributed under
each category.
Personal factors
This category relates to the ﬁrst hypothesis, which concerns personal characteristics.
The factors
mentioned in this category have the potential to conﬁrm or disprove this hypothesis. On average
the accidents have involved 1.86 people whereas, the minimum number of involved people is 1, which
corresponds to a solo accident. The maximum number of involved persons is 29, which account for
one single accident and is therefore considered to be an outlier, as it diﬀers from the other accidents.
As mentioned in the previous section, cf. 4.3, due to missing observations for part 2 at the person-level,
it was decided to exclude this part from the project, which why only part 1 is shown. Figure 5.6 below
presents the age and gender distribution for part 1.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Age of part 1
0%
2%
4%
%, Number
2.460
940
498
FEMALE
33%
MALE
67%
Figure 5.6: Distribution of age and gender of part 1
From the left-hand ﬁgure 5.6 it can be seen that more young people, and therefore new drivers are more
exposed to traﬃc accidents. The average age of part 1 is 41, whereas the minimum and maximum ages
are 6 and 100, respectively. Furthermore, it is found that 75 % of the data set are below the age of 54.
Additionally, it was seen that when the age of a driver’s increases, the number of accidents decrease.
The right-hand side of the ﬁgure shows that men are more likely to be involved in an accident when
compared to women, as 67 % of all accidents happen to men.
Based upon ﬁgure 5.7 it can be stated that more accidents, material damage, and injury respectively,
are more likely to happen to younger males.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
Age of part 1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
Age of part 1
0
500
1000
1500
Number
109
596
263
1.493
Material Damage
Personal Injury
Female
Male
Figure 5.7: The distribution of age among sex
However, when comparing accidents involving material damage with those involving injury, it can also
be seen that females have the same distribution as men. Calculating the proportion of young females
in injury accidents among all female accidents are the same compared to the proportion of young males
in injury accidents among all male accidents. Likewise, the proportions of injury accidents among all
Page 37 of 66
==PAGE:43==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
ages are very similar, which indicate that the risk of an injury accident, does not depend on age. The
proportion of younger and middle-aged people in injury accidents corresponds to 17%, whereas the
elderly account for 18% which is not a signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
The alcohol factor shows that 92% of all accidents did not involve alcohol; however, this, means that
8% of accidents were associated with alcohol. Further investigation indicates that the average per-mile
was found to be 1.54. The highest per-mile was 3.81; however, it can be seen that 75% of the data set
are beneath 2.03 when only people who have been aﬀected are accounted for.
Alcohol is mainly a factor in relation to the occurrence of accidents, as it aﬀects the human’s reﬂexes
[Nisgaard, 2018]. An interesting aspect of the alcohol factor is seeing who is most likely to drive under
the inﬂuence of alcohol, as this makes it possible to developed targeted prevention. Based on the
ﬁnal data set, 495 accidents had a driver who was driving inﬂuenced by alcohol when crashing, which
resulted in a personal injury accident. An average of 1.7 people was involved in these accidents.
While, as said above, the data indicated only 8% of accidents were alcohol-related, and among this
only 18% accounted for personal injury accidents. This indicates that the combination of personal
injury and alcohol only accounts for approximately 1% of the data set. It also shows that alcohol has a
minimal inﬂuence on the outcome of an accident, though it would be relevant to study those accidents
that involve both alcohol and injures more detailed. The graph below presents a visual depiction of
alcohol per-mile, combined with age and gender, respectively.
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
Promille part 1
20
40
60
Number
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
Promille part 1
0
20
40
Number
Alcohol/Sex
Alcohol/Age part 1
FEMALE
MALE
30
59
Figure 5.8: Distribution of alcohol per-mille for part 1 based on gender and age for part 1
The left-hand ﬁgure presents the distribution for males and females and indicates that men are most
likely to be in an accident in which alcohol is involved. However, the distribution of accidents with
alcohol involved is equal for men and women, which indicate that women who are involved in accidents
do not drink less than men. The right-hand graph, in contrast, shows a color distribution with an
average age of part 1, which has a pretty clear line. People of above 40 years of age are on average
more likely to be involved in an accident with a per-mile above 2.0, whereas people below 45 years of
age who are involved in an accident are on average more likely to have a per-mile of below 2,0. This
clear line is surprising as one often hears of drunk driving among young people, but it is perhaps a
distorted picture of the reality, as it may be less surprising to hear about elderly being involved in an
accident. Alternatively, it may be because of the greater the age, the higher the likelihood of poor
reﬂexes. Those young people who were involved in accidents while having a per-mile of less than 2.0
may be due to lack of experience regarding how a drink aﬀect the per-mile. As a result, for example,
they may drive home from parties after having their last drink some time ago and thus believing that
they are sober enough to drive.
The graph 5.8 below presents a visual depiction of alcohol combined with accident situation and region.
0
1
2
3
Promille part 1
0
100
200
0
1
2
3
Promille part 1
0
10
20
SOLO
CROSSING
PEDISTRIAN
DIFFERENT DIRECTION
PARKING
SAME DIRECTION
TURN
Other
Capital
Central
North
South
Zealand
Alcohol / Accident situation
Alcohol / Region
Figure 5.9: Distribution of alcohol per-mille for part 1 based on accident situation and region
Page 38 of 66
==PAGE:44==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
The left-hand ﬁgure explains how alcohol is distributed by accident situation and as expected; solo
accidents are the primary accident type. The fact that solo accidents are the most exposed situation
for accidents when driving under the inﬂuence of alcohol, is a good thing, as solo accidents often only
involved the people driving under the inﬂuence of alcohol, meaning that typically no other element(s)
are involved in accidents with a drunk driver. The ﬁgure to the right presents the distribution among
regions, in which south and middle Jutland lay in the top. However, the ﬁve regions do not diﬀer
enormously, which indicates that drunk driving is a general problem throughout Denmark.
Based on the above four graphs, it can be stated that, in general, men are at higher risk of being
involved in a solo accident when aﬀected by alcohol, than females. Likewise, younger people are more
likely to be aﬀected by alcohol and to be involved in a personal injury accident. In addition, it was
found that it was mostly elderly who had a blood alcohol content of above 2.5 per-mile, but when
people fall into this category and are involved in an accident, they tend to lead to material damage
accidents.
Element factors
This category relates to the second hypothesis, which concerned element characteristics. The factors
included in this category have the potential to conﬁrm or disprove this hypothesis.
The accidents had in average involved 2.2 elements, of which the minimum number of involved elements
is one, that corresponds to a solo accident in which the driver loses control of the vehicle without hitting
obstacles on or beside the road. The maximum number of involved elements in an accident corresponds
to 29, which account for one accident and are therefore described as an outlier. Figure 5.10 below
presents the distribution of element 1 and element 2.
Part1: VEHICLE
Part2: VULNERABLE ROAD USER
%, Accidents: 22%
Part1: VEHICLE
Part2: VEHICLE
%, Accidents: 44%
Part1: VEHICLE
Part2: OTHER
%, Accidents: 24%
Figure 5.10: Distribution of element 1 and 2
As expected, the combination of elements that correspond to most of the accidents is between two
vehicles, which accounts for 44% of the accidents investigated. Second, are vehicles still found as
element 1, however, element 2 are given by a vulnerable road user or is deﬁned as the element, other,
that correspond to 22% and 24% respectively. The combination between a vehicle and the element,
other, is referring to as a solo accident, in which a vehicle hits an obstacle on or beside the road.
Furthermore, among the total number of accidents is found 82,428 drivers of a motor vehicle and
12,719 vulnerable road users.
Figure 5.11 below shows the distribution of elements among injury
accidents.
Page 39 of 66
==PAGE:45==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
VEHICLE
VULNERABLE ROAD
USER
45%
VEHICLE
VEHICLE
27%
VEHICLE
OTHER
18%
Figure 5.11: Number of personal injury accidents distributed among elements
Based on this ﬁgure, it can be stated that 45 % of all personal injury accidents are between a vehicle and
a vulnerable road user, which represents a high share. When studying the total number of accidents
involving a vulnerable road user, personal injury accidents correspond to 34%. Additionally, personal
injury accidents between two cars correspond to 27 % of the total number of injury accidents. Whereas
studying accidents involving two or one motor vehicle(s) does injury accidents correspond to 11% of
the total number of accidents involving two or one motor vehicle(s). The aforementioned indicates
that the risk of injury accidents increase when a vulnerable road user is involved.
Figure 5.12 below shows the distribution of motor vehicle age among the number of accidents.
0
10
20
30
40
Motor vehicle age part 1
0%
2%
4%
6%
%, Number
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Motor vehicle age part 2
0%
5%
10%
%, Number
Figure 5.12: Number of accidents based on motor vehicle age
The ﬁgure indicates that newer motor vehicles are more likely to be involved in an accident. It can
furthermore be seen that when age increases, the number of accidents decrease.
Additionally, at
around the age of 18 for part 1, the curve decreases signiﬁcant, which is described by the fact that a
car’s lifetime is generally not longer than 20-30 years. The average age for element 1 is found to be 9,
whereas, for element 2, it is 8. These numbers are similar, which suggests that the age of the average
motor vehicle involved in an accident is the average of a car’s lifetime. Furthermore, it can be noted
that for both elements 75% are below the age of 14. The maximum age was found to be 116, which
is an outlier, although it is not unlikely that this accident is incorrect, as the ﬁrst cars in Denmark
appeared at the start of the 1900s [Kanal-Frederikshavn, 2018]. Unsurprisingly, the minimum car age
was found to be 0, as this number is the lowest for a motor vehicle age. Motor vehicle age speciﬁes the
year of a car’s ﬁrst registration in Denmark. When studying injury accidents among the total number
of accidents, it can be seen that age does not inﬂuence accident outcome. Accidents involving two new
cars have the same proportion of injury accidents compared to two old cars.
The average weight for motor vehicles is 2,480 kg, which is high when one considers that 75% of the
data set are under 2000 kg. This can be explained by that trucks and other large vehicles, have a
signiﬁcant impact on the average weight of motor vehicles. Four accidents occurred, in which, the net
weight of the vehicles involved was above 40,000 kg, but these are considered outliers.
Based on the data, a distinction is made between small and large motor vehicles, with vehicles of 2,300
Page 40 of 66
==PAGE:46==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
kg or more being considered large. In order to study the vehicle weight in greater detail ﬁgure 5.13
below is presented, that shows how motor vehicles is chosen to be distinct.
Figure 5.13: Weight deﬁnition of car
The ﬁgure shows that a medium-size car (a Ford), can be assigned to either the large or the small
group, depending on its weight. When studying the weights of the vehicles involved in all personal
injury accidents, an interesting ﬁnding was noted, which is presented in ﬁgure 5.14 below.
1K
2K
3K
4K
Weight of element 1
1K
2K
3K
4K
Weight of element 2
large + large
large + small
small + small
Figure 5.14: Personal injury accident divided on car weight
Figure 5.14 shows that injury accidents are less likely to occur between two large vehicles when
compared to accidents involving a small and large motor vehicle or two small vehicles. However, when
looking into the proportion of injury accidents among these three groups (large-large, large-small and
small-small), no diﬀerence in the severity outcome was found.
Surrounding factor
To determine whether the time of day inﬂuences the severity of accident outcomes, the time at which
the accidents occurred was investigated further. Figure 5.15 presents the distribution of the accidents
investigated over time.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
TIME
2%
4%
6%
TO WORK
FROM WORK
Material Damage
Person Injury
Figure 5.15: Distribution of accidents and time
Page 41 of 66
==PAGE:47==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
From ﬁgure 5.15 it can be seen that many accidents occurred in work hours. Accidents peaked at
7:00 and 15:00, which deﬁnes the time-period going to and from work. These hours are deﬁned as
the most stressed of the day, which are the time periods in which most people travel to or from work,
respectively. These hours are described as the most stressful of the day, and the traﬃc density is
similarly high during these periods. However, the number of accidents resulted in personal injury did
not increase signiﬁcantly during these hours, which indicates that a higher density of cars does not
lead to a higher risk of personal injury accidents.
Investigating the seasons indicates that 70% of all accidents occurred in daylight, which means that
only 30% occurred in dark conditions.
Regarding weather, 84% of all accidents occurred in dry
conditions, 13% in the rain and only approximately 1% occurred in conditions involving snow or fog.
Investigating personal injury accidents indicates an equal distribution.
The factor accident situation is displayed in ﬁgure 5.16 below, for both personal and material damage
accidents.
SOLO
24%
SAME DIR.
23%
TURN
9%
PARKING
7%
DIFFERENT DIR.
6%
PEDISTRIAN
5%
CROSSING
27%
Figure 5.16: Accident situation
Figure 5.16 indicates that most accidents (namely 37%) occur when vehicles are crossing. Furthermore,
the ﬁgure shows that 23% of accidents occur when two vehicles are driving in the same directions,
whereas accident when driving in diﬀerent direction represents 6%. However, investigating only per-
sonal injury accidents show that the accident situation with the highest risk of injury accidents are
those involving pedestrians.
Geographical factor
This category relates to the third hypothesis, which concerns geographical location.
The factors
mentioned in this category have the potential to conﬁrm or disprove this hypothesis.
Of the 54,169 accidents, it was found that 48 % were located less than 10 km from the nearest hospital,
22% were between 10 and 20 km away, and 29% were further than 20 km away. Figure 5.17 displays
Denmark’s 21 emergency hospitals, each of which is represented by a blue star, and the distance from
each accident to the nearest emergency hospital. The distance is presented through a color scale, which
is divided into three levels; below 10, above 20 and in the middle. The distance is based on Euclid’s
distance, which means that it is necessary to take into account the fact that the right distance may
be longer. The ﬁgure shows all of the accidents recorded by the police, which means that the number
of accidents displayed does not correspond to the data set analyzed.
Page 42 of 66
==PAGE:48==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
Denmark
Distance to hospital
Hospital < 10 [km]
10 < Hospital < 20 [km]
Hospital > 20 [km]
Figure 5.17: Distance from accidents to nearest hospitals. Blue stars represent hospitals
The average distance to a hospital was found to be 14 km. The minimum distance was 1 km, whereas
the maximum distance was 73 km away, which is quite far. The latter is considered to be a rare
accident location, as 75% of all traﬃc accidents were found to occur within 22 km of the nearest
emergency hospital. However, when comparing the number of injury accidents regarding the total
number of accidents in close, near, far respectively, a diﬀerence can be found. When only looking at
the accidents close to the nearest hospital the number of injury accidents is found to be 14%. Accidents
that occurred near to a hospital yield 17% while far was found to by 20 %. This shows that the further
away from a hospital an accident occurs, the greater the likelihood of an accident involving a personal
injury. It is interesting to determine which factors, in combination with hospital distance, diﬀer in
risk of personal injuries, which the table 5.1 below displays. Table 5.1 displays how hospital distance
diﬀer among sub-factors such as straight road, solo accidents and vulnerable road users. These are
subcategories of the factor road design, main situation, and element part 2, respectively.
Table 5.1: Distance of accidents involving personal injuries from hospitals
Straight road
Solo accident
Vulnerable road user (part 2)
Close
37 %
8 %
58 %
Near
57 %
20 %
34 %
Far
54 %
22 %
33 %
Considering the combination of a straight road and distance shows that accident resulted in injuries
occurred further than 10 km away from the hospital is approximate 55%. Likewise, the distance below
10 km shows that only 37% of the personal injury accidents happen on a straight road. Regarding
this ﬁnding, it can be stated that more severe accidents occur on straight roads further away from
emergency hospitals. Additionally, more solo accidents occur when the distance to the nearest hospital
is greater than 1; more precisely, the risk of injury accidents increases by 175%, when compared to
accidents that occur close to an emergency hospital. The opposite eﬀect is seen for vulnerable road
users, as their risk of personal injury decreases with greater distance from a hospital. This can be
explained by the fact that generally speaking, there are more vulnerable road users close to emergency
hospitals, as these are often located near larger cities.
Page 43 of 66
==PAGE:49==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
When studying the speed limit factor, it can be seen that 48% of all accidents occurred on roads
with a speed limit of 50 km/h, whereas roads with a speed limit of 80 km/h were second, at 22%.
The ﬁgure 5.18 below shows the distribution of material damage and personal injury accidents among
the recorded speed limits. The speed limits are divided into two groups, as it was noted that speed
limits above 80 km/h decreased the risk of injury accidents. Likewise, speed limits of up to 80 km/h
increased the risk of injury accidents.
20
40
60
80
Speed limit [km/h]
0%
50%
100%
% Number
80
90
100
110
120
130
Speed limit [km/h]
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
%, Number
Injury accidents
Material damage accidents
Figure 5.18: Speed limits and accidents involving personal injury and material damage
Looking at the speed limit of 80 km/h shows that 24% of the accidents resulted in injury accidents.
This is quite high, as the second highest speed limit for most injury accidents is 50 km/h, which
accounted for only 15% of injury accidents. This means that a speed limit of 80 km/h increases the
risk of personal injury by 60 % compared to a road with a speed limit of 50 km/h. Moreover, it can
be seen that personal injury accidents decrease with speed limits of above 80 km/h, which can be
explained by the fact, that highways feature carriageways, which reduce the risk of collisions.
Investigating the population density presents a higher density among the larger cities in Denmark, as
expected seen in ﬁgure 5.19.
BORNHOLM
Population Density
Low Density (POP/KM2 <40)
Medium Density (40< POP/KM2 <300)
High Density (<300 POP/KM2)
Figure 5.19: Visualization of population density in Denmark
Page 44 of 66
==PAGE:50==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
The ﬁgure 5.19 above presents the population density, separated into three categories; low, medium
and high. The density is described by the population per square meter in each parish. The ﬁgure
displays that larger cities correspond to higher densities, this is especially seen around Copenhagen, as
well as Odense and Aarhus. Studying all personal injury accidents shows that 53% of these occurred
at high population densities, whereas 30% at medium and 16% at low. However, from this alone, it
cannot be conﬁrmed whether the population density aﬀects the severity outcome, as more accident
happens in larger cities.
Another factor that could inﬂuence the severity outcome of an accident is road design. Studying this
shows that 37% of the accidents occurred on a straight road, while 37% occurred in an intersection. The
roundabout was found to be the one road design which had the fewest accidents. This distribution can
be explained by the fact that a roundabout is a speed reduction prevention measure, while a straight
road leads to a higher speed. Straight roads may also lead to less attentive drivers when compared
to roundabouts, which often require a certain degree of focus of a driver. However, when entering a
roundabout the elements do not face each other, and the likelihood of frontal collisions is thus reduced.
However, when considering the proportion of accidents involving injuries to material damage, there
are no diﬀerences between these diﬀerent types of road design.
Correlation
An important aspect regarding the factors used is the correlation between them. A correlation is
described as a linear relationship, whereby if one increases or decreases, the correlated factor increases
or decreases as well.
The correlation is based upon Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient, which is given by [Ware et al., 2012]:
rX,Y =
Pn
i=1(xi −x)(yi −y)
pPn
i=1(xi −x)2pPn
i=1(yi −y)2
(5.1)
Here, n describes the total number of observations in the sample, xi and yi describes the i observations.
The two factors and x and y are respectively the mean value of each factor. Figure 5.20 below presents
the correlations that exist in the data set investigated
1
0.13
1
0.05
−0.03
1
0.08
0.03
0.09
1
0
−0.04
−0.01
0.02
1
0.03
−0.09
−0.02
−0.07
0.04
1
−0.36
−0.28
−0.03
−0.07
0.02
−0.03
1
−0.02
0.05
−0.04
−0.1
−0.04
0.04
0.01
1
−0.08
0.07
−0.17
−0.12
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.07
1
−0.06
0.08
−0.03
−0.05
−0.01
−0.01
0.02
0.06
0.58
1
−0.01
0.08
−0.03
−0.02
−0.01
0.02
−0.02
0.02
0.15
0.09
1
0
0
−0.05
−0.04
0.06
0
−0.01
0.08
0.24
0.16
0.2
1
HOSPITAL_DISTANCE
SPEED_LIMIT
ALCOHOL_P1
CAR_AGE1
TIME
AGE_P1
POPULATION_DENSITY
CAR_WEIGHT1
NO_PEOPLE
NO_ELEMENTS
CAR_WEIGHT2
CAR_AGE2
HOSPITAL_DISTANCE
SPEED_LIMIT
ALCOHOL_P1
CAR_AGE1
TIME
AGE_P1
POPULATION_DENSITY
CAR_WEIGHT1
NO_PEOPLE
NO_ELEMENTS
CAR_WEIGHT2
CAR_AGE2
−1.0 −0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pearson
Correlation
Figure 5.20: The correlation among the numerical factors
The most signiﬁcant correlation in the above plot is between the number of people and elements
involved in an accident. This is logical, as more people often mean more drivers and related cars.
Another correlation worth mentioning is that between population density and hospital distance. The
correlation between these two factors is negative, which indicates that when the factor hospital distance
Page 45 of 66
==PAGE:51==
5. DESCRIPTIVE DATA RESULTS
increases the population density slightly decreases, which can be explained by the fact that most
hospital is placed near major cities (see ﬁgure 5.17). The same applies to the factors speed limit and
population density, which can be explained by the fact that roads in areas with dense populations
often have lower speed limits. The highest correlation in ﬁgure 5.20 is 0.58, which is not assumed to
create problems in terms of the results obtained and interpretation, as this correlation is categorized as
moderate. Moreover, all other correlations are categorized as weak or very weak; therefore, no further
actions are taken, concerning these correlations [Beldjazia and Alatou, 2016].
Partial conclusion
The results presented in this chapter, yield some main ﬁndings regarding the factors that have a
signiﬁcant eﬀect on the severity outcome of an accident. The main factors that negatively inﬂuence
the outcome of an accident are as follows:
- Greater distance to hospital;
- Vulnerable road users;
- Speed limit of 80 km/h.
Regarding the three hypotheses, the second and third hypotheses can be conﬁrmed, as vulnerable road
users increase the risk of being involved in an injury accident. The same applies to the distance to the
nearest hospital and a speed limit of 80 km/h. The ﬁrst hypothesis cannot be conﬁrmed, as personal
characteristics such as age, gender, and alcohol consumption were not found to increase the risk of
injury accidents. The factor, inattention, did not show any eﬀect on the severity outcome, although
it did show a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the occurring of an accident.
Page 46 of 66
==PAGE:52==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
6
Mathematical results
This section provides the results from the three mathematical methods; the neuro-fuzzy modeling,
the neural network and the decision tree. This section oﬀers answers regarding to which model to
use when predicting the severity of traﬃc accidents, and which methods have been most eﬀective in
providing the best traﬃc insights into an accident. In addition four scenarios is established based on
the mathematical results to provide more eﬀective preventive actions.
6.1
Neuro-fuzzy modeling
The neuro-fuzzy modeling was based on the 12 numerical and 12 categorical factors from the data set.
This method is the primary of this project, as neuro-fuzzy can not only describe complex functions,
but also present output that is human-friendly. However, this model, unfortunately, did not produce
any useful analytic results due to a lack of development and implementation of the code in Python,
which means that a usable analytic result could not be achieved. Therefore, the results have not been
included due to lack of reliability.
However, the model can provide useful results for severity modeling. Nevertheless, this would require
more time than was available for this project. In addition, it was discovered quite late in the process
that this model created problems, and there was not time to address these. Had more time been
available, then a closer examination of the implementation of the code may have produced a reliable
and meaningful analytic result.
The result expected from the neuro-fuzzy modeling was several fuzzy ”if-then” rules based upon
multiple fuzzy sets. The neuro-fuzzy could have provided several rules; selecting the 20 most signiﬁcant.
This model should provide good results, as it provides a crisp outcome, and reveals, for example, how
age is divided into groups in relation to the accident outcome of personal injuries. The rules could
have been as follows:
IF season IS winter AND element-2 IS vehicle THEN severity IS personal injury
or
IF season IS summer AND element-2 IS vehicle THEN severity IS material damage
This way of expressing results is very similar to the results for the decision tree; however, these
neuro-fuzzy if-then rules are described much more detailed.
6.2
Neural network
The neural network result, based upon the 12 numerical factors from the data set, is displayed in the
following ﬁgure:
Figure 6.1: Best-performing neural network with numerical data
The above ﬁgure displays the three best-explaining numerical factors of the 12 possible. The network
Page 47 of 66
==PAGE:53==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
contains one input layer with three inputs, two hidden layers with three and two layers respectively,
and one outcome layer with one neuron. The thresholds in the above network are, by default, 0.1,
which is the reference value. In general, a neural network is referred to as a black box, since the
calculation inside the hidden layers is often incomprehensible and opaque, which is partly conﬁrmed
in the above plot. This is only partly conﬁrmed because, more signiﬁcant factors would have made
the plot even more unreadable.
The crosses made on the above ﬁgure 6.1, is made to see how the neural network divide the observations
into the neurons in the ﬁrst hidden layer, based upon their weights. The red cross symbolize a neuron
where number of people and population density has an large inﬂuence. The number of people has a
weight on −748, indicating the more people involved in the accident the less risk of personal injury.
However, this only account for this one neuron, and can not be generalized across the network. The
blue cross symbolize a neuron where number of people and number of persons have a large inﬂuence,
which also applies for the green cross, though with diﬀerent weights. However, the above neural net-
work ﬁgure 6.1 is showed in order to visualize the formed network, but not to be investigated further
regarding the weights. Instead a plotting method called importance, which displays the numerical
input factors in relation to their inﬂuence in the network and the outcome. The importance plot in
ﬁgure 6.2 below, is based upon the Olden-method, which calculates the importance in relation to the
product between the input and output weights of the hidden layer, and sums this across all hidden
neurons [Beck, 2018a].
Figure 6.2: The importance of the numerical factors
This ﬁgure indicates that number of elements and number of people are the two most important fac-
tors for the model. Number of people are seen to have a lower importance compared to the number
of elements, however, the inﬂuence are still signiﬁcantly high. The number of people has a positive
eﬀect on personal injuries, which explains that the more people involved in the accident, the higher
the risk of a personal injury accident. Number of elements is the opposite, with a negative eﬀect,
which explains that the more elements involved in the accident, the lower the risk of a personal injury.
Similarly, population density aﬀects whether the outcome of an accident involves material or personal
injuries, as a higher population density increases the risk of a personal injury.
Regarding Figure 6.1, above, which is a relatively uncomplicated network, it is meaningless to inves-
tigate whether more neurons or hidden layers would increase the performance of the network, as the
network only has three numerical factors. However, decreasing or increasing the number of hidden
layers and neurons inﬂuences the result negatively and changes the accuracy signiﬁcantly when pre-
dicting the test data set. The network, therefore, is unchanged keeping the above number of hidden
layers’ and neurons.
Page 48 of 66
==PAGE:54==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
6.3
Decision tree
This section contains the results from the decision tree method.
This method had all 24 factors
incorporated, both categorical and numerical. By considering all the factors in this method, whether
categorical or numerical, they have the opportunity to inﬂuence the model’s result without any factor-
transformation. Based upon the most signiﬁcant factors found by the algorithm used to deﬁne the
decision tree, the most signiﬁcant factors are those that create the purest splits and, thereby, best
explain the data.
After the model was pruned, only high-inﬂuence factors were considered. The tree was pruned using
the smallest complexity parameter compared with best accuracy, which is when the number of splits
is ﬁve. Using this number, the model does not overﬁt the data, and the tree is reduced in complexity
without losing information and accuracy. The following plot displays the optimal decision tree with
ﬁve nodes:
Figure 6.3: The results from the decision tree based upon all factors
This tree is the ﬁnal decision tree, pruned to describe the data using fewest splits. If a statement is
true, the tree should be followed to the left, otherwise to the right. The tree has element part 2 as the
top node, which explains the most signiﬁcant factor and best deﬁnes the variance in data. If, element
part 2 is a vehicle, other type vehicle or a heavy vehicle, the tree should be read further to the right
side; whereas, the opposite will apply for a vulnerable road user. Regarding, the left side of the tree,
if part two in an accident is a vulnerable road user (bike, pedestrian etc.) and the accident happens in
the region of North Jutland, the accident is most likely to result in a personal injury. If, on the other
hand, the accident does not happen in North Jutland, but anywhere else in Denmark, the speed limit
is an important factor regarding the severity of an accident. If the speed limit on the road is in excess
of 75 km/h, the risk of being involved in a personal injury accident increases. The other side of the
tree indicates the number of people and elements involved in an accident. This side reveals that an
accident with three or more people and two or less elements has a higher risk of personal injuries. Solo
accidents are often included in this form, where part 1 is a vehicle and part 2 is an obstacle beside the
roads. In solo accidents, two elements are often involved, although this result is based upon multiple
persons in the one vehicle.
6.4
Comparison
This section compares the neural network and decision tree result, as neuro-fuzzy did not produce any
analytic results. The two methods were modeled using the same data, although due to the limitations
of neural network, only the numerical factors were giving.
Page 49 of 66
==PAGE:55==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
The neural network and the decision tree agree regarding the eﬀect on both number of elements and
number of people, as both indicated that the more people involved in the accident, the higher the risk
of a personal injury; whereas, the fewer elements involved, the lower the risk. The diﬀerence between
these two results is the clear splitting the decision tree is applying for number of people and number of
elements. The splitting is between two and three in both persons and elements, in which the number
of people equal three or above and the number of elements equal two or below, leading to a personal
injury accident. Instead, the neural network indicates that the more people, the higher the risk, and
the fewer elements, the lower the risk. This means that being ﬁve people in an accident results in a
higher risk than being four people. This is diﬀerent to the decision tree, which indicates that above
two people involved results in same probability.
The table, below, provides a performance comparison between the neural network and decision tree,
regarding predicting the test data set. The neural network’s performance in the table is based upon
the network with two hidden layers, containing three and two neurons respectively, which proved to
be the optimal network.
Table 6.1
Signiﬁcant factors
Accuracy
Confusion matrix
No. people
Prediction/Actual
Material damage
Personal injury
No. elements
Material Damage
4602
763
Population Density
Personal injury
0
121
Neural Network
86%
Element part two
No. people
Prediction/Actual
Material damage
Personal injury
No. elements
Material Damage
4378
688
Region
Personal injury
69
179
Decision Tree
Speed Limit
86%
The column signiﬁcant factors, list the best and most important factors, as determined by the numer-
ical factors in neural network and both the numerical and categorical in decision tree. The two models
agree regarding no. elements and no. people, as well as their eﬀect upon accident outcome. The rest
of the decision trees signiﬁcant factors are based upon categorical factors, which were not provided to
the neural network. The decision tree contains more useful results as it is easier to relate the if-then
rules; however, regarding the accuracy, which describes the percentage of correct predictions in the
test data, the two methods predict equally by 86%. Regarding accuracy, it is important to remember
that the accident outcome is not equally distributed, as 84% of the accidents’ outcomes are material
damage. This needs to be considered, as the accuracy would be 84% if all examples in the test data set
were predicted as material damage. An accuracy of 84% compared with 86% is a signiﬁcantly positive
increase, revealing that the two classiﬁcation methods are more accurate, than predicting all material
damage.
From the confusion matrices in the table, it is seen how the 86% accuracy was obtained. The dialog
in the confusion matrices describes the correctly predicted examples, with the decision tree predicting
slightly more correctly in the personal injury category, but not signiﬁcantly. As seen in the right,
upper corner of both confusion matrices, many observations predicted material damage, although the
actual outcome was personal injuries. This indicates that both models struggle to predict personal
injuries, which is explained by the fact that personal injuries only represents 16% of the total data
set. This describes an unbalanced outcome factor, since material damage and personal injuries are not
represented equally.
6.5
Scenarios
Based on the splitting results from decision tree and the results from the neural network, regarding
the number of people and elements in an accident, it was possible to establish table 6.2 below. In
this ﬁgure the results from the mathematical models are the foundation of the splits in elements and
persons. Based on these four scenarios is established. The purpose of creating these scenarios is to
Page 50 of 66
==PAGE:56==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
obtain a possible deeper understanding of a particular accident situation and its patterns, which will
provide conclusions regarding the three hypotheses. Finding patterns in these accidents’ situations
could lead to targeted and more-detailed preventions.
Table 6.2: Personal injuries distributed for diﬀerent scenarios
Scenario
Elements
Persons
Injury Acc.
Total
Proportion
1
1 or 2
1 or 2
6,511
43,585
15 %
2
3+
1 or 2
595
4,610
13 %
3
1 or 2
3+
861
862
100 %
4
3+
3+
942
5,111
18 %
8,909
54,169
16 %
From this table, accidents involving scenario 1 account for most accidents between 2013 and 2017;
however, only 15% resulted in personal injuries. If the accident instead was described by scenario 3,
the risk of being involved in a personal injury accidents was 100%. A deeper understanding of these
two scenarios is now discussed, because these scenarios are the two most signiﬁcant accident types
and may present possible signiﬁcant factors in relation to decreasing both the number of personal
injuries and material damage. Regarding scenarios 2 and 4, no further investigation was conducted,
as personal injury accidents were not signiﬁcant for these two scenarios. The remaining accidents in
these two scenarios are diﬃcult to explain in terms of severity outcome, as many seem to be one-time
accidents.
The ﬁrst studied scenario (1), had 6,511 personal injury accidents and 37,074 material damages. In
this scenario, the proportion of personal injuries only accounts for 15% of the total accidents. However,
the number of personal injuries is 73% of the total number of personal injury accidents in data, and
the material damages are 68% of the total material damages accidents. Due to this high proportion,
this scenario is studied further, below. The second studied scenario (3), the personal injuries account
for almost 100% of the total number of accidents in data, but 10% of the total number of personal
injury accidents. Based on these two scenarios, it is possible to describe 83% of the total personal
injuries and 68% of all material damages that happened between 2013 and 2017. Investigating these
scenarios enable us to learn where, how and which preventions would have the highest inﬂuence.
Scenario 1
This scenario focuses on accidents involving one or two elements and one or two persons, which
account for 6,511 personal injuries and 37,074 material damages.
When investigating these 6,511
personal injury accident further, the combination of elements involved is distributed as follows:
• 58 % of vehicle/vulnerable road user accidents
• 18 % of vehicle/vehicle accidents
• 19 % of vehicle/other accidents
• 3 % of vehicle/heavy vehicle accidents
Most of the personal injury accidents in scenario 1 were between a vehicle and a vulnerable road user,
which account for 58% of the 6,511-personal injury accidents. As vulnerable road users represent such
a large proportion, it was further investigated what type of vulnerable road user are most exposed.
The answer to which is cyclist. Vehicle/cyclist-accidents represent half of the personal injury accidents
(1,900) between vehicles and vulnerable road users. Examining the 1,900 personal injury accidents in
more detail reveals that 87% of the accidents happened in dry weather and 13% happened when raining
or snowing, which indicates that many cyclists ﬁnd alternative travel when it is raining or snowing.
However, the accidents in rain and snow account for 30% of the personal injury accidents in both
weather conditions, which has no inﬂuence on the severity outcome. Regarding inattention among
the 1,900 personal injury accidents, the risk of personal injury does not increase when inattention
is involved. However, 63% of all personal injury accidents involved inattention. Thus, inattention
is related to an accident occurring, but does not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on severity outcome.
Page 51 of 66
==PAGE:57==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
Furthermore, scenario 1 supports the results found using the decision tree, as in North Jutland there
is a 64% risk of personal injury, compared to the material damage accidents. The second highest
personal injury risk is found in Central Jutland, with 33% compared with material damage accidents.
Therefore, North Jutland has a large and dangerous bicycle problem, but only small changes might
lead to an increase in traﬃc safety. The risk of personal injury accidents between a vehicle and a
cyclist is higher on 80 km/h roads, though more accident occur on 50 km/h roads, partly because
more people cycle on roads with a speed limit of 50 km/h, although the risk of being involved in a
personal injury accident is signiﬁcantly lower. In fact, 73% of the accidents happened at speed limits of
50 km/h, and most accidents happened at an intersection. Therefore, it is necessary to seek solutions
for intersections in cities, as they seem to be highly exposed to vehicle/bicyclist-accidents.
This scenario (1) conﬁrms the second and the third hypotheses, as road design and speed limit are
geographically related factors that, in combination, increase the risk of personal injury for cyclists
involved in an accident with a vehicle.
The ﬁrst hypothesis could not be conﬁrmed, as personal
characteristics do not aﬀect the risk of being involved in a personal injury accident.
Scenario 3
This scenario focused only on one or two elements and three or more people and accounts for 861
personal injury accidents but only a single material damage. This means that the risk of a personal
injury accident when the accident involves one or two elements and more than three people is eﬀectively
100%. When investigating the elements involved within the personal injury accidents in more detail,
the accidents are distributed as follows:
• 8 % of vehicle/vulnerable road user accidents
• 68 % of vehicle/vehicle accidents
• 10 % of vehicle/other accidents
• 14 % of vehicle/heavy vehicle accidents
Based on this, most personal injuries in scenario 3 involved two vehicles accounting for 68% or around
590 accidents. This means that between 2013 and 2017, there have been, on average per year, 117
personal injury accidents involving two vehicles and three or more people. Furthermore, 49% of the
injury accidents happened at a speed limit of 80 km/h; whereas, 50 km/h accounts for only 23%. How
the speed limit aﬀects the accident situation is illustrated as follows:
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
110
130
0%
20%
40%
%, Number
11%
21%
16%
0%
8%
7%
6%
CROSSING
DIFFERENT_DIRE..
PARKING
SAME_DIRECTION
TURN
Speed limit [km/h]
Figure 6.4: Accident situation combined with speed limit for vehicle/vehicle in scenario 3
Figure 6.4 reveals that crossings (dark blue) are the most exposed areas for vehicle/vehicle accidents.
Among all the speed limits, crossings accounts for 49% of the risk of all personal injury accidents
between two vehicles. Furthermore, driving in a diﬀerent direction (orange) is the second most exposed
accident situation, accounting for 24% of the accidents. For speed limits above 80 km/h, crossings and
diﬀerent direction are less signiﬁcant, as these accidents cannot happen due to carriageway. However,
Page 52 of 66
==PAGE:58==
6. MATHEMATICAL RESULTS
this solution is not possible on city or country roads; crossings need to be an option. For speed limit of
80 km/h or below, an intersection accounts for 55% of the accidents; whereas, a straight road accounts
for 42%, which therefore means that new road designs need to be implemented.
Regarding inattention among vehicle/vehicle accidents, this factor accounts for 53% of the total injury
accidents.
This number is relatively high and could be decreased by greater focus when driving.
However, when studying only those accidents that happened on roads with a speed limit of 50 km/h,
the inattention factor increases to 64%. When this is compared with a road with an 80 km/h speed
limit, inattention accounts for 47%. Thus, people pay more attention when driving at a higher speed.
Therefore, more focus when driving can reduce the number of accidents.
This scenario supports the found factors, cf. chapter 5.2, as speed limit and road design are said to
inﬂuence injury accidents. The road design, intersection, displayed a higher risk regarding personal
injury accidents, which corresponds with a geographically related factor.
Partial conclusion
The results in this chapter provides many ﬁndings, in relation to which factors have a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on the severity outcome. The main ﬁndings that inﬂuence the outcome of an accident negatively are
as follows:
- Larger population densities;
- The more people involved in an accident;
- The fewer elements involved in an accident;
- Part 2 being a vulnerable road user;
- The northern region of Denmark;
- Speed limit above 75 km/h for vulnerable road users;
- Intersections and speed limit equal to 50 km/h, for vehicle/bicycle-accidents;
- Intersections for vehicle/vehicle-accidents.
Regarding the three hypotheses, all three are conﬁrmed. The ﬁrst hypothesis is conﬁrmed by the
number of persons involved in an accident, which increases the risk of personal injury accidents.
The second hypothesis is conﬁrmed by the element type and a decreased number of elements, which
increases the risk of personal injury accidents. The third hypothesis is conﬁrmed by the the northern
region, as vulnerable road users had a higher risk of personal injury, which also applies for larger
population densities. Furthermore, scenario 1 conﬁrms the second and third hypotheses, as accidents
between vehicles and cyclists, at an intersection with a speed limit of 50 km/h increased the risk of
personal injuries. Finally, scenario 3 conﬁrmed the third hypothesis, as speed limit and road design
have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the severity outcome.
Neuro-fuzzy modeling, unfortunately, did not produce any useful analytic results due to a lack of
development and implementation of the code.
However, the model can provide useful results for
severity modeling, due to the many features incorporated. Because of this the neural network and the
decision tree presented the most useful analytic results.
Page 53 of 66
==PAGE:59==
7. DISCUSSION
7
Discussion
First, a short discussion regarding descriptive results is presented. Second, the mathematical results
are discussed and validated based on real-life accidents between 2013 and 2017. Third, the scenarios
are described, to determine future actions in more detail. Fourth, an overall preventive strategy is
introduced and discussed based on the previous results.
7.1
Data
Chapter 5 revealed that a vulnerable road user, the distance to the hospital and a speed limit of 80
km/h were factors that increased the risk of injury accidents, conﬁrming the last two hypotheses. The
ﬁrst hypothesis states that personal characteristics aﬀect the severity outcome, which could not be
conﬁrmed via the descriptive results. However, the descriptive results are evident that relatively new
cars are involved in more accidents. Despite new cars having advanced safety features, as mentioned
in section 2.3, they are costly and not aﬀordable for a large share of the population, [Ekstra-Bladet,
2019]. New cars may, therefore, not be as safe as claimed, as people often choose the necessary safety
equipment, the same as in most cars. Consequently, new cars do not reduce the risk of injury accidents,
as they have the same safety level as many older cars on Danish roads. Regarding the weight of a
motor vehicle, could not conﬁrm or disprove the second hypothesis, although many smaller cars were
involved in injury accidents, unsurprising. Today, most people buy smaller cars, and two out of three
people in Denmark have bought a small car in recent years. This factor explains why this type of car
accounts for a large proportion of accidents [˚Arhus stiftstidende, 2012]. Besides, smaller cars can be
combined with the age of the driver, as younger people are at a higher risk of being involved in an
accident. Young people do not always have the same economic power as middle-aged people or the
elderly, and, therefore, are more likely to drive small cars. The second hypothesis states that element
characteristics aﬀect the severity outcome, which is conﬁrmed, as vulnerable road users were found to
be at a higher risk of an injury accident compared with other elements. This ﬁnding is supported by a
study within the European Union [European-Commission, 2016] explaining that vulnerable road users
account for almost half of road victims, which, relating to this project, was found to be 45%. The
third hypothesis states that geographical location inﬂuences the severity outcome, which is conﬁrmed,
as a speed limit of 80 km/h and distance to hospital bot increase the risk of injuries, although the
eﬀect of the latter is only small.
7.2
Mathematical approaches
Neuro-fuzzy modeling
The neuro-fuzzy modeling did not produce any useful analytic results. However, due to its application,
the method is assumed to be good at severity modeling. The model learns fuzzy rules based on structure
learning and optimizes each fuzzy set to ﬁt, and best describe the data. There is no need for prior
knowledge, but can be implemented and the method is perfect for humans to learn from, as it describes
the outcome in a very human-friendly manner. The advantages of neuro-fuzzy modeling are that more
complex data sets, can be described by adding more rules, but the interpretation and learning do not
become more complex, as the topmost signiﬁcant rules can be selected.
Traﬃc accident data are often quite complex, as the person, element and accident levels do not have
the same structure, and data often contain many categorical factors. Therefore, the neural network
was limited by only including half of the factors, which is a major drawback, since the categorical
factors contain much important information regarding the accident.
Additionally, in the decision
tree, a major drawback is that the algorithm is very sensitive to noise, as only small changes will
change the data structure of the tree completely. Neuro-fuzzy modeling, in contrast, does not have
these disadvantages, which makes it a good approach for complex problems, in which human-friendly
interpretation is the main goal.
Neural Network
The neural network revealed that the number of people and elements are the two most important
numerical factors, according to traﬃc accidents outcome. The more people involved in an accident,
the higher the risk of personal injury; whereas, the more elements, the lower the risk of personal injury.
The above combination of the number of people and elements supports solo accidents, in which the
Page 54 of 66
==PAGE:60==
7. DISCUSSION
involved car had multiple people in it. These types of accident are often combined with young people
driving together to and from parties. Several accidents based upon this type of involvements occurred
between 2013 and 2017. One accident, from 2016, which involved four young men driving into a tree
in Copenhagen, had the following note from the police [Selin and Krogh, 2016]:
The accident happened at 03 o’clock when the car hit a tree at high speed for unknown reasons
All the police know from this accident is the high speed, but what caused the vehicle to drive into
the tree is unknown. This could be due to some unobservable measure, such as inattention, which
does not seem unlikely, when four young men drive together on a Friday night, possibly going to a
party. Another similar accident occurred in 2017 when seven young men were packed together in one
car with not enough seat-belts for all. In this accident, a 17-year-old boy lost his life. The accident is
described as follows [Ryttergaard, 2017]:
The two men sat with ﬁve other young men in the car as the driver, for unclear reasons, lost control
of the car and ended up in a nearby ﬁeld.
Like the other accident, this accident involved young men, at night, who for unknown reasons, rolled
into a ﬁeld beside the road. The police suspect the accident was due to high speed, though high speed
alone does not cause accidents. However, high speed and inattention are a dangerous combination, as
it becomes diﬃcult to see changes in the road in the darkness. Inattention is, again, an unmeasured
factor, but could explain how the car ended up into the nearby ﬁeld. Other factors, such as crossing
animals, illness and sudden, unforeseen incidents could also explain these types of accident, but since
most of these accidents involve young men with many or too many people in the vehicle, the reason is
most likely inattention.
This type of accident is a general problem, and not just between 2013 and 2017. In 2018, a solo
accident happened involving ﬁve young people, four of whom died. This accident also happened at
night on the way to a party. A woman was driving the car and suddenly lost control of the vehicle
and drove into a tree. The police state [Piculell, 2018]:
The police do not suspect alcohol-driving, but believe that the accident is due to inattention during
driving, combined with too high speed.
As with the other two accidents, has this accident happened at night and involved several young
people. This accident illustrates that these types of accident happen often.
The decision tree result supports these types of solo accidents with several people in the vehicle,
though it does not focus on young people only, but generalizes to everyone. This result explains that
not only are young people at risk of personal injuries when driving together in one car; the elderly face
the same risk. Driver experience, therefore, has no inﬂuence, since inattention can occur at any age.
However, most of these accidents occur involving young people, which could be because it is easier for
young people to distract each other while driving since they do not think about the consequences of
distracting the driver.
The ﬁnal signiﬁcant factor, population density, indicates that a higher population density causes a
higher risk of an injury accident.
This result is supported by ﬁgure 5.11 (see section 5.2) which
states that 45% of the injury accidents are in combination with a vehicle and a vulnerable road user.
Vulnerable road users are often in larger cities, especially cyclists, who are the vulnerable road users
aﬀected the most. This is supported by a statement from Jesper Sølund, of The Danish Road Safety
Council [Sørensen, 2016]:
Concerning the cyclists who are seriously injured, we know that 2 out of 3 accidents happen at
intersections and mostly in the cities.
This statement supports the fact that population density increases the risk of injury accidents. Pop-
ulation density may therefore not be signiﬁcant if only vehicle-vehicle accidents were incorporated in
the data, as it is the injury accidents caused by cyclists in cities that create signiﬁcance for population
density.
Decision tree
The decision tree revealed that element part 2, is the most signiﬁcant and best-explaining factor. From
this factor, the tree follows three routes, which are now further discussed.
Page 55 of 66
==PAGE:61==
7. DISCUSSION
The right-hand side of the tree explained by element part 2, the number of people and the number
of elements, was discussed in the neural network section. The main diﬀerence between the neural
network and decision tree is that the decision tree latter creates a clear splitting regarding the number
of people and elements in an accident concerning the outcome. The decision tree indicates that if
the accident contains more than two people and fewer than two elements, and that part 2 is not a
vulnerable road user, the outcome of an accident will most likely result in personal injuries.
The left side of the tree displays two results, where the ﬁrst route is displayed in the following plot:
Figure 7.1: Coloring of the discussed route in the tree
Several articles support this left route. One article regarding Hjørring municipality, located in the
northern Jutland, a local citizen states the following in an interview[Simonsen, 2015]:
It is impossible to cycle in Sindal. We have to drive in a zigzag all the way, and it is really sad. They
probably do not have the money to do anything about it, or they make stop-gap solutions
This woman is a cyclist in Hjørring municipality and is a perfect example of the result from the decision
tree. She is a vulnerable road user, who rides in northern Jutland, and because the road has many
holes or only stop-gap solutions, she has to ride around these holes, thus, puts herself at greater risk of
being involved in an accident. Another article emphasizes how the prospects for the future look, which
are not promising. In this article, the Head of the Technical Committee in Frederikshavn Municipality,
Karsten Thomsen states [Videbæk and Flyttekjær, 2016]:
If you, as a driver in Frederikshavn Municipality, like to drive on a fairly even road without holes,
diﬃcult times waits.
He knows that the holes in the road are a problem; there is insuﬃcient fund to correct them. Although
the article explains how the most severe roads have been corrected, this is only a small part of the
total road network. The article also mentions that all the northern municipalities are prioritizing their
roads, so it is not only one municipality North Jutland but all of them. Similarly, Jens Christian
Golding, Head of Technology and Environment Committee in Jammerbugt Municipality, states:
They need to be corrected, but I do not think they are so bad that they are dangerous to road safety.
North Jutland has poor and uneven roads, but they are not prioritized, despite the Road Directorate
having analyzed road safety in the region, which explains why eight out of nine municipalities have
more holes year by year. The rate of holes growth is around 9% each year [Hofmeister, 2018]. Jens
Golding explains how the economy is the reason the roads are not being improved, stating that if the
roads need to be improved, then facilities for children and the elderly in the municipality must be
reduced, as these are the highest priority. Upon these three articles, the conclusion is clear: The road
problems are well known, but there are insuﬃcient funds to improve the holes, because their priorities
are children and elderly, due to the holed not being critical. However, the result of the decision tree
Page 56 of 66
==PAGE:62==
7. DISCUSSION
does not support this conclusion. The decision tree reveals that the paved roads are critical and that
this increases the probability of personal injury due to an accident in North Jutland.
The described situation, of a vulnerable road user in the north of Denmark, accounts for 2% of all
accidents, but regarding the personal injury situation, this accounts for 7% of all the severe accidents.
This describes a signiﬁcant factor, as the risk of personal injury accidents in North Jutland is 62%,
compared with, on average, 31% in other regions.
The second route on the left side of the tree is as follows:
Figure 7.2: Coloring of the discussed route in the tree
This red route indicates that vulnerable road users in all other regions of Denmark, on roads with a
speed limit above 75 km/h are at higher risk of a personal injury accident, than on roads with a speed
limit below 75 km/h. This result is supported by a more depth investigation of data, based upon
vulnerable road users only, which is displayed below in ﬁgure 7.3.
MATERIAL DAMAGE PERSONAL INJURY
DARK
DAYLIGHT
54%
62%
46%
38%
Speed Limit > 75 km/t
MATERIAL DAMAGE
PERSONAL INJURY
DARK
DAYLIGHT
31%
36%
69%
64%
Speed Limit < 75 km/t
Figure 7.3: The eﬀect of daylight on vulnerable road user on roads
This ﬁgure describes how the risk of personal injury accidents increases as the speed limit increases
from 70 km/h to 80 km/h. As a second and extra factor, daylight condition is added, as this seems
to have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on vulnerable road users. If a vulnerable road user walks, cycles, etc. on
a road with speed limit below 75 km/h, they are more likely to be involved in a material damage
accident, whether it is dark or daylight. If, on the other hand, the accident happens on roads with
a speed limit above 75 km/h, darkness and daylight play signiﬁcant roles. Here, 62% of all accidents
involving a vulnerable road user as part 2, on a road with a speed limit above 75 km/h, resulting in
personal injuries. This fact is supported by a statement from Klaus Bondam, who, in an interview
about light in traﬃc, states [Elkjær, 2017]:
- If more people become aware of the need for light and reﬂexes in traﬃc, the number of accidents
will also fall. Every accident is one too many. Therefore, we must be even better dressed.
The risk of being involved in personal injury accidents, whether it is dark or daylight is high; more
precisely it is 56%, on a road with a speed limit above 75 km/h. However, if the accident happens
Page 57 of 66
==PAGE:63==
7. DISCUSSION
when it is dark, the risk of being involved in personal injury accidents increases by 13%, compared
with daylight. This route in the decision tree, in which part 2 is a vulnerable road user, the region is
anywhere, but North Jutland and the speed limit is above 75 km/h, accounts for nearly 2% of all the
accidents, with 52% of these resulting in personal injuries. Regarding accidents below 75 km/h, the
risk of personal injury accidents decreases to 30%
7.3
Preventive actions
Below will the two scenarios be presented, as well as preventive actions.
Scenario 1
Road design and the speed limit are geographically related factors found in scenario 1 that, in com-
bination, increase the risk of personal injury for cyclists involved in an accident with a vehicle. A
solution from the Netherlands that, focuses on cyclist safety is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.4 below:
Figure 7.4: Solution from Holland - source: [Bicycle-Dutch, 2018b]
This intersection ensures that cyclists, before entering the intersection, are moving at low speed. When
the cyclist enters the intersection, he/she must go around an elevation of stones, which reduces the
speed of the cyclist. This solution can increase the safety for cyclists, as the person in the vehicle
has a much better overview and less chance of being surprised by a fast moving cyclist. The vehicle
turning right follows the elevation of the stones and has a complete overview from the side window
along the cycle path. However, these accidents should be studied further, though, because, for this
project, information regarding part 2 on a personal level is not known, which makes it challenging to
go into detail with the cyclist. Some factors, such as helmet and age for part 2, is needed to give a
ﬁnal action for prevention. However, this section still deﬁnes some of the accidents and their severity
outcome; therefore, the following prevention actions could reduce the risk of personal injury accidents
or even eliminate accidents, which is the optimal goal:
• Focus on inattention, as this would reduce the number of accidents;
• Intersections in cities require attention for greater safety; the cyclist should reduce speed before
entering them.
Scenario 3
From scenario 3, speed limit and intersections were found to increase the risk of personal injury acci-
dents. Another solution for the crossing accidents, when they are assumed to happen at intersections,
is once more taken from the Netherlands.
Page 58 of 66
==PAGE:64==
7. DISCUSSION
Figure 7.5: Solution from Holland - source: Google maps
This type of intersection is common in the Netherlands, [Bicycle-Dutch, 2018a]. The advantage of this
intersection is its simplicity, as a driver only needs to focus on one ﬂow at a time. This means that
the driver at this intersection does not cross in one step, but crossing is divided into several steps,
which makes the trip through this intersection more safely. This not only applies to vehicles, but also
to a cyclist. This type of intersection is assumed to decrease the risk of a personal injury accident.
However, this solution requires an extension of the current Danish intersection, which may not be
possible for all intersections.
The following preventive actions are suggested:
• Campaigns that focus on inattention when driving in cities
• Intersections divided into more steps, to make the crossing simple
Prevention against inattention
In general, inattention is a factor connected to many of the accidents, both personal injuries, and
material damage. This factor is apparent in several of the descriptive results (cf. section 5.1.), the
police descriptions, and likewise for both of the two scenarios. However, this factor did not have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence in relation to the severity outcome. Nevertheless, inattention remains interesting
as it is relevant for answering the following three questions: 1) Which actions could make a personal
injury accident into a material damage accident? 2) Which actions could make a material damage
accident into no accident? 3) Which actions could make a personal injury accident into no accident?
The main question to answer in this project is number one, whereas answering the other two questions
relates to inattention.
However, all three questions are important aspects when discussing traﬃc
accidents, which is why preventive actions against inattention must be considered, as this will most
likely result in fewer personal injury accidents. One preventive action that manipulates people’s feelings
could be as follows:
In 2014, this woman looked at her MOBILE 
for 2 seconds and CRASHED. Her DAUGHTER 
DIED and she survived with severe injuries. 
PULL OVER  
or be  
ATTENTIVE 
In 2014, this woman looked at her MOBILE 
for 2 seconds and CRASHED. Her DAUGHTER 
DIED and she survived with severe injuries. 
PULL OVER  
or be  
ATTENTIVE 
Figure 7.6: Preventive action against inattention (Source picture:[FDM, 2019a])
Page 59 of 66
==PAGE:65==
7. DISCUSSION
This type of prevention against inattention is inspired by Germany, as similar signs are seen along
their highways. This type of action manipulates people’s feelings and may be necessary for people to
pay attention to the road and the traﬃc when driving. Some essential aspects incorporated into the
above action poster are, the three appeal forms of logos, ethos and pathos [Petersen, 2018]. These
three appeal forms are essential for persuading and convincing drivers on the road. Many approaches
have been attempted regarding traﬃc safety, all of which try to prevent accidents. However, to gain
the driver’s full attention, diﬀerent and drastic actions may be necessary. Logos describes how the
poster should convince people by relating to common sense. This is achieved by pointing out that a
previous accident happened at this exact spot on the road. Pathos, on the other hand, involves the
poster convincing people by appealing to emotions; hence, the use of mother and daughter relationship,
which many people can relate to. Even if it is a man driving, it will still aﬀect him emotionally, as
he may have a wife and children. The last appeal form is ethos, which is used to convince people
by trust, which is incorporated at the bottom of the poster, where it reads ”Road Directory,” which
means that this information comes from a trustworthy source. The cost of this poster next to the road
cannot be compared to the amount of money saved by avoiding one personal injury accident. In the
traﬃc safety section (see cf. section 2.3), the price of a personal injury accident is demonstrated to
be above DKK 7,000,000, which is far above the price of a single poster, which could be placed where
several accidents occur. Therefore, the money used on analysis, advertising or a scare campaign can
be beneﬁcial for society, as it would save money as well as lives.
Descriptive results, cf. chapter 5.2 revealed that the development for inattention among all accidents
has increased since 2013. The preventive action regarding the mother-daughter poster is assumed to
reduce the number of accidents. However, another preventive action is suggested by the politicians
this year, in which a clip in license and a ﬁne of 1,500 DKK is giving for the use of hand-held
mobile phone, GPS, iPad, and Smart-watch [FDM, 2019c]. This action does not manipulate people
feelings, and thereby may not be as preventive since electronic devices often it used by people without
them thinking about it. This can be supported by the risk homeostasis theory, as peoples maximum
tolerance of risk might be higher for some people. This puts people with a high tolerance of risk, in an
increased risk of personal injury accidents, as well as the people who are surrounded by these drivers.
Moreover, by eliminating inattention from accidents, it might be possible to prevent any accidents,
which supports the domino theory.
7.4
Limitations
The focus in this report is accidents in Denmark, over a ﬁve-year period, from the 1st of January
2013 to the 31st of December 2017. This period was chosen, as the existing road network, each day is
improved, which makes data uncertain if too old. The period stops in 2017, as the data in accidents
from 2018 are not fully complete.
The used data were gathered from police recorded accidents. Unfortunately, the police records of ac-
cidents are under-reported, since some accidents are not recorded, which are known as dark numbers
[Ranhauge and Hagelskjær, 2019]. However, this factor is not assumed to be valid for fatal traﬃc acci-
dents; however, when the severity of accidents drops, the number of recorded accidents will, likewise,
drop. This factor is especially apparent for cycle accidents. A comparison between police recorded data
and hospital data from 2016, reveals that only 5% of cycle accidents were recorded. Traﬃc planner
Dorthe Scott Hansen, from Viborg municipality, states the following about dark numbers [Ranhauge
and Hagelskjær, 2019]:
When planning traﬃc, we only have the opportunity to start from the police records. Moreover, this
means that we might have a wrong picture of how many accidents happening. Therefore, we are
interested in accessing the hospital data so that we can get a better overview.
This statement supports the problematic regarding dark numbers as many people around Denmark
uses these recorded accidents. Therefore, it is essential to remember that the number of material
damage or lighter personal injury accidents might be higher than stated in the data.
The police
are not always informed when smaller accidents happen, as people can often handle the situation by
themselves and contact their insurance if any damage happened. Similarly, if a car and a cyclist collide,
but nothing happens, most people will carry on. However, if the cyclist after a few hours, feels pain
Page 60 of 66
==PAGE:66==
7. DISCUSSION
and goes to the hospital, he/she will be checked, and if he/she has a severe injury, the hospital will note
it. This means that more correct knowledge about the degree and number of accidents in Denmark
requires information from insurances, hospitals and the police. Hospitals will record accidents that
the police have not, which means that more personal injury accidents have most likely happened since
a person will only visit the hospital following an accident if something hurts.
Traﬃc accidents recorded by the police may contain record errors, as there is much information to
be noted. In section 4.2 under data, it was stated that it is important to perform the process of
accident records correctly, as the report passes many people, trying to understand accidents down to
the smallest detail. However, although the accident is being checked, errors can still occur. An example
of this is an accident from 2017 in Aalborg, in which a vehicle and cyclist crashed on a roundabout. In
this accident, the speed limit on the road is noted as 130 km/h, which is unrealistic, as cyclists are not
allowed on roads with more than an 80 km/h speed limit, and roundabouts are not built on high-speed
roads. This type of issue is noted six times. Another example of wrongly measured data is the type of
vehicle recorded. There are nine accidents in which a vehicle weight on 32,000 kilos was recorded as a
normal vehicle, which is unlikely. This issue causes some outliers in the car segment, as these vehicles
should have been noted as trucks. When road tax in Denmark is calculated, the top category of car
weight is ”above 2000 kg,” which is far from the 32,000 kg [for Taxation, 2018]. All cars above 20,000
kg are most likely wrong measurements, and should not have been noted as normal cars, but instead
as a tractor, truck, van, etc. This type of wrong measurements could create noise in the results when
investigating what type of vehicle aﬀects the severity the most. As another example, a solo accident
was noted with part 1 and part 2 as a vehicle. This accident was noted as a solo accident because
part 2 blocked an exit, and when part 1 tried to get around part 2, part 1 drove into a light pedestal.
This accident should not have been noted as a car in part 2, as a solo accident only involves one car.
Many more small errors such as these are most likely hidden in the data, but these are assumed to
only account for a small percentage of the total data, which, thus, causes no further actions regarding
ﬁnding and deleting the errors.
Page 61 of 66
==PAGE:67==
8. CONCLUSION
8
Conclusion
This thesis investigated the factors aﬀecting the severity outcome of a traﬃc accident, based on
accident data from police records between 2013 and 2017. The project was narrowed in focus to at
least one vehicle in all accidents. To examine this investigation, three hypotheses were formulated,
each describing the personal characteristics, element characteristics, and the geographical location.
For analyzing the three hypotheses, three mathematical models were used, with neuro-fuzzy as the
primary model.
The analyses revealed that traﬃc accidents were a constant problem over the analyzed period, which
has both social and economic consequences for Danish society. Furthermore, all three hypotheses were
conﬁrmed by the mathematical models, as well as by descriptive analysis. The ﬁrst hypothesis
stated that personal characteristics impact the outcome of a traﬃc accident, which was conﬁrmed
by the number of people involved in the accidents. A higher risk relates to an increased number of
persons in accidents. Besides, no other factors were signiﬁcant regarding the risk of an injury accident.
The second hypothesis stated that element characteristics impact the outcome of a traﬃc accident,
which was conﬁrmed by two factors; a vulnerable road user and the number of elements. The risk
of injury accidents increases if one of the involved elements is a vulnerable road user, which accounts
for 45% of all injury accidents. Furthermore, the fewer number of elements involved in an accident,
the higher the risk of an injury accident. The third hypothesis stated that the likelihood of injury
depends on the geographical location, which was conﬁrmed by four factors: distance to hospital, a
speed limit of 80 km/h, higher population density and region. The northern region of Denmark was
especially exposed to vulnerable road user accidents and had an increased risk compared with other
regions in Denmark. Additionally, driving on a road with a speed limit of 80 km/h increases the risk
of injury accidents by 60% compared with a road with a speed limit of 50 km/h. The distance to the
hospital has a minor inﬂuence on the severity outcome, as the risk of an injury accident increases from
being close (< 10km) to a hospital compared with being far away (> 10km). Similarly, population
density aﬀected the severity, as a larger population density increased the risk of injuries. The factors
aﬀecting the severity outcome were as best as possible ﬁtted into four diﬀerent scenarios, of which
the ﬁrst and third were investigated further. Scenario 1, which involved one and two elements and
one or two people, was primarily vulnerable road user accidents. For this scenario, the preventive
action involved a new intersection design, which focused on the cyclist. Scenario 3, which involved one
and two elements and three or more people, was primarily two vehicle accidents. For this scenario,
the preventive action involved, likewise, a new intersection design, as crossing caused a higher risk of
injury accidents. Furthermore, inattention was seen as a factor throughout this investigation, regarding
the accidents occurring. A preventive action regarding inattention was established, by manipulating
peoples feelings and thereby potentially reduce the number of inattentive accidents. However, this
factor did not conﬁrm any of the three formulated hypotheses as to the factor, inattention, do not aﬀect
the severity outcome of an accident. Although, it did not aﬀect the severity outcome, nevertheless, it
was still investigated as this factor was shown to be presented in many material damages and personal
injury accidents.
The neuro-fuzzy model did not provide any analytic results, although the model is assumed to be a
preferable model regarding severity modeling, if more attention is paid to the implementation of the
code. The method contains excellent interpretation skills, as well as a good learning process, which
optimizes the performance of the model. However, two other models, the decision tree and the neural
network, were chosen to support the neuro-fuzzy, but ultimately became the most important. The
decision tree is an eﬀective model due to its straightforward if-then rule approach, which makes it easy
to interpret the results. The neural network is an accepted classiﬁcation method for severity modeling,
although the algorithm only incorporates numerical factors. This is a problem because categorical
factors contain much relevant information. The decision tree and the neural network are, therefore,
eﬀective models to use. However, as the neuro-fuzzy system can incorporate complex functions and
human-friendly results, this model is still preferred for future use.
Page 62 of 66
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
References
[Auck et al., 1998] Auck, D., Umberger, A., and Kruse, R. (1998). Neuro-fuzzy classiﬁcation. Book-
title: Advances in Data Science and Classiﬁcation. Note: This book presents new concepts and
implementations of Computational Intelligence (CI) systems.
[Beck, 2018a] Beck, M. W. (2018a). Package ‘neuralnettools’. Last accessed 28.04.2019.
[Beck, 2018b] Beck, M. W. (2018b). Visualization and analysis tools for neural networks. Last accessed
02.05.2019.
[Beldjazia and Alatou, 2016] Beldjazia, A. and Alatou, D. (2016). Precipitation variability on the
massif forest of mahouna from 1986 to 2010. Last accessed 06.05.2019.
[Berlingske, 2013] Berlingske (2013). Small cars have changed denmark. Last accessed 05.05.2019.
[Berlingske, 2019] Berlingske (2019). Analysis of danish companies: Women are in hr, men are man-
agers. Last accessed 05.05.2019.
[Bicycle-Dutch, 2018a] Bicycle-Dutch (2018a). A common urban intersection in the netherlands. Last
accessed 07.05.2019.
[Bicycle-Dutch, 2018b] Bicycle-Dutch (2018b). Junction design the dutch - cycle friendly - way. Last
accessed 07.05.2019.
[Bilbasen, 2019] Bilbasen (2019). The most important security systems. Last accessed 29.04.2019.
[Bruun, 2018] Bruun, N. B. (2018).
Understanding the movement: Young adults will live in the
province. Last accessed 25.04.2019.
[by Etienne Jodoin and Reyes, 2006] by Etienne Jodoin, A. and Reyes, C. A. P. (2006). A method
for the fuzziﬁcation of categorical variables.
[by Robert Babuska, ] by Robert Babuska, A. Fuzzy systems, modeling and identiﬁcation.
[byg.tek, 2018] byg.tek (2018).
More and more women are becoming craftsmen.
Last accessed
07.05.2019.
[Danish-Regions, 2019] Danish-Regions (2019). Emergency and prehospital. Last accessed 29.04.2019.
[DTU-Transport, 2013a] DTU-Transport (2013a). Fact sheet on car traﬃc in denmark (tu). Last
accessed 27.04.2019.
[DTU-Transport, 2013b] DTU-Transport (2013b). Transport habit study by gender. Last accessed
27.04.2019.
[DTU-transport, 2018] DTU-transport (2018).
Transport economics unit prices.
Last accessed
29.04.2019.
[Economic-Councils, 2016] Economic-Councils (2016). Economy and environment 2016. Last accessed
29.04.2019.
[Ekstra-Bladet, 2019] Ekstra-Bladet (2019). So much money will the danes spend on the next car.
Last accessed 02.05.2019.
[Elkjær, 2017] Elkjær, J. B. (2017). So much diﬀerence, whether or not you go with a reﬂex. Last
accessed 04.05.2019.
[European-Commission, 2016] European-Commission (2016).
2015 road safety statistics: What is
behind the ﬁgures? Last accessed 10.05.2019.
[European-Commission, 2017] European-Commission (2017).
Road safety 2017.
Last accessed
12.04.2019.
[FDM, 2019a] FDM (2019a).
10 traﬃc stresses - how to drive happily onwards.
Last accessed
05.05.2019.
[FDM, 2019b] FDM (2019b). New safety equipment for cars. Last accessed 29.04.2019.
Page 63 of 66
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
[FDM, 2019c] FDM (2019c). This gives marks in the license. Last accessed 11.05.2019.
[for Taxation, 2018] for Taxation, M. (2018). Tax rates in road tax law. Last accessed 04.05.2019.
[Fritsch et al., 2019] Fritsch, S., Guenther, F., Wright, M. N., Suling, M., and Mueller, S. M. (2019).
Training of neural networks. Last accessed 02.05.2019.
[Fuller, 1995] Fuller, R. (1995). Neural fuzzy systems. Note: This Lecture Notes containes the material
of the course on Neural Fuzzy Systems delivered by the author at Turku Center for Computer Science
in 1995.
[Hofmeister, 2018] Hofmeister, L. (2018). View of roads with dents and holes municipality has no
advice to keep the roads straight. Last accessed 22.04.2019.
[Johansen, 2019] Johansen, G. (2019). Emergency reception. Last accessed 06.03.2019.
[JydskeVestkysten et al., 2012] JydskeVestkysten, Folkeblad, V. A., Dagblad, F., Avis, F. A., and
Stiftstidende, F. (2012). Ouh 100. Last accessed 29.04.2019.
[Kanal-Frederikshavn, 2018] Kanal-Frederikshavn (2018). ar-nostalgia for all the money on the par-
adise quay. Last accessed 09.05.2019.
[Kaplan et al., 2014] Kaplan, S., Vavatsoulas, K., and Prato, C. G. (2014). Aggravating andmitigating
factors associated with cyclist injury severity in denmark. Journal of Safety Research 50, pages 75-
82.
[Kishore, 2018] Kishore, A. V. (2018). Decision Tree.
[Klingenberg, 2017] Klingenberg, K. (2017). New ﬁgures: Fewer dies in traﬃc - even though the danes
are driving more. Last accessed 27.04.2019.
[Møller and Janstrup, 2017a] Møller, M. and Janstrup, K. H. (2017a). Severity models. Last accessed
17.04.2019.
[Møller and Janstrup, 2017b] Møller, M. and Janstrup, K. H. (2017b). Underreporting and risk with
focus on frequency models. Last accessed 17.04.2019.
[Nauck, 1999] Nauck, D. (1999). Fuzzy rule learning with symbolic variables. Last accessed 02.05.2019.
[Nauck and Kruse, 1999] Nauck, D. and Kruse, R. (1999). Neuro-fuzzy methods in fuzzy rule gen-
eration. Booktitle: Fuzzy Sets in Approximate Reasoning and Information Systems. Note: This
chapter illustrates several methods to learn fuzzy rules from data by using approachesknown as
neuro-juzzy methods.
[Nisgaard, 2018] Nisgaard, A. (2018). Promille barometer: How alcohol aﬀects your ability to drive.
Last accessed 28.04.19.
[Petersen, 2018] Petersen, J. A. H. (2018). Apeal forms. Last accessed 05.05.2019.
[Piculell, 2018] Piculell, K. L. (2018). four young people were killed in a violent accident. Last accessed
22.04.2019.
[Prato et al., 2014] Prato, C. G., Rasmussen, T. K., and Kaplan, S. (2014). Risk factors associated
with crash severity on low-volume rural roads in denmark. Transportation Safety and Security,
pages 1-20.
[Ranhauge and Hagelskjær, 2019] Ranhauge, C. and Hagelskjær, R. (2019). Dark numbers threat the
traﬃc safety. Last accessed 04.05.2019.
[RegionMidtjylland, 2012] RegionMidtjylland (2012). From the place of injury to emergency reception
in central denmark region. Last accessed 29.04.2019.
[Rich et al., 2013] Rich, J., Prato, C. G., Hels, T., Lyckegaard, A., and Kristensen, N. B. (2013).
Analyzing the relationship between car generation and severity of motor-vehicle crashes in denmark.
Accident Analysis and Prevention 54, pages 81-89.
[Road-Directorate, 2016] Road-Directorate (2016). Twice as many men as women in traﬃc accidents.
Last accessed 27.04.2019.
Page 64 of 66
==PAGE:70==
REFERENCES
[Road-Directorate, 2017] Road-Directorate (2017). Reporting of traﬃc accidents.
[Road-Directorate, 2018a] Road-Directorate (2018a).
How big is the car park.
Last accessed
06.04.2019.
[Road-Directorate, 2018b] Road-Directorate (2018b). Key numbers for road transport. Last accessed
15.04.2019.
[Road-Safety-Commission, 2013] Road-Safety-Commission (2013). Road safety commission national
action plan, 2013-2020. Last accessed 25.04.2019.
[Ryttergaard, 2017] Ryttergaard, E. (2017). Seven young cocks were killed 17 years old after a violent
accident. Last accessed 22.04.2019.
[Saunders and Tosey, 2013] Saunders, M. and Tosey, P. (2013). The layers of research design. Last
accessed 01.05.2019.
[Saxena, 2017] Saxena, N. (2017). Analysis of road traﬃc accident using causation theory with traﬃc
safety model and measures. Last accessed 24.04.2019.
[Selin and Krogh, 2016] Selin, M. and Krogh, B. (2016). Tragic traﬃc accident three young people
killed in the middle of the night. Last accessed 22.04.2019.
[Simonsen, 2015] Simonsen, M.-A. B. (2015). It is teeming with holes in the north jutland roads. Last
accessed 22.04.2019.
[Statistics-Denmark, 2017a] Statistics-Denmark (2017a). Km5: Population 1st january at parish, sex,
age and church member. Last accessed 27.04.2019.
[Statistics-Denmark, 2017b] Statistics-Denmark (2017b). Uheldk1: Injured and killed in road traﬃc
accidents by region, casualty, motor vehicles involved, age ander gender. Last accessed 06.04.2019.
[Sørensen, 2016] Sørensen, M. S. (2016). Cyclists over the age of 45 are most likely to be injured in
traﬃc. Last accessed 10.05.2019.
[Tableau, 2019] Tableau (2019). Pivot data from columns to rows. Last accessed 11.05.2019.
[Therneau and Atkinson, 2018] Therneau, T. M. and Atkinson, E. J. (2018).
An introduction to
recursive partitioning. Last accessed 19.03.2019.
[Transport-Safety-Council, 2018] Transport-Safety-Council (2018). Historie for transport safety coun-
cil. Last accessed 25.04.2019.
[Transport-Safety-Council, 2019] Transport-Safety-Council (2019).
Innatention.
Last accessed
27.04.2019.
[Venstre-Traﬁc, 2018] Venstre-Traﬁc (2018). Better mobility and improving road safety. Last accessed
12.05.2019.
[Viaburro and Venkateswaran, 2017] Viaburro, G. and Venkateswaran, B. (2017). Smart models using
cnn, rnn, deep learning, and artiﬁcal intelligence principles. Booktitle: Neural Network with R. Note:
This book is intended for anyone who has a statistics background with knowledge in R and wants
to work with neural networks to get better results from complex data.
[Videbæk and Flyttekjær, 2016] Videbæk, K. and Flyttekjær, S. (2016). Gaps in the roads asphalt
budget is used elsewhere. Last accessed 22.04.2019.
[Volvo-Car, 2019] Volvo-Car (2019). Safety. Last accessed 29.04.2019.
[Ware et al., 2012] Ware, W. B., Ferron, J. M., and Miller, B. M. (2012). A conceptual approach
using r.
[WRA, 1909a] WRA (1909a). World road assocication. Last accessed 19.03.2019.
[WRA, 1909b] WRA (1909b). World road assocication, scope of the road safety problem. Last accessed
06.04.2019.
[xaktly, 2012] xaktly (2012). Logistic growth. Last accessed 05.05.2019.
[˚Arhus stiftstidende, 2012] ˚Arhus stiftstidende (2012). Small cars are the way forward. Last accessed
10.05.2019.
Page 65 of 66
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX
Appendix
Appendix A: Data description
Appendix B: R-code
Appendix C: Descriptive results
Page 66 of 66
==PAGE:72==
POLICE DATA VARIABLES
Uheldsniveau
Personniveau
Elementniveau
Time
Age 
Car Age
Weekday
Sex
Car weight
Accident Situation
Safety equipment
No. Elements
Speed Limit
No. People
Element
Alcohol
Road design 
Weather
Season
Light Condition
ADDITION DATA (POLICE, STATISTICS DENMAKR, MAP SUPPLY, HOSPITALS)
Population_Density
Distance_Hospital
Region
Innantention
APPENDIX A: DATA DESCRIPTION
==PAGE:73==
Before
After
Groups
TT-MM-SS
TT
Numeric
Before
After
Groups
Mandag
Mandag
Mandag
Tirsdag
Tirsdag
Tirsdag
Onsdag
Onsdag
Onsdag
Torsdag
Torsdag
Torsdag
Fredag
Fredag
Fredag
Lørdag
Lørdag
Lørdag
Søndag
Søndag
Søndag
Before
After
Groups
0
SOLO
SOLO
1
SAME_COURSE
SAME_COURSE
2
DIFF_COURSE
DIFF_COURSE
3
SAME_COURSE
CROSSING
4
DIFF_COURSE
PARTIAL_MOVEMENT
5
CROSSING
PEDESTRIAN
6
CROSSING
OTHER
7
PARTIAL_MOVEMENT
8
PEDESTRIAN
9
OTHER
Before
After
Groups
20
Numeric
30
NA
40
50
60
70
80
90
110
130
Uoplyst
NA
Before
After
Groups
Hest med rytter
Vulnerable Road User
Vulnerable Road User
Personbil
Vehicle
Vehicle
Taxi
Vehicle
Heavy vehicle
Køretøj under udrykning
Vehicle
Other
Varebil 1
Vehicle
UHELDSNIVEAU
TIDSPUNKT -> TIME
UGEDAG -> WEEKDAY
HOVEDSITUATION -> ACCIDENT SITUATION
HASTIGHEDSBEGRÆSNING -> SPEED_LIMIT
ELEMENT -> ELEMENT
==PAGE:74==
Varebil 2
Vehicle
Lastbil
Heavy vehicle
Forvogn til sættevogn
Heavy vehicle
Rutebus
Heavy vehicle
Bus i øvrigt
Heavy vehicle
Afspæring
other
Træ
Other
Mast
Other
Letbane
Other
Cykel
Vulnerable Road User
Knallert 30
Vulnerable Road User
Before
After
Groups
And. Vej
Other
Other
Flettest
Other
Straight Road
Jernabne
Other
Roundabout
kurve
Straight Road
Intersection
Lige_vej
Straight Road
NA
På_bro
Other
Rundkørsel
Roundabout
Selvstændig sti
Other
Stikryds
Other
T-kryds
Intersection
Udkørsel
Other
under_Bro
Other
Øvrige Kryds
NA
Kryds
Intersection
Uoplyst
NA
Before
After
Groups
Tørt
Dry
Dry
Regn
Rain
Rain
Tåge
Fog
Fog
Sne-Slud-Hagl
Snow
Snow
Stærk blæst
DRY
NA
Regn-Tåge
Rain
Regn-stærk blæst
Rain
Tåge-sne-slud-hagl
Fog
Tåhe-stærk blæst
Fog
Sne-sled-hagl-stærk blæst
Sne
Uoplyst
NA
Before
After
Groups
Janaur
Winter
Spring
Februar
Winter
Summer
Marts 
Spring
Autumn
April
Spring
Winter
VEJUDFORMNING -> ROAD DESIGN
VEJR -> WEATHER
ULEHDSDATO -> SEASON
==PAGE:75==
Maj
Spring
Juni
Summer
Juli
Summer
August
Summer
September
Autumn
Oktober
Autumn
November
Autumn
December
Winter
Before
After
Groups
Dagslys
Daylight
Daylight
Mørke
Dark
Dark
Tusmørke
Dark
NA
Uoplyst
NA
LYS -> LIGHT CONDITIONS
==PAGE:76==
Before
After
Groups
XX
XX
Numeric
Before
After
Groups
Mand
Male
Male
Kvinde
Female
Female
Before
After
Groups
Hjelm
Helmet
Helmet
Sele
Seat_belt
Seat_belt
Fodgænger
Pedetrian
Pedestrian
Uden
NO
NO
Before
After
Groups
XX
XX
Numeric
Before
After
Groups
Promille
Numeric
PERSONNIVEAU
PROMILLE  ALKOHOL AFFECTED_P1
KØN  SEX_P1
Sele  Safety equipment_P1
ALDER  AGE_P1
NEW  FREQ_PERSONS
==PAGE:77==
Before
After
Groups
DD-MM-YYYY
2017-YYYY
Numeric
Uoplyst
NA
Before
After
Groups
XXX
XXX
Numeric
Uoplyst
Before
After
Groups
XX
XX
Numeric
ELEMENTNIVEAU
NEW  FREQ_ELEMENTS
REGISTRINGSDATO  CAR AGE_P1_P2
TOTALVÆGT  CAR WEIGHT_P1_P2
==PAGE:78==
Dependent variable
Outcome variable
HYPOTHESIS
Time
Materiel
More accidents in the morning and afternoon
Weekday
Materiel
Number of accident per weekday do not differ 
Accident situation
Person
More severe accidents when having solo accidents
Speed Limit
Person
The higher speedlimit of a road the more severe acc. 
Element
Person
Vulnerable roadusers are in more severe acc
Road design
Materiel
More severe accidents when going on a straight road
Weather
Materiel
More critical accidents when it is snowing
Season
Materiel
More ciritical acc at winter season
Light Condition
Materiel
More severe acc at night, because of darkness
Alcohol
Person
Critical accidents when influence of alcohol
Driver licens year
Person
The more experience the less damage
Age
Person
Younger and older people attend to be in more severe accidents 
Sex
Materiel
Males are more likely to be in a severe accident
Safety equipment
Person
Seatbelt influence to outcome of the accident 
Freq personer
Materiel
Accident is not dependent on number of passengers in the car
Car age
Person
New cars are more safe
Car weight
Materiel
Bigger cars are more safe
Freq element
Materiel
More elements in a accident leads to a less severe accident
Population density
Materiel
Smaller density leads to more severe accidents
Distance hospital
Person
Longer distance leads to more severe accident
Region
Materiel
More severe acc in regions in Jultand comparede to Region hovedstad
Inattention
Person
Inattention plays a big part in accidents severity
-
HYPOTESER
==PAGE:79==
Variable
Numeric
Categorical
Season
√
Weather
√
Speedlimit
√
Road design
√
Acc situation
√
Light Conditions
√
Weekday
√
Element P1
√
Element P2
√
Inattention
√
Age P1
√
Alcohol P1
√
Freq persons
√
Freq elements
√
Sex P1
√
Safety Equipment P1
√
Car age P1
√
Car age P2
√
Car weight P1
√
Car weight P2
√
Region
√
Population Dens
√
Hospital Distance
√
Time
√
24
12
12
TOTAL VARIABLES
==PAGE:80==
Appendix B: R code 
R code for import and merging  
Import and merge element level data 
el_1 <- read.table('EL_1.txt',header=T) 
el_2 <- read.table('EL_2.txt',header=T) 
el_3 <- read.table('EL_3.txt',header=T) 
el_4 <- read.table('EL_4.txt',header=T) 
el_5 <- read.table('EL_5.txt',header=T) 
el_6 <- read.table('EL_6.txt',header=T) 
el_7 <- read.table('EL_7.txt',header=T) 
el_8 <- read.table('EL_8.txt',header=T) 
el_9 <- read.table('EL_9.txt',header=T) 
el_10 <- read.table('EL_10.txt',header=T) 
Element_niveau <- rbind(el_1,el_2,el_3,el_4,el_5,el_6,el_7,el_8,el_9,el_10) 
write.table(Element_niveau, "Element_niveau.txt", sep="\t") 
 
Import and merge personal level data 
pe_1 <- read.table('2013.txt',header=T) 
pe_2 <- read.table('2014.txt',header=T) 
pe_3 <- read.table('2015.txt',header=T) 
pe_4 <- read.table('2016.txt',header=T) 
pe_5 <- read.table('2017.txt',header=T) 
Person_niveau <- rbind(pe_1,pe_2,pe_3,pe_4,pe_5) 
write.table(Person_niveau, "Person_niveau.txt", sep="\t") 
 
Import and merge accident level data 
uh_1 <- read.table('UH_1.txt',header=T) 
uh_2 <- read.table('UH_2.txt',header=T) 
uh_3 <- read.table('UH_3.txt',header=T) 
uh_4 <- read.table('UH_4.txt',header=T) 
uh_5 <- read.table('UH_5.txt',header=T) 
uh_6 <- read.table('UH_6.txt',header=T) 
uh_7 <- read.table('UH_7.txt',header=T) 
uh_8 <- read.table('UH_8.txt',header=T) 
uh_9 <- read.table('UH_9.txt',header=T) 
uh_10 <- read.table('UH_10.txt',header=T) 
uh_11 <- read.table('UH_11.txt',header=T) 
uh_12 <- read.table('UH_12.txt',header=T) 
Uhelds_niveau <- rbind(uh_1,uh_2,uh_3,uh_4,uh_5,uh_6,uh_7,uh_8,uh_9,uh_10,uh_11,uh_12) 
write.table(Uhelds_niveau, "Uhelds_niveau.txt", sep="\t") 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Data processing and combining 
"-------------------------------------  LOADING PACKAGES ----------------------------------------" 
library("reshape2") 
library(dplyr) 
 
"-------------------------------------  IMPORTING DATA SETS ----------------------------------------" 
Uhelds_niveau <- read.table('Uhelds_niveau.txt',header=T) 
Element_niveau <- read.table('Element_niveau.txt',header=T) 
Person_niveau <- read.table('Person_niveau.txt',header=T) 
Uhelds_beskrivelse <- read.table('Uhelds_beskrivelse.txt',header=T) 
accidents_together <- read.table('Uheld_Sammensat.txt',header=T) 
 
"-------------------------------------  EXTRACT RELEVENT VARABLES ----------------------------------------" 
Element_niveau <- subset( Element_niveau, select = 
c(UHELDS_ID,UHELDSDATO,ELEMENTNR,STIFORLOEB,CYKELSTI,HASTSKOEN, 
MODEL,REGDATO,CRM_TOTALVAEGT ) ) 
Person_niveau <- subset( Person_niveau, select = 
c(UHELDS_ID,ALDER,ELEMENTNR,KOEN,KOEREKORT_AAR,PERSONNR,PROMILLE,SELE ) ) 
Uhelds_niveau <- subset( Uhelds_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,UHELDSART, 
UHELDSDATO,VEJR,VEJUDFORMNING,ELEMENTART1,ELEMENTART2, HAST_BEGR, 
HOVEDSITUATION,LYS,UGEDAG, TIME ) ) 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE SEASON OF THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
Uhelds_niveau$SEASON <- factor(months(as.POSIXlt(Uhelds_niveau$UHELDSDATO, format = "%d-%m-
%Y"))) 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON) %in% c("januar",'februar','december')] <- 
"WINTER" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON) %in% c("marts",'april','maj')] <- "SPRING" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON) %in% c("juni",'juli','august')] <- "SUMMER" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$SEASON) %in% c("september",'oktober','november')] 
<- "AUTUMN" 
Uhelds_niveau$UHELDSDATO <- NULL 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE WEATHER OF THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "VEJR")] <- "WEATHER" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER) %in% c("N/A",'Uopl')] <- NA 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER) %in% c("Tørt",'Blæst')] <- "DRY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER) %in% 
c("Regn",'Regn/blæst','Regn/tåge')] <- "RAIN" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER) %in% c("Tåge",'Tåge/blæst','Tåge/sne')] 
<- "FOG" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEATHER) %in% c("Sne",'Sne/blæst')] <- "SNOW" 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE ROAD TYPE OF THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "HAST_BEGR")] <- "SPEED_LIMIT" 
==PAGE:82==
 
"-------------------------------------  THE ROAD DESIGN OF THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "VEJUDFORMNING")] <- "ROAD_DESIGN" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN) %in% 
c("N/A",'Uopl','Øv_kryds')] <- NA 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN) %in% 
c("And.vej",'Flettest','Jernbane','På_bro','Selv/sti','Stikryds','Udkørsel','Under_bro')] <- "OTHER" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN) %in% c("Kurve",'Lige_vej')] <- 
"STRAIGHT_ROAD" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN)== "Rundkørs"] <- 
"RUNDABOUT" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ROAD_DESIGN) %in% c("+-kryds",'T-kryds')] <- 
"INTERSECTION" 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE ACCIDENT TYPE -------------------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "HOVEDSITUATION")] <- 
"ACCIDENT_SITUATION" 
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 0] <- "SOLO" 
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 1] <- "SAME_DIRECTION"  
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 2] <- 
"DIFFERENT_DIRECTION" 
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 3] <- "TURN"  
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 4] <- "CROSSING"  
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 5] <- "CROSSING"  
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 6] <- "CROSSING"  
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 7] <- "PARKING" 
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 8] <- "PEDISTRIAN" 
Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION[Uhelds_niveau$ACCIDENT_SITUATION == 9] <- "SOLO" 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE DAYLIGHT OF THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "LYS")] <- "LIGHT_CONDITIONS" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)== "N/A"] <- NA 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)== "Dagsl"] <- 
"DAYLIGHT" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS) %in% 
c("Mørke",'Tusmk')] <- "DARK" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$LIGHT_CONDITIONS)== "Uopl"] <- NA 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE WEEKDAY OF THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "UGEDAG")] <- "WEEKDAY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Man"] <- "MONDAY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Tir"] <- "TUESDAY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Ons"] <- "WEDNESDAY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Tor"] <- "THURSDAY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Fre"] <- "FRIDAY" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Lør"] <- "SATURDAY" 
==PAGE:83==
levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$WEEKDAY)== "Søn"] <- "SUNDAY" 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE ELEMENT 1 IN THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "ELEMENTART1")] <- "ELEMENT_P1" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1) %in% 
c("Abus",'Last','Rbus','S_Udr','Sætv','Trak','Vbil')] <- "HEAVY_VEHICLE" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1) %in% 
c("Cykl",'Fodg','Mc','Fohj','Rytter','Kn30','Kn30æ','Kn45','Kn45æ','M_red','M<400')] <- 
"VULNERABLE_ROADUSER" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1) %in% 
c("Flugt",'L_Udr','Pbil','Vare','Taxi')] <- "VEHICLE" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P1) %in% 
c("Div",'Divu','Dyr','Mast','N/A','Tog','Træ')] <- NA 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE ELEMENT 2 IN THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------" 
colnames(Uhelds_niveau)[which(names(Uhelds_niveau) == "ELEMENTART2")] <- "ELEMENT_P2" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2) %in% 
c("Abus",'Last','Rbus','S_Udr','Sætv','Trak','Vbil')] <- "HEAVY_VEHICLE" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2) %in% 
c("Cykl",'Fodg','Mc','Fohj','Rytter','BIKE','Kn30','Kn30æ','Kn45','Kn45æ','M_red','M<400')] <- 
"VULNERABLE_ROADUSER" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2) %in% 
c("Flugt",'L_Udr','Pbil','Vare','Taxi')] <- "VEHICLE" 
levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2)[levels(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2) %in% 
c("Div",'Divu','Mur','Mvrn','Værn','Sten','Letbane','Dyr','Mast','N/A','Jord','Hul','Tog','Træ','Bump','Bro','Afsp
','Cont','Atræ')] <- 'OTHER' 
Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2 <- as.character(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2 ) 
Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2 <- ifelse(is.na(Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2 ), 'OTHER', 
Uhelds_niveau$ELEMENT_P2 ) 
 
"-------------------------------------  FINDING VARIABLES FROM TEXT ----------------------------------------" 
Uhelds_beskrivelse1 <- Uhelds_beskrivelse 
patterns <- c("overse", "Overse", "overså", "Overså", "overser", "Overser", "Påkørte", "påkørte", "påkørt", 
"Påkørt", "uopmærksom" , "Uopmærksom", "uopmærksomhed", "Uopmærksomhed", "så_ikke","Så_ikke", 
              "uagtsom", "Uagtsom", "uforsætlig", "Uforsætlig", "ukoncentreret", "Ukoncentreret", "gps", "GPS", 
"gpsen", "mobiltelefon", "Mobiltelefon", "Telefon", "telefon", "Mobil", "mobil", 'radio',  
              'Radio', 'cd', 'CD','distraheret','Distraheret') 
Uhelds_beskrivelse1$text_Inattention <- ifelse(grepl(paste(patterns, collapse="|"), 
Uhelds_beskrivelse1$UHELDSTEKST) == T, 'YES','NO') 
Uhelds_beskrivelse1 <- subset( Uhelds_beskrivelse1, select = c(UHELDS_ID,text_Inattention ) ) 
Uhelds_niveau <- merge(Uhelds_niveau,Uhelds_beskrivelse1,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Uhelds_beskrivelse1) 
 
"------------------------- NUMBER OF ELEMENTS IN THE ACCIDENTS ----------------------------------------" 
element_niveau2 <- Element_niveau %>% group_by(UHELDS_ID) %>%   summarize( Count = n()) 
element_niveau2$NO_ELEMENTS <- as.numeric(element_niveau2$Count) 
==PAGE:84==
element_niveau2$Count <- NULL 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(Uhelds_niveau,element_niveau2,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(element_niveau2) 
 
"--------------------------------------- CAR WEIGHT -----------------------------------------" 
Element_niveau$CAR_WEIGHT <- as.numeric(as.character(Element_niveau$CRM_TOTALVAEGT)) 
Element_niveau$CAR_WEIGHT[Element_niveau$CAR_WEIGHT < 1] <- NA 
Element_niveau$CAR_WEIGHT <- as.numeric(as.character(Element_niveau$CRM_TOTALVAEGT)) 
Element_niveau$CAR_WEIGHT[Element_niveau$CAR_WEIGHT < 1] <- NA 
Element_niveau8 <- subset( Element_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,CAR_WEIGHT, ELEMENTNR ) ) 
Element_niveau8 <- Element_niveau8[complete.cases(Element_niveau8$CAR_WEIGHT), ] 
Element_niveau8 <- dcast(Element_niveau8, UHELDS_ID   ~ ELEMENTNR, value.var = "CAR_WEIGHT") 
Element_niveau8 <- subset( Element_niveau8, select = c("UHELDS_ID", "1", "2" ) ) 
Element_niveau8$CAR_WEIGHT1 <- as.numeric(Element_niveau8$`1`) 
Element_niveau8$CAR_WEIGHT2 <- as.numeric(Element_niveau8$`2`) 
Element_niveau8$`1` <- NULL 
Element_niveau8$`2` <- NULL 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Element_niveau8,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Element_niveau8) 
ACCIDENTS$CAR_WEIGHT2[ACCIDENTS$ELEMENT_P2 == 'VULNERABLE_ROADUSER' | 
ACCIDENTS$ELEMENT_P2 == 'OTHER' ] <- 0 
 
"---------------------------------- THE AGE OF THE CAR -------------------------------------" 
Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR1 <-  round(difftime(strptime(Element_niveau$UHELDSDATO, "%d-%m-%Y"), 
strptime(Element_niveau$REGDATO, format = "%d-%m-%Y"), units =  "days") / 360,0) 
Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR <- as.numeric(as.character(Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR1)) 
Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR[Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR < 0] <- NA 
Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR[Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR > 200] <- NA 
Element_niveau9 <- Element_niveau[complete.cases(Element_niveau$CAR_YEAR), ] 
Element_niveau9 <- subset( Element_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,CAR_YEAR, ELEMENTNR ) ) 
Element_niveau9 <- Element_niveau9[complete.cases(Element_niveau9$CAR_YEAR), ] 
Element_niveau9 <- dcast(Element_niveau9, UHELDS_ID   ~ ELEMENTNR, value.var = "CAR_YEAR") 
Element_niveau9 <- subset( Element_niveau9, select = c("UHELDS_ID", "1", "2" ) ) 
Element_niveau9$CAR_AGE1 <- as.numeric(Element_niveau9$`1`) 
Element_niveau9$CAR_AGE2 <- as.numeric(Element_niveau9$`2`) 
Element_niveau9$`1` <- NULL 
Element_niveau9$`2` <- NULL 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Element_niveau9,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Element_niveau9) 
ACCIDENTS$CAR_AGE2[ACCIDENTS$ELEMENT_P2 == 'VULNERABLE_ROADUSER' | 
ACCIDENTS$ELEMENT_P2 == 'OTHER' ] <- 0 
 
"------------------------------------ CREATING THE OUTPUT VARIABLE ----------------------------------------------------" 
ACCIDENTS$SEVERITY  <- with(ACCIDENTS,ifelse( UHELDSART == 'Anmsuh'  , 'MATERIAL' , 
                       ifelse( UHELDSART == 'Mskduh', 'MATERIAL' , 
                      ifelse( UHELDSART == 'Exuh'  , 'MATERIAL' , 
==PAGE:85==
                      ifelse( UHELDSART == 'Pskduh', 'INJURY' , NA))))) 
ACCIDENTS$UHELDSART <- NULL 
ACCIDENTS$SEVERITY1 <- NULL 
 
"--------------------------------- THE DISTANCE TO THE HOSPITAL ------------------------------------------------------" 
accidents_together <- subset( accidents_together, select = c(UHELDS_ID, REGION, INDB.KM2, Distance_km 
) ) 
names(accidents_together) <- c('UHELDS_ID','REGION',"POPULATION_DENSITY",'HOSPITAL_DISTANCE') 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,accidents_together,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(accidents_together) 
ACCIDENTS$SPEED_ESTIMATION <- NULL 
 
"----------------------- NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN THE ACCIDENT ----------------------------------------------" 
Person_niveau2 <- Person_niveau 
Person_niveau2 <- Person_niveau2[!grepl("N/A", Person_niveau2$KOEN),] 
Person_niveau2 <- Person_niveau2 %>% group_by(UHELDS_ID) %>%   summarize( Count = n()) 
Person_niveau2$NO_PEOPLE <- as.numeric(Person_niveau2$Count) 
Person_niveau2$Count <- NULL 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Person_niveau2,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Person_niveau2) 
 
"-------------------------------------  THE AGE OF PART 1 AND 2 ----------------------------------------" 
 
colnames(Person_niveau)[which(names(Person_niveau) == "ALDER")] <- "AGE" 
Person_niveau$AGE[Person_niveau$AGE == 0] <- NA 
Person_niveau1 <- subset( Person_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,AGE,PERSONNR,ELEMENTNR ) ) 
Person_niveau1 <- Person_niveau1[complete.cases(Person_niveau1$AGE), ] 
Person_niveau1 <- Person_niveau1[!(Person_niveau1$PERSONNR>1),] 
Person_niveau1 <- Person_niveau1[!(Person_niveau1$ELEMENTNR>1),] 
Person_niveau1$num <- sequence(rle(Person_niveau1$UHELDS_ID)$lengths) 
Person_niveau1 <- dcast(Person_niveau1, UHELDS_ID   ~ num, value.var = "AGE") 
Person_niveau1 <- subset( Person_niveau1, select = c("UHELDS_ID", "1" ) ) 
Person_niveau1$AGE_P1 <- Person_niveau1$`1` 
Person_niveau1$`1` <- NULL 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Person_niveau1,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Person_niveau1) 
 
"----------------------------------- THE DRIVERS SEX TRANSPOSING -------------------------------------" 
colnames(Person_niveau)[which(names(Person_niveau) == "KOEN")] <- "SEX" 
levels(Person_niveau$SEX)[levels(Person_niveau$SEX)== "Mand"] <- "MALE" 
levels(Person_niveau$SEX)[levels(Person_niveau$SEX)== "Kvinde"] <- "FEMALE" 
levels(Person_niveau$SEX)[levels(Person_niveau$SEX)== "N/A"] <- NA 
Person_niveau4 <- subset( Person_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,SEX,PERSONNR ,ELEMENTNR) ) 
Person_niveau4 <- Person_niveau4[complete.cases(Person_niveau4$SEX), ] 
Person_niveau4 <- Person_niveau4[!(Person_niveau4$ELEMENTNR>1),] 
Person_niveau4 <- Person_niveau4[!(Person_niveau4$PERSONNR>1),] 
==PAGE:86==
Person_niveau4$num <- sequence(rle(Person_niveau4$UHELDS_ID)$lengths) 
Person_niveau4 <- dcast(Person_niveau4, UHELDS_ID   ~ num, value.var = "SEX") 
Person_niveau4 <- subset( Person_niveau4, select = c("UHELDS_ID", "1" ) ) 
names(Person_niveau4) <- c('UHELDS_ID',"SEX_P1") 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Person_niveau4,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Person_niveau4) 
 
"--------------------------- DRIVER AFFECTED BY ALCOHOL ---------------------------------------------------" 
Person_niveau$PROMILLE1 <- as.numeric(as.integer(Person_niveau$PROMILLE)) 
Person_niveau$PROMILLE1[Person_niveau$PROMILLE1 == 999] <- 0 
Person_niveau$PROMILLE1[is.na(Person_niveau$PROMILLE1)] <- 0 
Person_niveau$PROMILLE <- NULL 
Person_niveau0 <- subset( Person_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,PROMILLE1, PERSONNR, ELEMENTNR ) ) 
Person_niveau0 <- Person_niveau0[complete.cases(Person_niveau0$PROMILLE1), ] 
Person_niveau0 <- Person_niveau0[!(Person_niveau0$PERSONNR>1),] 
Person_niveau0 <- Person_niveau0[!(Person_niveau0$ELEMENTNR>1),] 
Person_niveau0 <- Person_niveau0[!(Person_niveau0$PERSONNR==0),] 
Person_niveau0$num <- sequence(rle(Person_niveau0$UHELDS_ID)$lengths) 
Person_niveau0 <- dcast(Person_niveau0, UHELDS_ID   ~ num, value.var = "PROMILLE1") 
Person_niveau0 <- subset( Person_niveau0, select = c("UHELDS_ID", "1") ) 
names(Person_niveau0) <- c('UHELDS_ID',"ALCOHOL_P1") 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Person_niveau0,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
rm(Person_niveau0) 
 
"----------------------- THE PART 1 AND 2'S SAFETY EQUIPMENTS --------------------------------" 
colnames(Person_niveau)[which(names(Person_niveau) == "SELE")] <- "SAFETY_EQUIPMENT" 
 
levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)[levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT) %in% 
c('Uopl','B/barnstol','F/barnstol','Unknown')] <- "UNKNOWN" 
levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)[levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)== "Fodg"] <- 
"PEDESTRIAN" 
levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)[levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)== "Hjelm"] <- 
"HELMET" 
levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)[levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT) %in% 
c("Uden",'US/+airbag')] <- "NO" 
levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)[levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)== ""] <- "NO" 
levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)[levels(Person_niveau$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT) %in% c("MS/-
airbag",'MS/+airbag','Sele')] <- "SEAT_BELT" 
Person_niveau4 <- subset( Person_niveau, select = c(UHELDS_ID,SAFETY_EQUIPMENT,PERSONNR 
,ELEMENTNR) ) 
Person_niveau4$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT[is.na(Person_niveau4$SAFETY_EQUIPMENT)] <- 'UNKNOWN' 
Person_niveau4 <- Person_niveau4[!(Person_niveau4$ELEMENTNR>1),] 
Person_niveau4 <- Person_niveau4[!(Person_niveau4$PERSONNR>1),] 
Person_niveau4 <- subset( Person_niveau4, select = c("UHELDS_ID", "SAFETY_EQUIPMENT" ) ) 
names(Person_niveau4) <- c('UHELDS_ID','SAFETY_EQUIPMENT1') 
ACCIDENTS <- merge(ACCIDENTS,Person_niveau4,by="UHELDS_ID", all.x = TRUE) 
==PAGE:87==
rm(Person_niveau4) 
 
"--------------------------------------- DELETING ALL MISSING OBS ---------------------------------------------------" 
ACCIDENTS1 <- ACCIDENTS[complete.cases(ACCIDENTS), ] 
 
"------------------------------------------- EXPORT FINAL DATA SET ----------------------------------------------------" 
write.csv(ACCIDENTS1, file = "ACCIDENTS.CSV") 
write.table(ACCIDENTS1, "ACCIDENTS.txt", sep="\t", row.names = FALSE) 
 
R code for decision tree 
"------------------------------------------- IMPORT USED PACKAGE ----------------------------------------------------" 
library('rpart') 
"------------------------------------------- IMPORT DATA SET ------------------------------------------------------------" 
  data <- read.table('ACCIDENTS.txt',header=T) 
  data <- data[,-1] 
 
"------------------------------------------- SPLITTING DATA (TRAIN/TEST)---------------------------------------------" 
  set.seed(10) 
  train_data <- data[sample(2,nrow(data), replace=TRUE, prob=c(0.9,0.1))==1,] 
  test_data <- data[sample(2,nrow(data), replace=TRUE, prob=c(0.9,0.1))==2,] 
   
"------------------------------------------- BULIDING TREE WITH ALL VARIABLES -----------------------------------" 
  tree_model <- rpart(SEVERITY ~ . ,data = train_data, control = rpart.control(cp = 0.001, minsplit = 100)) 
  printcp(tree_model) 
  windows(); plotcp(tree_model) 
 
"------------------------------------------- PRUNING THE DECISION TREE -------------------------------------------" 
pruned_tree_model <- prune(tree_model, cp= 0.0039459) 
windows();plot(pruned_tree_model, uniform = T, margin=0.2) 
text(pruned_tree_model, pretty = 0, cex = 0.9, all = F) 
 
"------------------------------------------- CONFUSION MATRIX AND PREDICTION ----------------------------------" 
prediction_prune <- predict(pruned_tree_model, test_data[,-17],type = 'class') 
Classtable_prune <- table(prediction_prune, test_data[,17], dnn=c("Prediction","Actual")) 
Classtable_prune 
sum(diag(Classtable_prune))/sum(Classtable_prune) 
   
R code for neural network 
"------------------------------------------- IMPORT USED PACKAGE ----------------------------------------------------" 
library(neuralnet) 
library('NeuralNetTools') 
 
"------------------------------------------- IMPORT DATA SET ------------------------------------------------------------" 
==PAGE:88==
data2 <- read.table('ACCIDENTS.txt',header=T) 
table(data2$ACCIDENT_SITUATION) 
 
data2$INJURY <- ifelse(data2$SEVERITY == 'MATERIAL',0,1) 
 
normalize <- function(x) { 
  return ((x - min(x)) / (max(x) - min(x))) 
} 
 
data1 <- subset(data2, select = c(INJURY, NO_PEOPLE,NO_ELEMENTS , POPULATION_DENSITY)) 
data <- as.data.frame(lapply(data1, normalize)) 
 
"------------------------------------------- SPLITTING DATA (TRAIN/TEST)---------------------------------------------" 
set.seed(100) 
Train <- data[sample(2,nrow(data), replace=TRUE, prob=c(0.9,0.1))==1,] 
Test <- data[sample(2,nrow(data), replace=TRUE, prob=c(0.9,0.1))==2,] 
 
 
"------------------------------- CREATING THE NEURAL NETWORK --------------------------------------------------" 
NN_model <- neuralnet( INJURY ~ . ,  data = Train, hidden = c(3,2), linear.output = F, stepmax=1e6, 
threshold = 0.1) 
 
"------------------------------------------ VISUALIZING THE NEURAL NETWORK -----------------------------------" 
windows();plot(NN_model) 
windows();olden(NN_model) 
 
"------------------------------ CONFUSION MATRIX AND PREDICTION --------------------------------------------" 
Prediction <- neuralnet::compute(NN_model,Test[,-1]) 
results <- data.frame(actual = Test$INJURY, prediction = Prediction$net.result) 
results$predictedvalue <- ifelse(results$prediction < 0.5, '0', '1') 
ConfusionMatrix <- table(results$predictedvalue,Test[,1],dnn=c("Prediction","Actual")) 
ConfusionMatrix 
ACC <- sum(diag(ConfusionMatrix))/sum(ConfusionMatrix) 
ACC 
 
R code correlation  
LINK: http://www.sthda.com/english/wiki/ggplot2-quick-correlation-matrix-heatmap-r-software-and-data-
visualization 
"------------------------------------------- IMPORT USED PACKAGE ----------------------------------------------------" 
library(reshape2) 
library(ggplot2) 
 
"------------------------------------------- IMPORT DATA SET ------------------------------------------------------------" 
data1 <- read.table('ACCIDENTS.txt',header=T) 
==PAGE:89==
 
"------------------------------------------- SUBSET WITH ONLY NUMERIC VARIABLES -----------------------------" 
data <- subset(data1, select = c(NO_PEOPLE ,NO_ELEMENTS,CAR_WEIGHT2,POPULATION_DENSITY,                                  
HOSPITAL_DISTANCE, SPEED_LIMIT, TIME, ALCOHOL_P1, AGE_P1, CAR_WEIGHT1, CAR_AGE1, CAR_AGE2 )) 
 
"------------------------------------------- ESTABLISH CORRELATION MATRIX ---------------------------------------" 
establish correlation matrix 
cormat <- round(cor(data),2) 
melted_cormat <- melt(cormat) 
melted_cormat 
get_lower_tri<-function(cormat){   cormat[upper.tri(cormat)] <- NA   return(cormat) } 
get_upper_tri <- function(cormat){   cormat[lower.tri(cormat)]<- NA   return(cormat) } 
upper_tri <- get_upper_tri(cormat) 
melted_cormat <- melt(upper_tri, na.rm = TRUE) 
reorder_cormat <- function(cormat){   dd <- as.dist((1-cormat)/2)   hc <- hclust(dd)   cormat <-
cormat[hc$order, hc$order] } 
cormat <- reorder_cormat(cormat) 
upper_tri <- get_upper_tri(cormat) 
melted_cormat <- melt(upper_tri, na.rm = TRUE) 
 
"------------------------------------------------------- ESTABLISH HEATMAP ------------------------------------------------" 
ggheatmap <- ggplot(melted_cormat, aes(Var2, Var1, fill = value))+ 
  geom_tile(color = "white")+   scale_fill_gradient2(low = "blue", high = "red", mid = "white",                         
midpoint = 0, limit = c(-1,1), space = "Lab",  name="Pearson\nCorrelation") +  theme_minimal()+ # minimal 
theme theme(axis.text.x = element_text(angle = 45, vjust = 1,  size = 12, hjust = 1))+  coord_fixed() 
 
"---------------------------------------------------- VISULAZING HEATMAP ------------------------------------------------" 
print(ggheatmap) 
windows();ggheatmap +   geom_text(aes(Var2, Var1, label = value), color = "black", size = 4) + 
  theme( axis.title.x = element_blank(),   axis.title.y = element_blank(),    panel.grid.major = 
element_blank(),    panel.border = element_blank(),    panel.background = element_blank(), 
    axis.ticks = element_blank(),    legend.justification = c(1, 0),    legend.position = c(0.6, 0.7), 
    legend.direction = "horizontal")+  guides(fill = guide_colorbar(barwidth = 7, barheight = 1,                               
title.position = "top", title.hjust = 0.5)) 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
NUMBER OF OBS.
Min. FREQ_ELEMENTS
Avg. FREQ_ELEMENTS
Max. FREQ_ELEMENTS
Min. FREQ_PERSONS
Avg. FREQ_PERSONS
Max. FREQ_PERSONS
29
1,86
1
29
2,2
1
54.169
OVERALL STATISTICS
APPENDIX C: DESCRIPTIVE RESULTS
Material Damage
84%
Personal Injury
16%
PIE CHART ACCIDENT TYPE
Part1: VEHICLE
Part2: VULNERABLE ROAD USER
%, Accidents: 22%
Part1: VEHICLE
Part2: VEHICLE
%, Accidents: 44%
Part1: VEHICLE
Part2: OTHER
%, Accidents: 24%
DISTRIBUTION OF ELEMENT 1 AND ELEMENT 2
==PAGE:91==
DESCRIPTIVE - VEHICLE
1K
2K
3K
4K
Weight of element 1
1K
2K
3K
4K
Weight of element 2
WEIGHT 1 AND 2 - PERSON INJURY
1K
2K
3K
4K
CAR_WEIGHT1
1K
2K
3K
4K
CAR_WEIGHT2
 WEIGHT 1 AND 2 - MATERIAL
0
10
20
30
40
Motor vehicle age part 1
0%
2%
4%
6%
%, Number
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Motor vehicle age part 2
0%
5%
10%
%, Number
CAR AGE 1 AND 2
1%2% 0%
72%
25%
PIE CHART OF SAFETY EQUIPTMENT ON PART 1
43%
39%
4%
5%
9%
PIE CHART OF SAFETY EQUIPTMENT ON PART 2
SAFETY_EQUIPMENT1
HELMET
NO
PEDESTRIAN
SEAT_BELT
UNKNOWN
large + large
large + small
small + small
SAFETY_EQUIPMENT2
HELMET
NO
PEDESTRIAN
SEAT_BELT
UNKNOWN
==PAGE:92==
ALCOHOL_P1: 
0
% of Total Count of ALCOHOL_P1: 
92%
NUMBER OF OBS.: 49.780
PROMILLE 0
0
100
200
300
400
ALCOHOL_P1 (bin)
0
100
200
300
400
Count of ALCOHOL_P1
ALCOHOL
DESCRIPTIVE - DRIVER
0
20
40
60
80
100
Age of part 1
0%
2%
4%
%, Number
2.460
940
498
AGE PART 1
FEMALE
33%
MALE
67%
SEX PART 1
YES
56%
NO
44%
INNATENTION AMONG DRIVERS
SEVERITY
NO
YES
Material Damage
Personal Injury
16%
17%
84%
83%
INATTENTION
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
5000
5500
6000
6500
Number
5.572
6.019
6.122
6.392
6.343
INATTENTION DEVELOPMENT
SEVERITY
Material Damage
Personal Injury
==PAGE:93==
DESCRIPTIVE - SURROUNDINGS
SUMMER
24%
AUTUMN
27%
WINTER
25%
SPRING
24%
SEASON
WEATHER: FOG
PERCENT OF OBS.: 
1%
NUMBER OF OBS.: 503
WEATHER: SNOW
PERCENT OF OBS.: 2%
NUMBER OF OBS.: 1.201
WEATHER: RAIN
PERCENT OF OBS.: 
13%
NUMBER OF OBS.: 7.038
WEATHER: DRY
PERCENT OF OBS.: 
84%
NUMBER OF OBS.: 45.427
WEATHER CONDITION
DAYLIGHT
69%
DARK
31%
LIGHT CONDITION
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
TIME
2%
4%
6%
TO WORK
FROM WORK
WEEKDAY
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
TIME
MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
THURSDAY
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
SUNDAY
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
DISTRIBUTION ON SERVERITY AND WEEKDAY
DISTRIBUTION ON SERVERITY AND TIME ON DAY
Material Damage
Personal Injury
==PAGE:94==
DESCRIPTIVE - GEOGRAPHICAL
Capital Central North
Other
South Zealand
0K
5K
10K
15K
Number of Records
26%
21%
27%
17%
9%
0%
REGION
STRAIGHT ROAD
52%
RUNDABOUT
4%
OTHER
INTERSECTION
37%
ROAD_DESIGN
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
HOSPITAL_DISTANCE
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Number of Records
HOSPITAL
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
SPEED_LIMIT
0K
5K
10K
15K
20K
25K
30K
Count of SPEED_LIMIT
48%
10%
22%
0%
0%
1%
1%
6%
1%
0%
6%
5%
SPEED LIMIT
SOLO
24%
SAME DIR.
23%
TURN
9%
PARKING
7%
DIFFERENT DIR.
6%
PEDISTRIAN
5%
CROSSING
27%
ACCIDENT SITUATION
Personal Injury
Material Damage
