==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Conditional Error Statistics for Offshore Winds, from WRF 
Modelling and ASCAT Satellite Data 
 
 
 
Stefano Ribaudo 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0307 
June 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Stefano Ribaudo 
Title: Conditional Error Statistics for Offshore Winds, from WRF 
Modelling and ASCAT Satellite Data 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03077 
June 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
January 2019 – June 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
Mark C. Kelly 
Ioanna Karagali 
Andrea N. Hahmann 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The aim of this thesis is to provide a deeper understanding of the error statistics
of WRF models with regard to the Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT) measure-
ments for the North Sea region, more precisely we’ll look at conditional statistics
of mentioned errors. Throughout the thesis we’ll compare diﬀerent WRF runs
(called ensembles or ensemble member) based on their statistics. Since the en-
sembles may diﬀer from each other for few key elements (called schemes), we can
infer how the schemes are responsible for the errors. While information about
the errors can be used directly to deﬁne the model uncertainty, information
about diﬀerent schemes can help decision making for research purposes.
I would like to personally thank my supervisors Mark C. Kelly, Ioanna Karagali
and Andrea N. Hahmann for the help, skillful knowledge and patience shown
during this ﬁve months of collaboration. I would also like to thank my family for
their constant support and my elementary school math teacher Ada, to which I
ultimately owe my interest in science.
Kongens Lyngby, 28-June-2019
Stefano Ribaudo
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Following the ﬁndings of Hahmann et al. (2015) we observe a bias in WRF
simulations when compared to anemometer or Lidar measurements in the North
Sea. This bias is expressed as the diﬀerence between average WRF model output
and average measurements. This thesis’s objective is to deﬁne and analyze WRF
error metrics against ASCAT satellite data over the North sea and at 10 m
height.
Initially we’ll look at how the data is handled and converted through interpo-
lation to enable the comparison. This will allow for the computation of the
statistics that will help us determine how well the WRF model represents the
measurements.
The statistical analysis begins with the analysis of marginal pdf for the variables
of wind speed, wind direction and inverse Obukhov length for the WRF data.
The subsequent conditional statistics will be performed conditioning over these
variables.
Two diﬀerent error metrics are deﬁned, with the raw error representing the cor-
respondence between individual simulations and measurements while the time
averaged error represents the correspondence between average simulations and
measurements.
Initially the presence and eﬀects of phase shift for WRF simulations over the
error metrics is investigated. The conditional analysis continues by conditioning
the error metrics over WRF wind speed, wind direction and inverse Obukhov
length.
A correction for the ASCAT wind speed is presented and new conditional statis-
tics are obtained with the comparison against the corrected data.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Data
3
2.1
ASCAT data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The ASCAT instrument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
ASCAT data overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
WRF data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Introduction to the WRF model and model setup . . . . .
6
2.2.2
WRF data overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.3
Selected area of interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Grid interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Grid selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Interpolation of ASCAT data onto the WRF grid . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Aggregation and interpolation of WRF data onto the AS-
CAT grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.4
Choice of interpolation grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.5
Interpolation method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Time interpolation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Statistical analysis
21
3.1
Marginal statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Marginal statistics of wind speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.2
Marginal statistics of wind direction . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
Marginal statistics of inverse Obukhov length . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Conditional statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3.2.1
Deﬁnition of ‘error’ metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.2
Conditioning over correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
Conditioning over wind speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2.4
Conditioning over inverse Obukhov length . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2.5
Conditioning over wind direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Correction of ASCAT data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4
Conditional statistics with stability corrected ASCAT data
. . .
52
4
Discussion
57
5
Conclusions
63
Bibliography
67
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
With a total of 40 wind farms operating in the North Sea (as per 2015,Wikipedia
(2015)) and the new planned wind farm Thor by the Danish energy ministry
(EFKM, 2019), the North Sea is ﬁeld of great interest for wind energy.
To
optimize the cost of energy, the location of a new wind farm must be taken in
consideration during planning. The planning consists also of a wind resource
assessment, in which the comparison between diﬀerent possible sites based on
the wind climate takes form. Along energy production, knowing the uncertainty
of the wind climate is of great importance for both structural and economical
reasons during planning (Nielsen, 2018).
Currently the estimation of wind resource oﬀshore is done with numerical weather
prediction models (NWP) rather than the alternatives of in situ measurements
(which are expensive and available for a limited number of sites) or satellite
based measurements (that may have larger uncertainties than in situ measure-
ments) (Hahmann et al., 2015).
The Weather, Research and Forecast model (WRF) (Skamarock et al., 2008) is
one of such NWP models and includes a wide range of physics options or schemes
that govern the physical interactions within the simulations. This model is used
for the NEWA project, which aims to the creation and publication of a state
of the art electronic European wind atlas based on WRF simulations (Karagali
et al., 2018). Moreover, the NEWA project established diﬀerent experiments to
evaluate the model sensitivity to diﬀerent schemes oﬀshore. The performance
of these simulations is assessed with comparison to ASCAT winds. Given the
premises described, throughout this thesis we’ll analyze diﬀerent WRF simula-
tions for the North sea.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
The simulated wind speeds for each ensemble member will be compared with
measurements from the ASCAT satellite data, by applying error metrics specif-
ically adapted for this study. The deﬁnition and analysis of the error metrics
is carried out both to oﬀer results comparable with other literature in the ﬁeld
and to help the reader deﬁne its own error metric by understanding the infor-
mation that one could infer from it. The latter concept is expanded with the
use of conditional statistics, that will help study the error metrics dependencies
on major variables of interest for wind energy applications and meteorology re-
search. Initially we’ll condition on correlation between WRF and ASCAT data
to study the eﬀects of phase shift (Rosgaard, 2015). The conditioning over wind
speed follows a typical power curve of a wind turbine and is intended to show
the model performance for energy production purposes. Conditioning the error
metrics over inverse Obukhov length shows the model performance over diﬀer-
ent atmospheric conditions and conditioning over wind direction was initially
intended for testing purposes but instead yielded interesting results.
Following the results obtained while conditioning over atmospheric stability, a
stability correction for the ASCAT data is implemented. This correction allowed
for the discerning of errors given by the WRF simulations from those caused by
the assumption of neutral atmospheric conditions for the ASCAT data.
From the results obtained we’ll be able to analyze the performance of the sim-
ulations both from a physical point of view and from a scheme to scheme com-
parison. The latter could be used to deﬁne ensemble members with speciﬁc
objectives, such as the minimization of an error metric. Given that the reader
is interested in the error metrics presented, one could also derive the model
uncertainty over such error metrics.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Data
2.1
ASCAT data
A brief description of the ASCAT instrument is presented in the next section,
followed by a general overview of the data used. The data is available from the
year 2015.
2.1.1
The ASCAT instrument
The data is acquired by two satellites platforms, Metop-A and Metob-B. The
ASCAT instrument consists a pair of three antennas, one for each side of the
satellite. These antennas measure the back-scattering from the water surface.
The measured signal is called radiometrically-calibrated Level 1b NRCS, or
σ0. This signal is then converted with a empirical Geophysical Model Function
(GMF) that relates σ0, wind speed, direction and signal incident angle (EU-
METSAT, 2015). The measurement swath and diﬀerence between the right and
left group of antennas is visible in ﬁgure 2.2, where for example the two green
stripes represent the two swaths.
The latter are about 550 km wide.
Note
that the ASCAT instrument data is converted to wind speeds assuming neutral
atmospheric conditions (p. 39, EUMETSAT, 2015).
==PAGE:12==
4
Data
2.1.2
ASCAT data overview
The ASCAT data were obtained from the E.U. Copernicus Marine Service In-
formation and analyzed by DTU Wind Energy (Copernicus, 2017).
The analyzed data comes in .mat ﬁles, one for each day. These have a resolution
of 0.125 degrees in both longitude and latitude. Each ﬁle is comprised of four
passes. Each pass can be ascending or descending for either one of the satellites
platforms, and throughout this thesis each individual pass will take the name
of ASCAT temporal snapshot.
Throughout this thesis the ASCAT data always refers to the height of 10 m
above mean sea level.
Figure 2.1 shows an example of ASCAT data. The ﬁgure shows the ascending
pass of Metop-A for the ﬁrst of January 2015. As we can see the data looks
striped due to the instrument measurement swaths. Further analysis is pre-
sented in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.1: An example of ASCAT data, showing wind speed.
This ﬁgure
presents the data obtained by Metop-A on the ascending pass on
the 1st of January 2015. Since this data comes from one satellite
and one speciﬁc pass, the data shown takes the name of ASCAT
temporal snapshot.
From ﬁgure 2.2 we can see that for a single ASCAT temporal snapshot we have
==PAGE:13==
2.2 WRF data
5
Figure 2.2: An example of ASCAT data, showing the wind speed measurement
time. This ﬁgure presents the data obtained by Metop-A on the
ascending pass on the 1st of January 2015. Each color represents a
diﬀerent measurement time. The approximate measuring time for
the colors presented are (in ascending order): dark blue (∼16:54),
light blue (∼18:35), green (∼20:11) and yellow (∼21:52).
measurements at diﬀerent times, from around 16:54 for the dark blue area to
around 21:52 for the yellow area. The measurement time is not uniform for the
same color, e.g. the green area presents measurements from 20:05 at Latitude
34◦N to 20:17 at Latitude
72◦N.
Figure 2.2 also shows that subsequent
measurements overwrite previous measurements in our data.
These considerations will be of practical use later for both computing the cor-
relation coeﬃcient between ASCAT and WRF data and the process of time
interpolation.
2.2
WRF data
The WRF data used throughout this thesis is stored on the neweuropeanwin-
datlas.eu servers and part of the NEWA project (Karagali et al., 2018). Data
from two domains is used, the North sea domain (NW domain in the NEWA
project, ﬁgure 2.3) and the UK domain (ﬁgure 2.4).
==PAGE:14==
6
Data
The UK data was downloaded manually and will be used to analyze the perfor-
mance of the interpolation methods. This data was initially used due to a time
delay for the North sea domain data. The data for the North Sea domain was
directly handed by DTU Wind Energy and consists of 9 ensembles. Analogously
to the ASCAT data, all the data used refers to the year 2015.
The data comes in .nc ﬁles and is stored using a NetCDF data format(Wikipedia,
2019). This speciﬁc data format has been accessed to using the NetCDF library
in Matlab (MathWorks, 2019).
2.2.1
Introduction to the WRF model and model setup
The WRF model (Weather Research and Forecasting Model) is a meso-scale
numerical prediction system and it is used for a wide range of research and op-
erational applications (Skamarock et al., 2008).
The WRF model is used with a series of schemes and physical options that will
parameterize the physical interactions within the simulation. A detailed list of
schemes can be found on the UCAR oﬃcial web page (UCAR, 2019).
Each ensemble member analyzed will have a unique combination of schemes
and will be identiﬁed with the names of the schemes used. Our ensemble mem-
bers diﬀer for the choice of four schemes: the PBL (planetary boundary layer)
scheme, the surface layer scheme, the SST (surface sea temperature product
used for initial conditions) and the land surface scheme. A list of the adopted
schemes is presented is table 2.1.
Scheme category
Scheme names
PBL
ACM (Pleim, 2007)
MYJ (Janji, 1994)
MYNN (Nakanishi and Niino, 2006)
YSU (Hu et al., 2013)
Surface layer
PX (Noilhan and Planton, 1989)
MO (Monin and Obukhov, 1954)
MM5 (Jimnez et al., 2012)
MYNN
SST
OSTIA (Donlon et al., 2012)
OISST (Reynolds et al., 2002)
Land surface
RUC (Benjamin et al., 2004)
NOAH (Tewari et al., 2004)
Table 2.1: List of schemes used for the ensemble members
==PAGE:15==
2.2 WRF data
7
To each ensemble member we’ll assign a name that is a composite name of the
used schemes. The names will follow the pattern: PBL - Surface layer - SST -
Land surface.
The WRF simulations are performed in a nested conﬁguration, where the outer
domain drive the inner domain. The outer domain is initialized with lateral
boundary conditions from the atmospheric reanalysis ERA Interim, with reso-
lution 0.75◦x 0.75◦(Dee et al., 2011). Figure 2.3 presents various domains used
in the latest NEWA report where the yellow domain corresponds to the North
Sea domain analyzed through this thesis (Witha et al., 2019).
Figure 2.3: Map showing the WRF domains used in the latest NEWA report
(Witha et al., 2019). The North Sea domain analyzed in this the-
sis is presented in yellow (formally known as NW in the NEWA
report). The dots represent measuring stations whose data is un-
available for this thesis. The surrounding black rectangles repre-
sent the outer domains.
The UK domain is shown in ﬁgure 2.4 and represented by the initials GB.
==PAGE:16==
8
Data
Figure 2.4: Map showing domains for the WRF run that produced the UK
data. The UK domain is represented by the initials GB.
2.2.2
WRF data overview
The data is divided into square grid cells of 9 km2, and the grid cells centers
have a spatial resolution of 3 km. The temporal resolution is 30 min, or 48
values per grid cell per day.
With WRF temporal snapshot we refer to the collection of values for a variable
given a ﬁxed point in time and an ensemble member. An example is given in
ﬁgure 2.5. For wind speed and direction, the WRF data used for this thesis
refers to the height of 10 m above mean sea level.
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Grid interpolation
9
2.2.3
Selected area of interest
Since the NW domain shown in ﬁgures 2.5 and 2.3 is comprised of both sea
and land grid points, we deﬁne a new area of interest that covers only sea grid
points. Only grid points further than 50 km to coastal grid points have been
chosen to avoid the transitional inner boundary layer due to surface roughness
change (p. 132, Berg et al., 2017). The area will also be at least 30 km away
from the domain borders due to the nested setup.
Figure 2.5 presents the
grid points selected, where the area is centered at longitude 4.08 [◦N] and
latitude 55.85 [◦E]. This selected area measures 186300 km2 and spawns 414
km horizontally and 450 km vertically.
Figure 2.5: An example of WRF data, showing the wind speed. This data
refers to the ensemble member MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH for
the 1st of January 2015 at 00:00. The selected area is delimited
by black lines.
2.3
Grid interpolation
Since ASCAT and WRF data comes for diﬀerent points in space and at diﬀerent
times, the ﬁrst step in our analysis is to deﬁne an interpolation procedure to
be able to align ASCAT and WRF data in both space and time. Doing so will
==PAGE:18==
10
Data
allow us to compare the two diﬀerent data in a meaningful way. To interpolate
in space we have diﬀerent options:
• We could interpolate the ASCAT data on the WRF grid or vice versa;
• We must chose an interpolation method, e.g. linear / cubic etc...
To analyze to which choice is better for our study, we introduce the concept of
interpolation error. This is to express the consequences of any interpolation we
wish to adopt. For this study two parameters are chosen as representative of
the interpolation error: the diﬀerence in average wind speed and the ratio of
wind speed variance. Both quantities are computed from the wind speed ﬁeld
prior and after the interpolation, and each time we interpolate.
The diﬀerence in average wind speed is chosen to test whether the interpolation
overpredicts the highest (or lowest) wind speeds and underpredicts the lowest (or
highest) wind speeds. This choice is an adaptation of the guidelines presented
in p 44, Li and Heap (2008). The closer this parameter is to 0, the highest the
performance of the interpolation.
∆Ai = ⟨Ui, W RF grid⟩x,y −⟨Ui, ASCAT grid⟩x,y
(2.1)
The subscript i in equation 2.1 indicates the temporal snapshot i.
The ratio of wind speed variance is chosen to test if the interpolation over
predicts (or under predicts) the extremes (both high and low).
This choice
is presented in p 44, Li and Heap (2008), and is the optimal measurement of
performance that we can use from this source. This parameter shows a better
performance the closer it gets to 1.
RV ARi =
V AR

Ui, W RF grid

V AR

Ui, ASCAT grid

(2.2)
Again the subscript i indicates the temporal snapshot i and V AR is the statis-
tical variance.
2.3.1
Grid selection
We can interpolate the ASCAT data on the WRF grid or we can interpolate
the WRF data on the ASCAT grid.
Generally speaking, it is recommended to interpolate data from the ﬁner grid
(WRF grid) to the coarser grid (ASCAT grid) (p. 357, Wilks, 2011).
In our case this means to interpolate WRF data to the ASCAT grid.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Grid interpolation
11
Although this recommendation may be true for most cases, we’ve spotted pos-
sible problems for both approaches and no one given solution looks better than
the other without a proper analysis of the options.
Speciﬁcally, if we were to interpolate the ASCAT data onto the WRF grid we
would introduce new, unmeasured data. This is due to the WRF grid being
ﬁner than the ASCAT grid.
If we were to interpolate the WRF data onto the ASCAT grid we will leave
some of the predictor points out from the computation. This is since the inter-
polation methods presented further will use a ﬁnite set of neighbouring points
to predict. Given the diﬀerences in grids, many points on the WRF grid are not
neighbouring any ASCAT grid point. For the North sea selected area (ﬁgure
2.5), it is computed that approximately 26% of the WRF grid points will be
used for a bilinear interpolation, leaving the remaining 74% of the data unrep-
resented (computation not shown). This eﬀect is less prominent the lower the
wind speed gradient in our wind ﬁelds. Fortunately, we’ll analyze sea areas for
which the wind speed gradient is generally lower than on land.
2.3.2
Interpolation of ASCAT data onto the WRF grid
To measure the performance of this interpolation we’ll use the parameters ex-
pressed in equations 2.1 and 2.2. The data labeled as ASCAT grid refers to the
original data, while WRF grid refers to the interpolated data.
We’ll compute these parameters for every time we apply the interpolation. The
next ﬁgures show the distribution of such parameters when computed for the
whole year.
Looking at the mean of the distribution of ∆A in ﬁgure 2.6 we can observe that
the interpolation shows good performance. The standard deviation shows that
the diﬀerence in average wind speed is generally conﬁned in a ±0.04 interval.
This result is not ideal, although its relative importance will be contextualized
further in the reading.
The distribution of RV AR shown in ﬁgure 2.7 presents a mean value slightly less
than 1, indicating that the interpolation generally slightly under predicts the
extremes of wind speed. Some information about the minimum and maximum
of the wind ﬁeld is therefore lost due to interpolation. The opposite is true when
this ratio is more than 1, where the interpolation over predicts the extremes.
Given the distribution shown, the latter is less likely.
==PAGE:20==
12
Data
Figure 2.6: Distribution for the interpolation error metric diﬀerence in average
wind speed for the ASCAT data. The ASCAT data on its original
grid is denoted as Ui, ASCAT grid while the interpolated ASCAT
data on the WRF grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid. The subscript
i refers to the temporal snapshot number.
Mean and standard
deviation for the distribution are shown in the upper-right corner.
The interpolation method is bilinear.
2.3.3
Aggregation and interpolation of WRF data onto the
ASCAT grid
The interpolation performance is again measured as in previous section. This
analysis is performed using data from the MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH en-
semble member. Since we’ll use equations 2.1 and 2.2 as presented, the data
labeled as ASCAT grid refers to the interpolated data, while WRF grid refers
to the original data. This will change the interpretation of our performance
parameters. This is particularly true for RVAR.
The mean and standard deviation of the diﬀerence of averages in ﬁgure 2.8 are
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Grid interpolation
13
Figure 2.7: Distribution for the interpolation error metric ratio of variance for
the ASCAT data. The ASCAT data on its original grid is denoted
as Ui, ASCAT grid while the interpolated ASCAT data on the WRF
grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid. The subscript i refers to the snap-
shot number. Mean and standard deviation for the distribution
are shown in the upper-right corner. The interpolation method is
bilinear.
comparable with those for the other interpolation choice in ﬁgure 2.6. The stan-
dard deviation of ∆A looks slightly bigger when interpolating the WRF data
onto the ASCAT grid, reﬂecting the eﬀect for which not all the WRF data is
used within the interpolation. Due to this eﬀect, it will randomly happen that
some of our interpolations are computed with higher than average (or lower
than average) wind speeds and therefore will over predict (or under predict) the
wind ﬁeld average. Regarding the ratio of variance RVAR presented in ﬁgure
2.9, the mean of its distribution is slightly higher than 1 indicating that again
the act of interpolation generally loses information about the extremes of the
wind ﬁeld. The standard deviation of this distribution is comparable with the
other interpolation choice in ﬁgure 2.7.
==PAGE:22==
14
Data
Figure 2.8: Distribution for the interpolation error metric diﬀerence in average
wind speed for the WRF data.
The WRF data on its original
grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid while the interpolated WRF data
on the ASCAT grid is denoted as Ui, ASCAT grid. The subscript
i refers to the snapshot number. Mean and standard deviation
for the distribution are shown in the upper-right corner.
The
interpolation method is bilinear.
2.3.4
Choice of interpolation grid
Given the results presented in the previous sections, it looks like interpolating
the ASCAT data onto the WRF grid is the choice that allows for the highest
interpolation performance.
This is based on the standard deviations for the
diﬀerence in averages in ﬁgures 2.6 and 2.8 (0.0399 and 0.0444 respectively),
with the interpolation of ASCAT data to WRF grid showing the smallest value.
This is also based on the means for the ratio of variance in ﬁgures 2.7 and 2.9
(0.984 and 1.052 respectively), with the interpolation of ASCAT data to WRF
grid showing the closest value to 1.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Grid interpolation
15
Figure 2.9: Distribution for the interpolation error metric ratio of variance for
the WRF data. The WRF data on its original grid is denoted as
Ui, W RF grid while the interpolated WRF data on the ASCAT grid
is denoted as Ui, ASCAT grid. The subscript i refers to the snapshot
number.
Mean and standard deviation for the distribution are
shown in the upper-right corner.
The interpolation method is
bilinear.
Having knowledge of the later sections, the diﬀerence in performance is not as
important as other considerations. This means that the suggestion in Statistical
methods in the atmospheric sciences, third edition based on the choice of inter-
polation grid alone does not ﬁnd justiﬁcation for this thesis.
(p. 357, Wilks,
2011)
2.3.5
Interpolation method
By interpolation method, we refer to the algorithm used to perform the inter-
polation. Due to the complexity of such algorithms we prefer to use a stan-
==PAGE:24==
16
Data
dard Matlab function called griddata (Mathworks, 2019a). The only choices of
method that this function allows that could be useful for our study are bilinear
and bicubic. Having presented the problems when interpolating the WRF data
onto the ASCAT grid, it is of doubt if a method that uses more predictor points
performs better. For clarity a bicubic method always uses more predictor points
than bilinear. (Mathworks, 2019b)
Since this study was performed on the UK domain and showed deﬁnitive results,
we are not going to replicate it for the North sea area. Speciﬁcally, only the sea
grid points at least 6 km away from the coast were taken into consideration.
This study was also only performed on the WRF data since we would expect a
higher inﬂuence from the interpolation method than on the ASCAT data.
Figure 2.10: Distribution for the interpolation error metric diﬀerence in av-
erage wind speed for the UK data using bilinear method. The
WRF data on its original grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid while
the interpolated WRF data on the ASCAT grid is denoted as
Ui, ASCAT grid. The subscript i refers to the snapshot number.
Mean and standard deviation for the distribution are shown in
the upper-right corner.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Grid interpolation
17
Figure 2.11: Distribution for the interpolation error metric diﬀerence in av-
erage wind speed for the UK data using bicubic method. The
WRF data on its original grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid while
the interpolated WRF data on the ASCAT grid is denoted as
Ui, ASCAT grid. The subscript i refers to the temporal snapshot
number. Mean and standard deviation for the distribution are
shown in the upper-right corner.
Figures 2.10 and 2.11 show the distribution of diﬀerence in average wind speed
for the UK domain for bilinear and bicubic methods respectively. The distribu-
tions present similar mean and standard deviation. The shape of the distribu-
tions visually look very similar and Gaussian distributed.
Figures 2.12 and 2.13 show the distributions of ratio of variance for the UK do-
main for bilinear and bicubic methods. Again the distribution look alike, with
very similar mean and standard deviation.
Given the absence of signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two interpolation meth-
ods, the bilinear method is preferred due to lower computational time.
Given the similarities between the grids for WRF data on UK and North Sea
domains we would expect to obtain analogous results for the WRF data on the
==PAGE:26==
18
Data
North Sea domain.
Figure 2.12: Distribution for the interpolation error metric ratio of variance
for the UK data using bilinear method. The WRF data on its
original grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid while the interpolated
WRF data on the ASCAT grid is denoted as Ui, ASCAT grid. The
subscript i refers to the temporal snapshot number. Mean and
standard deviation for the distribution are shown in the upper-
right corner.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Time interpolation
19
Figure 2.13: Distribution for the interpolation error metric ratio of variance
for the UK WRF data using bicubic method. The WRF data on
its original grid is denoted as Ui, W RF grid while the interpolated
WRF data on the ASCAT grid is denoted as Ui, ASCAT grid. The
subscript i refers to the temporal snapshot number. Mean and
standard deviation for the distribution are shown in the upper-
right corner.
2.4
Time interpolation
With time interpolation we have again the choice of interpolating the ASCAT
data onto the WRF time stamps or interpolating the WRF data onto the AS-
CAT time stamps, however in this case we only have one useful choice.
Due to how the ASCAT data is presented, we have a maximum of four mea-
surements per grid point, and this data is most often available unevenly during
the day.
On the other hand, the WRF data has reliable time stamps that are evenly
distributed, one data point per half hour. This brings us to a total of 48 data
==PAGE:28==
20
Data
per grid point per day.
Due to the interpolation algorithm and these considerations projecting the WRF
data onto the ASCAT time stamps is a far superior choice. (p. 57-58, Li and
Heap, 2008)
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Statistical analysis
3.1
Marginal statistics
By marginal statistic we refer to statistics obtained without applying any condi-
tion, that is using all available data. (After interpolations and considering only
the selected area in ﬁgure 2.5)
Marginal statistics will give us a basic understanding of the variables that we
are going to analyze further with conditional statistics.
3.1.1
Marginal statistics of wind speed
In order to characterize the wind speed for the ASCAT data and the WRF en-
semble members we are going to present the distributions of wind speed.
Figure 3.1 shows the marginal probability distribution function of wind speed
for the ASCAT data, WRF ensemble members MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH
(base run, red line) and MYNN-MO-OSTIA-NOAH (production run, yellow
line). The bin width for these distributions is about 0.34 [m · s−1]. The distri-
butions are plotted from the 0.01 quantile to the 0.99 quantile.
From ﬁgure 3.1 the diﬀerences between the ASCAT data and the ensembles are
most noticeable in the ranges of wind speed from about 4.2 [m · s−1] to about
9 [m · s−1].
Both wind speed distributions from the ensemble members diﬀer from the AS-
CAT wind speed distribution near the peak of the distribution and overestimate
==PAGE:30==
22
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.1: Marginal distributions of wind speed for the ASCAT data and the
ensembles members MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH and MYNN-
MO-OSTIA-NOAH. The distributions are shown from the 0.05
quantile to the 0.95 quantile.
it.
Compared to each other, the production run overestimates wind speeds from
7.5 [m · s−1] to 9 [m · s−1], while the other ranges of wind speeds are underesti-
mated.
The diﬀerence between the ensemble members can be traced to the surface layer
scheme, MYNN for the base run and MO for the production run.
3.1.2
Marginal statistics of wind direction
To give a general understanding when conditioning on wind direction we present
the probability of occurrence for each wind direction. Note that to facilitate the
reading of subsequent plots, the wind direction has been divided into four in-
tervals, one for each cardinal direction and spawning 90◦each. The directions
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Marginal statistics
23
are deﬁned with 0◦representing winds coming from North and 90◦representing
winds coming from East.
Figure 3.2 shows the probability of occurrence of wind directions for the en-
semble member MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. The most common direction is
West and followed by South, North and lastly East.
All the ensembles present a fairly similar behaviour for wind direction.
Figure 3.2: Probability of occurrence for wind direction, ensemble member is
MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. Showing one sector per cardinal
directions due to similarity with other ﬁgures.
3.1.3
Marginal statistics of inverse Obukhov length
The Obukhov length (Obukhov, 1971) can be interpreted as a measure of
buoyancy. The atmospheric stability is related to buoyancy eﬀects and there-
fore the the Obukhov length. Unstable atmospheric conditions are character-
ized by negative Obukhov length and stable atmospheric conditions when the
==PAGE:32==
24
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.3: Probability of occurrence for wind direction, ensemble member is
MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. Showing the commonly used 12
sectors.
Obukhov length is positive. Studying the atmospheric conditions with the in-
verse Obukhov length (1/L) is generally more convenient, and neutral atmo-
spheric conditions are characterized when the latter value is close to 0 (Berg
et al., 2017).
Figure 3.4 shows the marginal pdf of inverse Obukhov length for the ensem-
ble member MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. The distribution presents a peak
around zero and the tails are not symmetrical with the tail on the negative side
being bulkier. This indicates that unstable conditions are more prominent than
stable conditions as one can expect from the sea surface 1.
1The relative high heat capacity of water makes so that the water is still generally warmer
than air overnight, keeping the heat ﬂux directed towards the atmosphere and therefore cre-
ating unstable conditions. During the day both land and sea surfaces are generally warmer
that the air due to the sun’s heating.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Conditional statistics
25
Figure 3.4: Marginal distribution of inverse Obukhov length for the ensemble
MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. This typical shape is shared for
all ensemble members.
3.2
Conditional statistics
By conditional statistics we refer to statistics obtained when analyzing only a
fraction of the available data. (After interpolations and considering only the
selected area in ﬁgure 2.5)
Following e.g. Pope (2000) or Berg et al. (2017) we deﬁne the conditional pdf
of X given Y :
f(x | Y )
(3.1)
From a practical standpoint this is equivalent to compute the pdf of X selecting
only values of X that where obtained when y0 < Y ≤y1.
As shown in later sections the values for y0 and y1 will be chosen to represent
and isolate a deﬁned event, such as stable atmospheric conditions or Easterly
winds.
To give an additional perspective on the deﬁnition, the marginal pdf would be
deﬁned as in 3.1 with −∞< Y ≤+∞.
==PAGE:34==
26
Statistical analysis
3.2.1
Deﬁnition of ‘error’ metrics
The objective of the WRF error metrics is to describe and summarize the dif-
ferences between the wind speeds measured by the ASCAT satellites and the
wind speeds simulated by a WRF ensemble member.
To this end we deﬁne the raw error and time averaged error respectively as:
RE |x,y,t ≡(Uw −Ua) |x,y,t
(3.2a)
TAE |x,y ≡

⟨Uw⟩t −⟨Ua⟩t

x,y
(3.2b)
Following the deﬁnitions in equations 3.2 we’ll have one raw error per measure-
ment point and one time averaged error per grid point.
The time averaged error has been chosen as a bias metric, while the raw error
has been chosen as an accuracy metric, with deﬁnitions of bias and accuracy as
in p. 304, Wilks (2011)
More speciﬁcally, the raw error represents the correspondence between individ-
ual simulations and measurements while the time averaged error represents the
correspondence between average simulations and measurements.
The choice for the TAE also reﬂects a possible error metric when evaluating the
mean annual wind speed for a given grid cell.
These error metrics will be analyzed primarily in terms of mean and standard
deviation. The mean can reveal any systematic diﬀerence, while the standard
deviation gives information about how the error metric is consistently close to
the mean value. The notation ⟨RE⟩xy,t indicates the mean of RE over all grid
point and all times, while σRExy,t indicates the standard deviation of RE over
all grid points and all times. The analogous is true for TAE, but the subscript
will be xy to indicate that the statistic is computed over all grid points.
3.2.2
Conditioning over correlation
One common problem with WRF runs is the presence of phase shift, for which
the simulation can predict an event before or after its observation or at a slightly
diﬀerent coordinate.
Understanding this eﬀect is the ﬁrst objective of our analysis of WRF errors.
This is to ensure that the diﬀerences between measurements and simulations is
not due to a simple space and time mismatch.
The ﬁrst step would be to ﬁnd a quantity to describe the spatial mismatch
between measurements and simulations. Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient has
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Conditional statistics
27
been chosen to describe the correlation (p. 50, Wilks, 2011).
An equivalent
expression is presented below.
rAW =
1
n −1
n
X
i=1
ai −µa
σa
wi −µw
σw

(3.3)
Where a represents the ASCAT wind speeds, w the WRF wind speeds, µ repre-
sents the mean, σ is the standard deviation and n is the sample size. Note that
the Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient is computed for each swath (ﬁgure 2.2) and
is only a function of time. For clarity, rAW = +1 implies a linear correlation
between the two variables, which we interpret as no spatial mismatch. Figure
3.5 shows the distribution of correlation coeﬃcient for the ensemble member
MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH, while ﬁgure 3.6 shows the mean correlation co-
eﬃcient for each ensemble member.
Figure 3.5: Distribution of Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient for the ensemble
member MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. Other ensemble members
show a similar distribution, meaning that phase shift is observed
for all simulations.
The distribution of correlation coeﬃcient in ﬁgure 3.5 shows that the mode falls
==PAGE:36==
28
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.6: Mean Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient for each ensemble member.
close to 1 and that the distribution is negatively skewed. All ensemble members
will show this behaviour. From ﬁgure 3.6 all ensemble members show a mean
correlation coeﬃcient between 0.62 and 0.66. These results conﬁrm that phase
shift are present for all ensemble members, therefore we continue our analysis
by computing the WRF error metrics when conditioning on the correlation co-
eﬃcient. The idea is to observe a reduction in error metrics when excluding less
correlated data. Figure 3.7 shows diﬀerent distributions of RE when conditioned
on diﬀerent thresholds of correlation coeﬃcient. The distributions show similar
mean values but diﬀerent standard deviation. Figure 3.8 shows the distributions
of TAE when conditioned on correlation coeﬃcient. The mean is identical to
ﬁgure 3.7 while the standard deviation doesn’t show the same reduction.
The resulting means and standard deviations of the distributions of RE for
each ensemble member are compared in ﬁgures 3.9 and 3.10. Figures 3.11 and
3.12 show the same information as in ﬁgures 3.9 and 3.10 respectively, but data
from diﬀerent ensemble members are separated. From these ﬁgures we can see
that removing lesser correlated snapshots will generally bring this mean RE to
be more negative. This contradicts the initial idea that we’ll observe a reduction
in error metric.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Conditional statistics
29
Figure 3.7: Distributions of raw error conditioned on correlation coeﬃcient for
the ensemble member MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH. The legend
states the threshold for the correlation coeﬃcient and the mean
and standard deviation for the distributions. Note that the stan-
dard deviation is decreasing when excluding less correlated data.
A possible explanation resides in noticing how the correlation coeﬃcient is com-
puted in equation 3.3. Since the correlation coeﬃcient doesn’t take into account
the diﬀerence in mean value for the two signals, we wouldn’t expect to neces-
sarily decrease mean RE.
Instead, we would expect to decrease the RE standard deviation as a conse-
quence of the removal of the highest deviations from the means. This is shown
in ﬁgure 3.10 and 3.12. Given the results in this section, the raw error will
not be analyzed when conditioning over wind speed, inverse Obukhov length or
wind direction. The time averaged error will always be analyzed instead. We’ll
justify this choice by remembering the following. Firstly the mean RE and TAE
coincide and secondly it is not necessarily true that improving the RE will also
improve the TAE, as shown by the standard deviation of the error metrics in
ﬁgures 3.7 and 3.8. The latter result reinforces the idea that if we use the WRF
==PAGE:38==
30
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.8: Distributions of time averaged error conditioned on correlation co-
eﬃcient for the ensemble member MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH.
The legend states the threshold for the correlation coeﬃcient and
the mean and standard deviation for the distributions. Note that
the standard deviation is not decreasing when excluding less cor-
related data.
data to compute any quantity such as the mean annual wind speed or the pa-
rameters of a Weibull distribution, we’ll need a new error metric and a new
analysis. Since the TAE is of practical use by evaluating the errors of a value
that characterizes a wind climate, only this error metric is analyzed thought the
whole thesis.
Given the results shown we can conclude that conditioning over spatial correla-
tion has a signiﬁcant impact on the standard deviation of RE (ﬁgures 3.7, 3.10
and 3.12) but not on the standard deviation of TAE (ﬁgure 3.8). The mean RE
and mean TAE are also aﬀected, but the diﬀerences don’t necessarily reﬂect an
improvement (ﬁgures 3.9 and 3.11). This diﬀerence is also not supported by a
theoretical analysis of the deﬁnition of the coeﬃcient (equation 3.3).
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Conditional statistics
31
Figure 3.9: Mean raw error conditioned on correlation coeﬃcient. The lines
group the values for each condition, the latter being shown in the
legend.
==PAGE:40==
32
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.10: Standard deviation of raw error conditioned on correlation coef-
ﬁcient. The lines group the values for each condition, the latter
being shown in the legend. The standard deviation is computed
over all grid points and over all times.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Conditional statistics
33
Figure 3.11: Mean raw error conditioned on correlation coeﬃcient. The lines
group the values for each ensemble member to show the relation
between mean raw error and correlation coeﬃcient threshold.
==PAGE:42==
34
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.12: Standard deviation of raw error conditioned on correlation co-
eﬃcient. The lines group the values for each ensemble member
to show the relation between standard deviation of raw error
and correlation coeﬃcient threshold. The standard deviation is
computed over all grid points and over all times.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Conditional statistics
35
3.2.3
Conditioning over wind speed
The conditioning on WRF wind speed follows a splicing dictated by a typical
power curve of a wind turbine. Mainly we assume a cut-in wind speed of 4 m/s,
nominal wind speed at 11 m/s and cut-out wind speed at 25 m/s. The splicing
is concentrated below nominal wind speed.
Wind speeds above nominal are
considered as a single set of conditions. Due to the unknown uncertainty on
WRF wind speed the nominal and cut-out wind speed have been transposed by
+1 m/s.
Figure 3.13 shows the mean TAE for the ensemble members. A clear pattern
is visible, with mean TAE being more negative when conditioning on lower
wind speeds. Knowing that lower wind speeds are observed more frequently
with unstable conditions (p. 81-83, Berg et al., 2017), this point toward more
negative mean TAE in unstable conditions than with stable conditions. Figure
3.14 shows the dependence of mean TAE with wind speed.
Figure 3.13: Mean TAE conditioned on wind speed for each ensemble member.
The conditional variable UW RF refers to the wind speed from the
WRF data, diﬀerent for each ensemble member. The lines divide
the results per sets of conditions, the latter shown in the legend.
==PAGE:44==
36
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.14: Mean TAE conditioned on wind speed for each ensemble mem-
ber. The conditional variable is wind speed from the WRF data.
The lines divide the results per ensemble member, the ensemble
members name are shown in the legend.
Given that we observe that the mean TAE shows a semi-linear dependence on
wind speed, it is useful to analyze this error metric when normalizing on wind
speed. Figure 3.15 shows the mean normalized TAE for each ensemble member.
We deﬁne the quantity in ﬁgure 3.15 as follows.
NTAE |x,y ≡TAE
⟨Ua⟩t

x,y
(3.4)
Where ⟨Ua⟩t refers to the mean wind speed for ASCAT data for a given grid
point. All ensemble members shows that the normalized mean TAE doesn’t
increase past 11 [m · s−1] with exception for the ensemble members ACM-PX-
OSTIA-RUC and YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC. The relative steepness of this nor-
malized error metric at low wind speeds suggests that it is mostly aﬀected by
unstable conditions.
Figure 3.16 shows the mean NTAE weighted over the WRF wind speed fre-
quency of occurrence. NCOND refers to the number of observations of WRF
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Conditional statistics
37
Figure 3.15: Mean TAE normalized by the time averaged wind speed for the
ASCAT data. For each grid point the respective TAE has been
divided by the corresponding average wind speed for the ASCAT
data.
wind speed for each condition described in the legend. NT OT refers to the total
number of observations of WRF wind speed. From this ﬁgure we can observe
the relative weight of each condition over the NTAE.
From ﬁgure 3.16 we can see that ensemble member MYJ-MO-OSTIA-NOAH
presents the biggest inﬂuence over NTAE for lower wind speeds, point toward
some discrepancies with the ASCAT data while computing over unstable at-
mospheric conditions. This behaviour is not observed when compared with the
ensemble member YSU-MM5-OSTIA-NOAH, meaning that the problem can be
linked with the PBL scheme MYJ but not with the surface layer scheme MO
given the similarities between MYNN-MO-OSTIA-NOAH and MYNN-MM5-
OSTIA-NOAH. The ensemble member YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC presents the
same problem for the highest wind speeds.
A comparison with the ensem-
ble members YSU-MM5-OSTIA-NOAH restricts the problem to the land sur-
face scheme RUC. When compared with the ensemble member MYNN-MYNN-
OSTIA-RUC the land surface scheme RUC doesn’t cause the same problem.
==PAGE:46==
38
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.16: The mean normalized TAE has been weighted on frequency of oc-
currence for each condition. From the ﬁgure we can compare the
relative eﬀects of each condition over the marginal mean NTAE.
Figure 3.17 shows the standard deviation of TAE when conditioning over WRF
wind speeds. The values are limited between 0.1 [m · s−1] and 0.21 [m · s−1],
smaller than the related means of TAE shown in ﬁgure 3.13.
The standard
deviation of TAE decreases with WRF wind speed and shows the lower standard
deviation for the marginal statistics. Comparing the ensemble members MYNN-
MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH and MYNN-MYNN-OISST-NOAH, the OISST product
causes an increase in standard deviation of TAE for marginal statistics and wind
speeds Uw ≤8.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Conditional statistics
39
Figure 3.17: Standard deviation of TAE conditioned on WRF wind speeds,
showing negative correlation with WRF wind speeds. The stan-
dard deviation is computed over all grid points.
3.2.4
Conditioning over inverse Obukhov length
From the results shown in the previous section diﬀerences in error metrics where
observed for diﬀerent WRF wind speeds.
Knowing the relation between at-
mospheric conditions and wind speed (p. 81-83, Berg et al., 2017), we would
expect to observe diﬀerences in error metrics when conditioning over the in-
verse Obukhov length as well. The conditions have been deﬁned following the
guidelines from the course micrometeorology for wind energy and the limits of
0.05 < 1/L ≤0.0025, 0.0025 < 1/L ≤−0.0025 and −0.0025 < 1/L ≤−0.05
describe the conditions for stable, neutral and unstable conditions respectively.
Atmospheric conditions outside these limits will be referred to as very stable
and very unstable. Since the ASCAT data assumes neutral stability conditions
(p. 39, EUMETSAT, 2015), we expect to observe a similar pattern to ﬁgure 3.13,
with lower ⟨TAE⟩xy for unstable conditions (where ASCAT overestimates) and
higher ⟨TAE⟩xy for stable conditions (where ASCAT underestimates). Figure
==PAGE:48==
40
Statistical analysis
3.18 shows the mean TAE for the ensemble members when conditioned on 1/L.
Analyzing the results for neutral conditions (purple line in ﬁgure 3.18) it is clear
Figure 3.18: Mean TAE conditioned on 1/L for each ensemble member. Each
line represents a condition with the blue line representing the
marginal statistics.
Very stable and unstable conditions show
the worst mean TAE, while for neutral condition the mean TAE
shows that most ensemble members overestimate the ASCAT
data.
that the PBL scheme MYNN overestimate the wind speeds when compared to
the ASCAT data. This result is derived from the formulation of TAE (equation
3.2b) and knowing that the wind speeds from the ASCAT data assumes neutral
atmospheric conditions.
The mean TAE for very stable conditions (cyan line in ﬁgure 3.18) shows that
the WRF simulations greatly underestimate the wind speeds. We can explain
this behaviour by saying that the WRF simulations retain some mixing in stable
conditions. This will transfer more momentum vertically through the layer and
will result in a lower wind speed. Also, the assumption of neutral conditions for
the ASCAT data means that the measurements are already underestimated.
That said we would expect the WRF predictions over very unstable conditions
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Conditional statistics
41
to show less TAE, but we instead observe values between -0.5[m · s−1] and -1
[m · s−1]. Given the formulation of TAE (equation 3.2b) we are unsure if the
diﬀerences we observe are due to WRF underestimating or the ASCAT data
overestimating due to the assumption of neutral condition.
By looking at the stable and unstable conditions for ensemble members with
PBL scheme MYNN, the assumption of neutral conditions for the ASCAT data
seems to balance with the diﬀerences in WRF predictions.
Figure 3.19 shows the standard deviation of TAE conditioned on 1/L. Very
stable conditions present values greater than the means of TAE in ﬁgure 3.18.
Figure 3.19: Standard deviation of TAE conditioned over 1/L. Very stable
conditions results in higher deviations from the mean. The stan-
dard deviation is computed over all grid points.
To understand the relative eﬀect of each condition on the mean of marginal
TAE we multiply by the frequency of occurrence of each condition.
Figure 3.20 shows the normalized TAE for each condition and ensemble member.
Very stable conditions now result as having almost no inﬂuence over the mean
marginal TAE. Instead all ensemble member show a higher inﬂuence for neutral
conditions. Regarding the latter, the diﬀerences in ensemble members with the
==PAGE:50==
42
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.20: The mean TAE is multiplied by the frequency of occurrence of
the corresponding condition.
Very stable conditions shows no
contribution to the marginal mean TAE while neutral conditions
shows the highest contribution for almost all ensemble members.
PBL scheme MYNN are more evident than in ﬁgure 3.13. The only diﬀerence in
these two ﬁgures is the frequency of occurrence of the conditions on 1/L, mean-
ing that, for example, the WRF simulations predicts neutral conditions more
often for the MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-RUC than MYNN-MM5-OSTIA-NOAH.
3.2.5
Conditioning over wind direction
Wind direction is not a variable on which we would expect to ﬁnd any signiﬁcant
diﬀerence when conditioning our error metrics over it. Although not intended
to bear any results, this analysis instead shown some interesting behaviours of
the WRF simulations.
To ease the reading of the following ﬁgures, the conditions have been chosen to
reﬂect the four cardinal directions. The North is located at 0◦and East at 90◦.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 Conditional statistics
43
Figure 3.21 shows the mean TAE conditioned over WRF wind direction.
From easterly directions we observe a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in mean TAE for
Figure 3.21: Mean TAE conditioned on WRF wind direction.
Easterly di-
rections show a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent mean TAE for ensemble
members with PBL scheme MYNN.
all ensemble member with PBL scheme MYNN. The reason could be related
to why the wind blows from east in the North sea region. The wind comes
from east in the rare but persistent occasions for which high pressure system is
located above Denmark. In this case a WRF spatial phase shift could explain
the diﬀerences. A second explanation could be found by observing that it is
possible that diﬀerent wind directions will give rise to diﬀerent wind speeds,
and therefore diﬀerent mean TAE by the relation between TAE and WRF wind
speed as shown in ﬁgures 3.13 and 3.14. To contextualize the second explana-
tion we show the mean wind speed for each wind direction condition and each
ensemble member. This result is visible in ﬁgure 3.22. From ﬁgure 3.22 we
can see how the mean WRF wind speed changes with direction. It is not true
that higher mean wind speeds will result in higher mean TAE, although this
result can be observed for single conditions. The latter argument also points
toward a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the directions other than wind speed. A
==PAGE:52==
44
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.22: Mean WRF wind speed conditioned on WRF wind direction as a
function of mean TAE. The ﬁgure shows a clear relation between
mean WRF wind speed and mean TAE when conditioned on
wind direction.
third explanation could be made observing that winds from easterly directions
are the closest to land (Denmark, Norway). If that would be the case, a study
of the TAE conditioned on both direction and spatial location will reveal the
diﬀerences.
To this end we divide the area of interest shown in ﬁgure 2.5 in a East area
and a West area. The whole area of interest will be called full area. The East
area covers a quarter of the full area, while the West are the remaining three
quarters. Figure 3.23 shows the partitioning of the area, with the yellow area
representing the East area and green representing the West area. Condition-
ing on these areas and on wind direction we can isolate the spatial eﬀects for
easterly winds. Figure 3.24 shows the mean TAE computed on the full, East
or West area for all directions (marginal) or the east direction only. In ﬁgure
3.24 almost all ensemble members show a further reduction in mean TAE with
exception of MYJ-MO-OSTIA-NOAH, MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-RUC and YSU-
MM5-OSTIA-RUC.
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Conditional statistics
45
Figure 3.23: The selected area of interest in ﬁgure 2.5 has been divided into
two smaller areas, of which one (yellow) is facing East to study
the relation between distance from coast and mean TAE for east-
erly winds.
This could show inconsistency with the reasoning, and one can show that the
presence of land should not interfere with the development of the surface bound-
ary layer (Troen and Petersen, 1989).
Ultimately we’ll analyze the standard deviation of TAE, shown in ﬁgure 3.25.
This ﬁgure shows a similar behaviour for most ensemble members with the
highest values for easterly winds and lowest for winds from the West.
The
land surface scheme RUC seems appears correlated with higher standard de-
viations for northern winds.
This can be checked by comparing the ensem-
ble members MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-RUC with MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH,
and YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC with YSU-MM5-OSTIA-NOAH.
==PAGE:54==
46
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.24: Mean TAE when conditioned on east direction and areas as
shown in ﬁgure 3.23. Most ensemble members present a further
reduction of mean TAE when conditioning on the East area.
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Conditional statistics
47
Figure 3.25: Standard deviation of TAE when conditioned on WRF wind di-
rection. The ensemble members show a similar behaviour. The
standard deviation is computed over all grid points.
==PAGE:56==
48
Statistical analysis
3.3
Correction of ASCAT data
When presenting the ASCAT wind speeds we’ve also noted that these data
are obtained assuming neutral wind conditions.
This assumption limits our
understanding of the error metrics, especially when conditioning on stability.
The neutral logarithmic wind proﬁle can be written as:
u(z) = u⋆
k log
 z
z0

(3.5)
Where u(z) is the wind speed, u⋆represent friction velocity (from the WRF
simulations), z measures height from the surface, z0 is the surface roughness
length and k is the Von K´arm´an constant k ≈0.4.
Following the Monin-Obukhov similarity theory, to include stability eﬀects a
stability correction function Ψm( z
L) is added to the neutral logarithmic law:
u(z) = u⋆
k
h
log
 z
z0

+ Ψm
 z
L
i
(3.6)
By reworking the equations 3.5 and 3.6 we get the formulation for the stability
correction as:
UA, corrected = UA −u⋆
k ∗Ψm
 z
L

(3.7)
Several corrections have been proposed to take into consideration stability eﬀects
(Holtslag et al., 2014). We’ll use the formulations: (Beljaars and Holtslag, 1991)
For unstable conditions:
−0.1 < 1
L ≤0
Ψm
 z
L

= 2 ∗log
1 + x
2

+ log
1 + x2
2

−2 ∗arctan(x) + π/2
(3.8a)
x =

1 −γ ∗z
L
1/4
(3.8b)
With γ = 16. For stable conditions:
Ψm
 z
L

= −β
 z
L

; 0 < 1
L < 0.1
(3.9)
With β = 4.7.
This correction is based on values of 1/L from the WRF simulations, while
the height from the surface is z = 10 m. The surface roughness length z0 is
computed using the following formulation (p. 77, Berg et al., 2017).
z0 = Acu2
⋆
g
(3.10)
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Correction of ASCAT data
49
Where the dimensionless Charnock constant Ac = 0.0162, u⋆is the friction
velocity (from WRF simulations) and g is the acceleration of gravity g = 9.81 [m·
s−2]. Since the correction is based on variables from the ensemble members, we’ll
obtain a diﬀerent correction for the ASCAT data for each ensemble member. An
example of distribution of correction is given if ﬁgure 3.26, where the quantity
−u⋆
k ∗Ψm

z
L

is shown to reﬂect the formulation in equation 3.7.
Figure 3.26: Distribution of the stability correction −u⋆
k ∗Ψm

z
L

as shown
in equation 3.6 for the ASCAT data. The legend shows mean
and standard deviation.
The distribution in ﬁgure 3.26 shows a peak over neutral conditions, where the
correction approaches zero. The distribution also shows a higher density for
negative values in accordance with the higher density for unstable conditions in
ﬁgure 3.4.
With the stability corrected ASCAT data we can repeat our analysis of the error
metrics for the WRF data against the corrected ASCAT data.
Figure 3.27 shows the mean −u⋆
k ∗Ψm

z
L

conditioned on inverse Obukhov
==PAGE:58==
50
Statistical analysis
length. From this ﬁgure the correction can be understood as a function of 1/L.
We observe that the correction doesn’t aﬀect neutral winds, instead increases
neutral wind speeds in stable conditions and decreases neutral wind speeds in
unstable conditions. The ﬁrst condition −0.1 < 1/L ≤0.1 can be interpreted as
marginal since the values of ASCAT data associated with values of 1/L outside
these limits are discarded.
Figure 3.27: Mean stability correction conditioned on 1/L. Neutral winds are
unaﬀected by the correction (purple line) while very stable and
very unstable conditions (cyan and red lines) show the highest
and lowest mean correction respectively.
Figure 3.28 shows the mean −u⋆
k ∗Ψm

z
L

conditioned on WRF wind speed.
From this ﬁgure we can observe that the correction is negative for all wind
speed conditions, but relatively smaller than in ﬁgure 3.27 (all the conditioned
values are contained between the blue and purple line shown in ﬁgure 3.27). A
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Correction of ASCAT data
51
distinct pattern is present, with lower wind speeds showing lower values for the
correction.
Figure 3.28: Mean stability correction conditioned on WRF wind speed. The
mean correction increases with WRF wind speed for all ensemble
members.
Figure 3.29 shows the mean −u⋆
k ∗Ψm

z
L

conditioned on WRF wind speed. The
results for the correction conditioned on wind direction are not to be compared
with those obtained for mean TAE, since this result is based only on values of
1/L. Instead, it doesn’t look like the easterly winds are aﬀected in a diﬀerent
way than the other directions.
==PAGE:60==
52
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.29: Mean stability correction conditioned on WRF wind direction. A
pattern is clearly visible, with mean stability correction showing
a dependence on WRF wind direction.
3.4
Conditional statistics with stability corrected
ASCAT data
We are now going to repeat the same procedure to obtain the conditional statis-
tics for the error metrics as previous sections, but with corrected ASCAT data.
Figure 3.30 shows the mean TAE when conditioning over WRF wind speed and
comparing against the corrected ASCAT data. The values in this ﬁgure look
very similar with those obtained without the corrected ASCAT data (ﬁgure 3.13.
This is since the values for the correction in ﬁgure 3.28 are relatively small in
comparison.
Given this result in ﬁgure 3.30, WRF for all conﬁgurations considered, overes-
==PAGE:61==
3.4 Conditional statistics with stability corrected ASCAT data
53
Figure 3.30: Mean TAE conditioned on WRF wind speed and computed with
corrected ASCAT data.
The WRF simulations are shown to
overestimate the ASCAT data on almost all conditions.
timates the mean winds over 6 [m · s−1] compared to ASCAT. Figure 3.30 also
shows that ensemble variability is mostly due to PBL scheme. Figure 3.31 shows
the mean TAE conditioned on 1/L and computed with the corrected ASCAT
data. Compared with ﬁgure 3.18 we observe a signiﬁcant improvement for very
unstable conditions for all ensemble members. Looking at ﬁgure 3.27 the mean
TAE for this condition increases (due to the negative sign in equation 3.2b).
This increase in mean TAE is also present for unstable conditions, but doesn’t
reﬂect in an improvement over mean TAE (with exception for the ensemble
member MYJ-MO-OSTIA-NOAH). A similar argument is valid for stable and
very stable conditions, with mean TAE improving for all ensemble members
over stable conditions but decreasing in performance for very stable conditions.
Figure 3.32 shows the mean TAE conditioned on wind direction and computed
with the corrected ASCAT data. Northern winds show a signiﬁcantly higher
mean TAE when compared with the non corrected ASCAT data in ﬁgure 3.21.
Easterly winds show an increase in mean TAE. These two directions are also
==PAGE:62==
54
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.31: Mean TAE conditioned over 1/L and computed with corrected
ASCAT data. The correction changed the relation between sta-
bility and mean TAE, with very unstable conditions showing the
highest change.
the most aﬀected by the correction as shown in ﬁgure 3.29.
The standard deviation of TAE is also found to change after the correction of
ASCAT data, although the diﬀerences are small. The most meaningful diﬀerence
is observed for the marginal standard deviations of TAE, shown in ﬁgure 3.33.
The average diﬀerence in standard deviations is 0.015[m · s−1], or an average of
13% decrease compared to the uncorrected data.
==PAGE:63==
3.4 Conditional statistics with stability corrected ASCAT data
55
Figure 3.32: Mean TAE conditioned over WRF wind direction and computed
with corrected ASCAT data. The correction improves the mean
TAE for easterly winds and decreases its performance for north-
ern winds.
==PAGE:64==
56
Statistical analysis
Figure 3.33: The marginal standard deviations of TAE are shown for each
ensemble member prior and after correction of ASCAT data. The
average diﬀerence in standard deviations is 0.015[m · s−1].
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4
Discussion
This thesis deﬁned and analyzed diﬀerent error metrics for 9 WRF ensemble
members against ASCAT measurements, over a selected area of interest and
using conditional statistics.
Initially we deﬁned an interpolation procedure.
This was done with the deﬁnition of two interpolation error metrics and the
comparison of the latter for the various choices for the interpolation (space
and time grid, method). To study the WRF errors we deﬁned and analyzed
two error metrics. These error metrics are then conditioned over correlation
(between WRF and ASCAT wind speed ﬁelds) and WRF wind speed, inverse
Obukhov length and wind direction. A stability correction for the ASCAT data
is presented and then the error metrics are analyzed again with the corrected
ASCAT data.
The interpolation procedure was chosen based on consideration of possible choices
of interpolation spatial and temporal grid, and interpolation method. To this
end two interpolation error metrics are deﬁned, with the diﬀerence in average
(∆A, deﬁned in equation 2.1) describing the overestimation or underestimation
of the highest or lowest wind speeds and the ratio of variance (RVAR, deﬁned in
equation 2.2) measuring the overestimation or underestimation of both highest
and lowest wind speeds.
The choice of interpolation grid is based on the results for the interpolation
error metrics over the selected area of the North sea domain (ﬁgure 2.5). The
two possible choices are to interpolate the ASCAT data onto the WRF grid or
to interpolate the WRF data onto the ASCAT grid. The results show a higher
standard deviation of ∆A when interpolating the WRF data onto the ASCAT
grid and similar means for ∆A for both choices (ﬁgures 2.6 and 2.8). The study
==PAGE:66==
58
Discussion
over RVAR shows a higher mean RVAR when interpolating the WRF data onto
the ASCAT grid, although both choices result in an underestimation of the
highest and lowest wind speeds. The standard deviations for RVAR are very
similar for both choices (ﬁgures 2.7 and 2.9). Therefore the interpolation error
metrics indicate a slightly better performance when interpolating the ASCAT
data onto the WRF grid.
The time interpolation oﬀers again the choice of interpolating the ASCAT data
onto the WRF time stamps or the WRF data onto the ASCAT time stamps.
Since the ASCAT data oﬀers a maximum of 4 measurements per day with the
latter being scattered unevenly during the day, while the WRF data presents
one data point per half hour (48 total per day) we prefer to interpolate the
WRF data onto the ASCAT time stamps (p. 57-58, Li and Heap, 2008).
The choice of interpolation method is based on the data from the UK domain,
selecting only grid points at least 6 km away from land. When comparing results
from each interpolation method, the choices of bilinear and bicubic show very
similar distributions for ∆A and RVAR (ﬁgures 2.10, 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13). We’ll
therefore prefer the bilinear method due to lower computational time. Given the
results for grid interpolation, time interpolation and interpolation method, we
chose to interpolate the WRF data onto the ASCAT grid and time stamps using
the bilinear method, leaving the ASCAT data untouched by the interpolation.
When deﬁning the error metrics, we introduce the raw error (RE, equation 3.2a)
as a metric to represent the correspondence between individual simulations and
measurements and the time-averaged error (TAE, equation 3.2b) to represent
the correspondence between average simulations and measurements.
The eﬀects of WRF phase shift are represented by the (Pearson) correlation
coeﬃcient (equation 3.3) and the error metrics are analyzed when conditioning
over this coeﬃcient. The results for ensemble MYNN-MYNN-OSTIA-NOAH in
ﬁgures 3.7 and 3.8 show that while the means for RE and TAE are identical,
the standard deviations for their distributions diﬀers. Speciﬁcally the σRExy,t
is always one order of magnitude higher than the mean (σRExy,t > ⟨RE⟩xy,t),
while the σT AExy is always lower than its mean (σT AExy < ⟨TAE⟩xy), with
comparable order of magnitude. Further analysis for RE when conditioning on
correlation coeﬃcient is presented in ﬁgures 3.9 and 3.10, where we can observe
again a higher σRExy,t than ⟨RE⟩xy,t for all ensemble members. These ﬁrst
results shows a clear diﬀerence between the two error metrics, suggesting that
the uncertainties must be derived (and are therefore applicable) with regard
to a speciﬁc error metric. Figures 3.10 and 3.12 also show that the σRExy,t
lowers consistently when conditioning over higher thresholds for the correlation
coeﬃcient, while ﬁgure 3.11 shows that the relation between mean RE and
correlation coeﬃcient threshold is not as clear.
==PAGE:67==
59
When conditioning TAE over WRF wind speed, we observe that its mean shows
a positive correlation with WRF wind speed (ﬁgures 3.13 and 3.14). A physical
interpretation of the phenomena suggests also a correlation between mean TAE
and atmospheric stability, with lower mean TAE for unstable conditions and
higher mean TAE for stable conditions. This interpretation is supported when
conditioning over 1/L in ﬁgure 3.18 with exception for the ensemble members
driven by the PBL scheme MYNN, that show no signiﬁcant diﬀerence instead.
Given the monotonic relation between TAE and WRF wind speed in ﬁgure
3.14, the TAE has been normalized over the mean ASCAT wind speed per grid
point (NTAE, deﬁned in equation 3.4) in ﬁgure 3.15.
This shows a relative
increase in TAE until 9 [m · s−1] followed by a relative decrease in TAE, for all
ensemble members with exception of YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC and ACM-PX-
OSTIA-RUC. Generally the NTAE results conﬁned between −5% and +5%.
The NTAE has then been weighted on frequency of occurrence of the WRF
wind speed in ﬁgure 3.16. From this result we can observe that lower wind
speeds have a greater impact over the mean NTAE for the ensemble MYJ-MO-
OSTIA-NOAH and this diﬀerent result can be traced to the PBL scheme MYJ.
The ensemble member YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC presents the same problem for
higher wind speeds, and this result can be attributed to the surface scheme
RUC.
A correspondence between WRF wind speed and σT AExy is shown in ﬁgure
3.17, although not consistent for every ensemble member. Again the σT AExy
results smaller than ⟨TAE⟩xy, but signiﬁcant diﬀerences are noted for smaller
WRF wind speeds when compared to the marginal counterpart.
The conditioning of TAE over inverse Obukhov length is performed to separate
the eﬀects of diﬀerent stability conditions. The mean TAE shown in ﬁgure 3.18
shows a consistent overestimation of the ASCAT wind speeds for the ensemble
members driven by the PBL scheme MYNN. For these ensemble members we
also observe similar mean TAE for stable and unstable conditions. The mean
TAE over very stable and very unstable conditions results in a underestimation
of ASCAT wind speeds for all ensembles. The σT AExy shows a value comparable
with ⟨TAE⟩xy for very stable conditions, and generally half of ⟨TAE⟩xy for very
unstable conditions. The σT AExy is higher than its marginal value for stable
conditions and comparable with its marginal value for neutral and unstable
conditions. The results obtained for stable conditions could be explained with
the tendency of WRF to overestimate the momentum transfer between layers
when in stable conditions, while the result over very stable conditions could be
explained by the assumption of neutral conditions for the ASCAT data. We
can than generalize these results in terms of uncertainty, with lower uncertainty
for the WRF mean annual wind speed over neutral and unstable conditions.
In ﬁgure 3.20 we show the mean TAE weighted on frequency of occurrence for
the stability classes. Very stable conditions don’t present any inﬂuence over the
marginal value, with neutral condition inﬂuencing the most for the ensemble
==PAGE:68==
60
Discussion
members driven by the PBL scheme MYNN and YSU.
The conditioning of TAE over WRF wind direction shows a unexpected result
for Easterly winds in ﬁgure 3.21, while other directions show comparable re-
sults. This low value for mean TAE is analyzed in ﬁgure 3.24 and a further
decrease of mean TAE is observed when conditioning over grid points closer
to land for almost all ensemble members. The presence of land up-hill could
explain this lower mean TAE, but this reasoning is shown to be inconsistent for
all ensembles. The σT AExy is found to be correlated to the WRF wind direction
in ﬁgure 3.25, although this correlation is not clear for some ensemble members
(ACM-PX-OSTIA-RUC and YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC). An ensemble to ensem-
ble comparison shows that the surface scheme RUC is responsible for higher
standard deviations of TAE for Northern winds. To interpret these results in
terms of uncertainty, we argue that the higher uncertainty for WRF mean an-
nual wind speed is presented for Easterly winds, with the surface scheme RUC
introducing more uncertainty for Northern winds.
Following the results when conditioning over 1/L, we implement a stability cor-
rection function for the ASCAT data in equations 3.8a and 3.9. This correction
allows us to analyze the error metrics without the assumption of neutral stability
for the ASCAT data. When conditioning TAE over WRF wind speed in ﬁgure
3.30, we can observe that the WRF simulations overestimate the corrected wind
speeds for almost all wind speed ranges. The conditioning over 1/L in ﬁgure
3.31 shows a distinct diﬀerence for mean TAE in stable and unstable conditions,
where the previous results without the correction in ﬁgure 3.18 shows little dif-
ference for ensemble members driven by the PBL scheme MYNN under these
atmospheric conditions. Conditioning of TAE over WRF wind direction in ﬁg-
ure 3.32 results in lower TAE performance over Northern winds and a slight
increase in TAE performance over Easterly winds.
Ultimately the eﬀects of the correction over the σT AExy is shown in ﬁgure 3.33
where we can observe a consistent reduction for the marginal σT AExy for all
ensemble members.
The average diﬀerence in σT AExy before and after the
correction amounts to 0.015 [m · s−1] or about 13% decrease compared to the
uncorrected data. This can also be interpreted as a reduction in uncertainty for
WRF mean annual wind speed by the introduction of the stability correction
for ASCAT measurements.
Comparing the results for the interpolation error metrics with the WRF error
metrics is not trivial due to the diﬀerence in deﬁnition. Speciﬁcally, ∆A consid-
ers spatial averages while the TAE considers time averages. Although that is
true, we observe that the mean diﬀerence for averages ⟨∆A⟩t (ﬁgure 2.8) doesn’t
indicate neither the overestimation nor the underestimation of wind speeds (on
average). This information can be compared with the marginal mean TAE (ﬁg-
==PAGE:69==
61
ures 3.13, 3.18, 3.21, 3.30, 3.31 and 3.32) that show instead an overestimation of
ASCAT data. Therefore we can argue that the mean overestimation observed
is not due to the interpolation procedure. Since we also observe a signiﬁcant
standard deviation for ∆A (0.04 [m · s−1]), compared to the marginal standard
deviation of TAE (0.12 [m · s−1]), we can argue that the overestimation or un-
derestimation of wind speeds by interpolation is present and has an eﬀect over
the standard deviation of TAE. A more precise evaluation of this inﬂuence is
not possible based only on these values due to the diﬀerence in deﬁnitions. The
results for mean RVAR in ﬁgure 2.9 shows a underestimation of both higher and
lower values for WRF wind speeds. This result can be taken into consideration
when conditioning TAE over WRF wind speed in ﬁgures 3.13 and 3.30. Since
the extremes are under sampled, the results for the conditions 4 < Uw ≤6 and
12 < Uw ≤26 may be aﬀected. Again, the amplitude of this inﬂuence can’t be
estimated due to the diﬀerence between error metrics deﬁnition for interpolation
errors and WRF errors.
A comparison with previous work in not trivial due to the diﬀerences in model
setup, measurements, duration of simulations, height above mean sea level and
error metrics deﬁnition.
Nevertheless in Hahmann et al.
(2015) a compari-
son between WRF simulations and buoy measurements reports a relative bias
(RB [%] , similar to NTAE) between −2% > RB > −4% at the station FINO1
(at 90 m), with six diﬀerent ensembles. This result is similar to what we’ve
obtained for NTAE in ﬁgure 3.15.
InKaragali et al. (2018), the comparison between WRF simluations and ASCAT
measurements at 10 m height results in ⟨TAE⟩xy estimated at 0.5 [m·s−1] for a
larger oﬀshore area than the area of interest analyzed in this thesis (ﬁgure 2.5),
with their analysis being over North sea and a section of the Baltic sea. The
model setup in the latter paper is similar to the one presented in this thesis, with
two ensemble members using the MYNN and YSU PBL schemes respectively.
Our results are generally smaller for marginal ⟨TAE⟩xy, with values between
0.3 [m · s−1] and 0.45 [m · s−1] for MYNN driven ensembles, and 0.2 [m · s−1] for
YSU-MM5-OSTIA-NOAH and 0.6 [m · s−1] for YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC (e.g.
blue line in ﬁgure 3.13). Note that we instead observe ⟨TAE⟩xy at ∼0.5 [m·s−1]
for the MYNN and YSU ensemble members under neutral conditions in ﬁgure
3.18 (purple line), a value very close to the one obtained inKaragali et al. (2018).
Lastly we note that a comparison between ASCAT measurements and buoy
measurements in Verhoef and Stoﬀelen (2009) shows statistics analogous to
marginal ⟨RE⟩xy,t and σRExy,t (buoy - ASCAT) at −0.19 [m·s−1] and 1 [m·s−1]
respectively. This means that if these statistics are valid for the entire selected
area in the North sea (ﬁgure 2.5), the marginal mean RE shown in ﬁgure 3.9
will lower by 0.19 [m · s−1] when comparing WRF data to the buoy data. The
standard deviation shown in latter paper is signiﬁcantly lower than the marginal
==PAGE:70==
62
Discussion
σRExy,t in ﬁgure 3.10 (∼60% of the values found in this thesis), meaning that
the WRF model introduces a signiﬁcant standard deviation when compared to
measurements.
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
Throughout this thesis we’ve analyzed diﬀerent WRF simulations against AS-
CAT measurements for a given selected area of the North Sea. The interpo-
lation procedure over space has been validated by deﬁning and comparing two
interpolation error metrics, the diﬀerence of averages (∆A) and ratio of vari-
ance (RV AR). These quantities have been obtained from the ﬁrst non-central
moment (spatial mean) and second central moment (spatial variance) of the
distributions of wind speed respectively. To validate the interpolation, we com-
pared how much these quantities change prior to and after interpolation. Given
the interpolation error metrics, we’ve shown that information about their distri-
butions can be used to infer how the interpolation acts on the data. Speciﬁcally,
the temporal mean of ∆A shows the overall overestimation or underestimation
of either one of the wind distributions extremes, while the temporal standard
deviation of ∆A shows the magnitude of overestimation or underestimation of
either wind speed distribution extreme. A analogous argument is true for the
temporal mean and temporal standard deviation of RV AR, with the diﬀerence
that RV AR shows overestimation or underestimation of both extremes of the
wind speed distribution. Having knowledge about the interpolation procedure,
we can then compare the error metrics deﬁned for the diﬀerence between WRF
simulations and ASCAT measurements with the interpolation error metrics.
Speciﬁcally, we observed that the average overestimation of WRF wind speeds
is not due to interpolation (by comparing marginal ⟨TAE⟩xy and ⟨∆A⟩t) while
σT AExy is aﬀected by the interpolation (comparing marginal σT AExy and σ∆At).
To compare WRF simulations and ASCAT measurements, two error metrics are
deﬁned. We’ve seen how two diﬀerent formulations for the error metrics estimate
a diﬀerent characteristic of the WRF errors, with the raw error (RE) represent-
==PAGE:72==
64
Conclusions
ing the correspondence between individual simulations and measurements and
the time averaged error (TAE) represents the correspondence between aver-
age simulations and measurements. Diﬀerent formulations are indeed possible,
given the reader’s objectives and destination for the error metric. Again we are
interested in the distribution of the error metrics. We’ve speciﬁcally chosen to
compare the mean and standard deviation of these distributions to check any
systematic behaviour and to derive the uncertainty of the WRF simulations
against the ASCAT data. Regarding uncertainty, we’ve proven that each error
metrics shows a diﬀerent uncertainty by comparing the standard deviations of
RE and TAE. Therefore we suggest to clarify to which quantity the uncertainty
in question refers to.
By presenting conditional statistics of the error metrics we’ve shown a more
in-depth analysis of the WRF simulations. The results of this analysis can dis-
tinguish the sources of an undesired or anomalous behaviour of the simulations,
such as poor performance of error metrics. Another use of conditional statistics
can be found to highlight the diﬀerences in WRF schemes. We’ve presented
three examples of conditional statistics. The analysis of TAE over wind speed
revealed a monotonic relationship between this error metric and WRF wind
speeds. The normalized TAE (NTAE, equation 3.4) conditioned over wind speed
showed poor performance for the ensemble YSU-MM5-OSTIA-RUC. Other en-
semble members sharing one or more schemes with the latter didn’t share the
poor performance, meaning that the combination of the schemes YSU, MM5
and/or RUC must cause the observed performance. The scheme MYJ was also
found to show poor NTAE performance for lower wind speeds, while the sea
surface temperature product OISST causes an increase in σT AExy when used
with the schemes MYNN and NOAH. Conditioning TAE over inverse Obukhov
length showed unexpected results, with similar ⟨TAE⟩xy for stable and unstable
conditions. The expectations was to observe a distinct diﬀerence in ⟨TAE⟩xy
due to the assumption of neutral condition for the ASCAT data, meaning that
these measurements should underestimate wind speeds over stable conditions
and overestimate wind speeds over unstable conditions. This result eventually
brought us to correct the ASCAT data to include stability eﬀects. Conditioning
TAE over WRF wind direction revealed again unexpected results, and a pos-
sible eﬀect on wind speeds driven by the presence of coast uphill. A scheme to
scheme comparison showed that the land surface scheme RUC is responsible for
higher σT AExy over northern winds. Note that at about NNE of the selected
area (ﬁgure 2.5) we ﬁnd a mountain range in Norway, possibly indicating a poor
scheme performance over this terrain.
The correction of ASCAT data also enabled us to evaluate how much TAE was
aﬀected by the assumption of neutral atmospheric conditions for the ASCAT
data. Among other diﬀerences, we observe a reduction in TAE standard devia-
tion. This changed our perspective on the uncertainty of the WRF annual mean
==PAGE:73==
65
wind speed, and assuming we evaluate uncertainty with the standard deviation,
about 13% of the observed uncertainty of the WRF annual wind speed (com-
pared to uncorrected data) is caused by the assumption of neutral conditions
for the ASCAT data.
==PAGE:74==
66
Conclusions
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
Beljaars, A. and A. Holtslag, 1991: Flux parameterization over land surfaces
for atmospheric models. Journal of Applied Meteorology, 30(3), 327–341.
Benjamin, S. G., G. A. Grell, J. M. Brown, T. G. Smirnova, and R. Bleck,
2004: Mesoscale weather prediction with the ruc hybrid isentropic-terrain-
following coordinate model. Monthly Weather Review, 132(2), 473–494.
Berg, J., J. Mann, M. Kelly, and M. Nielsen, 2017: Micro meteorology for wind
energy. Introduction to Micrometereology DTU course notes.
Copernicus,
2017:
Pum for wind-global ocean l3 wind. http://cmems-resources.cls.fr/
documents/PUM/CMEMS-OSI-PUM-012-002.pdf.
Dee, D. P., S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi,
U. Andrae, M. A. Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, P. Bechtold, and
co authors., 2011:
The era-interim reanalysis: Conﬁguration and perfor-
mance of the data assimilation system.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, 37(656), 553–597.
Donlon, C. J., M. Martin, J. Stark, J. Roberts-Jones, E. Fiedler, and W. Wim-
mer, 2012:
The operational sea surface temperature and sea ice analysis
(ostia) system. Remote Sensing of Environment, 116(Sp. Iss. SI), 140–158.
EFKM,
2019:
Danmarks
strste
havvind-
park skal ligge i nordsen. https://via.ritzau.dk/pressemeddelelse/
danmarks-storste-havvindpark-skal-ligge-i-nordsoen?
publisherId=9426318&releaseId=13569433.
==PAGE:76==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EUMETSAT, 16 July 2015: ASCAT product guide. Eumetsat-Allee 1, D-64295
Darmstadt, Germany. https://www.eumetsat.int.
Hahmann, A. N., C. L. Vincent, A. Pea, J. Lange, and C. B. Hasager, 2015:
Wind climate estimation using wrf model output: method and model sen-
sitivities over the sea. International Journal of Climatology, 35(12), 3422–
3439.
Holtslag, M., B. W. A.A.M., and V. B. G. J.W., 2014: Estimating atmospheric
stability from observations and correcting wind shear models accordingly.
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 555(1), 012052.
Hu, X.-M., P. M. Klein, and M. Xue, 2013: Evaluation of the updated ysu plan-
etary boundary layer scheme within wrf for wind resource and air quality
assessments. J. Geophys, 118(18), 10,490–10,505.
Janji, Z. I., 1994: The step-mountain eta coordinate model: Further develop-
ments of the convection, viscous sublayer, and turbulence closure schemes.
Monthly Weather Review, 122(5), 927–945.
Jimnez, P. A., J. Dudhia, J. F. Gonzlez-Rouco, J. Navarro, J. P. Montvez, and
E. Garca-Bustamante, 2012:
A revised scheme for the wrf surface layer
formulation. Monthly Weather Review, 140(3), 898–918.
Karagali, I., A. N. Hahmann, M. Badger, C. B. Hasager, and J. Mann, 2018:
New european wind atlas oﬀshore. Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
1037(5), 052007.
Li, J. and Heap, 2008: A Review of Spatial Interpolation Methods for Environ-
mental Scientists. Geoscience Australia Record, Sales Centre, Geoscience
Australia, GPO Box 378, Canberra, ACT 2601.
Mathworks, 2019a: griddata. https://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/
griddata.html.
Mathworks,
2019b:
Nearest
neighbor,
bilinear,
and
bicubic
in-
terpolation
methods.
https://se.mathworks.com/help/vision/ug/
interpolation-methods.html.
MathWorks, 2019:
Netcdf. https://se.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/
netcdf.html.
Monin, A. and A. Obukhov, 1954: Basic laws of turbulent mixing in the surface
layer of the atmosphere. Contrib. Geophys. Inst. Acad. Sci., USSR(24),
163–187.
Nakanishi, M. and H. Niino, 2006: An international journal of physical, chemical
and biological processes in the atmospheric boundary layer. Boundary-layer
Meteorology, 119(2), 397–407.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
Nielsen, M., 2018: Planning and development of wind farms, dtu course 46200,
course notes. Planning and development of wind farms DTU course notes.
Noilhan, J. and S. Planton, 1989:
A simple parameterization of land surface
processes for meteorological models.
Monthly Weather Review, 117(3),
536–549.
Obukhov, A., M., 1971:
Turbulence in an atmosphere with a non-uniform
temperature. Boundary-layer Meteorology, 2(1), 7–29.
Pleim, J., 2007:
A combined local and nonlocal closure model for the atmo-
spheric boundary layer. part i: Model description and testing. Journal of
Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 46(9), 1383–1395.
Pope, S. B., 2000: Turbulent Flows. Cambridge University Press, 501.
Reynolds, R. W., N. A. Rayner, T. M. Smith, D. C. Stokes, and W. Q. Wang,
2002: An improved in situ and satellite sst analysis for climate. J. Geophys,
15(13), 1609–1625.
Rosgaard, M. H., 2015: Limited Area Forecasting and Statistical Modelling for
Wind Energy Scheduling.
PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
Skamarock, C. W., B. J. Klemp, J. Dudhia, D. O. Gill, D. M. Barker, W. Wang,
and J. G. Powers, 2008: A description of the advanced research wrf version
3. In Tech. Rep. NCAR/TN-475+STR. National Center for Atmospheric
Research.
Tewari, M., F. Chen, W. Wang, J. Dudhia, M. A. LeMone, K. Mitchell, M. Ek,
G. Gayno, J. Wegiel, and R. H. Cuenca, 2004: . In Implementation and
veriﬁcation of the uniﬁed noah land surface model in the WRF model, of the
American Meteorological Society, B., editor, volume 132, American Mete-
orological Society, 2165–2170.
Troen, I. and E. L. Petersen, 1989:
European Wind Atlas.
Risø National
Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark, 656.
UCAR, 2019:
Wrf model physics options and references. http://www2.mmm.
ucar.edu/wrf/users/phys_references.html.
Verhoef, A. and A. Stoﬀelen, 2009: Validation of ascat 12.5-km winds. Ocean
and Sea Ice SAF Technical Note SAF/OSI/CDOP/KNMI/TEC/RP/147,
Ver.
1.2.
[Online].
Available:
www.knmi.nl/scatterometer/
publications/pdf/ASCAT_validation_125.pdf.
Wikipedia,
2015:
List
of
oﬀshore
wind
farms
in
the
north sea. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_offshore_wind_
farms_in_the_North_Sea.
==PAGE:78==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Wikipedia, 2019: Netcdf. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NetCDF.
Wilks, D. S., 2011: Statistical methods in the atmospheric sciences, third edi-
tion. Academic Press, The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford,
OX51GB, UK.
Witha, B., A. N. Hahmann, T. Sile, M. Drenkmper, Y. Ezber, E. G. Busta-
mante, J. F. Gonzalez-Rouco, G. Leroy, and J. Navarro, 2019:
Report
on wrf model sensitivity studies and speciﬁcations for the mesoscale wind
atlas production runs : Deliverable d4.3. Technical report, NEWA - New
European Wind Atlas.
