==PAGE:1==
Speech enhancement with deep
learning
David Czaudt (s175522)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
Lyngby, 28-06-2019
David Czaudt (s175522)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank to Ole Winther for supervising my thesis and providing a
lot of useful advices. I would also like to thank to my external supervisors Lars
Bøgild Christensen and Ulrik Kjems from RetuneDSP for providing me a lot of
valuable knowledge, advices for realization of this thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
In this thesis the area of speech enhancement is examined. Instead of traditional
signal processing approach machine learning algorithms are used, more specif-
ically deep learning. As input features the mel spectrogram is used, while the
output is the Ideal Ratio Mask (IRM). The mask estimator is a neural network
with hybrid architecture. The ﬁrst two layers are convolutional, followed with
recurrent and feed-forward layers. The dataset consisted of samples mixed with
various noise types at diﬀerent Signal-to-Noise ratios (SNR). The evaluation of
speech enhancement is not an easy task as the chosen metric should measure
the perceptual quality of the speech. Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality
(PESQ) and Short-time objective intelligibility measure (STOI) was chosen as
evaluation metrics.
For comparison the speech enhancement algorithm from
Mozilla was used as baseline algorithm. The results from experiments showed
that our model in most cases outperformed the baseline algorithm. Smaller mod-
els with similar architectures and performance was also introduced as a speech
enhancement system should be implementable into real-time environment.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related work
3
3
Background
9
3.1
Analogue to digital signal conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Conventional Speech Enhancement Techniques
. . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Linear ﬁlters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Frequency domain ﬁltering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3
Adaptive ﬁltering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Artiﬁcial neurons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Feed forward neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.3
Training of a neural network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.4
Convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.5
Recurrent neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.6
LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.7
Bidirectional recurrent neural networks
. . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Features
27
4.1
Discrete Fourier Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Short-Time Fourier Transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.3
Signal to Noise Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Training targets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.1
Ideal Binary Mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4.2
Ideal Ratio Mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Design/Experimental Setup
33
5.1
Design of the system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1.2
Training targets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3
Postprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.4
Loss function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Evaluation metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.1
Short-time objective intelligibility measure (STOI) . . . .
38
5.2.2
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ) . . . . .
39
5.3
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.5
Training setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.6
Baseline algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Results
43
6.1
BiLSTMConv model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.1
Test of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.2
Parameter reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.3
Comparison of noises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7
Conclusion and Discussion
55
A Github repository
57
B Important code snippets
59
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years a lot of improvements were achieved in the area of speech pro-
cessing. Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems showed signiﬁcant im-
provements in the past couple of years. There are many reasons, why these
technologies are improving. One of the reasons is the increase in computational
power. This exponential increase allows us to use algorithms which were compu-
tationally infeasible a decade ago. These algorithms are called neural networks
and are inspired with human brain. Another reason is that it is possible to
eﬀectively reduce the noise present in speech.
This process is called speech
enhancement and is the topic of this thesis. The usual way for noise reduc-
tion is to use digital signal processing (DSP) and spectral subtraction methods,
statistically optimal methods and others. In this work, the focus is to try out
diﬀerent approach using deep learning models. These deep neural network mod-
els proved to be an eﬀective way for both classiﬁcation and regression problems.
This method is becoming popular also in the area of speech enhancement. There
are many ways of using neural networks for speech enhancement. It can be com-
bined with DSP methods or used as an end-to-end method, both in time and
frequency domain. Diﬀerent architectures of neural networks exists. Diﬀerent
models extracts diﬀerent information from the provided features. Some of the
network architectures investigated in this work are feed-forward, convolutional
and recurrent neural networks. The convolutional layers are very good in feature
extraction, while recurrent neural networks are suitable for time series analysis.
This property can be useful as an audio ﬁle is time series. These two model
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
showed promising results in the area of speech enhancement, that’s why we
decided to investigate them further.
In this thesis the second chapter is dedicated to related works carried out in
the area of speech enhancement. In the third chapter the reader is provided
with background in basic signal processing, some of the conventional speech en-
hancement methods, an overview of neural networks and architectures for neural
networks. In Chapter 4. the used features are described while the ﬁfth chap-
ter is dedicated to the design of our system, the pipeline for the enhancement
process and the baseline algorithm. The results achieved in the experiments
are described in Chapter 6 and ﬁnally, Chapter 7 concludes the thesis by a
summary of achievements and discussion about potential future applications.
All the programming was done in python programming language. For neural
networks the pytorch framework and for audio analysis the librosa package was
used. A github link to a repository containing all the code and audio samples
used in this thesis and snippets about the most important parts of the source
code are provided as appendix.
1.1
Motivation
Noise is a presence of an unwanted signal in an observed signal. It is important
to get rid of the noise in order to increase the accuracy of the signal processing
systems. Why to use deep learning in speech enhancement? Why to use neural
networks in the area where DSP algorithms already performs quite eﬃciently?
Because, these algorithms have some limitations, require sections where speech
is not present, to model the noise and suppress it. They can not generalize to
non-stationary noises as they are hard to model. Neural networks has strong
generalization ability and can discover patterns in data, which DSP algorithms
cannot.
But don’t we need high computational power for training a neural
network and deploying it into real time environment? With properly chosen
and preprocessed features, reasonably sized model and a piece of engineering
everything is possible.
Combination of feature extraction and deep learning
for gain estimation provides an eﬀective framework for noise suppression. In
this work, ﬁrst, a bigger hybrid neural network architecture is proposed with
decent performance. This model is not suitable for real-time environment, so the
parameters are drastically reduced, roughly 500 times, to reduce the complexity
of the computation but still keeping a reasonable performance. Further details
are discussed in the following chapters.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Related work
Supervised Speech Separation Based on Deep Learning: An Overview
A lot of research has been conducted in the area of speech enhancement in
the recent years. With the rise of deep neural networks, speech separation can
be considered as a supervised learning problem. A nice overview is provided
in [WC17] by Wang D. In his work, the problem of noise suppression consist
of three parts: acoustic features, learning machines and training targets. The
choice of features plays an important role in the task of speech enhancement.
With correct feature extraction the demand on the learning machine is lower,
on the other hand with the feature extraction ability of neural networks, it is
possible to separate speech from noise with no preprocessing, just from raw wave
form. There are many diﬀerent features which can be used and each of them
requires diﬀerent preprocessing. Wang D. and his team also proposed a new
type of features called Multi-Resolution Cochleogram (MRCG), which calcu-
lates four cochleograms at diﬀerent spectrotemporal resolution to provide both
local and more global context. Classiﬁers and learning machines represents the
architecture of the models used for the task. The basic one is the classic feed-
forward network which has fully connected layers stack on top of each other. The
next proposed architecture in the network is a variant of feed-forward network
called convolutional neural network (CNN). These network are good at extract-
ing spatial features from the input data. They are very successful in various
image classiﬁcation tasks, but can be eﬀectively used for speech enhancement
==PAGE:14==
4
Related work
too. A typical convolutional layer consist of a number of convolutional and sub-
sampling layer pairs. As the name implies in each layer convolution operation is
performed on the data and a feature map is constructed. These maps represents
the extracted features. Another type of neural networks are recurrent neural
networks (RNN), which in contrast with feed-forward networks have also recur-
rent connections. These connections allow the network to model the changes in
the input over time. This sounds as a suitable solution for speech enhancement
as speech is continuous and changes over time. Many variations of RNNs exist.
For example long-short term memory networks (LSTM) or gated recurrent unit
(GRU) which both introduces memory cells. Generative adversarial networks
consist of two networks: generator and discriminator.
The generator learns
to map the input noisy data to the clean speech, while the discriminator tries
to separate the reconstructions of the generator from the clean speech labels.
These were the architectures described in D. Wang’s paper, however other ma-
chine learning models can be also used for speech enhancement. As D. Wang
described [WC17], it is important in supervised speech separation to choose a
proper training target to be able to learn and generalize. Depending on training
target speech enhancement can be treated either as classiﬁcation or regression.
There are two types of training targets: masking based targets and mapping
based targets. Mapping based targets represents the spectral representation of
clean speech, while masking based targets represents the time-frequency rela-
tions of clean speech to background noise. One of the learning targets proposed
by the authors is the ideal binary mask (IBM) [HW02] [RWB03] [Wan05]. In
the case of the IBM the problem as treated as a classiﬁcation problem as if
the signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio of a speciﬁc time-frequency bin is higher then a
speciﬁed threshold then it is classiﬁed as speech, otherwise as noise. Similarly
to IBM the target binary mask (TBM) also treats speech enhancement as a
classiﬁcation problem [LB15] [GB14]. The diﬀerence between the two masks is,
that the TBM compares the time-frequency units to a ﬁxed stationary signal,
which is the average of speech signals. On the other hand if the ideal ratio mask
(IRM) is chosen as training target, the speech suppression becomes a regres-
sion problem. The IRM is described in later chapters, but basically it is a soft
version of the IBM [HSB14] [NW13] [WNW14] [SRW06]. Further in the article
a comparison of performance of diﬀerent architectures can be found and also
diﬀerent tasks, as beamforming and speaker separation, are discussed.
Causal Speech Enhancement Combining Data-Driven Learning and Suppression
Rule Estimation
The problem of single channel speech enhancement was also examined by a team
from Microsoft and The University of Texas at Dallas [MT16]. They proposed
three solutions for noise suppression. The ﬁrst is an end-to-end DNN based
approach which tries to learn the mapping of the noisy speech to clean speech.
On input it gets an N number of either symmetric or causal STFT magnitude
==PAGE:15==
5
frames and the output is a clean magnitude spectrum at time frame m(ym).
The reason for usage of causal frames are the constrains of real-time processing
of speech. The network was able to remove almost all the noise, however the
clean speech estimation contained distortion, especially in the unseen data. To
overcome this problem in the second solution the DNN output represents the
suppression gain for the each T-f unit. More speciﬁcally
Yk(m) = Sk(m)
Xk(m)
(2.1)
where Sk(m) represents the clean signal magnitude STFT. This solution out-
performs in both causal and symmetric modes the conventional digital signal
processing methods for all tested SNRs.
The third proposed solution uses the architecture of a conventional speech en-
hancement system, namely a voice activity detector (VAD), but learns the func-
tion behind each unit from data. The units present in this solution are the clean
speech estimation, which is basically the ﬁrst regression model, the Bin-wise
VAD estimation, the prior and posterior SNR calculation and the suppression
rule estimation.
In the end the noisy speech is multiplied by the estimated
suppression rule. The conventional VAD is also replaced by a DNN, which es-
timates the probability of the presence of speech for each frequency bin [HM13]
[RLY13]. In the last step another deep neural network is trained to calculate
the suppression rule based on the prior and posterior SNRs. This approach was
examined before [EJH07], however the approach in this work is a little diﬀerent,
as the prior and posterior SNR is also estimated by DNNs.
This variant of
speech enhancement system outperformed the ﬁrst two solutions in both causal
and symmetric setup, especially on unseen data due to the good generalization
ability of DNNs and with the explicit noise spectral variance estimation.
Ideal ratio mask estimation using deep neural networks for robust speech recog-
nition
Another nice work was carried out by Wang with the usage of IRMs as training
targets [NW13]. They created a speech enhancement solution, which was part
of a bigger ASR system. As features they used 26-channel mel ﬁlterbanks. The
frequencies range from 50Hz to 7kHz. They trained 26 separate DNNs, one for
each channel. The training phase consisted of two parts, the ﬁrst part was an
unsupervised pretraining and the second was the supervised training. The out-
put from these networks does not use the information from neighbouring units.
Because of that, another feed-forward network is trained with one hidden layer,
which uses as input the output from the previous networks. This network is used
to smoothen the IRM before applying it to the data. After the noise suppres-
sion the enhanced mel ﬁlterbanks are used for further feature extraction for the
ASR system. The Aurora-4 dataset was used for training combined with 6 noise
==PAGE:16==
6
Related work
types ranging from 10 dB to 20 dB. There were 2676 samples from which 2100
was used for training and the rest for validation. To evaluate the performance,
the instantaneous SNR of the predicted data with the instantaneous SNR of
the clean speech is compared. On data with stationary noise they achieved an
average error of 2.3 dB, while on data with babble and airport noise the average
error was 3 dB across all channels.
Using Optimal Ratio Mask as Training Target for Supervised Speech Separation
Another type of training target is Optimal Ratio Mask (ORM), which can be
also used for supervised speech separation [XLZ17]. The features used in this
work are Mel-frequency cepstral coeﬃcients (MFCC), amplitude modulation
spectrogram (AMS) and relative spectral transform and perceptual linear pre-
diction (RASTA-PLP) and they used a symmetric 5 frames context window to
process information through time. The proposed network contains three hidden
layers with 1024 units in each layer and ReLU as activation function. As op-
timizer they used Adaptive gradient descent with Momentum accelerator and
to avoid overﬁtting, dropout regularization with 0.2 rate was utilized. As cost
function mean squared error was used. The target of the network was to output
suppression gain in the form of ORM. As training data 600 samples were chosen
from the IEEE female dataset mixed with four noises from NOISEX dataset
[VS93]. Other 120 samples combined with the same noises were used for valida-
tion. As evaluation criteria they used the Short-Time Objective Intelligibility
(STOI) which ranges from 0 to 1 and is highly correlated with human speech in-
telligibility [THHJ11]. Another metric used is Perceptual Evaluation of Speech
Quality (PESQ) which ranges from -0.5 to 4.5 [RBHH01]. They compared the
speech enhancement obtained with ORM to four other targets, namely IBM,
IRM, cIRM which is the complex ideal ratio mask and PSM which stands for
phase sensitive mask. Their results showed, that ORM outperforms all other
mask excluding PSM. In speech quality it also outperform the PSM.
RNNoise
This research was carried out by Mozilla [Moz]. They proposed a hybrid ap-
proach for real-time full-band speech enhancement [Val17].
They combining
the traditional DSP approach with deep learning.
With the usage of RNNs
they are predicting the Ideal Ratio Mask (IRM) gains for the noisy signal. The
architecture of their system is displayed on Figure 2.1.
==PAGE:17==
7
Figure 2.1: A block diagram of the proposed speech enhancement system by
Mozilla Corporation [Val17]
As input features the Bark-scaled [Moo12] spectral magnitudes are used with
22 bands. The output is the IRM with same size. Furthermore, discrete cosine
transform (DCT) is used on the bark scaled spectral magnitudes to decorre-
late the features, which yields 22 Bark-frequency cepstral coeﬃcients (BFCC).
They also add the ﬁrst and second temporal derivative of the ﬁrst 6 BFCCs.
Another features are the DCTs of the pitch correlations across frequency bands
from which they choose the ﬁrst 6. The last two features are a spectral non-
stationarity metric and the pitch period, to help the network to identify speech.
This sums up to 42 input features. The spectral magnitudes are converted to
Bark scale by triangular ﬁlter banks. To be able to suppress the noise between
pitch harmonics, they use FIR pitch ﬁltering. The model used in this work is a
recurrent neural network with Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) as memory cells.
The total number of hidden units is 215, divided into 4 layers. The layer with
the highest number of hidden units has 96 units. This adds up to 87503 weights.
As loss function the mean-squared error is used in form
L(gb, ˆgb) = (gφ
b −ˆgb
φ)2
(2.2)
where φ is a tunable parameter, which controls how much to suppress the noise
and usually a value of 1/2 works well [Val17]. As baseline algorithm they used
MMSE-based noise suppressor from the SpeexDSP library [Xip06]. As training
data they used various clean speech data from McGill [McG] combined with
many types of noise, including oﬃce, crowd, airplane, car, computer fans. They
were mixed at various SNR levels.
The RNNoise outperformed the baseline
algorithm on test data, which is unseen data. They tested it with babble, car
and street noise at 0 to 25 dB and their model performed better at all levels.
==PAGE:18==
8
Related work
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 3
Background
3.1
Analogue to digital signal conversion
An audio signal, as many other signals, is analogue. The ﬁrst step in audio
processing is the conversion of this analogue signal to digital.
This process
is called analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion. It consist of the following three
steps: sampling, quantization and coding [PM06]. Sampling is the conversion of
a continuous-time signal to discrete time signal. This is done by taking samples
at discrete time periods from the continuous-time signal. If xa(t) is the input
then
xa(nT) ≡x(n)
(3.1)
is the output and T is the sampling interval. The quantization is the conver-
sion from discrete-time continuous-valued to discrete-time discrete-valued sig-
nal. The value of each sample is selected from a ﬁnite set of possible values.
The diﬀerence between the unquantized sample and the quantized sample is
called quantization error. In the third step, coding, each quantized sample is
represented by a b-bit binary sequence[PM06]. Quantization is irreversible and
causes signal distortion. The selection of the sampling period is an important
parameter in order to avoid aliasing of the signal. In order to select a proper
sampling rate, prior knowledge is needed about the frequency components of
the signal. However, these components are just known after processing of the
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
signal. But, it is always possible to classify the signal into a group of signals
with some speciﬁc frequency attributes. For example, most of the important
frequencies fall below 3000 Hz in clean speech [PM06]. It is known, that the
highest frequency reconstructable from a signal at sampling rate
Fs = 1/T is Fs/2.
(3.2)
From this follows that
Fs > 2Fmax
(3.3)
where Fmax is the maximum frequency present in the signal. This is called the
Nyquist rate. Usually, an anti-aliasing ﬁlter is applied before the conversion, to
assure that the maximum frequency will not exceed Fmax.
3.2
Conventional Speech Enhancement Techniques
Noise is a presence of an interfering unwanted signal in another observed signal
[SV15]. There are many types of noises, for exaple:
• Electronic noise
• Acoustic noise
• Electromagnetic noise
• Electrostatic noise
• Channel fading and distortion
• Quantization noise
[SV15].
The presence of noise in signal degrades the accuracy of signal processing sys-
tems, that is why it’s necessary to remove noise from signal. One type of noise
is additive noise and it can be deﬁned as
y[n] = x[n] + v[n]
(3.4)
where y[n] is the noisy signal, x[n] is the clean signal and v[n] is the noise signal.
The goal of a speech enhancement is to estimate ˆx[n] of x[n] from y[n]. One
of the techniques for enhancement is gain estimation. In ﬁrst step the noisy
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Conventional Speech Enhancement Techniques
11
Figure 3.1: Conventional gain estimation pipeline. [Kol18]
signal is cut into overlapping frames.Then, the analysis step converts the frames
to a transform domain. Afterwards, the gain estimator estimates a gain which
is then applied to the noisy features to enhance them. In the synthesis stage
the features are converted back to time domain and the overlap add merges the
overlapping windows together, obtaining the enhanced signal. The methods for
gain estimation can be divided into four groups: spectral subtraction methods,
statistically optimal methods, subspace methods, machine learning methods.
The ﬁrst three methods are the conventional methods, which are either based
on digital signal processing, linear algebra or probability theory. For example, a
Wiener ﬁlter is a broadly used statistically optimal method. This work focuses
on the machine learning methods, namely deep learning.
Filtering can be also used in conventional speech enhancement. The ﬁrst type
of applicable ﬁlters are linear ﬁlters.
3.2.1
Linear ﬁlters
There are many ﬁlter types, which can be classiﬁed as [PM06]:
• High pass ﬁlter - removes low frequency components from the signal
• Low pass ﬁlter - removes high frequencies from the signal
• Band pass ﬁlter - lets through a limited range of frequencies matching
ﬁlter. Everything else is ﬁltered out.
• Band stop ﬁlter - removes the frequencies matching the ﬁlter. Every-
thing else goes through the ﬁlter.
These ﬁlter can be implemented using Inﬁnite Impulse Response (IIR) or Finite
Impulse Response (FIR) ﬁlters [PM06]. As input the ﬁlter receives time series
x(n) and the otuput is then y(n) which is also a time series. The ﬁlters are
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
deﬁned as
FIR
y(n) =
N
X
k=1
a(k)x(n −k)
(3.5)
IIR
y(n) =
N
X
k=0
a(k)x(n −k) +
P
X
j=0
b(j)y(n −j)
(3.6)
where x(n) represents the input series, a(k) and b(j) represents the ﬁlter coeﬃ-
cients and y(n) represents the output series. As it is seen in the equations the
IIR is a recursive function, which uses part of the output as input. The com-
putational demand of the ﬁlter depends on their order. The higher the order
the higher the computational demand is. IIR ﬁlter is faster as it requires lower
order, however FIR is more stable and the delay is constant [Phe19].
3.2.2
Frequency domain ﬁltering
Frequency domain ﬁltering consist of three main steps: signal analysis, ﬁltering
and synthesis of ﬁltered signal [SV15]. This steps can be further divided into
several smaller steps.
In ﬁrst step the signal is cut into short frames.
This
procedure is important as signal in very short time frame tends to be static. In
the second step the time frames are converted from time domain to a transform
domain, usually the frequency domain. A common method for this conversion is
the discrete fourier trainsform which will be described later. After performing
the conversion ﬁltering is applied, which usually consist of ﬁltering out the
frequencies whose power is below a threshold.
In the last steps the ﬁltered
frequencies are converted back to time domain, performing inverse operation on
them and then the frames are unframed back to a continuous signal.
3.2.3
Adaptive ﬁltering
The next type of ﬁltering is called adaptive ﬁltering. Adaptive Noise Canceller
uses adaptive ﬁltering to remove noise from a signal. The parameters of the
ﬁlter are adjusted automatically using a reference signal. The reference signal
is derived from the input signal in regions where no speech is present or is very
weak. In these sections only the noise is present, so the parameters of the ﬁlter
are set according to the values of the noise. The adaptive ﬁlters are however
==PAGE:23==
3.3 Neural networks
13
computationally very demanding due to long impulse responses. There were
algorithms proposed to overcome these issues, like the Wiener ﬁlter, Kalman
ﬁlter or Least Mean Square (LMS) algorithm [SV15].
3.3
Neural networks
Traditional algorithms have some diﬃculties processing complicated data, un-
cover hidden structures in data and can only work with already extracted fea-
tures. The same applies for traditional programming paradigms. It is hard to
ﬁt a single algorithm to diﬀerent cases. On the other hand, neural networks
can do pretty well in generalization to diﬀerent cases and unseen data. Neural
networks are inspired by the human brain. They are built of neurons form-
ing a layer and layers forming a network. The information is passed through
the network from the input through all neurons in all layers to the output. A
huge amount of development was needed, from the ﬁrst computational model
for neural networks from 1943 [MP43], until their actual usage. A major break-
through was the introduction of backpropagation [WJPJ74] in the 1970’s and
then it’s implementation in the learning process of neural networks [RHW86].
Many architectures exists for neural networks. For example, basic feed forward
networks, recurrent neural networks (RNN), to more advanced autoencoders or
gaussian adversarial networks (GAN). The relevant architectures for this thesis
are described in this chapter.
3.3.1
Artiﬁcial neurons
The smallest units in an artiﬁcial neural network are called neurons. The ﬁrst
type of artiﬁcial neuron were developed by Frank Rosenblatt in 1950s and 1960
and are called perceptrons. A perceptron works as follows. It has a number
of inputs, each with a speciﬁc weight and it has one output.
Each input is
multiplied by the weight of the input and in the end all of them are summed up.
Then if the sum is higher then a speciﬁed threshold the ouput is 1, while if it
is lower, then the output is 0 [Nie18]. This decision is made by a step function.
These are the basic types of neurons. However, if we want to represent data
which is not binary and also to allow more ﬁne grained output we need something
else. Usually, it is not enough to have just binary representation of the data,
so the step function is changed to an activation function. One type of neurons
are sigmoid neurons which, as the name implies, have the sigmoid function as
activation function. These neurons also keep their output value between 0 and
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
Figure 3.2: The sigmoid activation function
1, however they have continuous output, instead of just 1 or 0.
σ(z) =
1
1 + e−z
(3.7)
There are a lot of activation functions currently used in neural networks. A very
popular one is rectiﬁed linear unit (ReLU).
R(z) = max(0, z)
(3.8)
Another broadly used activation function is softmax. It is used in classiﬁcation
problems with K classes, as it distributes the probability of each class over the
whole output.
ˆyk =
ea
k
PK
k‘=1 ea‘
k for k = 1 to k = K.
(3.9)
The values are then normalized to keep the sum between 0 and 1. Regardless of
the type of the activation function, the output from a neuron can be described
as
y = f(
N
X
j=0
wjxj + b)
(3.10)
where f(.) is the activation function, w is the weight and x is the input. The
last parameter b is called bias, which is added to the sum of the weights and
inputs to adjust the output of the neuron to ﬁt more easily to the data.
Neurons are put next to each other to form layers. There can be tens, hundreds
or even thousands of neurons in each layer. The basic layer types are input,
hidden and output layers. There are diﬀerent architectures depending on how
these layers are connected to each other and how the data ﬂows through them.
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Neural networks
15
x1
x0
xn
wn
w0
w1
w2
w3
x2
x3
j = 0
n
wnxn
y
Inputs
Weights
Sum
Activation function
Output
+b
Figure 3.3: A neuron
3.3.2
Feed forward neural network
A feed forward neural network has just forward connections, no cyclic connec-
tions are allowed. The ﬁrst layer is the input layer. This is where the data
goes into the network. The last one is the output layer and in between are the
hidden layers. There can be as many hidden layers as one want, however the
more hidden layers are in the network, the more computationally demanding
the training and the inference are. It is important to ﬁnd a trade oﬀbetween
the number of layers and the processing time. Networks which have more than
one hidden layers are called deep neural networks. These multilayer networks
are sometimes called multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) despite the fact, that they
are not made of perceptrons [Nie18]. The number of neurons in the input layer
depends on the number of input features. For example if a greyscale image of
size 32x32 should be put into the network, then the number of input neurons is
32 x 32 = 1024. If the input would be an image with RGB colors, than the num-
ber of input neurons would be 32 x 32 x 3 = 3072. Before the image goes into
the input layer the features must be ﬂattened into one long vector. When the
data goes through a network for the ﬁrst time, the output is usually completely
diﬀerent from the expected output. First, the network has to learn.
3.3.3
Training of a neural network
As training a neural network is usually a supervised learning problem it is needed
to have labeled training data. This data is divided into small chunks called
batches. After each batch is passed through the network a so called loss(cost)
function quantiﬁes how well the model is performing.
An example of a loss
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
Input layer
Hidden layer 1
Hidden layer 2
Output layer
Figure 3.4: Feed forward neural network
function is the mean squared error (MSE):
C(w, b) ≡1
2n
X
x
||y(x) −a||2
(3.11)
In MSE, b denotes the biases, w the weights of neurons in the network, n is the
number of inputs, x is the input, while a is the output. The sum sums through
all the inputs. During the training the goal is to minize this loss. It is done
by an algorithm called gradient descent, which requires the loss function to be
diﬀerentiable. It calculates the partial derivatives of the function, let’s denote it
C, with respect to the weights, to get the direction in which the weights should
be modiﬁed to get closer to the global minima [Nie18]. An update rule is as
follows
wk →w′
k = wk −η ∂C
∂wk
(16)
bl →b′
l = bl −η ∂C
∂bl
.
(3.12)
A so called learning rate, denoted as n, limits the size of the adjustments made
to the weights, so they do not being modiﬁed to much, as it could lead to ﬁnding
and get stuck in the local minima instead of the global. By repeatedly applying
this rule the gradient gets closer to the minimum of the loss function. This takes
long time, as the gradient needs to be calculated for each sample separately. To
avoid this issue an optimization algorithm called stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) was introduced. SGD estimates the gradient by calculating it only for a
small amount of randomly chosen inputs and by averaging over them. It gets a
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Neural networks
17
good estimate and speeds up the training [Nie18]. There are many other opti-
mization algorithms, like Adam [KB15] or Adagrad [DHS11] which has adaptive
learning rate for better convergence. To propagate the error through all layers
an algorithm called backpropagation is used. It uses the chain rule of diﬀeren-
tiation for calculating the gradients through all the layers [RHW86].
3.3.4
Convolutional neural networks
Regular feed forward neural networks have some limitations. One of them is that
they do not scale well to process large images. For example with a colored image
of size 256x256x3 on input a neuron in the ﬁrst hidden layer would have 196608
weights, which is a lot if there are for example 200 neurons in one layer. Usually,
there are more than one hidden layers in a neural network which means that
there would be millions of parameters which could easily lead to overﬁtting [Kar].
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) solve this problem and they perform very
well in image processing. The ﬁrst CNN with backpropagation and learnable
ﬁlters was used by LeCun [LBD+89] to classify handwritten zip codes. The
neurons in a CNN are arranged in three dimensions, width, height and depth
,as an image is, and are called activation volume. For example, when an input
image of size 16x16x3 is being processed the activation volume is of same size, so
the neurons are arranged as 16x16x3. The output would then have dimensions
1x1xnum_of_classes.
Figure 3.5: Regular feed forward neural network on the left and convolutional
neural network on the right. It can be seen that the CNN has its
neurons arranged in three dimensions. [Kar]
A CNN network usually consist of convolutional layers, pooling layers and the
regular fully-connected layers.
Convolutional layer
The ﬁrst and core type is a convolutional layer and consist of learnable param-
eters which are the ﬁlters. Each ﬁlter is applied in full depth to the input of the
layer and has a speciﬁc width and height. An example ﬁlter can have a size of
==PAGE:28==
18
Background
4x4x3, where width and height are the 4x4 and the depth is 3 as an usual red,
green, blue (RGB) image has depth of 3 and the ﬁlter spans through full depth.
This ﬁlter is sliding through the width and height of the input volume and the
dot product is calculated at each position. This process is called convolution.
The output of this process is a two dimensional feature or activation map. Each
ﬁlter produces an activation map and each of them have diﬀerent parameters
and recognizes diﬀerent features. These features maps are then stacked up on
each other and sent to the next layer. The ﬁrst layer learns to recognize simple
features like edges, the layers after simple shapes and the later layers more com-
plex features. Each neuron in a CNN layer is only connected to the local region,
which reduces drastically the number of parameters. This local region is the
ﬁlter size. It is important to notice that this local connectivity spans through
the whole dept of the input. That means, that if the ﬁlter size is 4x4 and the
input is of depth 3 than each neuron in the convolutional layer will have 4x4x3
weights plus the bias. The output from a convolutional layer depends on three
hyperparameters: depth, zero-padding and stride [Kar].
• Depth - corresponds to the number of applied ﬁlters. The neurons, which
are looking at the same region, are called depth column
• Stride - is the number of pixels the ﬁlter is slided by. Usually the stride is
1 or 2.
• Zero-padding - is used to pad the input around its edges. For example it
can be used to keep the image size same through layers.
The arrangement of neurons which leads to the output is called spatial arrange-
ment and can be calculated by equation
out = W −F + 2P
S
+ 1
(3.13)
where W is the size of the input volume, F is the receptive ﬁeld (ﬁlter) size, S
is the stride and P is the zero padding size.
Parameter sharing
In convolutional neural networks a useful construction is parameter sharing. It
is based on the assumption that if a calculation of a feature is useful in one
position on the image, that it is also useful to calculate it on diﬀerent positions.
That means, that neurons calculating a feature map with a speciﬁc ﬁlter will
share the same weights through all the image. This helps to drastically reduce
the number of learnable parameters (weights) in the network. However, it does
not always make sense to have the assumption mentioned above. For example
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Neural networks
19
Figure 3.6: Spatial arragement of a CNN layer. The input is of size 5, the
kernel(ﬁlter) size is 3 and zero-padding is 1. On the left the stride
is 1 and on the right 2. The weights of the neurons are displayed
on the upper right corner and are shared across all the yellow
neurons. [Kar]
in pictures with centered content it makes more sense to learn diﬀerent features
on one side of the image then on the other [Kar]. The backward pass for the
convolutional layers is also convolution but with spatially ﬂipped ﬁlters.
Dilation
Another hyperparameter were introduced in a work by F.Yu and V. Koltun
[YK16] called dilation. This hyperparameter allows the ﬁlters to have space in
between the cells. This can be useful when one want to have spatial context in
a larger, more global area [Kar] quickly.
1x1 convolution
Convolutional layers with receptive ﬁelds 1x1 are specially useful near output
layers when one wants to preserve local context but merge the channel depths
to 1 with a dot product [Kar].
Pooling layer
The pooling layers also reduce the number of parameters in the network by
reducing the dimensionality of the data. It also reduces the probability of over-
ﬁtting. There are many form of pooling operations, the most common is max
pooling. A pooling layer has two hyperparameters, kernel size and stride. As
in convolutional layer the kernel is slided on the feature maps of previous con-
volutional layers by the speciﬁed stride and in case of max pooling the biggest
numbers are kept and the other ones are thrown away. Another type of pooling
is average pooling, where instead of the maximum value the average of the val-
ues is kept. Some papers propose not to use pooling layers [SDBR15] to reduce
the complexity of models. Instead, they are proposing to use bigger ﬁlters to
reduce the dimensionality of the data. In case of generative models it has also
==PAGE:30==
20
Background
been useful to get rid of pooling layers [Kar].
4
8
1
1
1
-1
-1
2
2
-8
5
5
6
3
3
4
8
-2
Max pool
5
6
Figure 3.7: Max pool with kernel size 2x2 and stride 2 [Kar]
Fully-Connected layers
In case of classiﬁcation problem usually the last layers are fully connected layers
to broadcast the local information to all neurons making the decision of which
class the sample belongs to. However, it can be useful in some cases to keep the
information just locally.
3.3.5
Recurrent neural networks
Feedforward and Convolutional neural networks have a couple of limitations.
For example, they both work with ﬁxed size input and ﬁxed size output. These
models also do the approximation from input sequence to output sequence in
ﬁxed number of computational steps [Kar15]. Also, it is diﬃcult to capture the
dynamics of data in time. That means, that these models are not suitable to
work with time series data. To overcome these issues, recurrent neural networks
were introduced. These networks can work with variable length sequences and
have loops, allowing information to persist. Diﬀerent RNN models work on dif-
ferent sequences either on input, output or both. Examples are single input and
sequence output (captioning an image), sequence input and single output (iden-
tity classiﬁcation from speech), sequence input and sequence output (language
translation), synchronized input sequence with the output sequence (labeling
video frames) [Kar15].
The reason why working with sequences, instead of single input, is important
is that past events can eﬀect future ones. A good example is a book. It is
necessary to remember what happened in previous chapters to understand the
ending of the book. Even on sentence level, it is important to understand the
beginning of a sentence to infer the meaning of the whole. Neural networks with
recurrent connections address this issue as they persist information over time
using the loop connections.
In the image above, xt represents the input at time t while the yt is the output
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Neural networks
21
Figure 3.8: Diﬀerent RNNs operating with sequences [Kar15]
xt
yt
loop connection
RNN
Figure 3.9: Chunk of a recurrent neural network
at time t and the loop connection which passes the output of current step to
the next step. When a sequence is processed by an RNN, each pass through one
part of a sequence is called a step. If an RNN is unfolded in time it looks like
this:
As the image shows the output at current timestep is passed to the same layer
at the next timestep. To make a full forward pass the network goes through the
whole sequence. To update the weights of the network the error in all timesteps
must be taken into account. For that a modiﬁed version of backpropagation
algorithm is used, called Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT). To calculate
error at each timestep, the BPTT unrolls the network, calculates and accumu-
lates the errors at each step. Then, the weights are updated through timesteps.
The sequences used can get quite long and so the computational steps required
to go through them. These long sequences usually cause a problem called van-
ishing gradient problem. This problem is typical for RNNs and arises also in
very deep feed-forward networks [Nie18]. When training very deep networks
or RNNs it is important to update eﬀectively the weight in earlier layers (or
in case of RNN in early steps of the sequence) too. However, the gradient in
the early layers are the products of gradients in the later layers so they can get
very small if the activations are below 1. This is because multiplying a number
smaller then 1 with another number smaller than 1 leads to an even smaller
==PAGE:32==
22
Background
RNN s
.
.
.
x
x
x
x
y
y
y
y
0
0
1
1
2
2
t
t
0
1
2
t
RNN s
RNN s
RNN s
Figure 3.10: Unfolded chunk of a recurrent neural network
number. And when the weights in the early layers are going to be updated the
gradients become so small that the updates are barely recognizable. This can
lead to a very long training. There is also another problem called exploding
gradient, which is similar to the vanishing case. It happens when the activa-
tions and gradients are numbers higher than 1. When multiplying over and over
with numbers higher than one leads in early layers to very high gradients, thus
very big updates on weights either the positive or negative weight and never
getting the correct value. To avoid these issues a method called gradient clip-
Figure 3.11: Standard backpropagation through time [Dl418]
ping [GBC16], or a modiﬁed version of BPTT called Truncated backpropagation
through time (TBPTT) can be used.
Truncated backpropagation through time (TBPTT)
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Neural networks
23
TBPTT was developed to overcome the vanishing gradient problem and to
reduce the computational complexity of backpropagation in case of long se-
quences. This algorithm splits the processing of long sequences to more smaller
forward/backward passes, which leads to more parameter updates. For example
in case of a sequence with length 12 standard BPTT would need 12 steps in each
direction(forward and backward). In case of TBPTT with a length set to four
the parameter updates happen 3 times, every four timesteps [Dl418].
Figure 3.12: Truncated backpropagation through time [Dl418]
This is very useful in case of longer sequences, for example with size of 5000 to
avoid the vanishing gradient problem and to reduce computational complexity.
The problem with this algorithm is that it is unable to learn long term depen-
dencies as the gradient calculation is performed on short term sequences. This
can lead for the gradient to stuck in local minima. For example in case of text
completion, it is important to know the deeper context of a text to correctly
predict the next word in the sequence. To avoid these issues Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) networks were introduced [HS97].
3.3.6
LSTM
LSTM networks consist of memory cells which allows constant error ﬂow through
them to ensure the gradient will not vanish or explode and that long term de-
pendencies will be remembered. In the initial design, each memory cell consisted
of an input gate, an output gate and the cell state. Later, in 1999 another gate,
called forget gate, was introduced, to enable the network to forget information
which is no longer needed [GSC99].
The input gate is a multiplicative unit
which protects the memory content from being overwritten by irrelevant inputs,
while the output gate is a multiplicative unit which protects currently irrelevant
information from the memory to be passed to other units [HS97].
In the ﬁgure above an LSTM cell is shown.
The horizontal line on the top
represents the cell state.
It contains information and is modiﬁed only with
==PAGE:34==
24
Background
+
tanh
x
x
x
tanh
sigmoid
sigmoid
sigmoid
C t -1 
h t -1 
x t
f t
i t
C~
t
ot
h t
h t
C t
Figure 3.13: LSTM cell [Ola15].
The circles with an "x" inside represents
pointwise multiplication, while the circles with a "+" inside rep-
resents pointwise addition.
linear operations. The gates are composed of sigmoid layer and a pointwise
multiplicative operation and they control how much information goes through
[Ola15].
Forget gate
The ﬁrst gate is the forget gate and it decides which information is kept and
which and in what extent is thrown away.
It receives ht−1 and xt and the
sigmoid outputs a number between 0 and 1 for each element in the cell state
Ct−1 [Ola15]. It is calculated as:
ft = σ(Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
(3.14)
To update the cell state a pointwise multiplication is applied on the outputs
from forget gate and the cell state.
Input gate
Update of the cell state with new information consist of two steps. In ﬁrst step
the input gate, which is also a sigmoid layer, decides which parts of the cell state
will be updated. In the next step a hyperbolic tangent (tanh) layer generates a
vector of values which should be added and these two vectors are merged into
one vector with a pointwise multiplication and ﬁnally, it is added to the cell
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Neural networks
25
state with pointwise addition [Ola15]. The input gate is described as
it = σ(Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
(3.15)
and the tanh layer as:
C′
t = tanh(WC · [ht−1, xt] + bC)
(3.16)
The update of the cell state with the forget and input gate is described as:
Ct = ft ∗Ct−1 + it ∗C′
t
(3.17)
Output gate
The output will be based on the cell state. The output gate consist again from
two parts. The ﬁrst, sigmoid layer, decides which parts of the cell state are
going to be outputted, while the second part is a tanh layer which keeps the
cell state values between -1 and 1. These two outputs are then combined with
a pointwise multiplication [Ola15]. Mathematically:
ot = σ(Wo · [ht−1.xt] + bo)
(3.18)
ht = ot ∗tanh(Ct)
(3.19)
Since the ﬁrst introduction and the addition of the forget gate many variants
of LSTM memory cells were developed. In 2000 Schmidhuber and Gers [GS00]
added peephole connections from the cell state straight to input and output
gates, which then make the gate layers base their decisions on the cell state as
well. Another variant is the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), which were intro-
duced in 2014. In these cells the input and forget gates are merged to form a
single unit called update gate and the hidden state and cell state are also merged
to one unit [CvMG+14].
3.3.7
Bidirectional recurrent neural networks
Another successful variation of RNN is Bidirectional recurrent neural network
(BRNN), introduced by Schuster and Paliwal [SP97]. The idea with BRNNs is to
have two hidden layers instead of just one, where one has recurrent connections
with past timestep while the second one is connected with future timesteps
[Lip15]. This allows the model to look not just in the past, but also in the
future. BRNNs can be described as
h(t) = σ(W hxx(t) + W hhh(t−1) + bh)
(3.20)
==PAGE:36==
26
Background
z(t) = σ(W zxx(t) + W zzz(t+1) + bz)
(3.21)
ˆy(t) = softmax(W yhh(t) + W yzz(t) + by)
(3.22)
where z(t) represents the forward and h(t) the backward hidden layers [Lip15].
x t - 1
xt
xt + 1
Figure 3.14: BRNN unfolded in time [Lip15]
LSTM units can be combined with Bidirectional connections and they perform
very well together.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Features
In the domain of speech processing it is important to choose suitable features,
which gives the most information needed for the system to work eﬃciently.
In case of automatic speech recognition, Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coeﬃcients
(MFCCs) were very popular in the past as they provided uncorrelated data
for machine learning algorithms, which were not able to handle highly corre-
lated data. However, as deep learning is becoming more and more popular, the
used features are also changing from MFCCs to Short-Time Fourier Transforms
(STFT) or ﬁlter banks. This is due to the feature extraction nature of neural
network. In case of speech enhancement there is also another constrain on the
features, they must be invertible. That means, that if the raw wave is converted
from time domain to frequency domain and features are extracted, then it must
be possible to convert these features back to time domain (the speech must be
reconstructed from the features).
4.1
Discrete Fourier Transform
In order to get the spectral components of a continuous-time signal x(t) a Fourier
transform must be carried out. It is deﬁned as
X(ω) =
Z ∞
−∞
x(t)e−jωtdt,
ω ∈(−∞, ∞).
(4.1)
==PAGE:38==
28
Features
where t represents the time index. The inverse operation to Fourier transform
is deﬁned as
x(t) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
X(ω)ejωtdω
(4.2)
As a digital signal is discrete, a Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is used instead
of the classic Fourier transform.
X(ωk) =
N−1
X
n=0
x(tn)e−jωktn,
k = 0, 1, 2, . . . , N −1,
(4.3)
As the Fourier transform is now calculated on discrete-time signal the inﬁnite
integral is replaced by a ﬁnite sum [Smied].
The inverse from DFT can be
calculated with the equation below:
x(tn) = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
X(ωk)ejωktn,
n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , N −1.
(4.4)
x(tn) represents the time index index and X(ωk) the frequency index.
4.2
Short-Time Fourier Transform
When a signal is cut into very small frames it appears to be stationary. For
these very small frames it is possible to apply the Short-Time Fourier Transform
(STFT), which gives back the complex representation of the signal in frequency
domain. It can be calculated by
X(m, ω) =
X
n
x(n)w(n −m)e−jωn = DTFTω(x · SHIFTmR(w))
(4.5)
where x(n) is the input signal at time n, w(m) is a window function, for example
"Hamming", Xm(ω) is the Discrete-Time Fourier Transform (DTFT) of the
windowed data centered at time mR and R is the hopsize between the windows.
It is necessarry to use a window function in order to avoid spectral leakage.
When the signal is cut into small observation windows the present frequencies
will be extended to inﬁnity. During this projection to frequency domain, only
periodic frequencies will be projected. Non periodic frequencies would cause
discontinuities over the entire basis set.
This is called the spectral leakage
[Har78]. Window function are weighting functions applied to the data in the
observation window to reduce the discontinuities near the boundaries, forcing
the frequencies to periodicity. It is important that the window function satisﬁes
the Perfect Reconstruction property. It satisﬁes it when it has the constant
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Signal to Noise Ratio
29
overlap-add (COLA) property [Smied]. If it does have the COLA property at
hop-size R then
∞
X
m=−∞
w(n −mR) = 1, ∀n ∈Z (w ∈COLA(R))
(4.6)
and the sum of DTFT’s over time equals to the DTFT of the whole signal X(w).
So
∞
X
n=−∞
Xm(ω) = X(ω) = DTFTω(x)
(4.7)
and then the inverse-STFT is the inverse-DTFT:
x(n) = 1
2π
Z π
−π
∞
X
m=−∞
Xm(ω)ejωndω =
∞
X
m=−∞
1
2π
Z π
−π
Xm(ω)ejωndω =
∞
X
m=−∞
xm(n)
(4.8)
The inverse converts the STFT back to raw wave form, so the enhanced fea-
tures could be converted back and saved as an audio sample. Now, back to the
STFT. The real part of the result represents the magnitude of the signal, while
the imaginary part represents the phase. By taking only the squared magni-
tudes of the STFTs a power spectrogram can be obtained. The human hearing
has logarithmic character, so more information can be ﬁnd in lower frequencies.
To imitate that it is possible to map the linear power spectrogram to mel spec-
trogram by using triangular ﬁlter banks. Further details are discussed in the
preprocessing section.
4.3
Signal to Noise Ratio
As the name implies, SNR is the ratio of signal power to noise power in the
sample. It is calculated as
SNR = PS
PN
(4.9)
where PS is the power of the signal and PN is the power of the noise. To express
the SNR in decibels one can use
SNRdB = 10log10(SNR) = 10log10( PS
PN
)
(4.10)
==PAGE:40==
30
Features
The power of a signal can be estimated as:
Ps = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
|s(k)|2
(4.11)
4.4
Training targets
It is important to choose a proper training target in deep learning based speech
enhancement. There are two categories of training targets: mapping based and
masking based [WC17]. In this work the focus is on masking based training
targets.
4.4.1
Ideal Binary Mask
Ideal binary mask (IBM) is a binary training target, which is deﬁned on a two
dimensional time-frequency (T-F) representation of a noisy signal. Each T-F
unit in a spectrogram or cochleagram, depending on the representation of the
signal, is marked by the IBM as 1 if its Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) exceeds a
speciﬁed threshold, 0 otherwise.
IBM =
(
1
if
SNR(t, f) > threshold
0
otherwise
(4.12)
Here, t represents time while f represents frequency. When using IBM as training
target for a deep learning model the problem becomes a classiﬁcation problem.
In this case a possible loss function could be the cross entropy loss [WC17].
4.4.2
Ideal Ratio Mask
The Ideal Ratio Mask (IRM) can basically be considered as a soft version of the
IBM [HSB14] [NW13] [WNW14] [SRW06]. It is calculated as
IRM = (
S(t, f)2
S(t, f)2 + N(t, f)2 )β
(4.13)
where S(t, f)2 represents the speech energy and N(t, f)2 the noise energy. Ad-
justing the β parameter scales the mask. An usual value for β is around 0,5. In
power spectrum the optimal estimator of target speech is the Wiener ﬁlter and
==PAGE:41==
4.4 Training targets
31
IRM is similar to it. As the bins in the IRM are numbers between 0 and 1 this
is a regression problem and the mean squared error (MSE) can be used as loss
function [WC17].
Figure 4.1: IBM on the left and IRM on the right for a melspectrum with 80
mel bins for a signal mixed with river noise at 0 dB SNR
==PAGE:42==
32
Features
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Design/Experimental Setup
This chapter describes the framework created for speech enhancement, the
phases in the pipeline, the dataset used and the features used in the work.
5.1
Design of the system
The pipeline of our speech enhancement system consist of three steps: prepro-
cessing, model and postprocessing.
Preprocessing
Model (Neural network)
Post
processing
Speech +
noise
Estimated
speech
Figure 5.1: The system pipeline
In the preprocessing phase the features are calculated, which represents the
input for the model, which in our case is a neural network. After the model
processes the data the output again requires some postprocessing steps to get
the estimated speech. In the next sections these steps are discussed in detail.
==PAGE:44==
34
Design/Experimental Setup
Noisy speech
STFT features
Mel spectrogram
Neural network
estimated IRM mask
on mel scale
Linear scale IRM
Enhanced STFT
spectrogram
Enhanced speech
x
Power spectrogram
Preprocessing
Postprocessing
Figure 5.2: The proposed pipeline step by step
5.1.1
Preprocessing
To obtain the power spectrogram a couple of more steps must be applied to an
audio sample. These steps are described below.
Framing
The ﬁrst step is to cut the signal into small overlapping frames. As mentioned
above, this step is neccessary as signal changes over time, so it would not make
sense to apply the DFT on the whole signal. The usual frame sizes are around
40ms with around 50% overlap [Fay].
Window function
The next step is to apply a window function on the frames. This is the w(m)
part of the STFT deﬁnition. An example of window function is the Hanning
window which is deﬁned as
wH(n) = wR(n)
1
2 + 1
2 cos(ΩMn)

= wR(n) cos2
ΩM
2 n

(5.1)
Spectrogram
It is now possible to apply an N-point FFT on each frame to get the frequency
components of the signal. As described earlier, the output from the STFT is a
vector of complex numbers representing the magnitude and phase. To get the
power spectrum the magnitudes must be squared.
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Design of the system
35
Figure 5.3: Hanning window [Smied]
Figure 5.4: Linear scale power spectrogram with 256 frequency bins
A power spectrogram is on linear frequency axis, however, more information
can be found in lower frequencies than in higher. This can be useful in speech
enhancement as the model can learn more useful features from the lower fre-
quency bands. As the human ear perception is logarithmic in nature a linear
spectrogram can be converted to mel-scaled (logarithmic) spectrogram. This
can be done with applying triangular ﬁlters to the power spectrogram. The
number of ﬁlters applied determines the number of mel frequencies in the re-
sulting spectrogram. A dot product is calculated between the triangular ﬁlters
and the power spectrogram. The mel spectrogram is then the input for the
network. The number of mel frequency bins was chosen to be 80, as this num-
ber is a compromise between the frequency granularity and the computational
demand on processing them.
Input Sequence
As the input sample can be very long, the data must be cut into small chunks
and processed sequentially. To provide the model with context information 11,
==PAGE:46==
36
Design/Experimental Setup
Figure 5.5: Mel spectrogram with 80 mel frequency bins
Figure 5.6: Mel ﬁlter banks [Fay]
frames were chosen as the sequence length. 5 frames from the past and 5 from
future, while the estimated frame is the middle one. The length of the sequence
was chosen based on previous works [MT16]. Of course, in real time environment
it is not possible to have frames from the future, however, it would be possible
to wait 5 frames and then start the enhancement process.
Output frame
As mentioned above the output is the estimation of the middle frame in the
input sequence. The input window is sliding through the input data frame by
frame and the output is always the middle frame of the actual 11 frames.
5.1.2
Training targets
As training targets the IRMs in the mel spectrum was chosen. They were calcu-
lated with the equation described in earlier sections. The number of frequency
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Design of the system
37
Neural network
Input sample
Sliding input window
Estimated frames
Figure 5.7: Inputs and outputs to the network. The sliding window of length
11 slides through the input sequence frame by frame inputting 11
frames at a time. The output is on the right. As it is shown two
frames were already processed while the third is currently being
processed.
bins were chosen to 80 to match the size of the input mel spectrum. With this
the model outputs in each frame for each input frequency bin a number between
0 and 1.
5.1.3
Postprocessing
This output mask will then represent a gain for the input spectrogram in mel
scale, thus, it has to be mapped back to linear scale.
Mel to linear mapping
When converting to mel spectrum the phase of the STFTs is discarded, only
the squared magnitudes are mapped to logarithmic scale.
Thus, the perfect
reconstruction back to wave form would be impossible. For this reason, the
predicted IRM masks must be ﬁrst converted to linear scale and then applied
to the STFT features of the noisy speech. This reverse mapping is done by
getting the highest frequencies in each ﬁlter bank in ﬁlter bank ﬁlter applied
when converting from linear scale to mel scale. Then we also have to get the
STFT frequencies present in the spectrogram of the noisy signal.
For each
STFT frequency band is the nearest mel frequency found and the value for that
frequency bin is then looked up and copied from the estimated IRM mask.
==PAGE:48==
38
Design/Experimental Setup
Inverse short-time fourier transform
When the IRM is on linear scale it is applied to the noisy time-frequency repre-
sentation of the input sample. With this the noise is suppressed and the sample
must be converted back to time domain. This is done by the inverse-STFT as
described earlier.
5.1.4
Loss function
With the usage of IRMs as training targets the enhancement becomes a regres-
sion problem.
The mean squared error was chosen as loss function for that
purpose.
ℓ(x, y) = L = {l1, . . . , lN}⊤,
ln = (xn −yn)2
(5.2)
In Equation 5.2, N denotes the batch size.
5.2
Evaluation metric
It is important to choose a proper method for evaluating the performance of the
model. One possible metric is the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR)
5.2.1
Short-time objective intelligibility measure (STOI)
The STOI[THHJ11] measure returns a value between 0 (worse) and 1 (best)
and it represents basically the correlation between the reference clean speech
and the degraded (enhanced in our case) signal. First, the signals are converted
to frequency domain. This is done by DFT on short overlapping windows of
length 256 samples and 50 % overlap. As window function the Hanning window
is used. Then, regions without speech are removed by ﬁnding the frame with the
highest clean speech energy and then removing every frame with energy lower
than the maximum - 40 dB. In the next step a one-third octave band analysis
is performed with 15 one-third octave bins. This is done by grouping the DFT
bins. The center frequency of the lowest band is 150 Hz, while the highest is
4.3 kHz.
Xj(m) =
v
u
u
u
t
k2(j)−1
X
k=k1(j)
|ˆx(k, m)|2
(5.3)
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Evaluation metric
39
ˆx(k, m) denotes the k-th frequency bin of m-th clean speech frame. The same
equation is used to calculate the one-third octave bands of the denoised speech.
The next step is a comparison by a correlation coeﬃcient of short-time temporal
envelope segments of length 384ms. This is calculated by
xj,m = [Xj(m −N + 1), Xj(m −N + 2), ..., Xj(m)]T
(5.4)
Where N is 30, which equals to the 384ms. These segments are ﬁrst clipped
and normalized to avoid large global diﬀerences and bound the sensitivity of the
model on much degraded units. This is done by
normyj,m(n) = min(||xj,m||
||yj,m|| yj,m(n), (1 + 10−β/20xj,m(n)))
(5.5)
where β is the lower signal-to-distortion (SDR) border and is set to -15 dB.
That means that
SDR = 10log10(
xj,m(n)2
(normy(n) −xj,m(n)2)) ≥β.
(5.6)
Than, the intelligibility measure is deﬁned as the sample correlation coeﬃcient
between the vectors
dj,m = (xj,m −µxj,m)T (normyj,m −µnormyj,m)
||xj,m −µxj,m||||normyj,m −µnormyj,m||
(5.7)
where µ is the sample average of the corresponding vector. In the last step, the
average of the intermediate intelligibilities is calculated by
d =
1
JM
X
j,m
dj,m
(5.8)
where J is the number of one-third octave bands and M is the number of frames
[THHJ11].
5.2.2
Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ)
Another method for assessing speech quality is PESQ [RBHH01]. It was devel-
oped by the International Telecommunication Union in 2008 [Uni08] to assess
the quality of communication channels. It is ,however, broadly used to assess
the quality of speech enhancement systems. It will is used in this work too. This
technique also requires the clean speech as reference signal. The whole process
begins by aligning the signals to standard level of listening by ﬁltering them
with FFT. Then the signals are aligned in time. In the next step an auditory
==PAGE:50==
40
Design/Experimental Setup
transform is carried out with linear ﬁltering and gain variation. In the last step,
two distortion parameters are extracted from the disturbance. These parame-
ters are then aggregated in time and frequency and mapped to Mean Opinion
Score (MOS) [RBHH01]. The PESQ values are between -0,5 (worse) and 4,5
(best).
5.3
Model
The model was a combination of convolutional layers and recurrent layers. The
ﬁrst two layers are convolutional to extract the best possible spatial features
for the further layers. The kernel sizes are set to 3x3 in both layers, while the
stride was 1. In the ﬁrst layer the number of ﬁlters is 96 and in the second
128. Max pooling was not used as the input width and height represents the
frequency bins and sequence length and we wanted to keep all the features
through the regression process. The next two layers are recurrent layers with
LSTM cells. There are 100 hidden units in each LSTM layer. Both of them
are bidirectional as the input sequence consists of 5 past, current and 5 future
frames. The next layer is a fully connected feed forward layer consisting of 256
neurons and followed by the output layer. Between the layers Rectiﬁed Linear
Units (ReLUs) were used as non-linearities. The output activation function is
a sigmoid function as the values in the IRM are between 0 and 1. To avoid
overﬁtting dropout, with a probability of 0.2, and batch normalization were
used between the convolutional, LSTM and feed-forward layers. The number of
input and output units is 80 as the melspectrogram and the corresponding IRM
mask consist of 80 frequency bins.
Conv 3 x 3 x 96
Conv 3 x 3 x 128
BiLSTM 100 hidden
FF 256 units
Output 80 units
ReLU
Batchnorm
Dropout
ReLU
Batchnorm
Dropout
Droupout 
ReLU
Batchnorm
Output
1 x 80
Input 11
x 80
BiLSTM 100 hidden
Sigmoid
Figure 5.8: The structure of the neural network
This model is big and complex and it has 27696832 learnable parameters. How-
ever, one of the goals of this work is also to ﬁnd a trade-oﬀbetween the perfor-
mance of the network and the complexity. To achieve this goal smaller models
were also investigated.
==PAGE:51==
5.4 Dataset
41
5.4
Dataset
The training dataset is a collection of 33 clean speech samples of news from NPR
News [NPR18]. The samples are varying in length, however were cut to same
length, 4 minutes and 40 seconds. As noise the Demand Noisy Environment
Dataset [TIV13] was used which consists of 18 diﬀerent environmental noises.
To create the noisy samples 4 types of noises, namely river, living room, metro
station and a coﬀe house, were combined with the NPR News samples at three
diﬀerent SNRs: 0 dB, 5dB and 10 dB. This adds up to 11 hours of audio data.
These 11 hours were split to training and validation data in proportion of 80
percent for training and 20 percent for validation. The clean speech test data is a
collection of podcasts from PBSs subchannel Now [PBS10] from year 2010. This
was combined with two other types of noises from the Demand Noisy dataset:
Park noise and traﬃc noise. In addition to 0 dB, 5 dB and 10 dB the test dataset
was also combined at -5 dB, -10 dB, -15 dB, -20 dB and at 15 db, 20 dB, 25 dB
and 30 dB to test the performance of the system in extreme conditions. All the
datasets were provided by RetuneDSP.
5.5
Training setup
The training loop consist of 100 epoch.
After each epoch a validation was
performed to avoid overﬁtting of the model to the training data. Early stopping
with 5 epochs patience was implemented to save the best possible model after
each epoch. As there were many training samples the batch size was set to a
high number, namely 440 to better capture the dynamics behind the data and
to make use of the available resources eﬃciently. A learning rate of 0.0001 was
used with the Adam optimization algorithm. The training run on the GPUs
provided by the Technical University of Denmark.
5.6
Baseline algorithm
As baseline algorithm the RNNoise from mozilla was used. It was chosen because
it’s similar in structure, it uses masking based approach and neural network for
gain estimation. The diﬀerence is that pitch ﬁltering is not used in this work,
however, we use convolutional layers in combination with the recurrent layers.
Another diﬀerence is, that instead of GRU units LSTM is used in this work.
The used features also diﬀers from those used in RNNoise.
==PAGE:52==
42
Design/Experimental Setup
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:54==
44
Results
6.1
BiLSTMConv model
When building a model with reasonable performance it takes a lot of time to ﬁnd
the optimal parameters and hyperparameters. This model was not an exception.
One and two convolutional layers were tried out, one and two LSTM layers were
tried out, bidirectional LSTM was tried out, GRU instead of LSTM were tried
until the optimal conﬁguration was found. When preparing the features the
audio ﬁles were cut into 32 ms windows with 50 % overlap and than with STFT
the spectrograms were computed which were then mapped to mel scale. The
corresponding IRMs were calculated and the network was trained. Below the
training loss and validation loss are displayed.
Figure 6.1: The loss (MSE) during the training. Train loss is on the left, while
validation loss is on the right.
As the Figure 6.1 shows the model was trained after ﬁve epochs. After that point
it was starting to overﬁt on the training data. In Figure 6.2 the improvement
of the predictions during training is displayed.
==PAGE:55==
6.1 BiLSTMConv model
45
Figure 6.2: The improvement of predictions after epochs. The top left image
is before the training, the top right is after the ﬁrst epoch. The
lower left image is after three epochs while the bottom right is after
ﬁve epochs.The IRM which the network was trying to predict is
on the bottom in the middle.
From Figure 6.2 it is clear how the network was learning during the training. In
the beginning the predictions were just random, however, after just one epoch
the network learned the dynamics of the data. In the later epoch the network
was ﬁnetuning the predictions.
==PAGE:56==
46
Results
6.1.1
Test of the model
To test the generalization capabilities of the model, it was tested on test data.
The test data consisted of 3 unseen clean speech samples combined with 4 unseen
noises, namely park, car, traﬃc and restaurant noises. They were combined at
-10, -5, 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25 dB SNR. During the mixing of the samples they were
not a-weighted. The performance of the model was combined with our baseline
algorithm, RNNoise from Mozilla.
Figure 6.3: The mean STOI on the left and the mean PESQ values on the
right. The blue line represents our model, while the orange repre-
sents the RNNoise. The PESQ and STOI of the noisy signal are
represented with dashed green lines and the ground truth with
dashed red lines.
As the Figure 6.3 shows, in case of STOI score at low SNRs the models perform
quite similarly, in the range from -5 dB to 5 dB mozilla’s model performs a bit
better, while in high SNRs our model outperformed the RNNoise model. In
case of PESQ score our model outperformed the RNNoise model at low and at
high SNRs too.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 BiLSTMConv model
47
Figure 6.4: The top left and right are the predicted gain and the IRM in this
order. The middle left is the spectrogram of the enhanced speech
with the predicted mask and the right is the spectrogram of the
enhanced speech with the IRM. The bottom left is the noisy spec-
trogram while the bottom right is the clean speech spectrogram.
The clean speech was mixed at 0 dB SNR with traﬃc noise.
The Figure 6.4 visualizes the performance of the model on unseen data. This
concrete example was a clean speech ﬁle mixed with traﬃc noise at 0 dB SNR. As
the image shows the model was able to identify and let through the speech while
==PAGE:58==
48
Results
the noise was ﬁltered out. Of course the noise was not suppressed perfectly as it
is unseen noise and have diﬀerent structure. The clean speech was also unseen.
Model
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
STOI
Big
0.597
0.697
0.789
0.863
0.914
0.946
0.966
0.978
RNNoise
0.571
0.697
0.796
0.865
0.908
0.934
0.949
0.959
Noisy
0.591
0.693
0.786
0.86
0.912
0.945
0.965
0.977
PESQ
Big
2.043
2.372
2.664
2.974
3.269
3.544
3.791
3.992
RNNoise
1.829
2.206
2.547
2.842
3.101
3.314
3.493
3.628
Noisy
2.053
2.355
2.647
2.955
3.256
3.54
3.79
3.99
Table 6.1: Comparison of enhancement achieved by our model and mozilla’s
RNNoise
6.2
Parameter reduction
The suggested model had 27696832 parameters. As the model should be im-
plementable in real time environment it was necessary to reduce the number
of parameters. Three smaller models were proposed, medium, small and mini
model. The medium has similar structure, however, the number of hidden units
was reduced to 30, number of LSTM layers is 1. The number of ﬁlters in the
convolutional layers was also reduced to 50 in the ﬁrst layer and 96 in the second
layer. The size of the ﬁrst kernel was changed to 5, to take advantage of the
parameter sharing. The total number of parameters of this model is 5779800.
The small model has no longer bidirectional LSTM layer and has only 10 hid-
den units. Both of the convolutional layers has 50 ﬁlters and 5x5 kernels. The
total number of weights in this model is 640482. The mini model has only 5
hidden units in the LSTM layer and both of the convolutional layers have only
30 ﬁlters. The kernel sizes remain 5x5. To reduce even more the parameters the
fully connected layer before the output layer was replaced by a convolutional
layer with 1x1 kernel and stride 1. The number of ﬁlters is also 1. With these
changes, this model has only 41888 parameters. The training setup, inputs,
outputs were same for all models.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Parameter reduction
49
Figure 6.5: The training process of the models. On the left the training loss
is shown and on the right the validation loss.
The Figure 6.5 shows the diﬀerences between the losses of each models. As
expected the loss increases with the number of decreased parameters in the
networks. Also, the bigger the model the less epochs needed for the model to
converge. Exception is the small and mini models, but that can be caused by
the fact, that the structure of the mini model diﬀers from the other models. It is
worth mentioning, that the medium and small models performed quite similarly
on the validation data, but it took almost twice epochs for the small model to
achieve the same loss.
Model
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
STOI
Big
0.597
0.697
0.789
0.863
0.914
0.946
0.966
0.978
RNNoise
0.571
0.697
0.796
0.865
0.908
0.934
0.949
0.959
Medium
0.597
0.697
0.789
0.863
0.914
0.946
0.966
0.978
Small
0.571
0.697
0.796
0.865
0.908
0.934
0.949
0.959
Mini
0.591
0.693
0.786
0.86
0.912
0.945
0.965
0.977
Noisy
0.591
0.693
0.786
0.86
0.912
0.945
0.965
0.977
PESQ
Big
2.043
2.372
2.664
2.974
3.269
3.544
3.791
3.992
RNNoise
1.829
2.206
2.547
2.842
3.101
3.314
3.493
3.628
Medium
2.043
2.372
2.664
2.974
3.269
3.544
3.791
3.992
Small
1.829
2.206
2.547
2.842
3.101
3.314
3.493
3.628
Mini
2.053
2.355
2.647
2.955
3.256
3.54
3.79
3.99
Noisy
2.053
2.355
2.647
2.955
3.256
3.54
3.79
3.99
Table 6.2: Comparison of enhancement achieved by all the models
==PAGE:60==
50
Results
Figure 6.6: The predicted Ideal Ratio Masks on test data. From the top right
corner: The mini model, the small model, the medium model and
the big model. The bottom middle image is the ground truth.
As can be seen in Figure 6.6 as the models are getting smaller the masks are
becoming smoother. That is because the models have less parameters, so they
cannot learn to predict the mask in that granularity level. As also the predictions
show, the mini model learn the features of the speech even better. The STOI
and PESQ score corresponds also to this ﬁnding.
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Parameter reduction
51
Figure 6.7: The average STOI and PESQ scores of the models on test samples
mixed at -10, -5, 0, 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 dB SNR. The solid lines
represents the models, while the green dashed line represents the
PESQ and STOI of the noisy samples and the pink dashed line
the samples suppressed with the IRMs.
As the Figure 6.7 shows all models performs quite similarly except of the small
model, which does not perform very well.
To make the performance of the
models more clear, the medium and the mini models are plot also separately
with our baseline enhancement algorithm.
Figure 6.8: The medium model compared to the big model and to RNNoise.
It is clear from Figure 6.8, that the big and the medium models perform similarly,
the big model performs slightly better. Both of the models outperforms RNNoise
in the achieved PESQ score.
The measurements of STOI shows, as already
previously mentioned, that the RNNoise performs better in STOI at SNRs -5
to 5 dB. The same implies for the mini model as shown in 6.9. It performs a bit
==PAGE:62==
52
Results
worse then the medium model, however, considering the number of parameter
diﬀerences between the models, it seems like this model would be the most
suitable to real time environment of small devices.
Figure 6.9: The mini model compared to the big model and to RNNoise
6.3
Comparison of noises
In this section, the ability of the model to suppress diﬀerent types of noises is
tested. The experimental setup is the same as in the experiments above. The
performance of the big model is tested and how it can adapt to diﬀerent noise
conditions. As stated above, the tested noises are: car, traﬃc, restaurant and
park noises. They were mixed at same SNRs and with the same samples as in
the above experiments.
Figure 6.10: The eﬀectiveness of the speech enhancement of the model on
diﬀerent types of noises.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Comparison of noises
53
The model can enhance speeches with diﬀerent eﬀectiveness, as the Figure 6.10
shows. Also, the diﬀerent noises have diﬀerent degradation eﬀect on the per-
ceived quality of the speech. The most degrading eﬀect has the restaurant noise.
This is because other distant speakers are present in the noise. The PESQ and
STOI score of enhanced samples with restaurant noise is the lowest from all en-
hanced samples, as the model was not train on noises, similar in structure, where
other speakers are present. That leads that the model identiﬁes the speech of
other speakers as speech not as noise. The enhancement of samples with park
noise is a diﬃcult task, as there are a lot instantaneous noises present, like birds,
children screaming and soldiers marching. The diﬀerence in the noisy and en-
hanced sample is the lowest in park noise, which means that the model can
only hardly generalize to this type of noise. However, the model can eﬀectively
suppress traﬃc noise. At 0 dB the enhancement is almost 0.5 PESQ. The car
noise is a very speciﬁc noise. It is constant and at very low frequencies.
Noise
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
PESQ
car
0.084
0.035
-0.084
-0.169
-0.231
-0.267
-0.271
-0.264
-0.218
-0.286
-0.39
-0.472
-0.551
-0.61
-0.653
-0.673
traﬃc
0.251
0.366
0.409
0.395
0.323
0.194
0.033
-0.086
0.053
0.187
0.209
0.161
0.044
-0.136
-0.329
-0.492
resto
-0.032
0.067
0.109
0.189
0.235
0.246
0.2
0.108
-0.348
-0.129
0.093
0.179
0.191
0.127
-0.022
-0.213
park
0.006
0.062
0.111
0.126
0.1
0.047
-0.002
-0.052
-0.037
0.094
0.165
0.15
0.073
-0.079
-0.229
-0.372
STOI
car
-0.005
-0.01
-0.014
-0.016
-0.015
-0.014
-0.013
-0.013
-0.021
-0.022
-0.024
-0.026
-0.028
-0.03
-0.031
-0.031
traﬃc
0.046
0.045
0.032
0.014
0.002
-0.005
-0.009
-0.011
0.052
0.05
0.036
0.012
-0.007
-0.019
-0.026
-0.03
resto
-0.005
0.018
0.042
0.047
0.036
0.018
0.005
-0.003
-0.105
0.007
0.056
0.064
0.04
0.011
-0.009
-0.021
park
0.03
0.026
0.019
0.009
0.002
-0.003
-0.007
-0.009
0.033
0.045
0.035
0.016
-0.002
-0.016
-0.024
-0.029
Table 6.3: The enhancement achieved by our model and the baseline algorithm
on diﬀerent noises. It is calculated as the diﬀerence between the
enhanced sample and noisy sample. The negative values signalizes
that the enhancement achieved worse score than the noisy sample.
For each noise there are two rows, the ﬁrst row represents our model
and the second the RNNoise.
The PESQ and STOI score tries to measure the perceived quality of a sample,
and such low frequencies does not distort the perceived speech that much, es-
pecially in higher SNR. However, the model tries to suppress the car noise, and
==PAGE:64==
54
Results
that leads to distortion in speech, thus, to lower PESQ and STOI score.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 7
Conclusion and Discussion
In this work the area of speech enhancement with deep learning was examined.
First, an overview of related works was provided. In these works a lot of features
and architectures were discussed. After reviewing these works a neural network
architecture was proposed. While the usual deep learning approaches consist of
either convolutional or recurrent neural networks, we decided to use a hybrid
architecture built of convolutional layers in combination with recurrent layers.
The convolutional layers serves as feature extractors, while the recurrent layers
process features in time. As input features the mel spectrogram was used with
80 channels. As input sequence a window with 11 frames was chosen with 5
past, current and 5 future frames. The output of the network is the current
frame of the mel-scaled Ideal Ratio Mask (IRM) consisting of 80 channels. As
the output implies, as training targets IRMs were chosen.
The built model
consisted of two convolutional and two bidirectional Long short-term memory
(LSTM) layers with a fully-connected layer in the end.
One of the goals of
this thesis was to build a model implementable on small devices, in real-time
environment. To achieve this goal, variations of the big model were built, cutting
down the size of the layers, ﬁlter numbers, kernel sizes and the overall number
of parameters. The training data consisted of 31 clean speech samples of length
4.40 seconds mixed with 4 types of noises (river, metro, cafe, living room) mixed
at 0 dB, 5 dB and 10 dB signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio. The test data consisted
of three samples from a completely diﬀerent data set combined with 4 noises
(traﬃc, restaurant, car and park) at -10 dB, -5 dB, 0 dB, 5 dB, 10 dB, 15 dB,
==PAGE:66==
56
Conclusion and Discussion
20 dB and 25 dB. The SNR range is much broader here to test the model in
extreme conditions and to identify it’s limitations. As baseline algorithm an
RNN based model from Mozilla, called RNNoise, was chosen which uses Bark-
scaled spectral magnitudes with 22 bands as input features. The output of the
model is, similarly to our model, an IRM mask, however, with just 22 bands. In
speech enhancement it is hard to test the quality of the system as it is hard to
imitate the human hearing. The metrics, which tries to measure the perceptual
quality of the speech, and were chosen as our metrics, are PESQ and STOI.
The ﬁrst experiments tested the performance of our model compared to the
RNNoise on test data. In most cases our model outperformed the RNNoise.
Both of the models have poor performance at very low SNRs below -10 dB.
This was expected, as below this range the speech is unrecognizable even by
human hearing. In the second experiment, 3 smaller models were tested. The
medium and small sized had similar architecture as the ﬁrst one, but with less
parameters. In the third one, instead of fully connected layer in the end a 1x1
convolution with stride 1 was used, to take advantage of the parameter sharing
and reduce the number of parameters even more. The small sized model did
not prove to perform well. The other medium sized and the 1x1 convolution
model performed similarly to the big one. It is surprising, as it has 500 times
less parameters than the big model. Another observation is, that with that less
parameters the predicted masks are smoother then in case of bigger models. This
could even help, as it could get rid of the noises present even in the clean speech,
like taking a deep breath. The training targets are unable to get rid of that,
as they are part of the clean speech. The third experiment tested the ability of
the model to generalize to diﬀerent types of noises. The four noises from the
test data were tested. The experiments showed, that the restaurant noise has
the lowest PESQ and STOI, however, the model can generalize decently to that
noise and can suppress it. The park noise contains a lot of instantaneous noises
with diﬃcult structure, like birds and soldiers marching. For this reason, and
because the train data did not have any noise with similar structure, the model
can not suppress this type of noise very eﬀectively. On the other hand, the model
performs very well on traﬃc noise. In the future a real-time system could be
implemented and deployed on small devices like RaspberryPi [Fou]. The smallest
model could be a good candidate for that purpose. One of the follow up works
could be an end-to-end regression for prediction of clean speech spectrogram
from noisy spectrogram. As a spectrogram consist of real part representing the
magnitude and an imaginary part representing the phase, either two models
could be trained, or multitarget learning could be used. Another possibility
could be to leave the feature extraction completely to the neural network and
work on raw wave form. With the computational power available nowadays it is
feasible to process raw wave samples with neural networks. Small DSP devices
,however, do not have the computational power yet.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Github repository
All the code, enhanced and reconstructed samples, calculated PESQ and STOI
scores and jupyter notebooks can be found in a github repository at:
https://github.com/Davide01/speech-enhancement-deeplearning
The source code for the models is in the models/ folder.
The utils/ folder
contains source code for util source ﬁles (fx.
early stopping).
The trained
models are in the trained_models/ folder.
Part of the dataset used can be
found in the dataset/ folder. The denoised reconstructed samples are in the
reconstructed/ folder. In this level the folders are named after the model names
used in the thesis. The noisy ﬁles are in the test_new_sorted/ folder and the
samples enhanced with the ground truths are in the ground_truths/ folder. In
the next level the enhanced ﬁles are divided into folders marked with the SNR
levels used for noise addition. The jupyter notebooks, training and testing loops,
feature calculations and other source ﬁles are in the root folder. In order to run
the codes
• pytorch https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/,
• librosa https://librosa.github.io/librosa/,
• pystoi-master https://github.com/mpariente/pystoi,
==PAGE:68==
58
Github repository
• python-pesq-master https://github.com/vBaiCai/python-pesq,
• and rnnoise-master https://github.com/xiph/rnnoise/
must be installed. All the python code is written in Python 3.5 or higher.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix B
Important code snippets
Figure B.1: The huge model
==PAGE:70==
60
Important code snippets
Figure B.2: Parameters of the model
Figure B.3: Forward pass
==PAGE:71==
61
Figure B.4: The training loop
Figure B.5: Calculation of mel features
==PAGE:72==
62
Important code snippets
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[CvMG+14] Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Fethi
Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase
representations using RNN encoder-decoder for statistical machine
translation. CoRR, abs/1406.1078, 2014.
[DHS11]
John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient
methods for online learning and stochastic optimization. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 12:2121–2159, July 2011.
[Dl418]
Dl4j. Recurrent neural networks in dl4j, 2018.
[EJH07]
Jan Erkelens, Jesper Jensen, and Richard Heusdens. A data-driven
approach to optimizing spectral speech enhancement methods for
various error criteria.
Speech Commun., 49(7-8):530–541, July
2007.
[Fay]
Haytham Fayek. Speech processing for machine learning: Filter
banks, mel-frequency cepstral coeﬃcients (mfccs) and what’s in-
between.
[Fou]
Raspberry Pi Foundation. Raspberry pi.
[GB14]
S. Gonzalez and M. Brookes. Mask-based enhancement for very
low quality speech.
In 2014 IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 7029–
7033, May 2014.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learn-
ing. The MIT Press, 2016.
==PAGE:74==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[GS00]
Felix A. Gers and Juergen Schmidhuber. Recurrent nets that time
and count. Technical report, 2000.
[GSC99]
F. A. Gers, J. Schmidhuber, and F. Cummins. Learning to forget:
continual prediction with lstm. In 1999 Ninth International Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks ICANN 99. (Conf. Publ. No.
470), volume 2, pages 850–855 vol.2, Sep. 1999.
[Har78]
Fredric J. Harris. On the use of windows for harmonic analysis
with the discrete fourier transform. In Proc. IEEE, pages 51–83,
1978.
[HM13]
Thad Hughes and Keir Mierle. Recurrent neural networks for voice
activity detection. In ICASSP, pages 7378–7382, 2013.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term mem-
ory. Neural Comput., 9(8):1735–1780, November 1997.
[HSB14]
Christopher Hummersone, Toby Stokes, and Tim Brookes. On the
Ideal Ratio Mask as the Goal of Computational Auditory Scene
Analysis, pages 349–368. 05 2014.
[HW02]
G. Hu and D. Wang. Monaural speech segregation based on pitch
tracking and amplitude modulation. In 2002 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, volume 1,
pages I–553–I–556, May 2002.
[Kar]
Andrej Karpathy.
Convolutional neural networks (cnns / con-
vnets).
[Kar15]
Andrej Karpathy. Neural networks and deep learning, 2015.
[KB15]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochas-
tic optimization. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
[Kol18]
Morten Kolbæk. Single-Microphone Speech Enhancement and Sep-
aration Using Deep Learning. PhD thesis, Technical Faculty of IT
and Design, Aalborg University, Langagervej 2, DK – 9220 Aalborg
Ø, 8 2018.
[LB15]
L. Lightburn and M. Brookes. Sobm - a binary mask for noisy
speech that optimises an objective intelligibility metric. In 2015
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), pages 5078–5082, April 2015.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[LBD+89]
Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard,
W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel. Backpropagation applied to hand-
written zip code recognition. Neural Computation, 1(4):541–551,
1989.
[Lip15]
Zachary Chase Lipton. A critical review of recurrent neural net-
works for sequence learning. CoRR, abs/1506.00019, 2015.
[McG]
McGill. Multimedia signal processing.
[Moo12]
B.C.J. Moore. An Introduction to the Psychology of Hearing. Emer-
ald, 2012.
[Moz]
Mozilla. Rnnoise: Using deep learning for noise suppression.
[MP43]
Warren Mcculloch and Walter Pitts. A logical calculus of ideas
immanent in nervous activity. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics,
5:127–147, 1943.
[MT16]
Seyedmahdad Mirsamadi and Ivan Tashev. Causal speech enhance-
ment combining data-driven learning and suppression rule estima-
tion. In Interspeech 2016, 17th Annual Conference of the Inter-
national Speech Communication Association, San Francisco, CA,
USA, September 8-12, 2016, pages 2870–2874, 2016.
[Nie18]
Michael Nielsen. Neural networks and deep learning, 2018.
[NPR18]
NPRNews. Npr news 2018, 2018.
[NW13]
A. Narayanan and D. Wang. Ideal ratio mask estimation using
deep neural networks for robust speech recognition. In 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Process-
ing, pages 7092–7096, May 2013.
[Ola15]
Christopher Olah. Understanding lstm networks, 2015.
[PBS10]
PBS. Now on pbs, 2010.
[Phe19]
Siemens Phenom. Introduction to ﬁlters: Fir versus iir, 2019.
[PM06]
John G. Proakis and Dimitris K. Manolakis. Digital Signal Pro-
cessing (4th Edition). Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA, 2006.
[RBHH01]
A. W. Rix, J. G. Beerends, M. P. Hollier, and A. P. Hekstra.
Perceptual evaluation of speech quality (pesq)-a new method for
speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs. In
Proceedings of the Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 200.
On IEEE International Conference - Volume 02, ICASSP ’01,
==PAGE:76==
66
BIBLIOGRAPHY
pages 749–752, Washington, DC, USA, 2001. IEEE Computer So-
ciety.
[RHW86]
David E. Rumelhart, Geoﬀrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams.
Learning Representations by Back-propagating Errors.
Nature,
323(6088):533–536, 1986.
[RLY13]
Neville Ryant, Mark Liberman, and Jiahong Yuan. Speech activ-
ity detection on youtube using deep neural networks. In INTER-
SPEECH, 2013.
[RWB03]
Nicoleta Roman, DeLiang Wang, and Guy J. Brown. Speech segre-
gation based on sound localization. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 114(4):2236–2252, 2003.
[SDBR15]
J.T. Springenberg, A. Dosovitskiy, T. Brox, and M. Riedmiller.
Striving for simplicity: The all convolutional net. In ICLR (work-
shop track), 2015.
[Smied]
Julius O. Smith.
Mathematics of the Discrete Fourier Trans-
form (DFT). http://ccrma.stanford.edu/˜jos/mdft/, accessed
(date accessed). online book, 2007 edition.
[SP97]
M. Schuster and K.K. Paliwal. Bidirectional recurrent neural net-
works. Trans. Sig. Proc., 45(11):2673–2681, November 1997.
[SRW06]
Soundararajan Srinivasan, Nicoleta Roman, and DeLiang Wang.
Binary and ratio time-frequency masks for robust speech recogni-
tion. Speech Communication, 48:1486–1501, 11 2006.
[SV15]
M. Sathya and Dr. S. P. Victor. Noise reduction techniques and
algorithms for speech signal processing. 2015.
[THHJ11]
CH Taal, RC Hendriks, R Heusdens, and J Jensen.
An algo-
rithm for intelligibility prediction of time-frequency weighted noisy
speech. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Pro-
cessing, 19(7):2125–2136, 2011.
[TIV13]
Joachim Thiemann, Nobutaka Ito, and Emmanuel Vincent. DE-
MAND: a collection of multi-channel recordings of acoustic noise
in diverse environments, June 2013. Supported by Inria under the
Associate Team Program VERSAMUS.
[Uni08]
International Telecommunication Union. P.862 : Perceptual evalu-
ation of speech quality (pesq): An objective method for end-to-end
speech quality assessment of narrow-band telephone networks and
speech codecs, 2008.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
[Val17]
Jean-Marc Valin. A hybrid dsp/deep learning approach to real-
time full-band speech enhancement. CoRR, abs/1709.08243, 2017.
[VS93]
Andrew Varga and Herman J.M. Steeneken. Assessment for auto-
matic speech recognition: Ii. noisex-92: A database and an exper-
iment to study the eﬀect of additive noise on speech recognition
systems. Speech Communication, 12(3):247 – 251, 1993.
[Wan05]
Deliang Wang. On ideal binary mask as the computational goal of
auditory scene analysis. In in Speech Separation by Humans and
Machines, pages 181–197. Kluwer, 2005.
[WC17]
DeLiang Wang and Jitong Chen.
Supervised speech separation
based on deep learning: An overview.
CoRR, abs/1708.07524,
2017.
[WJPJ74]
Paul Werbos and Paul J. (Paul John. Beyond regression : new
tools for prediction and analysis in the behavioral sciences /. 01
1974.
[WNW14]
Yuxuan Wang, Arun Narayanan, and DeLiang Wang. On train-
ing targets for supervised speech separation. IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio, Speech & Language Processing, 22(12):1849–1858, 2014.
[Xip06]
Xiph. Speex, 2006.
[XLZ17]
Shasha Xia, Hao Li, and Xueliang Zhang.
Using optimal ratio
mask as training target for supervised speech separation. CoRR,
abs/1709.00917, 2017.
[YK16]
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by
dilated convolutions. CoRR, abs/1511.07122, 2016.
