==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy - Electric Energy Systems
Deep learning for Security Constrained
Optimal Power Flow
Transforming the non-linear optimization program
into an MILP problem with Neural Networks
Jeanne
Mermet-Guyennet
(s172378)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
CEE - Center for Electrical Power and Energy
Department of Electrical Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 325
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tel (+45) 45 25 35 00
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The increasing complexification of power systems brought by the growing penetration
of renewable energy sources and use of controllable devices are reinforcing the need of
optimization models able to account for non-linear behaviors while remaining computa-
tionally efficient. We propose in this work to exploit the ability of deep neural networks
to recognize complex patterns in order to replace inequality constraints of a Non-Linear
Programming (NLP) optimization model, and ultimately to transform totally the NLP
into a Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problem. The approach developed
is totally novel in the way that the neural network classification analytical expression
is converted into a set of MILP constraints and directly integrated in the optimization
model. We provide a general framework and methodology and derive specific rules for
the definition of the constraints of the models. Furthermore, we provide a corrective
action and its metric to control the output of the neural network (NN) prediction di-
rectly in the optimization model, to tackle the uncertainty of the NN prediction. The
approach was tested and validated for the specific application of security constrained op-
timization of power systems on the 6-bus Matpower test-case. By implementing a linear
approximation of the AC losses of the system, we show that we are able to transform
the non-linear security constrained AC optimal power flow into an MILP problem and
to reach optimality with a cost of only 1.2905 $ (a distance of 1.7236MW) compared to
the benchmark SCOPF, while reducing the average simulation time and approximating
perfectly the losses at optimality.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Center for Electrical Power and Energy, depart-
ment of Electrical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of
the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree in Sustainable Energy.
Kongens Lyngby, June 30, 2019
Jeanne Mermet-Guyennet (s172378)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
At the term of this Master Thesis, I would like to specially thank my supervisors, Spyros
Chatzivasileiadis, Andreas Venzke and Giorgos Misyris.
I address my acknowledgements to Spyros, for offering me the opportunity to work
on such a interesting subject at the leading edge of the research in the field of power
system optimization. I would also like to thank him for his availability for meetings and
his always relevant feedbacks allowing me to have the necessary high-level understanding
of my work, leading to the writing and submission of a scientific paper.
I would like to thank warmly Andreas and Giorgos for their support and availability
at all time, providing me with necessary feedbacks and help in finding relevant papers,
allowing me to have important insights in this research field.
Finally I thank them specially for their listening of the doubts I had regarding my
master thesis and future, and for being supportive and understanding when I expressed
the willingness not to pursue in this field.
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
Basic structure of a plain neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Two types of database points distribution and the corresponding prediction .
10
3.1
General methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
ϵ-control on a neural network prediction example - Red dots are predicted
unsafe, blue dots are predicted safe. The grey area represents the actual
safe area. The black dotted line represents the NN predicted boundary. The
green dotted line is the NN predicted boundary after ϵ-control . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Solving process of the NN-SC-ACOPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1
Training databases representing the ensemble of safe (dark blue) and unsafe
points (light blue) for the DC representation (4.1a-4.1b) and AC representa-
tion (4.1c-4.1d). The grey area in 4.1d) and 4.1b) represent the safe points
of the detailed testing database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Representation of AC losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
ϵ effect on the Accuracy, Recall and Specificity of a 1-layer (4.3a) and 3-layers
(4.3b) neural network prediction of the DC safe area
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Predictions of training and testing databases - red and blue dots represent
the logits output of the NN prediction of the training database, blue area
represents the safe area prediction of the testing database . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.6
Optimization results and ϵ-corrected safe area prediction (blue area) . . . . .
27
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
3.1
Confusion matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
Training and testing databases parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Neural network structure and parameters for AC application . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Neural network structure and parameters for DC application . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Performances criteria of the training and testing database prediction
. . . .
25
4.5
Optimization results for the DC case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6
Optimization results for the AC case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.7
Comparison between benchmark and NN-SCOPF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
A.1 Bus data from the 6-bus case DC representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
A.2 Generator data from the 6-bus case DC representation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
31
A.3 Branch data from the 6-bus case DC representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
A.4 Generator cost data from the 6-bus case DC representation . . . . . . . . . .
32
B.1 Bus data from the 6-bus case AC representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
B.2 Generator data from the 6-bus case AC representation
. . . . . . . . . . . .
33
B.3 Branch data from the 6-bus case AC representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
B.4 Generator cost data from the 6-bus case AC representation . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Context and motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Methodology & Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
From NLP to MILP - Mathematical framework and challenges
5
2.1
Neural network mixed-integer representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
General formulation for the NN-MILP problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Challenges - From case specific to general notions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
NN-MILP Methodology and model formulations for SCOPF appli-
cations
11
3.1
High-level methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Approach for SCOPF applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Final models for NNSCOPF - DC and AC case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Case study - 6-bus test system
19
4.1
Database, neural network characteristics and performances . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Conclusion
29
5.1
Achievements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A 6-bus test case parameter - DC
31
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
B 6-bus test case parameter - AC
33
Bibliography
35
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Context and motivation
The recent and future developments of energy systems involve a very much needed in-
creasing penetration of Renewable Energy Sources (RES) in the modern power systems,
along with the use of controllable devices allowing to operate the network and replace
conventional units, paving the way to fossil free electrical networks. However, the uncer-
tainties and intermittency of RES combined with the flexibility of the aforementioned
devices bring a large number of additional states to the power systems, also resulting
from their interconnections development. As the complexity of power systems hereby
grows, the task of TSOs (Transmission System Operators) to take fast and efficient ac-
tions to operate the power system safely while ensuring minor costs to producers and
consumers is becoming increasingly arduous. They henceforth need to be provided with
efficient optimization tools able to handle large amount of data and assisting them in
the power system operation. Those tools have to be able to assess the states of op-
erating points without having to solve computationally laborious and time consuming
simulations, while ensuring the safety, security of supply and optimality of the networks.
Machine learning techniques and specially deep learning models have in the past
decades known significant break through and had big impact in areas such as health
care, legal systems, engineering and the financial industry.
Power systems have not
been left out of the race, and already from the 90s the use of Artificial Neural Networks
(ANNs) for power systems security assessment was seen as a very promising field [20] [18]
[17]. In the recent applications of deep learning for power systems we can distinguish
in the literature the work focusing on limiting risk and ensuring network’s safety, or
the work aiming at improving optimization tools and models in order to make them
more tractable and less dependant on networks parameters. In the first category we
can find multiple uses of deep learning models for power system security assessment
such as [12] or [21].
In [5] is developed the use of an ensemble learning method to
provide security rules ensuring the safety and optimality of the network, while in [9]
the authors exploit deep learning to learn human decisions from historical data and
advise dispatchers of remedial decisions in order to keep the networks power flow within
safe limits. The same authors later on used Neural Networks (NN) to rapidly rank N-1
and N-2 contingencies and prioritize security assessment [7]. Optimization problems are
often non-linear and non-convex, e.g. the ACOPF (Alternating Current Optimal Power
Flow) in power systems applications.
There is therefore a growing interest in using
deep learning to alleviate the computational burden of the models. In [19], deep neural
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
networks are used to learn directly the mapping between the load profile and the optimal
solution of the DCOPF (Direct Current Optimal Power Flow), whereas the authors of
[6] provide an alternative to learning directly the optimal solution of the DCOPF by
learning the active set of constraints at optimality and under uncertainty realization.
The same approach is exploited in [2] with random forests instead of neural nets, but
generalized to the DCOPF by using the predicted optimal solution as a start-point of
the iterative procedure for solving the OPF.
This work presents the development of a novel method for replacing inequality con-
straints of non-linear optimization problem by a mixed-integer representation of classifi-
cation neural networks, that applied to the security constrained optimization of power
systems allows to combine both networks security considerations and reduction of the
optimization model complexity. Previous work developed the use of deep learning to
replace security constraints in the Security Constrained Optimal Power Flow (SCOPF):
in [11], authors used decision trees to integrate small-signal and N-1 security assessment
in the SCOPD and solve the problem as a relaxed Mixed Integer Non-Linear Program
(MINLP), and in [10] a non-linear formulation of neural networks replace security con-
straints of the SCOPF. We propose here to go further in the simplification of the model
and exploit the presence of Rectified Linear Units (ReLu) in the neural network struc-
ture to transform the problem into a fully Mixed Integer Linear Program (MILP). The
contributions of this paper are the proposition of a general analytical framework for the
translation of Non-Linear Programs (NLP) into Mixed Integer Linear Programs (MILP)
using neural networks, and establish a general rule for the definition of the problem con-
straints. In addition, we provide a way of modifying the domain of the neural network
feasibility assessment, thus enabling a trade-off between the risk brought by the uncer-
tainty of the prediction and the optimality of the solution. Finally, by the application of
the method to SCOPF, we open the way to the solving of simple optimization problems
encompassing complex networks security conditions.
1.2
Methodology & Structure
The initial objectives of this master thesis were to find and present a way to translate
the neural network equations into an optimization problem, for power system SCOPF
applications. The first phase of the master thesis consisted in working mostly on the
analytical formulation of the problem, focusing on the Security-Constrained DCOPF
(SC-DCOPF), the linear approximation of the problem, and then implementing the
model to test it’s feasibility. Replacing a linear constrained optimization problem by
an MILP formulation was evidently not of a great interest in terms of improvement
of the computational burden and the solution found by our method would never catch
the optimal point of a linear problem that lies at the vertex of the security constraints,
unless the neural network predicted perfectly the safety boundary. As the focus here
was not on the performances of the neural network nor the database generation, the
application to the DCOPF gave us reasonable results and the work done allowed us to
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Methodology & Structure
3
understand better the neural network prediction and it’s corresponding expression in the
problem constraints, as well as to develop techniques to improve the tractability of the
problem and control the output of the neural network. When the method was confirmed
to work well for the SC-DC-OPF, we started working on the application to non-linear
optimization problems and more specifically the SC-AC-OPF. With a more significant
number of decision variables and their fully non-linear description, understanding how
to train the neural network and formulate the model was more challenging. However,
this allowed us to extract important learnings such as the choice of the input variables,
and the definition of the constraints of the optimization model.
The development of the method was done on a specific application: the security
constrained optimization of power systems. However, it allowed us to draw conclusions
that could apply to any non-linear constrained optimization problems, and this report
provides a general formulation and methodology for the method, followed by its demon-
stration on the SCOPF. The report is organized as follows. Chapter 1 provides the
mathematical formulation of the problem: how to transform a neural network output
into a set of MILP constraints, the overall model and the challenges associated to the
method. In Chapter 2 are detailed the methodology for the SCOPF application and
how were addressed the previously presented challenges, as well as the detailed models
for the DC and AC cases of the Neural Network Security Constrained Optimal Power
Flow (NN-SCOPF). Finally, we present the results of the method in the study case of
the 6-bus Matpower test case.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
From NLP to MILP -
Mathematical framework
and challenges
This chapter contains the description of the method to transform a non-linear opti-
mization problem into an MILP by using neural networks to replace certain inequality
constraints of the program. We start by describing the mathematical framework to con-
vert analytically the neural net output equation into an (Section 2.1), then the final
formulation for the NN-MILP is provided (Section ??) and finally the challenges arising
with the method are described in Section 2.3.
2.1
Neural network mixed-integer
representation
A non-linear optimization program with equality and inequality constraints can be writ-
ten in its general form as:
min
x , f(x)
(2.1)
s.t.
gi(x) = 0
i = 1, ..., p
(2.2)
hi(x) ≤0
i = 1, ..., m
(2.3)
Where x corresponds to the vector of state variables of the model.
An optimal
solution x∗of this problem minimizes the objective function f(x), while respecting the
p equality and m inequality constraints gi(x) and hi(x) represented in (2.2) and (2.3).
In this section, we show how the analytical expression describing the output pre-
diction of a classifier neural network can replace a set of inequality constraints of the
optimization problem. The structure of a fully connected N-layers perceptron is repre-
sented in Figure 2.1.
The neural net is composed of an N0 neurons input layer X0 ∈RN0, H = L −1
hidden layers Xl ∈RNl, each hidden layer l being composed of Nl hidden neurons, and
==PAGE:18==
6
2 From NLP to MILP - Mathematical framework and challenges
Input layer 
𝑋"
#
𝑋$
#
𝑋%#
Hidden
layers
Output layer
𝑧"
𝑧$
𝑤""
"
𝑤%%
"
𝑤%"
"
𝑋"
(
𝑋$
(
Figure 2.1: Basic structure of a plain neural network
a two neurons output layer z = {z1, z2}, corresponding to the classification labels of
the neural network prediction, i.e. the feasibility assessment of the constraints hk(x)
being replaced. The neurons from layer l −1 to layer l are fully connected by a weight
matrix Wl ∈RNl×Nl−1 and a bias vector bl, and to each hidden neuron is applied an
activation function ha(.) such that the output vector of the hidden layer l is expressed
as Yl = ha(Xl) = ha(WlYl−1 + bl). Note that for the input and output layers l = 0
and l = L, Y0 = X0 and YL = XL = z.
The activation function of the hidden neurons is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLu)
function: ha(x) = max(x, 0). The ReLu is part of the univariate piecewise linear func-
tions ensemble and can thus be described by a combination of linear functions in dis-
junctive ensembles that combined together cover the domain of the function, but do
not overlap [14]. This type of piecewise linear function can be decomposed into a set
of MILP constraints according to the combinatory disjunctive constraint approach [13].
We use the formulation of the ReLu as in [24] to describe the neural network output z
as a set of MILP constraints {Hl}, l = 1, ..., L −1 corresponding to each hidden layer:
z = WL.YL−1 + bL
(2.4)
= WLha(WL−1YL−2 + bL−1) + bL
(2.5)
= ... = fnn(X0, W, b)
(2.6)
Hl :
{
Xl = WlYl−1 + bl
Yl = max(Xl, 0)
(2.7)
⇐⇒















Xl = WlYl−1 + bl
Yl ≤Xl −lXl(1 −vx)
Yl ≥Xl
Yl ≤uXl.vx.
Yl ≥0
(2.8)
Where lX ≤X ≤uX, lX ∈RNl, uX ∈RNl and vx is the vector of binary variables
such as vx = 1{X>0}, vx ∈RNl.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 General formulation for the NN-MILP problem
7
The output layer is simply described as:
HL : z = WLYL−1 + bL
(2.9)
Finally, we need to express the constraint corresponding to the classification of the
NN itself, i.e. which of the two classes does the input X0 belongs to. In classification
problems, the output neurons z1 and z2 are usually normalized with the Softmax activa-
tion function1, and the output of the neural net is a vector of probability p = {p1, p2},
where p1 and p2 represent the probabilities that X0 belongs to class 1 or 2, respectively.
In order to ensure that the input remains within the boundaries of class 2 for instance,
we would express the classification constraint as: p1 < 0.5 and p2 ≥0.5. This is equiv-
alent in terms of the output vector z before normalization to the security constraint
Z:
Z : z1 ≤z2
(2.10)
Therefore, the ensemble of MILP constraints {Hl, Z}, l = 1, ..., L describes both
the relation linking a neural network’s output z to its input X0 and its classification or
feasibility.
2.2
General formulation for the NN-MILP
problem
The final problem to be solved resumes as:
min
x , f(x)
(2.11)
s.t.
{Ci(x)}
i = 1, ..., q
(2.12)
{Hl(x), Z(x)}
l = 1, ..., L
(2.13)
Where {Ci}, i = 1, ..., q correspond to the q remaining constraints of the problem
that are not described by the neural network. These constraints are a set of equality
and/or inequality constraints, and they have the role of defining the input variable of
the neural network X0. If X0 = x, then {Ci} must ensure that X0 belongs to the domain
on which was defined the training database: if X0 is defined on the domain Ω, and the
domain Λi associated to the constraint {Ci} is such as:
Λi : {X0 ∈RN0 | Ci}
(2.14)
Then the intersection of those domains must forms the domain of definition of the
training database: Ω= ∩iΛi. The input variable X0 can also be chosen as a subset of
1If z = {zi} then Softmax(zi) =
ezi
∑
i ezi
==PAGE:20==
8
2 From NLP to MILP - Mathematical framework and challenges
the decision variable x, and in that case the constraints {Ci} must also encompass the
description of the rest of the decision variables x\X0. As equations (2.13) result in an
MILP formulation, the overall problem can be solved as such if the objective function
and the constraints {Ci} are linear as well.
2.3
Challenges - From case specific to
general notions
In this section we describe the challenges brought by the use of neural networks to
transform a NLP into an MILP problem.
As in the present work, the method was
applied to the SCOPF of power systems in the DC and AC cases, we try to show how
from specific applications we were able to extract general knowledge on the method about
the choice of input variables to the neural network and their link with the condition of
linearity of the optimization problem, the database generation and the resulting accuracy
of the Neural Network, and finally the tractability of the problem.
2.3.1
MILP condition and choice of Neural Network
input variables
Attention must be brought to the total set of constraints, i.e. the neural network con-
straints {Hl, Z} and the rest of the constraints in the model {Ci}, as well as to the
variables used as input to the NN. The choice of the input variables can be motivated
by the performance of the NN: more variables can improve the information content of
the database hence improving the prediction performance, but it is then counteracted
by the need of the remaining constraints in the model to define the relation linking the
input variables to the decision variables or the input variables between themselves, and
those constraints might be non-linear. The determination of the set of constraint {Ci},
the choice of the input variable X0, and the database characteristics are tightly linked
and quite case specific, depending on the kind of inequality constraints that are to be
replaced.
As the method was developed with the simple case of the DCOPF under security
constraints, and the problem being completely linear, a natural choice of input variables
was the active power flowing through the lines, encompassing a total description of
the state of the system.
Moreover, this input variable can be expressed as a linear
combination of either the active power output of generators or the voltage angles of
busses, both decision variables of the original security constrained DCOPF. The balance
equation being linear, and describing the active power outputs of generators and/or the
bus angles (using the power transfer distribution factors allows us to eliminate the bus
angles from the problem), the overall problem constitutes an MILP whose variables are
fully described by all the equations. The AC case was more challenging in terms of
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Challenges - From case specific to general notions
9
choice of variables and constraints determination, however it allowed us to have a better
understanding of the relation between the NN constraints. The original set of variables
of the SC-AC-OPF is composed of the generators active and reactive power outputs as
well as the bus voltages and angles. The first approach was to use all these variables as
input variable X0 that would allow to have a fine neural network prediction, however
the database being generated on operating points of the system hence respecting the
networks equations, additional non-linear constraints were needed to provide the MILP
representation of the neural network with acceptable operating points. The solution
was eventually to reduce the number of decision and input variables to only the active
power of generators, thus allowing to use a linear approximation of losses in the balance
equation. The final SCOPF model is described in Section ??.
2.3.2
Database generation and accuracy of Neural
Network prediction
Transforming the NLP to MILP sing the neural network output is highly dependant
on the precision of the neural network prediction. In the case of a two classes classi-
fier neural network replacing some inequality constraints in the NLP problem, the {Z}
equation of the NN will define the boundary between the two output classes the system
can belong to. More precisely, the actual equation of the boundary corresponds to the
case where z1 = z2 in the {Z} equation, i.e. the probabilities that a given point belongs
to class 1 and class 2 are equal (Figure 4.5). The performance of the neural network
will hence be dependant on the shape of this boundary, and the use of fully connected
neural network might be a limiting factor for the prediction of certain boundaries. An-
other important aspect of translating the NN equations into a set of constraints in an
optimization problem, lies in the difference between the resolution of the population of
points used to train the neural network and the resolution of the population of points
that the solver will search, which are an almost continuous distribution of the space
defined by the constraints of the model. The distribution of training points at the in-
tersection between the two regions might not be precise enough for the NN to capture
the boundary equation (Type A in Figure 2.2), which would lead to a loss of accuracy
when the prediction is applied to the semi-continuum of the model’s feasible points. In
the present work applied to a small system this challenge was addressed by introducing
a ”safety-margin” as a constant ϵ in the {Z} constraint used to modify the prediction of
the NN (Section 3.2.3). We also provide a metric to appropriately compute the safety
margin ϵ for our case study. However, when considering bigger system or more complex
boundaries and as a database can only contain a limited number of points, covering
equally the whole space can become computationally arduous in terms of database gen-
eration and training efficiency.
In order to refine the NN detection of the boundary, methods such as the efficient
database generation developed in [22] ensuring that the population of points around the
==PAGE:22==
10
2 From NLP to MILP - Mathematical framework and challenges
Unsafe points
Safe points
Safety boundary
Prediction of safety boundary
Database distribution type A
Database distribution type B
Figure 2.2: Two types of database points distribution and the corresponding prediction
boundary is denser and represents a High Information Content (HIC) region could be
used. Figure 2.2 shows a schematic representation of a classification problem with a
non-linear boundary and two types of points distribution in the training database. As
the density of points around the boundary increases, the neural network will be provided
with more information on its shape and it will result in a better approximation (Type
B in Figure 2.2). Regions of the database that are far from the border don’t need to
be very dense as the neural network interpolation between points of a certain class, i.e.
with same sign of z1 −z2, would belong to the same class. This enables to cover the
whole space with different points density and thus to reduce the number of points of the
database.
2.3.3
Tractability of the problem
Finally, the method developed in this work exploits fully connected neural networks to
classify points of a small system and use this classification as an inequality constraint
in an optimization model. As the size of the system increases, the structure of the NN
must be refined to optimize its accuracy and this implies often adding hidden layers and
neurons in the hidden layers. As shown in Section 2.1, there is a ReLu unit for each
hidden neuron, applied to the linear combination of all the previous hidden layer ReLus
and the corresponding weights, which can easily make the problem intractable. We use
in this work a weight pruning method (Section 3.2.2) to improve the tractability of the
problem, but finest methods of pruning such as L0 pruning [16], Fisher pruning [23] or
ReLu elimination [24] could be used to apply the method to bigger systems.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
NN-MILP Methodology and
model formulations for
SCOPF applications
In this chapter is developed the methodology to solve the NN-MILP, from database
generation to optimal output of the program. We start in Section 3.1 by describing the
high-level methodology or the core steps of the method applicable to any optimization
problem, then follows in Section 3.2, the step-by-step methodology for power system
security constrained optimization with the characterization of the differences between
the two studied cases of SCOPF: DC and AC case. In Section ?? is defined the final
general model for SCOPF as well as its detailed AC and DC representations.
3.1
High-level methodology
The general methodology to transform the NLP to an MILP problem with neural net-
works is represented in Figure 3.1. This flow-chart summarizes the core steps of the
general method, remaining similar for any type of system that the method is applied to.
First, the input variable X0 is chosen, accordingly to which constraints will be replaced
by the classification neural net (Section 2.3). The database contains samples of the vari-
able X0 belonging to either of the two classes C1 and C2 corresponding to the feasible
and infeasible region of the set of inequality constraints to replace. The second step con-
sists in training a fully connected neural network to learn the relation z = fnn(X0, W, b)
assessing the feasibility of a certain value of X0. Finally, this relation is converted into
the set of MILP constraints {Hl, Z} as described in Section 2.1, and completed by the
constraints Ci, the final model can be optimized with an MILP solver.
Case specific methodologies must however be developed to complement the general
methodology depending on the application of the method, and to address the challenges
presented in the previous section.
In the following will hence be detailed how this
technique can be applied to the security constrained optimization of power systems by
detailing two applications: the DC case, used as a first development of the method mainly
for its primary understanding and the AC case: as a real application of transforming
an NLP into an MILP. Section 3.2.1 first describes the basic generation of a database
==PAGE:24==
12
3 NN-MILP Methodology and model formulations for SCOPF applications
Database 
generation 
Training of NN
Constrained 
optimization
𝑿" ∈𝐶%|𝐶'
𝒛= 𝑓++(𝑿", 𝑾, 𝒃)
𝑾, 𝒃
min 𝑓(𝒙)
𝑠. 𝑡.   {𝒞;(𝒙)}
{ℋ>, 𝒵}
𝒙∗
Figure 3.1: General methodology
containing the N-1 security assessment based on DC or AC power flows, and hence
justifies the choice of the active power of generators as input variable X0 in the AC
case. In Sections 3.2.2 and 3.2.3, we describe the training of the neural network and
demonstrate how we can address the challenges of the tractability of the problem and
the Neural Network precision.
It is important to note that although they are here
illustrated with a specific power system case these solutions are not bounded to power
systems purposes and can be useful tools for any application of the method. Eventually
inn Section 3.2.4 we show how to define the set of constraints Ci for both DC and AC
cases of an N-1 security constrained optimization.
3.2
Approach for SCOPF applications
3.2.1
Database generation
The AC and DC databases of the 6-bus test case were both generated in a ”brute force”
approach, by considering all possible combinations of active power generators set-points
spaced by a discretization interval α = 1MW, for one given load profile. The resulting
number of points |Ω| in the database is such as [22]:
|Ω| =
NG−1
∏
i=1
(P max
i
−P min
i
α
+ 1
)
(3.1)
For a 3 generators power system, this approach allows to cover the whole feasi-
ble space with uniform spacing between points resulting in a total number of points
|Ω| ≈1.5.104 to analyse if α = 1MW, however regular spacing can also lead to the
poor performance of the NNSCOPF, as we cannot ensure that the region containing the
optimal point will be described accurately in the database (Figure 2.2). Furthermore,
whereas this technique is the simplest way to generate a database for a small power
system, the number of operating points can easily reach disproportioned orders of mag-
nitude: in the case of the NESTA 162 bus system [4], the brute force approach would
require to generate |Ω| ≈7.1029 points. As the method is applied to larger systems, the
database generation technique must also be refined.
Each operating point of the databases is classified based on the N-1 preventive se-
curity assessment evaluating their feasibility in the AC case in terms of voltage and
generators active and reactive power limits as well as line thermal limits, under all of
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Approach for SCOPF applications
13
the K considered contingencies. The principle is the same for the DC case, except that
the line flows do not account for losses and the limits to respect are only of generators
active power outputs and active power flows of lines. The choice of input variable in the
DC case can hence be either the active power of generators or the active power flowing
through the lines, and the latter were chosen as they are a linear function of the active
power of generators and encompass all the information of the network. Regarding the
AC optimization problem, as the generators voltages are fixed and the system does not
contain any other controllable devices, there is only one snapshot associated to each of
the generators active power profile, and this allows us to consider only the active power
of the generators as input variable of the neural network and decision variable of the
NNSCOPF: X0 = x = p, and simplify further the optimization problem.
3.2.2
Training and pruning of the Neural Network
The learning process of plain neural networks is done by a Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) algorithm using back-propagation as a gradient computing technique. The SGD
iteratively adjusts the weights and biases at a certain learning rate η to minimize the
following loss function, called the ”cross entropy loss function” and commonly used in
classification Neural Networks [book_ml]
L = −1
M
M
∑
i
yilog(ˆyi) + (1 −yi)log(1 −ˆyi) + λ
2W 2
(3.2)
Where M represents the number of sample in the training database, yi is the output
label of sample i and ˆyi its predicted label.
is called the regularization parameter and
the corresponding term in the equation allows to limit the magnitude of weights. The
training is actually applied to subsets of the entire dataset, called mini-batchs. Once
the algorithm has been applied to all the mini-batches of the entire training dataset,
an epoch can be counted. The procedure is then reproduced over a certain number of
epochs until the weights and biases update cannot reduce the loss function any further.
The training of the plain neural network was done with the Python open source
machine learning library TensorFlow [1]. As the performances of deep neural network
were developed over time, they have seen their structures become bigger and deeper
thus bringing challenges to their deployment on resource constrained computing envi-
ronments. The need of compressed, energy and memory efficient neural networks that
would result in limited loss in accuracy has driven the research in this field to develop
model compressing techniques, such as model pruning that aims at sparsifying the con-
nections (weight tensors) of a given neural network. Weights pruning enables a good
trade-off between model size reduction and model quality degradation, and the resulting
pruned neural networks or ”large-sparse” models have been proven to lead to better per-
formances than smaller but dense models [25]. The present work makes use of the model
pruning implemented in the TensorFlow library, allowing to prune the model while it is
being trained. The use of large-sparse neural networks in the conmath of the NNSCOPF
enables to improve the tractability of the problem.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 NN-MILP Methodology and model formulations for SCOPF applications
The process of model pruning as operated by the TensorFlow toolbox consists first
in choosing the layers that need to be pruned and rank the corresponding weights by
their absolute values.
The weights with the smallest magnitude are masked to zero
and the remaining weights are updated by SGD at the following training step. The
operation is repeated until the required level of sparsity sf is obtained. The pruning
process starts at a certain training step t0 and is performed at the pruning frequency ∆t
over a certain number of pruning steps n. The sparsity equation presented in [25] allows
for a gradual pruning of the weights, starting at a high rate in the initial phase as the
connection matrixes of the network are most likely to contain redundant information,
and progressively slowing down as the number of weights in the network is reduced, thus
avoiding an important loss of accuracy contained in the remaining weights.
3.2.3
Controlling the output of the Neural Network
Despite their recent development and good performances on various applications, it is
impossible to ensure that two neural networks of same structure trained with equal
training parameters (number of epochs, mini-batch size, learning rate...) would lead to
the exact same prediction. This is due to the SGD algorithm that introduces stochas-
ticity in the learning by randomly shuffling the samples to evaluate the gradients and
the high non-convexity of the training optimization problem (i.e. the training algorithm
converges to different local optima). Moreover, as presented in Section 2.3, we cannot
ensure that the prediction of the Neural network will not fail to detect with precision
the boundary, and specially around the optimal point that our method seeks to find. To
reduce the risk induced by the NN uncertainty, we introduce in a similar approach than
the condition specific safety margin in [5]: a constant ϵ in the {Z} equation presented
in Section 2.1, that allows a leverage on the NN output prediction. We also present a
metric for the calculation of this constant permitting to limit the cost of such a control
procedure.
In Figure 3.2 is shown an example of Neural network classification of samples in a
training database as safe or unsafe. The grey area represents the correct safe area that
the NN has to detect, based on the training database composed of regularly spaced points.
The neural network classification corresponds to the sign of the difference between z1
and z2 (outputs of the NN before normalization, Section 2.1): a point in the database is
classified as safe if z1 < z2 (blue) and unsafe if z1 > z2 (red). The predicted boundary
z1 = z2 (black dotted line) can then be uniformly shrinked by the addition of the constant
ϵ to z1, thus substituting the boundary equation {Z} in the optimization problem by
z1 + ϵ = z2.
The calculation of ϵ is based on the confusion matrix of classifier neural network
prediction (Table 3.1). The confusion matrix indicates the nature of the prediction of
a neural network by dividing the output into four categories: the True Positives (TP),
or the samples predicted unsafe and actually belonging to the unsafe category (red dots
outside grey area in Figure 3.2), the False Negatives (FN) or the unsafe points predicted
safe (blue dots outside grey area), the False Positives (FP) safe points predicted unsafe
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Approach for SCOPF applications
15
𝑧" = 𝑧$
𝒛𝟏+ 𝝐 = 𝒛𝟐
Figure 3.2: ϵ-control on a neural network prediction example - Red dots are predicted
unsafe, blue dots are predicted safe. The grey area represents the actual safe area. The
black dotted line represents the NN predicted boundary. The green dotted line is the
NN predicted boundary after ϵ-control
(red dots inside grey area), and finally the True Negatives (TN) or safe points correctly
predicted safe (blue dots inside grey area).
Table 3.1: Confusion matrix
Predicted unsafe
Predicted safe
Actual unsafe
TP
FN
Actual safe
FP
TN
As the objective of the ϵ-control is to reduce the risk of predicting an optimal point
that is actually unsafe, we aim at minimizing the number of False Negative predictions.
However, we must ensure that the control of the boundary prediction does not lead to
a strong increase in the number of False Positive, and an unnecessary rise in cost. In
order to estimate the value of ϵ that would allow to bring the safety boundary within
acceptable limits, we use the distance metric between the two output logits z1 and z2 of
the False Negative predictions:
ϵ = ||z1,FN −z2,FN||∞.1{FN>0} + ϵmin
(3.3)
This expression for ϵ allows us to adapt the control to the nature of the prediction, by
using the distance to the boundary of the most remote incorrectly predicted safe point.
ϵmin corresponds to a ”safety threshold” used to cope with the non-uniform distribution
of the prediction: when FN = 0, then ϵ reduces to the safety threshold ϵmin as even if the
accuracy of the training database (dots in Figure 3.2) is equal to 100% (FN = FP = 0)
it is possible for points of the semi-continuum to be incorrectly classified.
==PAGE:28==
16
3 NN-MILP Methodology and model formulations for SCOPF applications
3.2.4
Dealing with the equality constraint in the
SC-ACOPF
In this section we show how to define the equality constraint (??) belonging to the set
{Ci} in the NN-AC-SCOPF. The AC power flow equations define the flow over each
branch and are non-linear. The balance constraint ensures for each bus of the system
that both active and reactive power are balanced, i.e. the consumption and generation
at this bus balances the in- and outgoing branch flows. We need to ensure that these
relations are respected in the optimization model to allow the NN to classify ”known”
points.
As the set of decision variables as well as the input variable of the neural network is
reduced to the active power output of generators: x = X0 = p and (??) becomes:
g(p) =
∑
g
pg −PD −PL = 0
(3.4)
With PD the total active power demand of the system, PL the total losses linearly
approximated from a base point P 0 = {p0
i }, i = 1, ..., NG as a function of the generators
active power output variation:
PL = P 0
L +
∑
Gen i
γi(pi −p0
i )
(3.5)
Where γi correspond to the linear coefficient of variation of the total losses for a step
∆pi of the active power output of generator i: γi =
PL−P 0
L
∆pi . Another solution to cope with
the AC balance of the system could be to train the neural network to detect balanced
points by generating a database containing unbalanced points, the model would then
need to be completed only with inequality constraints delimiting the hyper-volume of
the database containing the hyper-plane of the balance equation, however this would
require a very fine database generation technique as increasing the dimensionality of the
database increases the risk of a poor performance of the NN. As recent work also used
deep neural networks to learn the load-flow [8], the remaining constraints could also
consist in another neural network converted into an MILP program and describing the
learned power balance.
As the losses approximation requires to find a base point P 0
L close enough of the
optimal point to be able to make the assumption that the losses can be linearly esti-
mated, the process of solving the NNSCOPF is decomposed into two steps. Figure 3.3
summarizes the total process of solving the NN-SC-ACOPF:
NNSCOPF with DC 
balance equation
{𝑝𝑖
𝐷𝐶}
AC power flow
𝑃𝐿
0 = + 𝑝𝑖
0
,
,
−𝑃𝐷
Basepoint {𝑝𝑖
0}
NNSCOPF with losses 
linear approximation
Linear coefficients
{𝛾𝑖}
Optimal solution 
p∗
Figure 3.3: Solving process of the NN-SC-ACOPF
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Final models for NNSCOPF - DC and AC case
17
First, the model of the NNSCOPF described in (3.6)-(??) is solved with the balance
equation (??) without losses, i.e.
g(p) = ∑
g pg −PD = 0, then from the obtained
solution {pDC
i
}, the base operating point {p0
i } is computed with an AC power flow and
the corresponding losses P 0
L are used as base losses for the final NNSCOPF solving with
linear losses approximation.
3.3
Final models for NNSCOPF - DC and AC
case
3.3.1
General SCOPF
The preventive (i.e. we do not consider any corrective actions) SCOPF problem we are
trying to transform here can be written as [3]:
min
x0,u0 f(x0, u0)
(3.6)
s.t.gk(xk, uk) = 0
k = 0, ..., c
(3.7)
hk(xk, uk) ≤0
k = 0, ..., c
(3.8)
uk −u0 = 0
k = 1, ..., c
(3.9)
This optimization problem is bound to find the optimal set of state variables x0 and
control variables u0 minimizing the function f(x0, u0), and respecting the equality (AC
balance) and inequality (active and reactive bounds, apparent line flows, voltage limits)
constraints (3.6) to (3.9) under any contingency k = 1, ..., c (k = 0 corresponding to the
base case, or pre-contingency configuration). Equation (3.9) ensures the consistency of
the control variables between the base case and all the possible contingencies.
In the case of the AC representation of the system, the above set of constraints is non
linear and the problem requires to be solved with an NLP solver. Our method enables to
replace the non-linear equations (3.6)-(3.9) corresponding to the N-1 security constraints
of the system by the MILP representation of the neural network. The resulting models
are described in Sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3.
3.3.2
NN-SC-ACOPF
The final NN-SC-ACOPF model is described in (3.10)-(3.13):
==PAGE:30==
18
3 NN-MILP Methodology and model formulations for SCOPF applications
min
p
cTp
(3.10)
s.t.
g(p) = 0
(3.11)
pmin ≤p ≤pmax
(3.12)
{Hi(p),Z(p)}
i = 1, ..., L
(3.13)
Where (3.11) and (3.12) compose the set of equation {Ci} delimiting the domain of
the training database as described by (2.14) and depicted in Figure ??: the AC balance
equation and the generators active power limits. Equations (3.13) correspond to the
security assessment classifying an operating point as safe or unsafe.
3.3.3
NN-SC-DCOPF
The final NN-SC-DCOPF is such as, with x the active power flowing through the lines:
min
p
cTp
(3.14)
s.t.
Bbusδ = pg −pd
(3.15)
x = bBfδ
(3.16)
pmin ≤p ≤pmax
(3.17)
{Hi(x), Z(x)}
i = 1, ..., L
(3.18)
With Bbus and Bf the bus susceptance matrix and the line susceptance matrix, re-
spectively, pd the vector of the bus demands, δ the bus voltage angles, and b the vector
of the lines susceptances.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Case study - 6-bus test
system
The use of neural networks to transform an NLP to an MILP is demonstrated here for
power system optimization under security constraints in the case of the DC and the
AC representations of the 6-bus Matpower test case composed of 3 generators, 11 lines
and 3 constant loads. The line limits of the AC case were modified in order to allow
for the system to be N-1 safe when considering AC power flows. The parameters of
the system under DC and AC representations can be found in Appendices A and B,
respectively. All simulations (training of the neural network and optimization) were
run on a laptop with processor 1,6 GHz Intel Core i5 and 4 GB RAM. The training
and pruning processes were operated with Python and the Tensorflow [1] open source
library for machine learning applications. The optimization problems were solved on
Matlab with the Yalmip toolbox for modelling and optimization [15] and the Gurobi
solver. The chapter is composed of two sections: we describe in Section 4.1 the DC and
AC databases, analyse the predictions of the neural network, and eventually provide
the NN models selected for the MILP optimization. In section 4.2 we demonstrate the
performances of our method on the DC case as an illustrative application and the AC
case as an actual example of NLP to MILP conversion.
4.1
Database, neural network characteristics
and performances
4.1.1
Databases description
Figure ?? represents the training databases of the 6-bus system generators active power
set-points, obtained with the method described in 3.2.1 with a 1MW step between
each assessed operating points.
The For the sake of the study and to evaluate the
performances of the neural network on a testing database that would approach the semi-
continuous space on which the optimization solver operates, a detailed database was
generated with a smaller discretization interval α = 0.1MW, comprising the safe area
but not the entire space. Figures 4.1b and 4.1d show the superposition of the training
databases (dark and light blue dots) with the safe points of the testing database (grey
==PAGE:32==
20
4 Case study - 6-bus test system
area behind dark blue dots). It is important to note that these detailed databases were
generated only because of the small number of generators in the system, and they are
not a necessary component of the method, rather a way to assess the performances of
the neural network. As the number of points generated with a discretization interval
of 0.1MW increases of a factor 103, were generated only points within a small region
around the safe areas. Therefore, the ratio of safe/unsafe points is not the same in the
training and testing databases and this must be kept in mind when interpreting the
performance criteria.
Table 4.1: Training and testing databases parameters
Number of points
% of safe points
α
AC Training DB
4794
6.09 %
1MW
AC Testing DB
63402
37.13 %
0.1MW
DC Training DB
3276
1.74 %
1MW
DC Testing DB
68389
34.73%
0.1MW
As we can see in Figure 4.1b and 4.1d that are a closer view of the feasible regions of
the system, the training databases do not reflect with accuracy the shape of the boundary
(i.e. the edges of the grey area). This will induce a decrease in the performances of the
testing database prediction.
The AC database was generated using the AC power flow equations, the points
represented in Figure 4.1c and 4.1d are not constituting a perfect plane described by the
linear balance equation (4.1a and 4.1b) but a slightly curved surface. This curvature is
due to the losses of the system, that are represented in Figure 4.2.
4.1.2
Performance criteria
The performances of the NN are evaluated based on rates extracted from the confusion
matrix (Table 3.1) of the prediction: the Accuracy and MCC (Mathews Correlation
Coefficient) assess the performances of the overall prediction. As the representation of
unsafe and safe points in the training database is unbalanced in favour of the unsafe
points as shown in Table 4.1, the neural network will be better trained at detecting
them. In order to evaluate the prediction of the NN on an unbalanced dataset, the
Recall, Specificity and Precision are used:
• Accuracy: Proportion of correct predictions among all the samples in the dataset.
Accuracy =
TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN
• MCC: measure of correlation between predicted and actual values in a binary
classification. It yields a coefficient between -1 and 1, being 1 when the prediction
is perfect, 0 when the prediction is no better than random and -1 when all predicted
values are mistaken. MCC =
(TP.TN)−(FP.FN)
√
(TP+FP)(TP+FN)(TN+FP)(TN+FN).
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Database, neural network characteristics and performances
21
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.1: Training databases representing the ensemble of safe (dark blue) and unsafe
points (light blue) for the DC representation (4.1a-4.1b) and AC representation (4.1c-
4.1d). The grey area in 4.1d) and 4.1b) represent the safe points of the detailed testing
database
• Recall: proportion of correct positive predictions in all the positive cases. Recall =
TP
TP+FN .
• Specificity: proportion of correct negative predictions in all the negative cases.
Specificity =
TN
TN+FP .
• Precision: proportion of correct positive predictions in all positive predictions.
Precision =
TP
TP+FP
==PAGE:34==
22
4 Case study - 6-bus test system
Figure 4.2: Representation of AC losses
4.1.3
Effect of ϵ-control
The purpose of the ϵ-control, as explained in Section 3.2.3, is to have a way of reducing
the risk of predicting safe an unsafe point. Its value has to provide however a good trade-
off between optimality (e.g. the value of the objective function in the final optimization
problem), and feasibility (i.e. shrinking the predicted safe space of the NN). In order
to understand the effect of ϵ on the neural network prediction of the safe area, we
observed the variation of the Accuracy, the Recall and the Precision of the testing
database prediction of two examples of Neural Network trained on the DC database, as
a function of ϵ. The results are shown in Figure 4.3 for a 1-layer neural network (Figure
4.3a) and for a 3-layers neural network (4.3b). The values of ϵ reported on the graphs
have been computed by using the metric for ϵ described in (3.3).
Our method allows to find the epsilon that brings the prediction of the Neural Net-
work to almost zero False Positive predictions (unsafe predicted safe) with a recall of
about 100%. However, as we uniformly shrink the safe area this induces a big loss in ac-
curacy resulting from the decrease of the Specificity (proportion of safe points predicted
safe) for certain cases where the distribution of FP predictions is not uniform around
the safe area as in Figure 4.4a. The use of the constant ϵ-control should thus be limited
to neural networks that have been previously optimized to an acceptable prediction, in
order to correct small boundary deviations (Figure 4.4b and 4.4c).
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Database, neural network characteristics and performances
23
𝜖= 2.98
(a)
𝜖= 2.21
(b)
Figure 4.3: ϵ effect on the Accuracy, Recall and Specificity of a 1-layer (4.3a) and 3-layers
(4.3b) neural network prediction of the DC safe area
4.1.4
Final neural network models and prediction
performances
The networks structures and training parameters, as well as sparsity levels that were used
for the final optimization applications can be found in Table 4.2 and 4.3. The structure
notation is of the form [N0, N1, ..., Nl, ..., NL−1, NL] with N0 the number of input variables
or dimension of input vector X0 (11 for the DC case with active power flows of line and
3 for the AC case with active power outputs of generators), Nl the number of hidden
neurons in the lth hidden layers and Nl the number of output neurons, 2 in the case of
binary classification NN. The learning rate η as well as the regularization parameter λ
were taken the same for the DC and AC cases. Finally, the sparsity levels sf correspond
to the value allowing for a trade-off between the reduction of the computational burden
of the problem and the accuracy of the prediction. Indeed, introducing sparsity in the
weight matrixes can help smoothing the prediction by reducing the ”noise” brought by
weights of very low magnitude, until a certain level where the prediction is worsened by
the loss of the information contained in the weights.
Table 4.2: Neural network structure and parameters for AC application
Structure
Learning rate η
[3, 100, 200, 100, 2]
0.005
Regularization parameter λ
Sparsity sf
0.001
70 %
Table 4.4 summarizes the performances on the training and testing database of the
neural networks whose structures and training parameters are provided in Table 4.2 and
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Case study - 6-bus test system
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.4
Table 4.3: Neural network structure and parameters for DC application
Structure
Learning rate η
[11, 100, 200, 100, 2]
0.005
Regularization parameter λ
Sparsity sf
0.001
90 %
4.3. The predictions of both the training and testing databases are shown in Figure 4.5:
the dots correspond to the logits outputs of the training database prediction, and the
blue area corresponds to the interpolated safe area, or the testing database prediction.
We can see in this figure that the boundary between safe and unsafe regions corresponds
to a zero logits difference or z1 = z2. Their predictions with ϵ-control correspond to the
blue area in Figure 4.4b and 4.4c.
We can observe a general decrease in the performances of the NN prediction from
the training to the testing databases. This is obviously due to the higher precision of
the testing database (from αtraining = 1MW to αtesting = 0.1MW). However, we can
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Database, neural network characteristics and performances
25
Table 4.4: Performances criteria of the training and testing database prediction
AC Training DB
AC Testing DB
AC Testing DB - ϵ = 0.91
Accuracy
99.69
97.69
97.09
MCC
0.98
0.95
0.94
Recall
99.80
98.54
99.45
Specificity
98.29
96.26
93.1
Precision
99.86
97.81
96.06
DC - Training DB
DC - Testing DB
DC Testing DB - ϵ = 2.29
Accuracy
99.88
94.95
95.17
MCC
0.97
0.89
0.89
Recall
99.88
94.88
98.95
Specificity
100.0
95.09
88.06
Precision
100.0
97.32
93.97
(a) DC
(b) AC
Figure 4.5: Predictions of training and testing databases - red and blue dots represent
the logits output of the NN prediction of the training database, blue area represents the
safe area prediction of the testing database
observe an increase in the Recall for both the AC and the DC case after the application of
ϵ-control, our method indeed allows to reduce the number of False Negative predictions,
i.e. safe points predicted unsafe, at the expense however of the safe points prediction
and a decrease in the specificity and hence the overall accuracy. Further developments
of the ϵ-control could be a non-uniform ϵ determined based on a regional segmentation
of the prediction.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Case study - 6-bus test system
4.2
Optimization results
In Tables 4.5 and 4.6 are summarized the results of the DC case and AC case, respectively.
Are reported here the output of the optimization problems without security constraints,
the security-constrained optimization benchmark model results, and the results of our
method for NN-SCOPF, with the NN parameters, pruning levels, and ϵ-control detailed
in the previous section. Figure 4.6 is the illustration of those results. The benchmark
SCOPF models contain the constraints corresponding to all the considered contingencies,
following the model description in (3.6)-(3.9). The NN-SCOPF models are as described
in Section 3.3.3 and 3.3.2.
Table 4.5: Optimization results for the DC case
DCOPF
SC-DCOPF Benchmark
NN-DC-DCOPF
Dispatch (MW)
50.00
115.00
45.00
77.54
74.49
57.97
77.18
73.68
59.14
Generation cost ($/h)
2912.33
2955,61
2955.71
ϵ
-
-
2.29
Security state
Unsafe
Safe
Safe
Average solver time (s)
0.68
0.63
0.85
Table 4.6: Optimization results for the AC case
ACOPF
SC-ACOPF Benchmark
NN-SC-ACOPF
Dispatch (MW)
50.00
121.23
45.00
50,.05
93.24
73.43
50.85
91.83
74.03
Generation cost ($/h)
2976.77
2996.04
2997.34
Losses (MW)
6.2362
6.7192
6.7120
ϵ
-
-
0.91
Security state
Unsafe
Safe
Safe
Average solver time (s)
0.51
4.76
Step 1: 1.64
Step 2: 1.38
Table 4.7: Comparison between benchmark and NN-SCOPF
Cost of method ($)
Distance to optimality (MW)
NN-SC-ACOPF
1.2905
1.7236
NN-SC-DCOPF
0.1014
1.4720
Our method allows to find solutions that get reasonably close to the benchmark
optimization problems: 1.7236 and 1.4720 for the AC and DC case respectively, with
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Optimization results
27
(a) DC
(b) AC
Figure 4.6: Optimization results and ϵ-corrected safe area prediction (blue area)
costs of only 1.2905 $ and 0.1014 $ (Table 4.7, costs parameters in Appendices B and A).
The DC case is shown here as a complementary illustration of the method and we can see
that the average solving time is still higher than the benchmark, which is logical as we are
solving an MILP instead of a fully linear problem. However, in the AC case, our method
allows to reduce the solving time even accounting for the two step solving method as
described in Section ??, while finding the optimal solution that minimize the generation
costs, according to the safe area predicted by the neural network. After checking the
solution with an AC power flow, we confirmed that our losses approximation method
allows us to find an optimal point respecting exactly the AC balance of the system.
==PAGE:40==
28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Achievements
From given applications that are the AC and DC SCOPF we were able to draw significant
conclusions and insights on how to deal with the NLP to MILP transformation with
neural networks. A general model and methodology for replacing a set of non-linear
inequality constraints into the MILP formulation of a neural network classifier output
was derived, and validated for the security constrained optimization of power system, on
a small case. Along with that we were able to derive general rules on the application of
the method and more specifically how to choose correctly the input to the neural network
and how to define the remaining set of constraints as well as their link with the MILP
neural network constraints. Although the results of our models did not reach the exact
solution as of the benchmark models results, we provided an efficient way to control the
output of the neural network and reduce the risk of an unsafe solution while limiting
the costs of such a control.
Moreover, the lack of reaching the benchmark optimal
solution was mainly due to the database characteristics and neural network prediction,
which were not a main focus of the study: simple cases were intentionally used and can
be considerably improved with more advanced database generation techniques or more
recent deep neural network models.
5.2
Future work
The work done here opens a new field of application of neural networks for optimization
problems. As mentioned previously, the database and the neural network used were
very simple examples and by combining refined database generation techniques such as
[22] with our method, we could improve consistently the accuracy of the neural network
prediction. Moreover, deep neural network have been widely developed in the past years
and an interesting future work could be to try to use deep convolutional neural networks
for MILP formulations of constraints in optimization problems. As of the specific case
of power systems security constrained optimization, future work would be to perform a
scalability assessment of the method, in order to verify its applicability to large scale
power system models. The complexity of the safe area would increase but could be com-
bined with efficient database generation and sophisticated neural network this method
could be also used to integrate dynamic security assessments in the optimization prob-
lems, such as small-signal stability or transient stability, while keeping the optimization
==PAGE:42==
30
5 Conclusion
computationally efficient and tractable.
==PAGE:43==
APPENDIX A
6-bus test case parameter -
DC
Table A.1: Bus data from the 6-bus case DC representation
Bus
Type
Pd
Qd
Gs
Bs
Area
Vm
Va
BaseKV
Zone
Vmax
Vmin
1
3
0
0
0
0
1
1.05
0
230
1
1.05
1.05
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.05
0
230
1
1.05
1.05
3
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.07
0
230
1
1.07
1.07
4
1
70
70
0
0
1
1
0
230
1
1.05
0.95
5
1
70
70
0
0
1
1
0
230
1
1.05
0.95
6
1
70
70
0
0
1
1
0
230
1
1.05
0.95
Table A.2: Generator data from the 6-bus case DC representation
Bus
Pg
Qg
Qmax
Qmin
Vg
mBase
status
Pmax
Pmin
1
0
0
100
-100
1.05
100
1
200
50
2
50
0
100
-100
1.05
100
1
150
35
3
60
0
100
-100
1.07
100
1
180
45
Table A.3: Branch data from the 6-bus case DC representation
From
To
r
x
b
RateA
RateB
RateC
Ratio
Angle
Status
Angmin
Angmax
1
2
0.1
0.2
0.04
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
1
4
0.05
0.2
0.04
60
60
60
0
0
1
-360
360
1
5
0.08
0.3
0.06
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
2
3
0.05
0.25
0.06
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
2
4
0.05
0.1
0.02
70
70
70
0
0
1
-360
360
2
5
0.1
0.3
0.04
30
30
30
0
0
1
-360
360
2
6
0.07
0.2
0.05
90
90
90
0
0
1
-360
360
3
5
0.12
0.26
0.05
70
70
70
0
0
1
-360
360
3
6
0.02
0.1
0.02
80
80
80
0
0
1
-360
360
4
5
0.2
0.4
0.08
20
20
20
0
0
1
-360
360
5
6
0.1
0.3
0.06
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
==PAGE:44==
32
A 6-bus test case parameter - DC
Table A.4: Generator cost data from the 6-bus case DC representation
Model
Startup
Shutdown
n
c1
c0
2
0
0
2
11.669
213.1
2
0
0
2
10.333
200
2
0
0
2
10.833
240
==PAGE:45==
APPENDIX B
6-bus test case parameter -
AC
Table B.1: Bus data from the 6-bus case AC representation
Bus
Type
Pd
Qd
Gs
Bs
Area
Vm
Va
BaseKV
Zone
Vmax
Vmin
1
3
0
0
0
0
1
1.05
0
230
1
1.10
0.90
2
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.05
0
230
1
1.10
0.90
3
2
0
0
0
0
1
1.07
0
230
1
1.10
0.90
4
1
70
70
0
0
1
1
0
230
1
1.10
0.90
5
1
70
70
0
0
1
1
0
230
1
1.10
0.90
6
1
70
70
0
0
1
1
0
230
1
1.10
0.90
Table B.2: Generator data from the 6-bus case AC representation
Bus
Pg
Qg
Qmax
Qmin
Vg
mBase
status
Pmax
Pmin
1
0
0
150
-150
1.05
100
1
200
50
2
50
0
150
-150
1.05
100
1
150
35
3
60
0
150
-150
1.07
100
1
180
45
Table B.3: Branch data from the 6-bus case AC representation
From
To
r
x
b
RateA
RateB
RateC
Ratio
Angle
Status
Angmin
Angmax
1
2
0.1
0.2
0.04
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
1
4
0.05
0.2
0.04
60
60
60
0
0
1
-360
360
1
5
0.08
0.3
0.06
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
2
3
0.05
0.25
0.06
20
20
20
0
0
1
-360
360
2
4
0.05
0.1
0.02
100
100
100
0
0
1
-360
360
2
5
0.1
0.3
0.04
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
2
6
0.07
0.2
0.05
90
90
90
0
0
1
-360
360
3
5
0.12
0.26
0.05
70
70
70
0
0
1
-360
360
3
6
0.02
0.1
0.02
105
105
105
0
0
1
-360
360
4
5
0.2
0.4
0.08
20
20
20
0
0
1
-360
360
5
6
0.1
0.3
0.06
40
40
40
0
0
1
-360
360
==PAGE:46==
34
B 6-bus test case parameter - AC
Table B.4: Generator cost data from the 6-bus case AC representation
Model
Startup
Shutdown
n
c1
c0
2
0
0
2
11.669
213.1
2
0
0
2
10.333
200
2
0
0
2
10.833
240
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Martı́n Abadi et al. “TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale Machine Learning”.
In: 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 16). Savannah, GA: USENIX Association, 2016, pages 265–283. isbn: 978-
1-931971-33-1. url: https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi16/technical-
sessions/presentation/abadi.
[2]
Kyri Baker. “Learning Warm-Start Points for AC Optimal Power Flow”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1905.08860 (2019).
[3]
Florin Capitanescu et al. “State-of-the-art, challenges, and future trends in security
constrained optimal power flow”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 81.8 (2011),
pages 1731–1741.
[4]
Carleton Coffrin, Dan Gordon, and Paul Scott. “NESTA, The NICTA Energy
System Test Case Archive”. In: CoRR abs/1411.0359 (2014).
[5]
Jochen L Cremer et al. “Data-Driven Power System Operation: Exploring the
Balance Between Cost and Risk”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 34.1
(2019), pages 791–801.
[6]
Deepjyoti Deka and Sidhant Misra. “Learning for DC-OPF: Classifying active sets
using neural nets”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05607 (2019).
[7]
Benjamin Donnot et al. “Anticipating contingengies in power grids using fast neu-
ral net screening”. In: 2018 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN). IEEE. 2018, pages 1–8.
[8]
Benjamin Donnot et al. “Fast Power system security analysis with Guided Dropout”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09870 (2018).
[9]
Benjamin Donnot et al. “Introducing machine learning for power system operation
support”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.09527 (2017).
[10]
Victor J Gutierrez-Martinez et al. “Neural-network security-boundary constrained
optimal power flow”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 26.1 (2010), pages 63–
72.
[11]
Lejla Halilbašić et al. “Data-driven security-constrained AC-OPF for operations
and markets”. In: 2018 Power Systems Computation Conference (PSCC). IEEE.
2018, pages 1–7.
[12]
José-Marı́a Hidalgo-Arteaga et al. “Deep Learning for Power System Security As-
sessment”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09029 (2019).
==PAGE:48==
36
Bibliography
[13]
Joey Huchette and Juan Pablo Vielma. “A combinatorial approach for small and
strong formulations of disjunctive constraints”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04803
(2016).
[14]
Joey Huchette and Juan Pablo Vielma. “Nonconvex piecewise linear functions: Ad-
vanced formulations and simple modeling tools”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00050
(2017).
[15]
Johan Löfberg. “YALMIP: A toolbox for modeling and optimization in MATLAB”.
In: Proceedings of the CACSD Conference. Volume 3. Taipei, Taiwan. 2004.
[16]
Christos Louizos, Max Welling, and Diederik P Kingma. “Learning Sparse Neu-
ral Networks through L_0 Regularization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01312
(2017).
[17]
Yakout Mansour et al. “Large scale dynamic security screening and ranking using
neural networks”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 12.2 (1997), pages 954–
960.
[18]
Dagmar Niebur and Alain J Germond. “Power system static security assessment
using the Kohonen neural network classifier”. In: [Proceedings] Conference Papers
1991 Power Industry Computer Application Conference. IEEE. 1991, pages 270–
277.
[19]
Xiang Pan, Tianyu Zhao, and Minghua Chen. “DeepOPF: Deep Neural Network
for DC Optimal Power Flow”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.04479 (2019).
[20]
Dejan J Sobajic and Y-H Pao. “Artificial neural-net based dynamic security as-
sessment for electric power systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 4.1
(1989), pages 220–228.
[21]
Mingyang Sun, Ioannis Konstantelos, and Goran Strbac. “A deep learning-based
feature extraction framework for system security assessment”. In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Smart Grid (2018).
[22]
Florian Thams et al. “Efficient Database Generation for Data-driven Security As-
sessment of Power Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems (2019).
[23]
Lucas Theis et al. “Faster gaze prediction with dense networks and fisher pruning”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05787 (2018).
[24]
Vincent Tjeng, Kai Xiao, and Russ Tedrake. “Evaluating robustness of neural
networks with mixed integer programming”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07356
(2017).
[25]
Michael Zhu and Suyog Gupta. “To prune, or not to prune: exploring the efficacy
of pruning for model compression”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.01878 (2017).
