==PAGE:1==
Master's thesis  
Author: 
Jonas Kvist Andersen 
 
Supervisors: 
John Peter Merryman Boncori (DTU Space) 
Anne Munck Solgaard (GEUS) 
 
June 2019  
Application of Interferometric Phase-
based Techniques to Ice Motion Measure-
ments in Greenland Using Sentinel-1 SAR 
Data  
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Satellite Synthetic Aperture Radar missions allow for the mapping of ground deformation
through diﬀerent types of processing techniques. These techniques range from incoherent
oﬀset tracking measurements, which are generally of relatively low resolution and accuracy,
to coherent Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry (DInSAR) measurements, which are generally of
higher resolution and accuracy. During recent decades, several SAR systems have been uti-
lized for measuring ice velocity in the interior Greenland ice sheet, as well as on Greenland’s
marine-terminating outlet glaciers. Currently, the Sentinel-1 system, with its 6-day repeat
pass period and wide swath acquisition, is the most commonly applied system for retriev-
ing ice sheet motion measurements. These measurements are routinely acquired using oﬀset
tracking techniques. Due to the TOPS acquisition mode implemented on Sentinel-1, DInSAR
processing is challenging, owing to the azimuth coupling to the SAR signal introduced by the
TOPS antenna steering. Consequently, TOPS DInSAR processing has yet to be successfully
applied to the Greenland (or Antarctic) ice sheet.
This thesis investigates the feasibility of Sentinel-1 TOPS DInSAR processing in the interior
Greenland ice sheet. The investigation is focused on the North-East Greenland Ice Stream
(NEGIS) as a test case region. Diﬀerent approaches to DInSAR processing are investigated,
with the most promising approach applying a coregistration reﬁnement based on azimuth
displacement estimates from Multi-Aperture Interferometry (or oﬀset tracking), as a means
of eliminating the azimuth coupling in the TOPS signal. The obtained DInSAR results are
compared to oﬀset tracking measurements and external velocity measurements from GPS
stations. The DInSAR approach utilizing an azimuth coregistration reﬁnement was observed
to perform roughly twice as well as oﬀset tracking in the comparison to GPS measurements,
while strongly reducing the occurrence of phase discontinuities at burst edges, which arise in
the non-reﬁned DInSAR results due to the TOPS antenna steering.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, John Peter Merryman Boncori, for his guidance and
support throughout my Master’s thesis and for teaching me everything I know about SAR
interferometry. I would also like to thank my supervisor, Anne Munck Solgaard, for valuable
insight on the application of ice velocity measurements and for proposing regions of interest
for test cases (e.g. NEGIS). Furthermore, I would like to thank Christine Schøtt Hvidberg
and Aslak Grinsted for providing EastGRIP GPS measurements from the NEGIS region.
Also, thanks to Anders Kusk for providing valuable information and references regarding
the Sentinel-1 A/B bias along with other helpful insight. Finally, a thank you to all of my
friends from the student oﬃce for sharing a great work environment and for the occasional
tech support exchanges.
Front page image credit (top left image): ESA - P. Carril, 2014
==PAGE:4==
List of acronyms
DEM
-
Digital Elevation Model
DInSAR
-
Diﬀerential Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry
ESD
-
Extended Spectral Diversity
InSAR
-
Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry
IW
-
Interferometric Wide Swath
IOT
-
Intensity Oﬀset Tracking
LoS
-
Line of Sight
MAI
-
Multi-Aperture Interferometry
OT
-
Oﬀset Tracking
POE
-
Precise Orbit Ephemerides
S1
-
Sentinel-1
SAR
-
Synthetic Aperture Radar
SLC
-
Single Look Complex
TOPS
-
Terrain Observation by Progressive Scans
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
List of acronyms
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Arctic ice velocity measurements with SAR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Outline of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Summary of SAR geometry and signal properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Oﬀset tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
DInSAR with TOPS acquisition mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Multi-Aperture Interferometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Oﬀset tracking processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Coregistration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Interferogram formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Phase unwrapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.4
DInSAR calibration - from relative to absolute measurements . . . . .
20
3.2.5
Geocoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
DInSAR: Burst-wise processing approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4.1
Variations of the reﬁnement processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Validation via GPS measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results
32
4.1
Data overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
==PAGE:6==
4.2
Oﬀset tracking results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.1
Comparison of oﬀset tracking results and GPS
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
DInSAR results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.1
Nominal stripmap approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.2
Burst-wise processing approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.3
Reﬁned coregistration approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.4
Adaptive reﬁned coregistration approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.3.5
Comparison of DInSAR results and GPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5
Discussion
70
5.1
Feasibility of TOPS DInSAR for large scale ice velocity measurements
. . . .
70
5.2
Sources of uncertainty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Conclusions
75
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Arctic ice velocity measurements with SAR
During recent decades, several diﬀerent processing techniques have been utilized to generate
ice velocity measurements from space-borne SAR acquisitions.
The three mainly applied
techniques are oﬀset tracking, DInSAR, and Multi-Aperture Interferometry (MAI). DInSAR
and MAI are coherent techniques, meaning that they exploit the phase of acquired SAR
measurements. Oﬀset tracking, on the other hand, is a generally incoherent technique as it
applies a cross-correlation between intensity images and thus does not directly exploit the
phase in SAR images. All of the mentioned techniques will be described in chapter 2.
Only in recent years, with the launch of the EU Copernicus Sentinel-1 satellites, have routine
acquisitions of SAR ice velocity measurements, covering nearly all of Greenland, been attain-
able. Currently, routine Greenland ice velocity measurements are solely generated through
oﬀset tracking. There are many advantages and disadvantages to both oﬀset tracking and
DInSAR, which will be further elaborated in chapter 2. The main advantage of oﬀset track-
ing is that it allows the measurement of fast-ﬂowing ice, as found e.g. at marine-terminating
glaciers along the coast of Greenland. A disadvantage, however, is that oﬀset tracking pro-
duces measurements of a fairly coarse resolution and generally performs poorly in slow-moving
areas.
DInSAR allows for high resolution measurements, which are generally more accurate than
those obtained by oﬀset tracking. However, velocity measurements of fast-ﬂowing marine-
terminating glaciers are not attainable with DInSAR processing. Thus, a certain synergy
may arise, in which oﬀset tracking is used to map the high velocity glaciers, while DInSAR
may be used to map ice velocity in the interior ice sheet.
This thesis presents a study on the feasibility of applying Sentinel-1 DInSAR to ice motion
==PAGE:8==
1.2.
Outline of the thesis
measurements within the interior Greenland ice sheet. Recent studies regarding SAR ice
velocity measurement have claimed that the application of Sentinel-1 DInSAR on ice sheets
is problematic, due to the TOPS acquisition mode (Mouginot et al., 2017; Joughin et al.,
2018). This study aims to appropriately resolve the challenges associated with interferometry
on images acquired with the Sentinel-1 TOPS acquisition mode in non-stationary regions,
such as the Greenland ice sheet.
1.2
Outline of the thesis
The thesis consists of 6 chapters, with chapter 1 comprising the present introduction. Chapter
2 provides basic background knowledge on the various relevant SAR processing approaches.
Chapter 3 describes the applied methodology, i.e. the practical implementations of the inves-
tigated oﬀset tracking and DInSAR schemes. Chapter 4 contains a presentation and analysis
of the results obtained with both oﬀset tracking and DInSAR. Chapter 5 provides a discus-
sion on the feasibility of TOPS DInSAR, sources of uncertainty, and possible future work to
be carried out. Finally, chapter 6 provides a brief conclusion, outlining the work done for the
thesis and wrapping up the obtained results.
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
This chapter ﬁrst provides a brief summary of the geometry of a SAR acquisition and the basic
signal properties. Then follows a description of the three main SAR techniques for motion
measurement: Section 2.2 describes oﬀset tracking, section 2.3 outlines Diﬀerential SAR
Interferometry, section 2.4 describes the properties of the TOPS acquisition mode utilized
by Sentinel-1 and its consequences for DInSAR processing, and ﬁnally section 2.5 provides a
description of Multi-Aperture Interferometry.
2.1
Summary of SAR geometry and signal properties
Figure 2.1 shows the general acquisition geometry of a SAR system. The SAR platform, in this
context assumed to be a satellite, travels along the path labeled sensor path, which projected
to ground is called the radar track. The ﬂight direction (and radar track) is known as the
azimuth. The SAR platform moves in the azimuth direction while transmitting/receiving in
the Line-of-Sight (LoS) direction, also known as slant range or simply range. Azimuth and
slant range (LoS) are the two dimensions of the SAR image. Each dimension is associated
with a time variable: η is the azimuth time axis, while τ is the slant range time variable.
Naturally, each dimension can also be associated with a spatial variable: x for azimuth
position, R for range position. The projection of slant range on ground is known as the
ground range and the relation between the two is given by:
Rg =
R
sin(θi)
(2.1)
where R and Rg are the slant and ground range, respectively, and θi is the incidence angle of
the radar LoS. In the most simple case, the SAR antenna is aimed exactly perpendicular to
the azimuth. The antenna pointing is measured by the squint angle, θs, which is zero when
the antenna LoS is perpendicular to the azimuth. In this case, the beam-center crossing time,
ηc, and the zero-Doppler time, η0, are one and the same. For a given target on ground, the
==PAGE:10==
2.1.
Summary of SAR geometry and signal properties
zero-Doppler time occurs when the SAR platform is at the range of closest approach, R0,
while the beam-center crossing time occurs when the antenna beam is centered at the target.
The antenna may be pointed slightly forward or backward, in which case the beam-center
crossing time will occur before or after the zero-Doppler time, respectively. In Figure 2.1 the
squint angle is positive, meaning that the antenna is pointed slightly towards the azimuth
and the zero-Doppler time occurs after the beam-center crossing time.
Traditionally, SAR images are processed to zero-Doppler in the image focusing. This means
that each target is geometrically located at its range of closest approach in the focused SAR
image, corresponding to the target zero-Doppler coordinates (τ0, η0). Note that this makes
the azimuth and slant range directions perpendicular in the SAR image, even if the image was
acquired in a squinted geometry. A more complicated SAR image is obtained if the antenna
is steered during the acquisition, meaning that the Doppler centroid frequency varies across
the image, such as for the Sentinel-1 satellites. The speciﬁcations of the Sentinel-1 acquisition
mode and its imposed consequences are elaborated in section 2.4.
Figure 2.1: Sketch showing the general acquisition geometry of a SAR system. The sketch depicts a
forward squinted acquisition. Source: Cumming and Wong (2005).
The impulse response of a simple point target in a focused SLC image can be expressed as:
s1(τ, η) = pr

τ −2R0
c

pa (η −η0) exp

−j 4πR0
λ

exp (j2πfηc(η −η0))
(2.2)
4
==PAGE:11==
2.2.
Oﬀset tracking
where c is the speed of light, λ the radar wavelength, and fηc the Doppler centroid frequency.
pr and pa are two amplitude terms, usually taking the form of sinc-functions, and are generally
not of interest in interferometry.
The remaining variables were introduced above.
It is
observed that the phase of the SAR signal consists of two contributions. The ﬁrst term is
dependent on the range of closest approach, R0, and the radar wavelength. The second phase
depends on the Doppler centroid frequency, the zero-Doppler time and the instantaneous
azimuth time. Sections 2.3 and 2.5 outline how measurements of ground motion are extracted
from a pair of SAR images.
2.2
Oﬀset tracking
Oﬀset tracking is a term covering several related techniques, which all seek to estimate oﬀsets
between a pair of images. In the context of this study, oﬀset tracking refers to the Inten-
sity Oﬀset Tracking (IOT) technique, which essentially consists of a simple cross-correlation
between the master and slave intensity images of a SAR image pair. The cross-correlation
is two-dimensional, with the dimensions being slant range and azimuth. For a given pixel,
both a search window and a template window is deﬁned, the search window being the larger
of the two. In the master image, the template window is centered on the given pixel, while
the template window is moved around the pixels of the search window in the slave image.
The normalized cross-correlation is then computed for each position of the template window
within the search window. The 2D displacement of the pixel is taken as the displacement
that leads to the maximum normalized cross-correlation coeﬃcient. Important parameters
in oﬀset tracking processing are the template and search window sizes in range and azimuth,
which are typically based on the expected size and displacement of the features to be tracked.
Oﬀset tracking is also occasionally applied to optical images, in which case it is often labeled
feature tracking, as the technique essentially tracks the motion of recognizable features (e.g.
crevasses in ice). The tracking of features is also possible in SAR IOT, as any recognizable
features in the radar images will cause peaks in the computed normalized cross-correlation
(Gray et al., 1998). The strength in SAR intensity oﬀset tracking, aside from SAR being
an active sensor, eliminating the dependence of sunlight and cloud-free conditions, is that in
addition to recognizable features, speckle noise is also present in the intensity images. The
distribution of speckle noise can thus be considered a feature in the image, which can also
generate peaks in the normalized cross-correlation computation. Consequently, it is possible
to simultaneously track both features and speckle noise in the intensity images. The latter is
traditionally labeled speckle tracking (Strozzi et al., 2002). As a result, ice velocity measure-
ments in both slant range (i.e. LoS) and azimuth can be obtained with oﬀset tracking even
in the absence of recognizable features, as long as coherence in the image pair is reasonably
high such that speckle tracking is viable.
5
==PAGE:12==
2.3.
Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry
Measuring ground motion with oﬀset tracking has several substantial advantages. As men-
tioned above, oﬀset tracking exploits the intensity of the SAR images as opposed to the
phase. Consequently, the often troublesome phase unwrapping processing step, which is es-
sential in DInSAR, is avoided (phase unwrapping is described in sections 2.3 and 3.2.3). This
means that oﬀset tracking can measure velocities in much faster moving regions than can
be achieved with DInSAR, for instance at the fast-ﬂowing marine-terminating glaciers such
as Jakobshavn Isbræ. Another clear advantage is that oﬀset tracking allows measuring both
slant range and azimuth displacement, yielding a two-dimensional velocity measurement from
a single technique applied to a single image pair.
Due mainly to the advantages listed above, current routine SAR acquisitions of Greenland
(and Antarctic) ice velocities are facilitated exclusively with oﬀset tracking. Further rea-
soning behind the inclination towards oﬀset tracking is the complex steering of the antenna
onboard the Sentinel-1 satellites. Sentinel-1 is at this time arguably the best source of SAR
data for ice velocity measurements, due to its short repeat time and wide swath. The complex
acquisition mode, labeled TOPS, introduces further challenges to DInSAR processing - the
TOPS mode and the induced DInSAR challenges are further elaborated in section 2.4. Oﬀset
tracking, however, carries the disadvantage of producing displacement maps of quite poor
accuracy and resolution. The oﬀset tracking accuracy is generally between 1/10 and 1/100
of the resolution cell size, with higher coherence typically yielding a better accuracy when
tracking speckle, while the resolution is typically many resolution cells, i.e. on the order of
several hundred meters or worse (Bamler and Eineder, 2005; De Lange et al., 2007). The
poorer accuracy and resolution can be considered a consequence of oﬀset tracking being an
incoherent technique, meaning that not all available information is utilized. Another disad-
vantage in oﬀset tracking is the ionospheric eﬀects, which tend to generate streaks aligned
perpendicularly with azimuth in the oﬀset tracking azimuth displacement measurements.
This eﬀect was ﬁrst described by Gray et al. (2000). It is generally more severe at higher
latitudes, where the total electron content tends to be higher, and for lower radar frequencies.
Regardless, oﬀset tracking is an important technique for generating ice velocity measurements
along the coast of Greenland, where marine-terminating glaciers reach velocities high enough
for DInSAR to be infeasible due to loss of coherence and unwrapping issues.
2.3
Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry
Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry (DInSAR) is a technique that exploits the ﬁrst phase term of
eq. (2.2), i.e. the term that is dependent on the slant range distance to the target (Goldstein
6
==PAGE:13==
2.3.
Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry
et al., 1993). DInSAR measures the LoS component of deformation occurring in the time
between two SAR image acquisitions. This technique is known as repeat-pass interferometry,
as it involves two images acquired from (roughly) the same orbit, separated by some time,
which for Sentinel-1 can be as low as 6-days when using an image from each of the A and
B satellites. Conversely, single-pass interferometry involves two images acquired at the same
time (from one or two satellites), separated by a small baseline. This technique has often been
used to map ground topography and generate DEMs, as was done with the SRTM mission
(Rabus et al., 2003).
During the elapsed time, ∆t, between the two acquisitions of a DInSAR image pair, some
deformation may have caused a change in range of closest approach, ∆R, as well as a change
in zero-Doppler time, ∆η, for a given point target. If eq. (2.2) is taken to be the impulse
response of a target in the master image (i.e. the ﬁrst acquisition), the impulse response in
the slave image (i.e. the second acquisition) may be expressed as:
s2(τ, η) ∝exp

−j 4π(R0 + ∆R)
λ

exp (j2πfηc(η −(η0 + ∆η)))
(2.3)
where the amplitude terms have been omitted. An interferogram is formed simply as the
master image impulse response multiplied by the complex conjugate of the slave image:
I = s1(τ, η) · s∗
2(τ, η) = |s1 · s∗
2| exp (φint)
(2.4)
The interferogram phase is then simply the phase diﬀerence between the master and slave
images. It can generally be divided in the following contributions:
φint = φ1 −φ2 = φgeometry −φtropo + φiono + φspeckle + 2πfηc∆η
(2.5)
In a simple stripmap case, the phase term proportional to the Doppler centroid frequency
(i.e. the last term in the expression above) can generally be neglected. The ﬁrst term is
the desired term, as it is related to ground deformation, while the remaining terms represent
a tropospheric phase delay, a phase contribution due to ionospheric eﬀects, and ﬁnally a
contribution due to speckle noise. A requirement for DInSAR processing to be feasible is
that the investigated scene shows a reasonably high coherence. Coherence is a measure of the
statistical similarity between the received master and slave signals. If the coherence is high
the speckle noise distribution is centered closely around zero, while a low coherence means
that speckle dominates the interferogram and only noise is retrieved in the interferogram
phase. The ﬁrst term in eq. (2.5) may have multiple components:
φgeometry = φflat + φtopo −4π
λ ∆R
(2.6)
7
==PAGE:14==
2.3.
Diﬀerential SAR Interferometry
where only the ﬁnal term is the desired deformation phase. The ﬁrst two terms depend on
the interferometric baseline (i.e. the geometric distance between the satellite(s) at the time of
the master and slave acquisitions). The ﬁrst term represents a diﬀerence in slant range of the
LoS vector - it is often denoted the ﬂattening phase, as it corresponds to the interferometric
phase contribution obtained when observing a perfectly ﬂat surface. The second term rep-
resents a vertical (i.e. topographic) diﬀerence, which also has a slant range component, and
is denoted the topographic phase contribution. Elimination of these two phase contributions
can be achieved based on knowledge of the precise satellite orbits and a DEM.
The ﬁrst step of DInSAR processing is a coregistration of the master and slave images. The
coregistration is a resampling of the slave image into the geometry of the master image. This
step ensures that the master and slave images map the same targets, which is obviously
necessary for the interferogram to be coherent. Errors in the coregistration will result in an
additional error contribution to the interferometric phase due to a decreased coherence. Co-
herence may also be degraded by e.g. snowfall or wind, which alters the surface properties of
the imaged area during the time between master and slave acquisitions - this eﬀect is denoted
temporal decorrelation.
Assuming a successful correction of the φflat and φtopo contributions, a negligible eﬀect of the
other error terms in eq. (2.5), and a precise coregistration, the obtained interferometric phase
is proportional only to the LoS component of ground deformation and the radar wavelength.
The LoS deformation is then retrieved as:
∆R = −λ
4πφint,corr
(2.7)
The phase obtained from the SAR images is, however, wrapped in the interval [−π; π]. In
order to obtain the absolute phase, a phase unwrapping algorithm must be applied before
the phase can be converted to deformation. This is further described in section 3.2.3.
As was mentioned earlier, interferometric coherence is a requirement for DInSAR processing
to be feasible. Coherence is lost if the spatial gradient of the deformation in the observed
scene is so large that it results in a phase change exceeding 2π between neighboring resolution
cells (i.e. pixels). However, if the deformation gradient between two neighboring pixels is
larger than λ/4, corresponding to a phase change of π, the wrapped phase becomes ambigu-
ous and cannot be properly unwrapped, due to aliasing. Consequently, DInSAR cannot be
utilized in areas of large spatial deformation gradients, as is the case for some Greenland
marine-terminating glaciers.
Generally, the spatial resolution achieved with DInSAR is on the order of multiple resolution
8
==PAGE:15==
2.4.
DInSAR with TOPS acquisition mode
cells in slant range and azimuth, depending on the level of multi-looking (i.e. spatial aver-
aging) applied to the interferogram. For Sentinel-1, the ground range resolution is roughly
5 m, while the azimuth resolution is 20 m, meaning that an interferogram multi-looking of
12 × 3 in range/azimuth results in a resolution of 60 m in both ground range and azimuth.
2.4
DInSAR with TOPS acquisition mode
The main acquisition mode of Sentinel-1, when measuring over land regions, is known as the
Interferometric Wide swath mode (or IW mode). The IW mode is an example of the Terrain
Observation by Progressive Scans acquisition mode, abbreviated as TOPS mode (De Zan
and Guarnieri, 2006). Compared to conventional stripmap acquisitions, where the antenna is
kept at a constant angle with respect to the ﬂight direction (which is often roughly 90◦) and
one continuous swath is measured, the TOPS acquisition mode is somewhat more complex.
In TOPS, images are acquired in multiple sub-swaths by steering the antenna in range. A
short piece of each sub-swath is measured consecutively, starting from the sub-swath closest
to the satellite. Each of these small pieces is known as a burst in TOPS terminology. The
SAR ﬁrst measures a burst in the sub-swath closest to the satellite then moves on to measure
a burst in the neighboring sub-swath by steering the antenna elevation angle and so on. In
the case of Sentinel-1’s IW mode, a total of 3 sub-swaths is acquired. Aside from steering the
antenna in elevation (from sub-swath to sub-swath), the antenna is also steered in azimuth
within each burst: At the start of a burst the antenna is squinted backward (with respect
to the ﬂight direction) and is then steered forward, reaching an angle normal to the ﬂight
direction around the middle of the burst and ﬁnally a forward squint at the end of the burst.
Figure 2.2 shows the geometry of the burst and sub-swath acquisition relative to the satellite.
Note that in this thesis, "swath" refers to the full scene, i.e. the combination of all three
sub-swaths in the IW mode, while the sketch below refers to each of the sub-swaths as a swath.
9
==PAGE:16==
2.4.
DInSAR with TOPS acquisition mode
Figure 2.2: Acquisition geometry for the Sentinel-1 IW TOPS mode. The antenna scans a burst in
each of the three sub-swaths sequentially. The antenna is also scanned in azimuth, from aft to fore,
within each burst, causing a change in Doppler centroid across every burst. Source: Merryman
Boncori (2019).
TOPS was introduced as an improvement to the similar ScanSAR acquisition mode, in which
the antenna is not steered in azimuth, resulting in an azimuth-varying SNR and an image
artefact known as scalloping. It allows measuring much wider swaths than is usually measured
with a normal stripmap SAR, the price for swath width being a poorer azimuth resolution,
due to the decreased integration time for each observed target. Sentinel-1’s IW mode acquires
swaths of roughly 250 km with a resolution of about 5 m×20 m in ground range and azimuth.
Furthermore, the TOPS mode poses certain challenges for interferometric processing. These
challenges arise from a coupling between range and azimuth signals, caused by the azimuth
steering of the antenna.
The antenna steering in TOPS causes a linear azimuth frequency modulation, and conse-
quently a quadratic phase modulation, across each TOPS burst. The instantaneous Doppler
centroid frequency can be expressed as:
10
==PAGE:17==
2.4.
DInSAR with TOPS acquisition mode
fηc(η) = kT (τ) · ηref
(2.8)
where kT (τ) is the Doppler centroid rate in the focused SLC image, which is provided as a
polynomial function in range in the SLC metadata, and ηref is the azimuth time, referenced
to the middle of the burst (i.e. ηref = η −ηmid). As a result, the following quadratic phase
modulation exists in each acquired TOPS burst:
φmod = πkT (τ) · (η −ηref)2
(2.9)
At this point, it is noted that this modulation shifts the azimuth spectrum of a given TOPS
SLC burst image. The pulse repetition frequency (PRF) of Sentinel-1 is 486 Hz, slightly
larger than the target azimuth bandwidth in order to prevent aliasing, however, the Doppler
centroid excursion across a single burst (about ±2.6 kHz) is many times larger than the PRF.
Consequently a so-called deramping function, which subtracts the phase term given by eq.
(2.9), must be applied prior to any processing step that requires a basebanded signal. Such
processing steps include the image coregistration, as this step involves a resampling of the
slave image. Eq. (2.9) only basebands the signal if the mean Doppler centroid across the
burst is zero. Often, there is a small, non-zero mean Doppler centroid in the SLC images,
which is provided in the SLC metadata as a polynomial function in range. To account for
this mean Doppler centroid, fηc(τ), a second term is added to the deramping phase:
φmod = πkT (τ) ·
 η −η2
ref

−2πfηc(τ) (η −ηref)
(2.10)
After the resampling of the slave image, a reramping can be performed simply by adding
back φmod, which should be interpolated in the same way used to resample the slave image.
In section 2.3 above, it was mentioned that the Doppler centroid dependent phase term of the
master and slave impulse response (eqs. (2.2) and (2.3)) could generally be neglected in the
interferometric phase of stripmap images. For the TOPS case, the term cannot be neglected,
as the antenna steering causes a large variation in Doppler centroid frequency across each
burst. In most stripmap systems the Doppler centroid varies slowly across the image and
generally has a value < 100 Hz, while the Sentinel-1 IW mode sweeps the antenna across
a Doppler centroid interval of about ±2.6 kHz, slightly varying between each of the three
sub-swaths (Yague-Martinez et al., 2016). In the TOPS case, ignoring previously discussed
undesired phase contributions, the interferometric phase consists of the following two terms:
φint = −4π
λ ∆R + 2πfηc∆η
(2.11)
11
==PAGE:18==
2.4.
DInSAR with TOPS acquisition mode
The second phase term, which is seen to depend on the azimuth time displacement between
the master and slave acquisitions, ∆η, is superimposed on the LoS deformation dependent
phase contribution. The phase contribution caused by the Doppler centroid variation in the
master and slave images is
φerr(η) = 2πfηc(η)∆η
(2.12)
where the Doppler centroid dependence on azimuth position has been made explicit. The
change in azimuth time of a target between the two acquisitions, ∆η, can be caused by either
a physical motion in azimuth, ∆ηdeform, or by an azimuth error in the coregistration, which
in turn can be separated into a contribution stemming from uncertainty in the precise orbit
data and a contribution caused by ionospheric eﬀects, ∆ηcoreg = ∆ηorb + ∆ηiono (Merryman
Boncori, 2019). Hence, in a hypothetical case with zero azimuth motion within the scene and
zero coregistration errors, the resulting interferogram will contain no Doppler centroid-related
phase contribution. In practice, however, a phase contribution is generally obtained, which
is a superposition of physical azimuth motion and coregistration errors. From eq. (2.12) it is
seen that a phase ramp of 2π will be generated across a burst for a constant coregistration
error of:
∆η = 1/∆fηc = 1/5.6 kHz = 1.79 · 10−4 s
(2.13)
corresponding to 1.79 · 10−4 s · PRF = 0.087 azimuth pixels. This implies that the azimuth
coregistration accuracy requirement for the TOPS case is substantially more stringent than
for the stripmap case, where a constant azimuth coregistration error does not induce a phase
ramp but rather reduces interferometric coherence.
Even if a highly precise azimuth coregistration can be achieved, eliminating any azimuth
misregistrations, the azimuth coupling to the interferometric phase remains. This does not
constitute a problem if the ground motion has no azimuth component, however, if azimuth
motion exists within the scene it will contribute to the interferogram phase. From eq. (2.11)
it is noted that any azimuth motion, ∆η, which for simpliﬁcation purposes is here assumed to
be constant within the imaged burst, will result in a varying phase contribution, dependent
on the position within the burst. At the burst center, where the Doppler centroid frequency
is roughly zero, there will be a negligible phase contribution, while the burst edges will
show the largest contribution. Furthermore, at each burst interface of a sub-swath, a phase
discontinuity will be introduced, due to the jump in Doppler frequency from about +2.6 kHz
at the end of the ﬁrst burst to about −2.6 kHz at the beginning of the next burst. Such
phase discontinuities will be diﬃcult, if not impossible, for a phase unwrapping algorithm to
unwrap, depending on the magnitude of the discontinuity. Naturally, a spatial variation in
the azimuth motion within the scene will further complicate matters. Section 3.4 introduces
12
==PAGE:19==
2.5.
Multi-Aperture Interferometry
a DInSAR processing approach in which the coregistration is reﬁned to also include physical
azimuth motion, essentially decoupling the azimuth contribution from the interferometric
phase.
2.5
Multi-Aperture Interferometry
Multi-Aperture Interferometry (MAI) is a coherent technique, allowing the measurement
of azimuth motion within a SAR scene. It was ﬁrst introduced as a means of correcting
coregistration errors by Scheiber and Moreira (2000), who labeled the technique Spectral
Diversity. Bechor and Zebker (2006) introduced MAI as a technique for estimating azimuth
ground motion, thus allowing for a two-dimensional velocity retrieval from a single DInSAR
image pair. In a regular stripmap SAR acquisition, where the antenna remains at a ﬁxed
pointing angle throughout the acquisition time, a DInSAR interferogram is sensitive only to
LoS motion, assuming that the antenna points exactly perpendicular to azimuth, as described
by eq. (2.6). Had the antenna been pointed slightly towards or slightly away from the azimuth
direction, the measured motion would include an azimuth component through the Doppler
centroid term in eq. (2.5). The Doppler centroid frequency, fηc, is related to the squint angle,
θs, as follows:
fηc = 2Vs sin(θs)
λ
(2.14)
where Vs is the satellite velocity and λ the radar wavelength. If the squint angle is positive,
the LoS points towards the azimuth, while a negative squint angle means the LoS points away
from azimuth. MAI exploits the fact that even in cases where the antenna is not steered, i.e.
remains at a ﬁxed position, a squinted acquisition geometry can be synthesized by band-pass
ﬁltering the azimuth spectra of the acquired SLC image pair. This is made possible by ex-
ploiting the relation between the squint angle and the Doppler centroid frequency.
The Doppler frequency is equivalent to the azimuth frequency. Thus, through band-pass
ﬁltering of the azimuth spectra, a forward squinted acquisition (corresponding to a positive
Doppler frequency) and a backward squinted acquisition (corresponding to a negative Doppler
frequency) can be synthesized for both the master and slave. By generating an upper and
lower sub-band (i.e. a forward and a backward squinted acquisition) for both the master and
slave images we can form a forward and backward squinted interferogram. The phase of these
interferograms will each contain a contribution due to azimuth motion and a contribution
due to LoS motion, as described by eq. (2.5). The LoS motion contribution will, however,
be equal in the forward and backward squinted interferograms, while the Doppler centroid
dependent term will diﬀer, as the sub-bands have diﬀerent Doppler centroids. Hence, by
forming an interferogram between the forward and backward squinted interferograms, known
13
==PAGE:20==
2.5.
Multi-Aperture Interferometry
as a double-diﬀerence interferogram, we obtain the MAI interferogram, the phase of which is
sensitive solely to azimuth motion. The relation between azimuth motion, ∆x, and the phase
of the MAI interferogram, φMAI, becomes:
∆x =
φMAI
2π(fu −fl)Vg
(2.15)
where Vg is the satellite velocity projected to ground, and fu and fl are the center frequencies
of the upper and lower sub-bands, respectively. Note that the sensitivity of the MAI phase
to azimuth motion is given by the separation of sub-band center frequencies, ∆f = fu −fl.
Consequently, in order to obtain a high sensitivity towards azimuth motion, a large frequency
separation is preferred. However, if the frequency separation is larger than half the azimuth
bandwidth, ∆f > Ba/2, the bandwidth of each sub-band will be even smaller than Ba/2. As
the sub-band bandwidth determines the resolution of the resulting MAI interferogram, it is
obviously preferred to keep this bandwidth as large as possible. Hence, a trade-oﬀarises in
the selection of the sub-band frequency separation, ∆f.
One of the most crucial error sources in MAI is the ionospheric eﬀect, introduced in section
2.2, which generates roughly the same streaks in the MAI phase as observed in the azimuth
oﬀset tracking measurements, due to an added phase modulation of the ionospheric electron
content. The ionospheric phase contribution is not canceled in the MAI interferogram, as the
synthetically forward and backward squinted acquisitions observe the ionosphere at diﬀerent
squint angles.
When performing MAI with TOPS images, a deramping of both the master and slave SLCs
must be carried out prior to generating the upper and lower sub-bands, as the SLC spectra
must be basebanded prior to performing the band-pass ﬁltering. MAI is implemented in the
reﬁned coregistration DInSAR approach described in section 3.4, which includes a description
of the practical implementation of TOPS MAI.
14
==PAGE:21==
3
Methodology
In this chapter, a description of all the various DInSAR processing approaches, investigated
in this study, is provided through sections 3.2-3.4. First, however, section 3.1 gives a brief
description of the implemented oﬀset tracking routine. The ﬁnal section describes how GPS
measurements are used as a validation tool for the obtained oﬀset tracking and DInSAR
motion measurements.
Common to all the implemented processing chains is that they were developed as Bash
scripts utilizing various functions from the GAMMA SAR software library (Werner et al.,
2000) for each of the basic processing steps. In the reﬁned coregistration DInSAR approach,
described in section 3.4, the generation and ﬁltering of the MAI interferogram, along with the
updating of the coregistration look-up table, was developed as a MATLAB function. A high-
performance computer with a substantial amount of RAM and CPUs allowed the processing
of entire Sentinel-1 scenes to be carried out relatively quickly.
3.1
Oﬀset tracking processing
The oﬀset tracking procedure implemented for this study, which utilizes a series of GAMMA
functions, diﬀers slightly from the description provided in section 2.2.
While still being
intensity oﬀset tracking, the implemented scheme does not operate with a moving template
window within a given search window. Instead, the search window and template window are
essentially equal. Consequently, there is an upper limit to the motion that can be mapped
by the algorithm. To alleviate this problem, the master and slave images are coregistered
prior to the oﬀset tracking processing - a step that is not always performed in oﬀset tracking
routines. Once the images are coregistered, the upper motion limit is substantially higher
than any motion encountered in most of the interior ice sheet. The intensity oﬀset tracking
is implemented in the spectral domain, where an SLC oversampling is optionally carried
out prior to the cross-correlation.
SLC oversampling ideally allows for a more accurate
==PAGE:22==
3.2.
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing
estimation of the oﬀsets. As the oversampling is facilitated through a Fourier interpolation,
the master/slave images must be deramped prior to performing it. Because the oﬀset tracking
procedure does not exploit the phase of the signals, it is not necessary to reramp the images
once the SLC oversampling has been done. The intensity oﬀset tracking procedure delivers
slant range (i.e. LoS) and azimuth motion in units of SLC pixels. A conversion to m/y is
then achieved through knowledge on the SLC sample spacing and the temporal separation
between master and slave. Figure 3.1 shows a ﬂow chart, which outlines the various steps in
the implemented intensity oﬀset tracking routine.
Figure 3.1: Block diagram showing the processing ﬂow of the implemented oﬀset tracking procedure.
Various combinations of parameters for the oﬀset tracking procedure were tested. In the end,
a window size of 256 × 128 and a step size of 64 × 16 (in range/azimuth) along with an SLC
oversampling factor of 2, were adopted as the standard processing parameters. Arguably,
the aspect ratio of the window size should be equal to 4, which is roughly the ratio of
ground range pixels to azimuth pixels for Sentinel-1. In the various tests performed, however,
changes in the window size generally yielded negligible results. The eﬀects of changes to the
SLC oversampling factor were also tested and are documented in section 4.2.
3.2
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing
The ﬁrst investigated DInSAR approach consists of a simple, stripmap-like interferometric
processing routine. The routine follows a processing ﬂow, which would normally be imple-
mented in the processing of regular stripmap image pairs. As such, no special considerations
in regards to the TOPS acquisition mode are made.
16
==PAGE:23==
3.2.
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing
As outlined in section 2.4, a nominal stripmap processing of a TOPS image pair in a region
with azimuth motion is not expected to yield satisfying results. It is of interest, however, to
attain some idea of exactly how poorly the stripmap approach performs, prior to attempting
any sort of reﬁnements.
Figure 3.2 shows a block diagram, which outlines the main steps of the implemented stripmap
approach. The following sub-sections describe each of the main steps. These standard DIn-
SAR processing steps are also performed in the reﬁned DInSAR approaches, described in the
sections to come.
Figure 3.2: Block diagram showing the processing ﬂow of the nominal stripmap DInSAR approach.
The individual processing steps are outlined in the sub-sections below.
3.2.1
Coregistration
The ﬁrst main step of interferometric processing is a coregistration of the image pair. This is
traditionally done by resampling the latter acquisition, i.e. the slave image, to the geometry
of the earlier acquisition, i.e. the master image. To perform a purely geometric coregistra-
tion, a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) can be utilized. Based on Precise Orbit Ephemerides
(POE) and a selected reference height, preliminary latitude/longitude coordinates can be
computed for the master image. The available DEM is then interpolated to these estimated
coordinates, allowing for a subsequent recomputation of the master image latitude/longitude
coordinates using the precise heights from the DEM. With the master geometry converted
to georeferenced coordinates, these coordinates can then be converted to the geometry of
the slave image. Thus, we obtain a set of SAR coordinates, i.e. a sample and line num-
ber, for each pixel in the master geometry, containing the corresponding slave coordinates.
The link between master and slave image is stored in a complex look-up table (LUT), which
has the dimensions of the master image, with each element representing the corresponding
17
==PAGE:24==
3.2.
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing
SAR coordinates of the slave image. Once such a LUT is obtained, a simple 2D interpola-
tion of the slave image can be performed. In GAMMA, a 2D Lanczos interpolation is applied.
Important to note is that the slave image must be deramped, i.e. brought to baseband, prior
to performing the resampling (as was mentioned in section 2.4). When the resampling of
the slave SLC has been carried out, the resampled slave is reramped in order to preserve the
original phase. In this case, the deramping phase, which is reintroduced to the image, should
be resampled in the same way that the slave SLC was resampled. Aside from this step, the
nominal TOPS coregistration does not diﬀer from the conventional stripmap coregistration
process.
The external POE data, consisting of reﬁned orbit state vectors, are distributed by ESA 21
days after image acquisition.1 In the implemented coregistration procedure, the POE orbit
data are automatically included, if available (i.e. if the processed images are older than 21
days).
3.2.2
Interferogram formation
Once the master and slave images have been coregistered, an interferogram between the two
can be formed. In diﬀerential interferometry, where the signal of interest is the motion that
has occurred during the time separation of the two SAR images, the interferometric phase
contribution due to the scene topography, φtopo, must be eliminated along with the ﬂattening
phase, φflat. Such phase corrections are derived from the external precise orbit state vec-
tors (POE) along with an external DEM, usually the same DEM applied in the coregistration.
A multi-looking, i.e. a spatial averaging, of the interferogram is generally performed, in order
to reduce speckle noise. In this study, multi-looking by a factor of 12×3 in range/azimuth was
applied to every interferogram obtained with the various implemented DInSAR approaches.
This corresponds to a resolution cell on ground that is 60×60 m for all the presented DInSAR
LoS velocity maps.
3.2.3
Phase unwrapping
The interferogram provides a measure of the wrapped interferometric phase. The wrapped
phase, φwr, is given modulo 2π, meaning that the absolute phase value at a given pixel is:
φabs = φwr ± 2πN
(3.1)
1https://qc.sentinel1.eo.esa.int/
18
==PAGE:25==
3.2.
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing
where N is an integer. The process of converting from wrapped phase measurements to abso-
lute phase measurements is known as phase unwrapping. Several diﬀerent phase unwrapping
techniques exist. The goal of the unwrapping is to add or subtract some integer of 2π, such
that the absolute phase image is obtained. In this study, a phase unwrapping method based
on a Minimum Cost Flow (MCF) algorithm was used. The unwrapping procedure ﬁrst car-
ries out a Delaunay triangulation of the wrapped phase image. The MCF algorithm then
determines the solution with the lowest cost, where the cost is associated with phase jumps,
i.e. phase discontinuities. The interferometric coherence is used as a weight; areas of low co-
herence are associated with a low cost, while highly coherent areas are associated with a high
cost. Consequently, the algorithm will strongly prefer a solution where phase discontinuities
exist in the low-cost regions with poor interferometric coherence, rather than in the highly
coherent, high-cost regions. In low coherence areas, the interferogram is decorrelated, mean-
ing that the phase measurements are pure noise, and phase discontinuities in these areas are
of course much preferred over the discontinuities in highly coherent areas, where the phase
noise is minimal.
As described earlier, a spatial gradient of motion larger than λ/4 will cause ambiguities in the
wrapped phase and consequently a phase unwrapping error in the shape of a discontinuity in
the resulting velocity map. Such gradients may be observed, for instance, at the shear margin
of an ice stream, where the ice velocity magnitude changes drastically over a short distance.
In the TOPS case, however, a high spatial motion gradient may also be observed at burst
boundaries, where the sign of the phase contribution caused by azimuth motion (assuming
azimuth motion is present in the imaged region) will switch from one burst to the next, due
to the change in sign of the Doppler centroid.
Once the phase has been unwrapped, the LoS deformation is simply obtained by a scaling:
∆R = −λ
4πφunwr
(3.2)
where any error terms in the interferogram phase are naturally propagated on to the LoS
deformation measurement. With the displacement determined, an estimate of the LoS ve-
locity is simply obtained as vLoS = ∆R/∆t, where ∆t is the temporal baseline, i.e. the time
separation between the master and slave acquisitions.
Important to note is that the unwrapping algorithm unwraps the phase from a given reference
point. At this reference point, the velocity is then assumed to be zero. Consequently, the
obtained deformation (or velocity) map is referenced to this point, meaning that the value at
a given pixel provides the deformation/velocity relative to the phase unwrapping reference
point.
19
==PAGE:26==
3.2.
DInSAR: Nominal stripmap interferometric processing
Finally, it is noted that the implemented unwrapping algorithm does not unwrap the raw
interferogram phase, but rather the Goldstein ﬁltered phase. The Goldstein ﬁlter (Goldstein
and Werner, 1998) is a spectral ﬁlter, which works by separating the spectral components
of the phase fringe pattern (which are generally narrow-band) from the noise (which forms
a wide-band component) in a given region.
The ﬁlter then promotes the fringe pattern
component in regions of high coherence, while leaving decorrelated regions (i.e. regions of
poor coherence) unﬁltered. Goldstein ﬁltering is generally highly eﬀective in improving the
success rate of the subsequent unwrapping algorithm.
The ﬁlter is deﬁned by a window
size and a ﬁltering coeﬃcient, α, between 0 and 1, which determines the intensity of the
ﬁltering, with α = 1 being the strongest level of ﬁltering. In this study, a Goldstein ﬁlter
with α = 0.8 and a window size of 32×32 pixels was applied prior to every phase unwrapping.
Note that the Goldstein ﬁlter is applied after multi-looking, meaning that the square window
corresponds to a square window on ground.
3.2.4
DInSAR calibration - from relative to absolute measurements
We now turn our attention to one of the disadvantages in DInSAR processing, compared to
e.g. oﬀset tracking, namely that the resulting DInSAR LoS velocity maps are not absolute
measurements, as described above. In DInSAR processing, one often takes advantage of either
external data, such as GPS measurements, or of characteristics of the investigated scene to
calibrate the relative velocity measurements. In such cases, calibration might be performed
by selecting a phase unwrapping reference point at the location of a GPS station, where the
velocity is known, or at some location where velocity is assumed to be zero. For instance, if
DInSAR was performed at a Greenland scene in which bedrock was visible at some location,
one might select this location as a reference point, assuming the bedrock to be stationary over
the relatively short temporal baseline of the SAR image pair. In the present case, however,
in which DInSAR is to be performed on the Greenland ice sheet, neither GPS stations nor
patches of bedrock can be assumed to be available within a given scene (although in this
speciﬁc test case we are fortunate to have available GPS measurements). Hence, there is
a need for a generally applicable strategy to calibrate the DInSAR velocity measurements.
Here, it is proposed to use LoS oﬀset tracking velocity measurements as a means of calibrating
the obtained DInSAR results. The procedure adopted in this study is to extract the oﬀset
tracking LoS velocity (recall that this is an absolute measurement) from the location of the
selected phase unwrapping reference point and subtract this velocity from the DInSAR LoS
velocity map. In an attempt to smooth out the noisy oﬀset tracking signal, the oﬀset tracking
LoS velocity is extracted as a 5 × 5 pixel average centered on the reference point location.
The size of this averaging window was experimented with for the investigated test cases.
Generally, a large diﬀerence in the obtained LoS velocity value was observed when switching
the window from just a single pixel to a 3 × 3 or 5 × 5 pixel window. Increasing the window
20
==PAGE:27==
3.3.
DInSAR: Burst-wise processing approach
size further, however, generally caused very small changes in the obtained LoS velocity, which
is why the 5 × 5 window was selected as the optimum window size. Nevertheless, the choice
of the averaging window must be assumed to have a slight impact on the oﬀset tracking
calibration. An inaccuracy in the calibration will cause a constant shift in the DInSAR LoS
velocity across the entire scene.
3.2.5
Geocoding
Once an interferogram or displacement map is obtained, it is of interest to geo-reference it.
Analyzing a displacement map in radar geometry can be somewhat challenging as the image
dimensions are slant range and azimuth instead of e.g. East and North. This means that rec-
ognizable features, such as an ice stream, will be shaped and oriented diﬀerently, dependent
on the acquisition geometry. Furthermore, in order to calibrate and/or validate displacement
measurements, for instance using GPS station measurements, a common reference is needed.
To achieve such a common reference, a so-called back geocoding is performed. To facilitate a
back geocoding, a three-dimensional mapping of the region of interest is required, i.e. a map
of latitude, longitude, and height. Such a mapping is provided by a DEM, which was already
used in the coregistration of the master and slave images.
The ﬁrst step is to convert the DEM into the SAR geometry of the master acquisition, facili-
tated through orbit state vector information. The link between the original DEM coordinates
and the corresponding SAR coordinates is stored in a LUT, similar to the resampling LUT
generated in the coregistration step. Back geocoding is then performed as a simple 2D in-
terpolation of the given interferogram or displacement map into the SAR coordinates of the
DEM. Finally, the interferogram/displacement map can be converted back to the original pro-
jection of the DEM or to a diﬀerent map projection entirely. In the present case, where the
interior Greenland ice sheet was investigated, a polar stereographic projection was generally
used for the ﬁnal geocoded products.
3.3
DInSAR: Burst-wise processing approach
The main problem of the nominal stripmap processing approach described above is that the
antenna steering of the TOPS acquisition mode often results in phase discontinuities at the
burst boundaries, which in turn will cause discontinuities in the resulting LoS velocity map,
assuming phase unwrapping is even possible across the burst boundaries. Another challenge
is the varying antenna look-vector across the scene, however, in principle, this can be dealt
with by computing the look-vector for each pixel in the LoS velocity map, which then allows
a correct interpretation of the LoS velocity for each pixel.
21
==PAGE:28==
3.3.
DInSAR: Burst-wise processing approach
In an attempt to deal with the unwrapping diﬃculties across burst boundaries, the nominal
stripmap DInSAR processing scheme described in the section above was modiﬁed to process
a given scene burst by burst. In this way, unwrapping across burst boundaries is completely
avoided. Once all bursts have been processed individually, including phase unwrapping, the
resulting burst LoS velocity maps are stitched into a mosaic spanning the full scene. Figure
3.3 shows a block diagram outlining this processing approach. The only steps, which were
not introduced in section 3.2, are the extraction of a single burst and the stitching of bursts
into a mosaic, both being fairly straightforward processes.
Figure 3.3: Block diagram showing the processing ﬂow of the burst-wise processing DInSAR
approach.
A critical step in the burst-wise processing scheme is the calibration of the LoS velocity with
oﬀset tracking measurements. As a LoS velocity map is generated for every burst within the
scene, each burst must also be individually calibrated. In principle, this is not a problem,
as the oﬀset tracking procedure provides LoS velocity measurements for the entire scene. In
practice, however, the oﬀset tracking measurements are likely not accurate enough to ensure
a precise calibration from burst to burst. The oﬀset tracking calibration performed in the
stripmap approach described in section 3.2 above (and in the reﬁned coregistration approach
described in section 3.4) may result in a constant bias across the entire scene if the calibration
is inaccurate. The burst-wise calibration, however, may introduce a varying bias for every
burst in the scene, which is, arguably, substantially more problematic than a scene-wide
bias. If the oﬀset tracking measurements can provide a suﬃciently high accuracy calibration,
22
==PAGE:29==
3.4.
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
however, the burst-wise processing approach may be an improvement to the nominal stripmap
approach outlined in section 3.2.
3.4
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
As outlined in section 2.4, the phase of the TOPS signal has an azimuth coupling to it, un-
like nominal stripmap SAR signals. As a result, phase discontinuities can occur across burst
boundaries not only as a result of coregistration errors but also due to azimuth motion. Thus,
a diﬃculty arises in separating coregistration errors from real, physical azimuth motion. One
approach, suggested by Prats-Iraola et al. (2012) and De Zan et al. (2014), is to eliminate the
coregistration error signal by exploiting the burst overlap regions. In these overlap regions,
the Extended Spectral Diversity (ESD) method can be applied, since the same region is im-
aged with both a fore and an aft squinted antenna beam. ESD is essentially equivalent to
the MAI method described in section 2.5, the key diﬀerence being that one does not need to
separate the azimuth bandwidth into sub-bands in order to synthesize a fore and aft squinted
acquisition. Thus, ESD provides an estimate of azimuth motion at full bandwidth within
the burst overlaps. The approach suggested by De Zan et al. (2014) and Prats-Iraola et al.
(2012) is to exploit ESD in all burst overlap regions that can be assumed to be stationary
within a scene. An average constant azimuth oﬀset, which is taken to represent the azimuth
misregistration in the scene, is then computed from the stationary burst overlaps. This con-
stant oﬀset can then be accounted for in the coregistration of the image pair. Any remaining
phase discontinuities are then assumed to be caused by actual azimuth motion. Such phase
discontinuities may look striking and seem unphysical. However, one must keep in mind that
the TOPS acquisition mode diﬀers from the regular stripmap acquisition in that the LoS is
not constant over the entire scene. Rather, the LoS varies across each burst, shifting from a
backward squinted look at the beginning to a forward squinted look at the end of each burst.
As a result, in order to correctly interpret the obtained LoS velocity, one should take into
account the pixel-dependent look vector. At a burst boundary, this look vector jumps from
a forward to a backward squint, and so if a uniform physical motion exists in the region of
this burst boundary, the phase will show a discontinuity owing to the shift in antenna squint,
which is not an error in the signal.
The approach outlined above assumes that a constant azimuth misregistration error can be
estimated from a collection of burst overlap regions within the scene that can be assumed
stationary. An obvious problem arises if one was to try and implement this approach in the
DInSAR processing of a scene within the Greenland ice sheet: How can we estimate the az-
imuth misregistration if no burst overlaps can be assumed stationary? Another disadvantage
of the above approach is that the interpretation of the resulting LoS velocity becomes quite
diﬃcult, especially for someone unfamiliar with the TOPS acquisition mode. Therefore, a
23
==PAGE:30==
3.4.
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
diﬀerent approach, discussed in Scheiber et al. (2014), was pursued in this study. Instead of
attempting to interpret the azimuth-coupled LoS velocity obtained in the approach above,
the azimuth coupling to the SAR signal is eliminated prior to phase unwrapping. An advan-
tage of this approach is that the resulting LoS velocity map can then, assuming the azimuth
decoupling has been successful, be interpreted as a standard stripmap case, in which the
azimuth and LoS directions are both constant across the scene.
The azimuth decoupling of the SAR signal is performed via a coregistration reﬁnement,
in which the azimuth motion within the scene is estimated and accounted for. Chapter 2
introduced two possibilities for estimating azimuth motion, namely oﬀset tracking and MAI,
where the coherent MAI technique is generally expected to yield a more accurate estimate.
Scheiber et al. (2014) present a theoretical analysis of the achievable coregistration estimation
accuracy in azimuth using a reﬁnement based on either incoherent cross-correlation (i.e. oﬀset
tracking) or spectral diversity (i.e. Multi-Aperture Interferometry). For the MAI case, they
derive a coregistration accuracy limit as a function of the estimation window size, i.e. the
number of pixels that are averaged. The key point in this derivation is that an azimuth
misregistration corresponds to a phase error in the form of a phase ramp in azimuth across a
given burst, as described in section 2.4. Thus, selecting a maximum tolerable coregistration
accuracy is equivalent to selecting a maximum tolerable induced phase ramp. Note that the
estimation window mentioned here is taken to be square when projected on ground. For
Sentinel-1 the ratio between ground range and azimuth pixels is roughly Rsamp = 4 (i.e. the
azimuth sample spacing is about 4 times larger than the ground range sample spacing). Thus,
if N is the number of azimuth pixels in the estimation window, the total number of pixels in
the estimation window is:
Ntot = RsampN2
(3.3)
An analytical expression is then derived for the required estimation window size, assuming a
certain level of coregistration accuracy (and hence induced phase error). Scheiber et al. (2014)
propose a relaxed requirement, in which the maximum allowed phase error due to misregis-
tration is assumed proportional to the standard deviation of the interferometric phase, σint.
The rationale of this assumption is that it does not seem reasonable to attempt a coregistra-
tion that is orders of magnitude better than the interferometric phase standard deviation, as
such a precise coregistration will not improve matters if the scene gets decorrelated (i.e. if
the interferometric phase standard deviation is high). The ﬁnal expression for the required
estimation window size is:
Ntot = 12NLf2
ηc(η)
k2
dt2
(3.4)
where NL is the number of interferometric looks of the interferogram, fηc is the Doppler
24
==PAGE:31==
3.4.
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
centroid frequency, which is a function of the azimuth time variable, η, dt is the azimuth
sample spacing in time, and k is the proportionality constant between the required maximum
phase error due to misregistration and the interferometric phase error:
φcoreg,max = kφint,std
(3.5)
Thus, the requirement can be made more stringent by setting k < 1 or more relaxed by setting
k > 1. Note that the required estimation window size, Ntot, ends up being independent of
interferometric coherence. The required window size is, however, dependent on the Doppler
centroid and hence on the azimuth position within the burst. Recall from section 2.4 that the
Doppler centroid in a TOPS burst is roughly zero at the center of the burst, negative at the
beginning of the burst, and positive at the end of the burst. Thus, the required estimation
window size increases when approaching the burst edges. Based on eq. (3.4), Figure 3.4
shows a plot of the required azimuth window size, N, as a function of azimuth position
within a burst for the case k = 0.5 and NL = 36. The number of looks was selected to match
an interferogram multi-looking of 12 × 3, however as NL is the number of independent and
looks, NL = 36 is a slight overestimation. Note that although no speciﬁc requirement applies
to the burst center (where the Doppler centroid is zero), a minimum azimuth window size of
10 pixels has been selected to ensure a coregistration accuracy of 0.05 pixels for a coherence
of γ = 0.4.
Figure 3.4: Plot showing the required azimuth size of an averaging window for a MAI coregistration
reﬁnement as a function of the azimuth position within a Sentinel-1 burst. The red line represents
the required azimuth window size obtained from eq. (3.4), while the blue curve indicates a discrete
implementation, in which the burst is split into ﬁve blocks in azimuth.
The red curve in Figure 3.4 shows the required azimuth estimation window size as dictated
by eq. (3.4). In practice, it is not convenient to change the size of the averaging window at
25
==PAGE:32==
3.4.
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
every pixel. Instead, each burst can be divided into a number of blocks, within which the
estimation window size is taken to be constant. The blue curve shows the estimation window
size distribution used in the implemented coregistration reﬁnement algorithm of this study.
Note that a buﬀer is included, such that the window size in each of the blocks is chosen to
be larger than the strictest requirement within that block. Each burst is divided into ﬁve
blocks, and within each block, the estimation window size is set equal to or larger than the
strictest requirement within the given block (in other words, the blue curve is always above
the red curve).
Figure 3.5: Block diagram showing the processing ﬂow of the adaptively reﬁned coregistration
DInSAR approach.
Figure 3.5 shows a block diagram, which outlines the reﬁned DInSAR approach. The ﬁrst
part of the processing scheme is identical to the nominal stripmap approach, namely a non-
reﬁned coregistration using an external DEM and the master/slave POE. However, instead
of forming the interferogram based on the non-reﬁned coregistration, the next step is the
coregistration reﬁnement. The ﬁrst step in the reﬁnement process is to determine the required
size of the estimation window, i.e. the averaging window that will be applied to the azimuth
displacement estimates used to reﬁne the coregistration, which is a function of the azimuth
position within a given burst. Next, the MAI interferogram, which provides an estimate
of azimuth displacement within the scene, is generated.
As described in section 2.5, the
MAI interferogram is formed as the double-diﬀerence interferogram between an upper and a
lower master/slave azimuth sub-band. Prior to the generation of these azimuth sub-bands,
26
==PAGE:33==
3.4.
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
a so-called spectral whitening is performed on both the master and slave azimuth spectra.
The spectral whitening is simply an empirical ﬁltering, which normalizes the spectrum to
improve resolution, in this case making the spectrum more rectangular. Furthermore, azimuth
common-band ﬁltering is performed.
The common-band ﬁltering extracts only the parts
of the master and slave spectra that have common frequencies. The slave spectrum often
has a small oﬀset (on the order of a few Hz to tens of Hz) with respect to the master
spectrum. Forming an interferogram with two spectra that are not aligned causes spectral
decorrelation. This is avoided by applying the azimuth common-band ﬁlter, which discards
the spectral components that the master and slave do not have in common. Note that the
MAI interferogram generation takes as input the deramped master and slave SLCs, as the
signals must be at baseband. Figure 3.6 shows the average azimuth spectrum for sub-swath
IW2 of a coregistered master and slave image pair along with the spectra after whitening
and azimuth common-band ﬁltering. In this example, the master spectrum is centered at
−5.9 Hz, while the slave spectrum is centered at 4.5 Hz. The azimuth common-band ﬁltering
centers both spectra at −0.7 Hz, discarding components not common between the spectra,
while the spectral whitening provides a normalization, making the spectra more rectangular.
Figure 3.6: Average azimuth spectra of sub-swath IW2 of a coregistered master and slave image pair.
Left image shows the spectra prior to any ﬁltering. Note how the master and slave spectra are
slightly misaligned. Right image shows the spectra after spectral whitening and azimuth
common-band ﬁltering. The spectra are now aligned and rectangular.
Next, an upper and lower azimuth sub-band can be formed from each of the master and slave
spectra through a simple band-pass ﬁltering. Figure 3.7 shows the spectra of the master and
slave sub-bands, relative to the full resolution spectrum, in the case where the sub-bands
are separated by half the azimuth bandwidth, i.e. ∆f = Ba/2. Due to the common-band
ﬁltering, the master and slave sub-bands are perfectly aligned.
27
==PAGE:34==
3.4.
DInSAR: Reﬁned coregistration
Figure 3.7: Average azimuth spectra of the upper and lower master/slave sub-bands, generated by
band-pass ﬁltering the whitened and azimuth common-band ﬁltered master and slave spectra. Due to
the common-band ﬁltering the master and slave sub-bands are completely aligned.
Finally, the MAI interferogram can be formed and, as phase unwrapping is not needed,
converted to azimuth displacement. The obtained azimuth displacement map is then used to
reﬁne the coregistration LUT from the nominal coregistration that was carried out in the ﬁrst
step. Recall that the coregistration LUT has the same geometry as the master image and
each element provides the corresponding range and azimuth pixel of the slave image, stored
as a complex number. Thus, if the azimuth displacement estimates from MAI are converted
to pixel units these can simply be added to the LUT of the nominal coregistration. Once the
reﬁned coregistration LUT is obtained, the original slave SLC is resampled according to the
reﬁned LUT. From here, the remaining processing steps are equivalent to those described in
the nominal stripmap approach, namely the formation of the diﬀerential interferogram, phase
unwrapping and scaling to displacement, and ﬁnally, the calibration procedure utilizing oﬀset
tracking measurements.
3.4.1
Variations of the reﬁnement processing
Some variations to the coregistration reﬁnement procedure described above were applied.
Prior to testing out the adaptive averaging window of the MAI reﬁnement described above
(and shown in Figure 3.4), a constant window size was instead implemented. The window
size was then selected such that it exceeded the strictest requirement, namely the window
size requirement at the burst edges, and kept constant across the entire scene. As an experi-
ment, a constant window size signiﬁcantly below the burst edge requirement was also applied.
Regardless of whether the averaging window applied to the MAI azimuth displacement es-
timates is given an adaptive or a constant size, the frequency separation between the upper
and lower sub-bands, ∆f, must be selected. Two selections were investigated: ∆f = 0.6 · Ba,
which is the separation recommended by Scheiber et al. (2014), and ∆f = 0.5 · Ba, which is
the maximum separation possible without reducing the sub-band bandwidth to below Ba/2.
The diﬀerence between the azimuth displacements obtained with these two frequency sepa-
28
==PAGE:35==
3.5.
Validation via GPS measurements
rations was small for the investigated test cases. The separation of ∆f = 0.5 · Ba showed a
slightly closer agreement to available GPS measurements and was therefore selected for all
the applied MAI coregistration reﬁnements.
Furthermore, it was investigated whether azimuth displacement estimates obtained from
oﬀset tracking, instead of MAI, might be viable for use in the coregistration reﬁnement.
3.5
Validation via GPS measurements
Measurements from GPS stations are often useful as a means of validating DInSAR results.
The phase unwrapping step in DInSAR processing imposes a certain risk of errors in the
displacement map, stemming from errors in the applied unwrapping algorithm. Furthermore,
if the phase unwrapping point is located in a non-stationary area, and the displacement map
has not been properly calibrated, a constant bias will be present in the displacement map.
Assuming the bias is of a substantial size, it will in most cases be evident in the comparison
between GPS and DInSAR measurements. An unwrapping error will of course only be ob-
served in the comparison if GPS stations are available in the region where the unwrapping
error has occurred. However, unwrapping errors are often quite evident in the DInSAR dis-
placement map itself, as they result in discontinuities in the unwrapped phase (and hence the
displacement map). Finally, a GPS comparison can be used as a measure of the performance
of two diﬀerence velocity retrievals (e.g. from DInSAR and oﬀset tracking).
In order to facilitate a comparison between GPS and DInSAR displacement measurements,
the measurements must be in a common projection. In the present case, the GPS measure-
ments used were provided in a polar stereographic projection (EPSG:3413). Only horizontal
velocities (i.e. velocities in the x and y directions in the polar stereographic projection) were
available. The two horizontal velocity components were ﬁrst converted to a three-dimensional
local East-North-Up (ENU) coordinate system using the surface-parallel ﬂow assumption
(Joughin et al., 1998) along with a DEM. The ENU velocities were then further reprojected
to SAR geometry, yielding a velocity component each in the SAR LoS and azimuth directions.
The reprojection from a polar stereographic to a local ENU coordinate system for each GPS
station starts by converting the horizontal polar stereographic components, vx and vy, to
East and North components using the following relations:
vE = vx · cos(ψrot) + vy · sin(ψrot)
(3.6)
29
==PAGE:36==
3.5.
Validation via GPS measurements
vN = −vx · sin(ψrot) + vy · cos(ψrot)
(3.7)
where the rotation angle, ψrot, is the diﬀerence between the GPS station longitude and the
central meridian:
ψrot = ψGPS −ψCM
(3.8)
For EPSG:3413, the central meridian is ψCM = −45◦. The vertical component, vU, of the
ENU projection is obtained by invoking the surface-parallel ﬂow assumption, which dictates
that the vertical velocity component can be approximated as:
vU = vE · ∂
∂E h(λGPS, ψGPS) + vN · ∂
∂N h(λGPS, ψGPS)
(3.9)
where h(λGPS, ψGPS) is the surface height at the GPS position (given by its latitude and
longitude). Thus, the surface height gradient must be computed in each of the East and
North directions, at the location of the given GPS station. These gradients are computed
from the available DEM, which was already used in the coregistration procedure.
Figure 3.8 shows the geometrical relations between a local ENU coordinate system and the
SAR LoS and azimuth. Two angles are deﬁned: the look-vector elevation angle, θ, being the
angle between the LoS and the East-North plane, and the look-vector orientation angle, φ,
being the angle between East and the ground-projection of the LoS. From the sketch, the
following equations, relating ENU velocity components to the LoS and azimuth directions,
follow:
vLoS =
h
vE
vN
vU
i


cos(φGPS) cos(θGPS)
sin(φGPS) cos(θGPS)
cos(θGPS)


(3.10)
vaz =
h
vE
vN
vU
i


sin(φGPS)
−cos(φGPS)
0


(3.11)
where the velocity subscripts indicate the velocity direction. The subscript GPS indicates
that the look-vector angles, θ and φ, must be computed for each GPS station, as the look-
vector changes within the acquisition. The look-vector angles are computed using the satellite
orbit state vectors and a standard WGS84 ellipsoidal model of the Earth surface.
30
==PAGE:37==
3.5.
Validation via GPS measurements
Figure 3.8: Sketch showing the relation between a local East-North-Up coordinate system and the
SAR line-of-sight (i.e. slant range) and azimuth directions. Credit: John Peter Merryman Boncori
(Lecture slides, DTU special course, June 2018).
31
==PAGE:38==
4
Results
4.1
Data overview
For the main test cases in the Sentinel-1 DInSAR processing chain development, a region
within the North-East Greenland Ice Stream (NEGIS) was chosen. Both a 12-day and a
6-day Sentinel-1 image pair, covering the same region, were investigated. Table 4.1 provides
an overview of the investigated Sentinel-1 data, including relevant metadata, allowing for the
image pairs to be identiﬁed and acquired by the reader. Sentinel-1 data can be downloaded
from (among others) the EU Copernicus SciHub1 or the Alaska SAR Facility2.
Area
ID
Path/Frame
Orbit
Master
Slave
NEGIS, Greenland
NEGIS 12-day
112/335
Descending
2017-06-17 (S1B)
2017-06-29 (S1B)
NEGIS, Greenland
NEGIS 6-day
112/335
Descending
2017-06-23 (S1A)
2017-06-29 (S1B)
Table 4.1: Overview of investigated Sentinel-1 image pairs. The Master and Slave ﬁelds indicate the
date of acquisition as well as the satellite (S1A or S1B) of the master and slave acquisitions,
respectively, while the ID ﬁeld indicates the name used throughout this chapter to refer to each
image pair. Note that the two image pairs share the same slave image.
Figure 4.1 shows the acquisition geometry of the NEGIS 12-day pair master image, along
with the locations of the available GPS stations. The orbit is descending, i.e. the satellite
moves from roughly North to South, and the satellite is right-looking, meaning that the ear-
liest acquired sub-swath (IW1) is the right-most sub-swath in the image. The acquisition
geometry is plotted on top of a mosaic, which shows horizontal ice velocity magnitude ob-
tained via an averaging of oﬀset tracking results from all available Sentinel-1 images in the
Winter 2016-2017 (acquired from the ESA-CCI project3). NEGIS is seen to move through all
of IW3, as well as the ﬁrst few bursts of IW2. Furthermore, a smaller, more slowly moving
1https://scihub.copernicus.eu/dhus/#/home
2https://vertex.daac.asf.alaska.edu/#
3http://products.esa-icesheets-cci.org/products/downloadlist/IV/
==PAGE:39==
4.1.
Data overview
ice stream is seen to be located in the Southern half of IW1. All the results presented in
this section are plotted on top of the ESA-CCI oﬀset tracking horizontal ice velocity map for
reference. In all the DInSAR processing results, an interferogram multi-looking of 12 × 3 in
range/azimuth has been applied.
Figure 4.1: Overview of the acquisitions geometry of the 12-day NEGIS pair master image. The
green arrow shows the satellite ﬂight direction and pink triangles show locations of the available GPS
stations. The burst locations are plotted for each of the three sub-swaths (IW1-IW3). The
underlying ice velocity map shows average horizontal velocity magnitude obtained from a 2016-2017
Winter campaign (obtained from the ESA-CCI project.
GPS measurements were provided by the East Greenland Ice Core Project (EastGRIP4). A
two-dimensional measurement of horizontal ice velocity is provided in a polar stereographic
(EPSG:3413) projection. The velocity measurement for each station is given as a mean based
on a varying number of measurements (typically one or more measurements per year, acquired
during the summer months). The GPS measurements used in this study are averages for the
time period 2015-2018, with a few stations only spanning 2016-2018. A standard deviation on
the order of a few millimeters per year in each of the two dimensions is associated with each
station. Note that an additional uncertainty is introduced to the GPS measurements in the
conversion from the polar stereographic to the local ENU projection (and further reprojec-
4https://eastgrip.org/Science.html
33
==PAGE:40==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
tion to SAR geometry), as the surface-parallel ﬂow assumption is utilized in this conversion
process. This uncertainty is, however, likely very small in the case of the investigated NEGIS
image pairs, as this region shows neither high accumulation or ablation rates, meaning that
the surface-parallel ﬂow assumption should be quite accurate (Joughin et al., 1998).
For the DEM required in e.g. the image coregistration and geocoding steps, ArcticDEM 32
m tiles (i.e. with a posting of 32 m) were used (Morin et al., 2016). Several of these tiles need
to be combined in order to span a full Sentinel-1 scene. A script was written using various
GDAL functions to merge and reproject the ArcticDEM tiles.
4.2
Oﬀset tracking results
An oﬀset tracking processing routine was implemented for several reasons. Firstly, it is of
interest to compare the displacements obtained with oﬀset tracking to those obtained with
DInSAR. Secondly, the range oﬀset results were used for calibration in the DInSAR process-
ing, as described in section 3.2.4. Finally, it was deemed of interest to document two separate
artefacts in the oﬀset tracking displacement maps: One is the physically well-understood az-
imuth streak eﬀect generated by a spatial and temporal variation in ionospheric electron
content. The other is a more mysterious "patch" feature occurring only in the range oﬀsets.
Figure 4.2 shows the range and azimuth displacements obtained from oﬀset tracking on the
12-day NEGIS test case image pair. Note that in these displacement maps, along with all the
ones to follow, positive values indicate motion towards the radar (for LoS displacement maps)
or in the ﬂight direction (for azimuth displacement maps). Comparing the range and azimuth
oﬀset maps of Figure 4.2, we immediately note a higher level of detail in the range oﬀsets. This
is mainly due to the substantially higher range resolution (5 m vs. 20 m azimuth resolution
in the SLC images) but also due to the clearly visible ionospherically induced streaks. The
ionospheric streaks, which are oriented roughly in constant azimuth, are most clearly seen in
the slow-moving regions of the image, as the high velocity values of the ice stream mask the
eﬀect of the streaks. Discontinuities in the streaks are observed at the border of each sub-
swath. These discontinuities are due to the TOPS antenna steering. Because of the antenna
steering, the bursts of each sub-swath are measured with a variant look-vector and a temporal
separation. Consequently, the observed electron content of the ionosphere, which modulates
the radar pulses, generating the observed streaks, varies between sub-swaths. Highly negative
azimuth velocity is observed within the ice stream, which seems reasonable, as the azimuth
direction is almost parallel to the ice stream and the image pair stems from a descending orbit.
34
==PAGE:41==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
Figure 4.2: LoS (left) and azimuth (right) displacement maps generated by oﬀset tracking of the
12-day NEGIS test case image pair. The processing chain of section 3.1 was used with a window
size of 256 × 128, a step size of 64 × 16, and an SLC oversampling factor of 2.
Turning our attention to the LoS oﬀsets in Figure 4.2, the earlier mentioned patch-like arte-
fact is immediately noted. It is best seen in IW1 (the right-most sub-swath), where it has
generated a bunch of rectangular patches, most of which have a size of exactly one burst in
azimuth and a fraction of a burst in slant-range. Generally, a displacement ramp across az-
imuth, i.e. a seemingly linear variation, is observed within each patch. In IW3 (the left-most
sub-swath) some of the patches seem to be as large as an entire burst. This artefact is myste-
rious, in the sense that no physical explanation for it has been asserted. It has, however, been
observed by others, during processing independent of this study5. Based on the geometrical
characteristics of the patches, i.e. the perfectly rectangular shape, and the azimuth-aligned
ramp, it seems likely that the artefact stems from an issue in the Sentinel-1 focusing processor.
In the focusing step, data is (presumably) processed in blocks, and if one or more processing
parameters are not updated correctly, patch eﬀects related to the block processing might
occur. This is, of course, only speculation and should be investigated further. Aside from the
patch artefact, the range oﬀset map shows a clear distinction between the ice stream and its
surroundings. Also, a variation in LoS displacement is observed between the area to the West
and the area to the East of the ice stream. Furthermore, the smaller ice stream in the South-
ern part of IW1 is almost completely obscured by ionospheric streaks in the azimuth oﬀsets
but is quite well distinguished in the LoS oﬀsets. Note that the Eastern part of IW1 is aﬀected
by poor coherence, resulting in an increased noise level in both the range and azimuth oﬀsets.
The SLC oversampling performed prior to the intensity cross-correlation in the oﬀset tracking
routine increases the processing time signiﬁcantly. Therefore, it is interesting to determine
whether or not the oversampling provides substantial improvements.
The oﬀset tracking
5Personal communications: Anders Kusk (DTU Space) & Francesco De Zan (Microwaves and Radar
Institute, DLR)
35
==PAGE:42==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
procedure was repeated on the same image pair with the same parameters used to generate
the results in Figure 4.2 but without implementing SLC oversampling. Figure 4.3 shows
the diﬀerence in obtained LoS/azimuth displacement between the procedure including over-
sampling and the procedure excluding oversampling. In the case of the azimuth oﬀsets, the
oversampling seems to have a quite small eﬀect relative to the magnitude of the azimuth
displacements. Unsurprisingly, a rapidly varying, high magnitude diﬀerence is observed in
the region of IW1 which is dominated by noise. This is also observed in the case of the LoS
oﬀsets. More interesting is the apparent dependence of the LoS oﬀset diﬀerence on sub-swath.
A quantitative comparison with GPS measurements is presented in section 4.2.1.
Figure 4.3: Diﬀerence between LoS (left) and azimuth (right) velocity obtained when performing
oﬀset tracking with and without SLC oversampling, using a window size of 256 × 128 and a step size
of 64 × 16 in both cases, for the 12-day NEGIS test case image pair.
Oﬀset tracking in the interior ice sheet is generally more likely to produce good results
when applying it to 12-day image pairs than 6-day image pairs. This is because very small
displacements are, generally, diﬃcult to track for the oﬀset tracking algorithm. Temporal
decorrelation, which in the Arctic will typically be due to precipitation in between the two
image acquisitions, is on average worse for longer temporal baselines. However, the advantage
gained by using 12-day pairs, resulting in larger and easier to track displacements, tends to
outweigh the disadvantage of temporal decorrelation. Oﬀset tracking with 6-day Sentinel-1
image pairs was not conducted until late in this study when it was implemented as a means
of calibrating DInSAR results. Figure 4.4 shows the LoS and azimuth oﬀset tracking results
for a 6-day NEGIS test case image pair (spanning the latter 6 days of the presented 12-day
pair). Immediately, one notes a completely diﬀerent image than what was obtained for the
12-day case, even though the temporal baselines overlap. In fact, it appears that both a LoS
and an azimuth bias is present in the oﬀsets, based on the fact that the ice stream is still
discernible from its surroundings. As a side note, during this study, the bias was not initially
encountered in the oﬀset tracking results, where it manifests itself quite clearly. Instead,
it caused immense problems in the development of the DInSAR processing routines (pre-
36
==PAGE:43==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
sented in the coming sections), where speciﬁcally the azimuth bias has a critical eﬀect on the
interferometric phase. The eﬀect of the bias on DInSAR is investigated in the coming sections.
It turns out that the bias occurs speciﬁcally when processing an image pair consisting of one
image from each of the Sentinel-1 satellites, i.e. Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-1B. The satellites
are in the same orbit with a 12-day repeat cycle, separated by 180◦, meaning that 12-day
pairs will always consist of two S1A or two S1B images, while 6-day pairs consist of an
S1A and an S1B image. The S1A-S1B bias (as it will be abbreviated from here onwards)
was empirically documented in Schubert et al. (2017). They tested the location accuracy of
both Sentinel-1 satellites by geolocating a series of corner reﬂectors with each satellite. Of
interest to the current study is not the absolute location error but rather the diﬀerence in
location error between S1A and S1B. For a collection of corner reﬂectors in Torny-le-Grand
and Düsseldorf, Schubert et al. (2017) measured a diﬀerence in average location error between
the two satellites (S1B minus S1A) of 0.401 m in azimuth and 0.156 m in LoS. Important
to note is that these LoS/azimuth biases are an average over measurements taken over all
three IW sub-swaths. At the same time, Schubert et al. (2017) argue that there seems to be
a sub-swath dependence in the location accuracy, but they do not provide a speciﬁc estimate
of the bias for each sub-swath. In fact, only a single measurement is available within IW1,
meaning that the provided biases are an average of measurements predominantly in IW2 and
IW3. The eﬀects of the limited knowledge regarding this bias will be further discussed later
on.
Figure 4.4: LoS (left) and azimuth (right) velocity maps generated by oﬀset tracking of the 6-day
NEGIS test case image pair. The oﬀset tracking parameters are the same as the ones used in the
presented 12-day results, namely a window size of 256 × 128, a step size of 64 × 16, and an SLC
oversampling factor of 2.
The 6-day image pair presented in Figure 4.4 consists of a master image from S1A and a slave
image from S1B. Hence, to cancel out the S1A-S1B bias, oﬀsets of 0.401 m and −0.156 m
were added to the azimuth and LoS displacement maps, respectively, prior to the conversion
37
==PAGE:44==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
to velocity in m/year. Note that the sign in the LoS bias has been switched to comply with
our chosen convention of positive LoS representing motion towards the radar. Figure 4.5
shows the LoS and azimuth velocities obtained from the 6-day NEGIS test case image pair
with the S1A-S1B bias correction applied. First oﬀ, we note that the 6-day oﬀsets appear
substantially more noisy than the 12-day oﬀset from a coinciding period (presented in Figure
4.2), illustrating the point made earlier, that oﬀset tracking tends to perform better when
larger displacements are present. Secondly, we note that the azimuth streaks vary from the
ones observed in the 12-day case, as a diﬀerent ionospheric electron content has been observed.
The patch artefact in LoS also shows a diﬀerent spatial distribution, however, interestingly
enough, the eﬀect does seem to be more pronounced in sub-swath IW1 compared to IW2 and
IW3, which is also observed for the 12-day case in Figure 4.2. The artefact appears much
more severe in the 6-day case than in the 12-day case.
Figure 4.5: LoS (left) and azimuth (right) velocity maps generated by oﬀset tracking of a 6-day
NEGIS test case image pair. Processing parameters are unchanged from Figure 4.4, namely a
window size of 256 × 128, a step size of 64 × 16, and an SLC oversampling factor of 2, however an
S1A-S1B bias correction of −0.156 m in the LoS oﬀsets and 0.401 m in the azimuth oﬀsets has been
applied.
It is of interest to look at the agreement between the velocities obtained from the 6-day and
the 12-day image pairs. Figure 4.6 shows the LoS and azimuth velocity diﬀerence. Looking
ﬁrst at the LoS diﬀerence, we note that the highest deviations are observed in IW1, where
it was earlier noted that the patch artefact is most severe.
Also in IW2 and IW3, it is
clear that the patches, which are not distributed equally in the two image pairs, cause a
disagreement. Generally, it appears that the diﬀerence is predominantly positive, indicating
that the ice velocity computed from the 6-day pair is more negative than that of the 12-day
pair. Turning our attention to the azimuth diﬀerence, the eﬀect of the ionospheric streaks,
which vary between the two image pairs, is observed to have a dominant eﬀect. Not only are
the ionospheric streaks distributed diﬀerently, but they also tend to be more smeared out in
the 6-day results.
38
==PAGE:45==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
Figure 4.6: Diﬀerence between LoS (left) and azimuth (right) velocity generated by oﬀset tracking of
the 12-day and 6-day NEGIS test case image pairs (12-day minus 6-day). In both cases, processing
parameters are a window size of 256 × 128 a step size of 64 × 16, and an SLC oversampling factor of
2. For the 6-day pair, the S1A-S1B bias correction was applied.
4.2.1
Comparison of oﬀset tracking results and GPS
In order to determine the quality of the various oﬀset tracking results presented above some
external ice velocity measurements are needed for comparison.
To this end, we use the
available GPS station measurements. The locations of the available GPS stations are shown
in all of the velocity maps displayed in this section. Figure 4.7 shows a GPS comparison
plot for each of the LoS and azimuth NEGIS velocity maps obtained via the various oﬀset
tracking approaches presented above: The 12-day pair with oversampling, the 12-day pair
without oversampling, the 6-day pair without bias correction, and the 6-day pair with the
S1A-S1B bias correction applied. Each plot also shows the associated correlation between the
GPS and oﬀset tracking velocity measurements along with the error standard deviation and
the mean error. The GPS measurements have been reprojected from a polar stereographic
projection to the SAR LoS/azimuth geometry, as described in section 3.5.
39
==PAGE:46==
4.2.
Oﬀset tracking results
Figure 4.7: Plots showing a comparison between each of the LoS (left column) and azimuth (right
column) velocity maps obtained from the various oﬀset tracking procedures presented in the current
section and the available NEGIS EastGRIP GPS measurements.
Investigating ﬁrst the GPS comparison of the 12-day results (top two rows of Figure 4.7),
we note a surprisingly good agreement, with a standard deviation less than 1 m/year in
LoS and around 5 m/year in azimuth. It is noted that the 12-day velocities for which SLC
oversampling was not performed in the intensity oﬀset tracking procedure deviate slightly
more from the GPS measurements than the 12-day velocities with SLC oversampling. For
this reason, it was chosen to include SLC oversampling in the oﬀset tracking procedure,
especially when performing IOT on 6-day image pairs, which are generally expected to be
noisier. Looking at the GPS comparisons for the 6-day results (the bottom two rows of Figure
4.7), we immediately note the eﬀect of the S1A-S1B bias correction; when the correction is
not applied, a very clear bias is visible, whereas a much closer agreement is obtained when
the bias correction is implemented. Compared to the 12-day results, the standard deviation is
observed to be slightly larger in the LoS case, while the azimuth standard deviation is seen to
be twice as large. The large diﬀerence between the 6-day and 12-day azimuth velocity results
is not surprising, considering the eﬀect of the ionospheric streaks, which based on Figure 4.6
is seen to be quite dominant. Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, the 6-day oﬀset tracking
results are expected to be noisier, due to the fact that smaller displacements are measured,
compared to the 12-day case. Note that the disagreement between LoS oﬀset tracking and
40
==PAGE:47==
4.3.
DInSAR results
GPS measurements would likely be substantially larger had the GPS stations been located
in sub-swath IW1, where the patch artefact was seen to severely impact the results. Also,
the patch artefact in the LoS oﬀsets is substantially worse in IW1.
4.3
DInSAR results
In this section, the results obtained with the various DInSAR approaches, described in chapter
3, are presented and discussed. Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 present the nominal stripmap and the
burst-wise processing DInSAR approaches, while sections 4.3.3 and 4.3.4 present the reﬁned
coregistration approach.
Finally, section 4.3.5 provides a collective evaluation of all the
presented DInSAR results in the shape of a comparison with the NEGIS GPS measurements.
4.3.1
Nominal stripmap approach
The ﬁrst DInSAR experiments conducted in this study consisted of the implementation of a
simple, stripmap-like processing chain, as described in section 3.2. Generally speaking, this
approach was not expected to perform well on image pairs from non-stationary areas, such as
the selected NEGIS test region. The stripmap approach was ﬁrst tested on the NEGIS 6-day
image pair, as the smaller level of motion between the acquisitions, compared to the 12-day
pair, makes the phase unwrapping step more likely to succeed. Figure 4.8 shows the wrapped
phase, along with its Goldstein ﬁltered version, obtained from the straight forward stripmap
processing chain.
Interestingly, the interferometric phase actually looks quite reasonable
in the slow-moving regions outside the ice stream, where only minor phase discontinuities
are observed.
Discontinuities in azimuth are, however, quite severe at most of the burst
boundaries within the ice stream. Note that the Goldstein ﬁltering of the wrapped phase
in some cases provides a slight smoothening of the burst discontinuities. No coregistration
reﬁnements are applied in the stripmap processing approach. Therefore, neither is the S1A-
S1B bias correction. This is due to the fact that the S1A-S1B bias appears to arise in the
absolute displacement estimates obtained from e.g. oﬀset tracking and MAI, but not in the
nominal (i.e. non-reﬁned) interferogram.
41
==PAGE:48==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.8: Wrapped phase obtained from the nominal, stripmap-like processing chain, i.e. with no
reﬁnements or bias corrections, applied to the 6-day NEGIS image pair. To the left is the unﬁltered
wrapped phase, while the right image shows the Goldstein ﬁltered version (window size 32 and
α = 0.8).
Figure 4.9 shows a close-up view of the ice stream within sub-swaths IW2 and IW3, where
the extensive burst discontinuities are clearly visible.
Recall from section 2.4 that these
discontinuities exist due to the coupling between the LoS and azimuth, arising from the TOPS
antenna steering. In the present case, where no corrections or reﬁnements are performed, such
azimuth phase contributions may arise from a combination of real azimuth motion within the
scene (i.e.
the ﬂow of ice) and coregistration errors caused by ionospheric eﬀects, orbit
timing errors, and DEM inaccuracies. As mentioned above, the S1A-S1B bias does not seem
to yield a phase contribution in the nominally coregistered interferogram. Instead, the bias is
only present in displacement estimates such as the ones obtained from oﬀset tracking or MAI,
meaning that the S1A-S1B bias correction should not be applied if a coregistration reﬁnement
is not carried out. Looking at Figures 4.8 and 4.9, it is noted that the sources of azimuth
misregistration and azimuth motion collectively generate substantial phase discontinuities
at many of the burst boundaries within the scene, especially within the ice stream, where
azimuth motion is relatively large.
42
==PAGE:49==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.9: Close-up view of the unﬁltered 6-day wrapped phase depicted to the left in Figure 4.8,
zoomed in on the ice stream (Northern parts of IW2 and IW3).
Figure 4.10 shows the wrapped phase, with and without Goldstein ﬁltering, of the 12-day
NEGIS image pair. Again, discontinuities are observed at many of the burst boundaries.
In the 12-day case, the discontinuities are more severe outside the ice stream, which is not
surprising, as about twice the deformation is expected compared to the 6-day case. The
discontinuities within the ice stream are still present but are hard to discern closer to the
shear margin, where the fringes are very dense due to the high level of motion.
43
==PAGE:50==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.10: Wrapped phase obtained from the nominal, stripmap-like processing chain, i.e. with no
reﬁnements or bias corrections, applied to the 12-day NEGIS image pair. Left image is the unﬁltered
wrapped phase, while the right image shows the Goldstein ﬁltered version (window size 32 and
α = 0.8).
Figure 4.11 shows a close-up view of the ice stream, which shows both azimuth burst dis-
continuities but also discontinuities in range between sub-swaths IW3 and IW2. Due to the
longer temporal baseline, compared to the 6-day image pair, the wrapped phase in the 12-day
case shows a set of very dense fringes at the ice stream shear margin. If the spatial gradient
is too large, i.e. a diﬀerence of more than λ/4 between neighboring resolution cells, ambigu-
ities occur in the wrapped phase, and the phase cannot be properly unwrapped. This is a
disadvantage of using the 12-day image pairs for DInSAR processing.
44
==PAGE:51==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.11: Close-up view of the unﬁltered 12-day wrapped phase depicted to the left in Figure 4.10,
zoomed in on the ice stream (Northern parts of IW2 and IW3).
Figure 4.12 shows the LoS displacement obtained by unwrapping and scaling (cf. section
3.2.3) the wrapped phase of the 6-day and 12-day pairs, respectively. Recall that the phase
unwrapping is performed on the Goldstein ﬁltered phase. Looking ﬁrst at the LoS velocity
map generated from the 12-day image pair, it is noted that part of the ice stream’s Eastern
shear margin is missing, due to the spatial displacement gradient exceeding the requirements
for phase unwrapping to be successful. Furthermore, unwrapping errors extending across
several bursts (i.e. not aligning with a burst boundary) are observed within the ice stream in
the 12-day velocity map; although somewhat diﬃcult to distinguish, they appear as diagonal
lines, across which a constant gradient (of a multiple of 2π in phase or λ/4 in displacement) is
present, due to the failure of the phase unwrapping. Finally, the phase discontinuities between
burst boundaries are observed to result in corresponding discontinuities in the velocity map, as
expected. Observing instead the 6-day LoS velocity map, it is immediately noted that phase
unwrapping has been more successful. The shear margin is well-resolved, with no missing
parts, and unwrapping errors that are not related to the burst discontinuities seem to be
gone. Still, however, the phase burst discontinuities have, once again, caused discontinuities
at many of the burst boundaries in the resulting LoS velocity map.
45
==PAGE:52==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.12: LoS velocity obtained from the nominal stripmap DInSAR approach applied to the
6-day (left) and 12-day (right) NEGIS test case image pairs. The green dot indicates the phase
unwrapping reference point.
Recall that the DInSAR velocity measurements are not absolute, but rather relative to the
phase unwrapping reference point. Following the procedure presented in section 3.2.4 each
of the LoS velocity maps of Figure 4.12 were calibrated by subtracting the LoS velocity
obtained via oﬀset tracking on the corresponding image pair around the phase unwrapping
reference point. Note that in calibrating the 6-day results we must, of course, ﬁrst correct
the S1A-S1B bias in the 6-day LoS oﬀset tracking measurements, prior to extracting the
reference point velocity.
Figure 4.13 presents the DInSAR LoS velocity maps, calibrated
with oﬀset tracking measurements. Comparing the calibrated DInSAR LoS velocity maps to
the corresponding oﬀset tracking velocity maps, we note a strong agreement for the 12-day
image pair. The 6-day DInSAR velocity map is seen to agree much better with the 12-day
DInSAR/oﬀset tracking results than the 6-day oﬀset tracking results. Looking back at the
6-day OT LoS velocity map this disagreement seems to be predominantly caused by the patch
artefact observed in the LoS oﬀset tracking results, which appears much more severe in the
6-day case.
46
==PAGE:53==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.13: LoS velocity obtained from the nominal stripmap DInSAR approach applied to the 6-day
(left) and 12-day (right) NEGIS test case image pairs, calibrated by oﬀset tracking measurements
from the respective image pairs. The green dot indicates the phase unwrapping reference point.
The agreement between the 12-day and 6-day DInSAR LoS velocity maps is illustrated in Fig-
ure 4.14, where the diﬀerence between the two velocity maps is plotted (12-day minus 6-day).
Unsurprisingly, the largest diﬀerences coincide with the unwrapping errors observed within
the ice stream in IW3 and the ﬁrst burst of IW2 in the 12-day velocity map. Otherwise, very
small diﬀerences are observed in most of IW2 and IW3, while IW1 seems to show a larger,
roughly uniform positive diﬀerence. Large parts of IW1 show a poorer coherence compared
to IW2 and IW3, which means that LoS velocity measurements will tend to be noisier in
these parts of IW1. The poor coherence is not, however, expected to result in a constant bias
between the two image pairs. Instead, a partial explanation could be that the S1A-S1B bias
is, in fact, sub-swath dependent, as mentioned earlier, while the applied correction consists
of a constant oﬀset, estimated mainly from measurements within IW2 and IW3. A deviation
in the oﬀset tracking calibration procedure may also have caused a slight bias between the
two velocity maps, although this contribution is constant across the full scene.
47
==PAGE:54==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.14: Diﬀerence between LoS velocity obtained from nominal stripmap-like DInSAR
processing of the 12-day and the 6-day NEGIS image pairs, each calibrated by oﬀset tracking
measurements from the respective image pair.
A quantitative comparison between the LoS velocities obtained with the stripmap DInSAR
approach and GPS measurements is given in section 4.3.5. It should be kept in mind that even
though the LoS velocity maps generated from the nominal stripmap-like processing approach
might look reasonably accurate from a qualitative inspection of the maps and a quantitative
comparison with GPS measurements, the azimuth coupling to the SAR signal, caused by the
antenna steering, means that the LoS vector is actually varying across every burst. The LoS
will be squinted forward at the end of each burst and backward at the beginning of every
burst. The fact that the bursts are not perfectly aligned between the three sub-swaths means
that the LoS varies in a fairly complicated matter within the full scene mosaic. Thus, the
motion depicted in the LoS velocity maps generated by the stripmap processing chain may
indeed show real physical motion, however, in principle the velocity map cannot be interpreted
as a regular stripmap SAR deformation map, as the LoS is not constant. Instead, the LoS
vector orientation should be computed on a pixel level for the mosaic, in order to facilitate a
correct interpretation of the velocity. Another problem with the stripmap approach is that
the azimuth motion contribution may result from both physical motion and coregistration
errors.
48
==PAGE:55==
4.3.
DInSAR results
4.3.2
Burst-wise processing approach
The ﬁrst approach pursued, in an attempt to improve the DInSAR results presented above,
consisted simply of processing each burst in the scene as an individual image pair. This
approach is essentially equivalent to the stripmap procedure described above, the diﬀerence
being that an interferogram is generated and unwrapped for each individual burst. In this
way, phase unwrapping across burst boundaries is avoided. As will be evident from the re-
sults, however, this does not necessarily mean that discontinuities in the LoS velocity map
are avoided.
As described in section 3.3, the main problem of the burst-wise processing scheme is that it re-
quires an individual calibration for each burst, which in this study is performed via LoS oﬀset
tracking measurements. Whereas an inaccuracy in the oﬀset tracking calibration performed
in the nominal stripmap approach or the reﬁned coregistration approach may introduce a
uniform bias over the entire scene, inaccuracies in the burst-wise oﬀset tracking calibrations
may introduce biases that vary from burst to burst. As a result, the calibrated LoS velocity
mosaic is likely to contain a non-uniform bias, which is generally more problematic than the
image-wide bias that may be introduced in the other processing approaches.
Figure 4.15 shows the LoS velocity for the full scene of the 6-day NEGIS image pair, ob-
tained with the burst-wise DInSAR processing approach. Each burst has been individually
calibrated with LoS oﬀset tracking measurements of the 12-day NEGIS image pair. As the
LoS oﬀset tracking measurements for the 6-day NEGIS image pair were seen to be severely
aﬀected by the patch artefact (Figure 4.5) it was chosen to instead use oﬀset tracking mea-
surements for the 12-day pair for the calibration in the burst-wise processing procedure.
Performing the calibration with the 6-day oﬀset tracking measurements yields a result that
is almost completely dominated by biases caused by the oﬀset tracking patch artefact, espe-
cially in sub-swath IW1. For all the other DInSAR processing approaches, the calibration
was implemented with oﬀset tracking measurements from the corresponding image pair (i.e.
6-day oﬀset tracking calibration for 6-day DInSAR results), as these DInSAR approaches
involve only a single unwrapping reference point for the entire scene.
49
==PAGE:56==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.15: LoS velocity obtained for the 6-day NEGIS image pair with the burst-wise DInSAR
processing approach, i.e. by forming and unwrapping an interferogram for each burst in the scene.
The LoS velocity obtained for each burst has been calibrated by oﬀset tracking measurements from
the NEGIS 12-day image pair, using the same processing paramters listed in Figure 4.2.
The LoS velocity mosaic obtained with the burst-wise approach looks surprisingly accurate
in some areas, e.g. the Northernmost bursts of IW3 and the middle region of IW1. Even in
these regions, however, discontinuities are present at both azimuth and range burst bound-
aries. The range discontinuities (i.e. discontinuities between neighboring sub-swaths) are
mainly due to the individual calibration the bursts. The azimuth burst discontinuities do, of
course, have a physical contribution, due to the change in the antenna look direction across
a burst boundary. The calibration procedure does, however, also contribute to these discon-
tinuities, as is clearly seen in the sixth burst of IW2, which makes a proper interpretation
of the LoS velocity diﬃcult, if not impossible. Although the patch artefact observed in the
range oﬀset tracking results was not as severe for the 12-day pair, it is likely that it has
aﬀected the calibration of some of the bursts.
The results above illustrate that the non-reﬁned stripmap DInSAR approach may actually
be preferable to the burst-wise processing approach in most cases.
The idea behind the
burst-wise approach was to avoid phase unwrapping across phase discontinuities at the burst
boundaries, however as was seen in section 4.3.1, these discontinuities can often be unwrapped
50
==PAGE:57==
4.3.
DInSAR results
across anyways, depending on their severity. Instead, the burst-wise approach seems likely to
introduce even more severe biases between entire bursts, due to the oﬀset tracking calibration
procedure being performed for each individual burst.
4.3.3
Reﬁned coregistration approach
In section 4.3.1 we saw that the main problem with the simple stripmap-like DInSAR ap-
proach is that the azimuth coupling to the LoS signal gives rise to discontinuities in the phase,
and hence the LoS velocity measurements, at burst boundaries. As explained in section 3.4,
an attempt to combat these discontinuities was made by following a processing approach in
which the azimuth coupling to the LoS signal is eliminated. Additionally, the LoS velocity
map can be interpreted as a conventional stripmap result, in which the LoS is constant. The
approach consists of reﬁning the coregistration LUT, by accounting for the azimuth displace-
ment within the scene, estimated via Multi-Aperture Interferometry. We ﬁrst investigate the
results obtained from the coregistration reﬁnement approach in which a constant size, i.e.
non-adaptive, averaging window is applied to the MAI azimuth displacement estimates.
Figure 4.16 shows the wrapped phase, along with its Goldstein ﬁltered version, obtained from
DInSAR with a non-adaptive MAI reﬁnement. The constant window size is N = 128, i.e.
128 azimuth pixels and N · Rsamp = 128 · 4 = 512 range pixels. As the S1A-S1B bias is
present in the MAI azimuth displacement estimates for the 6-day pair, the bias correction
has been applied prior to updating the coregistration LUT. For reference, Figure 4.17 shows
the corresponding results without the S1A-S1B bias correction applied. As expected, the
S1A-S1B bias, when not accounted for, causes quite severe phase discontinuities in all three
sub-swaths.
51
==PAGE:58==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.16: Wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR with reﬁned coregistration, using a constant
window averaging ﬁlter (N = 128) on MAI azimuth displacement estimates, for the 6-day NEGIS
image pair. The S1A-S1B bias has also been accounted for in the coregistration. Left image is the
unﬁltered wrapped phase, while the right image includes a Goldstein ﬁltering of the phase (window
size 32 pixels and α = 0.8).
Figure 4.17: Wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR with reﬁned coregistration, using a constant
window averaging ﬁlter (N = 128) on MAI azimuth displacement estimates, for the 6-day NEGIS
image pair. In this case, the S1A-S1B bias has not been corrected. Left image shows the unﬁltered
wrapped phase, while the right image includes a Goldstein ﬁltering of the phase (window size 32
pixels and α = 0.8).
When reﬁning the coregistration to take into account azimuth motion, and taking into ac-
count the S1A-S1B bias, which in Figure 4.16 is done for the 6-day pair with a constant
window MAI reﬁnement, the results look much more promising. Looking ﬁrst at the phase
within the ice stream, it is observed that phase discontinuities, which in the non-reﬁned case
were quite severe, are almost perfectly resolved. The shear margin is also well-deﬁned and
continuous across bursts. The most acute phase discontinuities are observed within sub-swath
IW2, where some of the discontinuities are actually slightly worse than in the non-reﬁned case
(Figure 4.8). One might initially suspect that the deteriorated performance of the reﬁnement
52
==PAGE:59==
4.3.
DInSAR results
in this region could be due to a worsened interferometric coherence, however, for the 6-day
image pair the coherence is far worse in IW1, where the reﬁnement seems to perform quite
well. Instead, the degraded performance in IW2 could be related to the suspected sub-swath
dependence of the S1A-S1B bias. Another explanation could be that the coregistration re-
ﬁnement performs worse in areas of little motion, as the azimuth displacement estimates in
such areas will tend to be dominated by noise. Figure 4.18 provides a zoomed-in view of
the wrapped phase obtained for the constant window MAI coregistration reﬁnement for the
6-day pair in the ice stream region.
Figure 4.18: Close-up view of the non-Goldstein ﬁltered wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR
processing with MAI coregistration reﬁnement (ﬁltered with a constant averaging window, N = 128)
of the 6-day NEGIS pair, ﬁrst depicted on the left hand side of Figure 4.16.
For reference, Figure 4.19 shows the wrapped phase obtained for the 6-day pair when applying
the MAI reﬁnement with a constant averaging window of size N = 32, i.e. a size that does
not meet the requirements at the burst edges. As expected, close to the burst center there
is little diﬀerence from the N = 128 MAI reﬁnement presented above. However, closer to
the burst edges the noise level is seen to be much larger, illustrating that the window size
requirements are not met in these regions.
53
==PAGE:60==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.19: Wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR with reﬁned coregistration, using a constant
window averaging ﬁlter (N = 32) on MAI azimuth displacement estimates, for the 6-day NEGIS
image pair. The S1A-S1B bias has also been accounted for in the coregistration. Left image is the
unﬁltered wrapped phase, while the right image includes a Goldstein ﬁltering of the phase (window
size 32 pixels and α = 0.8).
After seeing the results of the coregistration reﬁnement using MAI azimuth displacement
estimates, one might wonder whether the azimuth displacement estimates obtained from
oﬀset tracking (presented in section 4.2) could be used in the coregistration reﬁnement. Figure
4.20 shows the wrapped phase obtained for the 6-day NEGIS image pair using azimuth oﬀset
tracking to reﬁne the coregistration. As in the case presented above, an averaging ﬁlter of
128 pixels in azimuth and 512 pixels in range was applied to the OT azimuth displacement
estimates. The oﬀset tracking processing parameters were the same as the ones presented in
Figure 4.5, aside from a change in step size to 12×3 azimuth/range pixels, in order to match
the dimensions of the interferogram. The S1A-S1B bias correction was applied, as was done
in the MAI case.
54
==PAGE:61==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.20: Wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR with reﬁned coregistration, using a constant
window averaging ﬁlter (N = 128) on oﬀset tracking azimuth displacement estimates (with window
size 256 × 128, step size 12 × 3, and oversampling factor 2), for the 6-day NEGIS image pair. The
S1A-S1B bias has also been accounted for in the coregistration. Left image is the unﬁltered wrapped
phase, while the right image includes a Goldstein ﬁltering of the phase (window size 32 pixels and
α = 0.8).
The resulting wrapped phase is quite similar to that obtained from the non-adaptive MAI
reﬁned coregistration approach. Some of the burst boundaries show slightly larger phase dis-
continuities than in the MAI case, however, conversely, other burst boundaries show slightly
less severe discontinuities. It should be noted that the required estimation window size pre-
sented in section 3.4 applies speciﬁcally for MAI - the averaging window should generally be
larger for oﬀset tracking estimates in order to yield the same performance obtained with MAI.
That being said, the applied constant window size was chosen to be substantially larger than
the MAI requirement at burst edges, meaning that it may also be (theoretically) suﬃcient
for the oﬀset tracking case.
The oﬀset tracking reﬁned wrapped phase actually appears to show slightly smaller phase
discontinuities within the ice stream in IW3, where most of the GPS stations are located,
although discontinuities outside the ice stream in IW3 appear to be slightly worse with the
oﬀset tracking reﬁnement, compared to the MAI reﬁnement. Figure 4.21 shows a map of the
MAI and oﬀset tracking azimuth displacement estimates used in the results presented above.
Note that the azimuth oﬀset tracking result is quite similar to the one presented in Figure
4.5, as the only diﬀerences are the applied averaging window and the changed step size (that
latter of which only makes the sampling denser and is not expected to change the overall
pattern of the velocity map). It is observed that the azimuth displacements resulting from
MAI processing appear less noisy, most notably in sub-swath IW1. The ionospheric streaks
appear more distinguishable, compared to the azimuth oﬀset tracking.
55
==PAGE:62==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.21: Left: Azimuth displacement for the 6-day NEGIS image pair estimated with MAI.
Right: Azimuth displacement for the same image pair estimated with oﬀset tracking, where a
window size of 256 × 128, a step size of 12 × 3, and an oversampling factor of 2 was applied. In both
cases, an averaging ﬁlter of size 512 × 128 in range/azimuth was applied and the S1A-S1B bias was
accounted for.
Figure 4.22 shows a comparison of the available GPS measurements and the MAI/oﬀset
tracking azimuth displacement estimates.
Interestingly, it is noted that the MAI results
show a slightly better agreement with the GPS in terms of standard deviation, however,
the MAI results also show a much larger mean error (about twice as large as that of oﬀset
tracking), indicating a substantial bias between the MAI and GPS measurements. This result
is surprising, as it does not seem to be related to the S1A-S1B bias correction since the same
correction was applied to both the MAI and OT results. Note that a constant bias in the
azimuth displacements used to reﬁne the coregistration in the DInSAR processing chain will
not cause a constant bias in the resulting DInSAR LoS velocity map. Instead, a constant
azimuth misregistration will be induced during the coregistration reﬁnement, leading to a
phase ramp in the interferogram, which in turn will lead to a variant velocity error across the
ﬁnal DInSAR LoS velocity map.
Figure 4.22: Comparison of available GPS measurements and azimuth displacements obtained from
MAI (left) and oﬀset tracking (right) for the 6-day NEGIS image pair. The MAI/OT processing
parameters are listed in the caption of Figure 4.21 above.
The reﬁned coregistration approach, using azimuth displacement measurements and a con-
56
==PAGE:63==
4.3.
DInSAR results
stant window averaging ﬁlter, was also applied to the 12-day NEGIS image pair. The resulting
wrapped phase is shown in Figure 4.23. Compared to the non-reﬁned phase obtained from
the nominal stripmap approach (Figure 4.10), the result is very satisfactory.
The phase
discontinuities, which were quite severe in the non-reﬁned case, are nearly all completely
eliminated. Both the azimuth discontinuities at burst boundaries and the discontinuities in
range at the sub-swath boundary between IW2 and IW3 have been well-resolved by the MAI
coregistration reﬁnement.
Figure 4.23: Wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR with reﬁned coregistration, using a constant
window averaging ﬁlter (N = 128) on MAI azimuth displacement estimates, for the 12-day NEGIS
image pair. Left image is the unﬁltered wrapped phase, while the right image includes a Goldstein
ﬁltering of the phase (window size 32 pixels and α = 0.8).
Figure 4.24 shows a zoomed-in view of the wrapped phase near the ice stream and the IW2-
IW3 intersection, the same region shown for the non-reﬁned 12-day case in Figure 4.11,
allowing for a closer inspection of the phase discontinuities. After the MAI coregistration
reﬁnement only very minor phase discontinuities are observed within IW3 (as well as IW1),
while IW2 still shows visible discontinuities at some of the burst boundaries, although these
are substantially smaller than the ones observed in the non-reﬁned case.
57
==PAGE:64==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.24: Close-up view of the non-Goldstein ﬁltered wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR
processing with MAI coregistration reﬁnement (ﬁltered with a constant averaging window, N = 128)
of the 12-day NEGIS pair, ﬁrst depicted on the left hand side of Figure 4.23.
As was done for the 6-day case, the coregistration reﬁnement was also performed using
azimuth oﬀset tracking as a substitute for MAI. The resulting wrapped phase for the 12-day
pair is shown in Figure 4.25. In this case, the results are very similar to those obtained
with the MAI reﬁnement. The remaining phase discontinuities, which are quite small, if not
perfectly resolved, at every burst boundary, are not generally observed to be either better or
worse for the oﬀset tracking reﬁnement case compared to the MAI reﬁnement case.
58
==PAGE:65==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.25: Wrapped phase obtained from DInSAR with reﬁned coregistration, using a constant
window averaging ﬁlter (N = 128) on oﬀset tracking azimuth displacement estimates (with window
size 256 × 128, step size 12 × 3, and an oversampling factor 2), for the 12-day NEGIS image pair.
Left image is the unﬁltered wrapped phase, while the right image includes a Goldstein ﬁltering of the
phase (window size 32 pixels and α = 0.8).
Again, a more thorough inspection of the MAI and oﬀset tracking reﬁnement approaches is
facilitated by comparing the azimuth displacement maps that are used to reﬁne the coreg-
istration LUT. The MAI and oﬀset tracking azimuth displacement estimates for the 12-day
image pair are shown in Figure 4.26. Based on a simple qualitative inspection of the dis-
placement maps, we observe a seemingly much closer agreement between the 12-day MAI and
oﬀset tracking azimuth displacements than was observed for the 6-day case in Figure 4.21.
Figure 4.26: Left: Azimuth displacement for the 12-day NEGIS image pair estimated with MAI.
Right: Azimuth displacement for the same image pair estimated with oﬀset tracking, where a
window size of 256 × 128, a step size of 12 × 3, and an SLC oversampling factor of 2 was applied.
In both cases, an averaging ﬁlter of size 512 × 128 in range/azimuth was applied.
A more quantitative inspection is carried out by comparing the MAI and oﬀset tracking results
to the available GPS measurements. The results of this comparison are shown in Figure 4.27.
59
==PAGE:66==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Again, the MAI azimuth displacements show a slightly smaller standard deviation to the GPS
measurements, compared to that of oﬀset tracking. Contrary to the observation made in the
6-day case, the 12-day MAI results do not show a large bias from the GPS measurements,
although a small positive bias is noted. For oﬀset tracking, the bias is even smaller and slightly
negative. Based on the GPS comparison, the MAI and oﬀset tracking azimuth displacement
estimates show a much closer agreement for the 12-day pair than for the 6-day pair.
Figure 4.27: Comparison of available GPS measurements and azimuth displacements obtained from
MAI (left) and oﬀset tracking (right) for the 12-day NEGIS image pair. The MAI/OT processing
parameters are listed in the caption of Figure 4.26 above.
Finally, the LoS velocity obtained from the constant window reﬁned coregistration approach
is investigated. For both the 6-day and 12-day NEGIS image pairs, the LoS velocity maps
are generated through phase unwrapping and scaling to velocity. Once again, in order to
obtain absolute measurements, instead of measurements relative to the phase unwrapping
reference point, each velocity map has been calibrated by LoS oﬀset tracking measurements
at the respective phase unwrapping reference point. The resulting calibrated LoS velocity
maps are seen in Figure 4.28. Comparing to the LoS velocity obtained from the non-reﬁned
DInSAR processing (shown in Figure 4.13) the result is satisfying; the unwrapping errors that
were observed in the non-reﬁned 12-day case have been resolved (aside from the area at the
Eastern shear margin where coherence is completely lost) and in both cases the discontinuities
at burst boundaries have been greatly reduced, if not completely eliminated in most cases.
The two velocity maps show very much the same pattern, with both the large ice stream and
the smaller stream in IW1 being well distinguished.
60
==PAGE:67==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.28: LoS velocity obtained from the reﬁned coregistration DInSAR approach, using a
constant averaging ﬁlter on MAI azimuth displacement estimates, for the 6-day (left) and 12-day
(right) NEGIS image pairs, calibrated by oﬀset tracking measurements from the respective image
pairs. The phase unwrapping reference point is indicated by a green dot.
The LoS velocity maps obtained with the oﬀset tracking reﬁnement resemble the ones gen-
erated by the MAI reﬁnement to such a degree that a qualitative comparison between the
velocity maps shows no visible diﬀerences. Instead, Figure 4.29 shows the diﬀerence in LoS
velocity obtained with the oﬀset tracking and MAI reﬁnements for the 6-day and 12-day pairs,
respectively. Note the very small values spanned by the color scale. The diﬀerence is seen
to be larger for the 6-day pair, which is not surprising considering the larger disagreement
between the MAI and OT azimuth displacements that was observed in the GPS comparison.
In both cases, the LoS velocity diﬀerence is seen to form linear ramps across the individual
bursts. This is exactly what we would expect if a constant azimuth shift is present between
the OT and MAI azimuth displacements used in the reﬁnements. The diﬀerence in azimuth
displacement estimated from OT and MAI, respectively, is shown in Figure 4.30 for both
image pairs. Indeed, a roughly constant azimuth shift is observed between OT and MAI
for the 6-day pair, while the 12-day pair shows a diﬀerence in azimuth displacement that is
somewhat larger within the ice stream, as is also apparent in the LoS velocity diﬀerence.
61
==PAGE:68==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.29: Diﬀerence in LoS velocity obtained with the oﬀset tracking reﬁnement and the MAI
reﬁnement for the 6-day (left) and the 12-day (right) NEGIS image pairs. Both reﬁnements use a
constant averaging window of 512 × 128 samples in range/azimuth. For the 6-day pair, the S1A-S1B
bias correction was applied.
Figure 4.30: Diﬀerence in azimuth velocity estimated from oﬀset tracking and MAI for the 6-day
(left) and the 12-day (right) NEGIS image pairs. For both the oﬀset tracking and MAI results a
constant averaging window of 512 × 128 samples in range/azimuth was applied. For the 6-day pair,
the S1A-S1B bias was accounted for.
In order to investigate any disagreements between the LoS velocity obtained from the 6-
day and the 12-day image pairs Figure 4.31 shows a mapping of the diﬀerence between
the two calibrated velocity maps. The largest disagreements are seen to be on the order
of a few meters per year.
IW3, the sub-swath containing the large ice stream, seems to
show a very close agreement between the two image pairs. There is some disagreement in
the very Northern part of IW2, where the 12-day pair shows a larger positive velocity (i.e.
towards the radar) than the 6-day pair. Finally, IW1 shows the highest disagreement, where
predominantly positive values are observed, indicating that the 12-day pair shows a higher
positive velocity. The pattern is similar to what was seen for the non-reﬁned case (see Figure
62
==PAGE:69==
4.3.
DInSAR results
4.14). The oﬀset tracking calibration procedure might partially explain the slight scene-wide
bias towards positive values.
Figure 4.31: Diﬀerence between LoS velocity obtained from the 12-day and the 6-day NEGIS image
pairs using the constant window MAI reﬁnement DInSAR processing approach. Each velocity map
is calibrated by oﬀset tracking of the respective image pair, i.e. the ﬁgure shows the diﬀerence
between the right and left maps of Figure 4.28.
4.3.4
Adaptive reﬁned coregistration approach
As outlined in section 3.4 the required size of the estimation window in the MAI reﬁnement
is a function of the azimuth position within each burst. In the results presented above, a
constant averaging window was applied, the size of which was selected to be larger than
the strictest requirement, namely the size requirement at the burst edge. In the following,
the results obtained with an adaptive MAI coregistration reﬁnement, i.e. with a varying
averaging window size, are presented. The window size variation follows the blue curve in
Figure 3.4. Figure 4.32 shows the wrapped phase obtained with the adaptive MAI coregis-
tration approach for the 6-day NEGIS pair. Only sub-swath IW3, in which all the available
GPS stations are located, was processed with the adaptive MAI coregistration reﬁnement
approach. Comparing the wrapped phase with that obtained with the constant window MAI
coregistration reﬁnement (shown in Figure 4.16) it is seen that the results are remarkably
similar.
63
==PAGE:70==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.32: Wrapped phase resulting from DInSAR with adaptive MAI coregistration reﬁnement for
the 6-day NEGIS image pair. Left image shows the unﬁltered phase, while the right image shows the
Goldstein ﬁltered phase. The S1A-S1B bias has been accounted for.
Figure 4.33 shows the wrapped phase obtained for the 12-day pair with the adaptive MAI
reﬁnement. Again, comparing with the constant window MAI reﬁnement from Figure 4.23 it
is hard to spot any visible diﬀerences.
Figure 4.33: Wrapped phase resulting from DInSAR with adaptive MAI coregistration reﬁnement for
the 12-day NEGIS image pair. Left image shows the unﬁltered phase, while the right image shows
the Goldstein ﬁltered phase.
In order to investigate how similar results generated by the constant window (N = 128) and
the adaptive averaging window approaches are, Figure 4.34 shows the diﬀerence in the re-
sulting MAI azimuth displacement estimates (constant window MAI minus adaptive window
MAI) for both the 6-day and the 12-day pairs. The results are clearly diﬀerent between the
6-day and 12-day image pairs. For the 12-day pair, very small diﬀerences are observed and
the deviations seem to be roughly centered around zero, although there does seem to be a
slight bias towards negative values within the ice stream. For the 6-day pair, however, a
fairly large diﬀerence is observed across the entire sub-swath. There appears to be a bias
64
==PAGE:71==
4.3.
DInSAR results
towards a negative diﬀerence. Furthermore, the eﬀect of the varying window size in the adap-
tive reﬁnement is clearly seen, as values are seen to be smoother closer to burst edges. The
observed diﬀerence between the constant and adaptive window cases is actually somewhat
unexpected. At the burst boundaries a diﬀerence of roughly zero would be expected, as both
the constant and adaptive approach performs an averaging with a window size of N = 128
in these regions. This observation points to a potential error in the ﬁltering in of adaptive
reﬁnement approach, although such an error was not identiﬁed upon closer investigation. It
turns out, however, that even though a visible diﬀerence in the MAI azimuth displacement
estimates is observed between the constant and adaptive averaging approaches, this diﬀer-
ence is not large enough to substantially impact the LoS velocity measurements, as seen by
the similarity in the obtained wrapped phase, the resulting LoS velocity maps shown below,
and the GPS comparison presented in section 4.3.5. A rough computation via eq. (2.12),
assuming a Doppler centroid variation of 4.8 kHz, shows that a constant azimuth shift of
−15 m/y (which is roughly observed in IW3 for the 6-day case) results in a LoS ramp of
only ±0.24 m/y across an entire burst. This is almost precisely what is observed in the LoS
diﬀerence between the constant and adaptive cases (although not plotted here).
Figure 4.34: Diﬀerence in azimuth velocity estimated via MAI with a constant size averaging
window and an adaptive averaging window for the 6-day (left) and 12-day (right) NEGIS image
pairs. For the 6-day pair the S1A-S1B bias has been accounted for.
In order to further quantify the comparison between the constant and adaptive reﬁnements,
the azimuth displacements obtained with the adaptive MAI averaging were compared to the
available GPS measurements (as was done for the constant window MAI reﬁnement case in
Figures 4.22 and 4.27 for the 6-day and 12-day pairs, respectively). The results are shown
in Figure 4.35. In both cases, an increase in standard deviation is observed for the adaptive
MAI reﬁnement, compared to the constant window MAI reﬁnement. As the constant window
reﬁnement applied an estimation window, which had a size exceeding the requirement at burst
edges in the entire scene, noise is averaged out over an increasingly larger area as one moves
from burst edge to burst center, compared to the adaptive reﬁnement approach. This might
65
==PAGE:72==
4.3.
DInSAR results
explain the slightly worse agreement with GPS for the adaptive window case. On the other
hand, the adaptive averaging ﬁlter should result in a better resolution of the MAI azimuth
displacements estimates closer to the burst edges. The positive bias observed for the 6-day
MAI azimuth displacement estimates in the constant window reﬁnement is even larger for
the adaptive reﬁnement, while the mean deviation in the 12-day case is nearly unchanged.
To summarize, in comparison with GPS, the azimuth displacements estimated from MAI
seem to performs much better for the 12-day pair than for the 6-day pair, both in terms of
standard deviation and in terms of the large bias observed for the 6-day case. Furthermore,
applying a large, constant size averaging window performs slightly better than the adaptive
averaging window in both cases.
Figure 4.35: Comparison of available GPS measurements and azimuth displacements obtained from
MAI with adaptive averaging for the 6-day (left) and 12-day (right) NEGIS image pairs.
Unwrapping and scaling of the interferograms obtained with the adaptive MAI reﬁnement
approach yields the LoS velocity maps shown in Figure 4.36. Unsurprisingly, as the wrapped
phase in both cases agreed so closely with that obtained with the constant window MAI
reﬁnement, the LoS velocity maps are observed to closely resemble those generated by the
constant window MAI reﬁnement approach.
For the 12-day case, unwrapping across the
Eastern shear margin is still not possible, leaving a small area of missing data.
66
==PAGE:73==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.36: LoS velocity obtained from DInSAR with adaptive MAI coregistration reﬁnement for
the 6-day (left) and 12-day (right) NEGIS image pairs. For the 6-day pair, the S1A-S1B bias was
corrected for. Both LoS velocity maps have been calibrated using oﬀset tracking of the respective
image pairs. The phase unwrapping reference point is indicated by a green dot.
4.3.5
Comparison of DInSAR results and GPS
Finally, as a means of evaluating the performance of the various DInSAR processing ap-
proaches presented in the sections above, a comparison of the resulting LoS velocity maps
with the available GPS measurements is carried out. Figure 4.37 shows a comparison between
GPS measured velocity projected to the radar LoS and the following DInSAR procedures:
The non-reﬁned (i.e. stripmap-like approach), the burst-wise processing approach (only ap-
plied to the 6-day pair), the MAI coregistration reﬁnement using a constant size averaging
window (N = 32, only for the 6-day case), the MAI coregistration reﬁnement with constant
averaging window size (N = 128), the oﬀset tracking coregistration reﬁnement with constant
averaging window size (N = 128), and the MAI coregistration with adaptive estimation win-
dow size.
67
==PAGE:74==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Figure 4.37: Plots showing a comparison between each of the LoS velocity maps obtained from the
various DInSAR procedures presented in the sections above and the available NEGIS EastGRIP
GPS measurements. The left column shows results for the 6-day NEGIS image pair, while the right
column shows results for the 12-day pair.
For the 6-day case, the agreement between GPS and DInSAR is almost identical between all
the various DInSAR procedures, with a standard deviation of about 0.44 m/year and a mean
bias of roughly 0.33 m/year. For the 12-day pair, a notable diﬀerence is observed between
the non-reﬁned and reﬁned procedures. All three reﬁned procedures show a similar agree-
ment with the GPS measurements, while the non-reﬁned procedure shows both a standard
deviation and a mean bias that are roughly 50% higher than for the reﬁned procedures. In-
terestingly, the GPS agreement is nearly identical between the 6-day and the 12-day reﬁned
DInSAR results, being just slightly better for the 6-day case.
68
==PAGE:75==
4.3.
DInSAR results
Although Figure 4.37 seems to suggest that the coregistration reﬁnement procedure hardly
improves the resulting LoS velocity measurements (at least for the 6-day case) it should
be kept in mind that the comparison with GPS measurements provides a relatively scarce
evaluation of the DInSAR LoS velocity map. Had GPS measurements been available in a
dense grid across multiple of the burst boundaries within the scene, we would likely observe a
larger disagreement in the GPS comparison of the non-reﬁned and reﬁned cases. Comparing
the 6-day LoS velocity maps of the non-reﬁned (Figure 4.13) and the MAI reﬁned (Figure
4.28, using a constant averaging window), there is a clear diﬀerence in the severity of burst
boundary discontinuities, which seemingly is not quite captured by the GPS comparison. In
the case of the 12-day pair, the more severe burst boundary phase discontinuities and the
phase unwrapping errors occurring in the non-reﬁned case, are resolved to an extent that
yields a more visible diﬀerence in the GPS comparison in the reﬁned cases.
Common to both image pairs is the observation that all the reﬁnement approaches shown in
Figure 4.37 yield a nearly identical agreement with the GPS, which is about twice as close
as the agreement between oﬀset tracking and GPS measurements. Although the N = 32
constant window MAI reﬁnement actually shows a similarly good agreement with the GPS,
a qualitative inspection of the wrapped phase revealed a substantially higher noise level than
those obtained for the other MAI/OT reﬁnement procedures, and consequently it is recom-
mended to use a larger constant window size or the adaptive version, where the window size
requirement illustrated in Figure 3.4 is met everywhere in the scene. Qualitative inspections
of the LoS velocity maps generated by each reﬁnement approach supports the notion that
changing the MAI averaging window from a constantly large window to an adaptive window,
or using azimuth displacements obtained from oﬀset tracking instead of MAI, results in rel-
atively small diﬀerences.
Conclusively, the results of this study do not point to an unambiguously superior DInSAR
coregistration reﬁnement strategy, however, based on the results, it appears that the im-
plemented coregistration reﬁnement approach provides an improvement over the nominal,
non-reﬁned stripmap approach and over oﬀset tracking measurements.
69
==PAGE:76==
5
Discussion
This chapter provides ﬁrst a discussion on the feasibility of utilizing TOPS DInSAR process-
ing for acquiring large scale ice velocity measurements in section 5.1. The discussion covers
both the automation of the DInSAR processing scheme, i.e. how applicable the developed
DInSAR processing routine is to other ice sheet image pairs, and an evaluation of the advan-
tages of DInSAR compared to current oﬀset tracking procedures in the interior ice sheet, i.e.
how much value is added by implementing DInSAR processing. Section 5.2 provides a discus-
sion of two major uncertainty sources in the developed processing schemes. Finally, section
5.3 suggests a few steps towards further improving the quality of the reﬁned coregistration
DInSAR approach.
5.1
Feasibility of TOPS DInSAR for large scale ice velocity
measurements
This study focused mainly on the implementation of DInSAR processing on two Sentinel-1
image pairs in the NEGIS region. The NEGIS region was selected as a test case, with the
main goal being to investigate the feasibility of performing Sentinel-1 TOPS DInSAR over the
full interior Greenland ice sheet. Although only a single region was investigated during the
course of this study, the NEGIS area is arguably a representative case study, showing most
of the traits typical of the Greenland ice sheet. The investigated region contains both areas
of very slowly moving ice, as well as an ice stream that shows (relatively) much faster motion.
Regarding the automation of the DInSAR processing scheme, most of the processing steps,
including the coregistration reﬁnement procedure, seems readily applicable to other Sentinel-
1 image pairs in other regions of the ice sheet. Regarding the DEM used in the DInSAR
processing, a semi-automatic approach was implemented in the form of a script, which takes
as input the raw ArcticDEM tiles that comprise the given Sentinel-1 scene and merges, re-
==PAGE:77==
5.1.
Feasibility of TOPS DInSAR for large scale ice velocity measurements
projects, and converts them into a format that is readily usable for the DInSAR processing
scheme. The inclusion of the external precise orbit data (POE) is fully automatic. The most
critical processing step is likely the oﬀset tracking calibration procedure, which requires ac-
curate oﬀset tracking measurements in the vicinity of the phase unwrapping reference point.
The observed patch artefact in the LoS oﬀsets could potentially impact the calibration pro-
cedure and consequently yield a bias in the resulting DInSAR LoS velocity map. Another
critical step is the selection of the location of the phase unwrapping reference point. For the
presented case studies, the reference point was chosen somewhat arbitrarily, which did not
pose any problems as coherence was quite high almost everywhere in the scene. If, however,
the reference point is selected in a highly decorrelated area, there will likely be a phase un-
wrapping error over most of the scene (i.e. an error of a multiple of 2π in the unwrapped
phase). A possible solution to this problem would be to select the phase unwrapping reference
point only in areas of high coherence. Thus, the reference point selection could still be made
arbitrary, however only selecting between highly coherent areas of the scene.
As already mentioned, current routine measurements of ice sheet-wide velocity are provided
solely by oﬀset tracking processing (generated and distributed by e.g. GEUS1 or ENVEO2).
For the test cases investigated in this study, oﬀset tracking was observed to perform quite well,
in comparison to the available GPS measurements, where standard deviations for the LoS
velocity component of 1.18 m/y and 0.84 m/y for the 6-day and 12-day pairs, respectively,
were obtained. These standard deviations are only about twice as large as the ones obtained
with reﬁned DInSAR, namely 0.44 m/y for the 6-day pair and 0.47 m/y for the 12-day pair.
It should be noted, however, that the investigated image pairs show an almost scene-wide
high coherence, meaning that the conditions for speckle tracking are optimal. Thus, for image
pairs where the coherence is lower, the oﬀset tracking performance is expected to deteriorate
correspondingly. An example of this can be seen in Figure 4.2, where the oﬀset tracking re-
sults are seen to be substantially noisier in the Eastern part of sub-swath IW1, which contains
regions of low coherence. Conversely, the LoS velocity obtained from the reﬁned coregistra-
tion DInSAR approach on the same image pair (Figure 4.13) appears unaﬀected by the lower
coherence in IW1. Another advantage of DInSAR is that the LoS velocity measurements are
not aﬀected by the patch artefact, which was observed in the LoS oﬀset tracking results. One
of the main advantages of oﬀset tracking is that 2D motion is retrieved. This is, however, also
possible with DInSAR processing by exploiting both ascending and descending orbits - this
is further described in section 5.3. Finally, a disadvantage of the TOPS DInSAR processing
is the azimuth coupling caused by the antenna steering, which may generate azimuth phase
discontinuities at burst boundaries, in the presence of azimuth motion. However, the azimuth
coupling seems to be eliminated quite eﬀectively by the implemented coregistration reﬁne-
ment procedure. Finally, there is the question of resolution. In the oﬀset tracking case, the
1https://www.promice.dk/DownloadSentinel.html
2http://cryoportal.enveo.at/data/
71
==PAGE:78==
5.2.
Sources of uncertainty
resolution depends on the characteristics of the observed region (e.g. coherence), however, it
can generally be said to lie somewhere between twice the template window size and the step
size (Pritchard et al., 2005), i.e. several hundreds of meters (in ground range/azimuth) in
the best case. The resolution is generally higher when tracking speckle, which is mainly the
case within the interior ice sheet. The oﬀset tracking ice velocity mosaics produced by GEUS
and ENVEO have postings of 500 × 500 m and 250 × 250 m, setting the lower bound for the
resolution cell size. With the multi-looking applied to the interferograms in this study, the
DInSAR results have a resolution of 60 × 60 m in ground range/azimuth, i.e. a substantially
higher resolution than what is obtained with oﬀset tracking.
Aside from the advantages of DInSAR highlighted above, it should be noted that the GPS
comparison presented for both the oﬀset tracking and DInSAR LoS measurements provides a
fairly sparse sampling of the LoS velocity maps, with most of the GPS stations being located
within NEGIS and a few stations being located just outside the stream. Qualitative inspection
of the oﬀset tracking and DInSAR velocity maps, however, generally shows a substantially
larger amount of noise (along with the patch artefact) in the oﬀset tracking results, compared
to DInSAR, especially in lower-coherence areas. In conclusion, based on the results observed,
there seems to be a considerable worth in utilizing DInSAR processing for measuring ice
velocity in the interior Greenland ice sheet, and the implementation of a routine DInSAR
processing scheme, covering more than just a single test scene, seems plausible.
5.2
Sources of uncertainty
An important source of uncertainty, speciﬁcally for DInSAR on 6-day image pairs, is the
S1A-S1B bias, the eﬀects of which was only recognized late in this study. As already men-
tioned, the S1A-S1B bias seemingly aﬀects absolute displacement estimates from e.g. MAI
and oﬀset tracking but not the raw phase information, which is exploited in the non-reﬁned
DInSAR approach. The bias was brieﬂy documented in Schubert et al. (2017), however,
no physical explanation for the bias was suggested. Although quite reasonable results were
obtained when applying a scene-wide S1A-S1B bias correction in the DInSAR coregistration
reﬁnement procedure, it is possible that a sub-swath dependence in the bias is partially re-
sponsible for the residual discontinuities observed at some of the burst boundaries. The bias
sub-swath dependence was suggested but not quantiﬁed in Schubert et al. (2017).
Uncertainty also arises in the oﬀset tracking calibration procedure implemented in the DIn-
SAR processing schemes. On a pixel level, the oﬀset tracking measurements are generally
not very accurate. Therefore, instead of extracting the LoS velocity from the exact pixel of
the phase unwrapping reference point, an average value from a 5 × 5 pixel region around the
reference point was computed and used for the calibration. This speciﬁc window size was
72
==PAGE:79==
5.3.
Future work
selected based on tests of the 6-day and 12-day oﬀset tracking results. For instance, the ex-
tracted calibration velocity from the 12-day LoS oﬀset tracking results was −7.03 m/y when
selecting a single pixel (i.e. the exact unwrapping reference point), −7.31 m/y when selecting
a 3×3 window around the reference point, and −7.47 m/y for a 5×5 window centered on the
reference point. Window sizes of 7 × 7, 9 × 9, and 11 × 11 pixels all resulted in a calibration
velocity value that deviated by no more than ±0.06 m/y from the calibration value obtained
for the 5×5 window. Similar results were obtained for the 6-day pair, which is why the 5×5
pixels was chosen as the standard window size in the oﬀset tracking calibration. The oﬀset
tracking calibration velocity was extracted from the geocoded image, which has a posting of
50 m, meaning that the averaging window corresponds to 250 × 250 m, around the expected
lower bound of the oﬀset tracking resolution.
5.3
Future work
An obvious next step in the development of a routine Sentinel-1 DInSAR ice velocity mea-
surement procedure is to utilize a combination of ascending and descending orbits to obtain
three-dimensional velocity measurements. In the cross-over region of an ascending and a de-
scending orbit, the ground is observed from two diﬀerent (non-parallel) look-vectors. As the
SAR is constantly right-looking and approaches the ground approximately from the South
and North, for the ascending and descending orbits, respectively, the LoS velocity obtained
for the ascending and descending orbits is sensitive to complementary components of the ice
motion. At high latitudes, such as the Greenland ice sheet, the orbit paths are not quite
aligned with the North-South direction, meaning that the measured DInSAR LoS velocity
is sensitive to North-South motion, although the sensitivity is substantially smaller than for
the East-West direction. Combining the LoS DInSAR measurements for an ascending and
descending orbit thus yields two independent motion measurements. The third equation,
necessary to solve for the three-dimensional velocity components (e.g. in a local ENU coor-
dinate system) is obtained from the surface-parallel ﬂow assumption (Joughin et al., 1998),
described in section 3.5. Alternatively, azimuth displacement estimates from MAI can be
included instead of the surface-parallel ﬂow assumption, providing two additional motion
measurements, although with a substantially poorer accuracy and resolution compared to
the DInSAR LoS measurements. This makes for an over-determined inverse problem, which
can be solved using e.g. a weighted least-squares approach, weighting each measurement with
its corresponding uncertainty.
Aside from the clear advantage of retrieving 3D rather than a series of 1D velocity mea-
surements, this procedure also allows the ice velocity measurements to be projected and dis-
tributed in a more intuitive coordinate system, such as a polar stereographic projection. The
73
==PAGE:80==
5.3.
Future work
LoS velocity measurements obtained from DInSAR on a single image pair are not straightfor-
ward to interpret, as they contain a component in the ground-projected LoS as well as in the
vertical dimension. Instead, 3D velocity measurements in a polar stereographic projection
will be considerably easier for users to interpret. If the ice velocity data is to be integrated
into a model or act as some kind of auxiliary data, a 3D projection is also preferable over the
LoS measurements.
In a routine Sentinel-1 DInSAR ice velocity mapping procedure it would be preferable to
utilize all available 6-day image pairs. Before this is done, however, more accurate knowledge
regarding the observed S1A-S1B bias should be acquired. As already mentioned several times,
it is likely that a scene-wide constant range/azimuth bias correction is not appropriate. If the
S1A-S1B bias is not properly dealt with, it may end up being one of the largest contributions
to uncertainty in the retrieved ice velocity measurements.
Sections 4.3.3 and 4.3.4 presented a few diﬀerent variations of the DInSAR coregistration
reﬁnement approach, which appeared to substantially improve the obtained DInSAR results.
Based on the test case investigated in this study, no clearly superior strategy regarding the
averaging of the azimuth displacements used in the coregistration reﬁnement was determined.
In particular, future work should include a deeper investigation into the optimal averaging
window size and the implementation of the adaptive window size approach.
Recall from
Figure 3.4 that the implemented window sizes were actually substantially larger than the
ones required from a theoretical point of view. A constant window size that was signiﬁcantly
smaller than the burst edge requirement (N = 32) was also applied, however, this window
size clearly caused a noise increase in the interferogram. Thus, an optimal window size may
exist somewhere within these boundaries (as a side note, the optimal averaging window is
not necessarily the one outlined by the red curve in Figure 3.4 - the parameter k in eq. (3.4),
which was chosen somewhat arbitrarily as 0.5, may have a more optimal value). In theory,
the adaptive averaging window should be the superior, although the test case results showed
little diﬀerence in the LoS velocity obtained with the constant and the adaptive approach.
However, a potential error in the implementation of the adaptive averaging was indicated
by the investigation of the ﬁltered azimuth displacement estimates and should be further
scrutinized.
74
==PAGE:81==
6
Conclusions
The goal of this study was to investigate the feasibility of Sentinel-1 TOPS DInSAR as a
technique for acquiring ice velocity measurements over the interior Greenland ice sheet. Sev-
eral approaches to DInSAR processing were investigated. First, a simple, nominal stripmap
processing scheme was applied in order to determine the severity of the azimuth coupling
introduced by the TOPS antenna steering. As a ﬁrst approach, attempting to deal with the
phase unwrapping challenges at burst boundaries, a burst-wise stripmap processing scheme
was investigated. This approach, however, proved very dependent on an accurate calibration
for every individual burst, which appeared diﬃcult to achieve with the utilized oﬀset tracking
calibration scheme. Furthermore, the burst-wise processing approach does not eliminate the
azimuth motion coupling, meaning that the LoS direction is not constant and, consequently,
the obtained LoS velocity measurements can, in principle, only be correctly interpreted by
computing the LoS vector on a pixel level. The ﬁnal investigated DInSAR approach con-
sisted of a coregistration reﬁnement, based on MAI (or oﬀset tracking) azimuth displacement
estimates. The reﬁnement, ideally, eliminates the azimuth coupling to the SAR signal, both
resolving the phase discontinuities at burst boundaries and facilitating a conventional in-
terpretation of the obtained LoS velocity map, in which the LoS direction is constant and
perpendicular to the azimuth.
While only showing relatively small improvements over the nominal stripmap approach in
the comparison to the available GPS measurements, the coregistration reﬁnement approach
was clearly eﬀective in resolving phase discontinuities at burst boundaries. When perform-
ing the coregistration reﬁnement on 6-day image pairs, a correction for the S1A-S1B bias
was observed to be crucial. The applied correction consisted of a scene-wide constant oﬀset,
although it is possible that the actual bias is sub-swath dependent. Aside from the vari-
ous DInSAR procedures, an intensity oﬀset tracking processing scheme was implemented,
which was utilized to calibrate the DInSAR LoS velocity measurements. The oﬀset tracking
measurements were also used to evaluate the performance of the implemented DInSAR ap-
proaches versus oﬀset tracking.
==PAGE:82==
In conclusion, measuring ice velocity within the interior Greenland ice sheet with DInSAR
processing of Sentinel-1 TOPS data appears promising. The coregistration reﬁnement DIn-
SAR approach seems readily applicable to other regions, and with further improvements,
speciﬁcally to the ﬁltering of azimuth displacement estimates in the coregistration reﬁnement
procedure and the LoS velocity calibration scheme, routine DInSAR processing of the entire
Greenland ice sheet interior may be viable.
76
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
Bamler, R. and Eineder, M. (2005). Accuracy of diﬀerential shift estimation by correlation and
split-bandwidth interferometry for wideband and Delta-k SAR systems. IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Letters.
Bechor, N. B. and Zebker, H. A. (2006). Measuring two-dimensional movements using a
single InSAR pair. Geophysical Research Letters.
Cumming, I. G. and Wong, F. H. (2005). Digital processing of synthetic aperture radar data:
Algorithms and implementation. Artech House Remote Sensing Library.
De Lange, R., Luckman, A., and Murray, T. (2007). Improvement of satellite radar feature
tracking for ice velocity derivation by spatial frequency ﬁltering. In IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing.
De Zan, F. and Guarnieri, A. M. (2006). TOPSAR: Terrain observation by progressive scans.
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing.
De Zan, F., Prats-Iraola, P., Scheiber, R., and Rucci, A. (2014). Interferometry with TOPS:
Coregistration and Azimuth Shifts. EUSAR 2014; 10th European Conference on Synthetic
Aperture Radar; Proceedings of.
Goldstein, R. M., Engelhardt, H., Kamb, B., and Frolich, R. M. (1993).
Satellite radar
interferometry for monitoring ice sheet motion: Application to an Antarctic ice stream.
Goldstein, R. M. and Werner, C. L. (1998). Radar interferogram ﬁltering for geophysical
applications. Geophysical Research Letters.
Gray, A., Mattar, K., and Vachon, P. (1998). InSAR results from the RADARSAT Antarctic
Mapping Mission data: estimation of glacier motion using a simple registration procedure.
In Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium Proceedings, 1998. IGARSS ’98. 1998 IEEE
International (Seattle, WA).
==PAGE:84==
Gray, A. L., Mattar, K. E., and Sofko, G. (2000). Inﬂuence of Ionospheric Electron Density
Fluctuations on Satellite Radar Interferometry. Geophysical Research Letters.
Joughin, I., Smith, B. E., and Howat, I. M. (2018). A complete map of Greenland ice velocity
derived from satellite data collected over 20 years. Journal of Glaciology.
Joughin, L. R., Kwok, R., and Fahnestock, M. A. (1998).
Interferometric estimation of
three-dimensional ice-ﬂow using ascending and descending passes. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing.
Merryman Boncori, J. P. (2019). Measuring Coseismic Deformation With Spaceborne Syn-
thetic Aperture Radar: A Review. Frontiers in Earth Science.
Morin, P., Porter, C., Cloutier, M., Kelleher, C., Willis, M., Bates, B., Williamson, C., Peter-
man, K., Krieger, T., Keesey, S., Nolte, M., Bauer, G., and Becker, P. (2016). ArcticDEM.
EGU Poster.
Mouginot, J., Rignot, E., Scheuchl, B., and Millan, R. (2017). Comprehensive annual ice sheet
velocity mapping using Landsat-8, Sentinel-1, and RADARSAT-2 data. Remote Sensing.
Prats-Iraola, P., Scheiber, R., Marotti, L., Wollstadt, S., and Reigber, A. (2012). TOPS
interferometry with terraSAR-X. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing.
Pritchard, H., Murray, T., Luckman, A., Strozzi, T., and Barr, S. (2005). Glacier surge
dynamics of Sortebræ, east Greenland, from synthetic aperture radar feature tracking.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface.
Rabus, B., Eineder, M., Roth, A., and Bamler, R. (2003). The shuttle radar topography
mission - A new class of digital elevation models acquired by spaceborne radar. ISPRS
Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing.
Scheiber, R., Jager, M., Prats-Iraola, P., De Zan, F., and Geudtner, D. (2014). Speckle track-
ing and interferometric processing of TerraSAR-X TOPS sata for mapping nonstationary
scenarios. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote
Sensing.
Scheiber, R. and Moreira, A. (2000). Coregistration of interferometric SAR images using
spectral diversity. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing.
Schubert, A., Miranda, N., Geudtner, D., and Small, D. (2017). Sentinel-1A/B combined
product geolocation accuracy. Remote Sensing.
Strozzi, T., Luckman, A., Murray, T., Wegmüller, U., and Werner, C. L. (2002). Glacier
motion estimation using SAR oﬀset-tracking procedures. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
and Remote Sensing.
Werner, C., Wegm??ller, U., Strozzi, T., and Wiesmann, A. (2000).
GAMMA SAR and
78
==PAGE:85==
interferometric processing software. In European Space Agency, (Special Publication) ESA
SP.
Yague-Martinez, N., Prats-Iraola, P., Gonzalez, F. R., Brcic, R., Shau, R., Geudtner, D.,
Eineder, M., and Bamler, R. (2016). Interferometric Processing of Sentinel-1 TOPS Data.
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing.
79
==PAGE:86==
 
DTU Space, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet 
Elektrovej Bygning 328 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
 
www.space.dtu.dk 
