==PAGE:1==
Procedural generation of
challenging and entertaining
puzzle levels
Diego Tobarra
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
In this paper we present a study of how the combination of procedural techniques
and handcrafted design can lead to challenging and entertaining puzzle levels
from a human player perspective. Procedural techniques are often criticized for
not being able to grasp the gist of what makes a handcrafted puzzle enjoyable:
the sense of meaning, the feeling that some game element have been placed at a
particular time and space because that adds a deeper complexity to the puzzle,
combined with the rest of the elements in the level. This fact is specially visible
when analyzing puzzle games like Sokoban, in which combinations of simple
game elements create a problem that is enjoyable to solve.
Our proposal is
to use a constraint-solving algorithm called WaveFunctionCollapse to combine
blocks of pre-designed puzzle pieces within some given constraints. Procedural
content generation is therefore considered as a powerful tool for designers to
craft new levels, inspire new ideas and quickly detect potential problems when
combining patterns together.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at at studere hvordan kombinationen af proce-
dural teknikker og håndlavet design kan føre til udfordrende og underholdende
puzzlespil niveauer ud fra et menneskespil. Procedurteknikker kritiseres ofte for
ikke at være i stand til at forstå kernen i, hvad der gør et håndlavet puzzle beha-
geligt: følelsens betydning, følelsen af at noget spilelement er blevet placeret på
et bestemt tidspunkt og rum, fordi det giver en dybere kompleksitet til puzzle-
spillet , kombineret med resten af elementerne i niveauet. Denne kendsgerning er
særligt klart, når man analyserer puzzlespil som Sokoban, hvor kombinationer
af enkle spilelementer skaber et problem, der er behageligt at løse. Vores forslag
er at bruge en constraint-solving algoritme kaldet WaveFunctionCollapse for at
kombinere blokke af prædesignede puzzlespil inden for nogle givne begrænsnin-
ger. Procedural teknikker betragtes derfor som et stærkt værktøj for designere
til at oprette nye niveauer, inspirerende nye ideer og hurtigt opdage potentielle
problemer, når man kombinerer blokke sammen.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring the Master of Science in Digital Media Engineering, with Computer
Games specialization.
The thesis deals with procedural level generation, applied to puzzle games and
in particular to the Sokoban game. It also explores the application with proce-
dural content generation algorithms such as WaveFunctionCollapse and solving
problems such as walkability in procedurally generated levels.
The thesis consists of this report and an algorithm that receives puzzle patterns
and some parameters as an input and outputs the resulting generated level.
Lyngby, 21-June-2019
Diego Tobarra
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
First of all I would like to thank my supervisor, Prof. M. Rose, for his assistance
during the development of this master thesis. He has always helpful with his
advice and feedback.
To my girlfriend Ania, for supporting me always and for making the eﬀort of
understanding all the computer science concepts I throw at her and helping me
making the right decisions. To my family, for their unconditional love and for
helping em reach here.
To my friends and team-mates, Jorge Villa and Mikkel A. Kolding, for helping
me laugh at my errors, being strong when I needed it most and for making a
cool game out of the levels generated in this project.
To Jonas A. Billeskov and Tobias N. Møller for letting me have a look on their
implementation of the WaveFunctionCollapse algorithm early in the process,
and for always being helpful with all of my many questions.
I would like to thank Oskar Stålberg for his correspondence with me, being
always kind and quick to answer and for helping me ﬁgure out a system for
path-ﬁnding using WaveFuncionCollapse in this project.
To my old 02285 - AI and Multi Aagent Systems student team, Team DaVinci,
for letting me use the code of our previous project. And to Thomas Bolander,
lecturer on that course, for always being helpful anwering my very open-ended
questions at the beging of the project and for letting me use the Sokoban solver
from the course in my early experiments.
I would like to thank the participants in the user-testing sessions their help vali-
dating my hypothesis. Their names shall remain anonymous, as they requested.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract (English)
i
Abstract (Danish)
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
7
2.1
Procedural level generation algorithms: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Dungeon generation algorithms: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Diﬃculty control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to solving Sokoban problems: . . . .
10
2.2.1
Pathﬁnding algorithms:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
State of the art
13
3.1
Taylor and Parberry’s template-based Sokoban level generation .
13
3.2
Generating challenging Sokokban levels procedurally . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Roguelike’s level generation algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Procedural level generation as a tool for level designers . . . . . .
15
3.5
Wave Function Collapse algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Extensions and generalizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Pattern interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Solvability pre-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Constraint solving using WaveFunctionCollapse . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.4
Traversability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.5
Final post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Experiments and results
26
5.1
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Testing methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.1
Testing group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2.2
First testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.3
Second testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.1
Hypothesis 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3.2
Hypothesis 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3.3
Hypothesis 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Conclusions
35
6.1
Use of the WaveFunctionCollapse algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Roguelike pre-designed room pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
Strengths and weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3.1
Strengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3.2
Weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Future Work
39
7.1
Adding macro-structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Expanding randomness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.3
More diﬃculty curve control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A Original project plan
42
B Generated levels
47
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
While procedural content generation (PCG) is a technique that is widely ap-
plied in the game development industry, it involves certain challenges that many
game developers have approached in diﬀerent ways.
The classic game Rogue was one of the ﬁrst ones to introduce the idea of "pro-
cedurally generated levels (PGL)" and it lead to a whole new genre of games so
called rogue-like after it. Rogue used procedural generation to construct dun-
geons, by algorithmically deﬁne rooms, hallways, monsters, and treasure that
the player would ﬁnd. Roguelikes allow the development of complex gameplay
without having to spend excessive time in creating a game’s world. [1]
The game Spelunky, a 2D platformer rogue-like, generates its levels by combin-
ing pre-designed rooms that connect with one another. This method solves the
problem of ensuring a walkable path from start to end by picking from the right
set. It also provides a more balanced procedural-handcrafted relation, as the
levels keep the original structure of the pre-designed rooms and randomize the
occurrence of game elements on top.
Other games, like the recent title Bad North, make use of an constraint solv-
ing algorithm wave function collapse (WFC), in which some game elements are
placed ﬁrst in order to start with some initial structuring of the level and then
generate the rest procedurally within the constraints that the initial structure.
==PAGE:10==
2
Procedural content generation can also be seen as a tool for developers. Some
games have implemented procedural generation as a safeguard to avoid some
players telling others how to complete a mystery game, by creating the mystery
cases procedurally. See [2] and [3]. In computer graphics, PCG is better known
as random generation and it is mainly used for creating textures and 3D models,
in order to add variety to the art assets at a lower cost. Examples of software
speciﬁcally made for this purpose are TextRD[4] and SpeedTree[5].
But going back to the topic that this project is concerned about, here are some
of the most important challenges that PGL often face:
1. Many players often critizise the levels for lacking a sense of personality
and place compared to handcrafted levels.[6].
2. PGLs usually need an AI system that tests if the level generated is "playable",
with the deﬁnition of playable varying from one game to another. Puzzle
games might need to check if the levels are solvable, while platformers
need to test whether the level is traversable or not.
3. Testing is more diﬃcult than in games that do not use procedural gener-
ation. It can be approximated how many tests need to be run based on
min-max statistics, but there are always edge cases, specially when some
parameters aﬀect the occurrence of others.[7]
4. There is always the risk that the generated levels get repetitive after play-
ing the game many times. Derek Yu, author of Spelunky, admitted in his
book his fear prior to the game release of their algorithm not being able
to grasp the essence that makes its product attractive enough. [8]
However, many developers have chosen to spend time, money and eﬀort in cre-
ating extremely complex procedural systems, like the system developed by Tarn
and Zach Adams in Dwarf Fortress [?]. That is because the beneﬁts are greater
than the costs:
• PGL, when done right, provides almost inﬁnite game replayability, which
means hours of gameplay at a lower cost than their handcrafted counter-
part.
• It can also be used as a game mechanic. In roguelikes, PGL encourgaes
the player to focus on mastering their skill at playing the game rather
than memorizing level designs and enemy positions by trial and error, as
it is impossible to do the latest [9] [8].
==PAGE:11==
3
• Lowers the production costs of design and art assets, as artists and design-
ers can input the desired range of parameters and then receive as output
all the potential combinations of those parameters.
• It can also be used as a tool for artist and designers, by assisting the work
of generate large assets. An asset can be generated by the algorithm and
then be supervised by an expert and adjusted if needed.
Recent studies made by S. Karman on Generating Sokoban levels that are in-
teresting to play using simulation[10], which are based on previous studies on
Generating sokoban puzzle game levels with monte carlo tree search[11] made
by B. Kartal, suggest that "Currently there is an upper limit in terms of inter-
estingness that PGL for Sokoban cannot (consistently) exceed. This is mainly
due to the use of simple metrics that do not seem to be able to capture the
underlying concepts of interestingness."
We consider the word "fun" and even "interesting" to be too abstract in the
ﬁeld of game development. Therefore in this paper we will try to use a more
detailed taxonomy, following the one suggested by R. Hunicke to describe the
aesthetics of a game[12]. We will use the words "challenging" and "entertain-
ing" to describe the two elements that make Sokoban games fun to play, as the
Sokoban’s players often play the game in the look for a challenge and a passtime.
In this MSc thesis project, we explore an alternative approach for generating
Sokoban levels procedurally. The overall process consists of:
1. Turning the already existing Sokoban levels into smaller self-contained
puzzle patterns.
2. The patterns are checked to ensure they are solvable Sokoban puzzles,
from any of the entries that the pattern provides.
3. An algorithm combines these patterns in a meaningful way, adjusting level
size and occurrence of templates in the level based on the given input.
The algorithm is based mainly in a constraint-solving algorithm called Wave
Function Collapse and the levels generated resemble levels that dungeon gener-
ators create.
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Research questions
4
1.1
Research questions
The questions that this project seeks to give answer to are:
Challenging procedurally generated puzzles
Can Sokoban puzzles be
procedurally generated levels while still remaining challenging and entertaining?
Output variety
Can the output of combining hand-crafted templates be var-
ied enough so that the player will not realize that the levels are combinations
of the same patterns?
Real-time generation potential
Is the generation and validation speed of
this algorithm be fast enough to be considered for real-time generation?
Meaningful combinations
Can the combination of puzzle patterns become
more challenging than the sum of the individual challenges present in the pat-
terns together?
1.2
Project plan
Original project plan can be seen in Appendix A
Self-evaluation on the original project plan:
Even though the words
"adaptive diﬃculty" were on the original title and it was one of the initial po-
tential ﬁelds of study, it was discarded early at the beginning, even before the
original project plan was made. As it can be seen nothing related with that
topic is mentioned, nor in the MVP nor in the development plan section.
The idea of exploring adaptive diﬃculty in procedural puzzles was discarded
early for the shake of further exploration of other qualities that make Sokoban
levels challenging and entertaining. The only element in the project that remain
from that original project idea is the fact that the diﬃculty curve in a level can
be adjusted using our algorithm.
Here we propose a more accurate title for this thesis project: "Procedural gen-
eration of challenging and entertaining puzzle levels" and potentially adding
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Project plan
5
"using a constraint-solving algorithm".
Also, it is mentioned that a game will be developed together with the algorithm
to test the generated levels. Although a game has been developed using the
levels generated in this project, the mechanics of the game have expanded from
the original Sokoban rules and that game was not suitable for the testing of the
levels generated by this algorithm, which has remained focused on the classic
Sokoban game.
Figure 1.1: Screenshot of the game that was developed in parallel of the de-
velopment of this thesis project, in order to use the procedural
generated levels in it, but that ﬁnally derived into a diﬀerent game
with other mechanics than the classic Sokoban.
In addition, the necessity of implementing a classic Sokoban solver AI was no
longer needed when the authors realized that the problem of post-processing the
validity of the level could be avoided entirely by pre-processing the input tem-
plates. Therefore, the time planned on developing that customized solver was
spent on exploring diﬀerently sized pattern combinations within the constraints
that the algorithm had, in order to add variety and break the symmetry of the
generated levels.
Finally, some problems were not foresight at the beginning of the project, such
as how does the rotation feature aﬀect connectivity and ﬁtting constraints, and
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Project plan
6
therefore a large amount of time that was not planned ahead was spent on im-
plementing and debugging those features.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This project relies on the previously used algorithms used in the ﬁeld of pro-
cedural level generation. Here we present the ones that inﬂuenced this project
the most.
2.1
Procedural level generation algorithms:
Procedural content generation (PCG) in games refers to the creation of game
content automatically using algorithms.[13] Concretely the algorithms that have
been used or that have served as an inspiration for the development of this
project.
2.1.1
Dungeon generation algorithms:
Dungeon generation is the ﬁrst example of procedural generation of levels in
games: Rogue and Beneath Apple Manor both feature creation of a new level
consisting of a number of rooms connected by corridors surrounded by rock
walls. Dungeon generation is particularly well suited by 2D grid based games,
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Procedural level generation algorithms:
8
and by extension for 3D voxel based games. There are two basic approaches to
dungeon generation [14]:
1. Place the rooms ﬁrst, then attempt to connect them via corridors.
2. Place the corridors using a maze generation algorithm, then unify sections
of the maze to form rooms.
Rogue, and subsequent followers of its heritage so called "roguelikes", have be-
come popular among other things from using algorithms that procedurally create
genuine dungeons. Their level generation is all based on simple PCG algorithms
which are heavily modiﬁed and expanded for the speciﬁc game at hand. Some
of the most common algorithms used are:
• Random walk algorithm is a type of random walk that is one of the
most simple dungeon generation algorithms. The random walk concept
was suggested for the ﬁrst time by the physicist Smoluchowski when work-
ing on the Einstein-Smoluchowski approximation, which consists in treat-
ing Brownian motion as a discrete random walk. More information about
its origins and Brownian motion can be found in [15].
The algorithm’s pseudocode when used to generate dungeons is described
at [16] as follows:
1. Pick a random point on a ﬁlled grid and mark it empty.
2. Choose a random cardinal direction (N, E, S, W).
3. Move in that direction, and mark it empty unless it already was.
4. Repeat steps 2-3, until you have emptied as many grids as desired.
• Tunneling algorithm is another type of random walk which is based on
the idea of tunnelers that dig corridors and rooms.
An empty map is seeded by one or more tunnelers, and they travel around
that map opening all the areas that will become occupiable space, e.g.
corridors, doors, rooms, halls.
There is a wide variety of parameters to control for tunneler behavior:
Width, direction, speed, chance to turn, chance to create rooms, size and
shape of rooms... and while keeping the parameters static over the gen-
eration might produce very repetitive patterns, changing the parameters
dynamically along the generation process produces fairly realistic environ-
ment. [17]
• Growing tree algorithm behaves similarly as the random walk algo-
rithm; however the Growing Tree Algorithm keeps track of the cells it has
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Procedural level generation algorithms:
9
visited and expands the next cell picking randomly one of those. Accord-
ing to Coleman in the article explaining the algorithm[18], changing how
the cell is selected will change the algorithm entirely. It will act like the
Recursive Backtracker if you select the last cell added to the list, but it
will act like Prim’s Algorithm if a random cell is selected from the list.
The selection process can be varied create unique mazes.
The algorithm’s pseudocode is presented at [18] as follows:
1. Randomly select a cell and add it to the selected cells list.
2. Select a cell from the selected cells list. Then choose a cell adjacent
to it that hasn’t been visited. Add the adjacent cell to the selected
list and remove the edge between the two cells.
3. If there are no unvisited neighbors: Remove from the selected list
4. Repeat 2-3 until the selected list is empty.
2.1.2
Diﬃculty control
When speaking about diﬃculty control in games, there are two main techniques
of controlling it: Adaptive diﬃculty and algorithmic diﬃculty.
Adaptive diﬃculty
The Procedural Content generation Wiki describes it as
the process of adjusting the game’s diﬃculty in reaction to the player, by spawn-
ing new enemies or powering up existing enemies or by decreasing the frequency
and/or diﬃculty of existing enemies [19].
Classically, adaptive diﬃculty has
been seen as a hard problem, requiring a level of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in
the game to attempt to model the player to attempt to determine if they are
ﬁnding the game easy or diﬃcult.
Algorithmic diﬃcutly
is, as described by the Procedural Content genera-
tion Wiki, the design and placement of game content to correspond to a given
diﬃculty level [20]. What distinguishes algorithmic diﬃculty from adaptive dif-
ﬁculty is that the diﬃculty level remains ﬁxed in the game and does not adapt
to player actions.
Algorithmic diﬃculty can either attempt to estimate relative diﬃculty based
on the combination of content attributes (ontogenetic) or simulate an idealized
player encountering or using the content to determine its relative eﬀectiveness
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to solving Sokoban problems:
10
(teleological).
The teleological approach creates an accurate physical model
of the environmen and then simply runs the simulation.
The results should
emerge as they do in nature. The ontogenetic approach observes the end results
of this process and then attempts to directly reproduce those results by ad
hoc algorithms. Ontogenetic approaches are more commonly used in real-time
applications such as games. [21]
2.2
Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to solving Sokoban
problems:
We have chosen Sokoban puzzle for several reasons:
1. Sokoban has simple rules and an intuitive visual setting; hence it helps
during user testing session for its simplicity to bew understood.
Most
people ﬁnd it interesting and challenging and thus are willing to solve it
voluntarily.
2. Availability of resources. There is a very large number of levels of the
puzzle freely available on the Internet. These available levels span wide
range of diﬃculty. Sokoban is also used by AI community as a tested for
developing single agent search techniques, with many techniques and re-
sults are described in research literature (see e.g., [22], [23], [24], [25], [26]).
(a) Diﬃcult for human players and
easy for AI to sovle.
(b) Easy for human players and
diﬃcult for AI to solve.
Figure 2.1: Examples of diﬀerent complexity for humans and computers.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to solving Sokoban problems:
11
3. Complex combination of elements. As explained by Jarusek and Pelánek
in [27], despite the simplicity of the rules, Sokoban can be very challenging
for both humans and computers (Sokoban is PSPACE-complete problem
[22]). The puzzle also illustrates diﬀerences between humans and comput-
ers. There exist small instances that can be quickly solved by computer
(using a trivial brute force algorithm) but take humans hours to solve (see
Figure 2.1). At the same time, there are also instances of the puzzle, which
humans can solve but which are beyond capabilities of the state-of-the-art
artiﬁcial intelligence solvers.
2.2.1
Pathﬁnding algorithms:
A* algorithm
is an extension of Edsger Dijkstra’s 1959 [28] algorithm, and
it was ﬁrst published by the Standford Research Institute in 1968 [29].
It is widely used in many games, as it is an eﬃcient yet accurate algorithm for
calculating the shortest path from point A to point B. At its core, it works
by ﬁnding picking the next position in the path which minimizes the following
function: f(n) = g(n) + h(n) where g(n) is the exact cost of moving from the
starting point to position n and h(n) is an heuristic function, which gives the
approximated distance to the goal for position n.
It has its success over other algorithms such as greedy-best ﬁrst search because,
while greedy algorithms does not ensure an optimal solution and can provide
very long paths when dead-ends and rooms appear in the map, the A* algo-
rithm combines favouring positions that are close to the starting point (as in
Dijkstra’s algorithm) with also favouring positions closed to the goal, based on
the approximation provided by the heuristic function (as in greedy algorithms).
Level decomposition
is a technique that follows the divide-and-conquer
paradigm which divides a problem into smaller sub-problems until they are
easy enough to be solved or until the problems cannot be divided more. In
terms of solving Sokoban puzzles, it helps to solve large puzzles by dividing the
problem into rooms and tunnels and solving them separately, as proposed by
the research made by Botea, Müller and Schaeﬀer[30].
Minimum spanning tree (MST) algorithm
is an algorithm used to ﬁnd
a MST in a connected, edge-weighted undirected graph, being the MST a sub-
set of the edges that connects all the vertices together with the lowest total
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Artiﬁcial intelligence applied to solving Sokoban problems:
12
edge-weight and without introducing any cycle. It was ﬁrst proposed by the
mathematician Boruvka [31] in 1926 to ﬁnd an eﬃcient coverage in an electrical
network, although one of the most popular algorithms is the Kruskal’s algorithm
[32]
It is widely used as it has applications for many famous mathematical problems,
such as the travelling salesman problem.
For the Sokoban puzzle in particular, ﬁnding an approximation to the mini-
mum length path in which an agent can solve the puzzle is a travelling salesman
problem.
Chiseling algorithm
is an algorithm for ﬁnding a connecting path between
two or more points in a tile-based grid. The algorithm was ﬁrst published in 2018
by the procedural algorithm developer so-called BorisTheBrave in his GitHub
account [33], where the algorithm is further explained. It is a smart algorithm
useful for ﬁnding paths conencting more than two points, although there might
be simpler solutions for connecting two points, like combining the random walk
algorithm with distance heuristics as in A*.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
State of the art
3.1
Taylor and Parberry’s template-based Sokoban
level generation
Taylor and Parberry proposed in 2011 [34] an algorithm for the purpose of
generating Sokoban levels procedurally, using pre-designed templates (pieces
of Sokoban levels). The algorithm takes a few parameters and the templates
as input and builds a random instance of the puzzle that is guaranteed to be
solvable.
The algorithm consists of three high-level steps:
1. Build an empty room.
2. Place goals in the room.
3. Find the state farthest from the goal state.
The authors admit that some parts of the algorithm such as goal placement and
validating the levels can be optimized. The algorithm runs in exponential time
and can be used for oﬄine generation only [34].
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Generating challenging Sokokban levels procedurally
14
The work of Taylor and Parberry serves as the main inspiration in this project
for the the idea of generating challenging Sokoban puzzles by combining pieces
of existing levels.
3.2
Generating challenging Sokokban levels pro-
cedurally
The research made by Karman [10] on generating interesting Sokoban levels us-
ing the monte carlo tree search (MCTS) is based on Kartal’s articles studying
the application of the MCTS algorithm for solvable Sokoban level generation.
As explained by Karman, "most pseudo-randomly content result in content that
looks interesting at ﬁrst glance, but fails in accomplishing similar results to those
achieved by expert artists. Generating content that resembles content created
by expert artists has shown to be much more diﬃcult".
He also states how, although improvements have been made in the generation
process, the approach presented in [10] fails to provide levels that are equally
challenging as hand-crafted levels.
Excerpt: "Can simulation be used to generate Sokoban puzzles that
are interesting to play?. The concluding answer is: No. Although the gener-
ated puzzles are slightly challenging, they do not come near the interestingness
of handcrafted puzzles. It might be achievable by using a diﬀerent implemen-
tation... There seems to be an upper limit that the current approach cannot
(consistently) exceed. This is mainly due to the use of simple metrics that do
not seem to be able to capture the underlying concepts of interestingness."
3.3
Roguelike’s level generation algorithms
Roguelikes often use pre-designed rooms and pieces of the level, providing a good
handcrafted/procedural level balance. Although many roguelikes make use of
this technique, we have taken inspiration mainly from the game Spelunky.
Spelunky’s author Derek Yu mention in his book [8] that he managed to com-
bine the roguelike and the 2D platformer genre by tuning the procedural gen-
eration so that it picks the right templates when needed to ensure that the
level is traversable from start to end, without needing further AI to check the
traversability.
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Procedural level generation as a tool for level designers
15
This idea combined with the research on template-based Sokoban generation
done by Taylor and Parberry lead to the main thread of inspiration for this
project. If the validation process can be entirely remove and yet ensure the
puzzle’s solvability, we can consider this algorithm for real-time generation, as
the longest time on Taylor and Parberry’s research was spent on validation.
3.4
Procedural level generation as a tool for level
designers
We consider that procedural generation techniques and also generalization of
the the project we have developed can be considered as a tool for level designers
in order to facilitate large-scale combinations of design patterns and serve as in-
spiration for levels, as the output of the algorithm can also be edited manually
when using it oﬄine.
Other researchers have explored the idea of creating software to aid level de-
signers in their work, such as QuestBrowser [35] and Tanagra [36].
3.5
Wave Function Collapse algorithm
The WFC algorithm was developed in order to generate bitmaps that are locally
similar to the input bitmap. As described by his author, M. Gumin, the local
similarity that the algorithm tries to generate in the output means that:
• Constraint 1: Each NxN pattern of pixels in the output should occur at
least once in the input.
• Weak constraint 2: Distribution of NxN patterns in the input should be
similar to the distribution of NxN patterns over a suﬃciently large number
of outputs. In other words, probability to meet a particular pattern in the
output should be close to the density of such patterns in the input.
==PAGE:24==
3.5 Wave Function Collapse algorithm
16
Figure 3.1: Example of local similarity from the bitmap generated using WFC
The author of the algorithm Maxim Gumin released the source code of the algo-
rithm in his Github account [37] in 2016. The algorithm was originally inspired
by the namesake concept used in quantum mechanics for measurement purposes,
which was ﬁrstly introduced by Werner Heisenberg in 1927 in his paper on the
uncertainty principle [38].
The WFC algorithm is at it’s core a constraint-solving algorithm, which applied
to procedural level generation provides a level of control over the generation pro-
cess that is unlikely in other approaches. As mentioned by Karth and Smith in
their articel WaveFunctionCollapse is Constraint Solving in the Wild[39], "Con-
straint solving is neither a traditional nor well-known approach to procedural
content generation (PCG). Nevertheless, this approach can be surprisingly ef-
fective for building controllable content generators... The concept of working
with partial designs is part of what makes the animations derived from WFC
executions so visually stunning—we aren’t used to seeing our generators work
this way."
After Gumin’s public release of the algorithm, many game developers have ex-
perimented with it. Joseph Parker, an indie game developer, was one of the
ﬁrst to start using WFC. Other notable applications are Marian’s inﬁnite city
generator[40] and ports to many programming languages, which can be found
in Gumin’s github page.[37]
If there is one researcher from whose work in the WFC implementation in this
project has beneﬁted the most, that is Oskar Sålberg. Sålberg was one of the
ﬁrst one who generalized the WFC, extending it with other tile shapes[41], 3D
meshes[42], performance optimizations[43] and adding backtracking[44]. He also
created an interactive demo in 2017 to illustrate how it works under the hood
[45].
In personal correspondence with us, Sålberg explained how traversability can
==PAGE:25==
3.6 Extensions and generalizations
17
be ensured with WFC by keeping track of the already placed tiles, so-called
"collapsed" tiles, and choosing the next tile to collapse from that set.
This
procedure resembles how the the growing tree algorithm works,[18]. Every tile
contains information about it’s neighbours and whether it connects with them
or not, so we can use an heuristic function to give priority to tiles that expand
the traversable path.
This concept is also applied for level generation by Sålberg in his recently pub-
lished game, Bad North.[46]
3.6
Extensions and generalizations
Based on the research presented above in this chapter, we propose the following
extensions and generalizations of the current studies:
Decreasing generation speed
In the project developed by Taylor and Par-
berry [34], the Sokoban levels are created by ﬁrst randomly generating an empty
room out of room-pieces, and secondly placing goals and boxes in the level using
smart heuristics with the purpose of generating challenging combinations for the
players.
In contrast, in this project we start by using room-pieces containing both room
structure and goals & boxes. The solvability of the individual room-pieces is
ensured by using a Sokoban solver oﬄine. This approach decreases the gen-
eration time quite considerably, from 1 day to 0.2-5 seconds, even taking into
account that the hardware used for this project is also considerably better than
the one used back in 2011 by Taylor and Parberry. This is mainly because the
solvability of the level can be tested for each of the input templates individually
oﬄine, but the ﬁnal level generation process can be considered for real-time.
Increasing level size
Similar of how a dungeon generator combines rooms
to generate procedural levels, our project receives room templates as an input
and generate larger levels using both rotated and ﬂipped versions of the input
in the output.
While the approach presented at [10] starts from scratch, our algorithm can
aﬀord to assume that the input levels are valid (solvable) and therefore speed
up the generation process if a certain minimum level size is desired.
==PAGE:26==
3.6 Extensions and generalizations
18
Generating challenges
While other approaches such as [10] admit having
diﬃculties achieving interesting levels compared to handcrafted-ones our project
takes a diﬀerent approach. By using already challenging pieces of Sokoban puz-
zles, we are able to produce levels that are at least as challenging and entertain-
ing as the individual pieces of the puzzle are by themselves. In the experiments
section 5 we present some user research about how challenging and entertain-
ing are the generated levels and also whether the algorithm can create more
challenging levels than the sum of their parts.
Diﬀerently shaped patterns
Although with admitted strong limitations
(see section 4.1), the templates fed to the algorithm can have diﬀerent sizes and
shapes. This fact adds a lot of variety to the levels, which before this feature
implementation were very symmetric and therefore predictable.
Until the time of the publication of this report, we haven’t found any research
that uses the WFC algorithm with diﬀerently shaped modules.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Methodology
In this section we describe the algorithmic functionality of our project and the
process involved in the level generation and validation.
4.1
Pattern interpretation
The algorithm takes the puzzle patterns as an input. We will call the patterns
in this paper as templates for its usage as templates for a level.
The input
templates can be of three types depending on their position in the level: Start,
Intermediate and Final. The Start templates must contain the position of the
player. This lets the level designer adapt the diﬃculty curve of the level as
desired.
We use a non-standard Sokoban level format for the input templates, which
builds on top of the format used in one of our previous Sokoban-related projects
[47]. The format format used for [47] provides more ﬂexibility than the stan-
dard Sokoban so that this project can be used for other Sokoban version. Also
multi-agent levels can be considered. In this format, boxes will be capital letters
and goals small letters, while agents can be numbers ranging from 0-9.
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Pattern interpretation
20
We also expanded this format further by including the character / in order to
specify where a room can connect with another. These are the rules that all
input templates must fulﬁll:
1. Let the size of a template be of width w and height h, both w and h must
have value 5 or multiples of 5. The rows and columns can include spaces
to fulﬁll this rule.
2. Let the position of a connection with other room in the template be (i, j)
where i is the row and j the column index, it must fulﬁll the following
restrictions:
(a) Either i or j must be in the outer border of the template, meaning
positions 0, max. width for column or max. height for rows.
(b) The other corresponding element must be 3 or a value x so that
x %5 = 3.
E.g. a connection position can be (0, 8), but not at (0, 7).
(a) Standard level format in Sokoban
as described by sokobano.de [48]
(b) Sokoban level format used in this
project.
Note how the level has
been formatted to ﬁt the size con-
straints.
Figure 4.1: Examples of diﬀerent complexity for humans and computers.
The program reads the templates and ensures that w and h have value 5 or
multiple by introducing trailing white-spaces if needed.
In case that either w or h are larger than 5, the algorithm splits the template
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Solvability pre-processing
21
into sub-templates of size 5x5 with references to each other (we call this related
sub-templates complementary templates). This is made so that the algorithm
can ﬁt the templates in a grid.
Figure 4.2: Example of a 10x10 level template split into smaller templates.
Finally, for each of the templates rotated versions of them are calculated, in
order to increase the variety in the ﬁnal level. In order to make the algorithm
memory eﬃcient, we keep a reference to the original template and use a template
container that wraps the template and provide a rotated version of it when
requested.
4.2
Solvability pre-processing
In order to ensure the ﬁnal output level solvability, we perform a validity check
for each individual template, which means that every template can be solved
individually with the player starting in any of the deﬁned entrances to the tem-
plate. This is done during pre-processing time.
These templates are tested one by one using a Sokoban solver named JSoko,
developed by M. Meger [49]. This process helps designers to identify impossible
levels to be solve that otherwise would be diﬃcult to detect, as depending on
the entry that the player takes into the room, some rooms could be impossible
to solve.
==PAGE:30==
4.3 Constraint solving using WaveFunctionCollapse
22
Admittedly, even if the algorithm assists the process by generating all the pos-
sibilities needed for the testing, this process is very slow as it has to be done
manually for every output template. However, for the purpose of this project
and as the input templates dataset is small enough in size, this solution was
enough. The process, can be easily automated with a custom Sokoban solver
being run before the algorithm starts generating the output level.
Figure 4.3: Example of a template in which one of the entries lead to an
unsolvable solution.
4.3
Constraint solving using WaveFunctionCol-
lapse
We start constraint solving process by initializing a 2-dimensional grid of mod-
ules. Each module is deﬁned by a cell in the grid which contains:
1. A state, which can be one of the following: Closed, Open, Collapsed,
Contradicted. Its meaning is explained further in section 4.4.
2. A list of references to each of the neighbouring cells and the direction to
reach them. We do not consider diagonal cells as neighbouring cells in this
list.
3. A set of templates that can be placed in that cell.
This set is called
possibility space, as suggested by Gumin in the original algorithm [37].
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Constraint solving using WaveFunctionCollapse
23
The criteria for whether the template can be placed on the current cell is
based on the neighbour’s possibility space and the relationship with the
template at issue.
In this report we will use the words module and cell interchangeably to refer
positions in the grid.
Every module is initialize with all the possible templates in its possibility space
and with its state set to Closed. The algorithm ﬁrst places the Start template.
To do so, it randomly selects one of the corners in the grid and tries to place
the template, which has been randomly picked from the set of Starts.
The criteria to check if a template can be placed in a cell takes into account if at
least one of the connections faces inwards to the grid (and therefore can be con-
nected with other modules) and if the complementary templates can ﬁt in the
neighbouring cells. The complementary check is done recursively, as each tem-
plate only has a reference to its direct neighbours and complementary templates.
Once a valid template is found, the algorithm sets the occupied cells’ state as
Collapsed, sets the possibility space to only the desired template to be placed in
that position and ﬁnally updates the other modules’ possibility space recursively,
starting from the collapsed cell towards the neighbouring cells and onwards.
The criteria when updating the possibility space is that for each possibility p,
at least one of the templates in the neighbouring modules’ possibility space can
connect with p. If that is not the case, p will be removed from the possibility
space.
Same procedure is applied immediately after for the Final template, placing it
in the furthest module in the grid possible. We measure distance from one cell to
another using the Manhattan distance, which is deﬁned as |c1i−c2j|+|c1i−c2j|,
being c1, c2 cell positions in a grid and i, j their row and column index.[50]
Once Start and Final templates are placed, the algorithm iterates by picking
the next best module to collapse (for further explanation about criteria for best
module, see section Traversability 4.4) and updates the possibility space of the
other modules in the same way as mentioned before.
In other implementations of the WFC algorithm [37] [40] [46], when the possi-
==PAGE:32==
4.4 Traversability
24
bility space of a module is empty, we say that we have found a contradiction,
which means that the algorithm cannot ﬁnish with the module conﬁguration at
that point. In those cases the algorithm has to restart or backtrack until it ﬁnds
a valid solution. In our case, some modules can be in the Contradicted state, as
we do not need all the cells in the grid to contain a room. When happens to be
a contradiction, that cell is considered as an empty space. Contradictions can
occur in our algorithm as long there is a traversable path from start to end. We
call this path critical path.
4.4
Traversability
When a module state is set to Collapsed, all the neighbouring modules are set to
Open and added to a list. On the next iteration, the next module to be collapsed
will be picked from this list, as the list contains the modules that can poten-
tially expand the traversable path. This procedure was inspired by the system
to expand the traversable path used in the game BadNorth[51], co-developed by
Oskar Stålberg who kindly explained it in our correspondance with him.
In addition to this system, our algorithm tries to close the gap between Start
and the Final templates by picking the module in the open list that minimizes
the following function: f(c) = distance−to−start(c)+distance−to−final(c),
where c is the cell coordinates in the grid. Again we make use of the mentioned
Manhattan distance to measure distance.
If it happens to be more than one module with the same minimum value for the
function above, we choose the module that has lower entropy. In this case, the
entropy is deﬁned by the length of the possibility space. This follows Gumin’s
theory of how the lowest entropy rule follows a natural pattern: "I noticed that
when humans draw something they often follow the minimal entropy heuristic
themselves. That’s why the algorithm is so enjoyable to watch."[37] The en-
tropy in our project is a simpliﬁcation of what in information theory is called
"Shannon’s entropy"[52], named after Calude Shannon.[53]
To support tracking the traversable path, a simple implementation of a graph
representing the connecting rooms is used.
When a module collapses, it gets added to the graph as a new node that holds
information to all the rooms to which it connects.
At the beginning of the
==PAGE:33==
4.5 Final post-processing
25
algorithm the Start and the Final templates do not hold any connection. Then,
the connections grow from either one or the other. How the connections grow
in the graph resembles two growing trees 2.1.1 that try to ﬁnd each other.
4.5
Final post-processing
When all the modules in the grid have their state being either Collapsed or Con-
tradicted, the algorithm checks if a critical path has been found at this point
before proceeding.
If it has not been found yet, the algorithm restarts the generation with a dif-
ferent conﬁguration to try to ﬁnd a valid solution. Although admittedly using
backtracking could potentially ﬁnd the solution faster, the performance opti-
mization gain was not big enough to justify backtracking in this project, as
even restarting from the beginning the algorithm usually ﬁnds a valid solution
in terms of seconds.
If the critical path has been found at this point, the algorithm makes some
veriﬁcation and then parses the grid structure into a text ﬁle, both in our for-
mat and in the standard Sokoban format.
The veriﬁcation process includes
ensuring outer walls around the level and closing non-used connections from the
templates.
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 5
Experiments and results
Two user testing sessions were conducted during the development of this project
in order to test our assumptions. In this section we present the methodology
and results of those experiments.
The handcrafted levels we taken from the original Soko-ban collection[54], de-
signed by the developer Thinking Rabbit[55] and published in 1988 by Spectrum
HoloByte[56].
5.1
Hypothesis
Hypothesis 1 The algorithm can generate levels that are as challenging and
entertaining as handcrafted levels for the players.
Hypothesis 2 The users will not realize that the PGL are made out of the
same patterns.
Hypothesis 3 The generated levels can provide a more interesting challenge
than the sum of the individual challenges together.
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Testing methodology
27
5.2
Testing methodology
5.2.1
Testing group
We accounted for a group of 8 testers in both testing sessions. The characteris-
tics of the group are the following:
• The group age ranges from 19 to 43, with the majority of the people being
between 21-26.
• Half of them are males and the other half are females.
• A 60% admit playing mind games like sudoku/chess once in a while (mean-
ing less than once weekly) and the rest never play.
• 20% of the testers never play videogames, 50% play them once in a while,
10% play weekly and 20% play daily.
• 60% of the testers have not played Sokoban games before and the other
30% had.
• Their last completed level of education is: 50% Bachelor, 21% Master and
the rest 29% are undergraduates.
• Half of the testers come from a science and technology educational back-
ground, while the other half come from humanities and social sciences.
The group could have admittedly be more varied. Half of them come from a
scientiﬁc and engineering educational backgrounds, oriented to problem-solving
skills, and that the other half is also well educated. That could have biased the
results of the tests indicating that the puzzles are less challenging than what
they actually are for the general public. Also the majority of the tested individ-
uals play videogames often, and this could have biased the results in the same
way.
The tested group is relatively small and further testing can provide more conclu-
sive restuls. Nevertheless, for the purpose of this thesis, the authors believe that
it serves as a good indication of how challenging and entertaining the generated
levels are and we hope that this results can help future researchers to test this
assumptions further and develop new projects based on this assumptions.
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Testing methodology
28
5.2.2
First testing
For the ﬁrst user testing session, the testers were asked to solve three Sokoban
levels using the client JSoko[49] and the fulﬁll a short survey of 14 questions.
The time to solve the levels and number of movements were annotated by the
observer. The main objective of this experiment is to test hypothesis 2.
The ﬁrst level is the ﬁrst puzzle from the original Sokoban set[54]. The second
level is a level generated by our algorithm that contains a version of the the
ﬁrst puzzle, with slightly diﬀerent room structure but same problem given the
box/space conﬁguration. The testers were not aware of whether the levels were
handcrafted or procedurally generated.
(a) First
level
presented
-
Hand-
crafted.
(b) Second level presented - Procedu-
rally generated
Figure 5.1: User testing 1 levels 1 and 2. Note how the same puzzle pattern
as in level 1 appears on the top left of level 2.
The third level presented is another level that our algorithm has generated, but
that does not contain any similar pattern compared with the previous levels.
This level is used to test hypothesis 1.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Testing methodology
29
Figure 5.2: Third level presented - Procedurally generated. used to test hy-
pothesis 3
The week before before this testing session, another session was conducted with
the same users with the purpose of teaching them the mechanics of the Sokoban
game, ensuring that they all understood the controls and the rules of the game
before the testing, so that the time of learning them do not alter the results
presented in this report.
5.2.3
Second testing
On the second testing session, we presented the testers two Sokoban levels they
have never seen before. The ﬁrst level presented is handrcafted, the fourth level
from the original Sokoban collection[54]. The second level presented is gener-
ated by our algorithm.
Again the JSoko client was used for playing the levels and then the players had
to answer 18 questions on a quick survey.
The time to solve the levels and
number of movements are annotated by the observer.
The objective of this
testing is to test hypothesis 1 and 3.
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Testing methodology
30
(a) First level presented - Handcrafted
(b) Second level presented - Procedu-
rally generated
Figure 5.3: User testing 2 levels 1 and 2. Note how the level one (handcrafted)
posses a similar connected-rooms structure as our algorithm gen-
erates in level 2.
We presented the users two levels of similar algorithmic diﬃculty, measured by
means of movements and box-lines that the JSoko solver took to complete the
levels.
A box-line is deﬁned as how many times the player pushes a box, and any num-
ber of pushes on the same box in the same direction only count only as a single
box-line. As explained by Taylor and Parberry in [34], lines are a more accu-
rate metric than moves to measure how challenging a Sokoban puzzle is. It can
also be interpreted as the number of thoughtful movements that the player has
performed.
Moves
Pushes
Box-lines
Boxes
Level 1(handcrafted)
919
357
107
20
Level 2(procedural)
813
225
96
31
Table 5.1: Algorithmic diﬃculty metrics of the levels used in the 2nd testing
session, taken using JSoko
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Results
31
5.3
Results
5.3.1
Hypothesis 1
On the survey in session 2, we asked the players how challenging and how fun
they thought they were the levels we presented them, in a scale from 1-5 from
very easy/boring to very challenging/fun. They favoured the procedural levels,
both saying that they found the procedural level more challenging and fun to
play.
Figure 5.4: Users found the procedural level more challenging
Figure 5.5: Users found the procedural level more fun as well
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Results
32
In the survey we asked What in your opinion makes a Sokoban level challeng-
ing?. They commented that many boxes and not a lot of space in between is a
good indication of diﬃculty. They also indicated that the diﬃculty level should
raise progressively with no sudden increases in the diﬃculty curve.
Another question in the survey was What did you liked the most and the least
about level X?. The most common answers answers were the following:
• Procedural levels: The tested individuals enjoyed the increasing diﬃ-
culty over the levels. Using the algorithm we ensured that the ﬁrst room
was the easiest and the last one the hardest. On the contrary, they men-
tioned that the levels were too big and that they spent a lot of time moving.
Also it was mentioned that if a mistake was made at the beginning, they
might not notice until very late and they had to undo a lot of the puzzle.
• Handcrafted levels: The testers commented that once they found the
gist of the puzzle, they enjoyed how swiftly they solved it.
Also they
enjoyed that the blocks had to be carried from one room to another, which
make them think deeper on the problem. What they did not like was that
the solution was very hard to ﬁnd from the beginning.
Given these results, we can assert that the majority of the tested individuals
found these levels challenging and fun to play, favouring more the procedural
levels. Therefore, even though thorugh the answers in the form we can see that
the handcrafted levels still contain some qualities that the procedural levels
cannot grasp, to our assumption in hypothesis 1 we conclude that it is: True.
5.3.2
Hypothesis 2
On the ﬁrst testing session, 75% of the testers mentioned that they noticed
a pattern between the two levels. Even though the room structure had been
altered to disguise the fact that the puzzle was exactly the same, the players
recognized the pattern.
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Results
33
Figure 5.6: The majority of the players realized that there was a similar pat-
tern in the levels.
Therefore, based on this results, we conclude that our assumption in hypothesis
2 is: False. The players realized that there was a pattern in in the levels.
As an interesting fact, 50% of the tested individuals mentioned that they found
the pattern "at the end of the level" and the other 25% that noticed the pattern
mentioned that they found it "in the rooms in the middle", which indicates that
what the algorithm sets as the Final template might not seem to be the last
template to solve by the player.
Figure 5.7: Some of the players that identiﬁed a pattern thought that it was
in the middle rooms, while our algorithm identiﬁed it as the last
room to be solved.
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Results
34
5.3.3
Hypothesis 3
Many players have acknowledged that they have enjoyed the fact that the gen-
erated levels created rooms that should remain "unsolved" until you completed
other parts of the level, as solving those rooms ﬁrst would mean that the player
character will be trapped. This feature provides an interesting twist to the levels.
Figure 5.8: The two goals on the right have to be solved after the two on the
left. otherwise, the path will be blocked when exiting the rooms.
The algorithm creates the level ensuring that there is at least one room-solving
order possible, but the player has to guess that order as it is not explicitly
indicated while playing. The player will experiment with diﬀerent orders and
that can lead to situations that blocks the way or traps the player in a room.
Discovering these deadlocks brings enjoyment to the player while playing, as
they mention in their comments to the answers in the form.
The generated levels encourage the player plan ahead of moving and provides a
reason for looking at the big picture of the level, rather than solving the indi-
vidual levels separately. We believe that this feature should be explored further,
as it provides a more interesting challenge than the sum of its parts. For these
reasons, to our assumption in hypothesis 3 we conclude that it is: True.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
6.1
Use of the WaveFunctionCollapse algorithm
The WFC algorithm was a good choice in terms of performance and it certainly
made the constraint easier to work with and the code easier to maintain. The
fact that the input templates did not have the same size add a lot of com-
plexity, however. For every connectivity or placing possibility check done on a
template that belongs to another larger piece, the complementary pieces have to
be checked also. We decided to implement the relationship with the complemen-
tary templates following the WFC pattern of every piece only being aware of
the neighbouring ones. For this reason, every check has to be done recursively,
bubbling from one template to another and keeping track of the already visited
ones to avoid endless loops.
Nevertheless, the decision of using templates of diﬀerent sizes adds variety to
the ﬁnal output, which before implementing this feature looked very symmetric.
The authors believe besides the solution of using diﬀerently sized templates can
be implemented in a more ﬂexible way, this served as a proof-of-concept of how
the WFC can be used with diﬀerent sized modules. At the date of the publica-
tion of this report, the authors have not ﬁnd any other implementation of the
WFC that use diﬀerently size modules.
==PAGE:44==
6.2 Roguelike pre-designed room pattern
36
6.2
Roguelike pre-designed room pattern
The approach of taking pre-designed puzzle templates as input was very suc-
cessfully in achieving levels that are challenging for human players to solve and
it was exceptionally successfully in creating levels that are very challenging to
solve for the level agnostic JSoko Sokoban solver.[49] This is mainly because
the algorithm can generate very big levels quickly, and even though a human
player can quickly identify that the rooms can be solved individually, an AI al-
gorithm that is not aware of this fact gets lost in the combinatorial possibilities
of matching goals and boxes increase exponentially. Being the AI aware of this
fact, it can probably solve the levels quickly.
This approach also removed completely the need of having an AI algorithm to
check the validity of the output levels, which involves faster generation time and
lower development overhead. However, it also restricts the level output variety.
More thoughts on this can be read at section Future Work 7
Some examples of the levels that our algorithm generate can be found on Ap-
pendix B
6.3
Strengths and weaknesses
This section describes strengths and weaknesses of the algorithm that the au-
thors have identiﬁed.
6.3.1
Strengths
• Speed: Fast generation of relatively large levels. The algorithm can gen-
erate 50x50 tiles sized Sokoban levels in under 0.35 seconds. Even when
running into many contradictions, the algorithm usually generate levels of
this size in under 20 seconds.
• Diversity: Diﬀerently sized templates create original structures on every
iteration and rotating the templates increases the diversity of the output
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Strengths and weaknesses
37
levels compared with the input.
• Interesting levels: There are still some qualities in the handcrafted lev-
els that are impossible to recreate with this approach (boxes that need
to be carried far away from where they are found, macro-sctructure, etc.)
and therefore the authors believe that there are some qualities in puzzle
complexity from a human player perspective that procedurally generated
Sokoban levels cannot reach yet. More thoughts on this can be read at
section 7. Other researchers such as Karman suggested the same in pre-
vious research[10].
However, the tested players have commented that levels generated are
challenging and fun on a similar level to handcrafted levels. The authors
believe that this approach narrows the gap between the level of complexity
that can be achieved by procedural techniques compared to fully hand-
crafted levels.
This is in a great extent thanks to the combination of
handcrafted/procedural designs in the level generation.
• Diﬃculty control: Allowing to diﬀerentiate rooms appearing at the be-
ginning, in the middle and at the end allows the level template designer to
able to customize the diﬃculty curve on every level by inputting more/less
diﬃcult templates on each set. Many testers have mention how they en-
joyed the gradual increase of diﬃculty on the generated levels compared
to the sudden increases in the handcrafted original Sokoban collection[54].
• Solvability: Our approach of pre-processing the input templates to en-
sure individual solvability allows to assume the solvability in the ouput,
avoiding long post-processing validity tests and making the algorithm suit-
able for online generation.
6.3.2
Weaknesses
• Level designer dependant: The interesting of the output level is highly
dependant on the input templates. However, one of the initial ideas of this
project was that the combination of procedural and handcrafted tech-
niques was the key to achieve interesting procedurally generated levels
to be played.
The balance between both is the important part in the
equation.
• Levels generated too big: In order to create patterns that are mean-
ingful, our algorithm needs to create levels that are relatively big. The
original Sokoban puzzles ﬁt in a 20x20 grid and they contain many boxes
in few spaces. Our algorithm could of course make use of those levels as
==PAGE:46==
6.3 Strengths and weaknesses
38
pieces to create a larger level, but it will end up being a large succession of
large levels after another. However, when the algorithm creates interest-
ing macro-structure is when many small Sokoban patterns are combined
together, and for that the output levels need to be large enough. Many
tested individuals mentioned their dislike for the long time moving from
one area to another.
• Design constraints: Levels need to have their connections in speciﬁc
places for the algorithm to be able to connect the rooms. Also the input
templates must match size constraints further explained in section 4.1.
This could restrict the design too much, creating similar levels as a con-
sequence.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 7
Future Work
In this section we preset immediate possible extensions or generalizations of this
work that can be used for future research.
7.1
Adding macro-structure
Given the ﬂexibility of the WFC algorithm, future researcher could make use
of it by setting some parts of the level from the beginning and then letting the
algorithm create the rest based on those constraints. In our project, we input
the start and the end of the level and let the algorithm ﬁgure out the rest, but
if a more speciﬁc macro-structure was needed, lets say, something resembling a
cathedral, the algorithm could start placing the templates of the portico, the
altar and the connection to the wings, and then let the algorithm create the rest
by choosing randomly from the given set of templates.
Whereas PGL are often criticize for their lack of macro-structure [6], the authors
believe that when procedural generation is seen as a tool for designers rather
than a replacement, the possibilities of generating meaningful content on a large
scale are truly unlocked .
==PAGE:48==
7.2 Expanding randomness
40
7.2
Expanding randomness
Many roguelikes randomize the occurrence of game elements once the room
generation process has ﬁnished. By exploring possibilities of randomly placing
elements in the levels future projects could add more variety and lower the
probability of ﬁnding the exact same room-elements conﬁguration. However,
that will involve the necessity checking the validity of the ﬁnal level, potentially
involving long checking times. In that case, we recommend using that approach
only for oﬄine generation or online generation where the generation process can
aﬀord to take minutes to ﬁnish.
7.3
More diﬃculty curve control
The diﬃculty curve is an extremely important factor to take into account when
crafting a "fun" experience for the player. As in her research[57] Robin Hunicke
suggests: "One common approach to player investment is the ﬂow model devel-
oped by M. Csikszentmihalyi. Here our goal is to keep the player in the ﬂow
channel - away from states where the game is far too challenging, or way too
easy." The theory of ﬂow was originally developed by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
in 1990[58] and it has been further explored by posterior researchers such as
Noah Falstein, who in 2004 presented an improved game ﬂow[59], in which the
diﬃculty swiftly moves up and down in a wave pattern, remaining within the
Csikszentmihalyi’s suggested ﬂow channel.
Point being, research suggest that a good adjustment of the diﬃculty curve leads
to enjoyment, and this project has set the basis for what other researchers can
use as a methodology for moulding the curve in procedurally generated levels.
==PAGE:49==
41
Glossary
AI artiﬁcial intelligence. 9, 10, 36
MCTS monte carlo tree search. 14
MST minimum spanning tree. 11
PCG procedural content generation. 1, 2, 8
PGL procedurally generated levels. 1–3, 26, 39
WFC wave function collapse. 1, 15–18, 23, 35, 39
==PAGE:50==
Appendix A
Original project plan
==PAGE:51==
Project plan for MSc. in Digital Media 
Engineering Thesis 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Author:  
Diego Tobarra Gonzalez de Lopidana 
S172596 
 
Thesis title: 
Procedurally generation of puzzle levels with adaptive 
difficulty  
 
 
What is the problem? 
 
Procedural generation of levels in video game development has always been an interesting 
field of study, as it is a cheaper and faster solution compared with handcrafted levels. 
However, the interestingness of fully procedural generated levels are often way lower than 
the handcrafted ones. As explained the studies made by Karman [1], which are based on 
previous studies of the same kind of fully procedural generation of Sokoban levels made by 
Kartal [2][3], there seems to be an upper limit of interestingness that the procedural 
generation cannot (consistently) exceed. This is mainly due to the use of simple metrics that 
do not seem to be able to capture the underlying concepts of interestingness. 
 
What is the proposed solution? 
 
Brief:​ The aim of this project is to develop an algorithm that takes handcrafted parts of 
existing puzzles (we will call them templates), that entail some interestingness or, to put it in 
other words, can produce a challenge for the human mind when combined with other parts.  
 
I will focus my research on spatial puzzles, more specifically on variations of the classic 
Sokoban level. The reason is that it presents simple levels that can be represented 
algorithmically and the “interestingness” and difficulty of the puzzles can be measured 
scientifically through experiments, by the time taken to solve a puzzle by humans. Or it can 
be measured by parameters taken during the creation of the level. 
 
Basing the foundation of my research on the studies of Taylor and Parberry [4] on 
Procedural generation of Sokoban levels using templates, this project also aims to 
implement an AI agent that “places” boxes and goals in a given level and use a solution 
similar to “Reverse Solving”, as the one they use in [5]. However, for this project we want to 
43
==PAGE:52==
introduce assumptions in the templates of where to place boxes/goals, potentially 
introducing a “possibility space” with more possibilities than the desired amount of boxes and 
goals in the level. This will reduce the state search considerably and will turn the reverse 
solving problem into a relaxed problem.  
 
What is the expected outcome? 
 
The final goal is to include the procedurally generated levels in a videogame that other 
students and I develop on the side. Therefore, the game will be used as the testing media 
used in the conducted experiments during this project. We will use the game to identify and 
measure the interestingness in the puzzles. It will also serve as a proof of concept of how 
this algorithm can be implemented in a professional game development environment. 
 
 
 
Main objectives of the project (for the author) 
1.
Develop proficiency at writing complex algorithms in Python and C++. 
2.
Learn to use Unreal Engine for game development. 
3.
Get a solid background on AI and the application of pathfinding algorithms such as 
A*, developing appropriate heuristics according to the case. 
4.
Learn technical optimization techniques for games. 
5.
Improve my skills working on a multi-disciplinary team. 
 
Minimum Viable Product 
The MVP of this project should contain the bare minimum requirements so that, if everything 
else fails, it will be a valid proof of concept of the features that the thesis is based on, which 
could be expanded in a future work. 
 
Corresponding to the previously stated objectives, the MVP of this project should contain: 
1.
Generate levels offline for spatial puzzles procedurally, combining templates of 
handcraft human-interesting levels. 
2.
Starting from the solution state of the level, use an algorithm similar to reversed 
solving to generate a challenging level.  
3.
Filter the resulting levels after checking the solvability by some parameters 
(complexity, size, etc.) to ensure good quality. 
4.
Optimize generation process (use of memory, less CPU heavy calculations, etc.), so 
it can be considered to be run online before the level gets played. 
5.
Use the generated levels in a game that can be played on a computer using Unreal 
Engine. 
 
Development plan 
For the development of this project, I use the SCRUM method to organize my weekly tasks 
and state clearly for others and for myself where in the development am I. The Sprints will 
44
==PAGE:53==
take one week length, and every week the tasks to be done will be re-evaluated to match the 
monthly goals. The monthly goals describe the phases of development. 
 
The plan breaks down as follows: 
 
Month 1: February 
Month objectives:  
1.
Get solid on the foundational work to use during the thesis and have a clear overview 
of the state-of-the art techniques that have been used in the past for solving the 
same problem. 
2.
Get a good understanding of the Unreal Engine 4 framework, to be able to develop 
the game for testing purposes. 
3.
Plan the development and adjust the milestones and deadlines according to the plan. 
 
 
 
 
Month 2: March 
Month objectives: 
1.
Develop first iteration (purely functional, not concerned about difficulty or 
interestingness metrics) of the template shuffling algorithm based on the Wave 
Function Collapse algorithm [6]. 
2.
Develop first iteration  (purely functional, not concerned about difficulty or 
interestingness metrics) of the AI that will place boxes and goals in the generated 
levels, using only reverse movements, so that we ensure the level solvability. 
(Explained in [5]) 
3.
Conduct first user testing experiments (basic game needs to be implemented at this 
point). 
 
Month 3: April 
Month objectives: 
1.
Use the received feedback to adjust algorithm and make it more interesting and the 
game so that it does not distract the user in the next testing session. 
2.
Introduce metrics in the template generation that can lead to different levels of 
interestingness and difficulty. 
3.
Adjust heuristics and refine problem relaxation techniques in the AI so that it can 
produce more interesting levels. 
 
Month 4: May 
Month objectives: 
1.
Optimization of the algorithm generation. Consider at this point if the algorithm can be 
run online before playing a level in the game. 
2.
Second user testing session, fixing the problems from the previous one and 
observing the results. 
3.
Writing the thesis and documenting the project progress (using notes taken during 
the development). 
45
==PAGE:54==
 
Month 5: June 
Month objectives: 
1.
Fixing bugs in the algorithm and game. 
2.
Settling down conclusions of research (do a final testing session if needed). 
3.
Writing and polishing the thesis report.  
 
References 
1.
Generating Sokoban Levels that are Interesting to Play using Simulation 
by Simon Karman: ​https://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/366199 
2.
Generating Sokoban Puzzle Game Levels with Monte Carlo Tree Search, by 
Bilal Kartal, Nick Sohre, and Stephen J. Guy: 
https://www.cs.umn.edu/sites/cs.umn.edu/files/tech_reports/16-005.pdf 
3.
Data-Driven Sokoban Puzzle Generation with Monte Carlo Tree Search, by 
Kartal, Bilal & Sohre, Nick & J Guy, Stephen. (2016): 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311706278_Data-Driven_Sokob
an_Puzzle_Generation_with_Monte_Carlo_Tree_Search 
4.
Procedural Generation of Sokoban Levels, by Joshua Taylor and Ian 
Parberry: ​https://larc.unt.edu/techreports/LARC-2011-01.pdf 
5.
Sokoban: Reversed Solving, by Frank Takes: 
http://liacs.leidenuniv.nl/~takesfw/pdf/sokoban.pdf 
6.
Wave Function Collapse author’s implementation: 
https://github.com/mxgmn/WaveFunctionCollapse 
  
 
46
==PAGE:55==
Appendix B
Generated levels
==PAGE:56==
48
Figure B.1: Generated levels of size 20x20 and 30x30
==PAGE:57==
49
Figure B.2: Generated levels of size 30x30
==PAGE:58==
50
Figure B.3: Generated levels of size 50x50
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
[1] T. Hatﬁeld, “Rise of the roguelikes: A genre evolves. http://pc.gamespy.
com/pc/ftl-faster-than-light/1227287p1.html.”
[2] G. A. B. Barros, M. C. Green, A. Liapis, and J. Togelius, “Who killed albert
einstein? from open data to murder mystery games,” IEEE Transactions
on Games, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 79–89, 2018.
[3] H. Mohr, M. Eger, and C. Martens, “Eliminating the impossible: A pro-
cedurally generated murder mystery,” Proc. Experimental AI in Games,
2018.
[4] TexRD, “Texrd https://www.texrd.com/.”
[5] SpeedTree, “Speedtree https://store.speedtree.com/.”
[6] J. Bycer, “3 failings of procedurally generated game design. http://
game-wisdom.com/critical/procedural-game-design.”
[7] M. Rose, “5 tips for using procedurally-generated content in your game
https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/181853/5_tips_for_using_
procedurallygenerated_content_in_your_game.php.”
[8] D. Yu, Spelunky: Boss Fight Books #11. Boss Fight Books, Boss Fight
Books, 2016.
[9] G. M. Toolkit, “Roguelikes, persistency, and progression. https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=G9FB5R4wVno.”
[10] S. Karman, “Generating sokoban levels that are interesting to play using
simulation,” Utrecht University, pp. 100–103, 2018.
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
52
[11] B. Kartal, N. Sohre, and S. J Guy, “Generating sokoban puzzle game levels
with monte carlo tree search,” 07 2016.
[12] R. Hunicke, M. LeBlanc, and R. Zubek, “Mda: A formal approach to game
design and game research,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Workshop on Chal-
lenges in Game AI, vol. 4, p. 1722, 2004.
[13] J. Togelius, E. Kastbjerg, D. Schedl, and G. N. Yannakakis, “What is pro-
cedural content generation?: Mario on the borderline,” in Proceedings of
the 2nd international workshop on procedural content generation in games,
p. 3, ACM, 2011.
[14] P.
C.
G.
Wiki,
“Dungeon
generation.
http://pcg.wikidot.com/
pcg-algorithm:dungeon-generation.”
[15] M. Kac, “Random walk and the theory of brownian motion,” The American
Mathematical Monthly, vol. 54, no. 7P1, pp. 369–391, 1947.
[16] P. C. G. Wiki, “Random walk algorithm. http://pcg.wikidot.com/
pcg-algorithm:drunkard-walk.”
[17] Kyzrati, “Mapgen: Tunneling algorithm. https://www.gridsagegames.
com/blog/2014/06/mapgen-tunneling-algorithm/.”
[18] A. A. Coleman, “Growing tree algorithm,” in Procedural Generation Algo-
rithms, Kansas State University, 2016.
[19] P.
C.
G.
Wiki,
“Adaptive
diﬃculty.
http://pcg.wikidot.com/
pcg-algorithm:adaptive-difficulty.”
[20] P.
C.
G.
Wiki,
“Algorithmic
diﬃculty.
http://pcg.wikidot.com/
pcg-algorithm:algorithmic-difficulty.”
[21] M. West, “Shattered reality,” in Game Developer Magazine, UBM Tech,
August 2006.
[22] J. CULBERSON, “Sokoban is pspace-complete, technical report 97-02. de-
partment of computing science, university of alberta,” http://www. cs. ual-
berta. ca/˜ joe/Preprints/Sokoban, 1997.
[23] P. Van Lishout, François & Gribomont, “Single-player games: Introduction
to a new solving method combining state-space modelling with a multi-
agent representation,” Belgian/Netherlands Artiﬁcial Intelligence Confer-
ence, pp. 100–103, 2006.
[24] A. Venkatesan, A. Jain, and R. Grewal, “AI in game playing: Sokoban
solver,” CoRR, vol. abs/1807.00049, 2018.
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
53
[25] N. Froleyks and T. Balyo, Using an algorithm portfolio to solve sokoban.
PhD thesis, Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT), 2016.
[26] M. Crippa and F. Maroochi, “Monte carlo tree search for sokoban,” Poly-
technic University of Milan, pp. 100–103, 2018.
[27] P. Jarušek and R. Pelánek, “Diﬃculty rating of sokoban puzzle,” in Proc.
of the Fifth Starting AI Researchers’ Symposium (STAIRS 2010), pp. 140–
150, 2010.
[28] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,” Nu-
merische Mathematik, vol. 1, pp. 269–271, Dec 1959.
[29] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE Transactions on Systems
Science and Cybernetics, vol. 4, pp. 100–107, July 1968.
[30] A. Botea, M. Müller, and J. Schaeﬀer, “Using abstraction for planning in
sokoban,” in Computers and Games (J. Schaeﬀer, M. Müller, and Y. Björns-
son, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 360–375, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2003.
[31] O. Boruvka, “O jistém problému minimálním,” 1926.
[32] J. B. Kruskal, “On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the travel-
ing salesman problem,” Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 48–50, 1956.
[33] B. the Brave, “Chiseling algorithm. https://www.boristhebrave.com/
2018/04/28/random-paths-via-chiseling.”
[34] J. Taylor and I. Parberry, “Procedural generation of sokoban levels,” 2011.
[35] A. Sullivan, M. Mateas, and N. Wardrip-Fruin, “Questbrowser: Making
quests playable with computer-assisted design,” 2009.
[36] G. Smith, J. Whitehead, and M. Mateas, “Tanagra: A mixed-initiative
level design tool,” in Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
the Foundations of Digital Games, pp. 209–216, ACM, 2010.
[37] M. Gumin, “Wave function collapse algorithm source. https://github.
com/mxgmn/WaveFunctionCollapse.”
[38] W. Heisenberg, “Über den anschaulichen inhalt der quantentheoretischen
kinematik und mechanik,” in Original Scientiﬁc Papers Wissenschaftliche
Originalarbeiten, pp. 478–504, Springer, 1985.
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
54
[39] I. Karth and A. M. Smith, “Wavefunctioncollapse is constraint solving in
the wild,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the Foun-
dations of Digital Games, p. 68, ACM, 2017.
[40] M. Kleineberg, “Inﬁnite city generation using wave function collapse algo-
rithm. https://marian42.itch.io/wfc.”
[41] O. Stålberg, ““content-agnostic algorithm for placing tiles. heavily based
on the work of @exutumno. basically a sudoku-solver on steroids.” https:
//twitter.com/OskSta/status/784847588893814785.”
[42] O. Stålberg, ““more procedural tile placement. now in 3d. algorithm
inspired by the work of @exutumno” https://twitter.com/OskSta/
status/787319655648100352.”
[43] O. Stålberg, ““it’s getting faster (mostly due to bitwise operations).
actual speed depicted below”
https://twitter.com/OskSta/status/
794993371261665280.”
[44] O. Stålberg, ““i gave it an extra diﬃcult tileset to work with to make sure it
can repair itself when it has screwed up” https://twitter.com/OskSta/
status/793806535898136576.”
[45] O. Stålberg, “Wave function collapse algorithm interactive demo. http:
//oskarstalberg.com/game/wave/wave.html.”
[46] O. Stålberg, “Epc2018 - oskar stalberg - wave function collapse in bad north.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bcZb-SsnrA&feature=youtu.be.”
[47] A. Parra Acero, J. Garcia Lopez, K. Juul, M. R. Bjare, and D. Tobarra
Gonzalez de Lopidana, “Dtu course 02285 - ai and multi aagent systems,
sp18 - team davinci,” DTU, 2018.
[48] www.sokobano.de,
“Most
common
sokoban
level
as
described
by
sokobano.de
http://www.sokobano.de/wiki/index.php?title=Level_
format.”
[49] M. Meger, “Jsoko - java program for playing the sokoban game. https:
//www.sokoban-online.de/.”
[50] N. I. of Standards and Technology, “Manhattan distance https://xlinux.
nist.gov/dads/HTML/manhattanDistance.html.”
[51] O. Stålberg, R. Meredith, and M. Kvale, “Bad north - a minimalistic, real-
time tactics roguelite with vikings https://www.badnorth.com/.”
[52] E. of Mathematics, “Entropy - encyclopedia of mathematics https://www.
encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php/Entropy.”
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
[53] N.
Y.
University,
“Claude
shannon
https://www.nyu.edu/pages/
linguistics/courses/v610003/shan.html.”
[54] J. Domènech, “Sokoban - the "original" collection http://sokoban-jd.
blogspot.com/2014/05/the-original-collection.html.”
[55] T. Rabbit, “Thinking rabbit https://thinkingrabbit.jp/.”
[56] M. West, “Spectrum holobyte buy-back launches next generation,” in Com-
puter Gaming World, p. 116, December 1992.
[57] R. Hunicke, “The case for dynamic diﬃculty adjustment in games,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Advances
in computer entertainment technology, pp. 429–433, ACM, 2005.
[58] M. Csikszentmihalyi, “Flow. the psychology of optimal experience. new york
(harperperennial) 1990.,” 1990.
[59] N. Falstein, “Understanding fun–the theory of natural funativity,” Intro-
duction to game development, pp. 71–98, 2005.
