==PAGE:1==
 
Leveraging Blockchain 
within Procurement 
 
Name: Aksel Watson (S175507) 
University: Technical University of Denmark 
Supervisor: Peter Jacobsen 
Collaboration: Deloitte & Tradeshift 
Topics: Blockchain & Trade Finance 
 
Trade Finance 4.0 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
Terminologies  
 
Some terminologies used in this thesis, are not considered as ‘general’  or ‘common’ knowledge within the field 
of engineering and will therefore be explained before commencing the report. 
 
 
Account receivables and payables 
All companies have account receivables and account payables. Account receivables is the amount 
of money that other entities currently owe to the company, whereas accounts payable is the amount 
of money the company owes to another entity through, for example, unpaid invoices (Investopedia, 
2019). 
 
Invoice  
Invoices are physical or digital documents that indicate the amount payable, which importers send 
to exporters when they have delivered a product or provided a service. Invoices come in various 
formats that differ both nationally and internationally (Investopedia, 2019). 
 
Open-account payment terms  
Open account payment terms is a simple form of financing, where a company will require that their 
supplier wait 90-120 days before invoicing them for their goods (Investopedia, 2019). 
 
Maturity of a loan or invoice  
The maturity of a payable account such as loan or invoice reflects when it should be paid back. For 
example, the maturity can stipulate that repayment should fall within a specific timeframe such as 
within 120 days or by a specific date (Investopedia, 2019). 
 
Commoditizing assets 
Commoditizing assets displays the process of turning the amount payable into an asset that can be 
traded on the secondary market. For example, one could commoditize an invoice, as it represents a 
value that will be paid on maturity given that the importer can make the payment (Investopedia, 
2019). 
 
Transactional vs. program level 
Financial institutions will often differentiate between transactional and program loans. Transac-
tional refers to a loan that is given based on a single transaction e.g., based on a single invoice, 
whereas program loan refers to aggregated loans given, based on multiple transactions (Jesse, A, 
2019). 
 
Creditworthiness  
The creditworthiness of a company is a measure of a bank’s or other financial institution’s determi-
nation of the risks associated in offering this company a trade-loan. The company's creditworthiness 
is mainly based on the financial well-being of the company. However,  compliance issues related to 
money laundering and terror-funding are also taken into account  (Investopedia, 2019). 
 
 
Bank Guarantees 
Bank guarantees are used by importers to guarantee payment after a specified date if the importer 
is unable to pay the exporter (Investopedia, 2019).   
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
Readers Guide  
 
Before diving into this thesis, it is important to understand key elements of both the content and the 
structure. Thus this section will allow the reader an introduction to language, referencing style, and 
graphical representations that are necessary to understand before reading further.  
 
1. This thesis is written in American English, however will follow Danish ‘comma’ and ‘dot’ rules in regards 
to numbers that surpass 999 and decimal numbers. 
 
2. The APA referencing style will be applied, and will be presented as ‘(last name, publishing year)’ in the 
text and in the full citation in the bibliography. 
 
3. The suggested zoom level when reading the report is 120-130 %, as text in some sections and figures is 
down to font size 9.   
 
4. The structure of this report does not follow a typical thesis structure, where theory and analysis is split 
into two sections. Section 3 ‘Theoretical Analysis’ reflects both objective knowledge deduced from aca-
demic papers and subjective analysis based on interviews, flowcharts, company websites, etc. 
 
5. The final solution will not include the Bitcoin blockchain, however as there are thousands of blockchains 
with distinct differences, the Bitcoin Blockchain will be used as an example in section 3 ‘Theoretical 
Analysis’ to reduce confusion. 
 
6. Throughout the report, there will be many flowchart and process maps that includes the same three 
stakeholders - an importer, an exporter and a financial institution. These figures will consistently be 
constructed using the same ‘icons’ to avoid confusion. See these ‘icons’ and the descreption of the 
stakeholders below:  
  
The exporter’s bank 
The exporter’s bank will typically be a large 
traditional bank or a financial facility that 
specializes in trade finance located in the 
same country as the exporter. The main ac-
tivities of the exporter’s bank is to provide 
trade finance to the exporter. 
 
Importer’s bank 
The importer’s bank will typically be a large 
traditional bank located in the same coun-
try as the exporter. The main activities of 
the importer's bank will be to provide the 
importers bank guarantees towards the ex-
porter. 
 
The Importer 
The importer refers to the company im-
porting goods from a country other than 
the origin of their operations.  In the fi-
nancing process, the importer will be the 
initiator of the loans, as they will be de-
ploying delayed payment terms (source). 
 
The exporter 
The exporter refers to the company ex-
porting goods from a country other than 
their origin of their operations. In the fi-
nancing process the exporter will be 
known as the beneficiary as they are re-
ceiving the trade loans (source). 
 
Financial Institution 
The financial institutions refers to banks or other institutions that lend money as their primary 
business (source). Both the importers’ and exporters’ financial institution/s will be involved in 
the trade financing process and will be referred to as ‘Exporter’s bank’ and ‘Importer’s bank’ 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The purpose of thesis is to investigate the current procurement and trade financing process 
in respect to the implementation of blockchain technology. More specifically the investigation 
will be limited to financing types that benefit small exporters and exporters located in emerg-
ing markets, and thus will only consider ‘receivable export financing’. The investigation will be 
facilitated by analyzing Tradeshift’s - a provider of a end-end procurement and financing plat-
form - current process through two interviews conducted with the Product Manager of 
Fintech (financial technology), the Vice President of Global Banking Alliances and a blockchain 
specialist, who all currently works at Tradeshift. The necessity of blockchain within this indus-
try stems from the need for efficient payment and data processing, network security and au-
thenticity of documentation in order to instill trust between the participants. Blockchain offers 
these features through cryptographic security, decentralized data storage and digitized cur-
rencies. The result of this project, will reflect two solution proposals based on a private and 
permissioned blockchain respectively.  
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Preface  
Throughout the past year, many financial scandals have come into the limelight due to finan-
cial and especially fraud detection systems becoming more automated and increasingly au-
ditable. Two scandals however, received the largest media coverage of them all; Danske Bank 
laundering billions of DKK for conglomerates through their Lithuanian branch and Brita Nielsen 
funding her extravagant lifestyle through defrauding Roskilde Kommune of 120 million DKK. 
One thing these cases have in common, is that the money laundering partially occurred 
through fraudulent invoices sent by shell corporations in Lithuania and Brita Nielsen’s own 
companies, respectively. Both schemes lasted for many years, which indicates that both the 
current internal financial systems and external audit software has it limitation in respect to 
detecting fraud. After undertaking multiple courses within Blockchain in my 9th semester, I 
saw an opportunity to apply this technology to the above mentioned problem as it is designed 
to enable cryptographic security, decentralized data storage and a transparent transactional 
flow - three elements that together have the ability to increase the credibility, validity and 
authenticity of an invoice. As looking into  ‘invoicing’ as a whole would be too extensive, a 
specific process - ‘Export Receivable Financing’ - where payable invoices, bank guarantees, 
trade loans etc., are commoditized to be sold on the secondary market at an reduced price, 
will be investigated. In this instance, the authenticity of the invoice and its owner is essential, 
as one invoice can theoretically be sold multiple times before the maturity has been reached. 
Blockchain can fundamentally change the way that these commodities are traded; as invoice 
data can be matched through shared ledgers, historical transactions can determine risk pro-
files, standardization of invoices can mitigate mistakes and conditional self-executing digital 
contracts can replace many mundane and manual tasks associated with reaching  binding con-
tractual agreements. 
 
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
1 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Throughout time, procurement has been a process that is present in any company that has 
suppliers or supplies another company. The procurement process is the link that ensures that 
goods and services are moved between two parties and payed for. This can often entail that 
goods are moved from countries far away from the company’s origin. Thus, the timespan be-
tween when the goods are shipped, to the time when goods are received, can, in some cases, 
be up to six weeks. This can cause financial problems for companies since exporters cannot 
wait six weeks to be paid for their orders and importers cannot pay for goods they will first 
receive in six weeks. To deal with these issues, importers will often include strict payment 
conditions that require suppliers to wait 90-180 days before invoicing them for any goods and 
thus allowing the goods to be received before payment occurs. These payment delays have 
left exporters globally in a position where they are forced to obtain some type of short-term 
financing to remain a supplier to the respective importer. Early on, this problem was identified 
by banks and other financial institutions which resulted in what is known as trade finance. 
Trade finance is the process of banks loaning exporters money to front their shipment, so they 
do not tie up capital in shipments around the world. For large companies that are located in 
the developed world, trade finance has been used for many years to increase cash flow and 
liquidity. However, it can be very difficult for start-ups or niche companies to receive trade 
finance due to lack of collateral and as well as the fact that they might have a proven financial 
track-record to prove their creditworthiness. Furthermore, companies that lie in emerging or 
developing markets such as Africa and South-East Asia, can have an even tougher time obtain-
ing these loans due to aforementioned reasons, currency volatility, political instability, risk of 
money laundering and/or terror funding. 
 
From the beginning, the financing process has included many manual steps in order for the 
banks to identify and risk-asses their creditors, process the loan and execute the payment. 
However, with increasing pressure from exporters, importers and the authorities, it has be-
come essential to drive the current financing process towards a digital age, where technology 
is the primary value-driver through automated risk and fraud detection, real-time payment 
==PAGE:8==
 
2 
 
processing, process standardization, automated document generation, continuous data-
matching and process standardization. Throughout this report the current trade finance pro-
cess and subsequent upstream and downstream processes will be analyzed with respect to 
finding improvement areas by introducing automation and standardization within the process. 
The report will take outset in the current process that importers must undertake to obtain a 
trade loan, as well as the activities that the exporter’s and importer’s bank must go through 
to process and accept these loans and provide bank guarantees.   
 
Within the trade financing process, it is important that information is kept securely, data is 
auditable and payment processing is efficient. Thus, the analysis will result in a discussion on 
the implementation of blockchain technology to utilize the nature of distributed data storage, 
real-time data transfer and network transparency. Furthermore, as the finance industry in 
general, and the banking industry in particular, is private to the public, a case company - 
Tradeshift - that facilitates both procurement and trade financing has been interviewed and 
will represent the current ‘best practice’ within automation of procurement and trade financ-
ing. The final solution will reflect a trade financing process that has been simplified and auto-
mated using both-- capabilities of blockchain as well as the philosophy that surrounds the 
technology. The goal of the solution is to allow startups, SMEs and companies within emerging 
and developing markets, access to financing at an affordable interest rate by allowing non-
banking companies, institutional investors and individuals to act as debtors on a transactional 
level, in contrast to the typical aggregated program-loans currently offered by large banks and 
financial institutions. 
 
1.1 Scope 
The scope of this project is derived from the problems within the financing process introduced 
in the section above. The issues will be investigated, and then improved using principles, ca-
pabilities and philosophies from blockchain technology to simplify and automate the process. 
The primary focus will be on reducing risk in the overall process as this is the main driver of 
enabling trust between the involved parties. Reducing the risks between the participant will 
==PAGE:9==
 
3 
 
thereby allow smaller businesses access to trade loans with low interests as private individu-
als. Alternately, institutional investors can offer these loans as short-term, low-risk invest-
ments in their investment portfolio. All considerations will culminate in a proposed solution 
that will assess how a blockchain-based platform can benefit the current trade financing pro-
cess for high-risk exporters as well as a thorough implementation plan that outlines the finan-
cial, technical and humans resources necessary for the solutions to be introduced to the cur-
rent marketplace.  
 
1.2. Problem statement 
How can the current trade financing process be redesigned, automated and simplified to an 
extent that allows startups and companies within developing and emerging  markets access 
to ‘receivable export financing’ at an affordable interest rate by allowing non-banking compa-
nies, institutional investors and individuals to act as debtors on a transactional level, in con-
trast to the typical aggregated program loans currently offered by large banks and financial 
institutions using the principles, capabilities and philosophies of blockchain technology? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.
Where in the procurement process does the input for the trade financing pro-
cess  originate? 
 
2.
Can a debtor become profitable based on loans executed on a transactional 
level? 
 
3.
Can the risks associated with startups and companies within emerging markets 
be mitigated to an extent that increases their accessibility to their export financ-
ing? 
 
4.
Can the current client on-boarding process be simplified and/or automated to 
the extent that will continually allow for Know-Your-Costumer and Anti-Money-
Laundering compliance?
Trade Finance 
Blockchain 
 
1.
Is it realistic that the importer, exporter, shipper, and banks share a 
ledger between them for document sharing and payment processing? 
 
2.
Can the risks regarding onboarding be simplified and/or automated to 
the extent that it can be done by the network instead of a central au-
thority?  
 
3.
Are the risks associated with trade financing worth the investment nec-
essary to execute a blockchain solution on a large scale? 
==PAGE:10==
 
4 
 
1.3 Limitation 
The limitations of this project will portray what constraints have been endured or self-imposed 
throughout the project period; 
 
1. Trade finance and procurement are mature topics that have generated large amount 
of literature throughout the years, whereas blockchain is a term and technology that 
recently has become popular and therefore generated far less. This limitation will af-
fect the quality of the literature review, as it will limit the number of relevant articles 
that can be found about the topic as well as reduce the opportunity to introduce ad-
vanced search criteria such as publishing year. 
 
2. Although there might be other technologies with capabilities similar to blockchain such 
other cloud-based database systems, this report will only evaluate the trade financing 
process with respect to the  implementation of blockchain. Therefore it will not justify 
if the solution could have been done differently using other technologies, nor if these 
technologies would have been less costly. The reason behind this self-imposed limita-
tion is that the value of a blockchain solution is very much based on the number of 
participants in the network. Thus, it can be hard to quantify the value generated 
against the cost incurred, before fully understanding the final size of this network. 
 
3. The banking industry is extremely private and it requires unattainable access to use 
and test their internal systems which facilitate the financing process. The solution pro-
posed will therefore be limited to assessing how a blockchain-based platform can ben-
efit the current trade financing process and a thorough implementation plan that out-
lines the financial, technical and human resources necessary for the solutions to be 
introduced to the current marketplace, as a functional solution would be out of my 
collaboratory with Tradeshift and my technical skills in software engineering.     
 
4. The case company interviewed will be the only way to get access to the parts of the 
trade financing and procurement process that is not accessible to the public. To make 
==PAGE:11==
 
5 
 
a solution that is compatible with real life, this company and its subsequent processes 
will be considered as ‘best practice’ within automation of procurement and will 
thus  represent the current industry standards within this field. This limitation can po-
tentially affect the value of the solution as other companies working with similar ser-
vices might be using more advanced methods, technologies and/or processes, that 
should be considered as best practice instead. 
 
5. The current financing landscape is highly beneficial for the importer as they often will 
require delayed payment terms of up to three months; by default allowing the im-
porter ‘free’ trade finance. This thesis will therefore focus on approaches and financing 
types that enable and allow smaller suppliers and start-ups, especially within develop-
ing and emerging markets, access to financing. Practically, this will limit the project to 
considering only financing types related to ‘receivable export financing’ (exporter’s 
bank financing receivable invoices for exporters) and ‘importer payment guarantees’ 
(importer’s bank guaranteeing payment to exporter if the importer is unable to). 
 
1.4 Market Analysis 
The current trade financing market is very large and complex, and there are many different 
types of financing. Currently, it is estimated by the World Trade Organization that 80-90% 
of global trade relies on trade finance (either directly or indirectly) in the form of trade 
credit and bank guarantees (DiCaprio and Yao, 2017). The market primarily consists of 
large banks and other financial institutions that offer aggregated program loans to large 
and established organizations. This has left a gap in the market, where startups, asset-light 
companies and exporters within emerging markets, cannot receive trade finance as their 
risk profile and creditworthiness does not conform to eligibility requirements established 
by the banks. This is referred to as unmet trade finance as it practically represents trade 
finance applications that have been rejected by financial institutions. Currently, this gap 
amounts to 1,5 trillion USD and considering that the total trade volume amounts to 17,5 
trillion USD globally, closing this gap has the potential to increase the global trade volume 
by 8,5% (DiCaprio and Yao, 2017). Below in  figure 1 and 2, each of the four major regions 
==PAGE:12==
 
6 
 
Figure 1 
in the world will be graphed with respect to their proportional contribution to the total 
volume of global trade and unmet trade finance, respectively. Note that the regions are 
merged in the following way: Asia (East Asia, South Asia and South-east Asia), Europe (All 
OECD countries and Central Asia), Americas (North America, South America, Central Amer-
ica and the Caribbean) and Africa (Sub-saharan Africa, North Africa and the Middle East). 
 
In figure 1 and 2  above, it can be seen that in two of the largest regions - Asia and the Americas 
- the unmet trade finance is correspondingly proportional to the size of the market that they 
lie within at 38,5 % vs. 39 % and 16,2 % vs. 18 % (DiCaprio and Yao, 2017). This indicates that 
these markets are similar in regards to the types of companies that apply for financing and 
their procedures for rejecting/accepting their applications. However, looking into Europe at 
38,5 % vs. 29 %, indicates that there are fewer application that are rejected compared to Asia 
and the Americas. This is likely due to the conformity of the European market, where the GDP 
of each country included lies way above the world's average, whereas in the Americas, for 
example, some of the poorest countries in the world are also included- such as Venezuela, 
Honduras and El Salvador. Lastly, when looking into Africa, it is clear that there is a mismatch 
between the market size of Africa and the volume of unmet financing at 2,4 % vs. 14 %. This 
shows that the African region has a substantially higher rejection rate compared to the other 
regions, thus indicating that it will have a larger growth potential through trade finance as 
unmet trade finance represents trade that has not occurred due to a lack of funding (DiCaprio 
39%
29%
18%
14%
Unmet Trade Finance
Asia
Europe
Americas
Africa
43%
39%
16%2%
Market size
Asia
Europe
Americas
Africa
Figure 2 
==PAGE:13==
 
7 
 
and Yao, 2017). Practically, this growth potential can be quantified by calculating the theoret-
ical increase in trade volume when balancing the proportional contributions from figures 1 
and 2. This showed that going from a proportional contribution of 14 % to 2,4 % to the total 
global unmet trade financing, will increase trade volume by 209 billion USD and thus increase 
their proportional contribution to global trade from 1,1 % to 3,5 %. Figures 1 and 2 above do 
not indicate the size of the companies whose applications were rejected. However, figure 3 
below shows the distribution between accepted and rejected financing applications in per-
centage for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), Large Corporations and Multinational 
Corporations (MNCs) respectively.  
 
Looking into SMEs, it can be seen that more than half (52%) of all applications are rejected, 
which is a substantial amount considering that startups in North America and Europe account 
for 20 % and 40 % respectively of these regions’ total exports. Looking further into the bar 
chart, it is clear the rejection percentage decreases as the size of the company increases (Di-
Caprio and Yao, 2017). The reason for this tendency, is that larger companies will often have 
better access to collateral and/or historical financial and transactional data. From figure xx, it 
is clear that solutions geared toward start-ups will have the greatest effect on the overall mar-
ket as the percentages in figure 3 are based on the value of the applications and not on the 
number of applications. To summarize the points from this market analysis, it is clear that the 
solution needs to be designed in a way that incorporates both the challenges of offering trade 
finance in emerging markets such Africa and East-Asia and challenges associated with asset-
light start-ups and SMEs from all regions (DiCaprio and Yao, 2017). This information can be 
48
79
87
52
21
13
SMEs
Large Coporations
MNC
Accepted
Rejected
Figure 3 
==PAGE:14==
 
8 
 
moved along to the final solution as changing this will ensure that it is designed for the largest 
market impact. See data that has been used for all pie and bar charts in this section can be 
viewed in appendix 1.  
 
 
==PAGE:15==
 
9 
 
2. Information collection 
This section will describe the methods used to collect information and data throughout the 
project duration. The first part will reflect which methodologies have been used for collecting 
primary data from external sources through semi-structured interviews. The second part will 
reflect the literary investigations necessary in a project of this size and complexity -- thus rep-
resenting the secondary data obtained through books and academic articles. 
 
2.1 Primary data 
An Interview is a conversation between two or more people to gather information about  rel-
evant topic(s), and give the interviewer a better understanding or get a new perspective on a 
topic. Specifically, in semi-structured interviews, the interviewee is able to elaborate on 
his/her answers, and stands in direct contrast to the structured survey-based interview 
method. In this project, only the semi structured method was applied, as the questions (see 
appendix 2) were not geared towards ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers but towards answers that required 
further elaborations and clarification. This allowed the interviewee to introduce new perspec-
tives and even new components to pre-established questions. Practically, these interviews 
were initiated by sending the questions seven days beforehand for the interviewee to prepare 
and then conducting the interview. Some interviews were conducted via Skype, as the inter-
viewees were located  in Copenhagen, London and New York. A full transcript of the inter-
views can be found  in appendix 2. The employees from Tradeshift who participated are in 
shown in table 1 below with their respective name, position and department:  
 
 
Name 
Position 
Department 
Michael Belspiel 
Product Manager 
Fintech 
Andrew Jesse 
Vice President 
Global Fintech and Banking Alliances 
Mads Larsen 
Blockchain Specialist 
Tradeshift Frontiers 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
 
10 
 
 
2.1 Secondary data 
The literature review will be the foundation of this thesis and it will help find, investigate, and 
finally determine what literature is interesting and relevant. As the project covers three major 
topics -- procurement, trade finance and blockchain -- these will be the input to initiate the 
literature review process. Both trade finance and procurement are large independent topics. 
However, to understand the trade financing process thoroughly, one must understand the 
underlying principles, inputs and outputs of the procurement process as well. See figure 4 
below to understand the interlinkage between the two subjects.  
 
 
 
Due to the lack of the maturity of blockchain as a topic, it will not stand alone in this thesis, 
but be utilized for its capabilities and philosophy with respect to both procurement and trade 
finance. The three aforementioned topics will be equally prioritized when beginning the liter-
ature review to remove any topic specific biases (e.g., the bank’s role in blockchain systems). 
The literature used in this thesis will take outset in the articles that are found to be most rel-
evant within each topic as well as articles that portray the interlinkage between them. Figure 
5 below, shows the seven search strings that will be used when searching EBSCOhost and DTU 
Find It databases and th result in figure 6 below. 
 
Input 
Output 
 
Procurement 
 
Trade Finance 
 
Procurement 
Documentation 
Unpaid invoices 
Documentation 
Importer information 
Exporter information 
Paid invoices 
Figure 4 
==PAGE:17==
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procurement 
Trade Finance 
Blockchain 
Procurement+ 
Trade Finance 
Procurement+ 
Blockchain 
Trade Finance  
+ Blockchain 
Procurement+ 
Trade Finance + Block-
chain 
4221 
2979 
3994 
11 
5 
35 
0 
DTU Find it 
3443 
1964 
4048 
33 
6 
71 
0 
EBSCOHost 
Figure 5 
Figure 6 
==PAGE:18==
 
12 
 
In figure 6, it can be seen that within six out of seven search strings, it was possible to find 
relevant literature However, in the seventh search string that incorporates all three topics 
there were no results. Therefore, it was necessary to use a broader search engine for this 
search string. For this purpose Google Scholar was used as it often includes a broader search 
range. See figure 7 below, where Google Scholar was able to produce results that considered 
all three topics.  
 
 
The search results from figure 6 and figure 7 will be used to further determine which article 
will be used as literature for this thesis. As each of the search strings resulted in a large number 
of articles, other advanced search criteria from each database will be used to limit the number 
of articles to investigate further. Furthermore, the search strings will be divided into three 
layers based on the number of words used in the search string: the first layer represents the 
most general literature and the third layer will represent the most specific.  
 
 
 
 
 
4221 
16900 
165000 
1570 
4860 
1190 
Google Scholar 
Figure 7 
==PAGE:19==
 
13 
 
Layer 1 will primarily be used for the theory of this thesis and therefore consists of articles 
and books regarding one of the three main topics. The focus here was to find objective litera-
ture that could be used to gain a thorough understanding of each of these topics. Search string 
1 and 2 should mainly consist of books as they need to cover broad topic areas, whereas search 
string 3 only includes academic articles due to the lack of published books about blockchain 
specifically. 
 
 Layer 2 will be used for the analysis as the interlinkage between the topics will be relevant at 
this point. String 4 focuses on finding strong academic articles that reflect issues, risks, and 
improvement areas of the current procurement and trade financing process whereas search 
strings 5 and 6 will focus on how far this industry, research and academia have come with the 
implementation of blockchain technology in procurement and trade finance.  
 
Layer 3 will be used primarily in the discussion section, as these articles should reflect hypo-
thetical situations or thoughts yet to be tested in the real world. Here the focus will be on 
finding credible sources that shed light on how the future landscape of procurement, invoic-
ing, financing, banking, importing, exporting, sourcing etc., may look.  
 
The literature of the thesis will not be limited to the articles and books found in the litterature, 
as web-based sources, blogs, company websites, and other articles will have relevance for the 
project as well. However, as the aforementioned articles represent the topics that are being 
currently investigated, they will act as the starting point for the following ‘theoretical analysis’. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
14 
 
3. Theoretical analysis 
This section will be the basis of the analysis, discussion and further investigation of the current 
trade financing process. It will start by a presentation of the current procurement process; 
from the time that a product or service is requested internally by the importer until the ex-
porter is payed for the delivered goods. This will be followed by a thorough investigation of 
the current trade financing landscape, where financing types, stakeholders, risks and oppor-
tunities will be looked into; finally resulting in deep investigation of blockchain technology in 
order to understand which parts of the technology can be utilized within the financing process 
and which cannot. Below in figure 8, a diagram has been created that graphically portrays the 
informational flow of this section. 
 
 
 
 
Requisition 
Sourcing 
Purchasing 
Recieving 
Paying 
Open account 
Trade Finance 
Factoring 
Recourse 
Non-recourse 
Bank Garantees 
Acceptance (C) 
Unconfirmed 
Confirmed 
Acceptance (UC) 
Blockchain 
Decentralization 
Transparency 
Transparency 
Figure 8 
==PAGE:21==
 
15 
 
2.1 What is Procurement? 
 
Procurement is the process of requisitioning, sourcing, purchasing, receiving and paying for 
goods and services. The name is based on the fundamental sequence in procurement and 
financial process; the initial steps from requesting a product or a service to the final step of 
paying for it (Nicoletti, 2018). This process includes various steps that can be managed using 
different approaches, however any procurement process includes the steps outlined in figur 
9 below.  
 
 
 
Requisition 
Requisition refers to an internal process to request something that needs to be ordered or 
restocked. This process is done by any employee that has the authority to submit a purchase 
requisition form on behalf of the company. The manager(s) or purchasing officer(s) can use 
this document to review and approve the requisitions and subsequently allow the product or 
service to be ordered. The form will often include data such as the person making the request, 
the time and date of the request, the products requested, the delivery date and location and 
Figure 9 
Client Com-
pany
Requisition 
Sourcing 
Purchasing 
Receiv-
ing
Paying 
Supplier 
Invoice
Payment 
Order con-
firmation 
Advanced Ship-
ping Notice 
Purchase order 
Purchase request 
Supplier Inven-
tory/capacity 
Supplier Cat-
aloguing  
Employee re-
quests 
System re-
quest 
BOM 
Supplier 
selec-
tion 
Request for 
Quotation 
Receive sup-
plier bids  
Compar-
ing bids  
==PAGE:22==
 
16 
 
which manager(s) should approve the request. Within different organizations, different ap-
proval procedures and hierarchies are used. These will specify which manager levels can ap-
prove which requisition amounts (Nicoletti, 2018).  
 
Sourcing 
Sourcing is an external process, where suppliers can offer a specific number or amount of 
goods or services for a specific price. This process is often handled in two ways depending on 
the complexity of the offered product. The simplest form of sourcing is using suppliers that 
offer product catalogues indicating weight, cost, economies of scale (EOS) discount, minimum 
order, maximum capacity and estimated delivery time. However, this type of sourcing is only 
possible for products or services that are standardized to an extent that the price can be esti-
mated exactly. For personalized and customized products and extraordinarily large quantities, 
companies will often initiate a bidding process between suppliers known as Request-for-Pro-
posal (RFP). This process includes many steps and takes up more resources than simply picking 
a product, service or component from a catalog (Nicoletti, 2018). 
 
Purchasing 
Once the requisition request from the first step has been approved by the necessary man-
ager(s) and the supplier has been selected, the information necessary to issue a purchase or-
der is available. A purchase order will often include information similar to the requisitions 
form: quantity, price, company information, and where to email the invoice, ID-number and 
payment details. As the purchase orders are approved in first step, it will not be necessary to 
obtain further approval before sending it to the exporter. When the exporter receives the 
order, they will revert with an order confirmation that should match the information from the 
purchase order in regards to quantity and prices (Nicoletti, 2018).  
 
Receiving 
When the exporter has sent the goods off to the importer, they will send an advance shipment 
notice to the importer, which contains information about the pending delivery. The purpose 
of this document is to inform the importer of the exact delivery date (considering delivery 
date changes) and the physical characteristics of the goods in order for them to prepare the 
==PAGE:23==
 
17 
 
acceptance of the delivery. When the goods arrive at the importer’s inventory, the importer 
will have limited time to notify the exporter if any goods are missing, damaged, leaked or 
expired. If this is the case, the importer will let the exporter know and revert a credit note that 
indicates the discount that the exporter will receive for their next order. If there are no dam-
aged goods, the process will continue to payment (Nicoletti, 2018). 
 
Paying 
The last steps involve the importer paying for the goods received. This is done by the exporter 
sending an invoice to the importer that includes the amount that needs to be payed to a spe-
cific bank account. The invoice, purchase order, and purchase confirmation are now compared 
to each other to ensure that there are no discrepancies and that the exporter is being charged 
for the exact amount of goods that the importer received. If the information from these doc-
uments matches, the purchasing department will pay the invoice and archive it in their system 
(Nicoletti, 2018). 
 
2.2 Data flows 
In the section above, each of the processes were explained with respect to the action needed 
to be performed to fulfill each of the steps. However, for this information to become valuable, 
it is important to determine each step’s input, output and data requirements. As briefly men-
tioned in section xx (literature review), these characteristics will be used to determine the 
upstream and downstream requirements for the final solutions to ensure feasibility, compat-
ibility and efficiency. To determine the inputs and outputs, a flow chart is created in figure 10 
that details the document, data and information flow in the procurement process displayed 
in figure 9 above. Specifically, this flowchart emphasizes what documents are generated 
within each step, which documents are moved along to the next step and what data inputs 
are necessary to fulfill the purpose of each step 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
 
18 
 
 
 
As can be seen in figure 10 above, there are is a lot of data that is moved along from step to 
step. In modern ERP systems and other procurement solutions, a large part of this information 
is automatically generated such as names, time stamps etc., -- requiring however manual in-
put when having to decide supplier, price and quantity as these values are variable. Further-
more, all approvals that must be made need to be done manually by personnel reviewing the 
request and approving it. Here the approval hierarchies, rules and logics in regards to ‘which 
managers can approve which amounts’ need to be defined and input within any procurement 
system before it will be able to notify the correct manager(s). Furthermore, it can be seen in 
Initial in-
Requisition 
Approval re-
quisition form 
Name, Time of 
request, Items 
requested, Re-
quested Qualiry, 
Requested de-
livery date, Ap-
proval limits 
Approved by, 
Needed quantity, 
Needed delivery 
date, Approved 
supplier list, sup-
plier limitations, 
supplier catalogue 
and proposals 
Agreed quan-
tity, Agreed 
price, Agreed 
delivery date, 
Exporter infor-
mation, pur-
chase order 
ID-number, 
payment de-
Amount pay-
able Bank 
details, Pay-
ment date 
Delivery infor-
mation, Com-
pany infor-
mation, Deliv-
ery size, num-
ber of goods 
received, 
Quality report 
Sourcing 
Purchasing 
Receiving 
Paying 
Selected 
Supplier 
Advanced 
shipping no-
Order Com-
firmation 
Purchase or-
der 
Goods recei-
ved notifica-
Damaged 
goods noti-
Invoice 
Data outputs 
Data Inputs 
System 
Request 
Employee 
Request 
Approval 
Hierarchy 
Requisition 
form 
Figure 10 
==PAGE:25==
 
19 
 
figure 10, that the final output of the procurement process is the invoice that is sent from the 
exporter to the importer. As this invoice is also the input for the trade financing process, it is 
essential to understand the underlying process that generates it. This will help determine how 
early in the process the final solution must be implemented in order to ensure that the output 
of the procurement process is compatible with the input for a blockchain based trade financ-
ing solution. 
 
2.1 What is Trade Finance? 
 
Trade finance makes import and export transactions possible for entities ranging from start-
ups importing private label products overseas, to large companies importing or exporting 
large numbers of goods throughout the world (Barovick, 2007). Practically, trade finance in-
volves introducing a third-party to a company's transactions to remove the payment and sup-
ply risks. It provides the exporter with receivables or payments based on invoices and allows 
importers extended credit to fulfill orders. In general, it can be said that trade financing allows 
companies higher liquidity, since money is not tied up in current orders. However, it is not 
only importers or exporters lacking funds who require this type of financing, as it also protects 
against the fundamental risks associated with international trade -- currency fluctuations, po-
litical instability, issues of non-payment, and the creditworthiness of the parties involved. 
Within a typical trade financing process, many stakeholders can be involved to ensure the 
validity of the transactions (Barovick, 2007). Iin a typical process, the main stakeholders in-
volved include importers, exporters and their respective banks as explained in the reader's 
guide.  
 
Trade finance has been present in the market for decades since exporters and importers have 
always needed financing to fulfill their orders. However, in the past years, many importers 
have introduced strict open-account policies that has increased the necessity of financing for 
exporters with limited cash flow. Practically, open-account is a financing method, that does 
not include any banks. It is a policy where the importer will enforce a three to six month in-
voicing delay. This means that the exporters will wait until the maturity of the open account 
before invoicing the importer for their goods, thus resulting in three to six months of trade 
==PAGE:26==
 
20 
 
financing for the importer. However, at the same time, this leaves the exporter in a situation 
where they will not receive payment until the open account is matured and therefore in need 
of third-party financing. The exporter will therefore have to find a financial institution willing 
to loan them the money for the given order(s) based on the outstanding invoice(s) (In-
vestopedia, 2019). Open accounts create an unbalanced marketplace between the exporter 
and the importer; importers can receive practically free financing for 3-6 months, while ex-
porters are forced to seek third-party financing to sustain their operations. As this creates a 
‘buyers’ market’, only financing types that benefit the exporter will be investigated. Receiva-
ble financing is the most commonly used approach for exporters to receive financing based 
on invoices that will be paid upon maturity by the importer. Within short-term  receivable 
trade financing, one financing type dominates the receivable financing marketplace:  factor-
ing.  
 
2.1.1 Factoring  
Factoring allows exporters to fund their orders by selling their invoices to a financial institution 
at a discounted rate. When the exporter initially sells their invoice,  they will receive financing 
for 80 % of the total invoice amount. The remaining 20% will first be paid when the loan has 
reached its maturity and the importer has repaid the financial institution. The financial insti-
tution will charge a fee for this service, that will be deducted when the final payment to the 
importer is made. For financially healthy companies in developed countries, the discounting 
rate will usually amount to 2-6 % of the total invoicing value. Factoring causes an unusual 
dynamic, as the financial institutions purchasing the invoice are far less concerned with the 
credit worthiness of the exporters than the importer, as the importer will be making the final 
payment on the maturity of the invoice (Love, 2013). There are many types of factoring ap-
proaches, combinations and specific terms issued by each individual financial institution, how-
ever in figure 11 below portrays a typical factoring process.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
21 
 
 
 
Figure 11 displays the typical mechanics of the factoring process, and how the stakeholders 
interact with each other. However, there are many variations of factoring that involve both 
changing liability terms and introducing more stakeholders. These variations will either de-
crease or increase the risk for each of the stakeholders and thus change the interest rate that 
financial institutions can offer the exporter when acquiring the invoice (Love, 2013). 
 
Non-recourse factoring vs. recourse factoring 
In non-recourse factoring, the financial institution will accept risk associated with the importer 
not paying the invoice at maturity, since they will not be able to hold the exporter accountable 
for non-payment. Recourse factoring allows the financial institution to move this risk to the 
exporter, as the exporter will guarantee payment after a specified due date, if the importer is 
unable to or decides not to pay (Love, 2013). 
 
2.1.2 Importer payment Guarantees  
Factoring and forfeiting can only be sustained if financial institutions are repaid at the invoice’s 
maturity as this will cause the exporter to lose its trustworthiness toward the financial insti-
tution, while the financial institution will go bankrupt over time. The exporter’s financial insti-
tutions will therefore often require the importer to obtain a bank guarantee, that obligates a 
Exporter 
Importer 
Exporters Bank 
1)Sells goods and raises invoices 
2) Sells invoice 
3) Pays 80 % of invoice 
4) Pays remaining 20 % 
5) Pays invoice 
Figure 11 
==PAGE:28==
 
22 
 
financial institution to repay the exporter in the event of a non-payment by the importer. 
These bank guarantees will often come in the form on letters-of-credit (LCs) that establish a 
formal and legally binding agreement between the importer and its financial institution (Love, 
2013).  
 
An LC is a document from a financial institution that guarantees that payment from a buyer 
will be received on time and in the correct amount. If the importer is unable to pay for the 
purchased goods, the importer’s financial institutions will be required to cover the full or re-
maining amount of the purchase. In return for guaranteeing this payment, the financial insti-
tution will require that strict terms are met by the exporter with respect to requiring docu-
mentation in the form of commercial invoice. A financial institution will typically take a per-
centage of total value of the LC as a fee for this service (Love, 2013).   
 
Confirmed vs. unconfirmed Letter-of-Credit 
A confirmed LC is a type of LC that has a redundant guarantee obtained by the importer in 
addition to the first LC (unconfirmed LC). A confirmed LC is typically used when the importer’s 
financial institution has questionable creditworthiness and the exporter wants to obtain a sec-
ond guarantee to ensure payment. If the importer's financial institution does not follow 
through with their engagement, the second financial institution must pay the exporter for 
their goods, thus decreasing the risk of non-payment. An LC can be confirmed redundantly as 
many times required by the importer’s financial institution (Love, 2013).  
 
Acceptance credit (confirmed vs. unconfirmed) Letter-of-Credit 
An acceptance is an LC that instructs the importer’s financial institution to make the payment 
to the seller if all terms from the LC are met. This type of LC can be further broken down into 
two categories: confirmed and unconfirmed. A confirmed acceptance LC will ensure that the 
exporter will be paid, even if issues such as non-delivery or confiscation by customs authorities 
occur (Love, 2013). Practically, this means that the issuing bank will release the funds to the 
exporter as soon as the exporter places the products in the hands of the shipping company. 
In an unconfirmed acceptance LC, the exporter will hold all the risks, as the funds will first be 
released when the bank receives delivery confirmation.  
==PAGE:29==
 
23 
 
 
Factoring and forfeiting can be combined with or without bank guarantees in many different 
ways to form different types of trade loans. The ways you combine them will determine if the 
importer, importer’s financial institution, exporter or exporter’s financial institution will hold 
the largest risks. Below, all trade loan configuration that can be generated based on the above 
mentioned financing types and bank guarantees will be investigated.  
 
2.1.3 Risk Assessment 
As in any financial process, there are risks involved when dealing with global trade finance. 
These risks generally revolve around the creditworthiness of any of the stakeholders,  as if one 
company defaults on its obligations, one or more parties could lose their whole investment. 
This type of risk is often referred to as ‘risk of non-payment’ as it either refers to one of the 
stakeholders not being able to pay or to deliver the promised goods. Below, some common 
examples that can cause ‘non-payment’ are listed: 
 
 
Over or under invoicing to misrepresent the goods 
 
Multiple invoicing of goods and services  
 
Falsely described goods  
 
Short or over shipping to misrepresent the quantity of goods 
 
Phantom shipping: all documentation is completely falsified and there is no shipment 
(Ozeroglu, 2015) 
 
It is clear that these risks directly affect the exporter’s financial institution as they are buying 
invoices that do not correspond to the real-life transaction. Furthermore, it is clear that it will 
also affect the importer directly, as they are receiving orders that are not complete or do not 
live up to the promised quality standards. However, how will this affect the exporter? or the 
importer’s bank? Below, four scenarios have been created that portray the dynamic of the 
stakeholders and consequences of non-payment.  
 
Scenario 1: Importer defaults on obligations 
==PAGE:30==
 
24 
 
If the importer does not repay the exporter’s bank, the exporter and the exporter’s bank will 
initially have lost 20% and 80% respectively of the face value of the invoice. However, if there 
is a bank guarantee in place, the importer's bank will be obligated to repay the exporter’s bank 
in full. Thus, the importer's bank will finally lose the total face value of the invoice. 
 
Scenario 2: Exporter defaults on obligations 
If the exporter does not deliver the promised goods or deliver them in the promised quality, 
the importer will not pay the invoice that the exporter has sent. Initially, this means that the 
exporter’s bank has lost 80% of the face value of the invoice. However, if the factoring has 
been done with recourse, the exporter is obligated to repay 80% of the face value of the in-
voice to the exporter’s bank. Thus, the exporter will finally lose the total face value of the 
invoice. 
 
Scenario 3: Exporter’s financial institution defaults on obligations 
Consider that the exporter has sent the goods to the importer and the importer has paid the 
invoice to the exporter’s bank. If the exporter’s bank does not repay the last 20% of the in-
voice’s face value, the exporter will end up losing them. 
 
Scenario 4: Importer’s financial institution defaults on obligations 
Consider that the exporter has sent the goods to the importer and the importer has not paid 
the invoice to the exporter’s bank. If a bank guarantee is in place, the importer’s bank will be 
obligated to repay the exporter, however if he does not do this, the exporter and the ex-
porter’s bank will lose 20% and 80% respectively, of the face value of the invoice. 
 
From these four scenarios, it is clear that even one stakeholder defaulting on their payment 
obligations, will result in a monetary loss for one or more of the other stakeholders. It is there-
fore fundamental that trust is established in this environment, as monetary losses in many 
cases will be out of each stakeholder’s own control. Furthermore, these scenarios portray the 
strength of factoring and bank guarantees, since, if configured correctly, it can safeguard 
against losses. Specifically, financial institutions need to balance a portfolio of loan configura-
tions that minimize risks and maximize payouts, whereas exporters and importers need to 
==PAGE:31==
 
25 
 
weigh off the risks associated with taking the loan and the benefits associated with increased 
cash flow and liquidity. Below, all possible combination of factoring and bank guarantees will 
be investigated with respect to increasing or decreasing the ‘non-payment’ risk for each of the 
four stakeholders. To initiate this process, all combinations  that can be constructed based on 
the factoring and bank guarantees will be determined in figure 12 below: 
  
Non-recourse 
Recourse 
80 % Factoring 
Non-recourse + 
Confirmed LC 
Non-recourse + 
Unconfirmed LC 
Recourse + 
Confirmed LC 
Recourse +  
Unconfirmed LC 
Non-recourse + Confirmed LC + 
Acceptance (confirmed) LC 
Non-recourse + Confirmed LC + Ac-
ceptance (unconfirmed) LC 
Non-recourse + Unconfirmed LC + 
Acceptance (confirmed) LC 
Non-recourse + Unconfirmed LC + 
Acceptance (unconfirmed) LC 
Recourse + Confirmed LC +  
Acceptance (confirmed) LC 
Recourse + Confirmed LC +  
Acceptance (unconfirmed) LC 
Recourse + Unconfirmed LC + 
Acceptance (unconfirmed) LC 
Recourse + Unconfirmed LC + 
Acceptance (confirmed) LC 
Figure 12 
==PAGE:32==
 
26 
 
As there are two types of factoring (recourse and non-recourse) and four types of bank guar-
antees (confirmed, unconfirmed, acceptance (confirmed), acceptance (unconfirmed), there 
will be generated eight different loan configurations. As mentioned earlier, picking the right 
combination is essential for the importer, exporter and their respective financial institutions 
as it can reduce the cost and/or the risk of the loan. As this project focuses on improving the 
trade financing process for the exporter, these combinations will be assessed through an An-
alytical Hierarchical Process (AHP) analysis to determine which combination reduces the risk 
of non-payment for the exporter, while minimizing the cost of the loan. Practically, the AHP 
analysis was initiated by defining risk and a cost value for each of the aforementioned factor-
ing and bank guarantee types. In table 2 below, these values can be seen on a scale from 1 to 
5, where 5 is most desirable due to the maximizing nature of the AHP analysis; for each stake-
holder, one risk value will be determined as risk dynamics change with the type of loan con-
figuration. For the importer and exporter, one cost value will be determined, as costs associ-
ated with obtaining the factoring loan will be incurred by the exporter, whereas costs associ-
ated with bank guarantees are incurred by the importer to their respective banks. 
 
Types 
Exporter 
Risk 
Price Ex-
porter 
Exporter 
Bank Risk 
Importer 
Bank Risk 
Importer 
Risk 
Importer 
Price 
Recourse  
1 
1 
5 
3 
3 
3 
Non-re-
course 
5 
5 
1 
3 
3 
3 
Confirmed 
LC 
5 
1 
5 
3 
3 
1 
Uncon-
firmed LC 
2 
4 
1 
3 
2 
3 
 
In table 2, the risks and cost values were shown for each of the 6 types, however each of the 
8 combinations consist of at least three types, thus the sum of all choices related to the com-
bination will define the desirableness of the respective combination.  As the goal of the AHP 
analysis was to minimize the risk and the costs for the exporter, the following weights were 
applied with a consistency ratio of 9%: Exporter’s risk (45%), Exporter’s price (25 %), Exporter’s 
bank’s risk (14%), Importer’s bank’s risk (7,9%), Importer’s risk (4,2%) and Import price (2,6%). 
These criteria will be prioritized in the above mentioned order as the goal will, firstly be to 
minimize the risk and costs for the exporter to balance the current marketplace dynamics, 
==PAGE:33==
 
27 
 
then minimize the risks of the financial institutions (first the exporters and then importers) to 
maintain affordable interest rate, and lastly, the risk and costs of the importer, as their posi-
tion in the market is currently strong. See the result of the AHP analysis below in figure 13 and 
the full calculation in appendix 1. 
 
 
As can be seen in table xx above, combination C1 showed the highest result and thus it is the 
combination that reduces the risk of non-payment for the exporter the most, while also re-
ducing the pricing. This is natural, as both these configurations include non-recourse factoring 
that moves the risk of non-payment from the exporter to its bank. Furthermore it includes 
both a confirmed LC that introduces a redundant bank to the transaction and acceptance (con-
firmed LC), that moves the risks associated with confiscation  and non-delivery to the im-
porter’s bank. On the other hand, looking at the lowest scoring combination - C8 - all the 
aforementioned choices have been reversed, thus the exporter will be liable for non-payment, 
non-delivery and confiscation of the goods. Financial Institutions will typically offer all loan 
configurations mentioned above based on their own risks assessment viewed at in the next 
section.  
 
2.1.3 Onboarding processs 
Before an exporter or an importer can receive any type of trade financing or bank guarantee, 
they must be onboarded as a client at the financial institution. The onboarding process differs 
substantially from institution to institution as each applies their own internal risk assessment 
Figure 13 
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
Final scores
Final scores
==PAGE:34==
 
28 
 
procedures to determine eligibility of a new client. These procedures will often include steps 
to gather information about the company’s finances with respect to prior tax returns, prior 
annual reports and other transactional data that can verify the current financial position of 
the bank. Furthermore, information regarding the company’s structure, identification of key 
people, suppliers and investors, will be necessary to ensure the identity/authenticity of the 
applicant and their finances. This data will be provided by the applicant themselves, therefore 
must be reviewed and compared to financial data that can be obtained from various online 
database and government archives. In the end, this information will be reviewed by the finan-
cial institution to determine if the provided documentation will be adequate to allow the com-
pany a trade loan, bank guarantee, etc.  
 
To determine a realistic overview of the onboarding process, quotes from Andrew Jesse and 
Michael Belspiel will be used as the basis of the description. Both Andrew and Michael worked 
within the banking industry before joining Tradeshift and therefore will be able to share in-
sights that cannot be found online (Ozeroglu, 2015).  
 
Collecting data 
The onboarding process is initiated by the collection of data. This data will help the bank assess 
the values of the applicant as well as financial risks involved with non-payment and the com-
pany’s geographical location. The information that is required from each financial institution 
will naturally differ, however often includes the following: 
 
“There is an onboarding process for an exporter becoming a client of a bank, which includes 
3-5 years of audited financials, articles of incorporation, ID of key people in the company (de-
pending on size) and a supplier list; there are also product specific requirements, where you 
will need certain software integrations to set up a receivables financing facility.” ….Michael 
Bespield . 2019 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
29 
 
This quote indicates the sheer mass of the documentation that needs to be provided, when a 
new applicant wants to become eligible for a trade loan. For many SMEs and companies within 
emerging and developing countries, even 3-5 years of audited financials can be hard or im-
possible to come up with, as their financial systems or physical archiving is not up-to-date. 
Especially, ‘ID of key people’ and ‘Supplier list’ are becoming increasingly important as finan-
cial institutions must comply with regulatory compliance measures with respect to KYC (Know-
Your-Customer) and AML (Anti-Money-Laundry). These regulations require financial institu-
tions to verify the identity of their clients, their business associates, their transactions, and if 
there is a potential of illegal intent towards its business relationships. To conform to these 
rules, Michael emphasizes that product specific requirements are also necessary to onboard 
customers. ‘Product specific requirements’ refers to the software and data quality require-
ments that banks impose for an applicant to become eligible for a trade-loan and thus be 
allowed to use their platform. Product specific requirements will often result in many paper-
based companies as well as companies without complex financial-control software not being 
able to adhere to these requirements and thus not able to obtain a loan. 
 
Verify data 
As the aforementioned data is usually provided by the applicants themselves, the data must 
be validated and matched through industry specific databases and/or governmental archives 
that include historical records of the company’s financial obligations, starting date, etc. Again, 
these databases and the type of information that can be obtained by the banks will also differ: 
There are enormous costs associated with kyc, aml and checking sanction lists when onboard-
ing businesses - so it is a very heavy process. They are checking different data sources and 
running according to their own internal compliance and risk processes, which are laborious 
and are costly for them internally. I definitely see huge opportunity for aggregation; aggrega-
tion of these different data sources to drive savings for whoever is purchasing or involved in 
financing these transactions “.....Andrew jesse xx, 2019 
 
Andreemphasizes the necessity of complying with the kyc/aml regulations and the laborious 
work that it entails. He indicates that applicants must be run through and cross-referenced in 
==PAGE:36==
 
30 
 
various industry specific databases. These databases operate similarly to the danish ‘rki’ (ex-
perian owned) database, where loan agencies, e-commerce etc, can pay a fee to verify the 
current credit score of their customer. Although, instead of customers, banks and other finan-
cial institutions can check the credit score of companies, if they have historically complied with 
kyc and aml, if they are working with other business that are known for illegitimate transac-
tions, current investment and much more. With regards to this, andrew also emphasizes that 
these data sources are highly disaggregated, in the sense that the financial institution would 
need access to multiple data sources in order to obtain a comprehensive overview of the ap-
plicant’s risk profile. Lastly, it is implied that this disaggregation drives high costs as both -  
licenses for the databases are expensive, as well as the fact that there is  redundant time spent 
searching each database individually.   
 
Reviewing data 
When the collection and verification process are finished, the information must be reviewed 
by the financial institution to finally determine if the applicant is eligible for  trade financing. 
The result of this review however, will not necessarily result in a ‘yes or ’no’ decision, as finan-
cial institutions can offer more expensive loans to higher risk customers (developing countries, 
startups etc.). More expensive loans are either introduced directly through the financial insti-
tution offering loans with a higher interest rate or indirectly where the financial institution will 
offer the trade loan configuration from section xx (risks) that reduces their risks the most. 
Below an example is presented that displays this well: 
 
“Companies like Pepsico and Frito Lay do a lot of sourcing, in particular India from small one 
acre potato farm in rural india. The bank it used to work for - Standard Chartered Bank - had 
a big Indian presence, and the idea was to deal solely with buyer risk - Pepsi risk is a good risk, 
and aggregated to all these suppliers (red. potato farmers), we should be able to finance them 
based on Pepsi risk. Based on Pepsi risk, this could be financed at a 3% interest rate, which is 
a great rate for a small Indian farmer who usually will pay around 10% interest on trade loans” 
- ….Michael Belspiel, xx, 2019 
 
From this quote, it is clear that trade loans offered to bigger companies will have a substan-
tially lower interest rate than those offered to small companies. Furthermore, it emphasizes 
==PAGE:37==
 
31 
 
the impact that the risk assessment will have on the conditions of the loan; the money is being 
loaned to fund the same order, however based on two different risk profiles, which will cause 
the interest rate to differ by 7 %. Considering the differences in interest rate, it is again clear 
that utilizing the importer’s creditworthiness can allow small exporters, who would not oth-
erwise have had access to trade financing, to have access at at an affordable interest rate. 
However, at the same time, this also demands that the exporters limit their collaboration to 
importers with a healthy financial position, which for many under developed countries and/or 
start-up networks, will not be the case. 
 
2.1.4 Tradeshift Approach 
In the section above, the procurement and trade finance process was described and investi-
gated from a theoretical perspective to understand the underlying principles of various loan 
schemes that are found in the current marketplace. Practically, these loans are obtained 
through various finance specific platforms such as WeTrade, that offers trade-loans through a 
common investment pool shared by a network of nine large banks (incl. Nordea) or through 
full-suite Procure-to-Pay platforms such as Tradeshift, that allow users access to both trade 
financing as well as procurement specific services such as digitizing invoices, processing pay-
ments, tracking financial data and standardization of sourcing. As this report encompasses 
both procurement and trade finance, Tradeshift’s current approach will be used to determine 
the current best practice within this field. Furthermore, Tradeshift’s platform architecture and 
capabilities will be used to determine what processes and/or technologies are being used cur-
rently and which ones can be copied or used directly in the final solution (Tradeshift, 2019).  
 
In the previous many sections, the procurement, trade financing and on-boarding process was 
described in detail to give an understanding of the underlying principles of a platform like 
Tradeshift. When going through these processes, the focus was to explain what mechanism 
generates inputs, outputs and risks, as this information will be needed for the final solution. 
However, on a platform like Tradeshift, many of these mechanisms are seamlessly integrated 
into the platform as procurement and financing systems can communicate in real-time.  To 
understand to what extent these three processes are currently  automated and standardized, 
==PAGE:38==
 
32 
 
the whole standardized process described prior to this point ill be compared to the process 
that Tradeshift undertakes to deliver its services. 
 
Within the requisition process, Tradeshift’s platform enables companies and employees to set 
up internal ‘shops’ that hold an approved supplier list and approved pricing. In these ‘shops’, 
the employees in charge of procurement can request items by selecting the quantity and qual-
ity required. Furthermore, the platform will allow companies to define automated approval 
hierarchies, that will send notifications to appropriate manager(s) through the platform. Ena-
bling these internal ‘shops’ will allow companies to reduce or remove internal requisitions 
systems as all necessary functions can be done through Tradeshift’s platform.  
 
Within sourcing, Tradeshift applies the two sourcing approaches described in section xx 
(sourcing). Similar to the importer’s internal ‘shops’, they allow exporters to create their own 
shops. In these shops, exporters can upload attributes such as descriptions, quality measures, 
dimensions, pricing, EOS discounts, and delivery information for each of their products. The 
importer can thereafter select a product directly from a specific supplier ‘shop’, or enter the 
so called ‘marketplace’, where you can filter between aforementioned attributes as well as 
search for specific components. This type of sourcing will enable flexibility within the supplier 
selection, as each exporter does not have to be contacted for a price quote. However, the 
external ‘shops’ and ‘marketplaces’ are only appropriate for standard components and thus 
Tradeshift also offers standardized RFP solutions. Here, importers can create RFPs that indi-
cate the requirements with regards to aforementioned attributes as well as awarding criteria. 
Tradeshift will allow importers using both sourcing strategies to benchmark these prices 
against a similar product; for cataloging, the importer is able to compare components from 
exporter’s ‘shops’ to thousands of similar products in the ‘marketplace’, whereas for RFPs, 
Tradeshift will store anonymized historical pricing data that can be used to benchmark the 
incoming proposals.  
 
When the proposal has been granted or the component from the catalog has been picked, the 
Tradeshift platform allows the importer to generate the Purchase Order automatically and 
send it to the exporter directly through the platform. The exporter will then be able to view 
==PAGE:39==
 
33 
 
this PO in real-time and further return the Order Confirmation to the importer through few 
clicks. From this point, the Advanced Shipping Notice and Goods Received Receipt will be gen-
erated based on real-life inputs from the importer and exporter. As the purchase order and 
order confirmation also are digital, all four documents can now be matched to generate the 
invoice. Within the Goods Received Receipt, the importer will specify if any goods were dam-
aged, broken or wrongly shipped and this will automatically be deducted from the invoice 
after agreement between the exporter and importer. 
 
The financing process differs substantially as Tradeshift currently only offers ‘payable buyer 
financing’ whereas in this report ‘receivable seller financing’ was investigated. The difference 
here is that the partnership banks will pay the invoice immediately and allow the importer the 
maturity period to repay, thus making the importer the beneficiary of the loan without collat-
eral (similar to open-account financing). Whereas, in ‘receivable seller financing’ the invoices 
are commoditized to the extent that they can be viewed as monetary assets by the exporter’s 
bank - thus the exporter will be the beneficiary of the loan with the invoices as collateral.  
 
The reason Tradeshift is able to offer collateral-free loans to their buyers, is due to the fact 
that only companies that are a part of the C5000 (the 5000 biggest companies) will be eligible 
to become buyers on the platform. Furthermore, as mentioned by Michael in section 3 (re-
viewing - onboarding), “Pepsi risk is good risk”, which portrays how large companies will have 
easier access to trade loans at better interest rates. Limiting ‘buyers’ and thus financing access 
to C5000 companies, will allow Tradeshift to reduce, or in some cases even eliminate, the 
onboarding process. As of date, Tradeshift has not implemented a full end-to-end blockchain 
solution. They have, however, created different functionalities that rely on blockchain tech-
nology to increase safety and enable network trust (Tradeshift, 2019; Jesse, A. and Belspiel, 
M, appendix 2).  
 
2.3 What is blockchain? 
==PAGE:40==
 
34 
 
After understanding both the procurement and trade financing process, it is important to in-
vestigate what capabilities and applications of blockchain technology can be utilized to rede-
sign and improve these processes. The term ‘blockchain’ was coined in 2008, with the intro-
duction of the cryptocurrency ‘Bitcoin’ and its subsequent decentralized network structure. 
The Bitcoin network was defined as a “history of transactions recorded on a distributed 
ledger”, which refers to the architecture of a blockchain system, where all transactions occur-
ring within the network will be saved on a distributed ledger. In practice, this means all par-
ticipants of the network will be able to store and view any transaction that has occurred on 
the network locally. However, since the introduction of ‘Bitcoin’, blockchain technology has 
grown substantially through innovative applications and business models that increase net-
work safety, transparency and processing speed, while reducing the need for centralized au-
thorities/mediators (Weber, 2018). To understand the utility of blockchain, the main capabil-
ities of the technology will be described below. 
 
2.3.1 Decentralized 
When Bitcoin was introduced in 2008, the major difference between this network and typical 
networks, was the decentralization of the central authority. Typical networks will have central 
authority in the form of a system administrator or mediator, who will decide the rules, the 
costs, and who can participate in the network. A common example of this could be ebay, who 
owns and runs their website centrally and thus their network. Here they will allow specific 
participants to buy and sell their goods between each other and facilitate payment process, 
while taking a substantially fee for this service. In decentralized networks, the disks storage, 
processing power and network bandwidth is shared by participants offering their device’s 
computing power. This will reduce the need for large stakeholders to bear the costs associated 
with data storage and processing network transactions. Furthermore, in this type of network, 
the centralized authority will be distributed between the network participants through inno-
vative consensus protocols that specify a set of rules regarding who can validate the transac-
tions that occur on the network for a monetary reward (cryptocurrency) (Waldo, 2019).  
  
These consensus protocols are fundamental drivers in removing transactional middlemen 
such as ebay, Amazon etc., as it instead allows network participants the ability to validate 
==PAGE:41==
 
35 
 
transactions for a small monetary reward. Furthermore, these protocols also portray contrasts 
between blockchain network architecture as different protocols will allow for different net-
work dynamics and real-life implication. For example, a proof-of-work based blockchain such 
as Bitcoin will use substantially more electricity than a proof-of-stake based blockchain such 
as NEO; as in the Bitcoin blockchain, multiple ‘miners’ will be competing to validate the same 
transactions thus using computing power redundantly, whereas in the NEO blockchain only 
one ‘miner’ will be elected to validate the transaction. 
 
Within blockchain technology, decentralized also refers to the way data is stored within the 
network. In typical cloud based networks, the data will be stored on a single server in a single 
location. This type of storage increases the risks involved regarding cyber attacks and data 
losses, and if this server is affected, the whole network’s data will be affected. In blockchain 
networks however, all participants will store the network’s data redundantly on their own 
devices. This mitigates the aforementioned risks, and if one device is affected, the same data 
will be stored on thousands of other devices. Below, see this graphically represented in figure 
14. 
 
 
 
 
 
As can be seen in figure 14 above, decentralized storage involves more components than cen-
tralized. Practically, this will cause an increase in costs associated with servers and electricity, 
as data will be stored redundantly, hundreds, thousands or millions of times. This can be a 
major barrier for large businesses and/or networks, as it will reduce the data storage efficiency 
in respect to monetary costs. However, storing data redundantly will increase the validity and 
trustworthiness of the data, as the redundant copies can be compared to each other continu-
ally (waldo, 2019) . 
Decentralized 
Centralized 
Figure 14 
==PAGE:42==
 
36 
 
 
2.3.2 Immutable 
‘Blockchain’ is composed of the words ‘block’ and ‘chain’, which portrays the fundamental 
network architecture of the blockchain system; a chain of blocks. Each of these blocks contain 
network information or transactional data depending on the type of blockchain and its utility. 
For example, in the Bitcoin network, the data contained in the block is in the form of transac-
tions (amount, receiver and sender). Whereas, a blockchain geared towards supply chains 
would merely contain informational transactions (Weber, 2018). Other than the data men-
tioned above, each block will include a ‘hash’. This hash can be viewed as the block’s finger-
print as it is unique and mathematically linked to all the data within the block. Therefore, if 
you change any data inside this block, the hash code will change as well. Each block will also 
contain the hash of the previous block, which is what creates the chain between the blocks 
and fundamentally increases the security of the network (Weber, 2018). As seen in figure 14 
xx below: 
 
2.3.3 Transparency 
Blockchain networks are built to allow for full transparency and auditability between partici-
pants in the network. In the Bitcoin network, this transparency stems from the fact that the 
holdings and transactions of every participant are visible to anybody in the network (or the 
world). To make this possible, each participant will have both a private and a public key; the 
private key is used as a signature to send and validate the ownership of your funds, whereas 
the public key is used as a sending address. These keys are mathematically linked, and one can 
therefore find the amount of funds in someone’s account based on their public key (Weber, 
2018). An example of this transparency can be found through -  https://bitref.com/ - where 
you can search for any public key to see the exact amount of Bitcoins in the person’s wallet or 
https://www.blockchain.com/explorer - where you can search for any hash code to see what 
transactions are included in that block. Note: If you want to try ‘Bitref’ use the following public 
key: 35hK24tcLEWcgNA4JxpvbkNkoAcDGqQPsP or your own- 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
37 
 
2.3.4. Applications  
The applications of this technology stem from the three aforementioned drivers; decentrali-
zation, immutability and transparency. Individually and combined, these drivers allow for 
many benefits, and showcase the advantages of using blockchain technology. In figure xx, the 
applications are linked to the capabilities to understand what part of the underlying network 
architecture is responsible for which benefits.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decentralizing and distributing the authority throughout the whole network, will reduce the 
necessity of fee-heavy middlemen. In many cases middlemen such as ebay will take a 20 % fee 
to solely facilitate, process and validate the transactions. However, in blockchain systems 
where cryptographic logic and powerful consensus protocols are in place, these transactions 
can be validated through the network at a minimum fee that is distributed to the validators 
(miners, etc.) (Waldo, 2019). In general, removing the centralized middlemen will both in-
crease the speed of the transactions and reduce the intermediary fees, as fewer hands will be 
involved in the transactions. However, this is only possible if a cryptocurrency is used within 
Removal of 
Middlemen 
Reduction in 
intermediary 
f
Reduce pro-
cessing time 
Trust without 
authority 
Ownership of 
assets 
Decentrali-
zed 
Cryptocur-
rency 
Smart cont-
racts 
Remove 
double 
Immutable 
Transparent 
Figure 15 
==PAGE:44==
 
38 
 
the system. A cryptocurrency is a digital currency and/or assets, that in many blockchains rep-
resents a monetary value. Cryptocurrencies live on the blockchain, and are therefore designed 
to enable both real-time transactions as well as processing expenses that nearly reach 0 
%.  Furthermore, the three aforementioned capabilities can also be utilized to instill trust be-
tween the participants to an extent that informational assets such as deeds or monetary as-
sets such as cryptocurrencies can be held on the blockchain with confidence in their authen-
ticity (Waldo, 2019). This can further be utilized to ensure that assets are not transferred or 
spent more than once. See the this problem graphically represented below in figure 16: 
 
 
 
As can be seen in figure 16 it is clear that double spending can be a problem as the same assets 
can be sold or transferred multiple times. In blockchain systems however, the transfer of as-
sets needs to be confirmed through the consensus protocol. As seen in figure xx2, the block-
chain will not allow two identical assets to be sold twice as only one will be validated. To de-
termine which transaction that should be executed, the network will prioritize the transaction 
that occurred first. Nevertheless, in some cases the transaction will occur simultaneously and 
here the transaction with the majority of confirmations, will be prioritized and executed in-
stead (Waldo, 2019).  
 
 
Buyer 
Seller B 
Waits for 
comfirmation 
Waits for 
comfirmation 
Accepted 
Rejected 
Figure 16 
==PAGE:45==
 
39 
 
Combining cryptocurrencies with a decentralized authority structure of blockchain, has al-
lowed for a new type of digital contract to be introduced - Smart Contracts. Smart-contracts 
are self-executing contracts that specify conditions that must be met by the involved partici-
pants to be executed. As they are self-executing, the contract is digital and has a standardized 
format, and the conditions to be met are coded into the contract (Waldo, 2019). mart-con-
tracts can both be configured to release monetary assets (cryptocurrencies) and informational 
assets (deeds, doctor results, etc.) on execution, and can thus be used for a variety of auto-
mation within administrative operations and contractual agreements. For large companies, 
smart contracts are a primary driver of implementing blockchain, as the amount of time saved 
will quickly be realized on the company's bottomline (Waldo, 2019). 
 
It must be understood, that what was described above refers to public blockchain such as the 
Bitcoin and NEO networks where anyone can join and participate in the core activities. These 
blockchains will allow for the maximum amount of decentralization as anyone can join, read, 
write and audit the ongoing activities on the network. However, there are also two other dis-
tinct blockchain types -  private and permissioned. Private blockchains, are, for example, IBM’s 
‘Hyperledger’(used by Maersk), where only selected participants can enter the network 
through an authentic invitation. This type of blockchain is typically used within a consortium 
of organizations since transactions will be validated centrally by the network operator instead 
of the network’s participants Hyperledger, 2019). Permissioned blockchains act as a hybrid 
between public and private, where anybody can join after verifying their identity. However, 
they are only allowed to perform specific activities within the network. Before any blockchain 
based solution can be initiated, the type of blockchain must be determined as it will determine 
the network structure of the solution.  
 
If only one single ledger is required, a blockchain based network architecture will not be nec-
essary to implement, as data and transaction validation will not be done centralized by the 
network participant, but instead by the network administrator. Cloud-based procurement 
platforms - such as Tradeshift - operate with this type of centralized network architecture, as 
they facilitate and validates both the transaction of funds and informational flow that occurs 
between the importer, exporter and their respective banks. 
==PAGE:46==
 
40 
 
In environments without a central authority will validate all transactional and informational 
flows that occur on the network. In these types of systems, the trust between participants is 
enabled through the credibility of the network administrator and its subsequent processes. 
Here the network participants will need to trust that the network administrator exclusively 
grants access to creditable importers, exporters and banks as these stakeholders will be inter-
acting within the boundaries of the platform (Hyperledger, 2019).  
 
In some ways, a private blockchain such as the IBM hyperledger (currently used by Maersk), 
resembles a centralized cloud-based network structure, as it is the network administrator who 
decides who can participate in the network. However, in contrast to centralized networks, 
instead of controlling the network and validating the transactions, the network administrator 
will merely distribute the rule of the network to incoming participants. Furthermore, in private 
blockchains, it will be the company that initiates the blockchain implementation, that will be 
the acting network administrator and thus blockchain owner (Hyperledger, 2019). 
 
In the hyperledger blockchain, four different roles are introduced - endorser peer, anchor 
peer, general peer and ordering peer; while the first three are controlled by each participating 
company, the last is controlled by Maersk. As the ordering peer is owned by Maersk, this will 
be the network administrator who is responsible for maintaining the ledger across the whole 
network by building and distributing the data blocks to the network participants. Within each 
company, the endorser peer validates the outgoing transactions, the anchor peer acts as the 
link between the company and the ordering peer, and the general peer will merely hold the 
data generated elsewhere in the blockchain. Practically, the network works in the following 
sequence: 
 
1. An employee from a participant company makes an informational transaction, such as 
indicating that the goods have been received at a specific time and location. 
2. This transaction is then broadcast as a request to the endorsement peer, who checks 
the ID of the sender and other details to validate the transaction. 
3. From this point, the endorsement peer will send a notification back to the employees 
with a rejection or approval of the request. 
==PAGE:47==
 
41 
 
4. If the transaction was approved, the employee can then broadcast the transaction to 
the ordering peer, who will include it in the block. 
5. The ordering peer will then distribute the block to the anchor peers of other network 
participants. 
6. The anchor peers will now broadcast to the general peers in their organization to en-
sure the ledger is synchronized. (Hyperledger, 2019) 
 
On a blockchain like Maersk’s, these types of transactions will occur thousands if not millions 
of times within minutes as practically each and every product shipped through the supply 
chain will leave a digital trail. Thus, processing speed is essential as this information needs to 
be updated in real-time across the network. In the Hyperledger network, the informational 
transactions are executed based on conditional smart-contracts that match the transaction 
data with the network. Permissioned blockchain works similarly to a private blockchain -- par-
ticipants only are allowed to execute some functionalities on the network. In contrast to pri-
vate blockchains however, anybody can join the blockchain, after validating their identity 
and/or other industry specific information. In regards to trade finance, this information could 
include a specific creditworthiness rating from a specific database, and/or a referral by an-
other current active importer/exporter. The entrance criteria must be established objectively 
as the fairness should drive trust within the network (Hyperledger, 2019).  
 
 
2.4 Summary of findings 
Now that all three topics have been thoroughly investigated, it is important to understand 
what elements can be used in the final solution. This section will therefore summarize all es-
sential findings that were made in the market analysis, literature review and theoretical anal-
ysis. 
 
1. In the market analysis it was shown that the African region had potentially the biggest 
growth in regards to meeting the demand for trade finance. This was shown based on 
the proportional contributions to the region’s unmet trade finance and its global ex-
port footprint -- which, compared to EMEA, APAC and NA, was 4 to 5 times higher. 
==PAGE:48==
 
42 
 
However, at the same time it found that throughout all the regions, Asia has the high-
est market value and thus even minor changes to this process could drive massive sav-
ings. Lastly it was shown that there is a clear mismatch between an SMEs financial 
position and the requirement enforced by the financials causing massive unmet trade 
finance figures globally. 
 
2. The dependency between procurement and trade finance was portrayed in both the 
literature review and the theoretical analysis. The output of the procurement process 
acts as the input to the trade financing process, and it is therefore essential to consider 
a future solution where these processes are either integrated or as a minimum, com-
patible. This same dependency was also viewed between the trade finance process 
and the financial institution’s onboarding process. However within this dependency, 
both interviewees expressed the necessity of aggregating data sources and thus need-
ing integration instead of compatibility to drive cost savings through reduce processing 
time and licensing fees. 
 
3. Through analyzing the current procurement process, it was shown that to create a sin-
gle invoice, multiple employees needed to be involved as well as solid back-end sys-
tems that create data inputs automatically. Furthermore, it was shown that documen-
tation such as Advance Shipping Notices, Purchase Orders, Purchase confirmations, 
Goods Received notifications was generated within the process and could be utilized 
to validate the real-life transactions digitally.  
 
4. Through analyzing the current trade financing process, it was clear that open-account 
financing is creating a marketplace that tends to prioritize the importer. However, at 
the same time, factoring also introduced an unusual dynamic, where the terms and 
the pricing of a trade loan could be based on the creditworthiness of the importer 
instead of the actual beneficiary - the exporter. This is highly beneficial for the ex-
porter, as this increases their access to trade-loans. 
 
5. Analyzing Tradeshift’s current process thoroughly, gave an understanding of how far 
the industry currently is and to what extent automation has been introduced in both 
==PAGE:49==
 
43 
 
the procurement and trade financing process. It further showed that Tradeshift em-
phasizes standardization of documentation such as PO, order confirmations, ASN, in-
oives, goods received notifications, etc. Specifically, matching the values (price, quan-
tity) of these documents continuously throughout the process was done to ensure the 
conformity of documentation. This standardization was also portrayed through 
Tradeshift’s RFP, cataloging, ordering and payment processes. In general, Tradeshift 
displays the power of platform technology, as services, databases and processes can 
be aggregated and integrated to the extent that will allow both importers and export-
ers to fulfill all their procurement and financing needs through a single website. 
 
6. In the final section regarding blockchain, the unusual architecture and governance of 
the blockchain network was revealed. It was shown that by decentralizing authority 
through innovative consensus protocols and monetary incentives to allow participants 
to validate the transactions, blockchain creates a seamless transparency that allows 
participants to share their cost and resources associated with powering the network. 
Furthermore, applications such as ‘removing double spending’ will allow trust to be 
enabled in an environment without authority -- and  ‘smart-contracts’ can utilize the 
power of logic to become self-executing, thus removing many manual tasks.      
 
==PAGE:50==
 
44 
 
4. Final Solutions 
 
The final solution will reflect all prior considerations made until this point. As mentioned ear-
lier in section 1, the solution will be limited to presenting a hypothetical, feasible solution, as 
it will not be possible to test or implement it. The solution will take outset in the the three 
processes introduced throughout the theoretical analysis which showed all activities that an 
end-to-end trade financing solution must include. Furthermore, as mentioned in section 3, the 
dynamics of a blockchain will change based on the type of blockchain that is chosen, thus 
multiple solutions will be presented:  
 
1. A fully permissionless blockchain solution will not be presented, as it is deemed unre-
alistic that exporters can obtain financing and importers can obtain a bank guarantee 
prior to sharing any type of financial or identifying data with the debitor. If a trade 
financing solution should be decentralized to this extent, other incentive mechanisms 
such as collateral, need to be introduced which directly contradicts the need for capi-
tal. 
 
2. A permissioned marketplace-based blockchain, where participants can buy and sell in-
voices and bank guarantees as stocks with fixed return rates: This implies replacing the 
bank’s validatory authority with network trust, security and conditional smart-con-
tracts and thus enabling a decentralized peer-to-peer marketplace. This solution will 
be based on many of the concepts from the Bitcoin blockchain-- however, incorporat-
ing informational requirements before users can enter the network.   
 
3. A private bank-based blockchain, where all funding is enabled through participating 
banks: Larger banks will act as superconductors to increase geographical reach and 
enable decentralization of data. The network will grow through utilizing the bank’s ex-
isting client network consisting of large importers with supply networks that stretch 
==PAGE:51==
 
45 
 
across the globe. This solution will be based on the network architecture of IBM Hy-
perledger. The two feasibilities are presented in a combined process map in figure 17: 
 
 
 
 
In figure 17, both the financing processes for the private and permissioned blockchain is pre-
sented. The yellow color represents the process that both solutions include, the blue boxes 
refers to activities, specifically performed in the private or the permissioned blockchain,  and 
lastly,  the green boxes represent the involved stakeholders.  
 
 
Figure 17 
==PAGE:52==
 
46 
 
4.1 Procurement 
Looking into the two process maps, the input that instigates each of the processes is the same 
- an invoice. As mentioned in section 3, there are many prior steps before the invoice is actu-
ally generated. However, as shown in section xx (tradeshift) - Tradeshift currently automates 
every process associated with procuring goods - it will be assumed that these technological 
capabilities can be moved to this solution, and thus changes need not to be considered. Fur-
thermore, digitizing an invoice can be done in multiple ways -- either by simply copying that 
data from the physical invoices to a standardized digital form or by using vision technology to 
scrape and paste the data into the form. Considering the capabilities and applications of block-
chain, this process cannot be improved through this technology and thus the inputted invoice 
will be assumed digitized when it enters the trade finance process.  
 
4.2 On-boarding and risk assessment 
Within the onboarding process, these two solutions differ substantially. This is because, in the 
private blockchains, the membership banks will directly decide who is allowed onto the chain; 
and within the permissioned blockchain, anybody can apply to become a part of the chain 
based on specific requirements. In section 3, Andrew emphasized the costs associated with 
on-boarding and that the costs were driven by disaggregate informational sources that could 
assist in checking identity, creditworthiness, know-your-customer and anti-money-laundry 
regulation. In common for these solutions, is an aggregated database containing both external 
data obtained from various global licenses and governmental databases and internal data gen-
erated from the history of the blockchain ledger. An aggregated database can be hard to im-
agine, however as introduced by Andrew, companies like Mastercard are currently working 
on it. 
 
“One probably worth checking out, MasterCard is working on a tracker trade directory right 
now, where they are aggregating around 20-25 data sources on top of their merchant data-
base of 150 billion merchants with all sorts of different lists feeding into that.” 
 
Databases like these could be uploaded directly to the blockchain, and linked to chain partici-
pants through company IDs, Invoice IDs etc. and utilized for automating risk detection and 
==PAGE:53==
 
47 
 
assessing creditworthiness. These data sources however, will often only include generalized 
data to reflects the wellbeing of the company; within a blockchain-based system, where all 
data is saved, validated and authenticated, the transactional data can also be utilized to un-
derstand payment patterns of chain participants with respect to delays and non-payment and 
thus broaden the basis of the risks analysis.  
 
Private Blockchain 
In the private blockchain, the emphasis will be on growing the blockchain network through its 
existing import clients. Practically, this will be done by utilizing the unusual dynamic that fac-
toring creates mentioned throughout the report, where the exporter can obtain a low interest 
loan based on the importer’s risks assessment. Here the membership banks will be able to 
utilize the financial knowledge that they have about their existing clients, and their subse-
quent suppliers. Below in figure 18, this onboarding approach will be shown in detail. 
  
 
 
Membership 
banks 
Importer 1 
Importer 2 
Supplier 2 
Supplier 5 
Supplier 8 
Supplier 1 
Supplier 4 
Supplier 7 
Supplier 3 
Supplier 6 
Supplier 9 
Supplier 10 
==PAGE:54==
 
48 
 
In figure 18 above, the color coding of the stakeholders indicates the risks associated with 
offering this particular stakeholder a loan based on a invoice. The first part of the chain con-
sists of the bank's existing clients - importer 1 and importer 2. For these clients, the bank will 
have general financial knowledge about their financial health as they were onboarded when 
they joined the bank as a client. More importantly, the bank also has transactional data, that 
can allow a deeper knowledge about the next part of the chain - the exporter. 
 
1. Determine how many transactions have occurred between the client and the exporter. 
2. Determine how many of these transactions have been paid in full and on time. 
3. Determine if any instance of non-delivery has occurred, and thus has money been 
withheld  by the bank. 
 
This type of knowledge will again allow the bank to make quicker and more detailed risk as-
sessment of the potential beneficiary of the loan. In this type of network, the risk assessment 
of the importer will trickle down through the tiers of the supply chain. In figure xx, it can be 
seen that the risk increases as the connection to the client importer decreases. However, look-
ing at supplier 9 in tier 3, it can be seen that the risk of this importer is reduced compared to 
suppliers 7 and 8; the reduced risk is due to the fact that connection 3 tier exporters instead 
of one single. In these types of networks, the membership banks will utilize the interlinkage 
between their clients, their suppliers, their suppliers’ suppliers, etc., to reduce the overall risk 
of the network, thus broadening their financing customer base.  
 
Other benefits of this type of structure include aggregating results of risks assessment. In the 
current marketplace, an exporter can apply for as many trade loans as they wish. Each time 
the exporter applies for a loan, the process described in section 3 is initiated.  In the private 
blockchain, banks within the chain can share their risk assessments with each other in order 
to reduce the number of redundant checks made on the same exporter. This type of aggrega-
tion will drive large savings within the onboarding process.   
 
Permissioned blockchain 
Within the permissioned blockchain, there is no central authority that can validate the credi-
bility and creditworthiness of the involved participant. Instead, other trust incentivizing 
==PAGE:55==
 
49 
 
measures must be implemented to allow trades to be conducted while minimizing the risk of 
non-payment, non-delivery, etc. The following requirements will therefore be used within the 
onboarding process: 
 
1. Exporters and importers must provide country specific information that will allow the 
company’s  registration number, owner, etc., to be matched against government da-
tabases. Optionally, companies can also upload various financial data that reflects 
their current financial position to entice potential lenders. 
2. Exporters can only join the network collectively with an importer, who currently has 
an outstanding payment to the exporter. 
3. Exporters, importers and lenders’ creditworthiness will equal the same when enter-
ing the blockchain. 
4. The upper loaning limit of the exporters will increase as they demonstrate ‘good be-
havior’ with regards to loaning patterns.  
5. When accepted to the platform, the blockchain must be hosted locally to ensure 
credibility of the blockchain ledger. 
 
Measures 1 and 2 will validate the existence of the company in the real-world, as the export-
ers, importers and lenders will never meet each other face to face through this solution. Meas-
ure 1 will allow the exporters to upload the information about themselves that they find rele-
vant for a risk assessment; the exporters can decide on the amount of documentation they 
will provide, as, in the end, it is the lender who will decide what interest rate they will offer 
for the given loan. Measure 2 will ensure that only exporters that hold valid invoices can par-
ticipate in the chain, as the validity of the invoice must be confirmed before it can be financed 
and bank guaranteed. Measure 3 will ensure fairness of the network, as all participants inde-
pendent of size, capital, country of origin, etc., will start at the same creditworthiness; instead, 
creditworthiness will be based on the transactions (loans) made on the network. Measure 4 
will ensure that trust can be established between the participants without a central authority 
as the ‘loan sizes’ and thus the benefits, depends on the behavior of the individual participant. 
Similarly, this type of rating system is used in many sharing-economy solutions such as Uber 
==PAGE:56==
 
50 
 
and Airbnb (where there is no “central authority”). However, different from these two ser-
vices, the creditworthiness will be based on objective transactional analysis instead of per-
sonal opinions. Finally, measure 5 will allow the redundancy of data to be created in the net-
work, which will consequently increase the security of the network and reliability of the in-
voice and its subsequent owner. 
 
4.3 Trade finance 
Within the final step of obtaining the trade lonas, the two solutions differ substantially, 
since  in the privave blockchain, the exporter will be guaranteed a loan when accepted to the 
platform, whereas in the permissioned blockchain, the exporter will merely be qualified for 
obtaining a loan when accepted. 
 
Private blockchain 
In the private blockchain, the membership banks have already decided to finance the invoice 
at this point, as the risk assessment was used to determine both, which loan configuration 
from section 3 and interest rate can be offered to this exporter. Loans on this blockchain will 
be facilitated through smart-contracts that follow  the logic of the loan configuration. For ex-
ample, if we take combination 1 from figure 19 below. 
 
 
 
 
In this configuration, the smart-contract will pay out 80% of the face value of the invoice as 
soon as the exporter has been approved (factoring). If the importer is unable to pay the 20%, 
the first bank will pay the importer (bank guarantee), however if this first bank is unable to 
pay the 20%, the second bank must (confirmed LC) repay the exporter (Non-recourse + Ac-
ceptance (confirmed) LC). Each loan configuration and thus each smart-contract will include a 
different logic, that must be defined before this blockchain can handle all 8 type of loans from 
section 3.  
==PAGE:57==
 
51 
 
 
Permissioned blockchain 
In the permissioned blockchain, the exporter will not be guaranteed the loan at this point, as 
the invoice will be listed on a marketplace where potential lenders can acquire the invoice. 
Before the exporter can place the invoice on the marketplace, the validity of it must be guar-
anteed; the data of the invoice must be matched to the corresponding data generated within 
the procurement process. Therefore, the exporter will be asked to upload the order confirma-
tion and the advance shipping notice and the importer will be asked to upload the purchase 
order and the goods received notification respectively. At this point, a smart-contract will be 
introduced that will execute if all four documents are uploaded and all  five documents match. 
If this is the case, the smart contract will be deployed on the blockchain and subsequently on 
the marketplace. When the information from the invoice is uploaded to the blockchain, the 
invoice and the four corresponding documents will be hashed (encrypted) onto the blockchain 
and given a unique identifiable code that is mathematically linked to the invoicing data. This 
code will ensure that the data within the invoice does not change, as it will cause the data-
block to be invalid and thus also invalidate the invoice. As mentioned in section 3, these dy-
namics can also be utilized to eliminate double spending. For example, if a participant tries to 
deploy the same invoice twice, both invoices will end up in a pool of unconfirmed transactions 
with the same hashcode - here the first invoice that is processed will be cleared for trading, 
whereas the second will fail to deploy as the data does not correspond to the rest of the block-
chain. When placing the invoice on the marketplace, the exporter can indicate any interest 
rate for any loan configuration. However, as mentioned earlier, in the end, the loaner will 
decide the price of the loan. As in the private blockchain, the loan configurations will be facil-
itated by similar smart-contracts, however the participant of the contracts will not be deter-
mined before the contract is deployed. When the requirements of loan configuration are ful-
filled, the smart-contract will be executed between the stakeholder. From this point, the 
smart-contracts will release 80% of the funds to the exporter and the remaining 20 % when 
the loan has reached its maturity. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
 
52 
 
5. Final considerations 
As blockchain incorporates many aspects, all parts of the technology could not be included in 
the final solution. These considerations will therefore reflect thoughts about how the applica-
tion of and the philosophy behind the technology can be applied to the two above mentioned 
solutions. 
 
Blockchain ownership 
In the true nature of blockchain, the ownership structure should be similar to the network 
structure - decentralized. Practically, this implies that all participants own a share in the block-
chain, and thus will also be entitled to a part of the profits. However, this type of ownership 
structure is not proposed in the private blockchain, as the membership banks combined will 
own the blockchain. Each of the membership banks will therefore also contribute evenly to 
the development, maintenance, and onboarding costs, as well as share profits generated on 
the platform. Revenue stems from interest rates as well as minimal transaction fees that cover 
costs associated with the computing power of the transactions. As the objective in the private 
blockchain is to grow organically through their importer network, eventually new ‘super con-
necter’ banks will be have to be added to increase the geographical reach of the blockchain. 
In these instances, each membership bank must sell part of their shares to ensure that own-
ership is distributed evenly amongst the member banks. 
 
In the permissioned blockchain, both a single ownership structure and a shared ownership 
structure can be introduced. However, as this blockchain consists of a marketplace, there will 
be a substantial investment associated with the development and thus a owner will initially 
be needed. As the network increases in size, the costs associated with operating the network 
will also increase with respect to computing power and electricity. Therefore, it will be neces-
sary to incentivize network participants to share their computing power through one of the 
consensus protocols mentioned in section 3. On the other hand, if you consider a completely 
decentralized ownership structure, where each participant owns a part of the blockchain and 
on-boarding costs are absorbed through network fees -- here the philosophy of the blockchain 
would be the emphasis, as each additional participant joining the network will be valued the 
==PAGE:59==
 
53 
 
same as the current members of the network. However, ownership structures like these will 
bring up many liability questions such as: who covers the cost of the development and opera-
tions  and who fixes network bugs. 
 
5.1 Cryptocurrency 
Throughout this report, cryptocurrencies have has been mentioned few times. This is unusual 
as most people connect this with blockchain. However, for a blockchain to work most effi-
ciently and in a decentralized manner, a cryptocurrency needs to be considered. As briefly 
mentioned above, enabling a consensus protocol in the permissioned blockchain will allow 
the network to share its computing power requirements across the chain; but the participants 
who offer their computing must also be rewarded in some way as this computing is related to 
monetary electricity cost. In the Bitcoin blockchain and other popular blockchains, this reward 
is facilitated by the payout of the given cryptocurrency. Thus, if the blockchain should be run 
by decentralized computing power, a reward system must be introduced that can incentivize 
participants. Considering that these are blockchain designed trade loans, one could imagine 
reducing the interest fee for a loan for the lender or exporter respectively, in exchange for the 
validation of the network’s transactions (computing power). Furthermore, cryptocurrencies 
are designed to be digital and will thus allow for transactions of funds to occur in real-time 
and with little or no fee. This makes these types of currencies very attractive as it can increase 
the speed of the global transactions. However, contrary to other ‘real’ currencies, digital cur-
rencies are typically not backed by assets in real life, such as gold, oil etc., thus resulting in 
their price instability. Furthermore, smart-contracts are designed to be compatible cryptocur-
rencies, in a way that they can automate payments and withhold funds until the conditions of 
the contracts are met. In both the private and permissioned blockchain, this type dynamic was 
proposed and thus a cryptocurrency should be considered. 
 
5.2 Decentralization of data 
Another major topic within blockchain is the decentralization of data. The main benefit of 
decentralizing data is the added security that redundancy creates. In the permissioned block-
chain, it was proposed that all incoming participants should host the full blockchain locally as 
==PAGE:60==
 
54 
 
this will ensure that the network, its transactions, and its history are all continually matched 
throughout the network. However, at the same time this redundancy drives up storage cost, 
as the blockchain’s data could be stored thousands of times. In the beginning, the size of the 
blockchain will not be an issue, as not much data will be captured.  However, if we look at the 
Bitcoin network, the current size of the blockchain is around 160 GB, which is a substantial 
amount considering this solution will be designed to on-board individuals and small-scale ex-
porters. Therefore, to what extent the network needs to decentralized can be discussed, as it 
can reduce access for smaller companies.  In the private blockchain, a similar structure to the 
hyperledger blockchain will be proposed, where each membership bank has an endorse peer, 
anchor peer and general peer, that can send and receive data blocks between each other, thus 
ensuring that only the membership banks will host and access the data.  
 
5.3 Transparency 
Transparency is not emphasized in either solution, as the sensitivity of transactional data can 
be large for many companies. In the private blockchain, it was mentioned above that data will 
only be distributed to the membership banks, and therefore will not generate visibility for the 
participants. However, in the permissioned blockchain, all data (transactions, history, etc.) can 
be accessed by any of the participants in the network. Here the emphasis will be on increasing 
the transparency between participants, in order to increase the trust between them. Further-
more, in the last few years,  GDPR regulations have been introduced and these rules stand in 
direct contrast to the transparency of the network’s transactions, however also the immutable 
historical data that can be linked to any specific company; thus these rules should also be 
considered before embarking on creating an undeletable database.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
55 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The goal of this project was to ultimately determine if the use of blockchain technology within 
trade finance could increase the access to trade finance for startups and companies within 
developing and emerging markets. Each of the solutions took a different approach to increas-
ing this access. The private blockchain emphasized building up its network and thus broaden-
ing its customer base to emerging markets through their existing importers’ supplier network. 
Initially, when the blockchain is deployed this blockchain might not target the customer base 
it was intended for; however, as the network grows and the inter-financial connection be-
tween the membership banks, their clients, their suppliers, etc., becomes stronger, it will en-
able the membership banks to onboard clients further downstream in the supply chain. The 
private blockchain should be seen as a long-term solution as the value of the network lies 
within the participant interactions reducing the overall network risk. To accelerate the process 
of reaching exporters within emerging markets, ‘superconductor’ banks that lie within regions 
such as Africa and South-East Asia can be introduced. Furthermore, aggregating the risks and 
the creditworthiness result between the membership banks through the data sharing and 
storing capabilities of blockchain, will allow for a substantial reduction in the costs associated 
with onboarding new clients. Lastly, mundane and manual tasks will be exchanged by condi-
tional digital smart-contracts that execute when their logic is triggered. 
 
In the permissioned blockchain, any exporter that is able to upload the limited required doc-
umentation is eligible to enter the network. In this instance however, the eligibility of the ex-
porter will not guarantee a trade loan as the marketplace approach will be impacted by the 
dynamics of supply and demand; this could cause a similar dynamic as described in section 1 
, where exporters from specific parts of the world will not be offered any loans or only offered 
loans with extremely high interest rates. However, as the lenders will consist of both institu-
tional investors and individuals, atypical and in some cases subjective risk analysis can form 
the basis for trade loans offered to startups and companies within emerging markets; here 
one could almost imanage situations where a high school student in Denmark could be funding 
a weekly shipment of milk from Egypt to Sudan with his/her pocket money. Furthermore, 
==PAGE:62==
 
56 
 
through an onboarding process that is based on the four trust incentivizing measures, an in-
voice authentication process that matches the data from five documents, a unique hashcode 
that is mathematically linked to the data of the invoice and the aforementioned conditional 
smart-contracts, it is shown that trust can be established between participants in an environ-
ment that has no central authority.  
 
Through both solutions, it was shown that by utilizing the capabilities, philosophy,  and appli-
cations of blockchain technology such as smart-contracts, database aggregation, aggregated 
risk assessments, decentralization of data, network objectivity and digital currencies, the 
onboarding and trade financing process could be automated and simplified to an extent that 
can drive large savings within the process.  
 
In conclusion, it was proven that a peer-to-peer marketplace, institutional investors and indi-
viduals can act as debtors for startups and exporters in emerging markets on a transactional 
level instead of a program level can occur through the applications of a permissioned block-
chain.  
 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
57 
 
7. Biblography 
Barovick, R. (2007) The new Trade Finance Supply Chain Links Money, Technology, and More 
Middle-Market Players. World Trade, vol 20 (9) 
 
Boguchaskov, A., Pokamestov, I., Adamova, K. and Tropina, Zh. (2018) Adoption of blockchain 
technology in trade finance process. Journal of Reviews on Global Economics, vol 7 
 
DiCaprio, A and Yao, Y (2017) Drivers of Trade Finance gaps 
 
Hyperledger. 2019 (Online) The hyperledger greenhouse. Available at:    
https://www.hyperledger.org/ [Accessed: 14.06.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019a (Online) Invoice. Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/invoice.asp [Accessed: 12.04.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019b (Online) Factors. Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/factor.asp [Accessed: 22.04.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019c (Online) Bank Guarantee. Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/bankguarantee.asp [Accessed: 03.04.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019 (Online) Accounts Receivable. Available at:   
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/a/accountsreceivable.asp [Accessed: 13.04.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019 (Online) Trade Finance. Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/t/tradefinance.asp [Accessed: 25.03.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019 (Online) Maturity Date. Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/m/maturitydate.asp [Accessed: 28.04.2019] 
 
Investopedia, 2019 (Online) Credit Worthiness. Available at:  
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/credit-worthiness.asp [Accessed: 23.04.2019] 
 
Korpela, K. et al. (2017) Digital supply chain transformation towards blockchain integration. 
Hawiuu.edu 
 
Love, I. (2013) Role of Trade Finance. Evidence and Impact of Financial Globalization 
 
Macknight, J. (2018) Faster, Cheaper, Smarter: Blockchain in Trade Finance: Distributed ledger. 
Banker, vol 169 (1110) 
 
Nicoletti, B. (2018) The future: procurement 4.0. Springer, Agile procurement 
 
Nurmukhametov, R., Stepanov, P. and Novikova, T. (2018) Blockchain technology and its ap-
plication in trade finance. Financial Analytics: Science and Experience, vol 11 (2) 
 
Ozeroglu, Ali. (2015) International Trade Finance. Journal of Business and Economics, vol 6 (5) 
==PAGE:64==
 
58 
 
 
Tunca, T. and Zhu, W. (2018) Buyer Intermediation in Supplier Finance. Management Sci-
ence, vol 64 (12) 
 
Tradeshift. 2019 (Online) Buying and Payments for your business, your way. Available at:  
https://tradeshift.com [Accessed: 25.05.2019] 
 
Waldo, J. (2019) A Hitchhiker's Guide to the Blockchain Universe. Communications of the ACM. 
Vol 62 (3) 
 
Weber, M. (2018) An Advisors Introduction to Blockchain. Journal of financial services. vol 72 
(6) 
 
8. Appendix 
Appendix 1: Interview  
Appendix 2: data+AHP analysis 
 
 
 
 
