==PAGE:1==
Analysis of numerical smoke development calculation
methods in rooms with suspended beams
The uses and limits of the two-layer zone model method
and computational ﬂuid dynamic simulations
Master Thesis
Master of Science in Architectural Engineering
Jakob Bjellekjær Winther
==PAGE:2==
ii |
==PAGE:3==
Preface
Title:
Analysis of numerical smoke development calculation methods
in rooms with suspended beams
Subtitle:
The uses and limits of the two-layer zone model method and
computational ﬂuid dynamic simulations
Authors:
Winther, Jakob Bjellekjær
Student no.:
S137533
Afﬁliations:
Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Year:
2019
Period:
28/01 - 12/07
(F19 semester)
Type:
Thesis (Master)
Language:
English
ECTS:
32.5
Subject:
ﬁre dynamics, smoke development, CFD simulation, two-zone ﬁre
model, design process, Master of Science in Architectural Engineering,
Supervisors:
Dederichs, Anne Simone; Sommerlund-Thorsen, Kim
Company contact:
Rambøll Danmark A/S
Jakob Bjellekjær Winther, s137533
Preface | iii
==PAGE:4==
iv | Preface
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Fire engineers have a variety of methods at hand to calculate the smoke and
heat development in enclosures. Two commonly used methods to calculate
the smoke and heat spread are the simple two-zone layer model or using a
computer ﬂuid dynamics simulation (CFD) for more complex compartments.
The choice of method is often determined by the complexity of the case but
there is no clear deﬁnition of how complex the model can be before a CFD
model will be needed.
In this report it is investigated how complex a room can be before the
two-zone model deviates too much from a CFD model. The complexity
is centered around a common case of suspended beams from the ceiling.
Different beam sizes and different amounts of beams in the compartment
is analyzed in a CFD model and compared to a two-zone model to try to
determine a borderline between the two methods.
From comparing the performed simulations resulted in three statements
concerning the beams effect on the smoke development:
(1) Longer distance in-between beams leads to wider spread of heat and
smoke
(2) The most critical temperatures is in-between the combustion source
and the ﬁrst beam
(3) Higher beams directs the ceiling jets further downwards but hinders
the smoke development through the compartment
The statements conclude that a compartment with fewer beams would poten-
tially be more critical compared to a compartment with many beams. This
contradicts common understanding of how increased complexity - in this
case more beams - should increase the need for a CFD model.
A borderline between the two-zone model and a CFD model is discussed
but does not result in a singular robust separation between the methods for
current scenarios.
Abstract | v
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
Preface
iii
Abstract
v
Table of Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3
Learning Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.4
Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2
Theoretical Background
7
2.1
Design Fire
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2
Zone Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
3
Method
13
3.1
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
3.2
Comparison of Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
4
Programs
15
4.1
Computer Speciﬁcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
4.2
Argos
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
4.3
Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
5
Model Setup
19
5.1
Initial Model Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
5.2
Iteration Setups in FDS Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22
6
Model Veriﬁcation
27
7
Results
31
7.1
Comparison Between the Sizes of the Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .32
7.2
Comparison Between the Number of Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46
7.3
Irregularities in Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .52
7.4
Comparative Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .54
8
Discussion
55
vi
==PAGE:7==
9
Conclusion
59
10 Future Perspective
61
Bibliography
63
Appendices
65
A
Grid Resolution Study
67
B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening
71
C
Hand Calculation of Gas Temperature
75
D
Input Setup for Argos
77
E
Output graphs from Argos
79
F
Input Setup for FDS
87
TABLE OF CONTENTS | vii
==PAGE:8==
viii | TABLE OF CONTENTS
==PAGE:9==
1. Introduction
During the design development of a building project, the ﬁre engineer has to secure ﬁre safety
level during the building’s life span. A continuous cooperation with the architects and the ﬁre
engineer during the project’s development will ensure both an aesthetic and safe end-result. From
the early sketches of the design and through the project development, new proposals and design
changes often occur, which have an impact on ﬁre safety. This require several reevaluations of
the ﬁre safety level during this process. It is therefore an important factor that the methods, which
the ﬁre engineer has at his/hers disposal, is used efﬁcient to determine an accurate portrayal of
the ﬁre’s development as the project becomes more detailed.
Since 2004 the danish building regulations has been using a performance-based design ap-
proach to document the ﬁre safety with the inclusion of the appendix Information about Fire
Technical Dimensioning as a mean to document the ﬁre safety level, which can uphold to the
demands stated in the building regulations for ﬁre safety [Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen, 2004].
When assessing the ﬁre safety level in the pre-ﬂashover phase of the ﬁre, the evacuation safety
level (ESL) is investigated. The evacuation safety level can be determined by dividing the time
spend before the building is evacuated, tevac, has to be larger than the time it takes the ﬁre to
develop enough to, tcrit, as such:
ESL = tevac
tcrit
(1.1)
.
where:
.
ESL = evacuation safety level
.
tevac = time until evacuation is complete
.
tcrit = time until critical conditions is reached
To ensure a robust design, the evacuation safety level is recommended to be ESL > 1, as
no individual will be exposed in the evacuation [Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen, 2004].
Determining time until critical conditions for occupants includes various investigations of
visibility, heat radiation, temperature and smoke layer height - in which the complexity of the
building has an impact on the approach, yet frequent changes during the design process favor
faster methods. The method which the ﬁre engineer chooses to use all have advantages and weak-
nesses when applied [Toﬁło et al., 2016]. Combined with the desire to use a less time-consuming
method, the engineer must know which method is most appropriate to perform the analysis.
In this process the ﬁre engineer can use a variety of methods to investigate and verify the
ﬁre safety level of the design [Husted, 2004]. Some of the most used methods for performance-
based veriﬁcation are:
Introduction | 1
==PAGE:10==
(1) hand calculations, which provide an overview and a ﬁrst good guess of the design
[Toﬁło et al., 2016],
(2) two-zone layer models, which give a good estimate of the mass ﬂow and smoke height in
simple geometries by dividing the smoke and air into two uniform layers, the gas layer
and the ambient air [Toﬁło et al., 2016],
(3) ﬁre models, which use a computational ﬂuid dynamics code, also known as CFD models.
They are able to provide precise results in complex designs, but are computationally
expensive to preform [Toﬁło et al., 2016].
When calculating the smoke’s mass ﬂow, the design’s complexity inﬂuences the chosen method
– but how complex does the geometry have to be, before a two-zone model is invalid to use from
a practical viewpoint? It is therefore rephrased to the question: when is the two-zone model
justiﬁable to use instead of a CFD model?
Figure 1.1: Rising complexity when detailing models
1.1
Scope of Thesis
To be able to investigate and compare the use of a two-zone layer model with a CFD model,
the scenario has to be limited. Therefore the complexity of the design is limited to rooms with
suspended beams or technical installations, which are placed visible under the ceiling. This type
of exposure of the construction or installations is common as it allows for a higher ceiling and
safes expenses by excluding a suspended ceiling. An example of this can be seen in building
B127 at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), which was made by Christiensen & Co. in
2013, see ﬁgure 1.2.
2 | Introduction
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Installations suspended under the ceiling in building B127 at DTU Lyngby
[christensenco.dk, visited 19-06-2019]
The obstacles under the ceiling affect the mass ﬂow of the smoke which creates turbulence. The
turbulence can minimize the time until critical conditions are reached. The size and placement
of the obstacles have an effect on how critical the smoke and heat spread will become due to
turbulence.
Figure 1.3: Turbulence created when suspended obstacles from the ceiling are introduced
In the current work, a number of scenarios will be investigated, which are comprised of different
sizes of beams and distances in-between the beams. These scenarios will be implemented in a
CFD model. Comparing the measurements with a two-zone model - which doesn’t include any
beams - will determine how critical an effect the turbulence has on the calculation.
To be able to distinguish whether or not the two-zone method is valid enough, the size of
the deviation is discussed. The goal is to try and create a set of boundary conditions, or use
boundaries, where the two-zone method is justiﬁable able to perform a valid analysis without
regarding the beams – or when the two-zone method will be invalid and a CFD model will be
required for the design.
Introduction | 3
==PAGE:12==
The goal is to optimize the time versus reliability of the proposed design input that the ﬁre
safety engineer can provide through the design process. The boundaries will serve as guidelines
for ﬁre engineers to assess, whether or not the simpler and quicker method can be efﬁcient
enough to perform the analysis.
The following points will be discussed in the thesis:
• Compare the methods of calculating smoke development. What are the general pros/cons
and limits of each method? And how do these affect the following investigations?
• Investigate and analyze how the size and distance of suspended beams affect the smoke
development calculations for each simulation method. What constrains does the investi-
gated room have in terms of size and complexity for this investigation?
• Discuss if it is possible to determine an use criteria, boundaries or error margin to differen-
tiate the use of each method? And to what extend the size of the "error margin" can be
determined to justify the use of two-zone layer calculations instead of CFD simulations.
1.2
Limitations
The following limitations are made to narrow the scope of the thesis:
• Limited room dimensions
As the iteration process is focused on how the smoke spread is affected the beams and the
amount of beams, the room dimensions are locked and will not be iterated upon. A larger
or smaller room will only affect the time needed until the room is completely ﬁlled.
• Generic properties
As different materials - and the inﬂuence of their respected properties - are not investigated
in this thesis. Walls, ceiling, ﬂoor, beams, etc. will not be given any material properties.
This will give a more conservative representation of the temperature as the heat will not
conduct through the ceiling and walls etc. and any deterioration that would happen to the
beams is neglected. No structural analysis will be made. If there is no option to create a
generic - non-material - setup, the components will be chosen to be concrete as default.
• Limited design ﬁre
The design ﬁre used for the analysis will limited to one type with a speciﬁc size and heat
release rate (HRR). As the focus of this thesis is the geometrical elements, the design ﬁre
will not be investigated further.
• Limited amount of iterations setup of suspended beams
A selected amount of iterations of beam dimensions and total number of beams are chosen
to give a clear representation of the turbulence it creates. Combined with the large amount
of time a CFD model requires to perform the simulation - and the time available for the
master thesis is limited - the number of model iterations in CFD are limited to 9 different
setups.
4 | Introduction
==PAGE:13==
1.3
Learning Objectives
When writing a master thesis, the main goal is to expand upon common knowledge of the
current subject. As a novice to computer ﬂuid dynamics, and with only limited knowledge to
calculating two-zone layer ﬁre development from courses prior to the master thesis, the learning
objectives listed below are made to illuminate what I, as a student, desire to expand upon my
own knowledge when writing the thesis.
• Be able to use and distinguish common methods when calculating ﬁre development
• Gain knowledge of essential theory behind two-zone layer method and computer ﬂuid
dynamics
• Learn how to properly setup and use CFD models with compliance to best practices of the
industry
1.4
Approach
The thesis is structured around the comparison of the two calculation methods: the two-zone
model and the CFD model. The three main steps through the report are as follows:
1. Calculation Method Comparisons
2. Model Veriﬁcation
3. Comparative Analysis of Two-Zone Model and CFD Model
First the two methods of calculating smoke and heat development are presented, identifying
how each method works and their strengths and weaknesses. A model is then introduced, which
needs to be veriﬁed. Afterwards, the implementation of beams in the CFD is introduced, where
the comparative analysis between the two-zone model with no beams and a CFD model with
different beam implementations is made and discussed. See ﬁgure 1.4 for the overall progression
through the thesis.
Introduction | 5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.4: Thesis Progression
6 | Introduction
==PAGE:15==
2. Theoretical Background
2.1
Design Fire
The typical ﬁre development can be described by 4 primary stages: incipient phase, pre-ﬂashover,
post-ﬂashover and decay phase, as seen in ﬁgure 2.1. The development is highly dependent of
the design ﬁre and have different stages but the ﬁgure illustrates an idealised heat release rate
history for a compartment ﬁre [Spearpoint, 2008].
Figure 2.1: Arbitrary graph of idealized ﬁre development
One of the ﬁrst steps, as a ﬁre engineer, is determining which phase of the ﬁre is used as the
‘design ﬁre’, where upon the design calculations is based upon [Spearpoint, 2008]. Design ﬁres
are primarily dependent on the heat release rate from the ﬁre and are considered the best predictor
in describing ﬁre hazards [Babrauskas and Peacock, 1992].
The pre-ﬂashover phase - also refereed to as the growth phase - is deﬁned as the ﬁre’s de-
velopment from ignition to the point when ﬂashover occurs [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000].
During the growth phase is where most ﬁre fatalities occur in a ﬁre [Spearpoint, 2008]. When
determining the safety level for occupants in a building, the pre-ﬂashover phase is used as the
design ﬁre. This is also called a deterministic model [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000].
The design ﬁre is used as mean to predict the behavior of the ﬁre. When designing for oc-
cupant safety, the development of heat and smoke from the ﬁre is held up against the time needed
to perform an evacuation to determine the safety level [Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen, 2004]. As
the ﬁre grows the exposure of smoke and heat reaches more fatal conditions, minimizing the
chance of survival. Predicting the ﬁre’s behavior is a crucial element in determining when critical
Theoretical Background | 7
==PAGE:16==
conditions are reached. Pre-ﬂashover ﬁre growth can be predicted from experience in real ﬁres
and estimated using ﬁre growth models [Spearpoint, 2008]. In this analysis, a ﬁre growth model
is used to predict the smoke and heat development.
When assembling a ﬁre growth model, it requires a lot of assumptions, which have a large
impact in the design ﬁre. The assumptions are the basis upon which the model is assembled.
When using a ﬁre growth computer program, these assumptions are part of the input information
where upon the simulation is made. As mentioned, the heat release rate for the fuel is an
important factor in predicting the ﬁre hazard, which has to be determined by the user in most ﬁre
growth computer program [Spearpoint, 2008]. The user is therefore responsible for determining
a reasonable heat release rate for a ﬁre growth simulation. When simulating ﬁre models the
user is demanded to be acquainted with the assumptions made to perform the simulation and the
limitations of each model [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]
Fire growth computer models are used to calculate the ﬁre development in an enclosure
[Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]. When assembling a ﬁre model in a room, the inﬂuential factors
of the ﬁre development are the ignition source, fuel, enclosure geometry, compartment open-
ings and properties of bounding surfaces [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]. During the growth
stage, the smoke development in a room can be approximated by the two-zone layer model
[Spearpoint, 2008].
2.2
Zone Models
The ﬁre growth phase is termed as ‘fuel controlled’ as ﬁre growth is governed by the fuel
availability and surrounding geometry [Spearpoint, 2008].
In the early stages of the ﬁre growth in an enclosure, the compartment can be divided into two
zones, an upper hot layer and a lower cold layer, as seen in ﬁgure 2.2. The hot layer is the smoke
from the ﬁre and the cold layer is assumed to have the same properties as the outside ambient
air [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000, chap.5.1]. They are assumed to have a uniform temperature
and a uniform density through the layer and are treated as ideal gasses with a constant molecular
weight and constant speciﬁc.
When calculating the ﬁre growth, basic conservation equations from the ﬁrst law of thermody-
namics and the continuity equation for mass are applied to each zone. The layers are referred
to as control volumes (CV). The ﬁre development expressed from fundamental equations of
mass and energy in the control volumes [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]. The conservation of
momentum will not be explicitly applied in a simple the two-zone model and will therefore not
be discussed in this section.
8 | Theoretical Background
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: Two zone modelling of a ﬁre in an enclosure
.
where:
.
Tg = gas temperature
.
Ta = ambient air temperature
.
ρg = gas density
.
ρa = ambient air density
2.2.1
Conservation of Mass
The mass transport in and out of an enclosure can be summarized as,



Total mass entering
CV during time t


−



Total mass leaving
CV during time t


=



Net change in mass
within CV during time t



where the total mass ﬂow streams into and out of the compartment creates a pressure difference
developed between the inside and outside of the compartment [Byström, 2017]. In ﬁgure 2.2 the
total mass ﬂow streams can be stated as:
3
∑
j=1
˙m j = ˙mg −˙me −˙m f
(2.1)
.
where:
.
˙mg = mass ﬂow rate out of the compartment
.
˙me = mass ﬂow rate into ﬁre plume
.
˙mf = mass rate of gaseous fuel
Theoretical Background | 9
==PAGE:18==
The combustion of the fuel is treated as a source of mass ˙mf and energy ˙qc, where ˙mf + ˙me =
˙mp, as seen in ﬁgure 2.2. The mass supply rate of fuel must in most cases be speciﬁed by the
user of the zone model [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000].
2.2.2
Conservation of Energy
The heat balance of a ﬁre in an enclosure can be summarized as,



Heat release rate
by combustion


= ∑

Heat loss rate

where the total heat loss rate is described in equation 2.2 and is shown in ﬁgure 2.2 [Byström, 2017].
˙qc = ˙ql −˙qw −˙qr
(2.2)
.
where:
.
˙qc = heat release rate from combustion of fuel
.
˙ql = heat loss due to ﬂow of hot gases out of compartment openings
.
˙qw = heat loss through compartment boundaries
.
˙qr = heat radiating out through openings
Usually in zone models it is assumed that all of the fuel supplied can react provided there
is sufﬁcient oxygen available [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000].
2.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics
When analysing a design ﬁre in a CFD models, the simulation is made from the the set of
partial differential equations, similar to the two-zone model, that asserts conservation of mass,
momentum, and energy within the ﬁre and throughout the space surrounding it. But unlike
two-zone models, CFD models enforce the conservation laws in each of the thousands or millions
of relatively small volumes [McGrattan et al., 2013, chapter 32].
The volume of the compartment is divided by a mesh grid into a large amount of sub-volumes as
illustrated ﬁgure 2.3. The basic laws of mass, momentum, and energy conservation are applied
to each sub-volume [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]. A high amount of grid cells will result in a
more precise representation of the ﬁre and smoke spread. The larger the amount of grid cells
is, the more processing power is needed to perform the calculation in each cell, which leads to
longer calculation time. It is therefore advised to make a grid resolution study to investigate the
accuracy of the model. As the CFD calculations are dependent on the resolution of the numerical
grid, this is made to ensure a reasonable representation of the ﬁre’s development [Hurley, 2016].
A grid resolution study of the model setup described in chapter 5 is made, see Appendix A.
10 | Theoretical Background
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Zone divisions by a mesh grid in a CFD model
[Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]
An essential code in a CFD model is the use of the Navier–Stokes equations to simulate turbu-
lence - also called a turbulence model. Turbulent models are used to predict the evolution of
turbulence which are using simpliﬁed constitutive equations that predict the statistical evolution
of turbulent ﬂows [Pope, 2000].
Average turbulence models either use the Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equa-
tions or the Large Eddy Simulation (LES) [Hurley, 2016]. The principal idea behind LES is to
use a low-pass ﬁlter which ignores the the smallest length scales which are the computationally
expensive to resolve. This reduces the time needed to calculate the turbulence by effectively
removes small-scale information from the numerical solution [Hurley, 2016].
Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) is used for the CFD model analysis in the this report. FDS
uses LES code as a default [McGrattan et al., 2013]. Even though the application is very ﬂex-
ible, it has limitations which highly affect the simulation. The limitations are listed below
[Spearpoint, 2008, chap. 12]:
• The use of a rectangular mesh as its control volumes, makes it difﬁcult to simulate curved
or sloped surfaces
• Only one combustion reaction can be modelled no matter the number of fuels in the model
• Under-ventilated ﬁres or ﬁres subject to a suppression agent are not well modelled by the
instantaneous combustion reaction
• The grid resolution determines the accuracy of the fuel transport and combustion process
• Calculations are dependent of the processing power of the computer performing the
simulation, where large or complex models can require very long simulation time to
complete
Theoretical Background | 11
==PAGE:20==
12 | Theoretical Background
==PAGE:21==
3. Method
3.1
Literature Review
A literature study was conducted to investigate the usage of two-zone models and computer ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) models to gather an understanding of the methods potentials and boundaries.
The analysis is based on known literature about ﬁre dynamics such as Enclosure Fire Dynam-
ics [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000] and the SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering
[Hurley, 2016], which both presents theory behind two-zone layer models and computational
ﬂuid dynamics simulations, and methods of calculating smoke and heat transport with simpler
hand calculations. Previous comparisons of two-zone models and CFD models have will be
explored. This includes the conference paper Hand calculations, zone models and CFD – areas
of disagreement and limits of application in practical ﬁre protection engineering from 2016
[Toﬁło et al., 2016] and When to use zone-modelling and when to use CFD for ﬁre simulations
in connection to performance-based ﬁre demands? from 2004 [Husted, 2004]. Both texts lay
out the characteristics and overall guidelines of each method. A SWOT analysis has been made
to deﬁne strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of each method to communicate the
method’s characteristics [Toﬁło et al., 2016]. The conclusion of each text is a recommendation
on which method is more efﬁcient for certain analyses. A general consensus of separating the use
of the two-zone method and a CFD model is the complexity of the model. If the compartment is
complex, a CFD simulation is more likely to be recommended. The deﬁnition of what complexity
means is only vaguely described with examples.
Comparison of the methods with the intent to investigate how complex the model have to
be before the compartment can be before a CFD model simulation is needed, has not been
explored in reviewed literature. As complexity can be applied to many aspects of a ﬁre model,
the complexity is in this case related to the geometry, where it is focusing on a common scenario
of including suspended beams from the ceiling in the model. The analysis is centered around
how much does the beams interfere with the smoke and heat ﬂow through the compartment, until
a two-zone model cannot be rightfully used. To summarize this report investigate the boundary
between the two methods in relation to complexity of the compartment.
When modelling and simulating both methods, different software is used to perform the calcula-
tions. When using the applications, the user’s guide for each program is consulted when setting up
the input and output data properly [Deibjerg et al., 2003], [McGrattan et al., 2013]. Danish stan-
dards such as Information about Fire Technical Dimensioning [Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen, 2004]
and best practices from the industry is also taken into account, such as the CFD Best Practice
from 2009 [Best Practice gruppen, 2009] to perform calculations and simulations in compliance
to the industry’s recommendations.
Method | 13
==PAGE:22==
3.2
Comparison of Methods
The comparison of the methods is based upon previous comparisons between two-zone model
and CFD model in reviewed literature. Comparisons between zone models and CFD models
generally lack high quality studies (but plenty of general experiments) [Toﬁło et al., 2016]. This
section serves as a general comparison to highlight the main strengths and weakness’ of each
method - in relation to the scope of the thesis - to create a foundation whereupon the comparative
analysis is based on.
Both methods are governed by limitations made from mathematical restrains, which essen-
tially are the assumptions that allows the models to function. As mentioned in chapter 2:
Theoretical Background, the zone model is divided into zones, which allows for a fast simulation,
but this also restricts the model in calculating local ﬂow of air, turbulence and mixing of air and
smoke. The zones also have to be simpliﬁed into rectangles which in a complex model may
lead to errors [Toﬁło et al., 2016]. A CFD model is able to perform simulations of almost any
geometry models and turbulence in the model. It is only limited by the preparation time and
computational power available. The preparation of the model requires extensive knowledge from
the user to properly set up the model correctly. The chance of creating an error in the setup is
likely to occur. The computational power is linked to how fast the numerical calculations can be
performed for each control volume, which can take a long time to perform [Toﬁło et al., 2016].
Neither of the methods are efﬁcient in modelling sloped or curved surfaces. The CFD model
can create an approximation of a curvature with a ﬁne grid resolution but this will increase the
calculation time immensely.
When comparing the two-zone model results with the CFD model in the next chapters, it
can be deﬁned as an approximation of the smoke and heat spread, due to the lack of turbulence
and mixing of gasses. The deviations between the methods will then later on be used when
determining a use criteria.
14 | Method
==PAGE:23==
4. Programs
4.1
Computer Speciﬁcations
As each application listed in this chapter is reliant on the computer’s processing power to perform
the numerical integration, the computer speciﬁcations used for the simulations is listed below:
Processor
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-4790 CPU @ 3.60GHz
RAM
16 GB
OS
Windows 10
The computer has been provided by the Department of Civil Engineering from the Technical
University of Denmark during the thesis’ duration.
4.2
Argos
The zone model simulation program, Argos, is made by Danish Institute of Fire and Security
Technology (DBI), which uses calculation methods of ﬁre dynamics to calculate one or two-zone
layer models [Husted et al., 2009]. The following assumptions have be upheld when using Argos,
as listed in the Argos Theory Manual [Husted et al., 2009]:
• Each room is divided into 1 or 2 zones; a zone of cold gas and possibly above that a zone
of hot combustion gas with entrained air.
• A maximum of ten rooms can be modelled.
• Before ﬂashover, the ﬁre is initially fuel controlled but becomes ventilation controlled if
the oxygen level goes below 10.5
The analysis made in Argos is limited by the assumptions above. When using Argos, the
compartment is divided into several zones, which may include the ﬁre or combustion zone;
the plume; the compartment hot gas zone (the upper layer); the compartment ambient zone
(the lower layer); and the outside ambient zone [Deibjerg et al., 2003, chapter 2]. The pro-
gram calculates the ﬁre development and smoke transport numerical as described in Enclosed
Fire Dynamics [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000], which referenced in Argos’ Theory Manual
[Husted et al., 2009].
Programs | 15
==PAGE:24==
The program has a variety of ﬁre scenarios, design ﬁres and different components as part of an
existing library in the program. These are the input information for the program to perform the
simulation. It is possible to customize scenarios and implement other ﬁre types and components
manually. For the analysis made in this thesis, a custom scenario will be made. As the interface
was intuitive to use, it was easy to setup a simple scenario.
The output consists of a report of the numerical calculations and a graphical representation
of these, Appendix E. The output consists of the following:
• Heat Release Rate (HRR)
• Optical smoke density in rooms and in smoke
• Distance from ﬂoor to smoke layers
• Temperature in smoke layers
• Oxygen levels in rooms and layers
• Heat radiation and heat loss through surfaces
• Upper and lower ceiling surface
• Average temperature
• Floor pressure
• Numerical integration step length
A student license has been provided by DBI and is used for the analysis. The student license
does not limit or lock any features in the program or will affect the results. The current version
of the program is used for the analysis (version 5.9.97.423).
4.3
Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS)
Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) is a free and open-source software tool developed by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) of the United States Department of Commerce
[McGrattan et al., 2013].
FDS is a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulation application, which solves an approxi-
mate form of the Navier-Stokes equations for low-speed, thermally driven ﬂows - also known
as the Large Eddy Simulation (LES) - to simulate the mixing and transport phenomenon of
combustion products [Spearpoint, 2008]. FDS uses an input .fds-ﬁle to perform the simulation,
for example job_name.fds. FDS has no menu interface but uses MS-DOS to initiate the
simulation of the .fds-ﬁle. The ﬁle contains both general and detailed information about
the compartment, obstacles, ﬁre type etc. as well as which type of measurements the output
shall include. The FDS user’s manual describes several input and output parameters in detail
[McGrattan et al., 2013]. The model setup and output are described in chapter 5 Model Setup.
16 | Programs
==PAGE:25==
The .fds-ﬁle is made using Notepad. A FDS input ﬁle for one of the setups is included
in Appendix F. The only different factors between each input ﬁle are the height of the beam and
the total number of beams with equally divided distance between them. Setup of the different
amount of beams is also listed in Appendix F. The amount of columns of measuring points
are increased when the amount of beams are increased, as described in chapter 5.2, but is not
included in the appendix.
As the model doesn’t have an interface and only uses MS-DOS to initiate the simulation, it
became time consuming to setup the model in the .fds-ﬁle. Several test runs of the FDS model
were necessary to check if the beam setup was placed correctly or to check if the measuring
points was placed in the mesh of the beams, not measuring the temperature in the compartment
etc. This is just an example of the difﬁculties which occurred when assembling the model in
FDS. The user manual is essential to understand how the model can be set up and to ensure the
right output data needed [McGrattan et al., 2013].
The program was downloaded directly from NIST’s web page [pages.nist.gov/fds-smv, vis-
ited 05-02-2019]. The current version of FDS is used (version 6.7.0).
4.3.1
Smokeview (SMV)
Smokeview (SMV) is a visualization tool, which renders the numerical calculation from FDS,
which enables the user to visualize the output and the development over time. The requested
elements, which are desired to be visualized in Smokeview, have to be speciﬁed in the input ﬁle
for FDS before running the simulation. The FDS user manual speciﬁes the different options in
greater detail and will not be elaborated further in the thesis [McGrattan et al., 2013].
The program is also developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
of the United States Department of Commerce [McGrattan et al., 2013] and can be downloaded
together with FDS from NIST’s web page [pages.nist.gov/fds-smv, visited 05/02/2019]. The
current version of Smokeview is used (version 6.7.1).
Programs | 17
==PAGE:26==
18 | Programs
==PAGE:27==
5. Model Setup
The primary setup has to be comparable with both Argos, FDS and hand calculations in order to
be veriﬁed. The veriﬁcation will happen by comparing the model in Argos and FDS as well as
by hand calculations to secure they are comparable. To verify the compartment it has to have the
same initial conditions - or as close to the same as possible. Therefore the model has to be as
simple as possible. When the initial model has been veriﬁed, the FDS model implements the
beam iterations for comparison of the effects, see ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Comparison and veriﬁcation between methods
In this chapter, the following model conﬁgurations are reviewed to be able to perform the
veriﬁcation and the comparative analysis:
• Initial model setup
• Iteration setups for FDS
5.1
Initial Model Setup
In this section the initial setup of the analysis is presented. This serves as the basic model setup
to perform a compatible validation for each calculation method. When inclusion of suspended
beams is included in the model, the simulation results will be compared to the initial model as
part of the comparative analysis, as illustrated in ﬁgure 5.1. The following conditions will be the
same in every model.
Model Setup | 19
==PAGE:28==
5.1.1
Compartment Dimensions
The type of compartment strives towards being as generic as possible, as the analysis focuses on
the beam iterations, and not the room usage or different materials that it can be comprised of.
Therefore the compartment will not be a large hall, corridor or small enclosure - but somewhere
in the middle. To try and create a generic compartment, it is shaped as a square with a width of
20 meters and is 5 meters height (20×20×5 meter).
5.1.2
Compartment Materials
The compartment’s walls, ceiling, ﬂoor, as well as the beams, are categorized as adiabatic and
will not be given any material parameters, which neglect heat loss through boundaries and
components. This results in no loss of the smoke’s mass ﬂow and the smoke’s temperature won’t
decrease as fast [Best Practice gruppen, 2009]. As this is a conservative approach, it will create
more critical conditions than reality. This enables the analysis to be applied in different scenarios,
regardless of the material properties.
5.1.3
Ventilation
An opening is set with a dimension of 10 meter wide and 2.5 meters high to simulate natural
ventilation into the room. The mass ﬂow from the air supply will have an effect on the plume’s
ﬂow which is considered unwanted for this analysis. A low opening factor is favored to reduce
this inﬂuence. The opening factor O - determined by the opening area Ao, the height of the
opening Ho and the total enclosed area of the compartment AT - has a value of O = 0.033 m0.5.
The velocity is set to 0.04 m
s , as determined by Argos when preforming the simulation, which
will have a low impact on the ceiling jets.
A sensitivity analysis of the ventilation opening’s placement in relation to the beams has been
conducted to determine the most suitable setup for the analysis, see Appendix B. The appendix
investigates how the opening affects on the plume and if the opening should either be parallel or
perpendicular to the beams. It is concluded that the opening should be placed perpendicular to
the beams to have the least impact on the smoke development.
5.1.4
Fuel
The chosen design ﬁre is a liquid pool ﬁre of gasoline. A liquid pool fuel will only evaporate
gaseous fuels and not create char and retardants, as a solid ﬁre does [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000,
chap. 9.3.2]. Even though gasoline is comprised of many components and additives, it is a
common fuel and is therefore considered for the simulation. The heat release rate (HRR) is set
to 2400 kW/m2 as it is recommended in the CFD Best Practice to have a HRR between 500 and
2.500 kW/m2 [Best Practice gruppen, 2009]. The possibility of using a different fuel type and
heat release rate is mentioned in chapter 10 Future Perspective.
Gasoline is included in the Argos’ Default Library for liquid pool ﬁres and has a size of approx.
1 m2 (0.2 m3). Gasoline is not included as in the default library in FDS as ﬂammable liquid.
Combustion of octane is instead used in FDS as a representative for the combustion of gasoline
[en.wikipedia.org/wiki/gasoline, visited 05-05-2019]. The species ’N-Octane’ from FDS default
library is used [McGrattan et al., 2013, table 11.1].
20 | Model Setup
==PAGE:29==
The ﬁre will be placed in the center of the room to reduce the distance to the boundary walls
where the ceiling jets will create turbulence.
The initial model setup will be veriﬁed by comparing hand calculations with the simulation made
with Argos and with FDS, see chapter 6 Model Veriﬁcation. This is done to secure the setup
made in each program is comparable.
Figure 5.2: Dimensions of simulation model
Figure 5.3: Top view of model setup made in FDS, (red) ﬁre pool, (blue) ventilation opening
Model Setup | 21
==PAGE:30==
5.2
Iteration Setups in FDS Model
The iterations refer to different setup of the size of the beams and the interval distance between
the beam. The different variations of the beam sizes and distance between them are as follows,
see table 5.1. As the height of the beam is more crucial for the analysis, that is the ﬁrst parameter
to alter. The width has the same size as one mesh grid, as the width has little inﬂuence on the jet
streams.
Table 5.1: Variable dimensions and distances
Beam size
Amount of beams
[ height × width ]
400×200 mm
3 beams, with 5 m in-between
800×200 mm
6 beams, with ∼2.86 m in-between
1600×200 mm
9 beams, with 2 m in-between
To calculate the different iterations of beam setups, the setup for the FDS ﬁle will need to have 3
initial setups for measuring the temperature due to the different amount of beams. Columns of
temperature measuring points are placed in front of the beams (even numbers) and in-between
the beams (odd numbers), see ﬁgure 5.5 and 5.6. The column consists of temperature measuring
points for each 0.5 m in height, see ﬁgure 5.4. When running the FDS ﬁle, the simulation will
measure both in front and in between the beams.
Figure 5.4: Each column consists of 9 measuring point (red), each placed 0,5 meters apart
22 | Model Setup
==PAGE:31==
(a) 3 beams setup with 7 measuring columns
.
(b) 6 beams setup with 13 measuring columns
.
(c) 9 beams setup with 19 measuring columns
Figure 5.5: Setup for each beam iteration (section)
(a) 3 beams setup
(b) 6 beams setup
(c) 9 beams setup
Figure 5.6: Setup for each beam iteration (plan). The dots illustrates the measuring columns
as shown in ﬁgure 5.5, (red dot) in front of beams, (blue dot) in-between beams
As seen in ﬁgure 5.6, the measuring columns are aligned with the ﬁre pool in the middle of the
room to measure the temperature from the smoke spread when obstructed by the beams.
Figure 5.7: Division of upper-mid-lower mean temperatures
Model Setup | 23
==PAGE:32==
The output data is the numerical calculation of the temperature measured in each point. The
measurements are divided in an upper, mid and lower section, see ﬁgure 5.7. The temperature
measurements are divided into sections where each section is the mean value of the three points
in the related division. As each point is measuring a small part of the model, it is sensitive to the
the turbulence and the measurements will ﬂuctuate. To minimize this, the mean temperature of
each section will create a general representation of the smoke development. Therefore, when
comparing the data with the two-zone model or comparing the initial setup with the beam
iterations, the mean value of the sections is used.
(a) 3 beams setup
.
(b) 6 beams setup
.
(c) 9 beams setup
Figure 5.8: Iteration of beams setups, with numeration of the beams
24 | Model Setup
==PAGE:33==
Figure 5.8 shows the beam setup in FDS, where the beams height will differ. The amount of
iterations preformed sums up to a total of 12 different iterations, as shown in table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Total model iterations in FDS
(A) 3 beams setup
(B) 6 beams setup
(C) 9 beams setup
(A0) 0 beams (control)
(B0) 0 beams (control)
(C0) 0 beams (control)
(A1) 3 beams, 400×200
(B1) 6 beams, 400×200
(C1) 9 beams, 400×200
(A2) 3 beams, 800×200
(B2) 6 beams, 800×200
(C2) 9 beams, 800×200
(A3) 3 beams, 1600×200
(B3) 6 beams, 1600×200
(C3) 9 beams, 1600×200
The control iterations are made to secure the same points of comparison, when comparing setups
with and without beams in model when performing the comparative analysis in chapter 7, and
will be refereed to as the reference model(s).
Model Setup | 25
==PAGE:34==
26 | Model Setup
==PAGE:35==
6. Model Veriﬁcation
"Veriﬁcation of a model contains, as a minimum, a control of the theoretical
basis and the assumptions, which has been made in the model, can be
accepted." [Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen, 2004]
When calculating a two-zone model or a CFD model with computer applications, the pro-
grams must be veriﬁed to ensure that the models are solving the governing equations properly
[Hurley, 2016, chap. 32]. As the programs results will be compared, this is also required to
secure compatibility and/or identify any variations or errors, which might differ in each program.
To verify the models, each application will run a simulation of the initial setup of the model,
as described in chapter 5 Model Setup. The gas temperature development from each program
is compared with hand calculations of the gas layer temperature. When calculating the gas
temperature by hand, the experiment and statistical correlated equation for gas temperature
is used Enclosure Fire Dynamics [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000]. The results can be seen in
Appendix C Hand Calculation of Gas Temperature. The results can be seen in ﬁgure 6.1, where
the two-zone model was made with Argos and the CFD model was calculated with FDS. The
input information for Argos can be seen in Appendix D Input Setup for Argos and the output
used for this veriﬁcation is the Temperature in smoke layer, see Appendix E Output graphs from
Argos. The input setup for FDS can be seen in Appendix F Input Setup for FDS.
Figure 6.1: Comparison of methods when calculating the initial setup
Model Veriﬁcation | 27
==PAGE:36==
As seen in the results in ﬁgure 6.1, each development is fairly similar in progression - with a
fast increase in the ﬁrst 5-6 min after ignition, where it afterwards begin to have a more steady
curvature. The difference that occurs between each method is due to the dissimilar thermal
properties of the boundaries of the compartment setup for each model. When calculating the gas
temperature "by hand", the overall thermal property value hk is determined by the conductivity
k, density ρ, and speciﬁc heat c of the compartment surface material - see Appendix C. As
presented in chapter 5, the material properties of the compartment were to be neglected in this
analysis, but the possible values presented does not apply a choice to disregard the conduction
through the material. Therefore the compartment was given the material properties for concrete,
as seen in Appendix C. This results in a lower the gas temperature compared to the two-zone
model, as heat is conducted through the compartment’s boundaries. The base assumptions or
setup in each model are therefore ﬂawed in terms of compatibility, but to a lesser degree due to
the minor evasion.
The CFD model has the same curvature as the two-zone model but reaches a higher gas tempera-
ture before declining. The gas temperature in the CFD model is a mean value of all the upper
measuring points, as seen in ﬁgure 5.7 - with exception on the measuring points above the ﬁre
pool, as it would include the plume temperature. This is contributing to excelled temperature,
as the average smoke temperature would have been lower and more similar to the two-zone model.
The temperature difference between the CFD model and the two-zone model is mainly due to the
modelling of the ventilation opening in FDS. The opening has been modelled as an air supply
vent, which does not simulate the natural ﬂow out of the compartment as the two-zone model
does. This, combined with the adiabatic walls, ﬂoor and ceiling, results in no heat transmission
out of the compartment and creates higher temperatures in the room than the two-zone model.
Figure 6.2: Temperature proﬁle of FDS model
28 | Model Veriﬁcation
==PAGE:37==
The declining of gas temperature in the CFD model is due to the great amount of smoke which
has been accumulating in the compartment. As the modelled ventilation opening in FDS model
is not reducing the amount of smoke - as stated in the paragraph above - the lack of oxygen is
reducing the combustion from the ﬁre. This only became apparent when the ﬁre development
exceeded 8-10 minutes, where the smoke has completely ﬁlled the compartment. Afterwards
the smoke then started to cool, as seen in ﬁgure 6.2, which shows the mean temperature of each
measuring point at the different height.
The largest temperature difference between the two-zone model and the CFD model is ap-
prox. 12-13 °C - or approx. 10 % - which is considered a low deviance. The CFD model is
therefore ﬂawed in simulating a two-zone model setup. The lack of conduction results in a
more conservative representation of the temperature development in the ﬁrst 5-8 minutes. The
difference is representing a more critical scenario but as the difference is minor, the FDS model
is used for the comparative analysis.
An argumentation against including the ventilation opening, is the unwanted effect the air
ﬂow from natural ventilation would have on the plume, which would disrupt the ﬂow of the
smoke. This would decrease the accuracy of the measured temperature in the CFD model which
is not desired. A comparison between a non-ventilated setup and a natural ventilated setup might
have clariﬁed, which model is more suitable for the comparison, but this has not been explored
in this thesis.
In hindsight, a better compatibility between the CFD model and the two-zone model would have
been achieved if the ventilation opening in the FDS model was modelled to correctly simulating
the natural ﬂow in and out of the compartment. This error also indicates the high demand of
knowledge and experience which is required by the user when performing CFD simulations. For
the inclusion of an element to the model, the user should have a clear understanding on how this
element works and how it will interact with the other elements in the model.
Model Veriﬁcation | 29
==PAGE:38==
30 | Model Veriﬁcation
==PAGE:39==
7. Results
In this chapter the comparative analysis between the initial model setup and the different beam
iteration setups, as described in chapter 5.2, is made. The simulation of the initial model is
referred to the reference model in this chapter. The analysis is divided into two sections:
(1) Comparison of the beam sizes
(2) Comparison of the amount of beams
The division is made to perform the comparison of each iteration element and investigate which
aspect of the iteration - the beam size or the amount of beams - have tendency to create more
critical conditions. The measuring column placed above the ﬁre pool in each model is neglected
in the comparisons as it measures the plume’s temperature. As this is not relevant for this
analysis, it won’t be be discussed further in this chapter.
Results | 31
==PAGE:40==
7.1
Comparison Between the Sizes of the Beams
7.1.1
3 Beams Setup
The setups of the 3 beams with different height iterations - numbered A1, A2 and A3, as described
in table 5.2 - is simulated for 300 seconds and compared in this section. Figure 7.1 illustrates the
smoke development after 60 seconds.
Figure 7.1: Temperature in 3 beam setups (A1-3) after 60 seconds - output from Smokeview
In ﬁgure 7.1, turbulence is created from the ceiling jets being pushed down by the beams. The
measuring columns under the beam no. 1 and no. 3 are therefore of the most interest and is the
basis of the comparative analysis. The temperature development of each setup is compared with
one another and the reference model. In ﬁgure 7.2, the upper mean temperature development
under beam 1 and 3 are shown.
The temperature increase on both sides, with the beam size at larger size of 1600 × 200 mm
is resulting in the largest deviance from the reference model, as was expected. The difference
between each side of the beam is due to the placement of the beams in the FDS to ﬁt into the
mesh sizes of the model, resulting in the beam above the ﬁre pool is not placed completely
symmetrical to the ﬁre. This results in a slight deviance between in temperature under each beam.
This will be discussed in detail in chapter 7.4.
To investigate the amount of heat which is being projected downwards by the beams, the
mean temperature of the mid section under the beams is presented - point no. 4-6 as described
in ﬁgure 5.7. The deviance created by the second beam’s placement is more apparent when
comparing each side in ﬁgure 7.3. The ﬂuctuations that occur in ﬁgure 7.3 are due to turbulence
under the beam, where the larger beam size is resulting in a higher temperature increase as the
ceiling jets are pushed further downwards.
32 | Results
==PAGE:41==
(a) Measuring location, upper section
.
(b) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 1
.
(c) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 3
.
Figure 7.2: Upper mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 3 beams
setup
Results | 33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Measuring location, mid section
.
(b) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 1
.
(c) Mid Mean temperature development under beam no. 3
.
Figure 7.3: Mid mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 3 beams setup
(A)
34 | Results
==PAGE:43==
7.1.2
6 Beams Setup
The setups of the 6 beams with different height iterations - numbered B1, B2 and B3, as described
in table 5.2 - is simulated for 300 seconds and compared in this section. Figure 7.4 illustrates the
smoke development after 60 seconds.
Figure 7.4: Temperature in 6 beam setups (B1-3) after 60 seconds - output from Smokeview
As seen in ﬁgure 7.4, the smoke is apprehend from dispersing further by beams as the height is
increased. This increases the temperature when closer to the ﬁre pool but takes longer to spread.
This development is visible when comparing the upper mean temperature at beam 3 and 4 in
ﬁgure 7.5.
In ﬁgure 7.5, the temperature excels rapidly before contouring into a similar inclination to
the reference model’s ﬁre curve. The smoke is not distributed by any beams which is placed
above the ﬁre pool, which results in a more ﬂuid development to the nearest beams, compared to
the 3 and 9 beam setups. This contributes to the fast temperature increase.
As the distance from the ﬁre pool to the beams is smaller in the 6 beam setup, the smoke
development under the beams after no. 3 and 4 is investigated to see if the beams are restricting
the smoke development through the room. The temperature development to the next beams,
beam no. 2 and beam no. 5, is shown in ﬁgure 7.7.
In ﬁgure 7.6, temperature in the mid section under the beam has similar development as in
ﬁgure 7.3, but has larger ﬂuctuations. This is due to the higher smoke velocity as the beams are
located closer to the ﬁre pool.
Results | 35
==PAGE:44==
(a) Measuring location, upper section
.
(b) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 3
.
(c) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 4
.
Figure 7.5: Mid mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 6 beams setup
(B)
36 | Results
==PAGE:45==
(a) Measuring location, mid section
.
(b) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 3
.
(c) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 4
.
Figure 7.6: Mid mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 6 beams setup
(B)
Results | 37
==PAGE:46==
(a) Measuring location, upper section
.
(b) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 2
.
(c) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 5
.
Figure 7.7: Upper mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 6 beams
setup (B)
38 | Results
==PAGE:47==
(a) Measuring location, mid section
.
(b) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 2
.
(c) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 5
.
Figure 7.8: Mid mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 6 beams setup
(B)
Results | 39
==PAGE:48==
In ﬁgure 7.7, the temperature development is almost identical to the reference model with only
minor ﬂuctuations created by the turbulence. The model with beam size 400 × 200 mm has
primarily a higher increase in temperature than the others. This is a combination of the ceiling
jet still being guided downwards but is not as limited in the amount of smoke will traverse from
beam to beam as the 1600 × 200 mm setup.
The mean temperatures under the 2nd and 5th beam in ﬁgure 7.8 are almost identical to the
reference model. This result indicates that the beams are not creating any larger impact on the
temperature development when more beams are introduced.
40 | Results
==PAGE:49==
7.1.3
9 Beams Setup
The setups of the 9 beams with different height iterations - numbered C1, C2 and C3, as described
in table 5.2 - is simulated for 300 seconds and compared in this section. Figure 7.9 illustrates the
smoke development after 60 seconds.
Figure 7.9: Temperature in 9 beam setups (C1-3) after 60 seconds - output from Smokeview
Similar progression in smoke development is visible in ﬁgure 7.9 when compared to the 6 beam
setup in ﬁgure 7.4. This is also visible at the upper temperature at the 4th and 6th beam in ﬁgure
7.10 when compared to the upper temperature of the 6 beam setup in ﬁgure 7.5.
The similarity in the temperature’s progression is due to the distance from the combustion
source and the beam only differ with approx. 0,5 meters from the 6 beam setup. The 6 beam
setup has higher spike temperatures than the 9 beam setup. The difference might occur due to
placement of the 5th beam, which is located above the ﬁre pool, distributing the ﬂow from the
plume. This is also elaborated upon in chapter 7.4.3.
In ﬁgure 7.12, the temperature development at the 3th beam and the 7th beam has similar
outcome as the 2th and 5th beam at the 6 beam setup, as seen in ﬁgure 7.7. This is also the case
in the mid section under the 3th beam and the 7th beam in ﬁgure 7.13, where 1600 × 200 mm
beam size forces the mass ﬂow of the smoke downwards.
Results | 41
==PAGE:50==
(a) Measuring location, upper section
.
(b) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 4
.
(c) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 6
.
Figure 7.10: Upper mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 9 beams
setup (C)
42 | Results
==PAGE:51==
(a) Measuring location, mid section
.
(b) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 4
.
(c) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 6
.
Figure 7.11: Mid mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 9 beams setup
(C)
Results | 43
==PAGE:52==
(a) Measuring location, upper section
.
(b) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 3
.
(c) Upper mean temperature development under beam no. 7
.
Figure 7.12: Upper mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 9 beams
setup (C)
44 | Results
==PAGE:53==
(a) Measuring location, mid section
.
(b) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 3
.
(c) Mid mean temperature development under beam no. 7
.
Figure 7.13: Mid mean temperature comparison between beam heights in the 9 beams setup
(C)
Results | 45
==PAGE:54==
7.2
Comparison Between the Number of Beams
When making the comparison between the number of beams in each setup, simulations of 300
seconds are used for the upper section of the measuring column, as shown in ﬁgure 5.7 in chapter
5.2. The maximum, median and minimum values indicate the difference between the presented
setup and the reference model. The square dots represent the median value at the associated
measuring column, where the even numbers are located below the beams and the odd numbers
are located in-between the beams.
7.2.1
Beam Size of 400×200 mm
Each setup with 400 mm × 200 mm beam size is presented in ﬁgure 7.14.
The minimum and maximum values are the outer bounds of the deviation that occurs. The
middle measuring column in each ﬁgure has a large spread, but as the measuring column is
located above the ﬁre pool, the difference from the reference model can vary a lot due to the
ﬂickering plume. As this is the case, the middle column will not be included in the comparison.
This applies to the rest of the analysis in this chapter.
The 3 beam setup (A1) has a average temperature increase of +10,5 °C under the 1st beam
(measuring column no. 2) and +36 °C under the 3rd beam (measuring column no. 6). When
compared to the 6 beam setup and the 9 beam setup, the temperature is higher and reaches
between +39 °C and +54 °C at the beams nearest to the ﬁre pool. The temperature generally
reaches higher values when the more beams are introduced but this is expected as the beams are
located closer to the ﬁre pool.
If the comparison is made between the setups at approx. 5 meters away from the ﬁre pool,
the 6 beam setup a temperature increase in-between +16,8 °C and +17,2 °C and 9 beam setup
only reaches a temperature increase in-between +1,0 °C and +6,7 °C. This comparison results
that the 3 beam setup (A1) reaches a higher median temperature than the 6 beam setup (B1) and
the 9 beam setup (C1).
As more beams are introduced, the smoke has trouble reaching the outer bounds of the com-
partment as the beams and turbulence hinder the ceiling jets. This can be seen in the 9 beam
setup in ﬁgure 7.14.c, where the highest and lowest numbered columns generally have a lower
temperature than the reference model.
46 | Results
==PAGE:55==
(a) 3 beam setup with a 400×200 mm beam size (A1)
.
(b) 6 beam setup with a 400×200 mm beam size (B1)
.
.
(c) 9 beam setup with a 400×200 mm beam size (C1)
.
Figure 7.14: Temperature differences in relation to reference model
Results | 47
==PAGE:56==
7.2.2
Beam size of 800×200 mm
Each setup with 800 mm × 200 mm beam size is presented in ﬁgure 7.15.
The temperature comparisons in the 800 mm × 200 mm setups generally reach higher de-
viations to the reference model than the 400 mm × 200 mm setups in chapter 7.2.1. The
temperature peaks are higher, with the 3 beam setup reaching median temperatures up to +43,6
°C, the 6 beam setup reaching median temperatures up to +74,9 °C and the 9 beam setup reaching
median temperatures up to +66,8 °C in comparison to the reference model. The outer bounds are
reaching either similar to the reference model or are reaching colder temperature differences.
Similar to previous section, the 3 beam setup allows the smoke to spread further, creating
more critical conditions further away from the ﬁre pool than the other 2 other setups with more
beams. It is evident in the 6 beam setup that the beams nearest the ﬁre pool become more critical
but the model is almost identical to the reference model with a difference around +6,4 °C and
-13,4 °C. This is considered small compared to the 3 beam setup in ﬁgure 7.15.a. The scenario
indicates that the scenario could have been determined with a two-zone model as the variation
only surrounds the center of the model near the ﬁre plume.
48 | Results
==PAGE:57==
(a) 3 beam setup with a 800×200 mm beam size (A2)
.
(b) 6 beam setup with a 800×200 mm beam size (B2)
.
(c) 9 beam setup with a 800×200 mm beam size (C2)
.
Figure 7.15: Temperature differences in relation to reference model
Results | 49
==PAGE:58==
7.2.3
Beam size of 1600×200 mm
Each setup with 1600 mm × 200 mm beam size is presented in ﬁgure 7.16.
In the 1600 mm × 200 mm beam size setups the difference from the references differs even
further from the reference model than the 800 mm × 200 mm beam size setup the previous
section. As the volume is increased in-between the beams, as the height of the beams has become
higher. This increases the time it takes for the smoke to transport from one section, under the
beam and into the next section. This results in the high temperatures in the area closest to the
ﬁre pool, reaching up to +62 °C in the 3 beam setup, up to +95,1 °C in the 6 beam setup and
up to +85,6 °C higher compared to the reference model. As the smoke is hindered by the large
beams the outer boundaries, the temperature is lower signiﬁcantly than the reference model. The
three setups are reaching a temperature which is between -18,6 °C to -44,8 °C lower than the
reference model.
The high difference across the section of the compartment indicates that a compartment with
more beams, is able to hinder the smoke development through the compartment. This results
in a scenario where a compartment with several beams become more secure for occupants, as
the ﬁre development through the compartment is slowed. In comparison to using a two-zone
model, the two-zone model would result in a more conservative calculation of the time of when
critical conditions for occupant’s safety is met, when investigating smoke development in a large
compartment.
50 | Results
==PAGE:59==
(a) 3 beam setup with a 1600×200 mm beam size (A3)
.
(b) 6 beam setup with a 1600×200 mm beam size (B3)
.
(c) 9 beam setup with a 1600×200 mm beam size (C3)
.
Figure 7.16: Temperature differences in relation to reference model
Results | 51
==PAGE:60==
7.3
Irregularities in Measurements
When assessing the results from the simulations, minor deviations or errors were noticed which
caused some irregularities in the simulations. To get a better understanding of these irregularities,
they are identiﬁed and expanded upon further in this section.
When assessing the results in chapter 7.1 and chapter 7.2, there is a noticeable temperature
difference between the left and right side of the model, as mentioned prior in previous chapters.
This irregularity is due to the beam setup to ﬁt into the mesh size in the FDS model, see ﬁgure
7.17.
Figure 7.17: Illustration of the beam’s placement in grid
The placement of the beam affects the ﬂow of the smoke where a larger amount will drift towards
the right side of the beam, creating the irregular results between each side of the beam. To
resolve this, the mesh size could be reduced to achieve a ﬁner gradient, which would allow the
beams to be placed completely symmetrical to the ﬁre pool. The reduction of mesh size would
have increased the time needed to perform the calculation. A solution might have been to create
two sub-domains of different resolutions: a high resolution grid placed in the upper part of the
compartment and around the ﬁre plume, and a lower resolution for the bottom half of the room
minus the plume area. This would only increase the simulation time slightly and resolve the
asymmetry that occurs in the model.
When comparing the temperature development each 6 beam setup and 9 beam setup, the 6
beam setup is able to reach higher temperatures than the 9 beam setup. This difference occurs
because of the setup of the beams in relation to the ﬁre pool. The 6 beam setup doesn’t have a
beam located just above the ﬁre pool as the 9 beam setup which splits the smoke development
52 | Results
==PAGE:61==
from the ﬁre plume into two different volumes in-between beam 4 and 5 - and beam 5 and 6, see
ﬁgure 7.18. As the 6 beam doesn’t have a beam, the measuring points at beam 3 and 4 in the 6
beam setup share the same volume, which increases the temperature.
(a) 6 beam setup: no beam above ﬁre pool
(b) 3 & 9 beam setup: beam above ﬁre
pool
Figure 7.18: Dividing plume by beam above the ﬁre pool
These irregularities are not crucial errors to the results, but knowing what and how the different
aspects of the model affect the output, this will provide a better understanding of the ﬁre’s
development in the compartment.
Results | 53
==PAGE:62==
7.4
Comparative Analysis
The different comparisons made in chapter 7.1 and chapter 7.2 are used as the basis where upon
the comparative analysis is made. Summarizing statements can be made from the comparisons,
which are as follows:
1. Longer distance in-between beams leads to wider spread of heat and smoke
2. The most critical temperatures is in-between the combustion source and the ﬁrst beam
3. Higher beams directs the ceiling jets further downwards but hinders the smoke development
through the compartment
The most critical heat exposure is within the volume from the combustion to the ﬁrst beam,
where the ﬁrst beam disrupts the ﬂow of the ceiling jets and creates turbulence, as seen in chapter
7.1. The placement of the ﬁrst beam from the ﬁre is therefore a determining factor, as it the
area underneath this volume will become more critical. The beams are apprehending the smoke
from traversing longer distances, when more beams are introduced to the model, which cre-
ates higher temperature closer to the combustion source as they minimize the spread of the smoke.
From the results presented in chapter 7.1 and 7.2, the increase of beam height is resulting
in higher temperatures. As described, the beam hinders the transport of smoke through the
compartment, which increases the temperature closer to the ﬁre pool. When assessing whether
the beam heights are able to project the ceiling jet downward, as seen in ﬁgure 7.3 and ﬁgure
7.13, where the 1600 mm × 200 mm beam is able to project more heat downwards.
The 6 beam setup has been valued of low importance to the comparative analysis, as the
setup has close similarities to the 9 beam setup in terms of temperature development and smoke
spread. And because of the irregularity between setup measurements, as described in chapter 7.3,
the focus of the comparative analysis is more suited to carry out between the 3 beam setup and
the 9 beam setup.
The three statements above are considered when comparing the 3 beam setup (A1-A3) and
the 9 beam setup (C1-C3). The ﬁrst statement is a known fact, as a ceiling without any obstacles
will not disrupt the ceiling jets. When combined with the second statement, the distance between
the combustion and the ﬁrst beam is longer in the 3 beam setup which allows for a larger area
where higher temperatures occurs. The third statement is also a known fact but is crucial as the
higher the beams become, the temperatures between the ﬁrst beam and the combustion product
will increase as the volume in-between increases. As the height of the beam increases, the second
statement is emphasized even further.
From using the three statements, it can be concluded that the 3 beam setups generally reaches
more critical scenarios than the 9 beam setups. By default, this concludes that the CFD model
would be a more suitable method of determining the smoke and ﬁre spread compared to the
two-zone model. This might be the case for this scenario but a deﬁnitive boundary line between
the two methods is still undetermined. The possibility of creating such boundary condition is
discussed in the next chapter.
54 | Results
==PAGE:63==
8. Discussion
In this chapter, the possibility of determining a use criteria between the two methods presented
previously is discussed. The approach of the thesis was to investigate whether or not it is possible
to determine a boundary condition to able to justify the use of a two-zone model rather than a
CFD model. Such a boundary could be used as a guideline for ﬁre engineers to choose whether
or not the two-zone model is a viable method. For a scenario with suspended beams, it has
resulted in a question around how much the the two main parameters in the model iterations -
the beam height and the amount of beams - are altered. The three statements stated in previous
chapter result in two apposing conclusions between the parameters and the method of choice, as
depicted in ﬁgure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Parameters affecting the method most suitable for analysis
Figure 8.1 illustrates the contradicting parameters and how an increase of one or both parameters
will lean towards opposite methods. When the beam height increases, the CFD model generally
becomes the more favorable method, for investigating the smoke development in the room as
the ceiling jets are pressed downwards. The results shown in previous chapter indicates that
increasing the amount of beams in the compartment hinders the smoke development and creates
higher temperatures closer to the combustion product but lowers the temperatures further away.
The difference between high and low tends towards evening out, as the amount of beams in the
model increase. This will support the argument of justifying the use of two-zone model instead
of the CFD model.
The three statement contradicts common reasoning of how "complex" a compartment is perceived
before the two-zone model won’t be valid to perform simulation of smoke and heat transport. If
a compartment includes one or two beams in the ceiling, it is common to neglect the obstacles as
the compartment is not regarded complex enough - if the beam’s height is not considered too
large. The results, from the comparative analysis in previous chapter, concludes a contradictory
statement: the higher the amount of beams there are in the ceiling, the more reasonable will the
two-zone model become for smoke and heat transport simulations. This information contradicts
the common perception of what complexity means to the smoke development.
Discussion | 55
==PAGE:64==
The appliance of the two-zone model and the CFD model overlaps in areas, which do not have
sharp boundaries between the methods [Toﬁło et al., 2016]. It is therefore a difﬁcult task to
determine a singular value to perform as dividing factor between the methods.
There is different approaches to determine a factor, but all approaches has a weakness. One
approach is to make a subjective estimation, for example the model should not deviate more than
20 % from the reference model. A percentile value, such as this, is often based on experience
from the engineer, which knows from previous analysis and simulations, that it can be considered
safe within this margin. In this case the percentile value lacks a reference to where, the model
may only differ maximum 20%, as the set margin would otherwise vary a lot. The main weakness
of this method is the lack of evidence, where upon the margin can be qualiﬁed as a correct
approximation. As this has not been found for the model conﬁgurations with suspended beams,
this approach has not been qualiﬁed as a reasonable approach.
Another approach to determine a value based around a certain scenario in design ﬁre. When
creating a design ﬁre, it is centered around an acceptance criteria, where upon the time until
critical conditions is reached. An example of this is to investigate whether or not the two-zone
model is able to give a valid representation of the heat exposure approx. 5 meters away from the
combustion source. When assessing this scenario, the median values from ﬁgure 7.14-7.16 is
considered, see table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Difference between reference model and CFD model approx. 5m from combustion
A
B
C
(1) 400 × 200
10,5 - 36,0 °C
3,4 - 4,3°C
1,0 - 6,2 °C
(2) 800 × 200
20,3 - 43,6 °C
-3,9 - -3,3 °C
-13,9 - -5,6 °C
(3) 1600 × 200
22,9 - 62,0 °C
-16,5 - 13,3 °C
-34,4 - -16,7°C
In table 8.1 an error margin of +/- 20 °C than the reference model has been set as the max.
deviation, see table 8.2.
Table 8.2: Error margin of +/- 20 °C compared to reference model, 5m from combustion
A
B
C
(1) 400 × 200



(2) 800 × 200



(3) 1600 × 200



56 | Discussion
==PAGE:65==
The green check marks and red crosses indicates whether or not the margin has been reached.
The check marks indicates that the two-zone model will able to determine the heat exposure,
either around the same temperature as the CFD model or a more conservative representation (in
for example B3 and C3).
The weakness of this approach is that the result is highly dependent on the scenario which
is investigated as the difference between the two-zone model and the CFD model is based around
the simulations. The margin is therefore a representation of the current scenario rather than a
general margin.
A third attempt to create a boundary condition is to investigate the average median temperature
in the compartment but neglects the temperatures at the near plume region (r/H < 0.18), which is
used when estimating the maximum temperature of the ceiling jet [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000,
chap. 4]. The near plume region is deﬁned in equation 8.1 and as seen in ﬁgure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: Parameters for determining near plume region
Near plume region:
r
H < 0.18
⇒
Plume region radius:
r = 0.18H
(8.1)
.
where:
.
r = distance from plume
.
H = room height
This approach is able to deﬁne the radius of the plume, where any measuring points within this
radius can be neglected. The plume region radius equals 0.9 meters when the compartment has a
height of 5 meters, which means any measuring columns located within 1 meter is neglected,
when calculating the mean median temperature difference compared to the reference model. For
the 3 beam and 6 setup, only the center measuring column is neglected (column 9, 10 11). For
the 9 beam setup the three columns in the middle is neglected. The mean median temperature
difference is shown in table 8.3 below.
Discussion | 57
==PAGE:66==
Table 8.3: Mean median temperature difference compared to the reference model
A
B
C
(1) 400 × 200
+9,1 °C
+13,9 °C
+9,1 °C
(2) 800 × 200
+10,3 °C
+10,8 °C
+1,0 °C
(3) 1600 × 200
+11,05 °C
+3,16 °C
-9,8 °C
The weakness of this approach is the lack of visualization of the smoke and heat spread and only
provides a general representation of the inﬂiction the beams create, which can be considered
vague. If a boundary value was to be set it, the value margin would be set low, for example
+/- 5 °C, but from assessing table 8.3. This result will only accept setup C2 and B3 as beam
conﬁgurations where the two-zone model can be justiﬁed to perform a smoke and heat transport
analysis, see table 8.4.
Table 8.4: Error margin of +/- 5 °C for mean median temperature difference
A
B
C
(1) 400 × 200



(2) 800 × 200



(3) 1600 × 200



Through the discussion three attempts of determining an error margin have been stated, where
each had weakness in their approach. It has therefore not been possible to create one robust
max/min value or margin where upon the two-zone model could be considered a reliable method
for calculating smoke and heat transport in a compartment with suspended beams from the
ceiling. The attempts have been able to clarify the overlapping ﬁelds where the two-zone model
could be considered reliable enough for the investigation - but when weighting one method or
the other, it becomes either restricted by the distance to plume or it disregards the ﬂow of the
smoke development. It has therefore not been able to determine a certain level of complexity of
the beams to determine when the two-zone model is good enough to replace a CFD model.
58 | Discussion
==PAGE:67==
9. Conclusion
Comparison of the methods has been made which concluded that the lack of a turbulence model
in the two-zone model restricts the method from mixing air and gas. As the beams create
turbulence in the smoke’s mass ﬂow, this is the main source of the deviations between the two-
zone model and the CFD model. The two-zone model result is an approximation of the smoke
and heat spread, where the deviation between the methods is used when determining a use criteria.
The CFD model was veriﬁed by comparison with hand calculations and the two-zone model.
There was some deviation between the temperature development, which was a result of difference
in heat loss either through the compartment boundaries in the hand calculation or the lack of
heat loss through ventilation opening in the CFD model.
When comparing the beam iteration setups, it was concluded that fewer beams in the com-
partment is more prone to create more critical conditions than a room with a high amount of
beams. The 3 beam setup was able to spread further than the 6 beam and 9 beam setups, where
the beams were hindering the smoke and heat spread. The logic approach of a more complex
compartment (in terms of suspended beams), requires a more complex method is therefore up for
reconsideration. The primary result from the comparison was the three statements which deﬁned
how the beams affected the conditions in the compartment.
Several attempts of determining a borderline between the two-zone model and the CFD model
was made. In every attempt to determine a use criteria, the method was either, not supported by
evidence of how much the models may differ from one another, or the criteria would be made
from a certain acceptance criteria, which can differ from case to case. It can be concluded that it
was not possible to determine a useful boundary condition.
Conclusion | 59
==PAGE:68==
60 | Conclusion
==PAGE:69==
10. Future Perspective
In future developments on the subject, certain aspects of the simulation and analysis can be
improved upon. To improve upon current simulations in FDs would be to perform a CFD
simulation with a ﬁner detailing of mesh grid could correct some of the errors and irregularities
which occurred in this analysis. This would allow for a better detailing of the smoke development
and enable the model to become truly symmetrical.
It could also suggested to expand upon current investigations by performing simulations of
containing beam dimensions and/or beam heights which was not included in this thesis as it
might be able to determine a boundary conditions, for example a total beam amount of 4 or 5. It
could also interesting to investigate smaller beam sizes with a height of 200 mm or 100 mm to
be able to determine a certain beam height which can be neglected from the CFD model.
The limitations of the thesis prohibited certain areas to be explored upon, which could have a
larger impact upon the suspended beam setup. As mentioned in chapter 2 Theoretical Back-
ground, the heat release rate for the fuel is an important factor in a ﬁre growth model. It could
therefore be interesting to depict how the different types of ﬁres - different liquid pool ﬁres
and/or solid ﬁres - would affect the result in model setups explored in the thesis. Different heat
release rates could also be tested to investigate how critical the turbulence becomes when the
HRR is altered. Different compartment heights could also investigated in relation to exposure
from turbulence.
Future Perspective | 61
==PAGE:70==
62 | Future Perspective
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[Babrauskas and Peacock, 1992] Babrauskas, V. and Peacock, D. R. (1992). Heat release rate:
the single most important parameter in ﬁre hazard. Fire Safety Journal, 18:255–272.
[Best Practice gruppen, 2009] Best Practice gruppen (2009). CFD Best Practice.
[Byström, 2017] Byström, A. (2017). Compartment Fire Temperature: Calculations and
Measurements (Doctoral Thesis). Luleå University of Technology.
[Deibjerg et al., 2003] Deibjerg, T., Husted, B., Bygbjerg, H., and Westerman, D. (2003).
Argos User’s Guide: A step by step guide to ﬁre simulation. Danish Institute of Fire and
Security Technology (DIFT), (December).
[Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen, 2004] Erhvervs- og boligstyrelsen (2004). Information om
Brandteknisk Dimensionering. https://www.traﬁkstyrelsen.dk/ DA/ Byggeri/
Sikre-og-sunde-bygninger/ Brandsikkerhed.
[Floyd, 2002] Floyd, J. E. (2002). Comparison of CFAST and FDS for Fire Simulation with the
HDR T51 and T52 Tests. National Institute of Standards and Technology, NISTIR 686.
[Hurley, 2016] Hurley, M. J. (2016). SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering. Springer,
5. edition.
[Husted et al., 2009] Husted, B., Westerman, D., Sødring, T. W., and Baden, N. (2009). Argos
Theory Manual. Danish Institute of Fire and Security Technology (DIFT), Version 8.
[Husted, 2004] Husted, B. P. (2004). Hvornår kan man anvende zone-modellering og hvornår
skal der bruges CFD til brandsimulering i forbindelse med funktionsbaserede brandkrav.
Dansk Brand- og sikringsteknisk Institut.
[Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000] Karlsson, B. and Quintiere, J. G. (2000). Enclosure Fire
Dynamics. CRC Press.
[Luo et al., 1997] Luo, M., He, Y., and Beck, V. (1997). Application of Field Model and
Two-zone Model to Flashover Fires in a Full-scale Multi-room Single Level Building. Fire
Safety Journal, 29(1):1–25.
[McGrattan et al., 2013] McGrattan, K., Hostikka, S., McDermott, R., Floyd, J., Weinschenk,
C., and Overholt, K. (2013). Fire Dynamics Simulator User’s Guide (Version 6). NIST
Special Publication 1019 Sixth Edition.
[Pope, 2000] Pope, S. B. (2000). Turbulent Flows. Cambridge University Press.
[Särdqvist, 1993] Särdqvist, S. (1993). Initial Fires. RHR, Smoke Production and CO
Generation from Single Items and Room Fire Tests.
BIBLIOGRAPHY | 63
==PAGE:72==
[Spearpoint, 2008] Spearpoint, M. (2008). Fire Engineering Design Guide, volume 3rd editio.
New Zealand Centre For Advanced Engineering.
[Tavelli et al., 2014] Tavelli, S., Rota, R., and Derudi, M. (2014). A Critical Comparison
Between CFD and Zone Models for the Consequence Analysis of Fires in Congested
Environments. Chemical Engineering Transactions, 36:247–252.
[Toﬁło et al., 2016] Toﬁło, P., We¸grzy´nski, W., and Porowski, R. (2016). Hand Calculations,
Zone Models and CFD – Areas of Disagreement and Limits of Application in Practical Fire
Protection Engineering. 11th Conference on Performance-Based Codes and Fire Safety
Design Methods.
64 | BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:73==
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
Appendices
A
Grid Resolution Study
67
B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening
71
C
Hand Calculation of Gas Temperature
75
D
Input Setup for Argos
77
E
Output graphs from Argos
79
F
Input Setup for FDS
87
Appendices | 65
==PAGE:76==
66 | Appendices
==PAGE:77==
A
Grid Resolution Study
PURPOSE
"The most important task for a CFD modeler is to perform a grid resolu-
tion study for the particular application at hand. The accuracy of a CFD
calculation is dependent on the resolution of the underlying numerical grid."
[Hurley, 2016, chap. 32]
As Morgan J. Hurley described above in SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering, (2016),
the grid resolution in a CFD model is essential to the numerical calculation. Therefore it is
crucial that the mesh size is not too low, as the simulation will not provide a viable representation
of the ﬁre development - and a too high mesh size will result in long calculation times, which is
unwanted. This study is therefore an investigation to choose the right mesh size.
APPROACH
To perform the grid resolution study, two identical models, except for the grid size, is sim-
ulated and compared. The mesh size is represented by the number of cells the length, width
and height is divided into. The lower resolution is divided in 100 × 100 × 25 and has a total
cell amount of 250.000. The high resolution is divided in 200 × 200 × 50 and has a total cell
amount has 2.000.000 cells total. A lower mesh size than 100 × 100 × 25 is not investigated as
the beams won’t ﬁt into the mesh if it was any lower. The setup chosen is the 3 beam setup with
a beam size of 400 × 200 mm, also described as setup A1 in table 5.2. Each simulation is set to
simulate 60 seconds of ﬁre development.
When comparing the two models, the measuring columns under the ﬁrst and third beam is
evaluated, see ﬁgure B.2. The mean value of the top 3 measuring points in the column is
compared in the Results.
Figure A.1: Location of columns of measuring points
A
Grid Resolution Study | 67
==PAGE:78==
RESULTS
Table A.1: Simulation Time Comparison
Mesh Setup in FDS
Total Cell Amount
Simulation Time
[length × width × height]
[units]
[min]
100×100×25
250.000
52,38
200×200×50
2.000.000
724,00 (∼12 h)
(a) 250.000 cells
(b) 2.000.000 cells
Figure A.2: Render of simulation after 60 seconds with Smokeview
(a) Under beam 1
(b) Under beam 3
Figure A.3: Mean upper temperature development for 250.000 and 2.000.000 cells
68 | A
Grid Resolution Study
==PAGE:79==
ANALYSIS
The model have been simulated for each grid size conﬁguration. As shown in table A.1 the
simulation time for the high resolution mesh took approx. 12 times longer to calculate the
same scenario. When comparing the temperature development in ﬁgure A.3, the temperature
difference between the high and low resolution model is minimal. The 2.000.000 cell model
have a median temperature of +5 °C under beam 1 and -0.05 °C under beam 3. Under beam 1
the minimum and maximum temperature difference is -21 °C and +35 °C respectively. Under
beam 1 the minimum and maximum temperature difference is -34 °C and +37 °C.
The temperature difference is considered low in comparison to the calculation time needed
to perform the high resolution grid model. The outer bound temperatures is caused by different
spike temperatures in the simulation and is not evaluated to have greater affect in the overall
simulation.
The minor temperature deviance under each beam in ﬁgure A.3.a and A.3.b is a result of
the adjustment of the beams placement to ﬁt the lower grid size. The high grid size resolution
will enable this error to be ﬁxed to achieve a more symmetric result. This error is regarded to be
a minor deviance compared to the long calculation time needed to ﬁx it.
The rendition of the smoke development in ﬁgure A.2 might suggest a more accurate im-
age of the smoke layer height in the compartment if the high grid resolution is used, but this is
not explored further in this chapter.
SUMMERY
The performed grid resolution study concludes that the lower cell amount grid is capable
enough to supply a valid representation of the temperatures development and has a shorter
simulation time, which is preferred.
The mesh could have divided into a two domains, with a high resolution mesh in the up-
per part of the compartment and a lower resolution in the lower part. But as the deviation is
considered minor of character, this would only increase the amount of time needed to setup the
model correctly, and would increase the total calculation time, if implemented - therefore it is
not implemented in current model.
A
Grid Resolution Study | 69
==PAGE:80==
70 | A
Grid Resolution Study
==PAGE:81==
B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening
PURPOSE
The purpose of the sensitivity analysis is to analyze whether or not the placement of the ventila-
tion opening will affect the simulation results in the CFD model - and if the deviance between
each model will have a large impact upon the results. The inclusion of the ventilation opening is
made to be comparable with the two-zone model, the opening which creates the least interference
to the ﬁre development will be favored.
APPROACH
Two almost identical CFD models are compared, with the only difference being the place-
ment of the ventilation opening. The ﬁrst model is placed parallel compared to the beams and
the second places the opening perpendicular to the beams, see ﬁgure B.1. The model setup is
based on the 3 beam setup (A) from chapter 5.2 where each beam size iteration is investigated
in each model. The air supply and all the other parameters is identical to the iteration setup in
chapter 5 Model Setup.
(a) Parallel to ventilation supply
(b) Perpendicular to ventilation supply
Figure B.1: Beams orientation to the ventilation supply
When comparing the two model, the measuring columns under the ﬁrst and third beam is
evaluated, see ﬁgure B.2. The mean value of the top 3 measuring points in the column is
compared for each iteration in the Results.
Figure B.2: Location of columns of measuring points
B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening | 71
==PAGE:82==
RESULTS
Figure B.3: Render of temperature after 60 s, (a) Parallel to beams, (b) Perpendicular
(a) Parallel opening - under beam 1
.
(b) Parallel opening - under beam 3
.
(c) Perpendicular opening - under beam 1
(d) Perpendicular opening - under beam 3
Figure B.4: Temperature comparison for 60 seconds
72 | B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening
==PAGE:83==
The median temperature difference between beam 1 and beam 3 for the parallel and perpendicular
setup have been made, see table B.1. The median temperature is chosen as it represents the mean
deviation value between each side of the model.
Table B.1: Median temperature difference between beam 1 and beam 3
Opening
Location
Beam
Type
[H ×W]
Temperature
Difference
Parallel
400×200
±
23,19 °C
800×200
±
34,92 °C
1600×200
±
69,82 °C
Perpendicular
400×200
±
14,13 °C
800×200
±
27,72 °C
1600×200
±
39,06 °C
ANALYSIS
As seen on the 3 renditions in the ﬁgure B.3.a, the plume have an attendance to be blown
to the right due to the ventilation blowing air into the compartment from the left side of the room.
This is more apparent in the larger beam sizes as the smoke does not spread under the beams as
easy as the smaller sizes.
In ﬁgure B.4 the temperature under beam 3 is larger in both cases, but the temperature dif-
ference between each side is larger when the opening is placed parallel to the beams. As shown
in table B.1 the temperature is almost 70 °C larger under beam 3 than beam 1 with the largest
beam type - which is also approx. 80 % larger compared to the perpendicular setup. As the goal
is to strive for a symmetrical temperature development in the compartment from the ﬁre, the
ventilation opening is suggested to be placed perpendicular to the beams.
The temperature difference in the perpendicular setup is assumed to be caused by the placement
restrictions of the beams. The beams is placed to match into the mesh, which results in that the
beam is placed asymmetrical to the ﬁre by 200 mm. This results in a asymmetrical temperature
in front of the beams even though the ventilation opening is placed perpendicular to the beams.
SUMMERY
It can be concluded that the opening placement had a greater impact on ﬁre development.
When comparing the two opening locations, the deviations between each side of the ﬁre were
highest when the opening was placed parallel to the beams. And even though there still was devi-
ations between the temperature development under beam 1 and beam 3, the favored placement
of the opening is perpendicular to the beams.
B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening | 73
==PAGE:84==
74 | B
Sensitivity Analysis of Ventilation Opening
==PAGE:85==
C
Hand Calculation of Gas Temperature
When performing the hand-calculation of the gas temperature in chapter 6, the experiment and
statistical correlated equation for gas temperature presented in Enclosure Fire Dynamics by
McCaffrey [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000, chap. 6.3.2], is used.
The convenient from is used, which uses conventional values for some constant quantities
( g = 9.81 m/s2 , ρa = 1.2 kg/m3 , Ta = 293 K, and cp = 1.05 kJ/(kgK) ), see equation C.1:
∆T = Tg −Ta = 6.85

˙Q2
Ao
√HohkAT
1/3
(C.1)
.
where:
.
Tg = temperature of gas layer [K]
.
Ta = temperature of ambient air layer [K]
.
˙Q = heat release rate [kW]
.
Ao = area of opening [m2]
.
AT = total internal surface area [m2]
.
Ho = height of opening [m]
.
hk =
q
kρc
t
effective heat conduction term [ kW / m2K ]
The gas temperature is numerically calculated as a function of time. The values below are stated
in chapter 5 Model Setup:
Ta = 293.15 K
˙Q = 2400 kW
Ao = 25 m2
AT = 1200 m2
Ho = 2.5 m
Typical values of thermal property (kρc) for concrete [Karlsson and Quintiere, 2000, tab. 6.1]:
kρc = 2·106 kW / m2K
C
Hand Calculation of Gas Temperature | 75
==PAGE:86==
Figure C.1: Gas temperature development
76 | C
Hand Calculation of Gas Temperature
==PAGE:87==
D
Input Setup for Argos
The following information is an excerpt of the two-zone calculation report from Argos, which
states the input information. Certain elements might not be described here as it have been
evaluated to have low or no importance to the simulation.
BASIC INFORMATION
Scenario name:
ReferenceRoom
Company type:
Various
Basic bldg. construction:
Concrete
SCENARIO
Room name:
Reference Room
Room use:
Empty
Room length × width [m]:
20×20
Area [m2]:
400,00
Average height [m]:
5,00
Max. distance [m]:
14,14
Floor type:
Floor (Pettersson)
Base wall:
Wall (Pettersson)
Component:
Hole (Miscellaneous)
Component width [m]:
10,00
Component height [m]:
2,50
Height above ﬂoor [m]:
0,00
Fire installations:
-
Fire brigade:
-
D
Input Setup for Argos | 77
==PAGE:88==
CALCULATION OPTIONS
Post ﬂashover enabled:
X
Time limit [min]:
60
Plumemodel:
Heskestad
FIRE
Fire type:
Liquid pool ﬁre
Name:
Gasoline (Ref.)
Max. HRR per area [MW/m2]:
2,40
KBeta [1/m]:
2,10
Fire value [GJ/m3]:
32,34
Optical smoke potential [dB/m]:
100,0
Parabolic growth [MW/min2]:
2,40
Radiation fraction:
0,35
.
Volume [m3]:
0,20
Max. ﬁre area [m2]:
1,00
Min. pool depth [m]:
0,010
78 | D
Input Setup for Argos
==PAGE:89==
E
Output graphs from Argos
The following graph outputs from Argos include:
• Heat Release Rate (HRR)
• Optical smoke density in rooms and in smoke
• Distance from ﬂoor to smoke layers
• Temperature in smoke layers
• Oxygen levels in layers and rooms
• Heat radiation and heat loss through surfaces
• Upper and lower ceiling surface
• Average temperature
• Floor pressure
• Numerical integration step length
E
Output graphs from Argos | 79
==PAGE:90==
80 | E
Output graphs from Argos
==PAGE:91==
E
Output graphs from Argos | 81
==PAGE:92==
82 | E
Output graphs from Argos
==PAGE:93==
E
Output graphs from Argos | 83
==PAGE:94==
84 | E
Output graphs from Argos
==PAGE:95==
E
Output graphs from Argos | 85
==PAGE:96==
86 | E
Output graphs from Argos
==PAGE:97==
F
Input Setup for FDS
As the setups for each FDS output ﬁle consists of large text, only the ﬁrst iteration is shown
(A1), as the only difference is the beam type, their placement and the total amount - as well as
the measuring columns, as described in chapter 5. The different beam iteration setups is also
included below.
F.1
Full FDS setup for 3 beam setup (A1)
Generel information and compartment size
&HEAD CHID=’FDS_ROOM_B3_H400’,
TITLE=’FDS ROOM, 3 BEAMS, 400x200 in size’ /
&TIME T_END=300.
/
&DUMP MASS_FILE =.TRUE., DT_DEVC=1.
/
&MESH IJK=100,100,25, XB=0,20,0,20,0,5 / "half-size" fine mesh
#&MESH IJK=200,200,50, XB=0,20,0,20,0,5 / fine mesh
Hole in boundary wall (ventilation opening)
&SURF ID=’SUPPLY’, VEL=-0.04, COLOR=’BLUE’ /
&VENT XB=5,15,0,0,0,2.5, SURF_ID=’SUPPLY’ /
Obsticales in the ceiling
3 beams in ceiling
&OBST XB=4.8,5.0,0,20,4.6,5 / 400x200
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=14.8,15.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
Fire type
&VENT XB=9.4,10.6,9.6,10.4,0,0,
SURF_ID=’FIRE’ / ∼1 m2 pool (0,96 m2)
&SURF ID=’FIRE’,
COLOR=’RED’,
HRRPUA=2400.,
FYI=’HRR [kW/m2] from Argos for liquid pool fire for Gasoline’ /
F
Input Setup for FDS | 87
==PAGE:98==
&REAC FUEL=’N-OCTANE’,
CO_YIELD=0.01,
SOOT_YIELD=0.034,
HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION=4.37E4,
IDEAL=.TRUE.
FYI=’FUEL, CO_YIELD and SOOT_YIELD is based of N-OCTANE as gasoline
is not part the FDS library.
The HEAT_OF_COMBUSTION is for gasoline
from Initial Fires [Särdqvist, 1993]’/
Outputs
TEMPERATURE OUTPUT TOWERS
TOWER (1) - temperature, point
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=2.6,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(1)9’ /
TOWER (2) - temperature, point
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=5.2,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(2)9’ /
TOWER (3) - temperature, point
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=7.6,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(3)9’ /
88 | F
Input Setup for FDS
==PAGE:99==
TOWER (4) - temperature, point (PLACED UNDER THE FIRE)
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=10,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(4)9’ /
TOWER (5) - temperature, point
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=12.4,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(5)9’ /
TOWER (6) - temperature, point
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=14.6,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(6)9’ /
TOWER (7) - temperature, point
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,0.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)1’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,1.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)2’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,1.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)3’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,2.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)4’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,2.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)5’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,3.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)6’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,3.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)7’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,4.0, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)8’ /
&DEVC XYZ=17.4,10,4.5, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, ID=’TEMP(7)9’ /
F
Input Setup for FDS | 89
==PAGE:100==
SMOKE LAYER HEIGHT (XB) for each tower (x)
&DEVC XB=2.6,2.6,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(1)’/
&DEVC XB=5.2,5.2,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(2)’/
&DEVC XB=7.6,7.6,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(3)’/
&DEVC XB=10,10,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(4)’/
&DEVC XB=12.4,12.4,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(5)’/
&DEVC XB=14.6,14.6,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(6)’/
&DEVC XB=17.4,17.4,10,10,0,5, QUANTITY=’LAYER HEIGHT’, ID=’HSMOKE(7)’/
SMV output
&SLCF PBY=10, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’, CELL_CENTERED=.TRUE. /
&SLCF PBY=10, QUANTITY=’HRRPUV’, CELL_CENTERED=.TRUE. /
&SLCF PBY=10, QUANTITY=’VOLUME FRACTION’, SPEC_ID=’SOOT’,
CELL_CENTERED=.TRUE. /
&SLCF PBZ=4, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’/
&SLCF PBZ=3, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’/
&SLCF PBZ=2, QUANTITY=’TEMPERATURE’ /
&TAIL / End of file.
90 | F
Input Setup for FDS
==PAGE:101==
F.2
Obstacle setup for 3 beam setups
&OBST XB=4.8,5.0,0,20,4.6,5 / 400x200
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=14.8,15.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=4.8,5.0,0,20,4.2,5 / 800x200
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=14.8,15.0,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=4.8,5.0,0,20,3.4,5 / 1600x200
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=14.8,15.0,0,20,3.4,5 /
F.3
Obstacle setup for 6 beam setups
&OBST XB=2.6,2.8,0,20,4.6,5 / 400x200
&OBST XB=5.4,5.6,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=8.2,8.4,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=11.6,11.8,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=14.4,14.6,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=17.2,17.4,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=2.6,2.8,0,20,4.2,5 / 800x200
&OBST XB=5.4,5.6,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=8.2,8.4,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=11.6,11.8,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=14.4,14.6,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=17.2,17.4,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=2.6,2.8,0,20,3.4,5 / 1600x200
&OBST XB=5.4,5.6,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=8.2,8.4,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=11.6,11.8,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=14.4,14.6,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=17.2,17.4,0,20,3.4,5 /
F
Input Setup for FDS | 91
==PAGE:102==
F.4
Obstacle setup for 9 beam setups
&OBST XB=1.8,2.0,0,20,4.6,5 / 400x200
&OBST XB=3.8,4.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=5.8,6.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=7.8,8.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=12,12.2,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=14,14.2,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=16,16.2,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=18,18.2,0,20,4.6,5 /
&OBST XB=1.8,2.0,0,20,4.2,5 / 800x200
&OBST XB=3.8,4.0,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=5.8,6.0,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=7.8,8.0,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=12,12.2,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=14,14.2,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=16,16.2,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=18,18.2,0,20,4.2,5 /
&OBST XB=1.8,2.0,0,20,3.4,5 / 1600x200
&OBST XB=3.8,4.0,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=5.8,6.0,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=7.8,8.0,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=9.8,10.0,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=12,12.2,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=14,14.2,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=16,16.2,0,20,3.4,5 /
&OBST XB=18,18.2,0,20,3.4,5 /
92 | F
Input Setup for FDS
