==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Segmentation of
White Matter Hyperintensities
in Magnetic Resonance Images
Using Deep Learning
Amalie Monberg Hindsholm (s134235)
Copenhagen, July 15th 2019
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors
Ulrich Lindberg
MSc, Ph.D.
Dept. of Clinical Physiology,
Nuclear Medicine and PET
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Claes Nøhr Ladefoged
MSc, Ph.D., Postdoc
Dept. of Clinical Physiology,
Nuclear Medicine and PET
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Flemming Littrup Andersen
Associate Professor, MSc, Ph.D.
Dept. of Clinical Physiology,
Nuclear Medicine and PET
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Stig Præstekjær Cramer
MD, Ph.D.
Dept. of Clinical Physiology,
Nuclear Medicine and PET
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Liselotte Højgaard
Professor, MD, DMSc, Head of Department
Dept. of Clinical Physiology,
Nuclear Medicine and PET
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen
Censor:
Søren Baarsgard Hansen
Associate Professor,
MSc,
Ph.D.,
Medical
Physicist
Dept. of Nuclear Medicine and PET
Aarhus University Hospital
Department of clinical physiology, nuclear medicine and PET, Rigshospitalet
Afsnit KF-4011
Opgang 4, 1. Sal
Juliane Maries Vej 8
2100 København Ø
+45 35 45 40 11
KF4011.rigshospitalet@regionh.dk
Technical Univeristy of Denmark
Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Ørsteds Plads, Building 349,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
+45 45 25 58 32
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
University of Copenhagen
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
Blegdamsvej 3B,
2200 København N, Denmark
+45 35 32 79 00
email@sund.ku.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Introduction: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a young-onset disease which manifests as
MRI-hyperintense lesions of demyelineated neurons in the white matter of the brain.
Multiple methods have been suggested for automatic lesion segmentation throughout
the past two decades, but so far broad application in clinic has not been achieved. In
this study a state-of-the-art segmentation model is tested and tuned for generalisa-
tion on a local dataset with the aim of assessing clinical usability.
Methods: The winning method of the MICCAI 2017 WMH Segmentation Chal-
lenge was implemented. The method builds on a fully connected deep learning CNN
with U-net architecture. After testing the generalisation of the segmentation model
to local data, a number of variations were applied in an effort to improve performance,
including variations of training data and a few regularisation techniques. Performance
of the network variations were evaluated using a combination of four evaluation met-
rics, including a voxel wise dice score coefficient and precision and recall at lesion-level.
The final segmentation model was tested for clinical applicability on the held-out clin-
ical dataset. A clinical expert assessed all 55 generated segmentation maps twice in
random order and ranked them ”Perfect”, clinically ”Acceptable” or clinically ”Unac-
ceptable”.
Results: The winning method of the MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge gen-
eralised relatively well to the local dataset, and performance was further increased by
training on local data and employing dropout. The final segmentation model had a
mean performance on the test dataset of a DSC at 0.53, an AVD at 133.05, a lesion-
level precision of 0.63 and a lesion-level recall at 0.88. Clinical evaluation showed
high clinical usability with only three out of 55 generated segmentation maps rated
clinically unacceptable.
Conclusion: Building on the foundation of a strong segmentation model, a method
was developed which has high clinical relevance and has the possibility of improving
clinical workflow as well as providing a framework for further clinical testing
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Introduktion: Multiple Sklerose (MS) er en sygdom der udvikles tidligt i livet og
manifesterer sig som hyperintense lesioner af demyelinerede neuroner på MR-billeder.
Mange metoder til automatisk segmentering af disse lesioner er blevet udviklet gen-
nem, de sidste to årtier, men ingen af disse metoder har endnu opnået bred klinisk
obakning. I denne opgave implementeres en valideret, automatisk segmenteringsalgo-
ritme til segmentering af et lokalt MS datasæt. Den udvikles yderligere for at opnå
optimale resultater på det lokale data og testes med henblik på klinisk applikation.
Metoder: Den vindende metode fra MICCAI 2017 WMH Segmentation Challenge
bygger på et Deep learning netværk med en U-net struktur. Denne blev implementeret
med henblik på automatisk segmentering af MS lesioner. Modellens evne til at gener-
alisere sig til nyt data indput blev testet, hvorefter et antal netværksvariaioner blev
afprøvet. Heriblandt blev forskellige udgaver af trænings-data afprøvet og regulariser-
ingteknikker blev implementeret. De forskellige netværksvariationers præstation blev
vurderet på baggrund af fire mål for precision og segmenterings-overlap, heriblandt
Dice Score coefficienten (DSC) på voxel-niveau samt precision og recall på lesions-
niveau. Den endelige model blev testet på et klinisk dataset med henblik på klinisk
relevans. En klinisk expert vurderede alle 55 genererede segmenterings-masker og gav
dem scoringen ”Perfekt”, klinisk ”Acceptabel” eller klinisk ”Uacceptabel”.
Resultater: Den vindende metode generaliserede relativt godt til det lokale datasæt,
og resultatet blev yderligere forbedret ved at træne modellen fra start på lokalt data
samt ved bl.a. at indføre Dropout. Den endelige segmenteringsmodel havde en gen-
nemsnitlig DSC på 0.53, AVD på 133.05, precision på 0.63 og recall på 0.88. Den
kliniske evaluering viste at modellens lesions-segmentering havde høj klinisk relevans,
idet kun tre ud af 55 segmenteringsmasker blev vurderet klinisk uacceptable.
Konklusion: Med udgangspunkt i en stærk segmenteringsalgoritme fra litteraturen
blev der i denne opgave videreudviklet en metode til automatisk segmetering af MS-
lesioner, der viste sig at have høj klinisk brugbarhed.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a Masters Degree in Biomedical Engineering at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU. The project has been completed in collaboration with Department
of Clinical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine and PET at Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen.
The amount of work that has been carried out is equivalent to 32.5 ECTS points
and was completed during a time period from mid January 2019 to mid July 2019.
In this project, a deep neural network is utilised to automatically segment white
matter hyperintensities on brain MRI, and its performance related to clinical prac-
tice.
Supervisors
Ulrich Lindberg, MSc, Ph.D., Rigshospitalet
Claes Nøhr Ladefoged, MSc, Ph.D., Rigshospitalet
Flemming Littrup Andersen, Associate Professor, MSc, Ph.D., Rigshospitalet
Stig Præstekjær Cramer, MD, Ph.D. Rigshospitalet
Liselotte Højgaard, Professor, MD, DMSc, Head of Department, Rigshospitalet
Censor:
Søren Baarsgard Hansen, Associate Professor, MSc, Ph.D., Aarhus University Hospi-
tal
Submission date: July 15, 2019
Examination date: August 16, 2019
Amalie Monberg Hindsholm (s134235)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my very great appreciation to all of my supervisors Ulrich
Lindberg, Liselotte Højgaard, Claes Nøhr Ladefoged, Flemming Andersen and Stig
Præstekjær Cramer. Thank you for excellent guidance and collaboration and for so
much of your time.
A special thanks to Helle Juhl Simonsen and Stig Præstekjær Cramer for drawing
the manual reference standards used in this project and for assessing the generated
segmentation maps. This was a very time-consuming task, and the project could not
have been carried out without it.
I would like to thank all the people working at the whole-body counter for an in-
spiring and fun work-environment and for great advice when needed.
Last but not least, thank you to Liselotte Højgaard and the Department of Clini-
cal Physiology, Nuclear Medicine and PET for giving me the opportunity to write
this thesis and for trusting me with the project.
Amalie
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of Abbreviations
MS
Multiple Sclerosis
BBB
Blood Brain Barrier
CNS
Central Nervous System
CIS
Clinically Isolated Syndrome
ON
Opticus Neuritis
RRMS
Relapsing-Remitting MS
EP
Evoked Potential
DIS
Dissemination in Space
DIT
Dissemination In Time
EDSS
Expanded Disability Status Scale
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
RF
Radio Frequency
TR
Repitition Time
TE
Echo Time
FLAIR
Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery
CSF
Cerebral Spinal Fluid
GD
Gadolinium
AI
Artificial Intelligence
CT
Computed Tomography
GPU
Graphical Processing Unit
ML
Machine Learning
NN
Neural Network
DL
Deep Learning
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Abbreviations
LR
Learning Rate
ReLU
Rectified Liniar Unit
ADAM
ADAptive Moment Estimation
DSC
Dice Score Coefficient
AVD
Average Dice Score
WMH
White Matter Hyperintensity
MICCAI
Medical Image Computing Computer Assisted Intervention
DWM
Dirty White Matter
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Multiple Sclerosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
MRI Sequences for Imaging MS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Artificial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Activation function in CNN and Parameter Initialisation . . . .
12
2.3.4
Training Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.5
CNN for Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.6
U-net Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.7
Network Ensembles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.8
Regularisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
MICCAI 2017 WMH Segmentation Challenge Winner
. . . . . . . . .
19
3
Methods
21
3.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Data Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Acquisition Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Computational Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Data Delineation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.6
Preprocessing and Data Conversion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
3.7
Training-, Validation- and Test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Post-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9
Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9.1
Original Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9.2
Effect of Data Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.9.3
Regularisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.9.4
Selection of Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.10 Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.11 Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.11.1 Performance on Test Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.11.2 Clinical Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
33
4.1
Optimisation of Model Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Original Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Effect of Data Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.3
Regularisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.4
Selection of Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Final Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.1
Longitudinal Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.2
Clinical Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Discussion
45
5.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Future Prospects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Developmental Journey
59
A.0.1
MICCAI 2008 MS Lesion Segmentation Challenge
. . . . . . .
59
A.0.2
Initial implementation of the Segmentation Model
. . . . . . .
59
B Model Specifications
61
C Results - Model Adjustments
63
C.1 Performance of Each Model Variation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
C.2 Loss Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
C.3 Validation Data Split . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
D Longitudinal Development
67
List of Figures
69
==PAGE:15==
Contents
xiii
List of Tables
71
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a disease of the central nervous system affecting more than
2.3 million people worldwide [1]. It is a young on-set disease, predominantly affecting
people around 20-50 years old, and is the leading cause of non-traumatic, neurologic
disability in young adults [[2], [3]]. Much is still unknown about the disease, as it is
difficult to investigate for various reasons, including a highly varying disease course,
late diagnosis and impaired accessibility to the affected areas.
The cause of MS is not discovered, but it is known to be an inflammatory condition,
manifesting as a demyelination of the neurons in the white matter of the central
nervous system (CNS), forming MRI hyperintense areas known as MS lesions [4]. De-
myelination causes a delay, or complete stop, in the transmission of impulses in the
affected part of the brain, cutting off communication from CNS to the body.
Because the disease affects the CNS it is very difficult to examine the damaged areas
- in fact it was almost impossible until the development of Magnetic Resonance Imag-
ing (MRI) techniques in the early 1980’s [5]. Due to its highly sensitive soft-tissue
contrast, MRI is able to image the demyelinated areas of the brain and spinal chord
and is today the main investigational tool for MS diagnosis and monitoring [5]. Since
MRI has become a routine clinical examination in MS, technological advances and
newer MRI techniques have led to a highly improved understanding of the MS patho-
genesis and disease progression.
Diagnosis of MS mostly relies on MRI for distribution of lesions, and not specific
number or volume of lesions. In monitoration however, the exact change in lesion
volume and count can have great significance. To get a complete sense of disease
development, MRIs are today manually assessed. Clinical assessment of MRIs is per-
formed by neuroradiologists trained to identify MS lesions. It is a time-consuming
process, where the MS lesions are drawn onto the head-scans, and categorized ac-
cording to the McDonald criteria. The process is prone to intra-rater and inter-rater
variability, as a clear definition of the lesions can be difficult and the final delineation
therefore relies on personal judgement [6].
In recent years, automatic image analysis tools have shown to be increasingly promis-
ing alternatives to manual assessments in many fields of medical imaging. By analysing
the images statistically, image processing algorithms can provide consistent solutions
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
in a fraction of the time used on a manual assessment. In the past decade multi-
ple algorithms have been developed with the purpose of automatically detecting and
segmenting MS lesions in white matter, with some of the best proposals achieving
results comparable to a human rater [7]. Recently, especially methods based on deep
machine learning frameworks have shown great promise.
Many proposed AI methods for biomedical image assessment from the literature have
been developed as part of a ”programming challenge”, in which programmers compete
to obtain the best performance on an available challenge dataset. One of the more
recent challenges in white matter hyperintensity segmentation, was the ”MICCAI
2017 White Matter Hyperintensity Segmentation Challenge”, in which participants
were given training data from 60 patients, from 3 different scanners [8]. The data was
comprised of head- and neck scans with white-matter lesions of presumably vascular
origin. The winning method of this challenge was presented by Hongwei Li et al.,
proposing a fully convolutional network ensemble with a U-net architecture [9]. The
model had several desirable qualities such as being easily implementable, employing
up-to-date libraries and a simple architecture. Furthermore, it was shown to be ro-
bust to data from different scanners and was accepting of both one- and two-channel
inputs.
In this thesis the performance of the state-of-the-art MICCAI 2017 Segmentation
Challenge winner is evaluated on a local dataset, to assess whether its performance
can be generalised. The model is further developed to obtain best possible perfor-
mance on the local dataset and tests are performed with focus on relevance for clinical
practice.
1.1
Aim
• To test, implement and further develop an existing state-of-the-art automatic
method for segmentation of hyperintense, white-matter MS lesions on a local
MRI dataset, with focus on clinical implementation.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Multiple Sclerosis
MS is a disease characterised by CNS inflammation, demyelination, axonal injury and
axonal loss [10]. One of the earliest stages of MS is the activation of auto-reactive
T-cells outside of the CNS. The activated T-cells migrate through the blood-brain
barrier (BBB) and are reactivated by local antigen-presenting cells, initiating axonal
demyelination. The inflammation is worsened as additional inflammatory cells are
recruited by the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines by activated T-cells [10].
The inflammation and demyelination of CNS neurons, with possible formation of
plaque or scar tissue, is called an MS lesion. These lesions are often formed in the
white matter of the brain, during what is called an MS attack, and their discovery
and monitoring is crucial for diagnosing MS. An MS attack - or relapse - is defined
as newly appearing, neurological symptoms in the absence of fever, that last for more
than 24 h [10]. After an attack, a full recovery may be achieved, as remyelination
is initiated and the lesions may shrink or disappear. Axonal damage, however, is
irreversible and leads to chronic symptoms.
Symptoms of MS vary greatly in accordance with the affected area.
One of the
first signs of MS is often a clinically isolated syndrome (CIS), which is classified as a
clinical, demyelineated event which is isolated in time. The clinical course of MS is
different for each patient and can change over time. However, there are two general
classifications of the disease course, Relapsing-Remitting MS (RRMS) and Progres-
sive MS [11]. RRMS is the most common type of MS, characterised by recurrent
attacks, separated by periods of full or partial recovery, and extensive lesion forma-
tion. Progressive MS is defined as a steady worsening of symptoms over a period of
minimum 6 months, often associated with a smaller lesion load and slower rates of new
lesion formation ([11], [12]). Over time, most patients with RRMS develop secondary-
progressive MS (SPMS), only 15% of patients experience progressive MS at onset [11].
The diagnosis of MS is a long process of ruling out other possible diseases. Besides a
comprehensive medical history and a neurological exam, some of the most common
tests are; an evoked potentials (EP) test to monitor slowing of electrical conduction
caused by demyelination, a spinal fluid analysis to search for altered levels of white
blood cells, a test for the presence of oligoclonal bands in the CSF as a sign of a
==PAGE:20==
4
2 Background
nonspecific intrathecal immune reaction and an MRI examination to monitor the dis-
semination of MS lesions in time and space [13].
MRI can rule out other diseases and showcase the presence of lesions in time and
space [14]. Dissemination in space (DIS) is defined as one or more T2 lesions in at
least two out of four areas of the CNS: periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial,
or spinal cord [14]. Dissemination in time (DIT) is defined as a new T2 lesion or a
gadolinium-enhancing lesion on a follow-up MRI, with reference to a baseline scan. Or
as simultaneous presence of asymptomatic gadolinium-enhancing and non-enhancing
lesions at any time [14].
When examining an MRI for MS, all the lesions are counted within each MS-specific
area. This evaluation is combined with medical history of the patient using the Mc-
Donald criteria. The McDonald criteria is a set of criteria published in 2001 by a
team led by prof. Ian McDonald [15]. It is a tool which helps clinicians to make
accurate diagnosis of MS as early as possible by comparing number of attacks and
lesions with additional tests [15]. The criteria have been revised several times, most
recently in 2017 [16]. The revised version can be seen in table 2.1.
The diagnosis is then either: MS - all criteria fulfilled/possible MS - not all criteria
fulfilled/not MS - no criteria fulfilled [14].
MS lesions are seen in various regions of CNS. These patterns of lesions are important
to recognize when screening for MS, since non-pathologic, age-related or vascular le-
sions can be mistaken for MS. Besides being located in the four main areas of DIS,
MS lesions typically involve corpus callosum, ventricles, U-fibers, the temporal lobes,
brain-stem or cerebellum [14].
Especially lesions in the temporal lobe and juxta-
cortical lesions are distinguishable features for MS, as they are common in MS and
uncommon in vascular diseases. Juxtacortical lesions are a sub-group of cortical le-
sions and involve the juxtacortical U-fibers which are a part of subcortical matter.
Only juxta-cortical lesions are MS-specific, and must touch the cortex without expan-
sion into the ventricles [14].
When MS is established, the expanded disability status scale (EDSS) is used to clas-
sify the level of disability in the patient. The scale has 20 steps from 0-10, based
on eight individual functional system scales. The functional scales score the patients
abilities in 8 areas, and the final EDSS score is calculated from the individual score
of each functional system scale. 0 on the EDSS score corresponds to a normal neuro-
logical exam, and 10 corresponds to death by MS [17].
While it has been shown that lesion load at the time of diagnosis is not the deciding
factor for neither disease duration nor functional status, it has been shown to be of
great importance in longitudinal studies [18]. An increase in T2-hyperintense lesion
count and volume has been connected to increased disability, and the number of new
lesions within the first five years of diagnosis was the strongest predictor of level of
disability on the EDSS in the following years [18].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
5
Figure 2.1: MS lesions in four typical sites.
The average delineation of an MRI takes up to one and a half hour to perform, which
makes full delineations unfeasible in the clinic. Follow-up practice today is therefore
an assessment of how many new lesions have appeared since the last scan, without
exact lesion count or increased lesion volume assessment.
2.2
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging has a very delicate soft-tissue contrast, which enables
it to depict macroscopic abnormalities in brain tissue, such as the manifestations of
MS [7]. MRI is employed continuously throughout the processes of diagnosis, staging
and monitoring of disease progression.
MRI utilises the magnetic abilities of hydrogen nuclei (a single proton) in the body,
==PAGE:22==
6
2 Background
History of
clinical attacks
Number of lesions
with objective
clinical evidence
Additional data
needed for a
diagnosis of MS
≥2 clinical
attacks
≥2
None
≥2 clinical
attacks
1 (as well as clear-cut
historical evidence of a previous
attack involving a lesion
in a distinct anatomical location)
None
≥2 clinical
attacks
1
Dissemination in space
demonstrated by an
additional clinical attack,
implicating a different
CNS site or by MRI
1 clinical
attack
≥2
Dissemination in time
demonstrated by an
additional clinical attack,
by MRI or demonstration
of CSF-specific
oligoclonal bands
1 clinical
attack
1
Dissemination in space
demonstrated by an
additional clinical attack,
implicating a different
CNS site or by MRI
AND Dissemination in
time demonstrated by an
additional clinical attack,
by MRI or demonstration
of CSF-specific
oligoclonal bands
Table 2.1: McDonald scores for diagnosing MS, revised in 2017. Table is from Thomp-
son AJ, Banwell BL, Barkhof F, et al. Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis[16]
and the emission of radio-frequency (RF) waves from an oscillating magnetic field.
The hydrogen nuclei of the body normally spin with random axial alignment, but
when placed in a strong magnetic field, B0, such as from an MRI scanner, they start
precessing with a net direction in alignment with the field [19]. The precession fre-
quency, ω, of the nuclei in the external field is also called the Larmor frequency, and
is proportional to the strength of the field, B0: ω = γB0. The proportionality factor
γ is called the gyromagnetic ratio, and is dependent on the particle, in this case a
proton, and given in MHz/Tesla [20].
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
7
The net alignment of the precessing protons creates a net magnetisation vector, M, in
the direction of the external magnetic field. When an external RF signal is applied in
phase, the magnetic moment of the protons is exited to a plane perpendicular to B0.
When the external field is turned off, the magnetic moments start precessing back
to equilibrium, while RF-waves at the larmor frequency are transmitted [20]. These
RF-waves are measured and analysed to form an image.
The protons relax with different speed depending on their surrounding environments,
resulting in much of the contrast in MR images. The relaxation time is measured
on two separate scales; the time, T2, it takes to relax the transversal magnetisation
perpendicular to the B0, and the time, T1, it takes to rebuild the longitudinal magneti-
sation in the direction of B0[20]. Transversal magnetisation decreases exponentially
with time T2, and longitudinal magnetisation is rebuilt with time T1. Depending
on how long after excitation the signal is measured, the amount of longitudinal and
transversal magnetisation is respectively gone and completely rebuild.
These two
timescales are dependent on the excited molecules and the magnetic field strength,
why contrast between two tissues can be adjusted by measuring the signal at a time
when the protons of the two tissues have the largest difference in magnetisation.
A combination of settings designed to maximise or minimise specific tissue contrasts
is called a sequence. Different sequences are chosen depending on which features are
the subject of interest in the MRI. Sequences are often build to either maximise or
minimise T1 or T2 contrast between tissues. Two parameters which are changed in
order to produce a T1- or T2-weighted image are the echo-time (TE) and repetition-
time (TR), which represent the time from excitation to measurement and the time
between consecutive measurements respectively.
2.2.1
MRI Sequences for Imaging MS
In order to perform manual delineation of MRIs from an MS patient, the contrast be-
tween hyperintense lesions and normal brain tissue should be maximised. A combina-
tion of T2-weighted, T2-weighted FLAIR, and sometimes T1-weighted and gadolinium-
enhanced (GD) images is usually used.
A T2-weighted image is obtained by using a long TR and a relatively long TE -
maximising T2-contrast and minimising T1-contrast. In T2-weighted images, fat and
other solid substances transmit a low signal, whereas CSF and fluids transmit a high
signal. White matter therefore appears dark, while MS lesions and CSF appear as
bright areas [21].
The high CSF signal makes it difficult to identify MS lesions, especially lesions located
in corpus callosum and the periventricular region, both common sites for MS lesions.
A T2-weighted FLAIR sequence is therefore also employed. FLAIR is the abbrevia-
tion of fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, and it is a combination of a T2-weighted
image with a suppressed water signal. A T2-weighted FLAIR has a long TR and TE,
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Background
but starts with an inversion sequence, which flips the initial longitudinal magnetisa-
tion, effectively nulling the signal. The tissues then undergo T1-relaxation to rebuild
the longitudinal magnetisation, but because fluid has a longer T1-relaxation time
than fat and brain tissue, it is possible to measure the signal before the longitudinal
magnetisation of CSF is rebuilt. Thereby no signal is coming from the CSF [21].
A T1-weighted image is obtained by employing a short TR and a short TE. In
T1-weighted images, lesions appear dark against the high-signal white-matter back-
ground, but are less clearly defined than on T2 and T2-FLAIR images [21].
Gadolinium is a contrast agent which can be used to distinguish new active lesions
from older, in order to determine dissemination in time. GD will only be visible at
new lesions, where the the BBB has been broken down, and the otherwise large GD
molecules can leak into the created oedema surrounding the lesion [22].
(a) T2-weighted image (b) T2 FLAIR image
(c) T1-weighted image
Figure 2.2: Example of an MRI axial-slice, imaged using different sequences. The
high-signal CSF is nulled in the FLAIR image, which makes lesions appear clearer.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Artificial Intelligence
9
2.3
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) describes the patterns of machines which are able to per-
form tasks that require human-like intelligence. In recent years, the number of pub-
lications on AI in the medical field have drastically increased, with articles on MRI
and CT accounting for more than 50 % [23]. The combination of more labelled data
becoming available for use in AI and faster processing due to increasingly fast graphi-
cal processing units (GPUs), have made AI for the use in medical imaging one of the
most promising areas of health innovation [23].
Machine learning (ML) is a sub-set of AI methods, in which algorithms can learn from
past experience and thereby perform tasks they were not explicitly programmed to do.
ML employs automatic methods based on statistics, to process large amounts of data
in order to detect and predict patterns in future data. One of the most popular types
of ML algorithms is the neural network (NN). The concept of the neural network is
that an output can be predicted from an input x, by training a set of weights w to
minimize the loss between the predicted output f(x) and the ground truth y [24].
Deep learning (DL) is a version of machine learning, capable of detecting increasingly
complex features of an input without preceding, manual feature extraction [23].
2.3.1
Artificial Neural Networks
An artificial neural network is a collection of information processing units called
neurons, structured in a layered architecture.
Each neuron is connected to other
neurons by weighted connections, and accordingly performs a weighted sum of its
inputs. The sum is passed to an activation function and the activation is propagated
through the layers of the network. A simple, neural network is comprised of three
types of layers: an input layer, output layer and one or more hidden layers.
An
example of a simple NN with three input nodes, two output nodes and five hidden
layers is given in figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Simple architecture of a deep NN with five hidden layers. Adapted from
[23].
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Background
When the network becomes deeper, i.e. when more hidden layers are added, it is able
to learn increasingly complex features of the training data [23].
The input layer accepts an input vector at each node, and the output layer presents
the final result.
In the network depicted (fig 2.3), the output corresponds to the
probability of belonging to one of two classes.
Assuming a training dataset of images x ∈RI and a set of data labels y, with i = 1...I
and yi = 1...D, a neural network can be seen as a mapping f of input x to output y,
where
f : RI →RD
(2.1)
I is the number of neurons in the input layer, and D is the number of neurons in the
output layer - or number of predicted classes ([24], [25]).
The mapping is in most cases a linear model:
f(x) = xw + b,
(2.2)
where w and b are vectors containing the model weights and biases, respectively.
These are the parameters, which the model learn through optimisation.
Let the
initial value of all input nodes i = 1...I in a neural network be xi. The value of a
node j in the first hidden layer l will then be the linear, weighted sum
al
j =
I
∑
i=1
xiwl
ji + wl
j0
(2.3)
where wij are the weights of the layer, and wj0 the biases of the hidden layer.
After mapping, a non-linearity is applied to every node output through an activation
function ([23], [24]). The activation function is a non-linear function applied to the
initial value of each node, transforming it to an input for the next layer. Without the
activation function, the output of the network would just be a linear function of the
input, and thereby only describe linear phenomena. Activation can be applied to all
hidden- and output nodes.
The weighted sum from equation 2.3 is calculated for all I units in a hidden layer
and transformed by an activation function h. Choice of activation function decides
which neurons are propagated on as input to the second hidden layer (2) or output
layer:
zl
j = hl(aj)
(2.4)
In a network with multiple hidden layers zj will be the input for the next hidden layer
l with k = 1...K nodes
al
k =
J
∑
j=1
zl−1
j
wl
kj + wl
k0
(2.5)
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Artificial Intelligence
11
2.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
When processing large images or any kind of large input-data, the number of nodes in
a classic neural network becomes very high. Thereby increases the number of learn-
able parameters, such as weights and biases, and the model becomes slower with an
increased risk of overfitting [26].
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) are a variant of neural networks in which the
number of learnable features are decreased. CNNs can be applied to any data input
of grid-like structure - such as images. In CNNs the number of learned parameters is
drastically decreased by using sparse connections between layers as well as parameter
sharing. Parameter sharing across the input is applied by assuming that the features
of the input are invariant to translation - i.e. the same feature can be detected at
multiple image locations [26].
The filter is swept across the input, and for each region a feature is learned. The
number of fields, or pixels, the kernel moves for each convolution is a hyperparameter
called stride. In figure 2.4 the stride is 1. All learned features are stored in a feature
map with dimension dout = din −dkernel + 1. The filter is applied to the entire depth
of the input at once, corresponding to all three RGB channels for a color image. The
depth of the feature map is equal to the number of applied filters and each applied
filter corresponds to a learned feature of the input image.
As the weights of the image kernel are the same across the input, the amount of
learned weights per CNN layer is significantly lower than in a fully connected net-
work [24][23]. This decrease in computational complexity allows the feature extraction
to go deeper, as more filters can be applied per layer.
Figure 2.4: Simple version of a CNN with 4x4 input dimension, 3x3 convolution kernel
with stride 1, and a resulting feature map of dimension 2x2.
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Background
2.3.3
Activation function in CNN and Parameter Initialisation
A popular activation function for CNNs is the rectified linear unit (ReLU). The
function which essentially clamps the negative input value to zero, ensuring strictly
positive values [25]. It is a computationally effective, simple function, which enables
the network to train fast [27]. The ReLU activation of a given input a is given by:
ReLU(a) = max(0, a)
(2.6)
(a) Rectified linear unit activation
function. The function is zero when
x < 0 and linear for x > 0
(b)
Sigmoid
activation
function.
Real
numbers
are
converted
to
numbers between 0 and 1
Figure 2.5: Two common activation functions for use in deep NNs. The figures are
adapted from [25].
The last layer of a neural network relates the learned feature maps to the desired
model output. In the case of binary classification, a common choice of the activation
function is the sigmoid function. The sigmoid function takes a real-valued input and
outputs a value between 0 and 1, which can then be interpreted as the probability of
belonging to a certain class. The sigmoid function is given by [25]:
σ(a) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.7)
The initialisation of the model weights wi is important, as it determines how far
away from the ground truth, the model begins its optimisation.
There are three
common strategies for initialising weights in a deep neural network, initialising to zero,
initialising randomly, and transfer learning - i.e. initialising using weights trained in
a relevant model.
Initialising to zero effectively produces the same output as a one-neuron network. In
random initialisation the random numbers are drawn from a probability distribution
such as a Gaussian normal distribution. In some initialisation techniques random
numbers are drawn from a Gaussian distribution and then scaled in order to scale
the variance of the outputs. Glorot et al. proposed an initialisation method in 2015,
where the initial, randomly drawn weight w is scaled by 2/(nin + nout) to reduce
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Artificial Intelligence
13
variance. Here nin and nout are the number of units in the previous layer and the
next layer respectively [[28], [25]].
Transfer learning is a way of transferring knowledge from an already learned source
task, to a new target task, when a relevant network has previously been trained [29].
The algorithm thereby draws on previously learned knowledge when starting the task,
instead of approaching every task as an isolated job. Transfer learning can decrease
overall training time or increase the complexity of learned features in the same time.
Furthermore it decreases the risk of optimising for a local minimum [29].
When transfer learning, the model can either be trained end-to-end or fine-tuned. If
training end-to-end, all network layers are trained and updated after initialisation. If
fine-tuning, some layers are held from up-dating, or ”frozen”, so that it is only the last
few convolutional layers which are trained in the target model. Figure 2.6 presents
the two variations of transfer learning. The use of frozen layers have been shown to
decrease amount of time for training as well as improving network robustness [30].
Figure 2.6: Schematic representation of transfer learning for fine tuning a network
and as basis for end-to-end training
2.3.4
Training Neural Networks
Deep neural networks for supervised learning are usually trained through an iterative
optimisation process, where the output of the final network layer is compared to the
ground truth of the training dataset, and the network weights and biases are changed
accordingly. The difference between model output f(x, w) and ground truth y is the
model loss L(x, y), which is calculated by an appropriate loss function. The change in
learnable parameters is calculated as the partial derivative of the loss function at all
data points, backwards through the network. This process is called gradient descent
with back-propagation [[25], [26]].
The sign of the gradient L′(x, y), corresponds
to the direction the weights (positive or negative) and should be updated to reach
nearest local minimum. The size of the weight-update is determined by the learning
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Background
rate (LR), which is a hyper-parameter defined empirically or analytically, and by
algorithm momentum [25].
When iterated through the model, data can either be split into batches or all data
can be fed through the network at each iteration. Memory capacity during training
is often a limiting factor for batch sizes, whereas too small a batch size limits model
accuracy [26]. When all data has been through the network once, it is counted as an
epoch. As model weights are updated after each iteration - and epoch - model loss is
usually displayed as a function of number of epochs in a learning curve. A deep CNN
is usually trained for either a fixed amount of epochs or until a certain loss threshold
is reached. Although the optimal loss is zero, this is rarely the output after training
the model to end. Several factors can be deciding of the loss threshold, including
computation time and overfitting. The latter will be elaborated on in section 2.3.8
[26].
The ADAM optimisation algorithm is often implemented in deep learning networks
as a modification of the classic gradient-descent algorithm. The name ADAM comes
from adaptive moment estimation because it computes individual, adaptive learning
rates for each parameter [31]. ADAM only requires first-order gradients and is there-
fore computationally inexpensive [26].
Generally, the loss function is described as the sum of loss of the output:
L(xi, yi) = 1
I
I
∑
i=1
L(f(xi, w), yi)
(2.8)
where I is the number of data labels, xi is data input, w is all learnable parameters,
such as weights and biases, yi is the target value and L is the loss of a single output.
The choice of loss function depends on the modeling problem which is being solved.
Different loss functions can be applicable depending on whether it is a regression,
binary- or multiclass classification.
The dice score coefficient (DSC) can be used
in cases of binary classification tasks with class imbalance where a ground truth is
available [32]. The DSC is a value between 0 and 1 which represents the overlap
between two volumes, with 1 being maximum overlap. It was proposed by Milletari
et al.
[32] that a 2-class variant of dice-loss could be defined as follows.
Given
G = {g1, ..., gN} ground-truth segmentation probabilistic maps, over N slices and
P = {p1, ..., pN} predicted probabilistic maps over N slices [[9][33]]:
Loss = 1 −Dice = 1 −2
∑N
n=1 pngn + s
∑N
n=1 pn + gn + s
(2.9)
The s term is used to ensure the loss function stability by avoiding the numerical
issue of dividing by 0, i.e. if all entries of G and P were zeroes.
In binary classification tasks, class imbalance can be an issue, when one class make
up a very small part of the total output. Class imbalance increases the risk of the
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Artificial Intelligence
15
learning process being trapped in a local minimum and thereby bias the prediction
towards the dominating class [32].
2.3.5
CNN for Segmentation
When going deeper into a CNN feature extraction becomes more detailed, but at the
same time spatial context is lost. This is not an issue in cases where the output of the
network is a single class label, but in cases where a class label is connected to every
pixel in an input image, precise, spatial context i needed. For segmentation purposes,
the network thereby both have to be deep enough to extract highly complex features
but also be able to project feature-extraction maps to a higher dimensional space.
One approach to obtain the desired depth and up-scaling is to employ pooling layers
for downsampling and up-convolution for subsequent upsampling of features.
Pooling layer
In a pooling layer, the spatial size of the feature map is decreased through a pooling
operation. A decrease in number of learnable features results in downscaled compu-
tation, whereby more filters can be applied to the activation map in the following
layer.
Furthermore, when downscaling the image size, the region covered by the
kernel changes, thereby employing multi-scalar computation. Increasingly complex
features of the image can thereby be learned, as the feature maps get smaller [25].
A common choice of a pooling operation is the max-pooling operation. Given a fil-
tered region of a specified size, the output is reduced to the maximum value within
the filter, which is sliding across each depth slice of the input image with a specified
stride [25].
Figure 2.7: Example of a max-pooling operation. Figure is adapted from [25]
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Background
Up-convolution
Up-convolution is an expansion of the spatial dimensions of the feature map. The task
is to go from e.g. a 2x2 input feature map to a 16x16 feature map, while maintaining
the connectivity depicted in figure 2.4. In up-convolution a kernel filter is swept across
the feature map with a given stride, and each input row of pixels, is cross-correlated
with each filter value. Up-convolution is also called transposed convolution, as the
matrix operation corresponds to a transposed down-convolution [34].
The up-convolution is applied to the entire depth of the feature map, and the size
and stride of the up-sampling kernel determines the size of the output.
2.3.6
U-net Architecture
A U-net is an architecture developed for biomedical image segmentation, which em-
ploys a larger amount of feature channels in up-sampling, than other segmentation
models. The increase in feature channels results in the symmetric architecture pre-
sented in figure 2.8, and allows context information from the contracting path to be
propagated to higher resolution layers [35].
The U-net consists of four convolutional blocks in the contracting path, a base layer
and four blocks in the expansive path. Skip connections are employed between the
two paths (indicated by grey arrows), which concatenates the high resolution features
of the contracting path with the corresponding up-sampled output. Subsequent con-
volution combines information from the two paths to a more precise output [35].
Four decoding blocks make up the contracting path. Each block consists of two 3x3
convolutional layers, followed by a ReLU activation function, and a subsequent 2x2
pooling layer with stride 2 for downsampling. The input consists of an image with
depth 1 and the first two convolutions each employ 64 filters to the activation map.
As the number of features in the feature map is decreased through the contractive
path, the number of convolutional filters are increased.
The expansive path is comprised of four encoding blocks, which are concatenated with
the feature maps of the contracting path. Each block consists of a 2x2 up-convolution
which doubles the number of feature channels and two 3x3 convolutions. The number
of filters employed, is decreased in accordance with the increase in feature channels.
The final block consists of a an 1x1 convolution used to map each feature-vector from
the last convolution to the desired number of classes [35].
2.3.7
Network Ensembles
In ensemble models, the same network is trained n times, and the outcomes are
combined to produce a single prediction. By combining several outcomes, the stability
and robustness of the model is increased an the overall noise and bias-variance error
is decreased [9].
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Artificial Intelligence
17
Figure 2.8: Example of U-net architecture with input image of 572x572 pixels. The
initial two 3x3 convolutional layers have 64 filters, which is doubled at each pooling
operation. The max-pooling operation is a size 2x2 with stride 2 for downsampling.
The output has two feature channels, for positive and negative classification. The
white boxes represent the concatenated feature-maps. Figure is adapted from [35].
The drawback of training n networks instead of one, is that it requires n times as much
work to obtain the final prediction. This, however is only relevant for the training
process and not the testing, why it has no impact for usability of the model.
2.3.8
Regularisation
Methods for decreasing overfitting are collectively coined regularisation. A few se-
lected examples follow in this section.
Dropout
Dropout is a stochastic regularisation-technique which introduces noise in the hidden
layers of the network.
Each neuron in the hidden layers of the network is given
a probability p of being active during training, and is otherwise removed from the
iteration together with all connections [25].
The size of the network is reduced with a factor 1 −p, during training, but during
testing, all activations remain active. Each weight is multiplied with p, to keep the
expected output of testing the same size as when training ([36][25]).
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Background
Since the combination of neurons in a network changes with each iteration, training
a network with dropout resembles training multiple thinned versions of a network
with weight- and parameter-sharing.
This reduces co-dependency of neurons and
increases model robustness. The nodes in a thinned dropout layer are trained on less
information from the previous layer, and are thereby forced to develop a more general
function to describe the data, thereby reducing variance [26].
Figure 2.9: Neural network with two hidden layers, five input neurons and one output
neuron. The network on the right has dropout applied to both hidden layers. The
figures are adapted from [25].
Data Augmentation
One of the main restrictions of CNN performance is the amount of available training
data. An effective way to obtain a larger dataset is by creating new variations of the
data which is already at hand through data augmentation. By changing copies of the
training data within natural variation, the networks sees a larger variation of data,
which increases model robustness [26].
In the case of head-MR images, the most common variations in images are head orien-
tations, and placement, while other variations could be voxel sizes and the distribution
of distinct features. Appropriate transformations would be rotation, flipping, sheer
transformation and scaling within reasonable parameter ranges [9].
Weight Regularisation
When training deep networks, the weights quickly become large and complex, which
increases risks of overfitting. In order to restrain the weights, a regularisation can
==PAGE:35==
2.4 MICCAI 2017 WMH Segmentation Challenge Winner
19
be applied, which penalises the size of the weights during training. Calculating the
L1 or L2 norm of the weights is a common way of determining the size.
When
adding the weighs to the loss objective function during training, the weights can
then be penalised on basis of the calculated weights. The weighting, or penalisation
parameter is a hyperparameter typically denoted λ, which should be optimised for
the network [26].
Batch Normalisation
The use of batches in training neural networks, introduces an internal covariate shift
in the training process.
When training batches of data, the distribution of input
data fed to each layer changes with each epoch, leading to a covariate shift [37]. The
layers continuously have to adapt to new data inputs, resulting in a necessity for
lower learning rates and a more careful choice of initialisation. Normalisation of each
batch before it is fed to a layer has been shown to significantly improve these areas.
Batch normalisation is employed by computing a mean and standard deviation for
normalisation of each batch [37].
2.4
MICCAI 2017 WMH Segmentation Challenge
Winner
In this thesis the neural network architecture was based on a segmentation model
presented by Hongwei Li et al for the 2017 WMH Segmentation Challenge ([9], [8]).
The 2017 MICCAI Segmentation Challenge had as purpose to directly compare meth-
ods for automatic segmentation of White Matter Hyperintensities (WMH) of pre-
sumed vascular origin.
The training dataset made publicly available consisted of
T1-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images from 60 subjects acquired at 3 different
scanners. The test dataset consisted of images from 110 subjects, acquired at 5 differ-
ent scanners. The test dataset was newer made public, but held secret by organisers.
20 teams made entries to the challenge, and their individual performances were eval-
uated on the test dataset through five metric scores. The model proposed by Li et al
had the best overall performance of all entries, and was announced as the challenge
winner.
The model is a 2D fully convolutional neural network with a U-net architecture,
implemented as an ensemble model of three.
The network has a total of 19 con-
volutional layers arranged in a U-net structure, displayed in figure 2.10. 2x2 max-
pooling is employed in the contracting path with stride two for downsampling, and
2x2 up-convolution in the expanding path. ReLU activation is employed after each
convolutional layer except the last, which utilises the Sigmoid function. The kernel
size of the first two convolutional blocks is 5x5 as opposed to 3x3 in the remaining
layers. This is implemented in order to handle more complex transformations, as per
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Background
a study by Peng et al. [38]. At the final layer a 1×1 convolution is used to map each
64-component feature vector to two classes.
Figure 2.10: Network architecture of the implemented segmentation model by Hong-
wei Li et al. The network has a U-net architecture with a contracting and expansive
part and a total of 19 convolutional layers. Figure is adapted from [9]
The network was built to accept both 1- and 2-channel inputs in form of either both
2D T2-weighted FLAIR images and 2D T1-weighted images, or only T2-weighted
FLAIR.To accommodate the dataset which was acquired at three different scanners,
all input data slices were cropped to a uniform matrix size of 200x200 mm as part
of preprocessing. This ensures that all images have the same depth of feature maps
when processed in the deep CNN.
During training, data is drawn in batches from the long array of arranged 2D im-
ages. Weights are initialised using the Glorot-initialisation and updated through the
ADAM optimiser. Both functions are implemented with default KERAS values. Loss
is calculated through the Dice Loss function, and at the final layer, the Sigmoid loss
function is used to obtain values within a range of zero to one.
Data augmentation is implemented through rotation, shearing and scaling. The pa-
rameters are chosen to mimic the natural variations in head orientation within the
scanner.
Methods
Rotation
Shearing
Scaling (x & y)
Parameters
[-15o, 15o]
[-18o, 18o]
[0.9, 1.1]
Table 2.2: Data augmentation parameters. Table and data from [9]
Originally, the U-Net hyper parameters were set as follows: batch size for com-
puting the training loss was set to 30; learning rate was set to 0.0002; the number of
epochs was set to 50. The number of models in the ensemble was set to 3 [9].
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Datasets
Data from four separate datasets have been used in this study. The MICCAI 2017
Segmentation Challenge dataset [8], as well as three datasets acquired at Glostrup
Hospital: two datasets from two separate research studies, Tysabri 2 and ON, and a
clinical dataset.
The MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge training dataset was a combination of
data from three scanners, with a total number of patients N = 60. The datasets
included patients with various degrees of ageing-related degenerative and vascular
pathologies. Age and gender distribution of patients was not included in the chal-
lenge description [8]. The Tysabri 2 dataset was acquired for a study which has not
been published yet. The study investigates changes in permeability of the blood brain
barrier and the cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen (CMRO2) before and after treat-
ment with either one of the two types of medicine Tysabri and Gilenya. All patients
were early in disease progression at the beginning of the study, with a mean EDSS of
0.25 (N = 57, mean age = 32, gender distribution (female) = 83 %). The ON dataset
was acquired for a study of patients having experienced opticus neuritis, published
by Cramer et al. [39]. ON is a classic symptom of clinically isolated syndrome (CIS)
and early MS why the patients were not diagnosed with MS at the time of scanning
(N = 35, mean age = 37, gender distribution (female) = 77%). The clinical dataset
was acquired through follow-up examinations of patients diagnosed with MS (N = 55,
mean age = 45, gender distribution (female) = 73%).
3.2
Data Security
All patient specific data applied in this thesis was handled in compliance with the
danish data protection agency law no. 502, and thus all patient data used, was com-
pletely anonymised.
The two research studies behind the datasets, Tysabris 2 and ON, used in this thesis
was approved by the Ethics Committee of Copenhagen County according to the stan-
dards of The National Committee on Health Research Ethics and The Danish Data
Protection Agency, protocol number H-D-2008-002 for ON study and H-1-2014-132
for Tysabri 2 study (MRI protocol). All experiments were conducted in accordance
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Methods
with the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975 and all subjects gave written, informed con-
sent.
3.3
Acquisition Parameters
Table 3.2 presents acquisition settings for the MICCAI challenge data and the three
local datasets. All T1-weighted images were acquired in 3D, all T2-weighted and
T2-weighted FLAIR images were acquired in 2D. All 3D sequences were acquired in
the sagittal direction and all 2D multi-slice sequences in the transversal direction. All
3D FLAIR sequences were resampled into the transversal direction with slices of 3
mm thickness. Voxel dimensions are presented in mm3.
Final matrix and voxel sizes of all included images are presented in table 3.1.
8
images of the Tysabri 2 dataset were acquired at another spatial dimension than
the rest. These have a FLAIR-matrix size of 256x256x44 voxels and are presented
presented below the predominant Tysabri 2 resolution.
Dataset/
Scanner type
T2-w FLAIR
T1-w
T2-w
UMC Utrecht/
3T Philips
Achieva
(0.96×0.95×3.00)
(240×240×48)
(1.00×1.00×1.00)
(240×240×48)
–
NUHS
Singapore/3T
Siemens TrioTi
(1.00×1.00×3.00)
(252×232×48)
(1.00×1.00×1.00)
(256×232×48)
–
VU Amsterdam/
3T GE
Signa HDx
(0.98 × 0.98 ×1.20)
(132×256×83)
(0.94×0.94×1.00)
(132×256×83)
–
ON/3T
Philips Achieva
dStream
(0.45×0.45×3.84)
(512×512×35)
(1.00×1.00×1.00)
(240×240×160)
(0.45×0.45×3.84)
(512×512×35)
Tysabri 2/
3T Philips
Achieva dStream
(0.60×0.60×3.84)
(384×384×35)
(0.67×0.67×0.70)
(384×384×257)
(0.36×0.36×3.84)
(640×640×35)
(0.94×0.94×3.00)
(256×256×44)
(1.00×1.00×1.00)
(240×240×160)
(0.94×0.94×3)
(256×256×44)
Clinical/3T
Philips Achieva
dStream
(0.60×0.60×3.84)
(384×384×35)
–
–
Table 3.1:
Overview of voxels size [mm3] and spatial dimensions [voxels] for all
datasets, and their respective modalities, used in this project. Scanner type used
for acquisition is specified for each dataset.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Acquisition Parameters
23
Parameter
Dataset
UMC
Utrecht
NUHS
Singapore
VU
Amsterdam
ON
Tysabri 2
Clinical
N
20
20
20
35
57
55
Scanner
Type
3T Philips
Achieva
3T Siemens
TrioTim
3T GE Signa
HDxt
3T Philips
Achieva
3T Philips
Achieva
dStream
3T Philips
Achieva
dStream
FLAIR
voxel
dim.
(0.96×0.95
×3.00)
(1×1×3)
(0.98×0.98
×1.20)
(0.65×0.99
×3.5)
(0.59x0.59
x3.85)
(0.59x0.59
x3.85)
TR
11000
9000
8000
1100
1100
1100
TE
125
82
126
125
125
125
TI
2800
2500
2340
2800
2800
2800
T1
voxel
dim.
(1×1×1)
(1x1x1)
(0.94×0.94
×1.00)
(1x1x1)
(0.7x0.7x0.7)
-
TR
7.9
2300
7.8
8.15
11
-
TE
4.5
1.9
3.0
3.73
5
-
T2
voxel
dim.
-
-
-
(0.5x0.5
x3.85)
(0.36x0.36
x3.85)
-
TR
-
-
-
4170
7621
-
TE
-
-
-
80
100
-
Table 3.2: Acquisition settings for all six datasets. The first three make up the MICCAI challenge dataset, whereas the
last three are acquired at Glostrup Hospital. All T1-weighted images are acquired in 3D, all T2-weighted and T2-weighted
FLAIR images are acquired in 2D. Voxels size is given in [mm3] and axquisition times in ms.
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Methods
3.4
Computational Setup
The computational setup behind the data-processing of this thesis, was a computer
running the Ubuntu 18.04 operating system with an NVIDIA Titan V Graphical
Processing Unit (GPU) for larger processing power. The Titan utilised the CUDA
toolkit v. 9.0 and cuDNN v. 7.1, and it was connected to the training process via
TensorFlow v. 1.8.0 for GPU.
The model was implemented in Python 3.6 using the Keras library v.
2.2.4 for
deep learning. The MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge winner model was origi-
nally developed and implemented using python 2.7 and appropriate amendments were
therefore made to the code.
3.5
Data Delineation
The MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge data, Tysabri 2 and ON all had manual
reference standards, drawn on their T2-weighted FLAIR images. The MICCAI 2017
Segmentation Challenge dataset was delineated by three individual raters for inter-
rater variability and with additional corrections made by a fourth rater.WMH and
other pathologies were manually segmented in accordance with the standards for
reporting vascular changes on neuroimaging (STRIVE) criteria [[40],[8]]. Tysabri 2
and ON were delineated once, with corrections made by a separate expert. WMH MS
lesions were delineated in accordance with the standards decided upon in longitudinal
lesion Segmentation Challenge from 2015 [41]. The delineations were drawn using the
image-viewer FSLEYES (FSLeyes version: 0.21.1, FMRIB Centre, Oxford, UK, FSL
version: 5.0.10). An example of manually drawn delineations on a FLAIR-image from
Tysabri 2 can be seen in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Axial FLAIR image of an MS patient (left) with a corresponding, manually
drawn, delineation mask in red (right). The patient has both periventricular and
subcortical lesions.
After a subsequent examination of the Tysabri 2 and ON datasets, some images
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Preprocessing and Data Conversion
25
were re-delineated, because of missed lesions. When present, the lesion masks were
used as gold-standard for supervised training and evaluation throughout this study.
The clinical dataset had no manual reference standards.
3.6
Preprocessing and Data Conversion
Preprocessing was done in accordance with the steps proposed by Li et al [9]:
1) All T2- and T1-weighted images were re-sampled to the resolution of their re-
spective T2-weighted FLAIR images, as the manual reference standards were defined
on these. The images of the ON dataset were significantly larger than those of the
MICCAI 2017 dataset (see table 3.1) and became too heavy for Li et al.’s segmen-
tation model to process. All images were therefore initially re-sampled to the most
frequent resolution of the Tysabri 2- and clinical dataset with a spatial resolution of
384x384x35 voxels and a voxel-size of 0.60x0.60x3.84.
2) Each image was cropped or padded to a uniform matrix size to assure that input
images of different sizes would reach the same depth in the U-net. The MICCAI
2017 Segmentation Challenge dataset was cropped to size 200x200, following original
model structure. Tysabri 2, ON and the clinical dataset was cropped to a spatial
dimension of 288x288 voxels to hold all relevant voxels in the cropped image (see
table 3.1).
3) Voxel-intensities were normalised within a binary brain-mask of each image-slice.
The masks were created by thresholding voxel intensities at an empirically found
threshold, 70 for T2-weighted FLAIR and 30 for T1-weighted and T2-weighted im-
ages, and choosing largest, connected component within that mask. Gaussian, or z-,
normalisation was employed to every voxel X, inside each brain mask:
Xnorm = X −µ
σ
,
(3.1)
with µ being the mean and σ the standard deviation of voxel intensities in the mask.
Pre-processing in relation to training the model is shown in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Overall framework for training stage. Figure adapted from [9].
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Methods
The MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge dataset was corrected for bias-field in-
homogeneities by the challenge organisers. As no indications of inhomogineities was
found in the three other datasets, bias-field correction was not employed.
3.7
Training-, Validation- and Test data
Tysabri 2 and ON were used for training and evaluating the segmentation model
through model development. In total, the two datasets consisted of 91 subjects with
a total of 223 timepoints. Two of the timepoints did not have a T2-weighted scan
associated, and 46 did not have a T1-weighted scan associated.
Before usage, the data quality of Tysabri 2 and ON was assessed for artifacts in both
MRIs and manual reference standards. Especially motion artifacts and, to a lesser
degree, incomplete manual delineations were observed in the two combined datasets.
Scans from 22 patients were labeled ”low quality” and scans from 69 patients were
labeled ”high quality”, based on these observations.
The combined dataset of Tysabri 2 and ON was randomly divided into a training-
validation- and test dataset. The validation- and test dataset were exclusively drawn
from the ”high quality” cohort, whereas the training dataset held both cohorts. Train-
ing data: 71 subjects, 41 from Tysabri 2 and 30 from ON, with 155 timepoints dis-
tributed 56/99 (ON/Tysabri 2).
Validation data: 10 subjects, 5 from Tysabri 2 and 5 from ON, with 27 timepoints
distributed 8/19 (ON/Tysabri 2). The validation dataset was used for on-going eval-
uation of the model.
Test data: 10 subjects and 41 timepoints in total. All from the Tysabri 2 dataset. The
test dataset was held out until the final segmentation model had been constructed,
to ensure an un-biased evaluation.
Figure 3.3: Distribution of Training and test data from total Tysabri 2 and ON
dataset. N is the number of patients, i.e. the number of baselines scans. The numbers
in brackets present the number of longitudinal scans.
==PAGE:43==
3.8 Post-processing
27
3.8
Post-processing
The created segmentation maps were transformed back to their original size using a
padding or cropping operation, depending on size input, as proposed by Li et al.
As an additional post-processing step, all predicted lesions below 27 mm3 were ex-
cluded from the mask, in an effort to mimic manual reference standards. 27 mm3
were chosen as a an estimation of a minimal volume, since a volume of 3x3x3 mm is
the maximum of non-drawn volumes. This postprocessing step was also applied to
the delineation masks of the test set, in order to ensure coherence.
3.9
Segmentation Model
The winning method of the MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge Li et al., was
implemented as segmentation model in this project. The model was implemented as
it was originally presented by Li et al., and as described in section 2.3.8. After testing
how well the model generalised to the local data acquired at Glostrup, variations of
the network were tested in an effort to improve performance. The different changes
are described test-by-test below.
The full, baseline training dataset was used for training all initial model variations.
For each test, the best performing variation of the network was chosen as basis for
further testing.
3.9.1
Original Segmentation Model
The performance of the pre-trained method presented by Li et al., was compared to
training the model on the entire baseline Tysabri 2 and ON training dataset. Using
transfer learning for initialisetion, the model was trained in two separate forms: end-
to-end training on the local data and only training on the last convolutional layer
while keeping the remaining weights and biases frozen. The three different variations
are listed below, with deviations from the original model specified. For both of the
latter variations, no. of epochs was changed to 1000 and batch size was changed to
15.
• Direct application of weights trained by Li et al. for the MICCAI 2017 Segmen-
tation Challenge.
• Fine-tuning weights of the last convolutional layer on the Tysabri 2 and ON
training dataset. Initialisation of weights by transfer learning the original model
weights.
• Training a new set of model weights end-to-end on the Tysabri 2 and ON
training dataset. Initialisation of weights through transfer learning from the
original model.
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Methods
3.9.2
Effect of Data Input
The effect of changing the input channels of the model from the original two-channel
input of T1-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images was tested.
A two-channel
input of T2-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images was tried as well as a one-
channel input only including T2-weighted FLAIR images.
All three variations of
the model were trained end-to-end on local data with weight-initialisation through
transfer learning. No of epochs was 1000 and batch size was set to 15.
• Two-channel input using T2-weighted FLAIR and T1-weighted images as input
modalities.
• Two-channel input using T2-weighted FLAIR and T2-weighted images as input
modalities.
• One-channel input using T2-weighted FLAIR images as input modality.
3.9.3
Regularisation
End-to-end training of new model weights with transfer learning, and a one-channel
input was used when training the following models. As an attempt to decrease overfit-
ting and increase performance, a few regularisation techniques and general changes to
the network were employed. These are specified below. In all three cases the learning
rate was decreased to 10−5 and batch size to 6, because of memory issues. No. of
epochs was set to 1000. The models were not trained as an ensemble model, as it was
too time-consuming.
• All FLAIR-images were kept in their original spatial resolutions to avoid re-
sampling artifacts. Pre-processing crop-size was increased to 384x384 to include
the entirety of the ON images with a spatial resolution of 512x512 voxels (see
table 3.1).
• A sequence-of-slices input was implemented to the preceding model variation.
The model was changed from a one- to a three-channel input model, with the
first and third channels being the previous and following image slices to the
image slice in question.
• A dropout layer with dropout fraction 0.2 was implemented after every activa-
tion layer in the network.
3.9.4
Selection of Training Data
The best model based on the previously described variations, was tested for impact
of training data selection on model accuracy.
==PAGE:45==
3.10 Evaluation Metrics
29
• The ”high quality” baseline cohort described in section 3.7, was used for train-
ing the best performing network, to test the impact of data quality on model
performance.
• The entire longitudinal dataset was used to train the best performing network,
to test for improvements in model performance when increasing data size and
including later stages of disease progression.
3.10
Evaluation Metrics
The model output was evaluated on the basis of the same metrics as used in the
MICCAI 2017 WMH challenge.
The metric set was comprised of the dice score
coefficient (DSC), the average volume difference (AVD), sensitivity for individual
lesions (recall) and F1-score for individual lesions (precision) [8].
In the following, G and P denote lesion regions, with G being the ground truth, and
P being the predicted lesions. All metric formulations are adapted from the MICCAI
challenge [8].
Dice Score
The dice similarity coefficient measures the similarity of two segmentation masks at
voxel-level.
DSC = 2(G ∩P)
|G| + |P|
(3.2)
where |G| and |P| denotes the total number of voxels defined as lesions in the ground
truth and predicted mask respectively. The DSC provides the overlap in percentage
between G and P.
Average Volume Difference (in percentage)
The average volume difference (AVD) describes the overall volume difference between
predicted lesion volume VP and ground truth lesion volume VG. The AVD is given
in percentage as:
AVD = |VG −VP |
VG
100%
(3.3)
Sensitivity for Individual Lesions (recall)
The sensitivity, or recall, is the relationship between the number of correctly de-
tected lesions NP,T and the ground-truth number of lesions NG. It is here defined
for the number of individual lesions, with a lesion being defined as a 3D connected
component.
Recall = NP,T
NG
(3.4)
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Methods
Precision for Individual Lesions (F1-score)
The F1 score for individual lesions is the relationship between the number of correctly
detected lesions NP,T and the entire number of detected lesions NP . It is defined for
individual lesions, with a lesion being defined as a 3D connected component.
F1 = NP,T
NP
(3.5)
3.11
Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model
3.11.1
Performance on Test Dataset
The best performing segmentation model, was tested on the held-out test dataset
for an unbiased, final evaluation. The ten subjects from the test dataset had masks
drawn by two individual raters, in order to assess the variance and agreement between
raters. Performance metrics were therefore calculated with respect to both raters.
To evaluate the ability of the model to trace the same lesions at subsequent, longi-
tudinal scans, the model was tested on the longitudinal test dataset. For each test
data patient, predicted lesion volume and predicted lesion load was calculated at ev-
ery timepoint. The longitudinal development in lesion volume and count was then
compared to the corresponding manual delineations.
3.11.2
Clinical Evaluation
Binary segmentation maps predicted by the final model were evaluated for clinical
usability by a clinical rater. The rater had previously delineated some of the segmen-
tation maps of the Tysabri 2 and ON datasets. The clinical evaluation had two major
purposes.
• To evaluate the performance of the algorithm compared to that of the two raters
on the basis of the clinical usability, and thereby compare clinical usability to
performance metrics.
• To evaluate performance on a large dataset of 55 individual patients without
gold-standard segmentation maps.
The predicted MS lesion segmentation maps of the 55 clinical patients and 10 test
patients as well as the two manually delineated sets of test data segmentation maps
were presented in randomised order with their respective T2-weighted FLAIR scans.
The 55 clinical patients were included twice to asses intra-rater variability.
A total of 140 stacks of T2 FLAIR images with corresponding annotation masks were
thereby included. Each annotation mask was rated on a scale from 1 to 3, with 1
being ”Perfect”, 2 ”Acceptable and 3 ”unacceptable”. The rating criteria for each of
the three groups were designed by a trained, clinical experts and listed in table 3.3
==PAGE:47==
3.11 Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model
31
When in doubt of whether a mask was to be labeled perfect or acceptable, acceptable
was chosen.
Rating
Criteria
1 - Perfect
The algorithm has correctly identified all T2 white matter
lesions > 3 mm, that is, no false positive
or false negative detections.
2 - Acceptable
The algorithm has correctly identified at least 90% of the
total number of T2 white matter lesions > 3 mm.
3 - Unacceptable
The algorithm has wrongly identified more than 10% of the
total number of T2 white matter lesions >3 mm.
Table 3.3: Rating criteria of delineation masks, targeted at clinical use.
==PAGE:48==
32
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Optimisation of Model Performance
The following section displays segmentation performance of the different stages of
model implementation. Each box plot summarises the segmentation performance of
one model evaluated on the ten validation-subjects from Tysabri 2 and ON. Mean
and standard deviation of performance can be found for all 10 model variations in
appendix C.1. For each test, the established best performing model variation is used
as model framework for further testing.
4.1.1
Original Segmentation Model
Figure 4.1: Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models vary between employing the original model weights, fine-tuning and end-
to-end training.
==PAGE:50==
34
4 Results
Figure 4.1 displays the distribution of performance across the ten validation patients,
for each of the three initial implementations of the segmentation model. The orig-
inal segmentation model by Li et al. is found to perform well on some images but
poorly on others, when observing the distribution of DSC. Recall is consistently high,
whereas precision is lower. This indicates a high level of MS lesion detection, but also
a tendency toward being overly sensitive and thereby delineation of false positives.
An example of a delineation from a Tysabri 2 patient with false positives is shown in
the first image of figure 4.3.
Fine-tuning weights through initialisation with transfer learning and application of
freeze-layers results in a worse performance than just applying the original model
weights, when observing figure 4.1. End-to-end training of model weights on Tysabri
2 and ON results in the highest overall segmentation performance when comparing
segmentation scores and visual image assessment. A comparison of the three delin-
eations and gold-standard is shown in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.2: Example of MS lesion segmentation on an axial slice, which showcases the
differences between the three model variations. Both the pre-trained, original model
and the model employing freeze-layers delineates a number of false positives.
4.1.2
Effect of Data Input
The effect of changing the input channels of the segmentation model was investigated
by varying between a two-channel input of T1-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR
images, a two-channel input of T2-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images and a
one-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR images. Training with T2-weighted FLAIR
and T1-weighted images results in the overall most precise delineation of the three
variations. The two-channel input which includes T1-weighted images results in a
slightly higher average DSC and AVD, and a significantly higher average precision
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Optimisation of Model Performance
35
than the one-channel input. However, the differences are found to be small enough to
be outweighed by the fact that T1-weighted images are not part of standard clinical
acquisition protocol, and a one-channel input therefore is preferable. The difference
between the three segmentation models is showcased in figure 4.4, where a represen-
tative axial slice is presented with all three variations of segmentation maps as well
as the ground truth.
Figure 4.3: Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models are all trained end-to-end with a 2-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR
and T1-weighted images, a 1-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR and a 2-channel
input of T2-weighted FLAIR and T2-weighted images respectively.
The effect of changing the input channels of the segmentation model was inves-
tigated by varying between a two-channel input of T1-weighted and T2-weighted
FLAIR images, a two-channel input of T2-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images
and a one-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR images. Training with T2-weighted
FLAIR and T1-weighted images results in the overall most precise delineation of the
three variations. The two-channel input which includes T1-weighted images results in
a slightly higher average DSC and AVD, and a significantly higher average precision
than the one-channel input. However, the differences are found to be small enough to
be outweighed by the fact that T1-weighted images are not part of standard clinical
acquisition protocol, and a one-channel input therefore is preferable. The difference
between the three segmentation models is showcased in figure 4.4, where a represen-
tative axial slice is presented with all three variations of segmentation maps as well
==PAGE:52==
36
4 Results
as the ground truth.
Figure 4.4: Example of MS lesion delineations on a representative axial slice. The
model taking both T1-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images as input is the most
precise, regarding both lesion detection and delineation accuracy. The model includ-
ing T2-weighted images has a number of false negatives.
4.1.3
Regularisation
Besides the evolutionary steps presented in the two preceding sections, a number of
parameter changes as well as regularisation steps were added. At this comparison
each new change to the model was added on top of the next, if proven performance-
enhancing.
First the learning rate was decreased to 10−5, and re-sampling to a
common resolution was abandoned, so that all T2-weighted FLAIR images had the
same resolution as presented in table 3.1. This step significantly decreased the amount
of overfitting, compared to employing a higher learning rate and re-sampling, as can
be seen from the loss curve in figure C.1e, appendix C.2. It furthermore elevated mean
precision-scores and lowered mean AVD, presented in figure 4.5. The one-channel T2-
weighted FLAIR input was then changed to a 3-channel sequence-of-slices input, still
with T2-weighted FLAIR images.
This further decreased over-fitting significantly
(figure C.1f). Adding dropout with a dropout fraction of 0.2 to the model employing
SOS, slightly increased overfitting compared to not having dropout (figure C.2a),
however all performance metrics were slightly improved. In images 4.6 the changes
in segmentation performance is represented by delineations of an axial slice.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Optimisation of Model Performance
37
Figure 4.5: Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models are all trained end-to-end with a 1-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR
images. The models have increasingly higher performance, as more techniques are
applied.
Figure 4.6: Example of MS lesion delineations on an axial slice showcasing the dif-
ferences between the three model variations. The delineations become increasingly
precise with the application of SOS and dropout.
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Results
4.1.4
Selection of Training Data
Lastly differences in model performance on basis of changing the training data co-
hort were investigated. As the model obtaining best segmentation performance up
till this point, the network employing dropout was trained using the three variations
of training data. The 4 boxplots of figure 4.7 display the distribution of segmenta-
tion performance. The first model of the boxplot was trained on the entire baseline
training dataset of Tysabri 2 and ON. The second model was trained using only the
part of the baseline dataset labeled ”high quality”, and the third model was trained
on the entire longitudinal training dataset. The model trained on the entire baseline
dataset had the overall highest performance, as displayed in figure 4.7 and showcased
by image examples in figure 4.8. The longitudinal training cohort resulted in conver-
gence at a lower loss when observing fig C.2c in appendix C.2, but a higher degree of
overfitting.
Figure 4.7: Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models are all trained end-to-end with a 1-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR
images. They are trained on the baseline training data, ”high quality” baseline train-
ing data and longitudinal training data, respectively.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Final Segmentation Model
39
Figure 4.8: Example of MS lesion delineations on an axial slice showcasing the differ-
ences between the three model variations. Training the model on the entire baseline
dataset results in highest performance.
4.2
Final Segmentation Model
Based on the four tests described in the preceding section, the setup for the final
segmentation model network is presented in table 4.1.
Type of variation
Investigated network settings
Final setting
Level of training
w. local data
Original weights; freeze-layer;
end-to-end
End-to-end
Input channels
T2-w FLAIR + T1-w;
T2-w FLAIR + T2-w, T2-w FLAIR
T2-w FLAIR
Sequence-of-slices
SOS; no SOS
SOS
Dropout
Dropout; no dropout
Dropout
Table 4.1: Summary of investigated model inputs and network variations, with final
settings presented at the right side of the table.
Table 4.2 presents the segmentation performance of the final segmentation model
tested on the validation dataset.
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Results
DSC (↑)
AVD(↓)
Precision (↑)
Recall (↑)
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
0.62
0.23
66.64
281.2
0.67
0.25
0.81
0.27
Table 4.2: Average dice score (DSC), average volume difference (AVD), F1-score and
sensitivity (recall) for segmentation of MS lesions in a validation dataset of 10 subjects,
presented for the final segmentation model trained.
4.3
Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model
The final segmentation model was tested on a held-out dataset of 10 patients for an
unbiased performance estimation. As the test dataset was manually delineated by two
raters, the model performance was held against both and presented in table 4.3 along
with an average. The segmentation model obtained lower scores when evaluated on
the test dataset than on the validation dataset, regarding all metrics except recall.
The high recall-scores indicates that a higher proportion of predicted lesions were
correct, while the rest of the metric results indicate that a higher number of false
positives have been detected (F1-score) as well as a larger discrepancy on voxel-level.
Generally, the segmentation model is overly sensitive to hyperintensities compared to
the gold-standard.
DSC (↑)
AVD(↓)
Precision (↑)
Recall (↑)
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
Comparison
to rater 1
0.52
0.13
163.65
65.8
0.65
0.17
0.92
0.09
Comparison
to rater 2
0.54
0.15
102.45
153.7
0.61
0.21
0.84
0.06
Average
performance
0.53
0.14
133.05
109.75
0.63
0.19
0.88
0.08
Inter
rater
0.75
0.15
36
61.89
0.75
0.20
0.79
0.19
Table 4.3: Average performance of final segmentation model evaluated on held-out
test dataset with respect to two different gold-standards. The last row displays inter-
rater variability.
Three axial slices of representative test patients are shown in figure 4.9. The model
generally segments the same lesions as the gold-standard, but it delineates a larger
volume as well as an amount of false positives. This is especially visible in the image
displayed in the middle of the figure.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model
41
Figure 4.9: Three slices from representative test patients.
The model accurately
delineates most of the lesions defined by the gold-standard. In the image shown in
the middle, the predicted volume is larger than the manually drawn volume.
Three characteristic delineation examples of the final lesion segmentation model tested
on the test dataset, are shown in figure 4.10. The first image is an example of a true
negative of the brain stem with a true positive lesion beside it. The hyper-intense
brainstem is a difficult segmentation area often associated with flow artifacts, which
the model generally delineates correct. The second image of figure 4.10 shows an
example of a false positive brain fold lesion, which is a frequent false positive of the
model. The third image presents a false positive delineation of the ventricles, another
frequent false positive of the segmentation model.
Figure 4.10: Three delineation examples from the test dataset. First image: true-
negative of hyper-intensity in the brain stem, next to a true-positive lesion. Second
image: False positive delineation of brain fold. Third image: False positive delineation
of ventricles.
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Results
4.3.1
Longitudinal Evaluation
(a) Lesion load of patient 13 across 3 time-
points.
(b) Lesion load of patient 08 across 6 time-
point.
Figure 4.11: The two graphs both show a less than optimal discrepancy between
human rating and model predictions. Figure 4.11a show a significant difference in
development of lesion load, whereas figure 4.11b predicts approximately same devel-
opment but a large difference in overall lesion count.
(a) Lesion load of patient 11 across 6 time-
points.
(b) Lesion load of patient 07 across 5 time-
points.
Figure 4.12: The prediction of lesion load of patient 11 follows the manual delineation
both in terms of overall load and in longitudinal development. Figure 4.12b shows a
relative agreement in later prediction of lesion load, but a large difference at the first
timepoint.
The predicted lesion load at every longitudinal timepoint, was calculated and dis-
played along-side the gold-standard lesion load, of every patient. Four representative
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Evaluation of Final Segmentation Model
43
examples are presented in figure 4.11. In most cases, the algorithm predicts more
lesions than the manual reference standard, consistently for all time points. In some
cases such as 4.12 (a), the model predicts the same development in lesion load with
time as the manual delineations. However, in just as many cases, there are significant
discrepancies, such as in figure 4.12 (b), where the manual reference presents a large
increase in lesion load with time, whereas the model delineations are quite stable in
time.
4.3.2
Clinical Evaluation
Table 4.4 presents the clinical ratings of the 55 clinical test patients.
Only two, respectively three, of the 55 generated masks were rated to be unacceptable.
The same two masks were rated as unacceptable in both ratings, due to false positive
delineations in the dorsal horns. See figure 4.13 for examples of an unacceptable and
a perfect delineation. The same scan is rated bad quality at both evaluations. The
kappa score of the two ratings was 0.56, mostly due to discrepancies between the
”Perfect” and ”Acceptable” ratings.
Perfect
Acceptable
Unacceptable
Bad Quality
1st Rating
13
39
2
1
2nd Rating
18
33
3
1
Table 4.4: Ratings from clinical evaluation of the delineation masks generated for the
55 patients in the clinical dataset. 1st and 2nd rating refers to the fact, that the rater
saw all masks twice in anonymised, randomised order.
25% of all delineation masks were rated perfect, 65% were rated at least accept-
able and only 5% were rated unacceptable.
Table 4.5 presents the clinical ratings of the three types of delineation masks associ-
ated with the 10 test patients. Expert rater 1 has the highest number of delineation
masks deemed unacceptable, whereas the algorithm has none.
Perfect
Acceptable
Unacceptable
Bad Quality
Rater 1
1
6
3
0
Rater 2
4
5
1
0
Algorithm
3
7
0
0
Table 4.5: Rating of delineation masks of 10 test patients for evaluation of clinical
usability. Rater 1 and 2, refers to the two sets of manual reference standards of the
same test patients drawn individually by two expert raters.
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Results
Figure 4.13: Example of an unacceptable and a perfect delineation performed by the
segmentation model. The unacceptable delineation shows a segmented false positive,
hyperintense areas in the dorsal horns.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
This work presents a novel evaluation of a state-of-the-art MS lesion segmentation
method with focus on implementation in clinic.
Detailed assessment of MRIs in relation to diagnosis and monitoring of MS is
today a time consuming task, subject to inter-rater variability. In this thesis a state-
of-the-art lesion segmentation model has been tested on a local dataset of 94 patients
resulting in a relatively high performance, which was further enhanced. While only
presenting moderately high performance on a selection of evaluation metrics, the final
segmentation model was shown to produce segmentation maps with clinical relevance.
The final segmentation model was tested on 55 clinical MS patients, and the segmenta-
tion maps were rated by an expert rater. Only 5% of 55 predicted segmentation maps
were deemed clinically unacceptable, which means that the model predominantly per-
forms MS lesion segmentation with enough precision to be used in clinic. The rating
distinguished between ”Perfect” and ”Acceptable”, as a perfect segmentation is more
crucial for some applications in clinic than others. If the segmentation model was to
be used for assessment of disease progression, the masks should optimally be perfect,
as the exact lesion count and volume is important. Acceptable segmentation maps can
facilitate a quick reading of images, with subsequent correction by a clinical expert,
resulting in segmentation maps closer to perfect in much less time than a manual
segmentation.
While the amount of ”Perfect” ratings is significantly lower than ”Acceptable” ratings,
when observing table 4.4, there was some disagreement between which masks were
perfect and which were acceptable from first to second rating - hence the kappa score
of 0.5. Furthermore, a number of masks were scored in between ”perfect” and ”Ac-
ceptable”, which were all transferred to the ”Acceptable” category. The disagreement
in scoring the masks in these two categories highlights how difficult exact scoring of
lesion delineations is, and that a ”Perfect” rating is difficult to define as an exact
measurement.
The level of difficulty is further highlighted by the clinical ratings
of manual reference standards in table 4.5, where only few of the masks drawn by
experts were rated ”Perfect”. In this evaluation the automatic segmentation model
obtained clinical ratings better, or at level with, manual gold-truth, further validating
the generated segmentation maps and general model performance.
The clinical evaluation furthermore showcases the problems of measuring model per-
formance through evaluation metrics. As an example, the dice score of the segmen-
==PAGE:62==
46
5 Discussion
tation maps between rater 2 and the algorithm was quite low (0.54), but they both
have high clinical usability.
The relatively low metric values of the final segmentation model should thereby both
be viewed in context of the clinical rating and also general performance by MS segmen-
tation methods in literature. Aslani et al. proposed a Multi-branch Convolutional
Neural Network and compared it to several state-of-the-art methods in 2018 [42]. All
the proposed methods were tested on the test dataset of the ISBI 2015 Longitudinal
Multiple Sclerosis Lesion Segmentation Challenge. Aslani et al. achieved a mean
DSC of 0.61, which was just below the highest ranking model with a mean DSC of
0.63. The highest ranking model was proposed by Valverde et al. which employed a
cascaded 3D convolutional neural network. A third entry, proposed by team Madras,
which had received the initial title as challenge winner, because of a generally high
performance had a lower DSC of 0.55.
This testifies to the difficulty of ranking MS lesion segmentation models on basis of
evaluation metrics. It furthermore places the performance of the model proposed in
this project in vicinity of the state-of-the-art MS lesion segmentation methods.
Model performance was higher when tested on the validation dataset, than on the
test dataset. Though this could be a result of overfitting, there was a noticeable dif-
ference between the test- and validation dataset. The test data only included subjects
from the Tysabri2 dataset - acquired at the newest scanner model - while validation
data included data from Tysabri 2 and ON. Table C.3 in appendix C.3 presents fi-
nal segmentation performance on the validation dataset divided into validation data
from Tysabri 2 and ON respectively. It is here shown, that the model generally has
a higher performance score on ON data, explaining why the test dataset obtains a
lower overall score.
The model has a general tendency towards labeling more areas and larger volumes
than the gold-standard, which is both noticeable in figure 4.9 and in the longitudinal
evaluation of lesion load. This discrepancy is mainly connected to the detection of
dirty white matter and false positive detection of brain folds and the edges of ventri-
cles. Ventricles are a common issue of MS lesion segmentation, as the ventricle edges
and choroid plexus can present as hyperintense on a T2-weighted FLAIR scan [43].
False positive delineation of choroid plexus has not been observed as an issue for this
segmentation model. Some models apply masks that segment detected lesions in the
ventricles to eliminate the false positives [44]. True positives may however also be
excluded in this process.
Dirty white matter is defined as regions of intermediate signal intensity between those
of focal lesions and normal-appearing matter [45]. There are different standards on
whether or not dirty white matter should be delineated when assessing MRIs for MS,
but as long as the areas are consistently delineated or not delineated it is not crucial
for clinical applicability. The model appears to delineate DWM consistently, but an
expert assessment is necessary before this can be concluded.
The predicted, longitudinal development in lesion load does not agree completely
==PAGE:63==
5 Discussion
47
with manual reference standards. Besides the predicted lesion load generally being
too large, there are several instances of disagreement between the model and the
clinical expert, in whether lesion load has risen or fallen from one timepoint to an-
other. If the model was to be used in assessment of disease progression, the exact
lesion count would be important, and it should therefore be looked into before model
implementation. In order to more precisely identify whether e.g. a large, new lesion
had been overlooked by the segmentation model, or whether delineation of recurring
lesions were consistent, each longitudinal segmentation mask should be assessed by
an expert. However, this task was too large for the scope of this thesis.
The initial implementation of the segmentation model by Li et al. generalised rela-
tively well to the local validation data. Performance was lower on images from the ON
dataset, which might be due to the voxel-sizes being much larger in the ON dataset
than any of the three datasets from the MICCAI challenge. A higher performance
when trained on local data was expected, but the very low performance of applying
freeze-layers to the model was not.Fine-tuning the model by only training the last
convolutional layers have been shown by Tajbakhsh et al. to be a very robust solu-
tion in CNN, demanding less training data than end-to-end training [30]. To improve
performance of fine-tuning, different numbers of layers could be employed in training,
as the level of fine tuning has been found to be important for final model performance
[30].
The original model by Li et al. was implemented without the use of transfer learn-
ing. This was also attempted when training on the Tysabri 2 and ON datasets, but
was dropped due to model instability. When training without transfer learning, the
model would in most cases be reaching to nearly 0 in an early epoch and not update
afterwords. This phenomenon was also described in the paper published by Li et al.,
where it was connected to gradient exposure issues [9]. Li et al. encountered the
problem when setting a learning rate which was too low.
Model performance was greatly influenced by variations in training data. The origi-
nal segmentation model was optimised for a two-channel input including T1-weighted
images, as it was used for vascular segmentation. Since T2-weighted images are more
commonly used when assessing MRIs for MS in clinic, it was thought that they would
increase performance. In reality the model performed slightly worse when combining
T2-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images, which might be due to insufficient reg-
istration of the images, biased transfer learning or the fact that model parameters
were optimised for a T1-weighted input. Several of the highest ranking models in
literature, such as the 3D CNN network proposed by Valverde et al. combine both
T2-weighted, T1-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images for optimal performance.
These models are however more difficult to implement in clinic.
Both attempts at increasing performance by changing the training data cohort failed.
When increasing the cohort to almost triple size by including the full, longitudinal
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Discussion
dataset performance was decreased. By separating performance results of the model
trained on longitudinal data between ON and Tysabri 2 data, it was found that model
performance was actually increased on Tysabri 2 validation data, compared to the
baseline model (see table C.2 in appendix). Performance on ON data was however
decreased, which led to an overall decrease in performance, when averaging scores
across all 10 patients. This discrepancy is probably due to the fact that ON data was
underrepresented in the longitudinal data, why the model became worse at predict-
ing lesions at this resolution. A solution could be to include every other timepoint
of the longitudinal data, which would not change the distribution data from the two
scanners, but would almost double the amount of data.
The exclusion of all baseline data not labeled ”high quality” did not improve model
performance either. This was most likely due to the decrease in training data size by
excluding almost a third. The impact of data quality should therefore be tested on
two equally sized data cohorts.
5.1
Limitations
All validation- and test-images were kept in their respective resolutions during testing
of the different model variations. This limits the degree to which the performance
of the original segmentation model can be compared to the other models, as it is
trained on images of a very different resolution. It was chosen not to re-sample the
test images, as resampling can obscure or blur the images in which case details can
be lost. A segmentation model in clinic should therefore preferably function without
preceding resampling.
The post-processing step of masking all lesions below a volume of 27 mm3 on both
predicted and manual masks was applied in order to diminish delineation discrepan-
cies of the smallest delineations. The general guideline followed by our segmentation
experts states that lesions of which the maximum 2D dimension is less than 3 mm
long should not be drawn, so to let the model follow the same guideline, the limita-
tion was applied. Because the model tracks 3D lesions, the limit was set to (3x3x3)
mm3. Many predicted lesions below this limit are false positives and the mask thereby
increases model accuracy. However, several true positive lesions are also discarded,
when the limit is set so high. A lower threshold would allow more true-positive lesions,
while still penalising the smallest segmentations.
Based on evaluation metrics alone, differences between model variations are quite
small. As seen in table C.1, the differences in DSC are in most cases around 0.04,
which is much lower than the standard deviation of DSC, which lies around 0.20. Met-
ric results were therefore supported by visual assessments of the binary segmentation
maps and comparisons of the loss curves of appendix C.2.
From the standard deviation and boxplots, it is clear that all models have problems
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Limitations
49
with large variance in performance metrics. The variance should be assessed in rela-
tion to number of lesions in each of the images, as the number of lesions in the image
is important to the impact of e.g. one false positive on recall.
The evaluation metrics used throughout this thesis, were chosen as they were all part
of the MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge evaluation. The F1-score and recall
are calculated on lesion-level and are important in lesion detection, as the algorithms
ability to locate lesions is crucial. Because AVD and DSC scores are calculated at
voxel-level, they are sensitive to small discrepancies between gold-standard and pre-
diction. As lesion borders are often not clearly definable, discrepancies are almost
impossible to avoid.
When assessing the local datasets it was found, that there were some inconsistencies
in the manual delineations, as to which hyperintensities were defined as lesions. This
was supported by the inter-rater evaluation, where average dice between raters was
0.75 and recall was 0.79 - indicating a certain disagreement in lesion definition. The
inter-rater variability in gold-standards will always have impact on model metrics,
and to which degree we can rely on these metrics, and this is a general limitation in
automatic MS lesion segmentation research.
DSC was implemented as loss function in Li et al.’s network, as it is often used for mea-
suring label-overlap when a ground-truth is available [46]. However, if that ground
truth is inconsistent, and generally sensitive to small volume differences, DSC is not
an optimal choice. Especially because exact voxel-correspondence is not essential for
model performance or usability. However, metrics that are lesion-based such as recall
and precision (F1), cannot be implemented as loss.
The most relevant and precise assessment of model performance, would be to per-
form a clinical evaluation as that proposed in section 3.11.2, for every stage of model
development. This is, however, too time-consuming to be feasible for this thesis work.
The aspiration of this project was to implement the state-of-the art model with as few
changes as possible. However, after deciding on training end-to-end on local data the
standardisation of image-size in pre-processing had to be adjusted to accommodate
the larger images of the Tysabri 2/ON dataset, which led to a decrease in batch size
because of memory issues. The hyperparameters in the network by Li et al. had
been optimised for a model input of 200x200 mm as were appropriate for the dataset
of the MICCAI challenge [9]. Because hyperparameters affect each other, changing
the input- and batch size means that a new hyperparameter optimisation should be
carried out. This step was beyond the reach of this thesis, but would be an obvious
tool for further performance enhancement. The segmentation model by Li et al. was
chosen as basis for development, as it was winner of the newest WMH Segmentation
Challenge at the time of research, trained on the largest available dataset of 60 pa-
tients. It was furthermore a 2D U-net architecture which has been shown to work
well in cases of biomedical image segmentation [35] and was well suited for the 2D
images used in this project. These factors outweighed the fact, that the segmentation
model by Li et al. was developed for segmentation of vascular lesions.
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Discussion
In the MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge, Li et al. obtained evaluation metrics
close to that of the expert raters. These scores are however, not directly comparable
to those obtained in this project, because they were obtained using a different patient
cohort for a similar, but different, segmentation problem.
The applicability of this model relies greatly on robustness of data. The more vari-
ations of data the model sees during training, the more variations of test-images it
will be able to correctly delineate.
Patients from both the ON and Tysabri 2 datasets were at an early stage of dis-
ease progression, which is a weakness of the final model. Had the entire longitudinal
dataset been included, later stages of disease progression would have been represented.
In order to correctly evaluate the impact of including later stages of disease progres-
sion, the diversity of the test dataset should reflect that of the training dataset.
Data from two different scanners, and in total three different FLAIR-image reso-
lutions, was included in the training dataset. The inclusion of data from multiple
scanners and resolutions makes the model more robust towards input from an unseen
scanner type. However, if the model is to be sufficiently robust to handle image inputs
from any scanner equally, more variations need to be present in the dataset, and they
all have to be equally represented. As previously discussed, the longitudinal model
has an over-representation of Tysabri 2 data, which is acquired at a newer scanner
than ON. If the purpose was to fine-tune a model for the Siemens Achieva dStream
scanner, which is the one used at clinic in Glostrup today, the best performance
would probably be achieved by only including data from that scanner in the training
dataset.
For optimal robustness, and thereby broad application of the solution, the training
dataset should be much larger and more diverse, in order to equally represent all
relevant variations of disease progression and scanner types.
Programming challenges have been shown to have a problem of overfitting the pro-
posed models to the specific dataset and task set by challenge organisers (i.e. obtain
best performance based on metrics), whereby general application and clinical use-
ability is downgraded [47]. The MICCAI 2017 segmentation data challenge tried to
overcome the problem of overfitting by including training data from three different
scanners as well as test data from an additional two scanners, of which resolution and
size were unknown to participants. The segmentation model by Li et al. showed a per-
formance difference between testing on the data from unknown scanners and testing
on data from the same scanners as training data (DSC: 0.74 vs 0.80). This testifies
to the difficulty of constructing a truly robust segmentation model, and thereby the
general difficulty of applying challenge models for clinical purposes.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Future Prospects
51
5.2
Future Prospects
The learning curve of the final model indicates, that it is still prone to overfit-
ting. Further regularisation techniques as well as a thorough hyperparameter search
could possibly decrease overfitting. A commonly used regularisation technique is L2-
regularisation, where weights are penalised during training [26]. This technique is
easily implementable and would be an obvious next regularisation step. Hyperparam-
eter optimisation could be conducted as a grid-search of parameters. Especially, the
dropout fraction could have impact on overfitting and should be optimised.
A general problem of detection of false positives was observed, which decreases model
accuracy.
A larger training data cohort with fully delineated reference standards
as well as a more diverse representation of disease progression would likely increase
model robustness and decrease overall false positive score.
The final model was not trained as an ensemble network because of limited time of
this thesis. An ensemble model would increase robustness and decrease variance, and
should be employed in future models.
The model was shown to have high clinical usability, although it should be used
cautiously in cases demanding very high accuracy. The model could easily be linked
to the McDonald criteria for use in diagnosis of MS, by applying a mask which seg-
ments the brain into the four typical MS areas, and thereby count the amount of
lesions in each area.
The fact that the model had clinical usability comparable to delineation maps by ex-
pert raters both suggests that it is generally difficult to delineate MS lesions perfectly,
and that the faults of the segmentation model are minor. The use of the segmentation
model could significantly decrease the time used for assessment of MRIs in clinic, as
subsequent assessment is much faster than manual delineation. Predicted segmenta-
tion maps with subsequent manual corrections could furthermore be used to quickly
increase the amount of available, perfect training data, to further enhance model per-
formance.
The implementation of the model in clinic could potentially change the workflow
for many clinicians treating MS patients, and be part of changing the current dynam-
ics of the healthcare system. As automatic methods for assessing biomedical images
becomes better and better, the current systems in many different areas of healthcare
will have to be rethought.
==PAGE:68==
52
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
An automatic segmentation model could drastically decrease time spend on assessing
MRIs during MS diagnosis and prognosis. Towards this end, the winning method
from the MICCAI 2017 Segmentation Challenge was implemented and tested on a
locally acquired dataset. Despite being developed using multiple datasets with focus
on generalisation, the winning method did not generalise fully to our local dataset.
In recognition of this, several modifications to the original method was proposed and
evaluated, in combination with a fine tuning to the varations of the local datasats.
The proposed method showed performance comparable to methods proposed in recent
litterature, when evaluated on basis of a set of evaluation metrics. It was furthermore
shown to produce segmentation maps with a high clinical value, as 52 out of 55
clinically evaluated lesion masks were deemed at least acceptable for use in clinical
practice.
The purpose of this master thesis was to test and tune a state-of-the-art segmen-
tation method for clinical application of automatic MS lesion segmentation. Building
on the basis of a strong segmentation model, a method was developed which has high
clinical relevance and has the possibility of improving clinical workflow as well as
provide a framework for further clinical testing.
==PAGE:70==
54
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
M. S. Trust, Prevalence and incidence of multiple sclerosis, Multiple Sclerosis
Trust, November 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mstrust.org.uk/a-
z/prevalence-and-incidence-multiple-sclerosis (visited on February 23,
2019).
[2]
M. S. I. Federation, Challenges of MS research, MS International Federation,
November 2016. [Online]. Available: www.msif.org/research/challenges-
of-ms-research/ (visited on January 31, 2019).
[3]
D. C. P. Browne and more, “Atlas of multiple sclerosis 2013: A growing global
problem with widespread inequity,” Neurology, pages 1022–1024, 2014.
[4]
M. S. I. Federation, What is MS? MS International Federation, October 2018.
[Online]. Available: www.msif.org/research/challenges-of-ms-research/
(visited on January 30, 2019).
[5]
Y. Ge, “Multiple sclerosis: The role of mr imaging,” American Journal of Neu-
roradiology, volume 6, number 27, pages 1165–1176, Jun. 2006.
[6]
E. A. Ashton and more, “Accuracy and reproducibility of manual and semiauto-
mated quantification of ms lesions by mri,” American Journal of Neuroradiology,
volume 4, number 27, February 2003.
[7]
M. Filippi and M. A. Rocca, “Mr imaging of multiple sclerosis,” Radiology,
volume 259, number 3, 2011.
[8]
H. Kujif, Wmh segmentation challenge, MICCAI, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://wmh.isi.uu.nl/ (visited on April 2, 2019).
[9]
H. Li, G. Jiang, J. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Wang, and W. Z. B. a. Menze, “Fully
convolutional network ensembles for white matter hyperintensities segmentation
in mr images,” NeuroImage, number 183, pages 650–665, 2018.
[10]
C. Kamm, B. Uitdehaag, and P. C.H., “Multiple sclerosis: Current knowledge
and future outlook,” European neurology, number 72, pages 132–141, Jul. 2014.
[11]
J. Fletcher, S. Lalor, C. M. Sweeney, N. Tubridy, and K. Mills, “T cells in
multiple sclerosis and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis,” Clinical
and Experimental Neurology, number 162, pages 1–11, October 2010.
[12]
D. Miller and S. Leary, “Primary-progressive multiple sclerosis,” The Lancet
Neurology, volume 6, number 10, pages 903–912, October 2007.
==PAGE:72==
56
Bibliography
[13]
N. M. S. Society, Diagnosing MS, National Multiple Sclerosis Society. [Online].
Available: https://www.nationalmssociety.org/Symptoms- Diagnosis/
Diagnosing-MS (visited on February 18, 2019).
[14]
F. Barkhof, R. Smithuis, and M. Hazewinkel, Multiple Sclerosis, MR Center
for MS Research, Radiology Department of the ’Vrije Universiteit’ Medical
Center, Amsterdam and the Rijnland Hospital, Leiderdorp, the Netherlands,
May 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.radiologyassistant.nl/en/
p4556dea65db62/multiple-sclerosis.html (visited on February 24, 2019).
[15]
M. S. Trust, McDonald criteria, Multiple Sclerosis Trust, Jun. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.mstrust.org.uk/a-z/mcdonald-criteria (visited
on February 18, 2019).
[16]
L. Maier-Hein, M. Eisenmann, A. Reinke, A. Kopp-Schneider, and more, “Is
the winner really the best? a critical analysis of common research practice in
biomedical image analysis competitions,” The Lancet Neurology, volume 17,
pages 162–173, February 2018.
[17]
N. M. society, Functional systems scores (fss) and expanded disability status
scale (edss). [Online]. Available: https : / / www . nationalmssociety . org /
For-Professionals/Researchers/Resources-for-Researchers/Clinical-
Study - Measures / Functional - Systems - Scores - (FSS) - and - Expanded -
Disab (visited on Sep. 5, 2019).
[18]
U. Kaunzner and S. Gauthier, “Mri in the assessment and monitoring of mul-
tiple sclerosis: An update on best practice,” Theraputic Advances, Neurological
Disorders, volume 10, pages 247–261, 2017.
[19]
A. Berger, “Magnetic resonance imaging,” BMJ, volume 234, number 35, 2002.
[20]
L. Hanson, “An introduction to mri techniques,” MR-department, Hvidovre Hos-
pital, DRCMR, April 2010.
[21]
S. Trip and D. Miller, “Imaging in multiple sclerosis,” J Neurol Neurosurg Psy-
chiatry, number 76, pages 11–18, 2005.
[22]
N. Farris and S. Goergen, Gadolinium contrast medium (mri contrast agents),
Inside Radiology, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.insideradiology.
com.au/gadolinium-contrast-medium/ (visited on March 3, 2019).
[23]
F. Pesapane, M. Codari, and F. Sardanelli, “Artificial intelligence in medical
imaging: Threat or opportunity? radiologists again at the forefront of innovation
in medicine,” European Radiology Experimental, number 35, 2018.
[24]
T. Herlau, M. Schmidt, and M. Mørup, Introduction to Machine Learning and
Data Mining. DTU, 2018.
[25]
A. Karpathy, Cs231n: Convolutional neural networks for visual recognition,
Stanford University, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://cs231n.stanford.edu/
(visited on March 17, 2019).
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
57
[26]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
[Online]. Available: https://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[27]
A. Deshpande, A beginner’s guide to understanding convolutional neural net-
works, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://adeshpande3.github.io/adeshpande3.
github . io / A - Beginner ' s - Guide - To - Understanding - Convolutional -
Neural-Networks/ (visited on March 20, 2019).
[28]
F. Chollet et al., Keras documentation: Usage of initialisers. https://keras.io,
2015.
[29]
L. Torrey and J. Shavlik, “Transfer learning,” IGI Global, 2009.
[30]
N. Tajbakhsh, J. Shin, S. Gurudu, T. Hurst, C. Kendall, M. Gotway, and J.
Liang, “Convolutional neural networks for medical image analysis: Full training
or fine tuning?” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2016.
[31]
D. Kingma and J. BA, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” ICLR,
volume Conference paper, 2015.
[32]
F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S. Ahmadi, “V-net: Fully convolutional neural net-
works for volumetric medical image segmentation,” 2016 Fourth International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2016.
[33]
C. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, and M. Cardoso, “Generalised dice
overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced segmentations,”
Springer Link, volume Part of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science book
series (LNCS, volume 10553), 2017.
[34]
F. V. V. Dumoulin, “A guide to convolution arithmetic for deeplearning,” ArXiv,
2016.
[35]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation,” Springer International Publishing, volume In:
Navab N., Hornegger J., Wells W., Frangi A. (eds) Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015. MICCAI 2015. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol 9351, 2015.
[36]
N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, T. Vercauteren, A. Krizhevskykriz, I. Sutskeverilya,
and R. Salakhutdinovrsalakhu, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural net-
works from overfitting,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, number 15,
pages 1929–1958, 2014.
[37]
S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network train-
ing by reducing internal covariate shift,” arXiv, 2015.
[38]
C. Peng, X. Zhang, G. Yu, G. Luo, and J. Sun, “Large kernel matters —
improve semantic segmentation by global convolutional network,” 2017 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), volume 1,
pages 1743–1751, 2017.
==PAGE:74==
58
Bibliography
[39]
S. Cramer, S. Modvig, H. Simonsen, J. Frederiksen, and H. Larsson, “Permeabil-
ity of the blood–brain barrier predicts conversion from optic neuritis to multiple
sclerosis,” Brain, Journal of Neurology, 2015.
[40]
J. Wardlaw, E. Smith, G. Biessels, M. Dichgans, and more, “Neuroimaging
standards for research into small vessel disease and its contribution to ageing
and neurodegeneration,” Lancet Neurology, number 12, pages 822–38, 2013.
[41]
A. Carass, a. Roy, a. Jog, D. Pham, and more, “Longitudinal multiple sclerosis
lesion segmentation: Resource challenge,” Neuroimage, number 148, pages 77–
102, 2017.
[42]
S. Aslania, S. Dayana, L. Storellid, M. Filippid, V. Murinoa, M. Roccad, and D.
Sonaa, “Multi-branch convolutional neural network for multiple sclerosis lesion
segmentation,” arxiv, 2019.
[43]
M. Neema, Z. Guss, J. Stankiewicz, A. Arora, B. Healy, and R. Bakshi, “Normal
findings on brain flair mri scans at 3t,” AJNR, volume 30, pages 911–916, 2009.
[44]
S. Jain, D. Sima, A. Ribbens, M. Cambron, A. Maertens, D. Smeetsa, and more,
“Automatic segmentation and volumetry of multiple sclerosis brain lesions from
mr images,” Neuroimage Clinical, volume 8, pages 367–375, 2015.
[45]
M. Filippi and M. Rocca, “Dirty-appearing white matter: A disregarded en-
tity in multiple sclerosis,” American Journal of Neuroradiology, number 31,
pages 390–391, 2010.
[46]
C. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, and J. Cardoso, “Generalised dice
overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced segmentations,”
Part of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science book series (LNCS, volume
10553), 2017.
[47]
A. Thompson, B. Banwell, J. Cohen, and more, “Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis:
2017 revisions of the mcdonald criteria,” Arxiv, 2018.
[48]
S. Valverde, M. Cabezas, E. Roura, S. González-Villà, D. Pareto, and X. Vi-
lanova J. C. … Lladó, “Improving automated multiple sclerosis lesion segmenta-
tion with a cascaded 3d convolutional neural network approach.,” NeuroImage,
number 155, pages 159–168, 2017.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A
Developmental
Journey
A.0.1
MICCAI 2008 MS Lesion Segmentation Challenge
At the beginning of this project, implementation of two state-of-the-art segmentation
methods was begun, in order to compare their performance on the local data sets.
This would increase chances of finding the best method and explore different takes on
hyper-intensity segmentation. The alternative to the segmentation model proposed
by Hongwei Li et al, was the highest ranked method of the MICCAI 2008 MS Lesion
Segmentation Challenge and one of the top-ranked of both the MICCAI 2016 WMH
segmentation challenge and ISBI 2015 segmentation challenge. The method was pro-
posed by Sergei Valverde et al [48] and was based on a cascaded 3D convolutional
neural network approach. The method was favorable, because it was tested was fitted
for T2-weighted images.
However, the method was build on top of older versions of the Python libraries Theano
and Lasagne, and several of the functions turned out to be deprecated. Further more
the 3D network took 3D patches as input, which meant a significant re-sampling of
the local datasets would be necessary. The resolution in the x-direction of our data
was unfortunately so low, that each 3D patch would only comprise of 2-3 slices, basi-
cally eliminating the 3D effect.
The combination of out-dated software and resolution difficulties resulted in the ex-
clusion of the cascaded 3D network in this paper. The preliminary implementation,
however, helped improve my understanding of deep learning software and the effects
of data resolution.
A.0.2
Initial implementation of the Segmentation Model
To improve understanding of the segmentation model and secure the correct prelim-
inary implementation, the segmentation model by Hongwei Li et al was first imple-
mented with the exact same settings as the original model and trained and tested
on the original MICCAI 2008 challenge data set. Using the pre-processed challenge
data provided by Hongwei Li et al, we were able to nearly reproduce reported model
performance. Since we did not have access to the challenge test-data, which is not
==PAGE:76==
60
A Developmental Journey
made public by challenge organisers, three random subjects from the training cohort
were used for testing.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX B
Model Specifications
This appendix presents the specifications of each variation of segmentation model, as
well as a model summary of the final model.
==PAGE:78==
62
B Model Specifications
Model
Model specifications
Original
Original model weights, Training data: MICCAI 2017
segmentation challenge data, Input channel: 2 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR,
Batch size: 30, Learning rate: 2*10−4,
no. of epochs: 50, Transfer learning: no, re-sampling: no
Freeze
Application of Freeze layer, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON,
Input channel: 2 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Batch size: 15,
Learning rate: 2*10−4, no. of epochs: 1000, Transfer learning:
to transfered to all layers except last convolutional, re-sampling: yes
End-to-end
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 15, Input
channel: 2 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 2*10−4,
no. of epochs: 1000, Transfer learning:
initialisation of model weights, re-sampling: yes
T2 and FLAIR
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 15,
Input channel: 2 - T2-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate:
2*10−4, no. of epochs: 1000, Transfer learning:
initialisation of model weights, re-sampling: yes
FLAIR
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 15,
Input channel: 1 - T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 2*10−4, no. of epochs:
1000, Transfer learning: initialisation of model weights, re-sampling: yes
Low LR
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 6,
Input channel: 1 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 10−5,
no. of epochs: 1000, Transfer learning: initialisation of
model weights, re-sampling: no
SOS
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 6, Input channel:
1 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 10−5, no. of epochs: 1000,
Transfer learning: initialisation of model weights,
re-sampling: no, SOS implemented
Dropout
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 6, Input channel:
1 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 10−5, no. of epochs: 1000,
Transfer learning: initialisation of model weights, re-sampling: no,
SOS implemented, Drop-out implemented
High Quality
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 6, Input channel:
1 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 10−5, no. of epochs: 1000,
Transfer learning: initialisation of model weights, re-sampling: no, SOS
implemented, Drop-out implemented,Batch-normalisation implemented
Longitudinal
End-to-end, Training data: Tysabri 2/ON, Batch size: 6, Input channel:
1 - T1-w and T2 FLAIR, Learning rate: 10−5, no. of epochs: 1000,
Transfer learning: initialisation of model weights, re-sampling: no, SOS imp.,
Drop-out imp., Batch-normalisation imp., inclusion of longitudinal data
Table B.1: Specifications of each variation of the segmentation model.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C
Results - Model
Adjustments
C.1
Performance of Each Model Variation
For specifics of each model variation see table B.1. The metrics are Dice similarity
coefficient (DSC), average volume difference (AVD), F1 and recall, they are all defined
in section 3.10.
Model spec.
DSC (↑)
AVD(↓)
Precision (↑)
Recall (↑)
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
Original
0.46
0.25
76.38
74.17
0.38
0.23
0.74
0.31
Freeze
0.35
0.20
235.87
261.0
0.26
0.17
0.74
0.26
End-to-end
0.58
0.20
54.77
52.51
0.56
0.19
0.72
0.22
FLAIR and T2
0.55
0.22
45.68
19.2
0.51
0.18
0.62
0.25
FLAIR
0.50
0.15
158.16
117.13
0.59
0.21
0.83
0.17
Low LR
0.62
0.19
45.85
45.09
0.65
0.20
0.72
0.19
SOS
0.59
0.14
62.28
81.01
0.67
0.22
0.8
145
Dropout
0.62
0.23
66.64
281.02
0.67
0.25
0.81
0.27
High quality
0.56
0.20
53.29
37.97
0.58
0.23
0.63
0.25
Longitudinal
0.54
0.21
59.2
41.06
0.57
0.20
0.65
0.24
Table C.1: Full summary of performance metrics of each edition of the segmentation
model.
C.2
Loss Curves
The loss curves of each model variation is presented.
==PAGE:80==
64
C Results - Model Adjustments
(a) Model trained with freeze-layers.
(b) Model trained end-to-end with T1 and
FLAIR.
(c) Model trained with T2 and FLAIR.
(d) Model trained only with FLAIR.
(e) Model trained with lower learning rate.
(f) Model trained with sequence-of-slices.
Figure C.1: Training and validation loss curves.
==PAGE:81==
C.3 Validation Data Split
65
(a) Model trained with dropout.
(b) Model trained with ”High quality” data.
(c) Model trained with longitudinal data.
Figure C.2: Training and validation loss curves (continued).
C.3
Validation Data Split
Final model trained on longitudinal data set
DSC (↑)
AVD(↓)
Precision (↑)
Recall (↑)
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
ON
0.45
0.27
59.10
25.763
0.53
0.2
0.46
0.2
Tysabri 2
0.63
0.066
59.29
52.00
0.61
0.18
0.83
0.10
Table C.2: Performance of the final segmentation model trained on the entire longi-
tudinal data set and tested on validation data. The validation data has been divided
between the two data sets to investigate scanner influence.
==PAGE:82==
66
C Results - Model Adjustments
Final model trained on baseline data set
DSC (↑)
AVD(↓)
Precision (↑)
Recall (↑)
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
mean
std
ON
0.66
0.15
19.15
22.28
0.73
0.10
0.76
0.17
Tysabri 2
0.58
0.11
114.13
90.04
0.62
0.28
0.87
0.09
Table C.3: Performance of the final segmentation model trained on the baseline data
set and tested on validation data. Validation data has been divided between the two
data sets to investigate scanner influence.
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX D
Longitudinal
Development
The predicted lesion load at every longitudinal timepoint of the 6 test patients not
presented in section 4.3.1.
(a) Lesion load of patient 09 across 5 time-
points.
(b) Lesion load of patient 10 across 4 time-
points.
Figure D.1: In figure D.1a the two segmentations are relatively close in lesion count
and longitudinal development except for the first timepoint which displays a massive
difference. In figure D.1b the two segmentation show a large difference in lesion load
as well as a general discrepancy in development.
==PAGE:84==
68
D Longitudinal Development
(a) Lesion load of patient 12 across 3 time-
points.
(b) Lesion load of patient 14 across 3 time-
points.
Figure D.2: In figure D.2a there is a large discrepancy between the two segmentations.
Most significantly in lesion load, but also in development with time. In figure D.2b
the manual delineation displays a large variation in time, which is not detected by
the algorithm.
(a) Lesion load of patient 15 across 3 time-
points.
(b) Lesion load of patient 16 across 3 time-
points.
Figure D.3: In figure D.1a the automatic segmentation detects a large variation in
lesion load, which is not detected by the expert rater. In figure D.1b the manual de-
lineation segments a higher lesion load than the algorithm, with a similar longitudinal
development, excluding the first timepoint.
==PAGE:85==
List of Figures
2.1
MS lesions in four typical sites. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Example of an MRI axial-slice, imaged using different sequences.
The
high-signal CSF is nulled in the FLAIR image, which makes lesions appear
clearer.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Simple architecture of a deep NN with five hidden layers. Adapted from
[23]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Simple version of a CNN with 4x4 input dimension, 3x3 convolution kernel
with stride 1, and a resulting feature map of dimension 2x2. . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Two common activation functions for use in deep NNs. The figures are
adapted from [25].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Schematic representation of transfer learning for fine tuning a network and
as basis for end-to-end training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.7
Example of a max-pooling operation. Figure is adapted from [25] . . . . .
15
2.8
Example of U-net architecture with input image of 572x572 pixels. The
initial two 3x3 convolutional layers have 64 filters, which is doubled at each
pooling operation. The max-pooling operation is a size 2x2 with stride
2 for downsampling. The output has two feature channels, for positive
and negative classification. The white boxes represent the concatenated
feature-maps. Figure is adapted from [35]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.9
Neural network with two hidden layers, five input neurons and one output
neuron. The network on the right has dropout applied to both hidden
layers. The figures are adapted from [25].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.10 Network architecture of the implemented segmentation model by Hongwei
Li et al. The network has a U-net architecture with a contracting and
expansive part and a total of 19 convolutional layers. Figure is adapted
from [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1
Axial FLAIR image of an MS patient (left) with a corresponding, manually
drawn, delineation mask in red (right). The patient has both periventric-
ular and subcortical lesions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Overall framework for training stage. Figure adapted from [9].
. . . . . .
25
==PAGE:86==
70
List of Figures
3.3
Distribution of Training and test data from total Tysabri 2 and ON dataset.
N is the number of patients, i.e.
the number of baselines scans.
The
numbers in brackets present the number of longitudinal scans. . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models vary between employing the original model weights, fine-
tuning and end-to-end training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Example of MS lesion segmentation on an axial slice, which showcases
the differences between the three model variations. Both the pre-trained,
original model and the model employing freeze-layers delineates a number
of false positives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models are all trained end-to-end with a 2-channel input of T2-weighted
FLAIR and T1-weighted images, a 1-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR
and a 2-channel input of T2-weighted FLAIR and T2-weighted images re-
spectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Example of MS lesion delineations on a representative axial slice. The
model taking both T1-weighted and T2-weighted FLAIR images as input is
the most precise, regarding both lesion detection and delineation accuracy.
The model including T2-weighted images has a number of false negatives.
36
4.5
Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models are all trained end-to-end with a 1-channel input of T2-weighted
FLAIR images. The models have increasingly higher performance, as more
techniques are applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.6
Example of MS lesion delineations on an axial slice showcasing the dif-
ferences between the three model variations.
The delineations become
increasingly precise with the application of SOS and dropout. . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Distribution of segmentation performance across the validation dataset.
The models are all trained end-to-end with a 1-channel input of T2-weighted
FLAIR images. They are trained on the baseline training data, ”high qual-
ity” baseline training data and longitudinal training data, respectively. . .
38
4.8
Example of MS lesion delineations on an axial slice showcasing the dif-
ferences between the three model variations. Training the model on the
entire baseline dataset results in highest performance.
. . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.9
Three slices from representative test patients. The model accurately de-
lineates most of the lesions defined by the gold-standard. In the image
shown in the middle, the predicted volume is larger than the manually
drawn volume.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.10 Three delineation examples from the test dataset.
First image:
true-
negative of hyper-intensity in the brain stem, next to a true-positive lesion.
Second image: False positive delineation of brain fold. Third image: False
positive delineation of ventricles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:87==
4.11 The two graphs both show a less than optimal discrepancy between human
rating and model predictions. Figure 4.11a show a significant difference in
development of lesion load, whereas figure 4.11b predicts approximately
same development but a large difference in overall lesion count. . . . . . .
42
4.12 The prediction of lesion load of patient 11 follows the manual delineation
both in terms of overall load and in longitudinal development.
Figure
4.12b shows a relative agreement in later prediction of lesion load, but a
large difference at the first timepoint.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.13 Example of an unacceptable and a perfect delineation performed by the
segmentation model.
The unacceptable delineation shows a segmented
false positive, hyperintense areas in the dorsal horns. . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C.1 Training and validation loss curves. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
C.2 Training and validation loss curves (continued). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
D.1 In figure D.1a the two segmentations are relatively close in lesion count
and longitudinal development except for the first timepoint which displays
a massive difference. In figure D.1b the two segmentation show a large
difference in lesion load as well as a general discrepancy in development. .
67
D.2 In figure D.2a there is a large discrepancy between the two segmentations.
Most significantly in lesion load, but also in development with time. In
figure D.2b the manual delineation displays a large variation in time, which
is not detected by the algorithm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
D.3 In figure D.1a the automatic segmentation detects a large variation in
lesion load, which is not detected by the expert rater. In figure D.1b the
manual delineation segments a higher lesion load than the algorithm, with
a similar longitudinal development, excluding the first timepoint. . . . . .
68
List of Tables
2.1
McDonald scores for diagnosing MS, revised in 2017. Table is from Thomp-
son AJ, Banwell BL, Barkhof F, et al. Diagnosis of multiple sclerosis[16] .
6
2.2
Data augmentation parameters. Table and data from [9] . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1
Overview of voxels size [mm3] and spatial dimensions [voxels] for all datasets,
and their respective modalities, used in this project. Scanner type used
for acquisition is specified for each dataset.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:88==
72
List of Tables
3.2
Acquisition settings for all six datasets. The first three make up the MIC-
CAI challenge dataset, whereas the last three are acquired at Glostrup
Hospital. All T1-weighted images are acquired in 3D, all T2-weighted and
T2-weighted FLAIR images are acquired in 2D. Voxels size is given in
[mm3] and axquisition times in ms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Rating criteria of delineation masks, targeted at clinical use. . . . . . . . .
31
4.1
Summary of investigated model inputs and network variations, with final
settings presented at the right side of the table. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Average dice score (DSC), average volume difference (AVD), F1-score and
sensitivity (recall) for segmentation of MS lesions in a validation dataset
of 10 subjects, presented for the final segmentation model trained.
. . . .
40
4.3
Average performance of final segmentation model evaluated on held-out
test dataset with respect to two different gold-standards. The last row
displays inter-rater variability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Ratings from clinical evaluation of the delineation masks generated for the
55 patients in the clinical dataset. 1st and 2nd rating refers to the fact,
that the rater saw all masks twice in anonymised, randomised order. . . .
43
4.5
Rating of delineation masks of 10 test patients for evaluation of clinical us-
ability. Rater 1 and 2, refers to the two sets of manual reference standards
of the same test patients drawn individually by two expert raters.
. . . .
43
B.1
Specifications of each variation of the segmentation model.
. . . . . . . .
62
C.1 Full summary of performance metrics of each edition of the segmentation
model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
C.2 Performance of the final segmentation model trained on the entire longi-
tudinal data set and tested on validation data. The validation data has
been divided between the two data sets to investigate scanner influence. .
65
C.3 Performance of the final segmentation model trained on the baseline data
set and tested on validation data. Validation data has been divided be-
tween the two data sets to investigate scanner influence. . . . . . . . . . .
66
