==PAGE:1==
M A S T E R | T H E S I S
A Study on Multi-Terminal Berth Allocation and The Impact of
Speed Optimization
28th July 2019
Author:
Soﬁe Amalie Kongsted
Supervisors:
Ass. Professor Dario Pacino
Prof. Harilaos N. Psaraftis
==PAGE:2==
Formalities
This report is conducted by:
Soﬁe Amalie Kongsted (s130560)
DTU Management Engineering
Transport and Logistics
E-mail: soﬁekongsted@gmail.com
Supervisors:
Associate Professor Dario Pacino
DTU Management Engineering
E-mail: darpa@dtu.dk
Professor Harilaos N. Psaraftis
DTU Management Engineering
E-mail: hnpsar@dtu.dk
Department:
DTU Management Engineering
Akademivej
Bygning 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Phone: +45 45 25 48 00
Date:
Signature:
Release Date:
Edition:
ECTS-credits:
Comment:
28th July 2019
First Edition
35, including an oral presentation.
This project is conducted in order to achieve a Master of Science in
Management Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark, with
specialization in Transport and Logistics.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This project is conducted in accordance to my Master of Science degree within Transport and
Logistics at the Department of Management Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The
main focus of my masters degree has been Operations Research and alternative solution methodologies
to optimize transport related problems. Because of my interest in maritime transportation in relation
to sustainability, I have conducted this thesis to investigate if minimizing diﬀerent objectives using the
continuous Berth Allocation Problem in two consecutive ports, can induce speed reductions in liner
vessels.
Please notice that the only data, which has a direct connection to the ports (Tanjung Pelepas,
Malaysia, and Rotterdam, Netherlands) mentioned in this thesis, is the distance between them. When-
ever their names are used as a reference, it is exclusively applied to distinguish between the results
gained from the model. Thus the data applied and the conclusions drawn cannot be connected to
these ports directly.
All codes conducted in this thesis are programmed in Java. The reader of this project is assumed
to possess minor knowledge within optimization and Operations Research, including the terminology
within these areas.
Acknowledgements
First of all I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors Associate Professor Dario Pacino
and Professor Harilaos N. Psaraftis for their guidance and engagement in this project. They have
been very helpful in all phases of the project and whenever I hit a wall I was able to beneﬁt from their
knowledge and professionalism within their ﬁelds. Also a special thanks to Associate Professor Dario
Pacino for providing me with the necessary data.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Mr. Jens Finsen for reviewing the project and taking the time
to proofread each of the sections along the period. His expertise in possessing the English language
and Mr. Finsen’s many years of experience within the shipping industry have been a great help.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Within the past year there has been a heating discussion between NGO’s, politicians and operators
of the shipping industry, on whether to enact speed limits or speed optimization upon the ﬂeet of
the maritime transportation industry. Furthermore, vessels are experiencing a lot of waiting time
outside the ports because of delays; time they could have spend on sailing slower and thereby reduce
the amount of CO2 they emit. The purpose of this project is to investigate if better communication
between the ports and the vessels, can be seen as an alternative solution to speed limits in order to
minimize the speed of the vessels.
To approach this problem, a Tabu Search have been developed in relation to the Berth Allocation
Problem, to test if diﬀerent objective functions applied on two independent, consecutive terminals can
reduce the speed, while the ports are minimizing either cost, waiting time or service time. Reducing
speed will minimize the cost that the shipping companies spend on fuel, and thus it will create a win
win solution. Furthermore an analysis will focus on both private and political initiatives, which can
be enforced in order to make the maritime industry more sustainable.
The overall assessment of the results do not show signiﬁcant speed reductions, however, what is
clear is that minimizing waiting time in both ports only results in speed increases.
Furthermore,
minimizing cost in the latter port showed the best results in terms of either zero speed diﬀerence or
speed reductions. The results however, reﬂected that the model do not take into account the unforeseen
delays, which is where the biggest speed reductions can be found. Furthermore, an evaluation on speed
limits shows that the positive impact speed limits will have on the environment here and now, may
not be beneﬁcial for the economy and thus may not be seen as a sustainable solution.
Keywords: BAP, Speed Optimization, Liner Shipping, Industrial Ports, Sustainability
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Formalities
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Shipping Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Emission Estimation and Speed Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
The Continuous Berth Allocation Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Project Scope and Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Solution Methodology
10
2.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Data Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Construction Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Tabu Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Problem Speciﬁc Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Search Space and Search Methodologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Objective Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Speed Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Tabu Search Solutions
20
3.1
Performance of the Tabu Search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Minimum Total Cost Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Minimum Total Waiting Time Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Minimum Total Service Time Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Total Waiting Time versus Total Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Total Service Time versus Total Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Results Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Sustainability in Practise
30
4.1
Private Initiatives towards Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.1
External Market Pressures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
Stakeholder Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
IMO Policies towards Sustainability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Energy Resources and Technological Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Speed Optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Conclusion
34
6
Further Research
36
A Speed Calculations
39
B Distance Estimation
40
C Tabu Search Performance Results
41
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
1
CO2 emissions for the diﬀerent transport modes per tonne-km.[1] . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Rough overview of the terminal in Aarhus (Denmark). Source: Google Maps
. . . . .
3
3
Overview of the SECA Areas. [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
SOx regulations set by the IMO [3].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
The setup of a solution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
Illustration of the directions the vessel will be moved during the ”Emergency Solution”.
14
7
An overview of the three levels on which the TS operates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
8
Bar chart of the average speed reduction in regard to objective functions.
. . . . . . .
27
9
Average vessel distribution in regard to speed diﬀerence for objective functions. . . . .
28
10
Vessel size for diﬀerent types of vessels [4] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
11
Distance from Tanjung Pelepas, Malaysia, to Rotterdam, Netherlands
. . . . . . . . .
40
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Tables
1
Overview of data sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Performance of the Tabu Search in regard to minimizing cost in both ports. . . . . . .
21
3
Chosen parameters for the Tabu Search. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Maximum- and design speed overview of vessel type 1, 2 and 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing cost in both ports.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing waiting time in both ports.
. . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing service time in both ports. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8
Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing wait time in Tanjung and cost in Rotterdam.
25
9
Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing service time in Tanjung and cost in Rotterdam. 26
10
Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing cost in Tanjung and service time in Rotterdam. 26
11
Table of speed estimations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
12
Objective values of performance tests for 30 vessels.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
13
Objective values of performance tests for 40 vessels.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
14
Objective values of performance tests for 60 vessels.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
vi
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis
1 | Introduction
The focus on green solutions and sustainability has grown drastically within the past decades. Air
pollution, increasing temperatures, increased water levels, acid rains and many other problems are
discussed on a daily basis and one of the biggest sinners is the ever growing need for transportation.
Economic growth and a greater demand for transportation are often closely related, which Rodrique
et al. underpins by stating:
”A relation between the quantity and quality of transport infrastructure and the level of economic
development is apparent.
High density transport infrastructure and highly connected networks are
commonly associated with high levels of development.” [5].
That is why the goal in terms of sustainable solutions and transportation is to ﬁnd better alternatives
and to use the system more eﬃciently in order to prevent pollution whilst the demand is still met.
In Europe where the standard of living and economic wealth in general is higher than in most other
parts of the world, more and more production sites are being outsourced to Asia, Africa or South
America. The reason is the much lower production costs, which makes it much cheaper to import the
goods instead of producing them domestically. This means a large amount of Europe’s export has
gone from being physical goods to be knowledge-based non-physical products, such as IT solutions
and innovative designs being produced outside Europe.
Accordingly, there is a vast demand for
transportation of imported goods around Europe.
The Trans-European Network (TEN-T) is the initiative which, among others, makes it possible to
cross the borders of all EU-countries and create better trade possibilities within the European borders
[6]. Furthermore, the program has determined certain guidelines to promote sustainable development.
The main initiative of this development is to build green corridors through Europe in order to make
freight transportation easier, whilst the most sustainable routes are used. Here seaborne transportation
plays a dominant role.
Figure 1: CO2 emissions for the dif-
ferent transport modes per tonne-
km.[1]
Looking at Figure 1 it is obvious that maritime transporta-
tion is the most environmentally friendly mode of transporta-
tion. However, it is also the most inﬂexible mode, meaning it
is controlled by various circumstances, that makes it impossible
to stand alone in distributing goods. The most obvious is wa-
ter, which means in big inland areas with no rivers or channels,
the vessels must be complimented with train or truck.
Time
is also a big issue, especially for companies distributing perish-
able goods, such as milk products, fruits and ﬂowers. No doubt
airborne transportation would be the most suitable for these
types of goods, however it is very costly in terms of both money
and pollution. Furthermore, it is inﬂuenced by certain routes,
passages and port terminals and thus maritime transportation
is most suitable for freight over large distances, which accord-
ing to UNCTAD review on Maritime Transportation from 2018
is growing each year. Around 90% of global freight have been
transported by sea at some point, which makes it an ever grow-
ing alternative to the other transportation modes [7][8]. These
market shares are high especially because of economies of scale, which makes maritime transportation
favorable both in terms of cost and capacity.
Page 1 of 41
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis
1.1 | The Shipping Industry
As a brief introduction to the shipping industry the following section will describe the diﬀerent
services it provides and the main actors of a very dynamic and multi-facetted industry. Furthermore,
it will provide a description of the general outlook and operations conducted at a container terminal.
In general the shipping industry distinguishes between three main services: liner shipping, bulk
Shipping and Specialized Service Segments[9].
Liner services are bound to a ﬁxed schedule on a ﬁxed route, and can therefore be compared to a
bus service. Since McClean invented the container in 1955, the container industry and liner shipping
have reached a market share of 60% (2017), which possibly has been inﬂuenced by the high safety it
provides [10]. Because of the enclosed containers being stacked, the ships can carry a vast amount of
diﬀerent goods. The goods carried by container vessels are typically of higher value compared to bulk
services [9].
The bulk service diﬀer not only from the value of the goods, but also for its ﬂexibility, which means
the bulk shippers do not follow a ﬁxed time schedule and often sign one contract at a time. This
means the vessels often carry a vast amount of the same commodity with no ﬁxed schedule. In that
way it could be compared to a taxi service. The commodities involved are either dry bulk such as ore
and grain or ﬂuid bulk such as oil [9].
The last deﬁned service, Specialized Service Segments, is also unique. The vessels in this group are
mainly constructed for one particular purpose - examples include the large cruise ships tailor made
for passengers or the Ro-Ro (Roll-on Roll-oﬀ) vessels which makes it easy to transport vehicles [9].
As mentioned above the liner service is similar to a bus service, just larger in scale. This means that
several vessels of either the same company or from companies working in alliances are servicing the
same route and ports in a weekly frequency, and in that way the customers can rely on a consistent
schedule, securing that a vessel is arriving at a certain port on the same day every week. The size of
the vessels has its limitation though. Especially in Europe only a few very big ports exist (Hamburg,
Rotterdam and a few more), meaning the vessels arriving from Asia will be unloaded in these ports,
and then feeder vessels (less than 3000 TEU) will serve a smaller route within Europe. This type of
network makes it possible to carry goods as long as possible on sea, which is desirable in terms of
sustainability.
In general the shipping industry attracts a vast amount of stakeholders and the interrelation between
them can vary a lot.
The transportation part can be divided into three main stakeholders.
The
shipping company, who often owns the ships, the freight forwarder, who is the link between the
shipping company and the customer and then the customer itself, who could be anything from a
manufacturer to a single private person. In terms of the terminal, stakeholders could be the truck or
train operators, the terminal management team, the crane operators and of course the shipping related
stakeholders mentioned above. Since the shipping industry involve a great economy, companies and
global organizations, many other third and fourth party stakeholders could be mentioned as well. For
more information about stakeholders and their inﬂuence see [9].
This project focuses on the liner industry and the optimization of container related problems. The
standard measurement of containers makes them easy to stack and thus the container terminals can
store a vast amount of containers in a relatively small area. The shape of a terminal varies from port
to port, but the main idea of a terminal is illustrated in Figure 2, which is a rough overview of a
terminal based in an ortofoto of Aarhus Havn in Denmark taken from Google Maps.
The containers arrive at the terminal in the Hinterland Area.
Here the inter-modal operations
happen from either truck or train to terminal cranes, which move the containers to the container yard,
where they are stored until their vessel arrives. Then in the end the containers are moved to the quay
side where they are loaded on the container vessel. Containers being discharged from the vessel are
Page 2 of 41
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis
Figure 2: Rough overview of the terminal in Aarhus (Denmark). Source: Google Maps
often moved to another yard (depending on the size of the terminal) until they are picked up by a
truck or train. The automation of the yards also diﬀer from port to port. Hamburg Harbour which
contain various yards, has one area where the containers are picked up by fully automated vehicles
moving them from the yard to the quay side, where other yards use manually controlled vehicles.
Because of the many inter-dependencies at a terminal many diﬀerent terminal related optimization
problems have been developed through the years. It is very expensive in both time and money to
move the containers around the terminal, and thus it is important to place them at the most optimal
location from the beginning.
There is no point in placing the ﬁrst container to be moved in the
bottom of a stack, or place it at the other end of the yard from where the vessel is going to berth.
The same could be mentioned in terms of the loading procedure of the vessel. The containers to be
discharged next should be stacked on the topmost location on the vessel. A third essential factor to
consider during loading/unloading operations is the balance of the vessel. This means the weight of
the containers also have an impact. Considering these factors and then imagine a vessel that can carry
18,000 TEUs, it is vital to use eﬃcient optimization models to plan these operations.
1.2 | Emission Estimation and Speed Optimization
In Kontovas’ communication from 2014, he explains how most OR-related researches have assumed
that the fuel consumption of the vessels is cubical related to its speed, and how that is not entirely true
[11]. According to Psaraftis’ chapter on speed optimization (2019) this is indeed a general tendency,
and they both agree that the consumption of the main engines is proportional to the speed alone
[12]. However, they also both underpin that the vessels consist of auxiliary power systems and boilers
providing the crew with among others electricity and hot water. This means the vessels will always
emit something as long as the engines are running, even at speed zero.
Page 3 of 41
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis
External factors such as weather, waves, cleanness of the hull and the payload of the vessel will
inﬂuence the fuel consumption as well. Especially the weather and waves can have a major impact on
both the fuel consumption and delays because of their unpredictability. That is why it might not be
the optimal solution to implement speed limits as the NGOs suggest, since the same vessel can sail
faster in fair wind and slower in headwind and still pollute the same amount of emissions. However,
this will be discussed in section 4.
Psaraftis and Kontovas (2009a) explain the two main approaches on how to estimate emissions [13].
They argue that theoretically, the most reliable method is the top-down approach, because it is based
on collected data on global marine fuel sales and CO2 estimates. However, in practise it is questioned
whether this data is reliable enough, due to the way it is deﬁned in the diﬀerent databases and the
number of sales that are announced. Furthermore, it is seen that the CO2 estimates based on the
entire commercial ﬂeet diﬀer signiﬁcantly from activity-based estimates. They mention that this leads
to the other approach, bottom-up, which bases its estimates on vessel-activity. This requires knowledge
about vessel types, engine information, ﬂeet activity, size, weights etc.; see Psaraftis and Kontovas
(2009a) for more. Furthermore, this method is more ”customized”, in terms of assumptions and the
way it is applied when modelling. Both methods involve uncertainties, because it is impossible to
describe exact reality in mathematical terms.
Emissions is a general word for air pollutants, however this deﬁnition includes many diﬀerent sub-
stances which all have diﬀerent impacts on the environment. The most common emissions discussed
are the greenhouse gases (GHG) of which the most dominant gas is CO2, that is mainly caused by
combustion of fossil fuels such as oil, coal, wood etc.[14]. The vessels use bunker fuel which is the sec-
ond to last product (just before asphalt) received when reﬁning crude oil. This means it is a residual
oil product, that contains a lot of toxic substances. These conditions also make it a cheap product,
which is lucrative for the ship owners. The prices however, depend on the type of fuel and so far the
industry uses three types: 1) Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO), which is the cheapest fuel, 2) Marine Diesel/Gas
Oil (MDO/MGO), which is also known as low Sulphur fuel and is very expensive in comparison to
HFO, and lastly 3) Liqueﬁed Natural Gas (LNG), which contain no sulphur and only little CO2, but
requires big changes to both ﬂeet and ports.
Using the bottom-up method, Kontovas (2014a) suggests one way to estimate CO2-emissions, which
is shown in Equation 1.1 [11].
CO2 Emissions [tonne CO2] = FC02 [
kg CO2
tonne fuel] · F[tonne fuel]
(1.1)
F is the total amount of fuel consumption and FCO2 is an emission factor, that depends on which type
of bunker fuel the vessel uses including the content of Sulphur. Kontovas refers to the IMO’s guidelines,
which in the newest version from 2014, set the emission factors to be 3.114tonneCO2/tonnefuel for
HFO, 3.206tonneCO2/tonnefuel for MDO/MGO, and lastly 2.750tonneCO2/tonnefuel for LNG [15].
As mentioned before the fuels also contain Sulphur, which is not categorized as an GHG, but cause
acid rains when reacting with, among others, water and oxygen [16]. Since it is not considered as
a global problem, but more as a local problem close to land, regulations come to form as ECA’s
(Emission Control Areas) close to the borders and in ports. See Figure 3 to get an overview of these
areas. Kontovas (2014) likewise suggest a way to estimate SO2, which measure 98% of SOx-emissions
emitted through fuel consumption:
SO2 Emissions [tonne SO2] = 0.02 · S [% SO2] · F [tonne fuel]
(1.2)
The factor 0.02 is derived directly from the reaction Sulphur has with oxygen. S is the percentage-wise
content of SO2 in the fuel, which diﬀer even for the same type of fuel. In the IMO guideline from 2014,
the average content in 2012 for HFO was 2.51% and for MDO/MGO it was 0.14 [15]. As illustrated on
Page 4 of 41
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis
Figure 3: Overview of the SECA Areas. [2]
Figure 4, new regulations were enacted in 2015 by the EU and the IMO for the SECA-areas, mandating
Sulphur contents less than 0.1% and by 2020 these regulations will be toughened to 0.5% for fuel used
outside the SECA-areas as well [3]. Comparing these numbers, it is indeed the MDO/MGO which
is most harmful in terms of CO2, but show the lowest Sulphur content. Furthermore, the fuel price
for the MDO/MGO is signiﬁcantly higher than for HFO, which means that until 2020 and as long as
LNG is not considered, there will be a trade-oﬀbetween these two types of fuel. The current solution
is, that vessels switch to MDO/MGO when they enter the SECA-areas and otherwise use the cheaper
HFO.
Figure 4: SOx regulations set by the IMO [3].
Since the industry is suﬀering from low proﬁt margins and strongly rely on the fuel prices, fuel
consumption is paramount to the vessel owners. That is why it is vital for the industry that changes
made towards a more sustainable mindset will beneﬁt them economically as well. Until recent years
it was common to conclude that minimizing cost (where fuel cost is the most inﬂuential) was the
same as minimizing emissions, because less fuel means less fuel consumption and thus less pollution.
The estimation methods mentioned previously all come down to the question on how to estimate fuel
consumption. In Psaraftis’ book from 2019 he derive the following [12]:
f(x) = p · d(x) and m(x) = e · d(x)
(1.3)
⇒f(x) = p
e · m(x)
(1.4)
Page 5 of 41
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis
Assuming that emissions are solely related to the fuel consumption he concludes that, if Equation 1.3,
where p is the fuel price, e is the emission factor and d(x) is the fuel consumption, then the total
fuel cost f(x) can be formulated as stated in Equation 1.4 (m(x) is the total amount of emissions).
In that way he derive that the fuel related cost is a function of the emissions and thus it becomes a
win-win situation for the vessel owners to minimize the emissions. But in order to get these results, it
is necessary to calculate d(x). Kontovas (2014a) suggests a method that includes both speed (v) and
payload (w) [11]:
f(v, w) = k · (p + vq) · (w + A)2/3
(1.5)
k, p and q are constants for k > 0, p ≥0 and q ≥3. A is the weight of the empty ship in tonnes and
with a full tank. k is known ship related constant which depend on diﬀerent vessel characteristics. If
p = 0 and q = 3, then the cubic relation between fuel consumption and speed is reached, which means
the value of p is vital to the emissions polluted at zero speed. Du et. al (2011a) proposes another
method similar to the ones of Kontovas (2014a) [17]. He deﬁnes the fuel consumption as a function of
speed and distance:
f(d, v) = (c0 + c1 · vq) · d
v
(1.6)
c0, c1 > 0 are both coeﬃcients found by linear regression based on the speciﬁc vessel type and d is the
distance. The rest of the notation are identical to the one described in equation Equation 1.5. Both
papers refer to MAN Diesel & Turbo’s guidelines from 2004, where they suggest q = 3.5 for feeder
vessels, q = 4 for medium-sized and q = 4.5 for jumbo-sized container vessels. According to the scope
of this project, Kontovas’ deﬁnition is more appropriate since it considers the payload of the vessels
as well.
The scope also relates to the fact that, it is not necessary to consider the emissions related to the
auxiliary engines, and accordingly, the emission estimations conducted in this project only focus on
the speed and the payload of the vessels. Furthermore, it is assumed that the vessels maneuver in and
out of a port identically, thus the relative diﬀerence is so small that it has no relevance. Therefore
only the average speed during transit will be considered in this project; the payload w and the other
constants in equation Equation 1.5 will be deﬁned when the common vessels in the data sets for both
ports are identiﬁed.
1.3 | The Continuous Berth Allocation Problem
Meisel & Bierworth (2010a) and (2015a) have been very useful to get an overview of the diﬀerent
scopes and solution methods proposed through the years in accordance to the Berth Allocation Prob-
lem (BAP) and Quay Crane Assignment Problem (QCAP) [18][19]. Furthermore they give a good
description of the diﬀerent aspects and versions of the BAP:
The general Berth Allocation Problem (BAP) is an optimization problem facing the logistical issues
of scheduling vessels in a port terminal. According to Figure 2 this problem would be categorized
under quay side operations. In the static version of the problem all vessels are assumed to be waiting
outside the port and are all ready here and now to start berthing. The static version is desirable
on an operational level, when delays (or other logistical issues) create queues outside the terminal.
The dynamic version, however, assumes that the vessels arrive continuously and is more relevant on a
tactical level generating schedules 1 or 2 days in advance. Since this project also considers the speed
of the vessels between two terminals, the dynamic version of the problem would be most relevant.
When modelling the BAP there are three diﬀerent ways to interpret the structure of the berths:
1.
Discrete: the quay is divided in few berths where a vessel will occupy an entire berth in its
handling time no matter the size.
Page 6 of 41
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis
2.
Continuous: the quay is divided in many berths and the vessels will occupy as many berths as
their lengths require. In that way the vessels do not occupy space they do not use.
3.
Hybrid: the quay is divided in berths as in the discrete version, however the vessels can share
these berths, so i.e. big vessels can occupy two berths.
In the data provided for this project the quay is divided in 10-meter blocks, and each vessel length
is divided by 10. This means, the vessels ﬁll up as many 10-meter blocks as they are deﬁned as in the
data set and thus the structure of the model is continuous. Furthermore, the model considers desired
positions for the vessels, meaning if a vessel is not berthing at its desired location it will take longer
time for the transport vehicles to collect the containers in the yard, and thus a penalty will be added
to the objective.
1.4 | Project Scope and Literature Review
In order to optimize service levels, vessels need to balance their speed with the amount of fuel
they spend, since fuel is the shipping companies’ highest expense and increasing fuel consumption
will increase the amount of CO2 emitted. After the International Maritime Organization’s (IMO)
special committee on environmental protection held their 73rd meeting (MEPC 73) in April 2018,
there has been a heated discussion about whether to implement speed limits or speed optimization as
an action towards CO2 reduction [20]. Multiple NGO’s are pushing for speed limits, but some South
American countries, due to their high export of perishable goods, strongly disagree, and suggest speed
optimization instead. The problematic of this discussion however, only underpins the diﬃculties in
deﬁning a single recipe for speed optimization whilst speed limits may result in a reduction of customers
using maritime transport instead of air and road transport. This means, if the vessels have to slow
down and still maintain their service levels, they must save time in the ports. Because of delays or
miscommunication between the ports and the vessels, it is a common issue that vessels are waiting
outside the ports. As an example, vessels waited 7 hours on average outside Singapore Harbor in
September 2015; time they could have spent sailing slower and accordingly emit less CO2 [21].
As Kitack Lim, the Secretary-General of the IMO, points out in his opening speech for the MEPC
meeting held in China May 2019, the future focus has to be on ports as well as the vessels. His point
being that it is not enough just to put limits on the vessels, but a greater collaboration between vessels
and ports is of high importance as well [22]. Various optimization problems in regard to industrial
ports have been conducted and researched in previous studies. One of them is the Berth Allocation
Problem (BAP), which aims to optimize the time schedule for the vessels berthing at a terminal. To
the best of the authors knowledge, so far the focus has mainly been on a single terminal and how that
in relation to other quay side problems (such as Quay Crane Scheduling) can be optimized. The focus
has also mainly been on minimizing time, which obviously is very important, but as sustainability
has become a big issue in the past decades, it would be interesting to combine the minimization of
time and CO2 emissions. Thus, the aim of this project is to analyze the impact time schedules in two
subsequent industrial ports, have on the speed of the vessels sailing in between. The following two
Hypotheses have been conducted:
Hypothesis 1:
When two independent, consecutive ports apply diﬀerent objectives when minimizing the BAP, it will
have a positive impact on the speed of the vessels sailing between those exact two ports.
Hypothesis 2:
Better communication between ports will decrease sailing speed and thus CO2.
Page 7 of 41
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis
The analysis is based on a Dynamic Berth Allocation Problem (DBAP) being optimized in accor-
dance to 3 diﬀerent objective functions, in order to see which objective value gives the best result
in regard to speed and hence emission reduction. According to Bierwirth and Meisel (2010a) and
(2015a) minimizing handling and waiting time are indeed the most dominant objective functions in
past researches [18][19]. Both Du et al. (2011a) and Golias (2009a) have combined time and emissions
in regard to waiting time [17][23]. Also Golias (2009a) has used the arrival time as decision variable
instead of as an input parameter in the aim to minimize the fuel consumption/emissions when the
vessels are mooring. However, as Du et al. (2011a) argues, the fuel consumption when sailing is far
more pollutant than when mooring. Similar to the scope of this project, Du et. al (2011a) investi-
gates a continuous BAP with dynamic arrival times and includes the speed of the vessel, aiming to
minimize fuel consumption and emissions of vessels entering a terminal. Using a Mixed Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) algorithm the results have proven that using a variable arrival time strategy
compared to a constant arrival time strategy, the ports can reduce emissions signiﬁcantly. That is
why this project only uses the ETA and the EST as guidelines/parameters, and then the mooring
time is included in the actual arrival time. In that way the actual arrival time will become a decision
variable.
Since the complexity of the BAP makes it impossible to ﬁnd an optimal solution within a decent
amount of time using regular OR methods, an alternative method is applied. Within the past decades,
there has been an enhanced development in ﬁnding search structures that can generate fast and near-
optimal solutions; these are called meta heuristics. The review from Bierwirth and Meisel (2015a) also
shows that the majority of the studies provided from 2010 to 2015 apply Genetic Algorithms (GA)
and Evolutionary Algorithms (EA). The reason for this may be that they are simple methodologies,
which are easy to adapt to any given problem. Furthermore they also state that:
”Problem speciﬁc local search algorithms, meta-heuristics and especially mathematically driven heuris-
tics and exact methods are clearly under represented so far.” [19].
Hansen et. al (2008a)[24] investigate 4 diﬀerent algorithms for a discrete and dynamic BAP and
ﬁnd that the one, which gives the best results, is a Variable Neighbourhood Search (VNS) that uses
3 diﬀerent change moves in the algorithm. Either it makes a local insertion, an interchange or an
insertion. This method is only possible if the Berths follow a discrete structure, thus it will have
to be modiﬁed if it were to be used in this project.
Iris et al.
(2015a) applies a combination of
the Generalized Set Partitioning formulation (GSPP), and column reduction techniques in order to
decrease the amount of feasible columns (possible solutions) being generated by the Pricing Problem
(sub problem to the GSPP) [25].
Meisel and Bierwirth (2009a) analyze two diﬀerent meta heuristics; Squeaky Wheel Optimization
(SWO) and Tabu Search (TS) [26]. SWO rank weak performing elements of a solution high on a
priority list, and accordingly bases a new solution upon this priority list. In that way the previous
weak performances will now become better and hopefully improve the solution. This means the meta
heuristic operates in two diﬀerent spaces; a priority space where it analyse and prioritize the previous
solution which become the basis of a new solution generated in the solution space. They argue that
it is easy to implement in this type of problem because of the individual contribution each vessel
gives to the objective, and accordingly it is the vessels that are prioritized. The method, however,
may circulate if a previous priority list is found again. For this problem Meisel and Bierwirth suggest
”local reﬁnements”. For more about this see Meisel’s and Bierwirth’s (2009a) article [26]. The TS
methodology also proceed from a priority list, however use pairwise swap between vessels. If a better
solution is not found it stores the entire berth plan in a Tabu List, and accordingly exclude any vessel
swap which leads to that speciﬁc berth plan. Depending on the size of the Tabu List, the meta-
heuristic ensures that the algorithm does not circulate around the same solutions in eternity. Both
meta-heuristics terminate when a better solution has not been found in a speciﬁc number of iterations.
Meisel and Bierwirth (2009a) conclude that both methodologies show near optimal solutions in a
reasonable amount of time. Furthermore, they argue that ”The heuristics do not signiﬁcantly diﬀer
Page 8 of 41
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis
in solution quality.” [26].
So to answer the two hypotheses listed above, a combination of SWO and TS will be conducted.
section 2 contain a thorough description of how a construction heuristic will generate a schedule based
on which sequence the vessels will enter the port, starting with a ”ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst serve” strategy.
Every vessel is scheduled with a starting point in it most desired position in both time and space,
and then afterwards will be moved if it overlaps with already allocated vessels. This move is based on
minimizing a certain objective function. If this move still makes it impossible to allocate the vessel
an ”Emergency Plan” will be executed. A Tabu Search will then try to rearrange the sequence in
which the vessels are allocated in the schedule, by always picking the worst allocated vessel from the
previous iteration. In that way a better solution may be found. section 2 also contains an elaboration
on how the rest of the analysis will be evaluated, in terms of both calculating the speed of the vessel
which the ports have in common, and the discussion on how both private and legislative initiatives
can have an impact on making the maritime industry more sustainable.
In section 3 all of the results generated by the TS are presented starting with an evaluation of the
performance of the TS. Then 6 diﬀerent combinations of the 3 diﬀerent objective functions are tested
to see if some combinations will result in a larger speed reduction then others. In combination with
that, it will be discussed whether these reductions are high enough, so that the discussion on whether
to implement speed limits or speed optimization becomes irrelevant.
A discussion is then presented in section 4 trying to comprehend the beneﬁts and disadvantages
of various solutions and initiatives, which both the IMO and the shipping operators themselves can
induce in order to reduce CO2 and in general become more sustainable. This discussion, among other
subjects, includes the actions that the IMO have taken upon some of the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals that the UN enacted in 2015.
Lastly the entire report will be summed up in section 5 highlighting the most relevant results and
give an answer to whether the results can conﬁrm or dismiss the two hypotheses. Furthermore a
section on further research is elaborated, discussing the weaknesses of the methodologies used in this
project, while also discussing other subjects to investigate in correlation to better communication
between ports and vessels.
Page 9 of 41
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis
2 | Solution Methodology
Since today’s computers are not powerful enough to solve even medium size optimization models in
a suitable amount of time, various methods customized for each individual problem are developed in
order to ﬁnd at least near optimal solutions. These methods are called meta heuristics. First an initial
solution is conducted either by a given structure or in a random order, which is then used as input
for the optimizing meta heuristic. What all meta heuristics have in common is that they all represent
a general idea, and thus the design/speciﬁcation of them is paramount to the results attained. The
continuous BAP have been well researched through the past decades, and in most cases the meta
heuristic methodology has produced acceptable results in a decent amount of time. For this project a
Tabu Search (TS) has been developed, which will be described in the following section. Furthermore
the section contains a list of assumptions as an underlying basis of the model, a clariﬁcation of the
applied construction heuristic, and a general description of the methodological approach to cover the
problematics stated above.
2.1 | Assumptions
Describing a real-life problem in mathematical formulas requires to some extent assumptions about
certain elements of the model. Intuitively, the model’s complexity increases as the model becomes more
realistic, which means the need for alternative solution methods increases. For the model designed in
this project the following assumptions have been made:
• The two ports, Tanjung Pelepas, Malaysia, and Rotterdam, Netherlands, have 25% of their
weekly amount of vessels in common.
• Based on real life schedules from Maersk, it takes approximately three weeks to sail from
Tanjung Pelepas to Rotterdam. This means if the schedules in Tanjung Pelepas starts in hour
0, the schedules in Rotterdam starts in hour: 168hours · 3weeks = 504 hours
• Actual mooring time is equal to actual arrival time, thus the time it takes maneuvering the
vessels in the ports is included in the arrival time.
• The speed of the vessels are considered as an average. Accordingly, externalities such as wind
and weather are not considered.
• There must be at least 1 berth between each vessel, so if one vessel ends in berth 80 then the
next must be positioned in 81.
2.2 | Data Structure
The data provided exist in 5 diﬀerent sizes deﬁned as the amount of vessels and the length of the
quay. Each data size exist in 10 diﬀerent instances, which gives a total of 50 instances. The diﬀerent
sizes can be seen in Table 1. The data have been used in Meisel & Bierwirth (2009a) and Iris et al.
(2015a) and is a ﬁctive sample [26][25]. For more information about its origin see Meisel & Bierwirth
(2009a).
Table 1: Overview of data sizes
Number of vessels
20
30
40
60
80
Berth length [m]
1000
1000
1000
1000
1500
Each data set features various diﬀerent vessel descriptive- and time related parameters. Among
other parameters, it contains the size of the instance, meaning the number of vessels to be allocated
Page 10 of 41
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis
Figure 5: The setup of a solution.
and the size of the quay, which is divided in 10-meter slots. So, whenever referring to 1 berth in
the project, it represent 10 meters of the entire quay length. Furthermore, it contains the four time
parameters, shown in Figure 5, which limits the number of possible positions each vessel has. Each
instance represents a single port, and thus the original instances have been modiﬁed, so that two
original instances represent one port each and together represent one new instance. This means the
number of instances is reduced to half size; 25 instances. The data was originally made for a BACAP
(Berth Allocation and Crane Assignment Problem), which is why the service time originally depended
on the number of cranes assigned to each vessel. In the original data set a minimum and maximum
number of cranes is allocated each vessel, however, since crane assignment is not considered in this
problem, the number of cranes used for each vessel in this project is the average of the maximum and
minimum number of cranes rounded up. Then each vessel is given a service time per crane assigned
to them, and accordingly their service time is calculated as follow:
craneTime [h] = ceil
maxCrane + minCrane
2

[cranes] · craneHours
h
h
crane
i
(2.1)
serviceTime [h] = craneTime [h] + (|Berth −actualBerth|) [berths] · Beta
h
h
berth
i
(2.2)
Page 11 of 41
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis
Berth means the desired berth position, and actualBerth is the variable SBi shown in Figure 5. The
absolute value of the subtraction of those two elements multiplied with a time factor Beta, will return
the extra time it will take for the small crane vehicles to transport the containers along the yard. This
means if Berth = actualBerth, then this part of the equation will become 0 and the formula will just
return the crane time as the total service time.
According to APM terminals home page [27] 94 vessels departed from their terminal in Tanjung
Pelepas during week 26, 2019. When searching on Maersk’s schedules from Tanjung Pelepas to Rot-
terdam directly, exactly 3 vessels departed from Tanjung Pelepas that same week. As it was diﬃcult
to ﬁnd an exact number of departures going directly to Rotterdam, and 3 out of 94 vessels is a rather
small share, it is decided that 25% of the vessels in Tanjung Pelepas go directly to Rotterdam, so the
number of results to compare is a decent size. In order to make sure those 25% have identical sizes
in the same instance (in both Tanjung Pelepas and Rotterdam), the data ﬁle for Rotterdam will be
modiﬁed in the following way:
1.
The 25% biggest vessels in Tanjung Pelepas are identiﬁed.
2.
In Rotterdam 25% of the vessels with the same size will be identiﬁed. If there is not enough of
the same size, the rest will be identiﬁed as the ones closest to the same size and their length will
be modiﬁed.
3.
A list of the pairwise, identical ships is conducted.
4.
A maximum speed and design speed are identiﬁed depending on the size of the vessel, as shown
in Appendix A.
5.
A maximum travelling time and design travelling time is identiﬁed based on the speed and the
distance between the two ports (see Appendix B).
6.
The four time parameters, for the 25% of the vessels only, are modiﬁed in the data set for
Rotterdam.
Changing the time parameters requires knowledge about the vessel’s ﬁnishing time in Tanjung
Pelepas, in order to prevent major delays and misinformation. Thus, the time parameters are not
changed until a ﬁnal solution is found for the port of Tanjung Pelepas. This makes the model more
similar to real life, where the vessels inform the consecutive port of their ETA, as soon as they ﬁnish
their service in the previous port. The time parameters are changed the following way:
newETARot
i
= FT Tan
i
+ designTime
(2.3)
newEST Rot
i
= FT Tan
i
+ maxTime
(2.4)
newEFT Rot
i
= newETARot
i
+ (oriEFT Rot
i
−oriETARot
i
)
(2.5)
newLFT Rot
i
= newETARot
i
+ (oriLFT Rot
i
−oriETARot
i
)
(2.6)
designTime and maxTime are the time it takes for the vessel to get from Tanjung Pelepas to Rot-
terdam using design speed and maximum speed respectively. The new EFT and LFT are set based
on the original diﬀerence between ETA and LFT and EFT and LFT, respectively.
2.3 | Construction Heuristic
The construction heuristic generating the initial solution is a greedy heuristic scheduling the vessels
one at a time in the current most suﬃcient position. This means that the later a vessel is allocated,
the greater the risk that the vessel gets a less desirable position. Accordingly, the algorithm generated
for the initial solution may not produce the optimal solution.
Looking at Figure 5 the solution is illustrated in an xy-coordinate system. The vessels illustrated
as blue rectangles are drawn based on their length and in what position they begin in terms of berth
Page 12 of 41
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis
and hour. The yard is structured in such a way that the speciﬁc containers are located in correlation
to the desired berth position of the vessel, so as a reﬂection of a real-life situation, the load/unloading
time will increase the further away the vessel is from its desired berth position. The service time is
illustrated as the height of the rectangles.
sol ←empty list of positions for all vessels;
unAllocated ←list of all vessels;
allocated ←empty list;
while unAllocated not empty do
ship ←smallest vessel in unAllocated;
oriPositionship ←the most desired position;
if allocated not empty then
curPositionship ←oriPositionship;
othShip ←ﬁrst allocated vessel ship overlaps with;
objV alue ←∞;
checkAgain ←true;
if othShip = -1 then
checkAgain ←false;
end
else
while checkAgain = true do
run ”Checking Procedure” in all positions around othShip;
if any position have been approved then
checkAgain ←false;
minObj ←objective value of any approved position;
if minObj < objV alue then
objV alue ←minObj;
curPositionship ←Position of minObj;
end
end
if checkAgain is still true then
run ”Emergency Solution”;
end
end
end
sol ←curPosition;
end
else
sol ←oriPosition;
end
Add ship to allocated;
Remove ship from unAllocated;
end
objective ←objective value of solution;
Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code for the construction heuristic.
The pseudo-code presented in algorithm 1 describes the construction heuristic generating the initial
solution. The general thought of the greedy heuristic is to keep scheduling the vessel with the earliest
arrival time; in other terms ”ﬁrst-comes-ﬁrst serve”. The start position for each vessel is predeﬁned
as their desired berth allocation and in terms of time they start in their estimated time of arrival
(ETA). Then the ship is checked for overlap with all the previous allocated vessels. If the return value
is -1, the vessel does not conﬂict with any other vessel, and will be scheduled to its ETA and most
desired berth position. Otherwise it will return the number of the ﬁrst vessel it conﬂicts with and
Page 13 of 41
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis
Figure 6: Illustration of the directions the vessel will be moved during the ”Emergency Solution”.
a checking procedure will be activated. As shown in algorithm 1, the checking procedure checks all
possible positions around the vessel it conﬂicts with. Every time it ﬁnds a feasible position it identiﬁes
a cost. If this cost is the best found so far it updates the vessel’s position to those coordinates. Note
that a position is deﬁned by SBi and STi, then EBi and FTi can be calculated afterwards.
If the checking procedure does not identify a feasible position, the algorithm will then run an
”Emergency Plan”. With a starting point in the most desired position, the vessel will be moved ”α”
steps in 8 diﬀerent directions as shown in Figure 6. For example moving in the direction of the upper
right corner, the vessel’s berth position and starting time will be increased by an α-value deﬁned as
an integer in the interval [0; ∞]. With only a horizontal and a lower boundary, the vessel will at some
point always be able to ﬁnd a feasible position. By horizontal boundary means the length of the quay,
and the lower boundary is the vessel’s earliest starting time (EST). Intuitively, the vessel’s position will
only be approved if it obeys the boundaries and it does not overlap with any of the already allocated
vessels.
As mentioned before the main purpose of a construction heuristic is not to ﬁnd a perfect solution,
but rather a quick solution which comply with the limits of the problem. Accordingly it means that
it is an acceptable solution if some of the vessels exceed the port time of maximum 168 hours. The
construction heuristic described above, is based on a ”ﬁrst-comes-ﬁrst serve” strategy, however, when
it is used in the meta heuristic it will take a predeﬁned sequence, which will be described in the next
section.
2.4 | Tabu Search
Tabu Search was ﬁrst proposed by Fred Glover in 1986 during the revolutionary time period of
meta heuristics. As the name suggest, these solution methods are recognized as a generalized superior
Page 14 of 41
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis
methodology to control problem-speciﬁc construction heuristics in order to improve the output. The
TS methodology should be seen as a general local search, such as a ”Hill Climber”, with a memory,
meaning it will remember the moves that have already been made [28]. Whether it is short term
memory (limited memory size) or an inﬁnite memory is for the designer to decide. In that way the
algorithm allows non-improving solutions, with the purpose of getting out of local minimums. In this
project the meta heuristic will attempt to optimize the sequence in which the vessels are allocated,
both related to time and space. In that way some of the later arriving vessels will have a greater
chance of getting their most desired position.
2.4.1 | Problem Speciﬁc Description
The general idea of the Tabu Search, used in this project, is to continuously ﬁnd the worst located
vessel in the previous iteration and then try to reschedule the entire sample of vessels, while the worst
located vessel is positioned in every possible slot of the sequence, except for the sequences that are
already on the Tabu List (TL). Accordingly the goal is to ﬁnd a sequence that produces a schedule
that ends up with a better objective value than the previous. In this project the size of the TL is
inﬁnite.
In algorithm 2 the pseudo-code for the Tabu Search is described. To control the solutions generated,
three variables exist for each of the three levels of the algorithm. The three variables consist of the
Objective ”Obj”, ”Sol” which is the positions of all vessels, and ”List” which is the sequence. The
lowest/third level, denoted ”temp”, is updated every time the worst located vessel is placed in a new
position of the sequence. By worst located means the vessel with the largest diﬀerence between most
desired ﬁnishing time and actual ﬁnishing time. If ”tempObj” is better than ”newObj”, which is the
second level, all variables of the ”new”-level are updated. In that way the second level contains the
best found solution of the third level. In the end the algorithm checks if the best found objective
contained in ”newObj” is better than the overall ”bestObj”, which is the ﬁrst/upper level of the
algorithm. Again, if this is true then the entire solution is updated. The best found solution of the
third level becomes the new list in which the next worst located vessel will be identiﬁed, which means
”newList” will be added to the TL. In other words, the TL only contains the lists of the best found
solutions of the third level. Since the algorithm will never check a sequence that is already in the
TL, the solution space will be narrowed down and the chance of checking the same solution again and
again will be avoided. To better understand the levels see Figure 7.
In order to terminate the algorithm a limit is set for the number of iterations of non-improving
solutions. This means every time the best list of the third level has been found (newList have been
updated) the iteration count will increase by 1. Only if the overall ”bestObj” have been updated the
iteration count will reset. So, if the algorithm have not found a better solution after e.g. 20 iterations,
Figure 7: An overview of the three levels on which the TS operates.
Page 15 of 41
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis
bestObj ←objective of initial solution;
allocated ←sequence from initial solution;
bestList ←allocated;
tabuList ←add allocated;
newList ←bestList;
newSol ←initial solution;
iteration ←1;
while iteration ≤limit do
newObj ←∞;
tempList ←newList;
tempSol ←newSol;
ship ←ship with worst position;
if ship have been chosen more than 3 times in a row then
ship ←random ship;
end
for all positions ”i” in the sequence do
tempList ←move ship to position i;
if tempList is not in tabuList then
tempObj ←objective of new schedule using tempList;
tempSol ←update from new schedule;
if tempObj < newObj then
newObj ←tempObj;
newSol ←tempSol;
newList ←tempList;
end
end
end
tabuList ←add newList;
if newObj < bestObj then
iteration ←0;
bestObj ←newObj;
bestSol ←newSol;
bestList ←newList;
end
iteration ←iteration + 1;
end
Algorithm 2: Pseudo-code for the Tabu Search.
the algorithm will terminate and the best solution is returned. There are many other ways to construct
both the construction heuristic and the criteria of the TS, however this will be discussed in section 3.
2.4.2 | Search Space and Search Methodologies
The search space can be deﬁned as all possible sequence combinations and positions of the vessels in
each of these sequences. Accordingly the search space will increase drastically just by adding one more
vessel to the equation, which means the solution space would increase exponentially. Furthermore,
the problem includes integer variables, which makes it even harder to ﬁnd optimal solutions. This
is what makes the BAP hard to solve to optimality. The BAP can therefore be categorized as an
NP-problem, meaning it can be solved in Non-deterministic Polynomial time. The deﬁnition of NP-
problems is that if a solution is known to be a NP-problem, the correctness of this solution can always
be solved in polynomial time. So in order to ﬁnd the optimal solution of the BAP, will require that all
Page 16 of 41
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis
possible combinations is tested, which incur an exponential amount of combinations. That is why a
construction heuristic is applied to generate a feasible solution in a polynomial amount of time, where
the criteria of the construction heuristic itself will verify the correctness of this solution. Then the
meta heuristic will generate more feasible solutions in a polynomial time in order search for better
solutions. This means that a meta heuristic does not guarantee to ﬁnd the optimal solution, but can
generate good and feasible solutions in a decent amount of time.
A local search is designed by using an opposite hill climber to minimize the objective. However,
since the worst allocated vessel is always chosen, the search space is limited to a neighborhood of all
possible positions of the vessel by always moving the worst allocated vessels; even though they may
not always be the best vessels to test. This means it would require a lot of iterations to ever be
able to check one of the early arriving vessels, because they are being allocated ﬁrst and have the
highest chance of being placed in their most desired position. In that way, the local search uses search
intensiﬁcation to investigate an area, that seem more promising to quickly ﬁnd a better solution. The
downside to a local search, however, is that it can be stuck in a local minimum, which means that
the optimal solution may be found in an entire diﬀerent part of the search space. In other words; by
allowing the model to proceed from the best found solution of the third level solutions, the algorithm
does allow worse solutions than the best solution of the ﬁrst level, but may not hill climb high enough
to enter a new valley/local minimum. And that is where a search diversiﬁcation comes into play.
The search diversiﬁcation is a method which executes a drastic change, often randomly, in order to
land in a diﬀerent neighborhood. These changes make it possible to jump out of a local minimum and
hopefully ﬁnd a better solution. The most important thing to notice, though, is that the best found
solution so far is always saved until a better one comes along, due to the fact that these ”jumps” may
cause even worse solutions than before. In algorithm 2 an ”if-loop” is created stating that ”if ship
have been chosen more than 3 times in a row” then pick a random ship instead. Since all positions
of a vessel have already been checked the second time in a row it is chosen, it makes no sense to let
the algorithm use a lot of iterations on sequences it has already checked. The reason, however, it will
allow 5 iterations, is that the next worst ship to be chosen may not be the same for two third level
solutions. In that way this random pick makes it possible for the algorithm to pick one of the early
allocated vessels and change to a diﬀerent neighborhood.
2.5 | Objective Functions
In the construction heuristic the vessels’ ﬁnal position is determined by minimizing the objective
value being either cost, waiting time or service time. This means the objective value is minimized per
vessel during the scheduling and then the total objective value is returned in the end by summing the
cost of all vessels after the solution is found. Then the TS only takes into account the total objective
value that is generated by the schedules.
The cost is based on the amount of hours a vessel exceeds its estimated time window, and are
divided in three categories:
1.
If the vessel is serviced within its estimated limits meaning within the interval of ETA and EFT,
the cost is 0.
2.
If it exceeds its estimated limits but is scheduled after EST or before LFT, a cost is added per
hour it exceeds the estimated limits.
3.
If the vessel exceeds its LFT a higher cost is added per hour it exceeds LFT.
If the vessel exceeds LFT it will only count in the cost for the hours it exceeds the LFT and not the
hours it exceeds EFT.
The waiting time is calculated as the diﬀerence between a vessel’s ETA and ST, assuming that the
Page 17 of 41
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis
vessel arrive at its ETA, and the port cannot service the vessel before its ST. If ETA ≤ST there is
no waiting time, which means that the port is not penalized if the vessel have to speed up if its service
start before its ETA. Note however, that the vessel’s EST is a the lower limit, since it is deﬁned by
the vessels maximum speed.
The service time is deﬁned as the hours the vessel is services by the port and is calculated by
subtracting the vessels ST from its FT. This means if the vessel moves away from its most desired
berth position its service time increase. The weakness of this objective function is that it does not
care about when the vessel starts its service, but only the diﬀerence between ST and FT. This means
the vessel may be scheduled far away from its ETA, without the port being penalized.
Theoretically minimizing cost is the only out of three objective functions, that take into account
movements in all directions, and thus it will be interesting to see if it will be expressed in the results
generated in section 3.
2.6 | Speed Optimization
The ongoing discussions in the IMO encompasses, among other subjects, the complexity of deﬁning
a standard method of speed optimization. The many diﬀerent parameters and stakeholders are in
evidence in the discussion because of the many diﬀerent types of goods, ﬂeet types and sizes, stake-
holders, the free market economy controlled by demand and supply and so on. This project will not
propose a solution for this problem, but instead investigate the possibility that better communication
between ports and vessels may automatically cause speed reduction. The ﬁrst part of the discussion
conducted in this project will contain an analysis of the results gained from the BAP, and if and
how they can answer the given hypotheses. To do this two types of speeds are calculated after the
ﬁnal solutions have been found for both Tanjung Pelepas and Rotterdam. These are calculated the
following way:
Speedactual [knots] =
distance [nm]
(ST Rot
ship −FT Tan
ship ) [h]
(2.7)
Speedestimate [knots] =
distance [nm]
(ETARot
ship −FT Tan
ship ) [h]
(2.8)
The actual speed (Equation 2.7) uses the start time in Rotterdam and represents the optimal speed,
where both ports and the vessel all share information on actual time variables. The estimated speed
(Equation 2.8), however, uses the ETA in Rotterdam instead of the actual starting time (ST). In
that way this speed represent a situation where the port of Rotterdam only get information about
the vessel’s actual ﬁnishing time, but none of them share real time information. Intuitively, these
calculations only apply to the 25% of the vessels they have in common. As stated in the assumptions,
the results only focus on the average speed and do not consider externalities, such as wind and weather
or other obstacles at sea. Furthermore, the speed is based on the ﬁnishing time in Tanjung Pelepas
and the start time in Rotterdam, which means that the model assumes the mooring time is included
in these variables. The two diﬀerent speed calculations are the core results of this project, since they
can tell if a signiﬁcant speed reduction will occur if real time information is shared between vessel
and port. Theoretically, if a vessel can start mooring at the exact hour it arrives, it can be concluded
that it must have sailed its optimal speed in accordance to minimizing waiting time in the port. Thus
theoretically, optimal real time information sharing between vessel and port will result in zero waiting
time.
Realistically, however, this conclusion has its challenges since unforeseen complications can
occur suddenly. Also the type of optimization chosen induce a paradox between the speed and the
purpose of the BAP, which will be elaborated in section 3.
If this real time information sharing will make a diﬀerence to the speed it will have an indirect eﬀect
on the environment as well. To calculate the CO2 each vessel emit will require information on the
Page 18 of 41
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis
total load of the vessels. Since this is not available in the data, it will require too many assumptions
to estimate the CO2 emissions, and thus may be biased. So whenever emissions are referred to in
relation to the results, it will be based on the indirect reduction of emissions caused by reducing fuel
consumption and speed.
2.7 | Analysis
As mentioned before the ﬁrst part of the discussion consists of a quantitative analysis of the results
gained from the meta heuristic, in order to conﬁrm or deny the hypotheses.
The second part of
the analysis, will discuss the diﬀerent legislative initiatives, which can push the shipping companies
to change their mindset towards more green solutions. Furthermore, it will discuss how the vessel
companies can change their mindset and induce own initiatives towards green solutions. Since the
world is not black and white, these initiatives do sometimes require trad-oﬀs and of course may
not solve the entire climate problematic, which is why the analysis will discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of these initiatives. Furthermore, it will describe how many of these issues are connected
to the stakeholders and the consequences it will have on the three aspects of sustainability; economy,
social welfare and the environment.
Page 19 of 41
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis
3 | Tabu Search Solutions
In order to give an actual evaluation of the solution obtained in the following analysis, it is important
to deﬁne what a good solution is. Since the data has never been tested on this type of problem before,
it is hard to tell whether the objective values are even close to an optimum. Furthermore, the aim of
this project is to look at the speed results gained from the two independent minimization problems,
so theoretically the analysis of this project does not care for the actual minimization results, but more
about the speed calculated from these minimization problems. However, the closer the vessels are to
their most desired position the less diﬀerence there will be between their ETA and actual starting time.
Accordingly, the diﬀerence in speed is minimized as well, and thus the speed results are intuitively
dependent on the quality of the minimization solutions. Therefore the deﬁnition of a good solution
in this analysis is obtained, whenever the speed diﬀerence between the actual- and estimated speed is
equal to or less than 0.00 knots. This means the vessels have not speeded up to reach a certain start
time and thereby emit less CO2. Please note that, whenever actual- or estimated speed is mentioned
in the following section, it means the speed gained with or without real time communication just as
described in section 2.
Before the actual results are performed an evaluation of the TS is conducted.
This is done in
order to ﬁnd an iteration parameter for each data size, that gives the most consistent results within
a reasonable amount of time. In the following section the performance evaluation is followed by an
analysis of the diﬀerence in speed with or without real time communication between vessel and port.
The results are based on a multi-terminal analysis, where three diﬀerent objective functions are tested
in 6 diﬀerent combinations of two ports, which is ﬁnalized by a comparison of these solutions.
3.1 | Performance of the Tabu Search
Assuming a real life situation, it will be diﬃcult to convince the ports to make a trade-oﬀbetween
reducing their cost and the speed of the vessels, which is why the performance of the TS is evaluated
upon reducing the objective function. As described above the termination criteria of the TS is a ﬁxed
number of iterations counting non-improving solutions. This means, as the parameter of iterations
increases, the greater the chance is of ﬁnding a better solution; in other words, the more iterations
the TS allows, the closer it becomes of converging. Choosing this iteration parameter is limited by
the time it takes to run a single instance, which increases signiﬁcantly every time a better solution is
generated and the iteration count is reset. Thus the performance is tested for 3 diﬀerent data sizes
(30-, 40- and 60 vessels), and with 5 diﬀerent iteration parameters. Because of the randomness of the
diversiﬁcation the performance is evaluated upon the average (µ) and the standard deviation (σ) of
the objective value, and an approximate running time. These results are presented in Table 2.
The time stated in Table 2 is an approximation, because the TS is highly dependent on the input
data. Thus it is possible that a diﬀerent data set of the same size would diﬀer signiﬁcantly in both
time and objective. Even the same data set can diﬀer in time dependent on the neighbourhoods that
the diversiﬁcation takes the local search to.
It is clear that the time aspect is the biggest hindrance for the TS to perform well. Just by increasing
the data size from 30 to 40 vessels, the amount of iterations are bisected going from 120 iteration to
60; both running for approximately 5 minutes. The reason the time increases so signiﬁcantly for only
10 more vessels is because of how the TS count an iteration. As stated before, one iteration includes
n number of schedules, where n is the number of possible positions the worst located vessel is tested
in, except for the sequences that are not in the TL. This means, the more vessels to be allocated the
more possible sequences there are. Accordingly, it is the continuously rescheduling, that takes a lot
of time, why it may have been more appropriate to look more into the schedule already generated
from the initial solution, and try to make improvements in that. One way to do it, could be to swap
2 vessels, or to move a single vessel to another position; this could either be a random or controlled
Page 20 of 41
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis
Table 2: Performance of the Tabu Search in regard to minimizing cost in both ports.
30 VESSELS
Iterations
70
100
120
150
200
Ports
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
µ
58.67
41.00
34.00
43.11
33.50
41.05
33.30
38.79
36.26
37.15
σ
53.06
13.47
4.97
6.69
3.74
2.94
3.86
9.95
3.88
10.20
approx. time
2 min
3 min
5 min
8 min
12 min
40 VESSELS
Iterations
50
60
80
100
120
Ports
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
µ
93.36
106.14
144.36
126.35
95.57
110.46
101.69
81.13
106.66
66.52
σ
11.94
37.51
91.27
47.34
18.86
36.32
13.61
33.13
12.19
21.98
approx. time
min
5 min
7 min
15 min
17 min
60 VESSELS
Iterations
50
60
xx
xx
xx
Ports
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
µ
468.90
436.84
432.04
544.97
-
-
-
-
-
-
σ
60.31
46.30
120.82
107.50
-
-
-
-
-
-
approx. time
10 min
20 min
decision. However, because the problem is built upon a continuous BAP with dynamic service times,
it requires a lot of considerations on how to move a vessel. I.e. if it was decided to swap two vessels
it must be clariﬁed how to manage a situation where the vessels are not of the same size, so one of
them cannot ﬁt in its new position. Another issue could be the time- and quay limitations, which
restrict the vessels to move into certain positions. The eﬃcient part of this methodology, however,
is the possibility to apply delta-evaluation. Instead of recalculating the entire objective every time a
move is made, it would be possible to just add/subtract the diﬀerence in the objective implied by this
particular move. This could speed up the algorithm considerably.
The diversiﬁcation strategy described in section 2, where the algorithm selects a random vessel if
the same vessel have been chosen 3 times in a row, could also have been done diﬀerently. Another
type of swap strategy could be applied, so the algorithm selects a number of ships randomly and swap
them around, so the solution to proceed from will create a new neighbourhood. In accordance to the
strategy already applied another procedure could be to select a certain number of vessels to swap
around randomly and then create a completely new sequence. This method may be a more eﬀective
diversiﬁcation strategy than the one applied, which have not changed the solution signiﬁcantly. That
is also why this parameter have not been tested with other numbers than 3.
Another element to look at, is the application of the Tabu List (TL). There exist many methods for
applying a TL; one could be to save hash-values, which means that the best objective values are saved,
and thus the algorithm only have to check a single value, instead of an entire list of vessels every time.
This method, however, requires a tendency of unique objective values, which is not a tendency in this
project. If the above mentioned swap or single move method was applied, the TL could consist of the
vessels implied. The TL should then have a ﬁxed length, so that old swaps can be reused. This will
minor the risk of missing a possible good swap later on. Other elements to put in Tabu, could be,
a ship and its previous position(s). Meisel & Bierwirth (2009a) mention a method where an entire
solution is saved with the purpose of narrowing down the solution space faster, however in Gendrau et.
al. (2014) they argue against this method, because it takes a lot of space and time for the algorithm
to check through every time [26][28]. So basically it can be concluded, that the hard part of designing
a meta heuristic is to decide how all the diﬀerent elements should be combined in order to quickly ﬁnd
good solutions, and the type of methodology to choose will highly depend on the size of the data.
Page 21 of 41
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis
Looking more speciﬁcally into the objective values of each of the instances, it is ﬁrst of all desirable to
get small objective values, since it is a minimization problem. Therefore each of the tests are evaluated
upon the average cost gained from running the same test 5 times. Furthermore the standard deviation
is presented, which says something about the dispersion of the results. The actual results are only
run one time, and thus it is desirable to use an iteration parameter that gives the most consistent
solutions. This means, the lower the standard deviation is, the more consistent the model is and the
greater chance there is to get a good solution in ﬁrst try.
Looking at the results for the instance with 30 vessels, the test with 120 iterations are generating the
overall best solutions in regard to both average objective value and standard deviation. The test for
150 iterations has the lowest average for both ports, but distinguish itself in the standard deviation.
However, the calculation of the standard deviation does not care whether a result come out signiﬁcant
to the negative or the positive side, which is only obtainable if the actual results are looked at more
speciﬁcally. In Appendix C the speciﬁc results are presented, where it can be seen that the result, that
come out signiﬁcant is a lower objective value than the rest, and thus pull the average down. The 200
iterations do not perform better than the 150 in any of the four values, while it takes approximately 4
minutes longer to run a single instance, and therefore it is reasonable to choose the iteration parameter
to be 150 for the instance with 30 vessels.
For the instances with 40 vessels 120 iterations are chosen. The reason more iterations are not
tested is because of the time aspect. It takes approximately 17 min. to run a single instance, which
is already a long time considering that the standard deviations have not changed signiﬁcantly in
comparison to the test with 50 iterations. The average objective value are signiﬁcantly lower for the
port of Rotterdam, and thus it seems to be the better choice.
As mentioned before 94 vessels were visiting the port of Tanjung Pelepas in week 26, and thus
the data size of 80 vessels would be interesting to use in the results. Unfortunately, because of the
poor performance of the TS causing a slow running time, it has been decided to use instances with
maximum 60 vessels. For this data size, 50 iterations are chosen because it has the lowest objective
average and the lowest standard deviation. This might be a coincidence that the 60-iteration test
have shown bad results in some of the runs, but keeping to the facts, 50 iterations have shown most
consistency. Also here, the time aspect limits the investigation of converging the meta heuristic, and
thus only 50 iterations and 60 iterations were tested. To get an overview of the iteration parameters
chosen for each data size see Table 3.
Table 3: Chosen parameters for the Tabu Search.
Vessels
30
40
60
Iterations
150
120
50
The performance of the TS is generally poor because of the time limitations; especially for the larger
instances. This means the meta heuristic have not converged in terms of consistency/stability in the
solutions, which is why it is hard to tell whether the solutions are good or not. Furthermore, there
exist no other results to compare with, since the data set have never been applied to this type of
problem before. In terms of better performance of the TS, some bigger adjustments or perhaps a new
strategy must be applied in order to obtain that. Since the TS have not converged it seems a waste
of time to evaluate the performance each time the objective function is changed, and thus the above
deﬁned iteration parameters will remain in all of the results obtained in the following sections. It is
important to note that just because the model has not converged, does not mean that the obtained
results are incorrect; they just might not be the best solutions or even good solutions. This will of
course aﬀect the speed results, which are presented in the tables below. The ﬁrst three tests are
with identical objective functions in both ports, and the last three tests are with diﬀerent relevant
combinations of those three objective functions.
Page 22 of 41
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis
Table 4: Maximum- and design speed overview of vessel type 1, 2 and 3.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Vessel Size [m]
34 < l
30 < l ≤34
22 < l ≤30
Max Speed [knots]
25
23
22
Design Speed [knots]
18
16.5
16
The result tables in the following analysis only represent 3 out of the 5 types of vessels. This is
because the algorithm chooses the 25% biggest vessels, and thus it happens that these vessels, no
matter the data size, is never picked smaller than vessel type 3. In Table 4 the maximum- and design
speed of the three biggest vessel types are presented. Looking at the speed tables below the estimate
speed is identical to the design speed every time, which indicates that the model have calculated the
speed correct, because the ETA in Rotterdam is based on the design speed.
3.2 | Minimum Total Cost Analysis
The ﬁrst test conducted minimizes the total cost in both ports. As described in section 2 the cost
function does not give any penalty as long as the vessel is scheduled within its ETA and EFT. This
means a cost per hour will be given if the vessels is scheduled ahead of its ETA, or if it is still serviced
after its EFT. In that way the minimization will aim towards the vessels most desired position.
In Table 5 it can be seen that only 3 out of the 9 results show an actual speed reduction. Furthermore
there is no pattern in which vessel type that gain the most reduction, since each vessel type show a
reduction in three diﬀerent data sizes. The largest reduction happens for vessel type 2 in the instance
with 60 vessels, with an average speed reduction -0.07 knots. this correspond to a reduction of approx.
0.4%, which is very insigniﬁcant. However, putting it into the perspective of the relation between speed
and fuel consumption every reduction counts. As said before, the data given do not say anything about
the weight of the vessels, and thus it will be diﬃcult to show actual calculations, but looking at the
relation between the fuel consumption and the weight- and speed of the vessel in Equation 1.5, this
reduction will be signiﬁcant even to an empty vessel. For a three week trip it will mean tons of fuel
that will be saved. So even though a reduction of 0.4 % does not sound of much it means a lot in the
scale it is applied. Of cause this scale also works in the opposite direction, so just a minor increase
will have a major negative eﬀect on the fuel consumption.
The most signiﬁcant speed increase is seen in the instances with 60 vessels. Intuitively, it is harder to
ﬁnd a good location for all vessels, when suddenly 20 more vessels have to ﬁt in the same amount of
space. Accordingly it means that if the risk that a vessel gets a less desirable location increases, so do
the risk that a vessel is moved ahead of its ETA, which imply that the vessel have to sail faster.
Table 5: Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing cost in both ports.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Data size
Speed
[knots]
30 vessels
actual
18.00
16.79
15.95
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
0.00
0.29
-0.05
40 vessels
actual
17.99
16.58
16.10
estimate
18.04
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
-0.05
0.08
0.10
60 vessels
actual
19.10
16.44
16.24
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
1.10
-0.07
0.24
Page 23 of 41
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis
3.3 | Minimum Total Waiting Time Analysis
With a big ﬂow of container vessels going in and out, and a large amount of employees on shifts it
is impossible to avoid delays. However, it is very expensive for the ports if they cause delays on the
vessels, which is why the ports are interested in minimizing the waiting time. As the function imply
in section 2 waiting time is deﬁned as the hours in diﬀerence between the actual start time and the
ETA if the vessel starts later than its ETA.
Table 6: Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing waiting time in both ports.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Data size
Speed
[knots]
30 vessels
actual
23.25
21.51
18.46
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
5.24
5.02
2.46
40 vessels
actual
22.24
20.01
18.73
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
4.24
3.51
2.74
60 vessels
actual
22.97
20.62
19.30
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
4.97
4.11
3.30
Looking at Table 6 there is no speed reduction in any of the tests. In fact there is a signiﬁcant
increase, especially for vessel types 1 and 2. The highest increase is seen for vessel type 1 in the
instance with 30 vessels. With a speed increase of 5.24 knots it corresponds to an increase of 29%.
It makes good sense though when you look further into how the minimization is deﬁned. Minimizing
the waiting time will induce each of the vessels to be positioned closest to their ETA or below. This
means the algorithm does not apply a penalty, whenever the vessel is scheduled before its ETA, but
only minimizes the hours added to the ETA. Therefore the results reﬂect a tendency to schedule the
vessels before their ETA, which result in the vessels sailing faster than their design speed. Therefore
it can be concluded that minimizing waiting time is not in favour of minimizing speed. The same
can be said about minimizing tardiness. Since it also minimizes the upper time limit, the results will
show same tendency to move the vessels ahead of ETA, which is not desirable. Therefore minimizing
tardiness is excluded from this project.
3.4 | Minimum Total Service Time Analysis
Minimizing the total service time is very similar to minimize cost, because a penalty is given when
the vessel moves away from its most desired berth position. The diﬀerence is though, that the cost
equals zero as long as the vessel is scheduled in such a way that it does not cross its ETA and EFT,
whereas the service time starts counting the minute it leaves its most desired berth position. Hence,
the downside of minimizing service time is that it does not consider when the vessel starts its service.
The service time is calculated as ServiceTimei = FTi−STi, so the service time will only increase when
FTi increases, which it only does when the vessel moves away from its most desired berth position.
Therefore moving up and down in time is not penalized, and thus the risk of increasing the speed is
higher when minimizing service time than when minimizing cost.
This comes to show in the results presented in Table 7. Only vessel type 1 in the instances with 30
vessels see an actual reduction. Again -0.07 knots corresponding to 0.4%, is a very small reduction,
but in the scale it is relevant it will have an impact. The problem is though that according to these
results, there are no guarantee that a speed reduction will happen, in fact there is a tendency that
the opposite will happen.
Page 24 of 41
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis
Table 7: Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing service time in both ports.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Data size
Speed
[knots]
30 vessels
actual
17.93
17.99
16.49
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
-0.07
1.48
0.49
40 vessels
actual
20.29
18.43
17.83
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
2.29
1.93
1.83
60 vessels
actual
19.42
18.08
17.44
estimate
18.91
16.93
16.00
diﬀerence
0.50
1.15
1.44
3.5 | Total Waiting Time versus Total Cost
Since minimizing cost has shown the best results so far, this objective function is tested in combina-
tion with the other two objective functions. Minimizing waiting time has a tendency of scheduling the
vessels ahead of their ETA, which is why it would make no sense to apply this objective in the port
of Rotterdam in the following tests. Therefore the ﬁrst test minimizes total waiting time in Tanjung
Pelepas and total cost in Rotterdam.
Table 8: Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing wait time in Tanjung and cost in Rotterdam.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Data size
Speed
[knots]
30 vessels
actual
18.01
16.49
16.00
estimate
18.01
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
0.00
-0.01
0.00
40 vessels
actual
18.33
16.77
16.05
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
0.33
0.27
0.05
60 vessels
actual
18.36
16.55
16.22
estimate
18.20
16.57
15.99
diﬀerence
0.16
-0.02
0.23
For this test it is seen that none of the averages goes above 1 knot in increase. Especially should
be mentioned the instance with 30 vessels, where no increase is seen at all. This is an indication
that almost all of the vessels have been scheduled in their most desired position, and therefore the
diﬀerence between their starting time and their ETA is minimal. The interesting part of these results,
though, is how the larger instances keep a minimum diﬀerence as well. So even though it gets harder
to ﬁnd a desirable position for the vessels in both time and space when the amount of vessels increases,
it seems that this combination of objective functions generates good solutions. This means, that if
the TS were to be improved and thereby hopefully could give better solutions, this combination of
objective functions may result in speed reduction or at least close to zero diﬀerence.
3.6 | Total Service Time versus Total Cost
For the same reason as with the previous combination, it would be interesting to see what results
would come out of combining service time and cost. Again minimizing service time can induce solutions
Page 25 of 41
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis
where the vessels are scheduled before their ETA, because the minimization only care about the berth
position and not the starting time. However, those exact two objective functions gave the best results
in the previous tests with identical objective functions in both ports, which is why it is interesting to
look into this combination as well.
Table 9: Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing service time in Tanjung and cost in Rotterdam.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Data size
Speed
[knots]
30 vessels
actual
18.01
16.50
16.02
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
0.01
-0.01
0.02
40 vessels
actual
17.98
16.49
16.10
estimate
18.00
16.49
16.00
diﬀerence
-0.02
0.00
0.10
60 vessels
actual
19.41
16.69
16.23
estimate
18.13
16.51
16.00
diﬀerence
1.28
0.18
0.23
The results presented in Table 9 is based on minimizing service time in Tanjung Pelepas and cost
in Rotterdam. These results are even lower than the ones above in Table 8. It is only the instances
with 60 vessels that show an increase above 0.1, otherwise the results are close to zero; even two of
them show a minor reduction.
Beside the fact that the TS performance is poor, another reason that there is no signiﬁcant reduction
when minimizing service/waiting time in Tanjung Pelepas and cost in Rotterdam, may be because
the ETA in Rotterdam is based on the ﬁnishing time in Tanjung Pelepas.
This means that if a
vessel is scheduled early in Tanjung Pelepas, the ETA will be adjusted in Rotterdam before the actual
minimization starts for Rotterdam, and thus it makes no diﬀerence in terms of starting time. On the
positive side it will not matter either, if the vessel becomes late in Tanjung Pelepas, and therefore it
creates a certain safety for the vessel. In real life though, the container vessels have a certain service
level and thus the ﬁxed schedule they need to keep towards their customers. This means the shipping
company may have their own interest in keeping a higher speed in order to catch up on delays.
It would be reasonable to think that the tendency of scheduling the vessels before its ETA in
Rotterdam would repeat itself by minimizing the service time in Rotterdam. But because the function
does not penalize the starting time, but only the berth position, the vessels might as well be scheduled
later than their ETA, and thus it would be interesting to see the outcome of this test.
Table 10: Average speed diﬀerence for minimizing cost in Tanjung and service time in Rotterdam.
Vessel Category
1
2
3
Data size
Speed
[knots]
30 vessels
actual
19.91
18.14
17.09
estimate
18.01
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
1.90
1.65
1.09
40 vessels
actual
21.82
17.73
17.28
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
3.82
1.23
1.28
60 vessels
actual
21.60
18.02
17.91
estimate
18.00
16.50
16.00
diﬀerence
3.60
1.51
1.91
Page 26 of 41
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis
Figure 8: Bar chart of the average speed reduction in regard to objective functions.
The presented results in table Table 10 show what was expected. The risk of vessels being scheduled
before their ETA is too high, when minimizing the service time in Rotterdam, and therefore the result
comes out with only increased speeds. Hence it can be concluded that with the type of problem stated
in this project and the way the objective functions are deﬁned, cost is the only objective function
of the three tested, that gives reasonable speed results when minimized in Rotterdam. An issue to
consider though, if the methodology of optimizing the BAP with two diﬀerent objective functions in
two consecutive ports were to be implemented in real life, is that how to deﬁne which port is the latter.
Since the liner vessels’ routes are circular all of them will become a ﬁrst and last port, and thus this
methodology may only be relevant on certain legs; especially the long ones.
3.7 | Results Comparison
In general for all the results, no pattern is seen for which vessel type nor instance size that achieves
the lowest speed reduction. The majority of the results show a speed increase and the reductions that
are actually seen are all less than 0.1 knot. For the tests where cost and service time are minimized
in both ports, it can be seen that the small sized instances are closer to 0.00 because the majority of
the vessels are scheduled in their most desired positions, where as minimizing waiting time only show
considerable increased speeds. To point out the most signiﬁcant results, minimizing cost gives the
overall best results in terms of reduction; 3 out of the 9 results show an actual reduction on average.
However, minimizing waiting/service time in Tanjung Pelepas and cost in Rotterdam has shown the
lowest average numbers for all 9 results across both vessel type and instance sizes.
However, it is hard to tell from the above tables which of the above objective function combinations
that induces the greatest reductions for those vessels that actually obtain a speed reduction. Since
all of the above results are averages taken from every instance divided in vessel types, there may be
some signiﬁcant speed reductions that get lost because they are oﬀset by signiﬁcant speed increases.
Therefore it could be interesting to investigate how many of the vessels that actually see a reduction
for each instance, and how extensive that reduction is. In Figure 8 the results of this investigation
is presented. To ﬁnd these numbers an average is taken across all instance sizes and vessel types, so
each bar chart represent an average for the entire test for each combination of objective functions.
The dark green bar charts represent the average percentage of vessels in each instance that show an
actual speed reduction and the light green bar charts represent the average speed reduction.
From this illustration it is obvious that minimizing waiting time induces a faster speed. None of
Page 27 of 41
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis
Figure 9: Average vessel distribution in regard to speed diﬀerence for objective functions.
the vessels in any of the 15 instances obtain a speed reduction, so it is reasonable to conclude that
minimizing waiting time in both ports has no positive eﬀect on the speed. Comparing the other tests,
especially the minimization of service time in both ports stands out. In this test the largest reduction
is seen with 0.27 knot reduction. In the tests where cost are minimized in both ports the largest share
of vessels are seen. Average 19% of the vessels obtain an actual speed reduction of average 0.13 knot.
For the combined tests the combination of service time and cost show very similar results. Minimizing
cost in Rotterdam induces that 13% of the vessels obtain a speed reduction, where in the opposite
test only 11%. Looking at the speed reduction, the results have reversed; here the minimization of
cost in Tanjung Pelepas show the greatest reduction. In Table 8 the results were generally low, which
is also shown on the bar chart, where only a general reduction of 0.04 knot is obtained. The vessel
share, on the other hand, is 15%, so from the ports point of view, where only minor deviations from
the estimated schedule is desired, this test is desirable.
What must be noted, however, with this chart is that only the vessels showing an actual reduction
are included in the calculations, and so the ones which obtain their most desired position and see
neither a reduction or increase in speed are not included. To evaluate which of the objective functions
that induces the fewest speed increases, Figure 9 gives an overview of how the average distribution of
vessels look like for each test in accordance to speed. There is no doubt that minimizing cost in the
subsequent port gives the best results. Those 3 tests show the lowest amount of vessels obtaining speed
increases and the largest number of vessels with zero diﬀerence. And it makes sense; the cost function
is the only of the three, which comprehend both time and space, and penalize in both dimensions
when the vessel is moving away from its most desired position. Furthermore, there is no doubt that
minimizing waiting time is the worst objective to choose, since almost 60% of the vessels show an
increase in speed.
From what the results have shown, considering the bad performance of the TS, it can be concluded
that minimizing cost would be the objective function to continue investigating in further research. It
has shown the best results in terms of both speed reduction and the amount of vessels being located in
their most desired position. Another conclusion to be made is that minimizing waiting time the way
it is deﬁned in this project, is not in favour of reducing speed, which is very interesting considering
that most optimization today minimizes waiting time (see section 1).
Considering a real life situation, the assessment of optimizing the communication between vessel
and port can be seen from two diﬀerent points of view. Besides that the vessels will emit less CO2
by slowing down, the ports may reduce the fees they have to pay the vessels for waiting outside the
Page 28 of 41
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis
ports. If the vessels know beforehand that the port schedule is delayed, then they can slow down and
plan their future route so they still stick to their own schedule. Therefore a close to zero diﬀerence
in speed would be desirable to the ports because then the vessels stick to their plan, and the chance
of having to pay a fee is smaller. A slower speed will probably cause that the vessels will have to sail
faster later on, because they have a ﬁxed schedule to catch up on. So, it depends on how the vessel
and port in between deﬁne delays because when it comes to time, the vessels will still be delayed no
matter if they are sailing or swing at anchor. But on the other hand, they will save money on fuel.
Also, seen from a greater perspective it would be better (from a CO2 reductive perspective) if the
vessels sailed faster on the short legs instead of the long ones from Asia to Europe, or exploited that
their vessels are almost empty when they are going eastbound. However, this will be discussed later.
As said before, the biggest problem with the tests performed in this subject, is that it does not
account for the possibility that the ports become delayed shortly before the vessels arrive. There are
many factors which could cause a delay, since the port’s service depend on so many both internal an
external elements. Of course it will be impossible to avoid this type of delay completely in real life, but
hopefully better communication between vessels and ports will minimize the extensive waiting hours
seen today. A big downside of not enacting restrictions upon the speed, but just try to improve the
communication, is that the vessels might be moved ahead of their ETA and thereby have to sail faster.
Of course the vessels have the possibility to decline that position in the schedule, because a speed
increase induces an increase in fuel consumption. However, this may induce a delay in the other end,
since the vessels might risk that the port cannot schedule them before many hours later. Accordingly,
the vessels have to consider the chance of getting delayed against an increase in fuel consumption. The
paradox induced by these results, is that in terms of speed it is desirable that the vessels’ ST > ETA,
since this relationship will result in speed reductions. But delays are very expensive for the ports,
since they have to pay for the extra hours which the vessels loose. Therefore this research should be
seen as way to exploit the time which the vessels already spend waiting, due to bad communication
between ports and vessels, and not a call for more delays in ports.
Page 29 of 41
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis
4 | Sustainability in Practise
Until recent years the search for prosperity and proﬁt has been paramount to the urging reality
of climate change, which have left its mark on the globe today.
The focus on green solutions is
ever growing, and the pressure from NGO’s and especially young activists, has taken the discussion
and the mindset of both the people and the politicians to a whole new level. This, naturally, has
had a great inﬂuence on the political strategies set by the UN and thus also by the IMO. The IMO
recognizes that their role of being an indispensable piece in the puzzle of global trade, can inﬂuence
all actors of the maritime industry to act upon the 2030 Agenda set by the UN. With that said, it is
diﬃcult to set uniform guidelines and policies for such a multi-faceted industry. The following section
will discuss both the private and legislative initiatives, that the shipping companies and the IMO
have/can implement in order to force a world, characterized by its large economic ﬂow, to think more
green. Furthermore, it will elaborate the advantages and disadvantages of the diﬀerent initiatives, and
how it will aﬀect the stakeholders and the competitiveness of maritime transportation.
4.1 | Private Initiatives towards Sustainability
Time is money; that is the key word to describe the modern world and its productivity. The faster
things can be done the more money will circulate and the human standard of living will reﬁne. The
biggest hindrance is that the environment is often left out of that equation. The transport industry
is highly aﬀected by the mentality of the market and how the customers prioritize, meaning that if
the mentality of the costumers change to be in favor of the environment, it can indirectly force the
shipping industry to be more sustainable. It requires, though, that the majority of the worlds nations
start thinking that way. It may be diﬃcult to change the mentality in third world countries, since
their lack of economical proﬁt and mental strength often do not reach that far, and that is why it is
important the worlds leading economies who play a dominant role in the trading market, keep thinking
more green.
4.1.1 | External Market Pressures
Since the focus on sustainability has increased the past decades, many upcoming companies, es-
pecially in the food industry, collect marks as ”fairtrade” and ”organic” to sell their products and
thereby use sustainability as a marketing strategy. If this tendency increases, it will aﬀect the shipping
industry as well, since it may start a new competition strategy among transport companies on who
can provide the greenest and cheapest freight. External market pressures towards sustainability can
also eﬀect the shipping industry negatively; i.e. 3D-printers have made it both interesting and easy
to produce various devices and plastic products instead of buying them on E-bay, which means less
products are being transported. On the other hand less transportation also means less GHG emis-
sions have been emitted. The same is a reality with moving production sites from developed- to less
developed countries. If more products were produced domestically the need for transportation will
decrease, which is bad for the shipping companies but proﬁtable to the environment.
4.1.2 | Stakeholder Collaboration
Finding solutions to improve the communication could not be of more relevance than now. In his
opening speech at the IMO meeting held in China in Spring 2019, the General-Secretary of IMO
Kitack Lim stated the following:
”Transport is a chain.
No link in a chain can really be eﬀective if viewed in isolation.
Actions
that impact the ships, will also have a wider impact throughout the entire supply chain; especially on
Page 30 of 41
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis
ports.”[22]
With that he points out how important it is, that sustainable issues are faced in solidarity with the
entire shipping industry. Furthermore, he states that many of the improvements can be found in the
ports, where the vessels spend somewhat 15% of their fuel. He encourages the attendants to deliberate
and keep in mind during the discussions, what a central role the industrial ports play in reaching
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG’s) deﬁned by the UN. Among other things he also states
that with its powerful role in world trade, the shipping industry could support a growing economy by
improving port connections, which to some extent can be improved by eﬀective communication among
stakeholders.
As with many other institutional systems, the mentality of always doing what is most proﬁtable
for oneself rarely beneﬁts the entire system. An exception occurs, though, when it leads to win-win
solutions where multiple parties work together and all beneﬁt from the same act.
The improved
communication between vessels and ports, which is the main discussion of this project, could be
accomplished through the vessel’s GPS system, so the port can keep track of the vessel at all times.
The port should be informative in the opposite direction as well, so if their schedule forecast is not
consistent with the vessels estimated time of arrival they should reschedule the vessel.
The worlds largest shipping association, BIMCO, have already introduced this way of thinking in
their concept called ”just-in-time” (JIT). Jeppe Skovbakke Juhl, who is Manager in the Department
of Maritime Technology and Regulation in BIMCO, held a presentation in March 2019, where he
outlined the main idea behind JIT, which basically means any action that refers to minimizing delays
in ports and thereby reduce the idle time. He states that:
”Just-in-time requires good early communication with port and harmonization amongst parties con-
cerned” [29].
Thus the JIT is not only a matter of slowing down, but also an optimization of procedures inside
the port, in order to eﬀectuate the time a vessel spend in each port. This will not only reduce the
amount of CO2 emitted by the vessels, but also other pollutants which are harmful to the land and
air around the ports. Jeppe Skovbakke Juhl also mentions that it will enhance safety on the vessels
by avoiding risks such as sailing full speed in fog to reach a berthing time that is not available anyway.
At some point unforeseen delays are hard to avoid, since it is impossible to predict if a crane suddenly
breaks down, if a staﬀmember gets ill, or if the vessel is traveling through a storm. Of other dis-
advantages about JIT, Jeppe Skovbakke Juhl mentions that the vessel operators loose the possibility
to maintain the vessel, which they normally take care of while anchored. Furthermore it should be
considered the extra working hours the staﬀmay have, since it may require more active workers when
sailing, than when anchored. From the ports point of view, it will require some investment, since it
will induce a need for extra resources in terms of new technology and/or workers to manage a new
communication system.
Another way to minor the pollution is to agree on more horizontal collaboration between the vessel
owners, and in that way minor the risk of having too many half empty vessels. The shipping industry is
already built upon collaboration contracts between vessel owners and shipping agencies, who connect
the customer to the shipping company to eﬀectuate the process of ﬁlling each vessel to the limit.
Furthermore the shipping companies have built up alliances so several companies service the same
string in order to keep a consistent and high-frequent service level. These collaboration strategies
induce win-win solutions for the shipping companies, since they individually can avoid expanding their
ﬂeet drastically, when their customer surface expand. Meaning they can serve many routes without
having to ﬁll each route with the amount of vessels necessary to ﬁll up a weekly service. Intuitively they
save money on operating costs, while they exploit the vessel’s full capacity and thereby gain a higher
revenue. From an environmental perspective it means that the less competition there is between the
vessel owners on the same routes, the less vessels will be in service and thus less vessels will contribute
to climate change. Thus a more centralized co-operation strategy and more horizontal collaboration
Page 31 of 41
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis
will decrease the amount of CO2 emitted. However, this can only be realized if the revenue which the
shipping company looses from outsourcing their service, is lower than the cost of putting their own
vessel in to service; otherwise it would not be proﬁtable for them. In general, stakeholder collaboration
has its challenges when it comes to money, because working competitors suddenly have to share data
and other information, which expose the companies to one another. It requires a lot of trust between
parties and most importantly clausal contracts, that protect the companies.
4.2 | IMO Policies towards Sustainability
However, both initiatives mentioned above must be realized on behalf of the companies’ own initia-
tive, and can therefore be seen as long term solutions, which is not always enough to reach the goals
set by the UN. So on a more short-term basis, political decisions must be forced upon the operators
of the industry.
The need for change is vital; Psaraftis and Kontovas (2009a) make it clear that
post-panamax (container vessels with capacity above 4,400 TEU) are by far the biggest sinners when
it comes to CO2 emissions [13]. In 2015 17 SDG’s were enacted by the UN to work as guidelines
towards a better and more sustainable world including economic growth, social development and a
cleaner environment [30]. It is no secret that the shipping industry is highly aﬀected by this, because
approximately 90% of the worlds trade is at some point in touch with maritime transportation [31].
Accordingly, the IMO have devised a brochure containing a brief overview of the actions IMO perform
towards reaching the SDG’s with relevance to maritime transportation [30].
4.2.1 | Energy Resources and Technological Improvements
In accordance to SDG 7 ”Aﬀordable and Clean Energy” and SDG 13 ”Climate Action”, the IMO
approved in 2011 the ﬁrst legally bounding GHG emission control regime for the entire maritime
sector, which enforce technical measurements on new vessels and emission reduction measurements
on all vessels.
This means that all vessels built in 2025 must be 30% more energy eﬃcient than
those built in 2014, and that all vessels no matter age must reduce their CO2 exhaustion signiﬁcantly.
Furthermore they have been leading contributors within international cooperation towards cleaner
energy accessibility and promoting scientiﬁc work on new technology towards alternative energy.
In 2017 the IMO decided to reduce the sulphur limit not only in SECA areas but also outside these
areas, which means that by 2020 the SOx-emission allowance must be beneath 0.5% outside the SECA
areas and 0.1% (see Figure 4) inside the SECA areas [32]. The vessels then have to buy more expensive
alternative fuels or buy scrubber systems, which is a ﬁlter installed separately on the vessel.
It is necessary to enforce these regulations upon the industry since new technology often induce higher
costs for the shipping companies and thus they will not apply to it unless it is mandatory. On the
other hand, it may result in increased transport fees, which will weaken their competitiveness towards
other modes, and is therefore not proﬁtable for the overall CO2 statistics.
Kitack Lim also point out in his opening speech that the ports must built the necessary infrastructure
to provide the vessels with sustainable energy while they are anchored [22]. In that way the vessels
avoid using fuel on their auxiliary engines, which provide the staﬀwith the electricity necessary, and
accordingly reduce the amount of GHG emitted in ports. The internal activities inside the ports, such
as the quay-side operations, the hinterland operations and so on are also subjects to look at, but will
not be discussed in this project.
4.2.2 | Speed Optimization
In accordance to SDG 10 ”Reduced Inequalities” the IMO constitute a platform where both member
states, researchers, NGO’s and company stakeholders can meet and discuss the issues regarding the
Page 32 of 41
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis
maritime industry. Since the MEPC 73 in April 2018 the highest priority on the agenda, was to
discuss whether the IMO should enact speed limitations upon industrial vessels or not. It was enforced
by various NGO’s, who by their powerful inﬂuence, want the shipping industry to face the reality of
climate changes and what a big diﬀerence it will make if the vessels enforced slow-steaming. The biggest
opposition to this suggestion were several South American countries, who instead suggested speed
optimization. Ever since, the IMO have seen diﬃculties to ﬁnd an agreement, since the idea of speed
optimization seems ideal, but in practise it is very diﬃcult to deﬁne and standardize, because of the
many diﬀerent shapes and functions of the industrial ﬂeet. Furthermore, the liner vessels often carry
thousands of containers containing thousands of diﬀerent cargoes, whereas some of them are perishable.
And it is especially for this reason the South American countries suggest speed optimization, since
they are one of the biggest export nations of perishable foods such as oranges, avocados etc. This
means if speed limitations are enforced, the extra time it takes to sail the same legs can be fatal for
the economy of these nations.
Another negative eﬀect of speed limits could be that the vessel owners just put one more vessel
into service in order to keep up with their existing schedule, which only increases CO2 emissions. In
his newest book, Psaraftis (2019) mentions that there is almost a binary relation between the vessels’
payload when it goes to Europe and when it returns to Asia [12]. As Equation 1.5 state both the
speed and the payload of the vessel has a close relation to the fuel consumption, which means that
the vessels advantageously could speed up when they are going east. In that way they could catch
up on lost time while emitting less. The same could be said about headwind and tailwind, as well as
waves and no waves. This means if speed limits are forced upon them, they could not take advantage
of a lighter weight nor good weather.
The beneﬁts however, of implementing speed limitations will be that it is easy to control by law
enforcement, since the vessels GPS system will disclose its displacement in accordance to time and
accordingly can be registered and saved in the vessel’s data system. Just like the tachographs installed
in all trucks driving inside EU borders can register and save when and for how long the drivers rest.
Seen from a greater perspective, speed limits does not seem to be the best solution, as it might not be
beneﬁcial for the environment in the long run. Especially, if the shipping companies start increasing
their ﬂeet in order to keep up their schedules or if customers begin to use other modes because of
increased travel time. Seen from an economical point of view, the companies exporting perishable
foods may suﬀer from longer travel times or might begin to use airborne transportation. The shipping
companies will not be able to exploit external conditions such as the weather or the close to zero
payload they have when they sail eastbound, so they can sail faster and catch up on delays without
emitting more CO2.
A third solution could be to allow high speeds, but to enforce speed fees after a certain speed limit,
meaning the vessel company should pay an extra fee depending on how much they exceed and for
how long. In that way the vessel operator will have to pay even more besides the extra fuel induced
by sailing faster. This solution will be diﬃcult to implement on liner vessels because of the great
variation of goods they transport. If only 4,000 out of 18,000 containers contain perishable foods, it
will be hard to convince the residual 14,000 container owners to pay extra for faster delivery, unless
it is proﬁtable for them. In some cases, though, the vessel owners are also interested in fast transport
times for various reasons. First of all faster transport times means the vessel owners can obtain higher
cargo ﬂow and therefore have a higher money ﬂow. Second of all the vessel owners are in competition
with trains and airplanes, which means if the transport time is too long, they might loose customers.
Third of all the value of the goods is closely related to the in-transit inventory cost. This means the
longer it takes for a cargo to travel from supplier to customer, the earlier demand forecasts need to
be composed in order to keep a safety stock. So the longer it takes for a cargo to be delivered the
higher the inventory cost becomes. This means that the vessel owners at all times need to optimize
the balance between cost and revenue in order to gain the biggest proﬁt.
Page 33 of 41
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis
5 | Conclusion
As the speed and fuel consumption are exponentially related, there is no doubt that minimizing
speed is paramount to reduce the CO2 emitted by the industrial ﬂeet. Seen as a win-win solution the
shipping companies can save a signiﬁcant amount of money on fuel if they reduce their speed even in
small scales. The biggest hindrance though is time; the ﬁxed schedules, which is a characterization of
liner shipping, bounds the shipping companies to keep up a certain service level and thus make them
inﬂexible when it comes to time. Slowing down will, intuitively, induce longer travel time, that results
in a lower cargo throughput and higher in-transit inventory costs, and therefore have made it ever
relevant to seek methods that optimize the time they spend in ports.
To approach this problem an optimization of the continuous BAP has been conducted, using a Tabu
Search to see if combining diﬀerent objective functions for two consecutive ports will have an eﬀect
on the speed. Unfortunately the performance of the algorithm is weak in terms of time, and therefore
makes it impossible to converge the meta heuristic. The correctness of the solutions, however, makes
it possible to analyze them anyway. Thus three diﬀerent data sizes of 30-, 40- and 60 vessels is tested
with six diﬀerent combinations of minimizing total cost, total waiting time and total service time. It
is clear that minimizing cost gives the best results in terms of speed; minimizing cost in both ports
results in average 19% of the vessels show a speed reduction, and average 59% have zero diﬀerence.
In the tests where cost is minimized in Tanjung Pelepas and service time is minimized in Rotterdam,
the results show that on average 48% of the vessels have increased speed, where the opposite test only
resulted in average 27%, and so it can be concluded that it is preferable to minimize cost in the latter
port. That is because the cost function is the only one of the three functions, that considers both
time and space. Minimizing service time in both ports shows the highest speed reduction with an
average of -0.27 knots but only with a vessel share of 13%. This reﬂects the nature of the service time
function, which do not care about when the vessel starts its service but only the berth position. So
the chance of a late start time is higher than for the other two objective functions.
Another observation discovered by the results of the TS, is that minimizing waiting time mainly
induces increased speeds (59%) and no reduction. It makes sense since minimizing waiting time do
not penalize when the vessels are scheduled before their ETA, but only when they exceed it. This
means that, the construction heuristic prioritize a starting time ahead of ETA as high as a starting
time on ETA, when it schedules the vessels. The interesting part of this observation is that most
of the researching works on the BAP, include a minimization of waiting time, because of the aim to
reduce the time the vessels spend in ports, and in that help the vessels to sail slower; an observation
worth considering in future research.
The ports aim to schedule the vessels as close to their desired position as possible in both time and
space, and the tests imply that minimizing cost in the subsequent port is a preferable choice. On the
other hand the aim of minimizing speed requires that the vessels are scheduled later than their ETA, so
reﬂecting upon the search methodology the design creates a paradox in the search of minimizing speed.
Hypothesis 1 states, that when diﬀerent objective functions are applied in two independent BAP’s
generated for two consecutive ports, then it will have a positive impact on the speed. This cannot
be approved considering the results gained in this project, since there is no indication that combining
diﬀerent objective functions will have a greater impact on the speed. Thus the overall assessment
of the results is not consistent enough to state that certain combinations of objective functions will
induce lower speeds. This means Hypothesis 1 is declined.
In terms of Hypothesis 2, it can be concluded that the few vessels who actually see a speed reduction
is the ones who are scheduled later than their ETA, which means if the communication is improved,
so the vessels slow down instead of waiting outside the port, then a speed reduction will occur. Thus
Hypothesis 2 can be veriﬁed. However, it should be kept in mind that the methodology applied in
this project do not take sudden delays into account, and therefore it would be interesting in further
Page 34 of 41
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis
research to develop more realistic models which consider these issues.
Summing up on the discussion about the initiatives which can push the shipping industry in a more
sustainable direction, it is clear that all solutions both have positive and negative outcomes. On a
private level, a greater collaboration among shipping companies can induce a greater chance of ﬁlling
up the vessels, so less half-empty vessels will emit CO2. However, the free market structure can make it
diﬃcult to convince the companies on a more centralized co-operation strategy, unless it is proﬁtable
to both parties. Furthermore, the mentality of the consumers can highly eﬀect the transportation
sector, meaning if the environmental footprint, each cargo represents, is weighted more than the cost,
it may change the industry’s competing parameters. On a governmental level the IMO has already
implemented several acts to reach the SDG’s set by the UN. Among others, they have forced the
shipping companies to use less Sulphur content in fuels, enforced requirements on both existing and
new designs of the vessels, so they become more energy eﬃcient. Here and now the IMO is discussing
whether to implement speed limits on the vessels so they are forced to slow down. This, however, will
imply economical challenges for both companies and nations, who will be highly aﬀected by longer
travel times. In worst case scenario, it may induce, that some shipping companies put more vessels
into service in order to keep the frequencies their routes operates on today; and that will not beneﬁt
the environment.
There is no doubt that the focus on optimizing the operations and minimizing delays in ports will
have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the time vessels spend in ports, but maybe these researches should be
complemented with better communication platforms to exploit the time wasted on the unavoidable,
unforeseen delays, so the vessels can slow down instead. It will not only beneﬁt the vessels and ports
economically, but also the environment to a great extent.
Page 35 of 41
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis
6 | Further Research
• Change the solution strategy
As said before the performance of the TS was weak because testing the amount of iterations was
limited by the time it took to run a single instance. As suggested in the analysis, it may have been
more appropriate to make changes inside the schedule generated by the initial solution. One way to do
it could be to apply a swap strategy, where two vessels exchange positions. A diversiﬁcation strategy of
swapping a certain amount of vessels could then easily be implemented, since the set of rules on how to
reschedule the vessels will already be deﬁned. This methodology however can be diﬃcult to implement
to a continuous BAP since it requires many considerations on how to reschedule the vessels in positions
they might not ﬁt into. It may incur that the vessels that are scheduled around its new position, have
to be moved in order for it to ﬁt. Therefore a single move strategy may be more appropriate, where
only one vessel is moved to another position. It will also require many considerations, but time wise
it will only involve one ship instead of two. Both methods make it possible to apply delta-evaluation,
where only the diﬀerence to the solution induced by the swap/move is registered in the total objective
value, instead of recalculating the entire solution. That will save a lot of time as well. The tabu list
will however be implied in a diﬀerent way, where the swaps/moves are registered by the vessel number.
Depending on how many vessels there are in each instance it can be an advantage to limit the size of
the Tabu List so that previously moved vessels can be moved again.
• Incorporate sudden delays
It could be interesting to expand the model, so that a certain percentage of the vessels stochastically
become delayed, and then see what inﬂuence it will have on the speed results. At the same time a
new model can be developed to ﬁnd the best “saving strategy” that minimizes the same objective
function as the original problem, but also minimizes the number of vessels that will be aﬀected by a
rescheduling of a single delayed vessel. Thus it will become a multi-objective optimization problem,
where the objective functions are weighted either equally and diﬀerently in order to see how it will
impact both the economical- and the environmental results.
• The impact of payload
The model conducted in this project does not consider the payload of the vessels. Since the fuel
consumption is both highly aﬀected by the payload and the speed, it could be interesting to investigate
how big an impact the almost binary relation there is on the payload of the vessels between the ones
going eastbound and westbound. Maybe by slowing down on the heavy legs going to Europe, and
then catch up on time on the light legs going to Asia, the vessels can keep the frequency they operate
on today, while they save money and become more friendly to the environment.
Page 36 of 41
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis
References
[1] Harilaos N. Psaraftis. Course 42884 green transport logistics - lecture 1. page 62, 2018.
[2] Louise Hall. Sulphur requirements in imo emission control areas, 2015. URL https://www.shipownersclub.com/
louise-hall-sulphur-requirements-imo-emission-control-areas/.
[3] The implications of the new sulphur limits on the european ro-ro sector. Transportation Research. Part D: Transport
and Environment, 52:185–201, 2017.
[4] Marine Notes. URL http://www.marinenotes.in/2012/06/container-ship-sizes.html.
[5] Jean-Paul Rodrigue. The geography of transport systems, 2017. URL https://transportgeography.org/?page id=
5260.
[6] Green Transportation Logistics: The Quest for Win-Win Solutions. Springer International Publishing, 2015.
[7] UNCTAD.
Review on Maritime Transportation.
Technical report, 2018.
URL https://unctad.org/en/
PublicationsLibrary/rmt2018 en.pdf.
[8] International
Champer
of
Shipping.
Shipping
and
world
trade.
URL
http://www.ics-shipping.org/
shipping-facts/shipping-and-world-trade.
[9] Olesen,
Thomas
Roslyng.
Value
Creation
in
The
Maritime
Chain
of
Transportation,
2015.
URL
https://openarchive.cbs.dk/bitstream/handle/10398/9252/Mapping Report C Value Creation 2nd Edition.
pdf?sequence=3.
[10] I. Wagner.
Container shipping - statistics and facts, 2018.
URL https://www.statista.com/topics/1367/
container-shipping/.
[11] Christos A. Kontovas. The green ship routing and scheduling problem (gsrsp): A conceptual approach. Transporta-
tion Research. Part D: Transport and Environment, 31:61–69, 2014.
[12] Harilaos N. Psaraftis. Chapter10: Speed optimization for sustainable shipping. Sustainable Shipping: a Cross-
disciplinary View, pages 339–374, 2019.
[13] Harilaos N. Psaraftis and Christos A. Kontovas.
Co2 emission statistics for the world commercial ﬂeet.
Wmu
Journal of Maritime Aﬀairs, 8(1):1–25, 2009.
[14] Michael E. Mann. Greenhouse gas, 2019. URL https://www.britannica.com/science/greenhouse-gas.
[15] IMO.
Third IMO Greenhouse Gas Study 2014, 2014.
URL http://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Environment/
PollutionPrevention/AirPollution/Documents/Third%20Greenhouse%20Gas%20Study/GHG3%20Executive%20Summary%
20and%20Report.pdf.
[16] EPA. What is acid rain? URL https://www.epa.gov/acidrain/what-acid-rain.
[17] Yuquan Du, Qiushuang Chen, Xiongwen Quan, Lei Long, and Richard Y.K. Fung. Berth allocation considering
fuel consumption and vessel emissions. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 47
(6):1021–1037, 2011.
[18] Christian Bierwirth and Frank Meisel. A survey of berth allocation and quay crane scheduling problems in container
terminals. European Journal of Operational Research, 202(3):615–627, 2010.
[19] A follow-up survey of berth allocation and quay crane scheduling problems in container terminals. European Journal
of Operational Research, 244(3):12689, 675–689, 2015.
[20] Harilaos N. Psaraftis. Speed optimization vs speed reduction: the choice between speed limits and a bunker levy.
Sustainability, 2019.
[21] Port Technology. Average ship waiting times at global ports, 2015. URL https://www.porttechnology.org/news/
average ship waiting times at global ports.
[22] Secretary-General Kintack Lim. Video: Opening speech may 11, 2019, 2019. URL https://www.facebook.com/
iaphworldports/videos/308280393403743/.
[23] Mihalis M. Golias, Georgios K. Saharidis, Maria Boile, Sotirios Theofanis, and Marianthi G. Ierapetritou. The berth
allocation problem: Optimizing vessel arrival time. Maritime Economics and Logistics, 11(4):358–377, 2009.
Page 37 of 41
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis
[24] Pierre Hansen, Ceyda Oˇguz, and Nenad Mladenovi´c. Variable neighborhood search for minimum cost berth alloca-
tion. European Journal of Operational Research, 191(3):636–649, 2008.
[25] Cagatay Iris, Dario Pacino, Stefan Røpke, and Allan Larsen. Integrated berth allocation and quay crane assign-
ment problem: Set partitioning models and computational results. Transportation Research. Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 81:75–97, 2015.
[26] Frank Meisel and Christian Bierwirth. Heuristics for the integration of crane productivity in the berth allocation
problem. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 45(1):196–209, 2009.
[27] APM Terminals, 2019. URL www.apmterminals.com/en/tanjung-pelepas.
[28] Michel Gendreau and Jean-Yves Potvin. Chapter 9: Tabu search. Search Methodologies: Introductory Tutorials in
Optimization and Decision Support Techniques, pages 243–263, 2014.
[29] Jeppe Skovbakke Juhl. Presentation: Port eﬃciency - bimco. 2019.
[30] IMO. IMO and Sustainable Development, 2019. URL http://www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/HotTopics/Documents/
IMO%20SDG%20Brochure.pdf.
[31] business.un.org. URL https://business.un.org/en/entities/13.
[32] Thalis Zis and Harilaos N. Psaraftis. Operational measures to mitigate and reverse the potential modal shifts due
to environmental legislation. Maritime Policy and Management, 46(1):117–132, 2019.
Page 38 of 41
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis
A | Speed Calculations
Figure 10: Vessel size for diﬀerent types of vessels [4]
The maximum speed estimations applied in the algorithm are derived from the following link:
https://github.com/blof/LINERLIB/blob/master/data/fleet data.csv
The data represented in the link distinguish between ﬂeet size in terms of capacity measured in
Forty-Foot Equivilant (FFE), and provides, among other parameters, a maximum speed and a design
speed for each vessel type. By comparing the capacity with the vessel sizes in Figure 10, presented in
meter, a speed estimation is given for the vessels represented in the data set used in the algorithm.
The vessels have been divided as follow:
Table 11: Table of speed estimations
SIZE [m]
MAX SPEED [knot]
DESIGN SPEED [knot]
L > 34
25
18
30 < L ≤34
23
16.5
22 < L ≤33
22
16
20 < L ≤22
18
16
L ≤20
14
12
Page 39 of 41
==PAGE:47==
Master Thesis
B | Distance Estimation
Since the distance tool found on http://www.shiptraffic.net/2001/05/sea-distances-calculator.
html, did not include the port of Tanjung Pelepas, Malaysia, the illustration in Figure 11 is measured
from the Port of Singapore, Singapore, to Rotterdam, Netherlands. Since the distance between Tan-
jung Pelepas and Singapore is approximately 50 km (≈27NM), the distance in nautical miles is:
Distance = 8265 −27 = 8238
(B.1)
Figure 11: Distance from Tanjung Pelepas, Malaysia, to Rotterdam, Netherlands
Page 40 of 41
==PAGE:48==
Master Thesis
C | Tabu Search Performance Results
The following tables are presenting the full data set of the TS performance tests. To access the rest
of the data see the attached Excel-ﬁle ”Data.xls”.
All ﬁles regarding the coding in Java are collected in the zip-ﬁle ”Code.zip”.
Table 12: Objective values of performance tests for 30 vessels.
30 VESSELS
Iterations
70
100
120
150
200
Instance
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
1
33.32
42.66
31.55
43.05
31.15
36.02
33.40
44.48
40.50
38.02
2
35.16
55.52
42.65
37.22
39.94
42.61
39.94
21.09
34.82
48.66
3
40.30
24.05
31.17
46.67
31.17
43.58
30.80
41.77
32.29
21.85
4
31.16
51.97
30.82
36.27
31.66
41.53
30.82
43.93
33.40
43.34
5
153.39
30.79
33.82
52.32
33.58
41.51
31.54
42.66
40.30
33.88
µ
58.67
41.00
34.00
43.11
33.50
41.05
33.30
38.79
36.26
37.15
σ
53.06
13.47
4.97
6.69
3.74
2.94
3.86
9.95
3.88
10.20
Table 13: Objective values of performance tests for 40 vessels.
40 VESSELS
Iterations
50
60
80
100
120
Instance
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
1
79.53
102.73
102.25
98.43
80.52
50.36
87.07
55.07
105.98
78.79
2
105.70
147.89
119.88
106.87
87.62
139.78
122.90
88.81
122.90
98.52
3
88.04
98.63
87.28
142.92
79.53
129.68
95.95
48.92
114.39
48.32
4
87.42
49.85
106.00
82.38
107.55
129.81
96.59
132.27
95.19
46.89
5
106.13
131.61
306.30
201.16
122.62
102.69
105.93
80.57
94.86
60.07
µ
93.36
106.14
144.36
126.35
95.57
110.46
101.69
81.13
106.66
66.52
σ
11.94
37.51
91.27
47.34
18.86
36.32
13.61
33.13
12.19
21.98
Table 14: Objective values of performance tests for 60 vessels.
60 VESSELS
Iterations
50
60
Instance
Tan
Rot
Tan
Rot
1
518.21
465.78
271.18
589.32
2
502.96
451.58
546.97
491.56
3
431.21
462.03
517.44
411.54
4
511.24
367.98
487.27
698.21
5
380.89
455.33
337.35
534.21
µ
468.90
436.84
432.04
544.97
σ
60.31
46.30
120.82
107.50
0
Page 41 of 41
