==PAGE:1==
Deposition and characterization of small
mass selected entities for sustainable
chemical reactions
written by
Karl Krøjer Toudahl (s122559)
Supervisors
Niklas Secher
Jakob Ejler
Jakob Kibsgaard
Ib Chorkendorff
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
12th of July 2019
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis is submitted as the ﬁnal 35 ECTS credits needed to obtain a Master’s de-
gree in Physics and Nanotechnology at the Technical University of Denmark. The work was
carried out between the 2nd of January and the 12th of July 2019 and has been supervised
by Jakob E. Sørensen, Niklas M. Secher, Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib Chorkendorff. The elec-
trochemical testing has been done by Johannes Novak and scanning tunelling microscopy by
Miriam Galbiati. A formal requirement for the master thesis at DTU is the formulation and
submission of a project plan with an overall description, timeline and link to the learning
objectives. An evaluation of the project plan along with the original plan must be included in
the ﬁnal thesis. This information is available in appendix E.
Thesis Structure
Section 1 introduces the energy challenge and links it to catalysis. Section 2 introduces
the cluster source system applied to generate nanoparticles and smaller entities. Section 3
introduces the characterization techniques used as well as the electrochemical 3 electrode
setup. Section 4 includes the motivation, procedure, results and interpretation for Pt nanopar-
ticles used to benchmark the hydrogen evolution reaction. Section 5 includes the motivation,
procedure, results and interpretation for single atom, dimer and trimer entities used for the
hydrogen evolution reaction. Section 6 summarizes all signiﬁcant results brieﬂy. Section 7
gives an outlook for future model systems based on graphene supports .
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib Chorkendorff for strategizing, supervising and
making this project possible. I would like to thank Jakob Ejler for his advice and help learning
how to operate the Omicron system. Thank you to Johannes Novak for testing the catalytic
entities and helping me understand the fundamentals of electrochemical measurements - and
for showcasing the fundamental difference between the number 2 and 3. Also, thank you to
Luca Camilli for making his new STM available, when our own malfunctioned and thank
you to Miriam Galbiati for operating this STM system and help us learn new things about our
procedures. Finally, a huge thank you to Niklas Secher, for your patience and insight every
step of the way for the last year.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In an effort to limit the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere caused by the burning
of fossil fuels, alternative sustainable energy infrastructures are being proposed and inves-
tigated. Catalysis can enable the production of synthetic fuels as a means to store energy
from inherently varying energy production of solar cells and wind turbines or to be used as
feedstock chemicals [1]. In this work, a cluster source connected to a time of ﬂight mass
ﬁlter is used to deposit mass selected Pt nanoparticles, single atoms, dimers and trimers and
subsequently used to evolve hydrogen (HER) electrochemically in a 3 electrode cell. The
Pt nanoparticles are deposited on glassy carbon and have a mass of (370 ±18.5)kamu, cor-
responding to a diameter of (3.8 ± 0.1) nm for spherical particles. The nanoparticles are
deposited in a loading range of 5 ngcm−2 to 5000 ngcm−2, to determine the relation between
HER mass activity and the overpotential for different mass loadings. Pre and post deposi-
tion ion scattering spectroscopy and x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy are used to conﬁrm
the presence of Pt on the surface and the relative loadings, respectively. Cyclic voltammetry
is used to ﬁnd the overpotential at a current density of 10 mAcm−2 for the different mass
loadings and from this calculate the mass activity. A clear dependence between mass loading
and overpotential is found.
Pt single atoms, dimers and trimers are deposited on defect TiO2 stubs. The projected cover-
age of these entities is held constant to quantify the difference in electrochemical hydrogen
evolution. Pre and post deposition ion scattering spectroscopy is used to conﬁrm the presence
of Pt on the surface. The single atoms and dimers showed a difference in current density of
approximately 0.8 mAcm−2 and 0.4 mAcm−2 at 200 mV vs. RHE overpotential. This factor
two difference is equivalent to the number of entities deposited on the surface.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Energy Challenge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Sustainability, Catalysis and the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction . . . . . . . .
4
2
Experimental Setup
8
2.1
Ultra High Vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.1
Maintaining Ultra High Vacuum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
The Omicron System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
The Cluster Source and Nanoparticle Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Mass Selection: The Time of Flight Mass Filter . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Deposition of Small Entities and Sample Coverage Considerations . .
13
2.3
Tuning the Cluster Source Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Characterization and Catalytic Performance
17
3.1
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
The Hemi-Spherical Analyzer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4
Catalytic Performance by Cyclic Voltametry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Pt Nanoparticles for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
23
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Preparation of Glassy Carbon and Deposition of Pt Nanoparticles
. .
23
4.2.2
Characterization of Pt Nanoparticles on Glassy Carbon . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Electrochemical Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Discussion and Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Small Pt entities for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
32
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Pt Single Atoms, Dimers and Trimers on TiO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Preparation of TiO2 Stubs and Deposition of Single Atoms, Dimers
and Trimers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Characterization of Single Atoms, Dimers and Trimers . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Electrochemical Performance of Single Atoms and Dimers . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Discussion and Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Conclusion
40
7
Outlook
40
A Raster Factor Calculation
45
B
Coverage Calculation
46
B.1
Spherical Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
B.2
Small Entity Approximation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
C Sputtering Experiments
47
C.1
Ammonia sputter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
C.2
Ar Sputter Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
iii
==PAGE:5==
D Preparation and Testing of Commercial Pt/C Reference
48
E
Project Plan and Evaluation
49
E.1
Overall goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
E.2
Timeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
E.3
Suggested Link to Learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
E.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
List of Figures
1
Global atmospheric CO2 concentration between 1850 and 2018 . . . . . . . .
1
2
Global average temperature difference compared to 1961-1990 average
. . .
2
3
Global energy consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
4
Energy use per capita vs. GDP per capita
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
5
Framework of a energy infrastructure based on water splitting by Zhao et. al.
5
6
Overall schematic of water splitting and water splitting reactions . . . . . . .
5
7
Schematic of the principle of catalysis and Sabatiers principle for HER in acid
6
8
Schematic overview of the Omicron system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
9
Cross sectional view of the magnetron sputter head . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
10
Schematic of the principle of the lateral time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter . . . . . . .
13
11
Schematic illustration of single atom, dimer and trimer entities . . . . . . . .
14
12
Schematic of the tuning principle for nanoparticles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
13
Schematic of the tuning principle for single atoms.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
14
Schematic representation of elastic collision between moving body and body
at rest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
15
ISS resolution for different ion sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
16
Photoemission and inelastic mean free path of electrons . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
17
Schematic illustration of the Hemi-spherical analyzer . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
19
XPS survey and close-up of GC stub post Ar sputter cleaning . . . . . . . . .
24
20
ISS of GC stub post Ar sputter cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
21
Mass spectrum of Pt nanoparticles prior and after deposition of mass 370 kamu 25
22
Deposition current for the 5 ngcm−2 loading sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
23
XPS post deposition of different Pt nanoparticles loadings
. . . . . . . . . .
28
24
XPS of the 50, 20 and 10 ngcm−2 samples and ISS of the 20, 10 and 5
ngcm−2 samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
25
CV curve for 5 ngcm−2 Pt nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
26
HER mass activity against the overpotential for different mass loadings of Pt
nanoparticles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
27
ISS of TiO2 stub after Ar sputtering for 30 min. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
28
Pt single atom mass spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
29
Pt single atom deposition current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
30
Mass spectrum of Pt dimers and trimers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
31
Mass spectrum of small Pt clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
32
ISS of single atoms and dimers on TiO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
33
ISS of single atoms, dimers and trimers on TiO2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
34
CV of Pt single atoms and dimers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
35
STM image of heavily sputtered HOPG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
36
Clean and NH3 sputtered HOPG lattice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
37
Square raster pattern schematic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
The Energy Challenge
In 1824 the French mathematician and physicist Joseph Fourier recognized the imbalance
between the incoming sunlight and the actual temperature of the earth [2]. Later, in 1896
the Swedish chemist and physicist Svante Arrhenius attributed the heat trapping abilities of
the atmosphere to water vapor and carbon dioxide and also hypothesized, that the burning
of fossil fuels by humans could cause a global temperature increase [3]. Figure 1 shows the
global atmospheric concentration of CO2 in the period 1850 until 2018. From ﬁgure 1 it
is apparent, that the atmospheric CO2 concentration has increased from around 290 ppm to
400 ppm in this period, which corresponds to a 38 % increase.
Figure 1: Global atmospheric CO2 concentration between 1850 and 2018
This increase has, as Arrhenius predicted, been connected to the burning of fossil fuels fol-
lowing the industrial revolution, which took place in the beginning of the 19th century. Figure
2 shows the global temperature difference, commonly referred to as the temperature anomaly,
in the same period compared to the 1961-1990 global average temperature. Compared to this
baseline, the global temperature had increased by approximately 0.6 ◦C in 2018. Taking the
pre-industrial1 global temperature average as baseline, yields an increase of (1.0 ± 0.2)◦C
with a high conﬁdence [4]. There is a strong correlation between the atmospheric concentra-
tion of CO2 and the global temperature anomaly and in 2013, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change stated, that humans are the likely cause of the global warming [4].
1Here, pre-industrial means 1850-1900, as recognized by the IPCC due to lack of coherent temperature
measurements from earlier times [4]
1
==PAGE:7==
Figure 2: Global average temperature difference compared to 1961-1990 average
In 2016, a large number of countries signed the Paris Agreement, a political agreement which
(among other things) states: ”Holding the increase in the global average temperature to well
below 2 ◦C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase
to 1.5 ◦C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would signiﬁcantly reduce the risks
and impacts of climate change [5]”
As such, almost every country is now (at least politically) committed to address this global
temperature increase.
Figure 3: Global energy consumption by source 1960-2014
Consider now, ﬁgure 3, which shows the energy consumption by source in terawatt-hours
2
==PAGE:8==
(tera = 1012, that is, 1000 billion) TWh. This ﬁgure illustrates, that currently almost all
energy consumed comes from the burning of fossil fuels; carbon based gas, oil and coal.
Finally, ﬁgure 4 shows the relation between annual energy use per person in kWh and gross
domestic product per capita. The gross domestic product is a monetary quantiﬁcation of the
market value of a country’s total goods and service (annual) output. Looking at ﬁgure 4 it
becomes clear, that there is a strong correlation between the wealth of a country and its energy
consumption.
Figure 4: Energy use per capita vs. GDP per capita
Uniting all these correlations and trends makes it possible to state the energy challenge as the
following expression (methodology adopted from [6])
Emission = E ·GDP
(1)
where Emission account for the total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, measured in CO2-
equivalents; CO2-eq. The unit CO2-eq is applied to account for all types of GHG emissions in
a single number, since other gases like CH4 (methane) and N2O (nitrous oxide) also contribute
to global warming. Determining a gas’ magnitude in CO2-eq requires an analysis of its
spectral lines and lifetime in the atmosphere. The term E is an ’emission coefﬁcient’ and is
given in g/$. In 2012 E was equal to 622 g/$, meaning a market value of 1 $ on average
emitted 622 g of CO2-eq in GHGs. Looking at equation 1, it is clear that reducing the global
emissions can happen in two different ways; reducing E or reducing the overall GDP, for
now lets focus on reducing E. Reducing E is equivalent to reducing the emissions by created
value, which due to the inherent link between energy consumption and GDP, is connected to
a redesign of the entire world energy infrastructure.
3
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Sustainability, Catalysis and the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
The energy infrastructure is based on technologies, that make energy conversion possible on
the global scale. Thereby, the transition to an energy infrastructure, which emits less green-
house gas, but converts the same amount of energy (or more) is in essence comprised of a
technological transition. The technologies that accomplish this transition are often referred to
as being ’sustainable’, implying that the current energy conversion is unsustainable. Sustain-
ability in this regard means: ’The quality of causing little or no damage to the environment
and therefore able to continue (converting energy) for a long time’ [7]. Currently, the tech-
nologies which are thought to realize the transition toward sustainable energy conversion are
mainly solar cells and wind turbines. These differ fundamentally from the current energy
conversion technologies, since they rely on inherently varying energy sources: sunshine and
wind. Whereas a coal based powerplant can burn coal and thereby produce electricity on
demand in the desired amount, solar cells and wind turbines will have signiﬁcant downtime
during the night and in windless periods and may convert excess energy in some periods. One
way of alleviating this intrinsic problem with these technologies, is to use the excess energy
to drive chemical reactions in electrolyzers. The sustainable chemicals created in this fashion
may then be used as either feedstock for industrial processes or as fuel in fuel cells to convert
chemical energy to electricity on demand. These chemical reactions need a catalyst to run
efﬁciently, as an energy barrier prevents spontaneous reaction.
In the transition towards sustainable energy sources, water splitting has been extensively stud-
ied as it offers a way to convert an abundant cheap resource (water) into a high value chemical
feedstock or fuel (hydrogen). Figure 5 shows a possible framework of this new energy infras-
tructure, made by Zhao and coworkers [8]. In this framework, electricity is delivered by solar
cells or wind turbines and then used to conduct electrochemical water splitting via. elec-
trolysis. The hydrogen extracted by electrolysis is used as a chemical feedstock to produce
high value products such as ammonia or methanol or as a fuel in fuel cells to produce elec-
tricity. This type of framework ﬁrst of all requires efﬁcient and cost-effective water splitting
devices. A more direct route; photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting, in which an inte-
grated photo-absorber and electrolyzer splits water via. sunlight, has also been extensively
researched. Restrictions in the current densities allowed by PEC necessitates the use of high
surface area electrodes to generate similar hydrogen mass per time [9]. Furthermore, the in-
herent design of the PEC obviously restricts the energy source. The maturity, applicability
and ﬂexibility of electrochemical water splitting, makes it more attractive despite the lower
energy-to-hydrogen efﬁciency.
4
==PAGE:10==
Figure 5: Framework of a energy infrastructure based on electrochemical water splitting. Sus-
tainable technologies deliver electricity to perform electrolysis, prior to hydrogen utilization
as a feedstock or fuel.
Realizing the framework presented in ﬁgure 5 requires improvements to the efﬁciencies of
the electrochemical reactions that govern water splitting and gas recombination, known as
half-reactions, which are outlined in ﬁgure 6a and detailed in ﬁgure 6b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (a) Overall schematic of water splitting reactions. (b) Hydrogen evolution reaction
(HER), hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen
reduction reaction (ORR). OER and ORR are the 4-electron redox reactions from oxygen to
water.
The Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
Catalysis is the process of accelerating a chemical reaction, by offering an alternative reaction
pathway as shown schematically on ﬁgure 7a. The reactants A and B can react by overcoming
the energy barrier ∆E and then forming AB or by an alternative catalytic reaction pathway,
with a much smaller energy barrier - notice that the enthalpy ∆H remains unchanged for the
overall reaction. In practise, a catalyst is any entity that offers this alternative path, but the
5
==PAGE:11==
catalysts studied in this work are solid state metals. These metallic catalysts offer this alter-
native pathway by letting the reactants bind chemically to their surface.
In order for the catalyst to efﬁciently accelerate the reaction, there must be a balance in the
binding energy of the reactants to the surface. If the reactants are bound too strongly they will
stick to the surface and catalyst will be gradually covered by reactant until no active sites are
available. If the surface is too inert, the reactants will never bind to the surface and thus the
catalyst remains inactive. This balance in the binding energy to the surface is called Sabatiers
principle and can be seen for different metals conducting the hydrogen evolution reaction on
ﬁgure 7b (borrowed from [10] data from [11] trend from [12]).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: (a) Schematic of the principle of catalysis. The reactants A and B can react by the
alternative pathway via. a catalyst. (b) Sabatiers principle shown for the hydrogen evolution
reaction in acid.
The sustainable catalysis discussed previously happens electrochemically, meaning an elec-
tric potential is used as driving force in electrolyzers. Consider the hydrogen evolution reac-
tion in acidic electrolyte, given as
2 H+ + 2 e–
H2
(2)
where the electrons are supplied by the catalyst, which acts as a cathode and the protons are
supplied by the electrolyte. Let ∗denote a free site on the catalyst and thereby the reaction
may proceed as follows
2 H+ + 2 e– + 2 ∗
2 ∗H
(3)
meaning the protons are adsorbed to the catalyst and supplied with an electron to create
adsorbed hydrogen. The reaction may now proceed through two different steps
2 ∗H
H2
(4)
H+ + e– + ∗H
H2
(5)
meaning the adsorbed hydrogen can react on the surface and desorb as gaseous hydrogen or
become supplied with additional proton and electron and then desorb. This is a very simple
reaction mechanism compared to OER where several intermediates (e.g. OOH∗, OH∗and
O∗[1]) are present. The ﬁgure 7b shows the catalytic rate against the hydrogen adsorption
6
==PAGE:12==
energy from which it is clear, that Pt is superior due to its ﬁnely tuned adsorption energy of
hydrogen. By the simplicity of HER, it is a good ’model reaction’ as the possible products
are limited to hydrogen and the reaction mechanism is well described.
Creating Model Catalysts
Engineering new catalysts that ideally enhance the efﬁciency of the sluggish OER and ORR
reactions, requires a link between the theoretical framework, which describes the quantum
mechanical interaction between reactants and catalysts and the experimental results obtained
by testing the catalysts under operating conditions. This is due to the fact, that characteriz-
ing the catalysts under working conditions, is a very complicated and often not feasible, as
the high gas pressures or liquids in a reaction chamber severely limits the characterization
tools available. Aside from this, industrial catalysts and their catalytic reactions are devel-
oped to maximize their efﬁciency, with little regard system simplicity, which makes it hard
to determine cause and effect. Thereby, developing new catalysts and understanding existing
catalytic reactions is often done using model systems. This link is a model system with well
deﬁned properties, in this case well deﬁned catalytic entities.
This work strives to create ’model catalysts’, by the use of the state-of-the-art Omicron sys-
tem, which is capable of depositing mass selected entities using a magnetron sputterhead
connected to a lateral time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. Apart from mass selection, the catalyst mate-
rial, size and loading can be ﬁnely tuned - and the catalysts can be characterized before and
after substrate deposition with surface sensitive spectroscopies in ultra high vacuum.
The catalysts produced by the Omicron system are then sought to be tested by HER, in order
benchmark the reaction and set a gold standard for electrochemical measurements. Further-
more, very small entities of a few atoms are tested by HER to hopefully display new catalytic
properties.
7
==PAGE:13==
2
Experimental Setup
This section describes the working principle and experimental details needed to interpret the
deposition and characterization of small entities.
2.1
Ultra High Vacuum
Consider a surface of Pt oriented in the [100] direction by Miller index notation and assume
the pressure surrounding the surface is 1 atm of atmospheric gas. How many gas molecules
will hit the average Pt surface atom each second under these conditions? Using kinetic gas
theory, the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution can be used to consider the orthogonal velocity
component (only this component will result in surface collision) of the gas relative to the
surface which yields
f(vx)dvx =
r
m
2πkT e
mv2x
2kT dvx
where vx is the velocity component orthogonal to the surface, k is Boltzmann’s constant, m is
the mass of the gas molecules and T is the temperature of the gas. The total ﬂux of the gas
may then be found by integrating all velocities and using that the ﬂux of molecules per vx is
proportional to velocity and the probability distribution
F =
Z ∞
0
r
m
2πkT e
mv2x
2kT vxdvx =
r
kT
2πm
Weighting the ﬂux by the gas density ρ and utilizing the ideal gas relation between gas density
and pressure ρ = P
kT leads to an expression, which relates the ﬂux of particles hitting the
surface per area per time to the pressure
Ftotal(P,T) =
P
√
2πmkT
(6)
Pt has an FCC structure, which results in a planar density of
1
4R2 in the [100] direction,
where R is the atomic radius of 175 pm for Pt. This corresponds to 8.16×1014 Pt atoms
per cm2. The partial pressure of oxygen in the atmosphere is around 0.21 bar (nitrogen is
relatively inert under standard pressure and temperature therefore disregarded) and as such is
is possible to calculate the average number of oxygen molecules that hit the average Pt atom
in the (100) surface per second using equation (6).
Navg,O2 = Ftotal(PO2,Troom)4R2
Pt = 69×106
Thereby, the average Pt atom in the (100) surface is hit 69 million times per second or,
equivalently, that it on average takes 14 ns before the average (100) Pt atom encounters an
oxygen molecule. Given that one of these interactions result in chemical reaction the surface
will no longer be ’clean’, that is, pure Pt. From equation (6) it is also apparent that Ftotal is
proportional to P, meaning the pressure must be reduced by 12 orders of magnitude before the
average atom in the Pt (100) surface is limited to one oxygen molecule interactions during 8
hours. The resulting pressure corresponds to 1×10−10 mbar and is called ultra high vacuum
(UHV) [13].
8
==PAGE:14==
As stated in the above, the encounter between the Pt surface and the oxygen molecule does
not necessarily result in chemical reaction. In order for the molecule to ’stick’ to the surface
other conditions must be fulﬁlled, for example: The molecule has to interact inelastically
with the surface and hit a site capable of adsorption. One way of quantifying these conditions
is to implement an efﬁciency coefﬁcient called the ’sticking coefﬁcient’, which is the proba-
bility of a gaseous species sticking to the surface [14]. This coefﬁcient varies greatly but is
obviously smaller than 1 and thereby the surface in UHV can often be considered free from
signiﬁcant surface adsorbed species for longer than the 8 hours derived from the example.
The low pressure of UHV makes experiments conducted under this condition well controlled,
as opposed to experiments done in a liquid or at atmospheric (or higher) pressure, which
makes UHV experiments great for fundamental studies of surfaces and their properties.
2.1.1
Maintaining Ultra High Vacuum
Creating UHV is done by the use of various vacuum pumps. These pumps operate in dif-
ferent pressure regimes and UHV can usually be obtained by a serially connected roughing
(pressure range [1 bar - 1 mbar]) and turbopump (pressure range [1 mbar - 1×10−10 mbar]).
The UHV system is then heated to around 150 ◦C (a procedure called baking) to degas the
chamber walls and vaporize the adhered water in the system [13].
The Omicron system is also equipped with ion and sublimation pumps to decrease the pres-
sure all the way down to the 1×10−11 mbar regime. The ion pump functions by ionizing the
gas species and then accelerating the ions onto an electrode. The sublimation pump passes
current through a titanium ﬁlament, which then sublimates onto the chamber walls. As pure
titanium is highly reactive, residual gas species will stick to its surface and thereby reduce
the pressure.
Working with UHV systems is associated with high maintenance, as reparation needed in-
side the chamber requires ventilation and subsequent pump down and baking, which for our
system usually takes 24 hours. Furthermore, any loading of samples and in chamber gas ex-
periments requires a careful monitoring of the system pressure as signiﬁcant deviations from
UHV could break the pumps and gauges.
2.2
The Omicron System
The Omicron system consists of ﬁve serially connected chambers that are all (generally) kept
under UHV conditions ( < 10−10 mbar). The overall application of the Omicron system is the
generation, deposition and characterization of mass selected entities under controlled condi-
tions, that is, UHV. Entities may refer to any number of atomic clusters, even down to single
atoms - or nanoparticles with diameters of more than 10 nm. The working principle of the
Omicron System may be summed up as: The cluster source ’creates’ the nanoparticles (or
single atoms/dimers/trimers), the lens system focuses the beam of particles which leave the
cluster source, the time of ﬂight ﬁlter selects the mass of interest. The preparation chamber
is the destination of the particles, where the target substrate is present. The analysis cham-
ber offers pre and post deposition characterization under ultra high vacuum conditions. A
schematic representation of the setup (aside from the analysis chamber) can be seen on ﬁgure
8 (created by Jakob Kibsgaard).
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 8: Schematic overview of the Omicron System - from left to right: Aggregation zone,
lens system and time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter and preparation chamber. Courtesy of Jakob Kibs-
gaard
2.2.1
The Cluster Source and Nanoparticle Growth
A cluster source is, as the name implies, an instrument capable of producing clusters, which
in this respect are nanoparticles or even smaller entities (atoms/dimers and so on). The over-
all requirements of the cluster source when used for mass selected particles are [15]
1. Sufﬁcient particle ﬂux
The ﬂux of particles needs to be high enough to create coverage up to one whole monolayer,
although the typical coverage in this project is smaller (∼1%).
2. Flexibility of source materials for particle generation
The ﬂexibility of the source material, referred to as the target, ultimately limits the ﬂexibility
of the whole system and thereby the research possibilities. Optimally, any material should be
applicable, as the purpose of the system is to create model systems, often guided by density
functional theory calculations, which may suggest interesting properties for a wide range of
catalyst candidates. In practise, the main focus is the transition metals, as these have reactiv-
ities in the desired range.
3. Adjustable particle mass distribution
The ability to control the mass distribution of generated particles, is of vital importance, as
the size of the nanoparticles has been linked to the catalytic properties as reported in [16].
4. Well controlled clean aggregation environment
Cleanliness is another parameter, which must be actively controlled in a cluster source; here
cleanliness means reactive gas species should be kept in the UHV regime (≤10−10 mbar).
Failing to properly control the partial pressure of reactive gas species will likely result in
oxidized particles, if the impurity gas is of atmospheric composition. If one wishes to study
oxides, one can purposely introduce oxygen ’in-ﬂight’ via. controlled and clean lines.
10
==PAGE:16==
5. High ionic particle proportion (for mass selection)
A high ionic particle proportion is mandatory, if the goal is to manipulate the particles using
electric ﬁelds, as when applying a mass ﬁlter. Only charged particles will interact with the
electric pulses generated in a mass ﬁlter and as such, the ionic proportion of the nanoparticles
is directly correlated to the ﬁnal particle ﬂux on the substrate after exiting the mass ﬁlter.
There are many types of cluster sources and one of the most widespread is the ’Sputter Gas
Aggregation Source’ (SGAS), which uses sputtering in conjunction with a magnetron sputter
head to greatly enhance sputter rate and ionic proportion [15]. The SGAS is the cluster source
type used in the Omicron setup, as it fulﬁlls all of the requirements described above.
The generation of catalytic particles happens in the aggregation zone, where a sputter target
is placed within a magnetron sputter head as shown on ﬁgure 9 (from [15]). A cylindrical
magnetic ﬁeld is generated on top of the sputter target and Ar is introduced into the chamber.
The target is negatively biased, which causes the Ar+ ions to sputter the target. The magnetic
ﬁeld conﬁnes a plasma above the target, which will increase the sputtering rate. This plasma
will cause circular erosion of the sputter target [15]. The metal atoms, which successfully
escape the target can now take part in particle growth. The walls of the chamber are cooled
by liquid nitrogen and here the Ar atoms serves as a medium to equalize the temperature
between the metal particles and the chamber walls. He is introduced to participate in the heat
transfer. The He atoms do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the sputtering process, since their
mass is much smaller than Ar - as such the temperature distribution may be altered by the
He ﬂow independently of the sputtering rate [10]. He also serves (with Ar) as facilitator of
agglomeration centers: Due to conservation of energy and momentum, two-atom collisions
are unlikely to create dimers. This instead happens by three-atom collisions with two metal
atoms and one noble gas atom.
M + M + N
M2 + N
where M and N denote the metal and noble gas atoms respectively. Further growth of the
dimers happens either by cluster-cluster growth, as indicated by [17] or by atom-addition.
Previous work with the Omicron system and TEM imaging of deposited particles have indi-
cated, that different target materials may promote different growth processes [10]. A pressure
gradient causes a ﬂux of particle to ﬂow through the exit aperture, where the particles expe-
rience a super sonic expansion, after which the particles no longer grow.
11
==PAGE:17==
Figure 9: Cross sectional view of the magnetron sputter head
2.2.2
Mass Selection: The Time of Flight Mass Filter
When the beam of particles leave the cluster source, a large portion will be ionized as de-
scribed earlier. As such, they can be focused by an electrostatic lens system in order to
increase the amount of particles, which enter the lateral time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter (TOF). Now,
an electric ﬁeld can be applied on the focused beam as the following relation holds
a = qE
m
(7)
where a is the acceleration, E is the electric ﬁeld, q is the charge and m is the mass of the
particle. From the relation it is clear that a ∝E with proportionality constant q/m - in other
words: Particles with the same mass to charge ratio will experience the same acceleration
when exposed to electric ﬁeld E [18]. A schematic representation of the TOF can be seen on
ﬁgure 10 (borrowed from [10]). When the particle beam enters the TOF, an electric pulse is
generated in plate 1, which causes the ionized particles to accelerate upwards. An identical
but opposite pulse is now generated in plate 2, which changes the trajectory of the beam back
to the original state - but laterally displaced. As such it is possible to ﬁlter the particles based
on their m
q -ratio. However, this design has one important drawback; since
m
q = 2m
2q = 3m
3q ... = Nm
Nq
it is impossible to ﬁlter the double mass given it is also doubly charged. This goes for all
integer couples of charge and mass, but in reality only the double m/q-ratio posses an issue,
as tuning of the cluster source conditions allows for a sufﬁcient narrow mass distribution to
neglect higher order mass/charge ratios.
12
==PAGE:18==
Figure 10: Schematic of the principle of the lateral time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter
The ﬁnite aperture at the exit of the time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter means the particle beam will
have a width. This width will ultimately determine the resolution of the mass ﬁlter. The
diameter of the exit aperture can be altered corresponding to a resolution of [18]
m
∆m = [20−50]
(8)
where m is the deposited mass, ∆m is the mass spread and the range [20-50] denotes the
resolution obtained for maximum to minimum aperture diameter respectively. Reducing the
exit aperture yields a smaller mass spread at the cost of a reduced signal. For the everyday
operation of the Omicron system, the aperture is left at maximum exit aperture opening,
corresponding to a resolution of
m
∆m = 20. This corresponds to a size error of ∼0.1 nm for
4 nm particles, which is usually considered acceptable precision.
2.2.3
Deposition of Small Entities and Sample Coverage Considerations
When the particles leave the time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter they are deposited on a sample through
an aperture with a diameter of 4.5 mm, which is carved into a metal ’ﬂag’ (ﬂat piece of metal),
connected electrically to an electrometer that measures the deposition current. Both the aper-
ture and the sample are biased (same voltage), to efﬁciently guide the particle beam onto the
substrate. If the sample voltage is too strong, the deposited entity may fragment on impact
with the substrate or become embedded within the substrate. The fragmentation or embed-
ding of a deposited entity upon substrate deposition is termed ’hard landing’ and is sought
to be avoided. The ’soft landing’ regime is the ’hard landing’ counterpart and is deﬁned as
the regime where the energy of impact is below the binding (cohesive) energy of the cluster
[19]. This will generally preserve the composition of the cluster, but not necessarily the ge-
ometry. As a rule of thumb the soft landing regime is typically around ∼1 eV per atom in the
deposited cluster. The boundary between the hard and soft landing regimes for a given entity
and substrate is generally not known and depends on several different factors such as surface
energy, hardness and temperature, but has been simulated for some elements in [19].
Apart from the bias, the sample is connected electrically to a highly sensitive electrometer.
As the vast majority of deposited entities are singly charged, the current measured by the
electrometer will directly correspond to the number of entities present on the sample. From
this, the projected coverage can be found, where projected means the cross sectional area of
the deposited entity. The projected coverage is used as a way to estimate the active area of
the deposited species, since the catalytic action happens at the surface of the entities. For
nanoparticles, a spherical approximation is used, meaning the nanoparticles are idealized as
perfect spheres, with the density of bulk Pt. The full calculation of projected coverage for
nanoparticles is shown in appendix B.1.
13
==PAGE:19==
For entities smaller than nanoparticles, the spherical approximation is thought to become in-
valid, as the entities shape becomes strongly dependant on atomic number as shown schemat-
ically on ﬁgure 11. As evident from the illustration, the atoms are thought to be structured
according to the closest packing of spheres. For entities with less than four atoms, these struc-
tures will be two-dimensional. Thereby, the projected coverage can be found by assuming
organization according to an FCC (111) surface. The calculation for the projected coverage
is shown in appendix B.2.
Figure 11: Schematic illustration of single atom, dimer and trimer entities. Notice the geom-
etry of the trimer, which is the most efﬁcient packing of spheres.
In order to promote well dispersed particles on the sample surface, the sample is moved in
a pattern during the deposition. There are two different patterns used in this work; a square
pattern and a raster pattern. The square pattern is a quadratic 1 by 1 mm pattern and the raster
pattern consists of several parallel lines in the horizontal direction, while gradually moving
vertically at the end of each line. The two patterns have different cycle durations to ensure
that different deposition durations make for several complete cycles. Both of these patterns
effectively increases the deposition area beyond the sample boundary. This means, that a
’raster factor’ must be either calculated or found by other means, in order to determine the
projected coverage by number of charges on the sample. This has been done analytically for
the square pattern shown in appendix A and simulated for the raster pattern by Jakob Ejler.
2.3
Tuning the Cluster Source Conditions
The conditions inside the cluster source inﬂuence the mass distribution of the particles. Ex-
tensive work with the setup over several years has shown that these conditions drift over
time - even though the tunable parameters (such as gas ﬂow or magnetron power) stay the
same. This effect is measurable during a single deposition, as shown in [10]. Currently, two
different mechanisms are proposed as drivers to this shift in mass distributions; uneven tem-
perature distributions and geometric alteration of the sputter target. In short, it takes several
hours of liquid nitrogen cooling, before the aggregation zone reaches thermal equilibrium,
which is often not feasible. Additionally, the erosion of the sputter target described earlier,
will change the plasma geometry and thereby the sputter rate. These discrepancies are sought
to be eliminated by pre-deposition tuning [10].
The parameters available for tuning are: Aggregation zone length, magnetron power, Ar and
He ﬂow, temperature and pressure. These parameters interact in complicated ways, which
makes the tuning effort a ’trial and error’ procedure. There are however some overall guide-
lines that sometimes work
1. Increasing the length of the aggregation zone →larger particles
14
==PAGE:20==
2. Reducing temperature →larger particles
3. Increasing pressure →larger particles
4. Increasing magnetron power →larger particle ﬂux
The contribution from changes in the Ar and He ﬂow is very unpredictable. When these
parameters are adjusted during the tuning process, the mass spectrum of the particles is con-
tinuously monitored by letting the particles land onto the biased metal ﬂag in the preparation
chamber. This ﬂag is electrically connected to an electrometer, which is synchronized to
the time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter, thereby making it possible to follow the changes to the mass
distribution caused by the tuning.
Tuning for Mass Selected Particles
Tuning for mass selected nanoparticles is done by initializing the conditions, that based on
previous experiments comes closest to the wanted particle size. In general this entails a
large aggregation zone length (250 mm), high Ar and He ﬂows (40 ml/min), low temperature
(−200 ◦C shroud) and medium magnetron power (15 W). When depositing nanoparticles,
the lens system, time of ﬂight ﬁlter, aperture and sample must be positively biased, as the
nanoparticles are most likely to become negatively ionized. After this is done, a mass spec-
trum is obtained in a large mass range ∼(1k-1M) amu and the mass distribution is assessed.
Figure 12 shows a schematic representation of the mass distribution before and after tuning,
where m– denoted the sought after particle mass and 2 m2– denotes the doubly charged double
mass.
Figure 12: Schematic of the tuning principle for nanoparticles. The current obtained for
nanoparticles is usually around 50-100 pA.
In this made up example, the double mass 2 m2– is larger than the sought after mass m– and
going from the broad untuned distribution to the sharp distribution is a matter of changing the
parameters introduced in the above, until a satisfactory current and single/double mass ratio
is obtained. This ratio should be larger than 10, as the double ionization is generally assumed
to be 10 times less probable than the single ionization. If this holds, that single/double mass
ratio on the sample will be at least 100, which considered acceptable.
15
==PAGE:21==
Tuning for Single Atoms, Dimers and Trimers
Tuning the cluster source to produce signiﬁcant single atom current, is done by minimiz-
ing the aggregation zone length (150 mm), have little or no He ﬂow and a small Ar ﬂow (4
ml/min), room temperature and high magnetron power (35 W). The single atoms are posi-
tively charged and thus the lens syste, time of ﬂight ﬁlter, aperture and sample must be neg-
atively biased. Initializing these conditions will always produce a decent single atom signal,
as shown schematically on ﬁgure 13. The single to double mass ratio is usually larger than
10, even before tuning and the tuning effort is generally much simpler than for nanoparticles.
Figure 13: Schematic of the tuning principle for single atoms. The current obtained for single
atoms is usually around 2-5 nA.
Tuning for dimers is basically the same, but the current is generally 10 times smaller. This
can usually be increased by cooling and introducing He. Tuning for trimers has only been
done once in my time, by N. Secher and it required a substrate potential of 48 V, which is
outside the soft landing regime.
16
==PAGE:22==
3
Characterization and Catalytic Performance
This section describes the fundamental principles governing the techniques used to charac-
terize small entities in this work.
3.1
Ion Scattering Spectroscopy
Ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS) considers the energy spectra of inert ions, typically He or
Ne, which have interacted with a surface. This is done by accelerating ions towards a surface
and then measure their kinetic energy after the collision, using a hemi-spherical analyzer
(introduced in section 3.3). The interaction between the ion and the surface may be modelled
as a 2D elastic collision between an incoming body (ion) and a body at rest (surface atom).
As such, the energy and momentum are conserved, which leads to the following relations
Figure 14: Schematic representation of elastic collision between moving body and body at
rest, used to model the scattering of He+ on a surface. Mi and vi is the mass and velocity of
the incident ion and Ms and vs is the mass and velocity of the surface atom.
1
2Miv2
i = 1
2Miv2
1 + 1
2Msv2
s
Mi⃗vi = Mi⃗v1 +Ms⃗vs
from geometric considerations, illustrated schematically on ﬁgure 14 the following holds
Mivi = Miv1cosθ +Msvscosφ
0 = Miv1sinθ −Msvssinφ
eliminating φ and vs one obtains
v1
vi
= ±(M2
s −M2
i sinθ)1/2 −Micosθ
Ms +Mi
17
==PAGE:23==
invoking conservation of energy the following energy ratio is found (only considering the
positive solution)
E1
Ei
=
"
(M2
s −M2
i sin2θ)1/2 +Micosθ
Ms +Mi
#2
(9)
which now only depends on the mass of the surface atom Ms, the mass of the incoming ion
Mi and the scattering angle θ. As such, the mass of the surface atom may be found, when
the other parameters are measured or known, which is done by bombarding the sample with
ions of known mass and energy and then measuring the energy of the outgoing ion beam at a
speciﬁc angle[13].
Investigating equation (9) by plotting the energy of the scattered ion as function of the tar-
get mass for different ion sources gives insight into the resolution of the ISS technique, as
showcased by ﬁgure 15 (borrowed from [20]). As evident, the resolution decreases dramati-
cally for the heavier elements and the entirety of the 5d metals are compressed into an energy
range of a few electron volts. This can be mitigated by using heavier ion source elements as
apparent from the ﬂattened Ne and Ar slopes, but it comes at the cost of increased sputter
damage, since heavier ions carry larger momentum.
Detection of the ions post surface interaction is done by the use of a hemi-spherical analyzer.
When the ions hit the surface the vast majority are neutralized (> 99 %) and only the remain-
ing are (< 1%) are detected, as the scattering cross sections are of ∼˚A
2 magnitude, causing
ISS to be extremely surface sensitive. Furthermore, ISS can detect very small amounts of
matter sitting on the surface, which makes is ideal to probe for possible contaminants and
when paired with XPS, it gives thorough insight into the outermost atomic layers of a sam-
ple.
Figure 15: ISS resolution for different ion sources. The entirety of the 5d metals which are
typically investigated in the cluster source setup are compressed into a few eV. This can be
mitigated by the use of heavier ion sources and the cost of increased sputter damage.
3.2
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
The greatest shortcoming of ISS is its resolution for heavy elements, but it also suffers from
lack of quantiﬁability. X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) makes use of the photo-
18
==PAGE:24==
electric effect and is a great complementary technique to ISS. The photoelectric effect is the
process of energy transfer between photons and electrons. A photon with sufﬁcient energy
may eject an electron from its orbital, which is then called a photoelectron. The kinetic en-
ergy of the photoelectron depends on the initial photon energy, the binding energy of the
electron and the workfunction of the solid. A schematic representation of photoemission is
seen on ﬁgure 16a borrowed from [13]. The kinetic energy of the photoelectron relative to
the vacuum level is given as
Ekin = hν −EB −Φ
(10)
where h is Plancks constant, ν is the frequency of the incoming photon EB is the binding en-
ergy of the electron and Φ is the workfunction of the solid. This means, that by measuring the
kinetic energy of the photoelectrons (using a hemi-spherical analyzer), it is possible to map
the orbital states of the probed solid. These orbital states comprise a elemental ﬁngerprint
for the different elements, which makes XPS ideal in identifying the elements present in a
sample. Figure 16a shows a schematic representation of the photoemission process, where
the ejected electron is illustrated as an empty state, comparable to the orbital state it inhabited
initially. Figure 16b shows the inelastic mean free path for different electron energies. This
trend line is commonly referred to as the universal curve, as the mean free path seems to be
approximately independent of the element investigated. This trend can be manipulated to our
favor; if we limit ourselves to the analysis of photoelectrons in the ∼50 eV to 1000 eV range,
only electrons escaping the 5-15 ˚A outermost layers of the substrate will be analyzed. Strictly
speaking, this means XPS is not a surface sensitive technique, as is holds information about
up to 10 atomic layers (depending on the structure of the investigated solid). It is possible to
increase the surface sensitivity by altering the angle of incidence of the x-ray source.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: (a) Schematic representation of the photoelectric process. (b) Inelastic mean free
path for different electron energies. Electrons in the 50 eV to 1000 eV range have mean free
paths comparable to the thickness of less than 10 atomic layers.
In order to obtain well deﬁned peaks in an XPS spectrum, the x-ray source must be approxi-
mately monochromatic, meaning the photons should have the same energy. This is achieved
by electron bombardment of an anode, usually Al or Mg. The electronically excited anode
will relax and emit a photon with energy equal to the energy difference between the excited
state and the ﬁnal state of electron. Taking the Mg anode as an example, the relaxation of
19
==PAGE:25==
2 p3/2 or 2 p1/2 into the 1 s state has an energy of 1253.6 eV (±0.5eV due to spin-orbit cou-
pling). However, due to the extremely short timescales of these transitions, the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle does not allow for a perfectly monochromatic x-ray (apart from the spin-
orbit contribution); since ∆E∆t ≥h
2π , there is a spread of nearly 1 eV for the most intense Mg
radiation, called MgKα12 [13].
There is range of other possible transitions in the Mg anode and the most relevant ones are the
MgKα3 and MgKα4 transitions, which is caused by the double ionization of Mg. They have
energitic shifts and relative intensities of (8.4 eV, 9.2 %)α3 and (10.0 eV, 5.1 %)α4 respec-
tively and give rise to a phenomenon known as ’satellite’ peaks. A satellite peak, is therefore
a less intense version of the peak caused by the main line radiation, which will always have
the same energetic shift. These can principally be avoided by the use of a monochromator,
which eliminates the signal of all satellites by diffraction, at the cost of a signiﬁcantly reduced
signal [13].
Another important effect happens when the photoelectron leaves the atom. It has a chance of
exciting the atom above the ground state, which causes the photoelectron to lose energy. This
effect is called ’shake-up’, since a smaller kinetic energy of the photoelectron translates to a
higher binding energy in the XPS spectrum.
3.3
The Hemi-Spherical Analyzer
The hemi-spherical analyzer, which is used to detect the ions and electrons in ISS and XPS, is
a type of electrostatic energy analyzer. This analyzer uses an electric potential and geometry
to measure the energy of electrons and ions in the 10 eV to 2000 eV range. A transfer lens
system is used to guide the charged species from the sample to the entrance of the analyzer. A
schematic representation of the hemi-spherical analyzer can be seen on ﬁgure 17 (borrowed
from [13])
Figure 17: Schematic illustration of the hemi-spherical analyzer
The analyzer consists of two concentric hemi-spheres, which guides the charged species from
the entrance slit to the exit slit. At the entrance slit, a retarding grid is mounted, which only
allows electrons of certain energy to pass and sets the potential between the two hemi-spheres
[13]. The resolution is a constant percentage (∼1 %) of the pass energy (∼5 eV) and the sig-
nal is proportional to the pass energy. This creates a trade-off between resolution and signal,
which can be compensated by conducting several measurements in the desired energy range
and taking the average.
The hemi-spherical analyzer can be operated in two modes, constant analyzer energy (CAE)
and constant retard ratio (CRR). In CAE mode, the pass energy is held at a constant value and
the transfer lens system retards the charged species to the desired energy. This is typically
20
==PAGE:26==
used for XPS spectra. In CRR mode, the retardation by the transfer lens system is constant
and the pass energy is adjusted to facilitate this. This reduces sensitivity at low kinetic ener-
gies and is usually used for ISS spectra.
3.4
Catalytic Performance by Cyclic Voltametry
The Nernst equation relates the potential of an electrochemical cell to the standard cell po-
tential and the concentration of the reduced and oxidized species, formally
E = E0 + RT
nF ln[O]
[R]
(11)
where E0 is the standard potential, R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, n is the num-
ber of electrons being transferred, F is Faraday’s constant, [O] is the concentration of the
oxidized species and [R] is the concentration of the reduced species. The standard potential
is the thermodynamically determined potential under standard conditions of the redox cou-
ple taking part in the reaction. For the water splitting reactions HER and OER (introduced
earlier), the standard potential is E0 = 0V and E0 = 1.23V respectively, measured against
the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Examining equation 11, it is clear that E = E0,
whenever the concentration of the reduced and oxidized species is equal. Thereby, in order
to shift the reaction towards more product, E must be altered. For an electrochemical device
splitting water, the two half reactions HER and OER happen at the cathode and anode repec-
tively and the overall standard cell potential is then E0
cell = E0
cathode −E0
anode. For the splitting
of water, this amounts to E0
cell = −1.23V vs. RHE using the standard potentials introduced
previously. The minus indicates that a potential must be applied for the reaction to proceed.
The efﬁciency of an electrochemical cell may be quantiﬁed by the overpotential η, which is
a metric of the additional voltage required to drive the reaction, as compared to the thermo-
dynamically determined reduction potential [21]. The overall overpotential of the cell can be
split into its constituent contributors, such as the ohmic resistance, mass transport limitations
and ﬁnally reaction kinetics. The overpotential is given as
η = Eapplied −Eeq
(12)
where Eeq is given from the Nernst equation 11 and Eapplied is the potential, which is ap-
plied in practise. By this notion, reducing the overpotential for a given current density is
equivalent to increasing the efﬁciency of the reaction and this can be achieved by catalyzing
the electrochemical reactions, thereby improving the kinetic component of the overpotential.
Comparing different catalysts for e.g. HER must be done under standardized conditions, as
the overpotential depends on several factors beyond the elemetal composition of the catalyst.
The 3-electrode cell
Finding the overpotential of deposited entities in this work is done using a 3 electrode cell,
which is shown on ﬁgure 18 (made by Taus Holtug, borrowed with permission from [22]).
The 3 electrodes are the working, counter and reference electrodes. The working electrode
(WE) is where the investigated reaction takes place, e.g. HER. The counter electrode (CE)
conducts the other half reaction, in this case OER. The reference electrode delivers the po-
tential scale by the potential of a stable redox couple. The reference electrode is physically
displaced from the WE and CE, to avoid contamination of these electrodes. All the electrodes
are ionically connected by a liquid electrolyte. In this schematic, a fourth ’dummy’ electrode
is also available to control the potential during submersion of the working electrode in the
21
==PAGE:27==
electrolyte.
Inlet 
(heating medium)
Gas
Electrolyte
Dummy 
electrode
Counter
electrode
Jacket
Outlet
(heating medium)
Luggin
capillary
Reference
electrode
Rotating 
disk electrode
Figure 18: Schematic illustration of the 3-electrode setup. The 3 electrodes are the working
electrode where half reaction of interest takes place, the counter electrode, where the other
half reaction takes place and the reference electrode, which delivers the potential scale by a
stable redox couple.
The idea is then to measure the kinetic component of the current for HER and then translate
it to the kinetic part of the overpotential. This is done by continuous rotation of the working
electrode, which forces a steady ﬂow of electrolyte to the WE by convection and thereby re-
duces the mass transport limitations. Furthermore, the electrolyte is saturated with hydrogen
gas, in order to maintain a well diﬁned stable potential cf. equation 11. If the electrolyte is
not saturated, the effect will be an earlier onset vs. RHE.
The potential of the WE (compared to the reference electrode) may now be cycled in the
desired potential range and the potential between the WE and CE is logged and the resulting
current is measured. The result is a cyclic voltammetry curve, which relates the potential to
the (hopefully) kinetic current.
From the CV curve the overpotential at a given current density can be found, simply by
dividing the current with the area of the working electrode. Furthermore, the mass activity of
the catalyst can be found, by dividing the current with the total catalyst loading.
22
==PAGE:28==
4
Pt Nanoparticles for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
4.1
Introduction
The current state-of-the-art electrocatalyst for HER, meaning the electrocatalyst, which pro-
duces the smallest overpotential at I = 10mAcm−2, is Pt. Due to the scarcity of Pt and
thereby price and scalability options [23], a signiﬁcant scientiﬁc effort has been put into ﬁnd-
ing abundant and cheap replacements. However, this vast focus and eagerness to replace Pt
has also meant an inﬂation in publications reporting a catalyst capable of obtaining over-
potentials lower or similar to that of commercial Pt/C catalysts, while neglecting other key
parameters, such as mass loading. In May 2019 J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff published a
comment in the scientiﬁc journal Nature Energy [24], which established the need for a more
coherent and controlled reporting on new catalysts for acidic and alkaline water splitting.
First of all, it is argued, that the current bottleneck in scaling acidic water electrolysis to the
terawatt scale is the efﬁciency of OER, which has an overpotential 3-4 times greater than
HER [24] using an Ir-based catalyst; an element even more scarce than Pt [23]. Secondly,
the race for ﬁnding better earth abundant HER (and OER) catalysts has led to increased focus
on claiming activity records. One of the issues with current activity record reporting, is the
comparison to ’state-of-the-art’ Pt, where researches erroneously use Pt in a less than ideal
condition, which in turn underestimates the performance of the reference and lowers the bar
of the activity record. Additionally, the mass loadings of some reported catalysts (e.g. sul-
ﬁdes and phosphides) are increased to unscalable levels, as a larger catalyst loading reduces
the overpotential for a given current. This makes it seem like the catalyst performs better
according to the I = 10mAcm−2 paradigm, but in reality the intrinsic catalytic activity is
very poor. The result is a catalyst, which would be even more expensive to scale than Pt
[25]. Finally, a counter electrode of Pt should be avoided, when testing for HER, as even
very small amounts of anodically dissolved Pt might redeposit on the working electrode and
signiﬁcantly enhance activity.
This motivates the need for an HER benchmark study, in which the relevant parameters are
carefully controlled and measured to set the standard of HER electrochemical performance
measurements. The Omicron System is well suited for creating and depositing state-of-the-
art Pt nanoparticles, as the UHV environment ensures the deposition of clean nanoparticles
with well deﬁned mass (and thereby size). Furthermore, the mass loading can be carefully
controlled, by measuring the deposition current. Finally, a counter electrode of Ir/IrO2 has
been made by Johannes Novak via. electrodeposition, to prevent additional Pt from being
deposited on the working electrode.
4.2
Experimental Procedure
In the following, the preparation, deposition, characterization and electrochemical testing of
Pt nanoparticles of different mass loading is described. The different loadings are (5, 10,
20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000 and 5000) ngcm−2 spanning three orders of magnitude. Three
100 ngcm−2 samples are made to test repeatability.
4.2.1
Preparation of Glassy Carbon and Deposition of Pt Nanoparticles
The glassy carbon stubs were sonicated for 10 min in ethanol and subsequently rinsed in ultra
clean (18.2 MΩcm) water and then sonicated one more time. The stubs were kept in concen-
23
==PAGE:29==
trated (67 %) nitric acid for one hour and then rinsed in ultra clean water and sonicated again.
After cleaning, the GC stubs were inserted in either Mo or Ta sample holders and then
mounted in the Omicron system. The GC stubs were subjected to 1000 keV 10 mA Ar sput-
ter cleaning for 10 minutes to completely remove the outer layers and expose a clean carbon
structure, details in appendix C. After sputter cleaning the GC stubs were characterized by
ISS and XPS to verify a contamination free surface environment. Figure 19 shows a represen-
tative XPS spectrum after the Ar sputter cleaning for a GC stub mounted in a Mo stage. The
full survey in ﬁgure 19a shows photoelectrons from the carbon (C) substrate, oxygen (O) and
the molybdenum (Mo) stage, which is all expected. A closer look on the 0 to 600 eV range
is shown on ﬁgure 19b, from which the doublet splitting of Mo 3d and Mo 3p can be viewed
more clearly as well as the Mgα3 and Mgα4 satellite peaks for the C 1s orbital (8.4 ev shift
9.2% rel. intensity and 10 ev shift 5.1% rel. intensity respectively) from the Mgα source.
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: (a) XPS survey scan of a glassy carbon stub in Mo sample holder post Ar sputter.
The X-ray source is Mgα(1253.7eV), the range is 1253.7 eV to 0 eV, step size 0.3 eV and a
constant analyzer energy of 50 eV was used. (b) Close-up of the XPS survey to the left in the
energy range 600 eV to 0 eV.
Figure 20 shows a representative ISS spectrum after sputter cleaning. The adventitious carbon
signal is always present on samples which have been exposed to the atmosphere and small
amounts of chemical residues (Na) from the chemical cleaning are usually present, just like
Ar ions from the sputter cleaning procedure are sometimes visible if the surface is otherwise
clean. Notice, that apart from Mo from the stage, the signal ﬂattens after 830 eV, which
according to equation 9 rules out elements with atomic mass higher than 98 amu.
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 20: ISS of GC stub post Ar sputter cleaning. The ion source is 1 keV He+ and the
analyzer angle is 146.7°. The ion beam was scanned in a 1 by 1 mm raster pattern and the
analyzer was kept at a constant retard ratio of 5 eV.
The cluster source was tuned to facilitate the deposition of (370±18.5)kamu Pt nanoparticles
at mass resolution m
∆m = 20 (least resolution, maximum signal), which corresponds to a parti-
cle diameter of (3.8±0.1)nm, assuming the particles are perfect spheres in accordance with
appendix B.1. This particle size was initially chosen to compare the HER activity with com-
mercial Pt nanoparticles. Figure 21 shows a representative mass distribution before and after
deposition of the Pt nanoparticles. There is a local minimum around mass 160 kamu, which
indicates a cluster-cluster growth mechanism, as the global minimum is around 320 kamu.
The double/single mass ratio was calculated to be > 40. The distribution is shifted towards
higher masses post deposition and the overall current is reduced by approximately 20 %,
which is likely a temperature effect.
Figure 21: Mass spectrum of Pt nanoparticles prior and after deposition of mass 370 kamu.
The transparent blocks indicate the resolution as deﬁned by the exit aperture in the time of
ﬂight mass ﬁlter.
After ensuring a sufﬁcient current of the desired mass 370 kamu nanoparticles and a high
single/double mass ratio, the GC stub is placed behind the 4.5 mm aperture and moved in a
25
==PAGE:31==
pattern which depends on the desired loading. The potential of the sample is set to 48 V, cor-
responding to a ’soft landing’ of the nanoparticles. Loadings in the range (5−100)ngcm−2
were moved in a 1 by 1 mm square pattern, whereas (200−5000)ngcm−2 used a raster pat-
tern. This change in patterns was made to ensure, that full cycles through the pattern was
possible, as the smallest loadings were deposited in a matter of seconds. Figure 22 shows the
deposition current for the 5 ngcm−2 loading sample. The ’leak current’ comes from the ﬁnite
value of the resistance between the sample and ground and is around 6 pA for these deposi-
tions. This must be subtracted when calculating the loading. From the deposition current, the
total charge and thereby total mass can be found as all nanoparticles are assumed to be singly
charged. Based on the resolution of the time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter, the precision of the loading
can be estimated according to appendix B.1.
Figure 22: Deposition current for the 5 ngcm−2 loading sample.
The beam is initially
’blanked’, while the GC stub is moved into the beam trajectory. The raster pattern is ini-
tiated and the deposition is executed by ’unblanking’ the beam and monitoring the deposited
charge until the desired loading is present.
Table 1 shows an overview of all samples with both the target loading and the actual loading
calculated based on the deposition current. The error is found by using the TOF resolution,
which for 370 kamu nanoparticles is 18.5 kamu and then backtracking that to a mass loading
using the spherical approximation showed in appendix B.1. Due to the absolute resolution of
the TOF, the error caused by this is effectively a percentage of the target loading whereas the
actual loading value is determined by the precision of the operator in blanking the beam at the
correct time. The single/double mass ratio is calculated by measuring the 370 kamu current
divided by the 740 kamu current after subtraction of the leak current. A more correct way
would be to integrate the current in the (370 ± 18.5)kamu and divide it with the integrated
current in the (740±37)kamu region after subtracting the leak current.
26
==PAGE:32==
ID
Target loading
Actual loading
single/double mass ratio
[ngcm−2]
[ngcm−2]
JoPt18
5
4.8±0.3
22
JoPt13
10
8.9±0.5
20
JoPt14
20
18.3±1.5
44
JoPt7
50
51±3
55
JoPt17
100
98±5
50
JoPt19
100
100±5
22
JoPt20
100
100±5
22
JoPt4
200
200±11
30
JoPt15
500
488±24
30
JoPt11
1000
1011±53
15
JoPt12
5000
5022±260
11
Table 1: Overview of deposited samples. The loading range spans three orders of magnitude
from 5 ngcm−2 to 5000 ngcm−2. The error is derived from the resolution of the TOF-MS.
Three samples with loading 100 ngcm−2 were deposited for repeatability.
4.2.2
Characterization of Pt Nanoparticles on Glassy Carbon
After deposition, the samples were transferred into the analysis chamber, where XPS and ISS
was carried out to verify a successful deposition. A successful deposition is signiﬁed by XPS
signals that match with the relative loadings and ISS which shows Pt on the surface of the
support. Figures 23 and 24 shows the XPS and ISS data of selected samples as identiﬁed by
their theoretical loading, that is, the target loading. Figure 23a shows the XPS data of the
high loading samples and there is a clear correlation between the Pt 4f signal and the loading.
For the 5000 ngcm−2 sample the signal is large enough to produce visible Mgα3/4 satelittes,
which is normally only the case for the C 1s orbital. For the medium loading samples in
ﬁgure 23b, there seems to be good agreement between the signal and theoretical loading,
as the 200 ngcm−2 shows around twice the signal as the 100 ngcm−2, which all show sim-
ilar signals. This is further indication (beyond the measured deposition current), that the
100 ngcm−2 repeatability samples have similar loadings. The loadings 20, 10 and 5 ngcm−2
are below the detection limit of the XPS as evident from ﬁgure 24a, but no data is available
for the 5 ngcm−2 sample due to equipment maintenance. Figure 24b shows the ISS data for
20, 10 and 5 ngcm−2 samples, which veriﬁes that Pt is present on the surface. The Mo signal
is signiﬁcant for the 5 ngcm−2 sample, which indicates misalignment between the sample
and ion beam. Also apparent from 24b is the adventitious carbon signal for the low energy
ions as well as a slight F signal, which is a known contamintant in the analysis chamber.
27
==PAGE:33==
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: XPS post deposition of different Pt nanoparticles loadings. The relative intensity
of the Pt 4f doublet corresponds to the difference in loading. (a) 500, 1000 and 5000 ngcm−2
Pt nanoparticles on GC stub, the Mgα3/4 satellite is visible for the 5000 ngcm−2 sample (b)
200 ngcm−2 and three different 100 ngcm−2 Pt nanoparticles on GC stub for repeatability
measurements. The 4f Pt doublet shows similar intensity for the three 100 ngcm−2 samples.
(a)
(b)
Figure 24: (a) XPS of the 50, 20 and 10 ngcm−2 samples. The 20 and 10 ngcm−2 samples
are below the detection limit of the analyzer.(b) ISS of the 20, 10 and 5 ngcm−2 samples. The
ion source is 1 keV He+ and the detector angle is 146.7° Trace amounts of Ar from sputtering
is visible and the 5 ngcm−2 is misaligned, which creates an Mo sample holder signal and
increases the oxygen signal as well.
4.3
Electrochemical Performance
To test the HER mass activity for the different sample loadings, the GC stubs with nanoparti-
cles were mounted on rotating disk electrode in a 3 electrode electrochemical cell similar to
the one shown in ﬁgure 18. A counter electrode of Ir/IrO2 was used as well as a Hg/HgSO4
reference electrode. The electrolyte consisted of 0.5 M H2SO4 and the working electrode was
rotated at a pace of 1600 rpm. The electrolyte was continuously supplied with hydrogen gas.
The potential of the working electrode was cycled between 0.2 V and −0.5 V vs. RHE and
the current between the counter and working electrode was measured. The CV curve for the
5 ngcm−2 sample can be seen on ﬁgure 25, for a selected cycle.
28
==PAGE:34==
Figure 25: Selected single CV scan for the 5 ngcm−2 Pt nanoparticles on glassy carbon
support. The counter electrode was Ir/IrO2. Electrolyte was 0.5 M H2SO4 and rotation was
1600 rpm.
From this cycle, the mass activity for the overpotential at 10 mA/cm−2 can be found. Figure
26 shows the HER mass activity aginst the overpotential at 10 mAcm−2 for different mass
loadings of Pt NPs. The green points refer to the (currently tested) samples in table 1, iden-
tiﬁed by their mass loading. The red points refer to a commercial 2.8 nm Pt/C reference,
synthesized by drop casting of an ink - details in appendix D. The error in the Pt/C loading
caused by the error in Pt wt. % from the manufacturer was estimated to 2.5 %. The Pt/C ref-
erence was tested using a Pt counter electrode - breaking the fundamental principle outlined
in the introduction of the chapter.
29
==PAGE:35==
Figure 26: HER mass activity against the overpotential for different mass loadings of 3.8 nm
Pt NPs from cluster source deposition (green) and 2.8 nm commercial Pt NPs by drop casting
synthesis.
4.4
Discussion and Summary
Judging from a combination of the XPS, ISS and deposition current, it appears the deposition
of (3.8±0.1)nm Pt nanoparticles happened successfully. There is a relative correspondance
with the 4f Pt orbital intensity as measured with XPS and the mass loadings and ISS shows,
that Pt is present on the surface. The accuracy of the actual loading is acceptable, although the
TOF resolution introduces an error of 5 % - this amounts to ∼50 ngcm−2 and 250 ngcm−2
for the largest mass loadings of 1000 ngcm−2 and 5000 ngcm−2 respectively.
Due to human error, the nanoparticles from the cluster source (3.8 ± 0.1)nm have a differ-
ent size than the drop casted commercial nanoparticles of 2.8 nm. This means, that the two
measurement ’series’ have different active areas, even though their loadings are the same.
Therefore, the mass activity of the two series can not be directly compared, as the commer-
cial Pt nanoparticles have approximately 30 % larger projected coverage. Furthermore, the
commercial Pt nanoparticles were tested using a Pt counter electrode, which defeats the pur-
pose of making a benchmark measurement, as even very small amounts of CE Pt dissolving
and redepositing of the WE could easily have a signiﬁcant impact on the low loading samples
[24].
These considerations might be used to explain, why the smaller loadings of Pt have higher
overpotentials than their commercial counterpart, even though the cluster source nanoparti-
cles are generally considered to be superior due to their cleanliness.
30
==PAGE:36==
Interpreting the mass activity on ﬁgure 26 requires a careful consideration of the hydrogen
evolution reaction mechanism. It appears like high mass loadings are completely unfeasible,
as the overpotential is only reduced by a tiny amount for a large additional loading. However,
there are two different possible mass transport limitations in HER - the adsorption of a proton
and the desorption of H2. The overpotential is measured at 10 mAcm−2, which corresponds
directly to the current density of protons adsorbed on the surface, assuming the 0.5 M H2SO4
electrolyte does not limit proton availability. Thereby, the turnover of hydrogen per site is
much smaller for the large loadings compared the the small loadings, simply because there are
far fewer proton-electron pairs per site. This means, that for large loadings, the mass activity
is likely limited by the availability of protons - and might be signiﬁcantly increased by higher
rotation or current density. For the small loadings, each site has to turnover relatively large
amounts of hydrogen per site - meaning the desorbtion of hydrogen is likely limiting the mass
activity. In real water splitting devices, these rate limiting steps must be considered to ﬁnd
the optimal (and scaleable) mass loading of Pt.
Outlook
Several improvements can be made to future measurements of this type. For a meaningful
comparison between commercial Pt nanoparticles and Pt nanoparticles made from the cluster
source, the Pt reference measurements must be redone with the Ir/IrO2 CE and the cluster
source samples must be redeposited with the proper particle size of 2.8 nm. The resolution
of the TOF mass ﬁlter could be increased, to reduce the mass loading error - although this
would likely not change the overall picture, due to the logarithmic nature of the mass activity.
Further enhancing the trustworthiness of the CV measurements, could be done by conduct-
ing inductively coupled mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) on the electrolyte post measurement, to
investigate Pt dissolution. ICP-MS could also be used to verify the mass loadings of nanopar-
ticles made by the cluster source to avoid using the deposition current as the only indicator.
Further down the line, it would be interesting to determine the turnover frequency, that is the
number of H2 molecules evolved per site per second for Pt. This is the true metric of catalyst
performance and requires knowledge of the number of active sites present in the catalytic
system. This can be estimated by measuring the electrochemically active area, which for Pt
can be done with CO-stripping. Alternatively, single Pt atoms could be deposited, as it is
possible to measure the number of atoms deposited very precisely using the cluster source.
This approach would raise the question if single Pt atoms have the same turnover frequency
as Pt atoms sitting on a nanoparticle surface.
31
==PAGE:37==
5
Small Pt entities for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction
5.1
Introduction
Catalysis is a surface phenomenon and therefore it seems obvious to maximize the surface
area pr. volume of catalyst material, to optimize the catalytic activity. This is done by shrink-
ing the particle size as
A
V ∝1
r
where A is the surface, V is the volume and r is the radius of a spherical particle. Thereby
nanoparticles will have a large surface to volume ratio, which translates to a smaller mass
loading for the desired overpotential. The mass loading of catalyst needed to efﬁciently drive
a reaction is of great importance, when considering the scalability options for new or existing
catalysts [23]. An example of this, is the study by E. Kemppainen et. al. [25], where the
’ultimate limit’ of Pt as a catalyst for photocathodic H2 evolution was investigated. It was
found, that 30 % of the world annual Pt production would be enough to support a 1 TWaverage
of hydrogen gas. This required a catalyst loading of 100 ngcm−2 with 5 nm nanoparticles
produced by the Omicron System. It was noted by the authors, that smaller nanoparticles
would likely decrease this loading, as more active surface is exposed. Thereby, the ultimate
utilization of a catalyst, is one were every catalyst atom participates in the reaction and no
atoms remain in the inactive bulk of the nanoparticle. This can be achieved if the atoms are
singly dispersed on a support.
Furthermore, calculations using density functional theory has indicated, that ’ﬁnite size’ ef-
fects are present in Au nanoparticles [26], meaning Au nanoparticles larger than 2.7 nm be-
haved like a bulk material. This may be explained by the difference in electronic structure
between a bulk metal and small entities with a countable number of atoms. The single, dimer
and trimer entities will have discrete energy levels, if the electronic interaction from the sup-
port is limited. This means, that single, dimer and trimer catalysts might show completely
different catalytic behavior than their bulk counterparts. Therefore, showing differences in
single, dimer and trimer catalyst entities is of great interest.
Single atoms have high surface energy, meaning they tend to agglomerate. This effect is
called sintering and is a well established phenomenon (and problem) in designing new cata-
lysts. Recently, J. Wan et. al. published a paper [27], which proposed the use of a defective
TiO2 sheet as support for catalytically active Au single atoms, deposited by wet chemistry
methods. This was seen to efﬁciently prevent sintering of the Au single atoms, supposedly
by stabilization though a Ti Au Ti interaction. In the following, this method is sought to
be realized by Ar sputtering of TiO2 stubs to create oxygen vacancies. Post sputtering, the
cluster source is used to deposit Pt single atoms, dimers and trimers on the defected TiO2
surface. The single atom and dimer samples are then used to perform electrochemical HER
using a 3 electrode cell similar to the one shown in ﬁgure 18.
5.2
Pt Single Atoms, Dimers and Trimers on TiO2
5.2.1
Preparation of TiO2 Stubs and Deposition of Single Atoms, Dimers and Trimers
The TiO2 stubs were sonicated for 10 min in ethanol and subsequently rinsed in ultra clean
(18.2 MΩcm) water and then sonicated one more time. The stubs were kept in concentrated
(67 %) nitric acid for one hour and then rinsed in ultra clean water and sonicated again.
32
==PAGE:38==
After cleaning the TiO2 stubs were mounted in Mo sample holders and loaded into the Omi-
cron system. The stubs were sputtered with Ar for 30 min (details in (C.2), to create oxygen
vacancies and remove contaminants from the surface.
After Ar sputtering the TiO2 stubs were characterized by ISS to verify a contamination free
surface environment. Unfortunately, there is no XPS available for these samples, since the
X-ray source controller was out of order at the time.
Figure 27 shows a representative ISS spectrum after sputter cleaning. The adventitious carbon
signal is always present on samples which have been exposed to the atmosphere and small
amounts of chemical residues (Na) from the chemical cleaning or stub fabrication process is
sometimes present. The inset shows a 30x zoom in the high energy range, where it is clear,
that no Pt is present.
Figure 27: ISS of TiO2 stub after Ar sputtering for 30 min. The ion source is 1 keV He+ and
the analyzer angle is 146.7°. The ion beam was scanned in a 1 by 1 mm raster pattern and the
analyzer was kept at a constant retard ratio of 5 eV. The inset shows a 30x zoom of the high
energy range, to verify that no Pt is present.
In total, six different samples were made, two with single atoms, two with dimers, one with
trimers and one blank (same sputtering no Pt). All samples had a target projected coverage
of 1 %, meaning the number of Pt atoms is sought to be constant for the single atoms, dimer
and trimer samples. No rastering was used for these samples.
Single Atoms
The cluster source was tuned to facilitate a high single atom current, while minimizing the
double mass according to the principles in section 2.3. The mass spectrum prior to the de-
position is shown on ﬁgure 28. Four different signal are detected in this mass range: Mass
80 amu, mass 195 amu, mass 235 amu and mass 390 amu. These masses are attributed to
Ar +
2 , Pt +
1 , Pt1Ar +
1 and Pt +
2 respectively.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 28: Pt single atoms mass spectrum, showing the entities present in the immediate mass
range. The Ar-species comes from the sputter gas in the cluster source.
The single to double mass ratio, which in this case is the ratio between the single atom current
and the dimer current is > 100. The resolution of the time of ﬂight is
m
∆m = 20, which gives
a broadening of ∼10amu. This means there is no error in loading caused by the time of
ﬂight, as there are no other entities than Pt +
1 in the range (195±10)amu. The sample holder
and aperture was biased to 1.5 V, corresponding to the soft landing regime. The beam was
blanked an the TiO2 stub was moved behind the aperture in the beam line of sight. The beam
was unblanked and the deposition current was measured until a projected coverage of 1 %
calculated according to B.2 was obtained. The deposition current can be seen on ﬁgure 29.
Figure 29: Pt single atom deposition current
34
==PAGE:40==
Dimers and Trimers
The cluster source was tuned to facilitate a high dimer or trimer current as shown on ﬁgure
30.
(a)
(b)
Figure 30: (a) Mass spectrum showing the presence of Pt dimers (b) Mass spectrum showing
the presence of Pt trimers
For these small clusters, the double mass is generally thought to be negligible, as evident for
the single atom mass spectrum on ﬁgure 28. There is a slight catch to this, as the trimer current
was obtained with an aperture and sample bias of 48 V, as this sufﬁcient current could not
be generated in the soft landing regime. This might have facilitated a non-negligible double
mass (Pt +
6 -current). There is no mass spectrum available in Pt +
6 range, but ﬁgure 31 shows
a mass spectrum up to Pt +
5 , with the same conditions used for trimer deposition. From this,
it seems safe to assume, that the double mass does not pose an issue for the trimer sample.
The dimers were deposited with aperture and sample bias of 1.5 V, corresponding to the soft
landing regime. The deposition current for the dimer and trimer samples are not shown, but
follows the exact same principle as for the single atoms.
Figure 31: Mass spectrum of small Pt clusters, achieved with aperture and sample bias of
48 V.
35
==PAGE:41==
Table 2 shows the target and actual coverage measured in % on an FCC (111) monolayer
according to appendix B.2. Since the mass resolution of the time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter is better
than the incremental Pt masses of 195 amu and that no other entities than Pt clusters are
present as shown on ﬁgure 28 and 31, the precision is determined based on the electrometer.
The precision of the electrometer is better than the two signiﬁcant digits reported here. The
loading of the samples is also shown.
ID
Type
Target coverage
Actual coverage
Actual loading
[% of FCC (111)]
[% of FCC (111)]
[ngcm−2]
PtTi1
single
1
0.99 %
5.1
PtTi2
dimer
1
0.98 %
5.0
PtTi3
blank
-
-
-
PtTi5
single
1
1.0 %
5.1
PtTi6
dimer
1
0.98 %
5.0
PtTi7
trimer
1
0.96 %
4.9
Table 2: Overview of single atoms, dimers and trimers on TiO2
5.2.2
Characterization of Single Atoms, Dimers and Trimers
Figure 32 shows ISS for the single atom and dimer samples, corresponding to PtTi1 and PtTi2
in table 2. From this, Pt is successfully deposited on the surface for both samples.
Figure 32: ISS of single atoms and dimers on TiO2 stubs. The ion source is 1 keV He+ and
the analyzer angle is 146.7°. The ion beam was scanned in a 1 by 1 mm raster pattern and the
analyzer was kept at a constant retard ratio of 5 eV.
Figure 33 shows the ISS for the single atoms, dimer and trimer samples. There are some trace
amounts of possibly Na and Pt is also present on the surface.
36
==PAGE:42==
Figure 33: ISS of single atoms, dimers and trimers on TiO2. The ion source is 1 keV He+ and
the analyzer angle is 146.7°. The ion beam was scanned in a 1 by 1 mm raster pattern and the
analyzer was kept at a constant retard ratio of 5 eV.
5.3
Electrochemical Performance of Single Atoms and Dimers
To test the HER activity for the different atomic entities, the TiO2 stubs with single atoms and
dimers were mounted on a rotating disk electrode in a 3 electrode electrochemical cell similar
to the one shown in ﬁgure 18. A counter electrode of Ir/IrO2 was used as well as a Hg/HgSO4
reference electrode. The electrolyte consisted of 0.5 M H2SO4 and the working electrode was
rotated at a pace of 400 rpm to prevent rapid contamination of the surface. The electrolyte
was continuously supplied with hydrogen gas. The potential of the working electrode was
cycled between −0.2 V and 0.2 V vs. RHE and the current between the counter and working
electrode was measured. The CV curve for a single atom sample (ID: PtTi1), a dimer sample
(ID: PtTi2) and a blank (ID: PtTi3) can be seen on ﬁgure 34, for a selected cycle.
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 34: CV of Pt single atoms and dimers using a 3 electrode cell and a rotating disk
electrode. The CE was Ir/IrO2 and the reference electrode was Hg/HgSO4. The rotation was
400 rpm.
From ﬁgure 34, there is a clear difference in HER activity between the blank TiO2, the single
atom and the dimer samples. At this point, this is the available CV data.
5.4
Discussion and Summary
From the mass spectra showing the presence of single atoms, dimers and trimers and the post
deposition ISS spectra, there seems to be a successfull depostion of these entities onto TiO2.
The ISS spectra are very similar for the PtTi1 and PtTi2 samples, but the next series of single
atoms, dimers and trimers (PtTi5, PtTi6 and PtTi7) all show different ISS behavior. This
could be explained by misalignment, as the samples were deposited without rastering and
therefore might be fairly concentrated. The trimer sample was deposited in the hard landing
regime (16 eV/atom), which could principally cause the Pt to penetrate beyond the outermost
layer and thereby decrease the ISS signal. There is no XPS data available, which means the
overall state of the samples beyond the outermost layer is unknown. Another weird effect,
supposedly generated by the large substrate potential, is that no Ar was present in the mass
spectrum, prior to trimer deposition, which is very unusual and currently not understood.
A signiﬁcant difference in HER activity was seen for the single atom (∼0.8 mAcm−2, PtTi1)
and dimer (∼0.4 mAcm−2, PtTi2) samples, at an overpotential of ∼200 mV. This factor two
difference in current density, is the same as the number of sites, if the dimers are considered
to be a single site. It is not known, if the Pt remained in its single atom and dimer state or
sintered as Pt in (almost) any state could produce HER at this overpotential.
Outlook
These preliminary results are interesting, but are in the end just two measurements, which
can not be interpreted as anything conclusive. Ahead lies simple reproducibility experiments
for both deposition and HER testing of single atom, dimer and trimer catalysts. Currently,
the trimer sample is made in the hard landing regime, which seriously questions its state post
landing. Subsequently, it seems obviously to decrease the substrate potential to the soft land-
38
==PAGE:44==
ing regime, but beyond the 1.5 V used for the single atom and dimer samples. Additional
tuning would then determine, if this is a viable route. Given, that it is possible to obtain rea-
sonable currents with this method, it would be interesting to test larger entities of 4, 5, 6 (and
so on) atoms.
The next step will be to verify, that the entities stay in their supposed state during testing.
This should be done by post electrochemical characterization, but the methods available for
this type of veriﬁcation are limited. One way, is to attempt to recreate these systems in on a
TiO2 single crystal and then proceed with scanning tunelling microscopy (STM). In a recent
PhD study by Thomas Maagard [28] (supervised by I. Chorkendorff and S. Horch), an in-
tegrated UHV-STM and electrochemical cell was developed and used to investigate (among
other things) Pt (111) surface corrosion. This type of novel setup and study is often associated
with great effort and time, but gaining atomic level catalytic insight is not an easy task.
Alternately to STM and in situ electrochemistry, systems with new, promising and repro-
ducible catalytic behavior can be investigated with extended x-ray ﬁne structure spectroscopy,
which requires a synchrotron facility. This is a way of determining the local electronic struc-
ture on the subnanometer scale and thereby determine the neighbouring atoms [14].
39
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
This project sought to gain insight in the catalytic properties of small Pt entities, in regard to
the hydrogen evolution reaction. These Pt entities were generated and mass selected using
a cluster source connected to a lateral time of ﬂight mass ﬁlter. Pt nanoparticles with a size
of (3.8±0.1)nm were deposited on glassy carbon, spanning a range of three orders of mag-
nitude in mass loading. The goal was to benchmark the hydrogen evolution reaction, using
pure and well deﬁned Pt nanoparticles. The samples were kept in UHV and characterized
XPS and ISS before and after deposition of the Pt nanoparticles. XPS and ISS showed a
contamination free surface before deposition and post deposition XPS and ISS showed suc-
cessful deposition of Pt on the surface of the glassy carbon. XPS conﬁrmed, that the relative
mass loadings corresponded to the intensity of the Pt 4f orbital. For samples below the de-
tection limit of XPS (20, 10 and 5 ngcm−2), ISS was applied to verify the presence of Pt.
The different mass loadings of Pt were used to evolve hydrogen electrochemically in a 3 elec-
trode cell with a rotating disk electrode. Cyclic voltammetry curves were produced for the
Pt samples, although the two highest loading values (1000 and 5000 ngcm−2) are yet to be
measured electrochemically. The CV curves were used to ﬁnd the mass activity for differ-
ent overpotentials at 10 mAcm−2 vs. RHE, which was then compared to that of commercial
Pt/C nanoparticles. There was a clear trend indicating, that mass loading can be ’traded’ for
overpotential, which underlined the importance of mass loading, when claiming HER activity
records.
Differences in nanoparticle size and elemental composition of the coutner electrode (Pt vs.
Ir/IrO2) between the commercial Pt nanoparticles and the Pt nanoparticles generated from
the cluster source, made quantitative comparison of the two measurement series unfeasible.
These differences are both thought to be advantageous for the commercial nanoparticles,
meaning new proper measurements with the same particle size and counter electrode, will
likely show the superior performance of the highly pure Pt nanoparticles from the cluster
source.
Additionally, Pt single atoms, dimers and trimers were deposited on defected TiO2 stubs, in
order to anchor the entities in oxygen vacancies. The number of atoms was sought to be held
constant for the difference atomic entities, by measuring the deposition current on the sample.
ISS showed a successful deposition of Pt on the surface, although no XPS data was available
due to maintenance of the x-ray source controller.
The single atom and dimer samples were used to evolve hydrogen electrochemically, using
a 3 electrode cell and a rotating disk electrode. There was a factor two difference in current
density at 200 mV overpotential vs. RHE, which corresponds to the number of sites avail-
able. These preliminary results are interesting with respect to further development of single
atom/dimer/trimer systems, which could give novel insight into the turnover frequency and
ultimate ultilization of Pt as an HER electrocatalyst.
7
Outlook
Moving forward, the results in this work pave the way for new interesting experiments. Apart
from the reproducibility experiments needed to substantiate these ﬁndings, another model
system is proposed.
40
==PAGE:46==
Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite as a Model System
Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), is the process of approaching an atomically sharp tip
towards a surface (dist ∼5 ˚A)and measuring the resulting tunneling current It, caused by a
potential difference Vt between the tip and sample. This method probes the density of states
at the fermi level and shows a convoluted image of the local electronic and geometric struc-
ture [24]. Using STM, atomic resolution of surfaces can routinely be obtained, which has
revolutionized the discipline of surface science.
Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG), is a stack of graphene layers, which have high
purity and a small mosaic angle. The carbon atoms in this structure are fully coordinated
and atomically ﬂat, which makes it an ideal candidate for scanning tunneling microscopy.
Graphene is sp2 hybridized carbon and has excellent electrochemical support attributes, sim-
ilarly to glassy carbon. Initially, the idea of this Master project, was to deposit single atoms
(using the cluster source) on well deﬁned HOPG to create atomic Pt sites, which could be
investigated by STM and subsequently tested electrochemically. The HOPG samples were
sputtered with NH3 (see appendix C.1) to hopefully bind the Pt to a nitrogen site. This ap-
proach was initially developed as the Pt atoms were highly mobile when investigated by
transmission electron microscopy (by Niklas Secher) and the nitrogen sites should bind the
Pt more strongly. Unfortunately, the sputtering energy and time was naively set to the same
values as for the Ar sputter cleaning procedure, which completely ruined the surface struc-
ture. This was discovered when Miriam Galbiati used STM to probe the surface of the HOPG
as shown on ﬁgure 35
Figure 35: STM image of heavily sputtered (2 µA NH3 at 1 keV for 10 min) HOPG surface
with Pt atoms. No useful information can be taken from this, other than an upper limit for the
sputtering has been ’discovered’.
The surface is far from ’highly oriented’ and it was calculated (appendix C.2) that every car-
bon atom on average experienced 10 collisions with the highly energetic NH3 species. Sub-
sequently, the sputtering energy 150 eV and time 20 s was lowered to produce no more than
∼0.5% nitrogen sites (calculation in appendix C.1). Figure 36 shows the difference between
the clean HOPG lattice and the HOPG lattice subjected to low energy NH3 sputtering.
41
==PAGE:47==
(a)
(b)
Figure 36: (a) STM image of the clean HOPG lattice (b) STM image of the HOPG lattice
with defect sites induced by NH3 sputtering. Sputter parameters were 150 eV NH3 for 20 s,
with a sample current of 80 nA)
From ﬁgure 36 shows, that it is possible to create these local lattice defects, while preserving
the overall HOPG structure. The next step is depositing single Pt atoms on the defected
N-HOPG structure and use STM to see if there is a succesful anchoring. This is currently
work in progress and samples with 0.1 % and 1 % single atoms, have recently been made and
delivered for STM analysis. If this N-HOPG/Pt system is promising, the next step will be
to text it electrochemically and to do this a new rotating disk electrode must be made by the
DTU physics workshop (currently submitted), as the square HOPG stubs do not match the
current circular RDE samples holder.
42
==PAGE:48==
References
[1] Zhi Wei Seh, Jakob Kibsgaard, Colin F. Dickens, Ib Chorkendorff, Jens K. Nørskov, and
Thomas F. Jaramillo. Combining theory and experiment in electrocatalysis: Insights
into materials design. Science, 355(6321):eaad4998, 2017.
[2] Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier. On the temperatures of the terrestrial sphere and inter-
planetary space.
[3] Svante Arrhenius. On the inﬂuence of carbonic acid in the air upon the temperature of
the ground. Future of Nature: Documents of Global Change, pages 303–312, 2013.
[4] IPCC. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 2013.
[5] Paris
Agreement.
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/
the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement, 2018.
Online;
accessed June
2019.
[6] Anders Holst Bodin. Klimakrisens rødder: Et spadestik dybere i kampen for klimaet.
Multivers, 2019.
[7] Cambridge
Dictionary.
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/
english/sustainability, 2019. Online; accessed 19 of June 2018.
[8] Guoqiang Zhao, Kun Rui, Shi Xue Dou, and Wenping Sun. Heterostructures for elec-
trochemical hydrogen evolution reaction: A review. Advanced Functional Materials,
28(43):1803291, 2018.
[9] Charles C L McCrory, Suho Jung, Ivonne M. Ferrer, Shawn M. Chatman, Jonas C.
Peters, and Thomas F. Jaramillo. Benchmarking hydrogen evolving reaction and oxy-
gen evolving reaction electrocatalysts for solar water splitting devices. Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 137(13):4347–4357, 2015.
[10] Anders Bodin. Synthesis of nanoparticle model systems for sustainable catalysis by gas
aggregation, 2017.
[11] Jakub Tymoczko, Federico Calle-Vallejo, Wolfgang Schuhmann, and Aliaksandr S.
Bandarenka. Making the hydrogen evolution reaction in polymer electrolyte membrane
electrolysers even faster. Nature Communications, 7(1):10990, 2016.
[12] J. K. Noerskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. R. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov, and
U. Stimming. Trends in the exchange current for hydrogen evolution. Cheminform,
36(24), 2005.
[13] I. Chorkendorff. Surface physics/chemistry. https://cn.inside.dtu.dk/cnnet/
filesharing/download/ee88d7f6-f681-4b4d-bc47-7a8150a8a5dc, 2018.
On-
line; accessed 6 of December 2018.
[14] I. Chorkendorff and J. W. Niemantsverdriet. Concepts of Modern Catalysis and Kinet-
ics. John Wiley and Sons Ltd,, 2003.
43
==PAGE:49==
[15] Wiley-VCH. Gas-Phase Synthesis of Nanoparticles. John Wiley and Sons, 2017.
[16] C. Roy, B´ela Sebok, B. Scott, E.M. Fiordaliso, J.E. Sørensen, A. Bodin, D.B. Tri-
marco, C.D. Damsgaard, P.C.K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, I.E.L. Stephens, J. Kibsgaard,
and Ib Chorkendorff. Impact of nanoparticle size and lattice oxygen on water oxidation
on nifeo¡sub¿x¡/sub¿h¡sub¿y¡/sub¿. Nature Catalysis, 1(11):820–829, 2018.
[17] C. G. Granqvist and R. A. Buhrman. Ultraﬁne metal particles. Journal of Applied
Physics, 47(5):2200–2219, 1976.
[18] B. Von Issendorff and R. E. Palmer. A new high transmission inﬁnite range mass selec-
tor for cluster and nanoparticle beams. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 70(12):4497–
4501, 1999.
[19] Vladimir N. Popok, Ingo Barke, Eleanor E.B. Campbell, and Karl Heinz Meiwes-Broer.
Clustersurface interaction: From soft landing to implantation. Surface Science Reports,
66(10):347–377, 2011.
[20] Jakob Ejler Sørensen.
Mass-selected copper nanoparticles for co2 electroreduction,
2017.
[21] Dr M.R. de Rooij. Electrochemical methods: Fundamentals and applications. Anti-
corrosion Methods and Materials, 50(5), 2003.
[22] Johannes Novak Hansen. Electrochemical energy conversion on single and dimer atom
catalysts, elektrokemisk energiomsætning p˚a enkelt og dimer atom katalysatorer, 2018.
[23] Peter C. K. Vesborg and Thomas F. Jaramillo. Cheminform abstract: Addressing the
terawatt challenge: Scalability in the supply of chemical elements for renewable energy.
Cheminform, 43(50):no–no, 2012.
[24] Jakob Kibsgaard and Ib Chorkendorff. Considerations for the scaling-up of water split-
ting catalysts. Nature Energy, 4(6):430–433, 2019.
[25] E. Kemppainen, Anders Bodin, B´ela Seb¨ok, Thomas Pedersen, Brian Seger, Bas-
tian Timo Mei, Dowon Bae, Peter Christian Kjærgaard Vesborg, J. Halme, Ole Hansen,
P. D. Lund, and Ib Chorkendorff. Scalability and feasibility of photoelectrochemical
h¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ evolution. Energy and Environmental Science, 8(10):2991–2999, 2015.
[26] Jesper Kleis, Jeffrey Philip Greeley, N. A. Romero, V. A. Morozov, Hanne Falsig,
Ask Hjorth Larsen, Jianmin Lu, Jens Jørgen Mortensen, M. Dułak, Kristian Sommer
Thygesen, Jens Kehlet Nørskov, and Karsten Wedel Jacobsen. Finite size effects in
chemical bonding: From small clusters to solids. Catalysis Letters, 141(8):1067–1071,
2011.
[27] Jiawei Wan, Wenxing Chen, Chuanyi Jia, Lirong Zheng, Juncai Dong, Xusheng Zheng,
Yu Wang, Wensheng Yan, Chen Chen, Qing Peng, Dingsheng Wang, and Yadong Li.
Defect effects on tio 2 nanosheets: Stabilizing single atomic site au and promoting
catalytic properties. Advanced Materials, 30(11):1705369, 2018.
[28] Thomas Maagaard. Combining uhv-stm and electrochemistry for surface studies of
model catalysts, 2018.
44
==PAGE:50==
A
Raster Factor Calculation
When the sample is moved behind the aperture to create a more uniform coverage, the de-
posited area goes beyond the boundaries of the TiO2 or glassy carbon stub, which both have
radii of 2.5 mm. This must be accounted for, as the measured current can no longer be di-
rectly related to the number of particles on the sample. This is done, by ﬁnding the actual
deposition area and relating that to the area of the stub. It is assumed, that the deposition ﬂux
is completely uniform and ﬁlls out the entire aperture.
The square pattern starts by moving the sample the length l in both directions. Then the stub
is moved 2l to the right, then 2l up, then 2l left, then 2l down, then to 2l right... and so fourth
in an inﬁnite loop. The deposition is started once the square pattern is initiated. The result is
a pattern with shape according to the dotted area on ﬁgure 37. The stippled line indicates the
aperture.
Figure 37: Square pattern schematic visualizing the area covered when moving the sample in
a quadratic square
The dotted (deposition) area is equavalent to the area of the black square minus the white
corners. The white corners all have the same area, which is equal to the quadratic radius of
the stub minus the area of one fourth stub area. Since there are four corners, this gives
Areadep = blacksquare−whitecorners
= L2 −4(r2 −1/4πr2)
= L2 −(4−π)r2
where L = 2l +2r. The rastor factor R f is then
Rf = Areastub
Areadep
= 4(l +r)2 +(4−π)r2
πr2
(13)
45
==PAGE:51==
B
Coverage Calculation
In the interest of creating samples with similar active areas, the samples are deposited based
on projected coverage. The projected coverage of a species is equivalent to either the cross
sectional area of the chosen geometry, which for nanoparticles is chosen to be spherical or
the percentage of a (111) FCC monolayer for small (non-spherical) entities.
B.1
Spherical Approximation
In order to ﬁnd the projected coverage of the deposited nanoparticles, we assume the de-
posited particles are perfect spheres and have density corresponding to that of bulk Pt. The
volume of a sphere is Vsphere = 4πr3
3
and the deﬁnition of density is ρ = m
V , thereby the diam-
eter of a Pt nanoparticle is given as
d =
 6m
πρPt
1/3
where m is the mass of the nanoparticle and ρPt is the density of bulk Pt. The projected
coverage is then equal to the cross section of the nanoparticle multiplied with the number
of charges deposited on the substrate and ﬁnally divided by the (geometric) aperture area,
formally
Covproj,NP = (d
2)2πNQ
Areaaperture
Rf
where NQ is the number of charges, Areaaperture is the geometric area of the aperture and R f
is the raster factor.
B.2
Small Entity Approximation
Now the coverage produced by particles for which the spherical approximation does not hold
is derived. This is the case for single atoms, dimers and trimers, but it is not clear exactly
when the spherical approximation breaks down. The planer (2D) density of Pt is derived
based on the (111) surface, which has the highest coordination and lowest surface energy.
For an FCC structure, the planar density is
1
2R2√
3, where R is the atomic radius. The Van der
Waals radius of Pt is 0.135 nm in an FCC structure, thereby the atomic planar density of
ρatomic,2D,Pt =
1
2·(0.135×10−9 m)2 ·
√
3 = 1.58×1019 m−2
The mass of the Pt atom is mPt = 3.24×10−25 kg, meaning the mass planar density of Pt is
ρ2D,Pt = ρatomic,2D,Pt·mPt = 5.13×10−6 kgm−2. The projected coverage of Pt atoms arranged
in an (111) FCC structure is then
Covproj =
NQmentity
ρ2D,PtAreaaperture
R f
(14)
where NQ is the number of charges and mentity is the mass of the deposited entity, Areaaperture
is the geometric area of the aperture and R f is the raster factor.
46
==PAGE:52==
C
Sputtering Experiments
Based on sputter current measurements during both Ar and NH3 sputtering experiments, an
upper bound for the number of times every atom is ’hit’ by the sputter gas is determined as
well as the percentage of nitrogen sites in HOPG
C.1
Ammonia sputter
The upper limit of nitrogen sites in the HOPG lattice is found by measuring the sputter current
by the following. First the number of charges hitting the sample is found by multiplying the
sputter current I with time spent sputtering t and divided by the elementary charge q
NQ = Is
q
The number of atoms in the sample is now found based on the number density of graphene
ρN,graphene and the area of the sample
Natoms,sample = ρN,graphene ·Asample
The upper limit for nitrogen site percentage is then
NQ
Natoms,sample
×100%
(15)
C.2
Ar Sputter Cleaning
The general procedure is the same as for C.1, only now the atomic density should be that of
the sputtered substrate. It should also be noted, that Ar is approximately twice as heavy as
NH3 and will therefore impact the surface more. The general expression for the percentage
of the substrate exposed to the sputter gas is still
NQ
Natoms,sample
The usual sputter cleaning parameters are E = 1keV, I = 10mA and t = 600s. This results
in a sputter current as measured on the sample of around 2 µA. This amounts to around 10
hits per surface site, depending on the exact surface structure and this is primarily used for
glassy carbon stubs.
The TiO2 stubs are very stable with enthalpy of formation at 944 kJmol−1 ≈10 eVatom−1
and therefore the sputter time is increased to 1800 s. As such the average TiO2 surface atom
is hit around 30 times.
47
==PAGE:53==
D
Preparation and Testing of Commercial Pt/C Reference
A Pt/C reference was synthesized by Johannes Novak using drop casting onto glassy carbon.
The mass loading was varied in a range of (10 to 10000) ngcm−2. The error in loading caused
by the error in Pt wt. % was estimated to 2.5 %. The nanoparticles deposited in this fashion
had a reported diameter of 2.8 nm. The nanoparticles were tested in an electrochemical cell
equivalent to the one shown on ﬁgure 18. A Pt wire was used as counter electrode and the
reference electrode was Hg/HgSO4. The potential was scanned in a range no higher than
0.2 V anodically and −0.6 V cathodically and the rotation was 1600 rpm. From this, relation
between the overpotential, mass activity and mass loading
Thereby, the differences in electrochemical testing between the nanoparticles from the cluster
source and the commercial Pt was the particle size and counter electrode.
48
==PAGE:54==
E
Project Plan and Evaluation
E.1
Overall goal
Develop, characterize, test and evaluate monomer/dimer/trimer Pt entities supported by a
well deﬁned highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrate for the two-electron oxygen
reduction reaction.
E.2
Timeline
January/February: Gain familiarity with the setup, initialize literary review process and
identify possible descriptors that determine the viability of the Pt/HOPG system. Produce,
characterize and test the ﬁrst Pt/HOPG systems.
March/April: Attempt to reproduce successful results or alter the development process if no
positive results are produced thus far. If no progress has been made at this point or fundamen-
tal challenges severely hinder further development; consider shifting the focus of the project.
May/June: Based on the work/decisions done/made in March and April, either continue
developing and Pt/HOPG system or propose different systems.
E.3
Suggested Link to Learning objectives
• To understand and formulate the origin, motivation and recent developments in single
atom/single site catalysis based on peer-reviewed scientiﬁc literature
• Apply relevant surface sensitive techniques in order to characterize novel catalytic sys-
tems
• Participate in high level technical discussions with scientiﬁc faculty in the SurfCat
group during weekly meetings
• Analyse and discuss the relevance of the Pt/HOPG system in relation to the energy
challenge and place it in a greater societal context
E.4
Evaluation
January/February: During the ﬁrst two months, fundamental issues with the available
HOPG stubs and preparation method were identiﬁed. The stubs were contaminated with
Cu from the use of a Cu backspacer in the electrochemical setup. The NH3 sputtering energy
was ridiculously high, resulting in a completely ruined surface environment. Also, the desig-
nated scanning tunelling microscope got its motor stuck and efforts to repair it were fruitless.
New HOPG stubs had to be purchased and efforts by the workshop in grinding them circular
for the electrochemical setup caused them to break. This called for the design and fabrication
of a new rotating disk electrode, capable of holding square samples and this process is set in
motion.
March/April: The focus was shifted to a benchmark of the hydrogen evolution reaction us-
ing Pt nanoparticles. The work with the HOPG was made in parallel as Luca Camilli made
his new UHV STM available with Miriam Galbiati handling the system.
May/June/July: Several issues with the counter electrode in the 3 electrochemical cell were
identiﬁed, which called for redeposition of several samples, as the original samples had been
49
==PAGE:55==
contaminated. Johannes Novak eventually electrodeposited a functional Ir/IrO2 counter elec-
trode, which has since beem employed to test the Pt nanoparticles and the Pt single atoms
and dimers.
Overall, the project went nothing according to plan, but several interesting results have still
been obtained and this is the nature of working with experimental surface science.
50
