==PAGE:1==
Alessandro Filippa
Primary reserve provision using
Utility-Scale Battery Energy Storage
Systems
Master Thesis, July 2019
==PAGE:2==
Alessandro Filippa
Primary reserve provision using
Utility-Scale Battery Energy Storage
Systems
Master Thesis, July 2019
==PAGE:3==
Primary reserve provision using Utility-Scale Battery Energy Storage Systems
Author(s):
Alessandro Filippa
Supervisor(s):
Seyedmostafa Hashemi Toghroljerdi, Chresten Træholt
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
July 2019
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements for graduation in Sustainable
Energy Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The report
represents 30 ECTS points.
Rights:
Alessandro Filippa, 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This thesis is submitted in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the Master’s degree
(MSc Eng) in Sustainable Energy at the Technical University of Denmark. The work was
performed at the Department of Electrical Engineering. The thesis represent 30 ECTS
points. The work in relation to the thesis has been conducted in the period February -
July 2019.
Kongens Lyngby, July 15th 2019
Alessandro Filippa
i
==PAGE:6==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Here i would like to thank my supervisors Chresten Træholt and Seyedmostafa Hashemi
Toghroljerdi, his help during this work and his important ideas have been fundamental.
I would also like to thank my mother, my father and my sister. Their support and love
made me what I am. I would like to thank Claudia, Edoardo, Guido, Ettore and Andrea
to for have always been as a second family. My thank you goes to Charlie, Giulia, Luca,
Lorenzo, Giuseppe and Mathilde for being amazing as they are. The space in this page
would not be enough to name all the extraordinary people I have met so far. Sharing my
life and experiences with everyone of you ﬁlled my heart, head and soul. I hope we will
meet all again.
ii
==PAGE:7==
ABSTRACT
The power system is undergoing a deep transformation.
Electriﬁcation, increased
penetration of renewable energy resources and of power electronic controlled devices
are posing challenges on the current system. Improved system ﬂexibility is considered
one of the key point to address this transformation. Flexibility is the ability of the power
system to properly change its operation, in other to harmonize generation and consumption,
and guarantee high quality of supply. Storage technologies such as Battery Energy Storage
Systems (BESSs) represent a interesting option for providing such ﬂexibility: one of the
main service they can provide is frequency response. BESS are considerably faster than
conventional units and thus able to provide a better response to power imbalances. Fast
frequency response has great value in low inertial systems or when generation is hardly
dispatchable.
In this thesis, one year of operation is simulated for a BESS unit taking part in the
ancillary service market in Eastern Denmark (DK2). The service of choice is the Frequency-
Controlled Normal operation Reserve (FCR-N) under tender condition in force. Such
service requires a power response proportional to the frequency deviation without deadband,
in any moment of the contracted period. The simulations are conducted in order to identify
how parameters deﬁning the unit and its operation strategy are aﬀecting the capability
to fulﬁll the contract and produce economic return.
The analysis consider technical
parameters such as system eﬃciency, power oﬀer and target state of charge, as well as
economic and regulatory aspect in the form of electricity taxes and operation requirements.
Deep analysis of the impact of these parameters on performances and revenues is performed
to understand the mechanics behind the operation of the simulated system. A model
proposed in literature is used to estimate degradation and lifetime of the battery pack in
order to evaluate the net present value and thus the proﬁtability of the project.
The results obtained conﬁrm that, with current regulation for FCR-N, BESS has no
opportunities to reliably provide the service while being economically feasible. If no
mechanism is designed to allow storage to control its state of charge (SOC), the unit
will likely have to interrupt the service due to its limited energy capacity and to the
energy content of the frequency deviation. Confrontation of the Danish requirements
with regulation adopted by other system operators suggests that revision of the current
condition is needed to create services and markets that can promote and beneﬁt from the
fast and precise response of BESSs.
iii
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Renewables and distributed energy resources integration challenges . . . . .
1
1.2
Energy storage integration in power systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
State-of-the-art of research on BESS integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.1
BESS system to improve frequency stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3.2
BESS systems providing ancillary services in a speciﬁc regulation
framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.3
Models for simulation of battery operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Barriers for BESS provision of ancillary services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4.1
Poor legal framework and unclear categorization of storage
. . . . .
6
1.4.2
Technical limitation: frequency’s energy bias and energy losses . . .
6
1.4.3
Limit of storage compared to conventional plants under outdated
regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.4
Energy tariﬀs and taxation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
An overview of frequency regulation services
9
2.1
Frequency reserves in Eastern Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Frequency containment reserves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Frequency reserve in Western Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Primary frequency reserve in United Kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Primary frequency reserve in Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.1
Degrees of Freedom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Frequency services in PJM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Primary frequency regulation signal in PJM . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.2
Regulation market in PJM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Operation set-point deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Availability payment and energy prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Availability payment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Energy settlement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Taxes on electricity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
3.3
System losses and eﬃciency levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Parameters for performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.1
Average eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.2
Failure rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.3
Percentage of unavailability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Base cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5.1
Operational strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5.2
Base case scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Deﬁnition of a new regulation framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6.1
New regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Degradation and lifetime estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.8
Economic evaluation of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.8.1
Investment and plant costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results
36
4.1
Base case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Sensitivity to starting State Of Charge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Sensitivity to power bid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
New regulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.5
Optimal conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Block operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.7
Sensitivity to frequency pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.7.1
Frequency statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.7.2
Eﬀect of change in power oﬀer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.7.3
Eﬀect of change in SOCstart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.7.4
Optimal conﬁguration sensitivity to frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.7.5
Block operation with diﬀerent frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.8
Comparison of diﬀerent year performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.8.1
Availability prices comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.8.2
Optimal conﬁguration in 2017 and 2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.8.3
Block operation performance in 2017 and 2018
. . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.9
Results of the economic evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Result discussion and summary
68
5.1
Discussion on assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6
Conclusion and future work
72
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
List of Figures
74
List of Tables
78
Bibliography
79
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A Appendix for starting SOCstart, CR
82
v
==PAGE:10==
Contents
B Appendix for Sensitivity to Pbid, CR
85
C Appendix for New regulation
91
vi
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
The ambitious goal of a fossil fuel free society bases it its vision for energy consumption on
large exploitation of clean resources. Technologies for renewable energy production are
extensively researched and developed and nowadays they are reaching competitiveness
with traditional generators [1]. The employment of this kind of technology is not the only
transformation to which the energy system is undergoing: electriﬁcation of many sector and
increasing electricity consumption are an important part of this transition [2]. Great part of
this electriﬁcation will come from developing economies since the high eﬃciency of electric
loads will keep electric consumption of developed countries relatively ﬂat [2]. Heating
and transportation are example of sectors experiencing fast shift towards electrical power
and they are of course increasing the electrical energy demand. Demand for electricity is
also naturally growing with the increasing population and increasing standards of living
which means more per capita and global consumption [3]. An increase of renewable and
distributed power generators is expected, but this transformation does not come without
complication and challenges. The existing power system and the way it operates must
be redesigned during the transition process to optimally implement the new technologies
and maintain the security and quality of power supply. The power system needs to wisely
integrate and coordinate the new technologies that will represent the backbone of the
future design. Main challenges of this transition can be addressed employing and designing
policy and technologies that provide ﬂexibility such as high level of communication between
units and energy storage.
1.1
Renewables and distributed energy resources
integration challenges
The current power system is still mainly relying on generation from large centralized
thermal power plants which can modify their production changing the fuel consumption.
Fluctuation of electricity demand can be easily addressed by re-dispatchment or redeﬁnition
of power commitment. Employment of wind turbines (WT) and solar photovoltaics (PV) is
a key factor of the transition to a sustainable power system; however, this kind of generators
are aﬀected by volatility of related natural resource. Wind not always blows, and sun
not always shines and thus generators do not have the ﬂexibility needed to follow the
electrical power demand. Even if seasonal and daily pattern are known, the variability of
the power output is a severe problem considered the inherent need of constant equilibrium
between generation and consumption. In fact, electricity cannot be stored directly but
needs technologies for conversion and storage. Moreover, if the natural resources are not
available at suﬃcient levels the installed capacity may not be able to generate enough power
to cover the demand, or on the opposite generation may be curtailed and wasted since it
overpasses the load request. To be able to rely on inﬂexible renewable generation, demand
1
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
should adapt to production pattern, while storage must act as buﬀer between production
and consumption to allow increased decoupling of the two. Inﬂexible power generation is
not the only challenge that new technologies are posing to the power system. Transmission
capacity, distribution capacity, protection and monitoring systems, are strongly impacted
by the shift a centralized and controllable power production to a system dominated by
decentralized energy resources. This kind of system can incur in problems such as over-
voltage and reverse power ﬂow that are not easy to solve with current standards of grid
operation and protection system. The discussion about the increased distributed asset
of the power system and related issues, is quite broad and out of the scope of this thesis
discussion. Between the main problems caused by the technological changes there is
frequency stability. When power generation and demand are not in balance the alternate
current changes its oscillation frequency. This parameter is index of stability and quality
of power supply. If more power is generated than consumed the system frequency will
increase, while if consumption is higher frequency will fall. If the majority of generators can
suddenly change its power output, it would be more diﬃcult to maintain the equilibrium.
The speed of frequency change is named Rate of Change of Frequency (ROCOF) and,
together with the deviation magnitude, is determined by the system inertia. The system
inertia is the sum of the rotating inertia of all synchronous generators connected. The
higher the inertia the slower the frequency will change in case of imbalance. So, it can be
said that inertia naturally limit the rate of change of frequency.
The vast majority of renewable and distributed generators, as well as storage technologies,
are connected to the grid via power electronics devices. For example, even if wind turbines
have a rotating mass and generate alternate current, power electronic allow the partial or
complete decoupling between generator and grid and thus a wider range of wind condition
at which the turbine is able to produce eﬃciently. PV and batteries instead need power
electronic converters since they deliver or consume direct current. The electrical decoupling
of generators and grid means that the generator does not contribute naturally to the total
system inertia. This kind of generators are referred to as non-synchronous generators and,
if their penetration increase, the total system inertia is lowered and thus frequency stability
is worsen. Some solutions have been investigated such as synthetic inertia [4] and fast
responsive reserves.
Normally the transmission system operator (TSO) of each area is in charge of procuring a
certain quantity of reserve power that can be activated to respond to frequency deviation
and restore the generation-consumption balance. This is referred to as frequency regulation
service. Anyway, the current design of frequency services does not completely solve the
problem of lowered inertia since slow response time are still tailored to conventional
generators capability, faster and/or larger response would be needed to maintain the
balance and frequency within acceptable levels.
1.2
Energy storage integration in power systems
The transformation of the power system require an higher level of ﬂexibility to be able to
withstand inconstant and uncertain condition of operation. Energy storage is considered
one of the most promising option to address this ﬂexibility [5]. Storage technologies are
2
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
diﬀerent and have the characteristic to provide the needed service to improve system
stability and respond to transformation challenges.
Energy storage technology have the potential of providing multiple services to the grid that
conventional assets may not be able to provide properly, eﬃciently or economically. One of
the strength of energy storage, especially of Battery Energy Storage Systems (BESS), is the
fast response that well combine with high variability of renewables. Batteries modularity
and capability of providing multiple services simultaneously are also valuable characteristic
that if exploited can allow to capitalize fully on storage’s economic value [6].
Apart from frequency stability there are other services that a battery storage can provide
to the grid. An example are peak shaving, reduction of renewables curtailment and voltage
support but they can also act as part of the grid infrastructure preventing congestion
problems and excessive infrastructure expansion [7]. In fact batteries can act both as
generators and consumers and allow certain rare but expected power ﬂows that otherwise
would require infrastructure upgrades.
Storage is considered mature enough to deliver multiple higher quality services.
Its
employment can reduce the need of conventional generation to provide the same services
and push system operation towards its optimum [8].
1.3
State-of-the-art of research on BESS integration
1.3.1
BESS system to improve frequency stability
Many studies about employment of BESS to provide ancillary services have been carried
out. Many of them considered the challenge of the frequency stability and investigated the
beneﬁt delivered to the grid by storage technologies.
For example [9] conclude that the use of battery energy storage can improve the capability
of the system to respond to frequency deviation events. In the work the faster response of
BESS is highlighted and its coordination with conventional generators improves system
stability in the Danish island of Bornholm.
In [10] simulation for the year 2014 where used to evaluate the performance of a
0.5MW/0.5MWh BESS and then validated through experiments. The research group
built an electrical model to obtain an high level of realism in the simulation. Even if this
study resemble more the one carried out in this thesis it was only intended to evaluate
the technical performance of the system (eﬃciency, unavailability and expected life of the
battery) in the Italian framework but the economical aspect of such project was not taken
into account.
[11] is a study that simulate the employment of a BESS unit, equipped with inertial
response and primary frequency regulation control loops, in the isolated power system of
Baja California Sud in Mexico. Such power system has a low number of generators and
low interconnection with wider and more resilient power systems. The eventual increase
of renewable power capacity will worsen its stability. The research team conﬁrms the
expected improvement in system frequency stability given by BESS response to power
3
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction
imbalance: the frequency lowest value in case of underfrequency events is reduced and load
disconnection (load shedding) is prevented.
1.3.2
BESS systems providing ancillary services in a speciﬁc regulation
framework
[12] Present an overview of the battery energy storage technologies. It also provides an
overview of type of investigation and gives some indication on how they can be improved.
The authors divide the models used in literature in two categories:
• Models for economic analysis. The aim is to evaluate the economic beneﬁts of BESS
for operator and customers. Optimal sizing and optimal operative strategies are often
the goal of the study. The author recommend the implementation of "appropriate
market models" to obtain realistic results.
• Models for power system stability. These models are intended to evaluate the technical
beneﬁt of BESS employment studying their response to system disturbances. The
author recommend to include eﬀect of depth of discharge, temperature and service
life since these parameter may signiﬁcantly impact on battery performance.
The above cited study has been published in 2009. From then, due to increasing experience
on market behaviour and increasing number of BESSs in the power system, many researches
on batteries performances in real market condition have been presented. An example is [13]
where the BESS optimal operation is deﬁned considering the PJM regulation framework
and battery ageing model. In this study the authors consider last changes in regulation
positive for BESS development in the frequency regulation market, in fact participants are
rewarded with a pay-for-performance scheme and BESSs beneﬁt for their capability of fast
and precise response.
In United States there are several Independent System Operators (ISO) and Regional
Transmission Organizations (RTO) and each deﬁne how frequency regulation service must
be provided and rewarded. Balancing units receive a signal from the ISO or RTO that
deﬁne the power response they should provide to maintain the balance. PJM system
operator introduced method to alter this signal and make it energy neutral, in order to
capitalize on fast responsive capability of certain unit while taking in consideration their
limited energy capacity [14]. A normal signal for slower unit is also used and each unit can
decide which signal it wants to follow. The capacity and operation payment that the unit
receive are scaled down proportionally with a "performance factor" which represent the
accuracy of the unit following the received signal. If the performance is considered too low
(i.e. the unit did not follow the signal or delivered incorrect response) the unit can also be
excluded from participation in regulation market in future.
The BESS project from Danish Technological Institute (DTI), Vestas, Energi Danmark
and ForskEL is a perfect example of experimental study on ancillary services provision
by battery energy storage systems. The project studied a system under real ﬁnancial and
market condition in Western Denmark. In the ﬁnal report of the project [15] the group
indicated that primary frequency provision has best economic opportunity for large-scale
batteries between the studied ancillary services. The project also pointed out that taxes
and tariﬀplay a major role in BESS low economic output. Another important point
4
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction
in frequency regulation delivery is the overall system eﬃciency: as the BESS project
found, battery itself has high eﬃciency, but primary frequency regulation often requires a
small power throughput making auxiliary consumption and inverter losses signiﬁcantly
impacting.
[16] is a master thesis dealing with a BESS system installed in Nordhavn, Copenhagen.
The study investigates the proﬁtability of the examined system in providing diﬀerent
ancillary services in Eastern Denmark. The author concludes that between the investigated
services only frequency regulation were found to be a interesting investment but still not
economical under Eastern Denmark regulation.
The requirement framework for primary frequency regulation in United Kingdom changed
in 2016 with the introduction of a new service. This is another example of regulation
change that open opportunity for BESS participation in ancillary service markets [17].
The TSO introduced the "Enhanced Frequency Response" (EFR), a frequency regulation
service that requires the capability of 100% balancing power delivery under one second.
The service has been introduced to face the increasing challenges to frequency stability
due to high penetration of renewables and non-synchronous generators. In [17], the author
describe the main features of the requirements and conclude that the BESS is suitable for
this kind of service. Anyway the study does not examine the actual potential earning of
such system in the actual market.
The British TSO National Grid provides a document describing the frequency regulation
services in UK [18]. The report recognize the problem of maintaining system stability with
slow responsive unit when the system inertia falls: these units will reach full activation
when the frequency has already reached the maximum allowable deviation. Two solution
are compared: increment of regulation capacity or faster responsive services. The analysis
conducted shows that the combination of a faster and current frequency response is
preferred (note that "response" refers to primary frequency regulation services in UK [19]).
Also in Germany recent changes in regulation clariﬁed rules for provision of PCR with
BESS. [20] provides a description of the main characteristic of the regulation which show
the presence of some "Degrees of Freedom" intended to allow ﬂexible operation to keep
the battery SOC inside a "permitted range". This range is deﬁned by a minimum time for
which the BESS must be able to provide maximum power. In Germany is 30 minutes but
the "European Network Code on Load and Reserves" indicate 15 minutes [21]. The author
concludes deﬁning a BESS project for PCR provision both economically and technically
feasible.
1.3.3
Models for simulation of battery operation
To eﬀectively simulate the performance of a battery energy storage a proper model should
be constructed or used. High precision of the model will of course give an higher ﬁdelity of
simulation results to reality. When possible the studies were validated by experimental
results ([10], [17], [22]), the model was already validated by previous studies ([23]) or an
existing system was operated to obtain direct on-ﬁeld experience ([15]).
[22] and [23] present an overview of battery models in general and for simulation of grid
5
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction
integrated systems in particular. They divide the battery models in diﬀerent groups
based on the level of approximation. The lowest level of approximation gives results
close to experiments while less precise models are more suitable for large simulations
where the computational eﬀort is signiﬁcantly higher. As both the authors say, too much
approximation can lead to unrealistic results and thus a good trade oﬀbetween precision
and computational eﬀort must be found. They both suggest the use of an electrical
model which consider an equivalent electric circuit (with a varying number of circuital
elements depending on the wanted approximation). However, this kind of model needs
an experimental campaign to tune the parameters. Analytical models are interesting in
studies handling large amount of data or large loops since they are signiﬁcantly faster and
are still able to provide valuable results.
1.4
Barriers for BESS provision of ancillary services
Employment of battery energy storage systems to provide ancillary services to the grid is
not a new concept, but as already said the interest is increasing due to the beneﬁt it can
bring. Despite this, there are still notable barriers preventing the full utilization of BESS.
1.4.1
Poor legal framework and unclear categorization of storage
Battery energy storage almost reached cost-competitiveness with other technologies in
ﬂexibility provision [5].
Current regulation and market structure are shaped on the
capability and limits of conventional power plants which so far were the main providers
of grid services. In some cases the existing legal framework does not consider speciﬁcally
battery participation in the ancillary services market. BESS role is not recognized and
corresponding regulation are unclear limiting its potential [7]. The diﬀerent characteristics
of batteries, and storage in general, require diﬀerent approaches when requirements are
deﬁned. Not only requirements, but also the services them self should be redesigned to
better integrate new technologies able to address many of the challenges deriving from
system transformation. An example is the aforementioned Enhanced Frequency Response
in UK. In US the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) Order 755, is a clear
signal of acknowledgement of the importance of fast and accurate response to power
imbalance, services that ﬁts batteries characteristics. In 2017 the report on Technologies
Perspective from IEA identify the lack of proper market for ﬂexibility and ancillary services
provided by storage as one of the reasons for low diﬀusion of such type of business model
[3].
1.4.2
Technical limitation: frequency’s energy bias and energy losses
Some limitations of battery storage systems are due to technological characteristic. As [15]
found BESS providing regulation are often required to operate at low load (power) level.
In this condition the power converter has poor eﬃciency and consumption of auxiliary
components has higher impact on the overall system eﬃciency. Technical limitations are not
only connected to eﬃciency. Frequency deviation of large magnitude and/or long duration
are not uncommon and become problematic since the unit will consume or generate energy
corresponding to a considerable percentage of its maximum capacity [24]. The problem
6
==PAGE:17==
1. Introduction
gets worse considering a unit installed for frequency regulation purposes that is expected to
deliver regulating power for many consecutive hours or days. Depending on the regulating
power level sold and on the size of the energy storage the unit is likely to reach full or
empty state without being able to deliver the service for some periods.
1.4.3
Limit of storage compared to conventional plants under outdated
regulation
The limited energy capacity is inherent to storage technologies. But their capability of
being both load and generators is what adds ﬂexibility to the system. The report from
the International Energy Agency (IEA) on the status of power system transformation [6],
admits that eﬃciency and cost improvements are relevant, but highlights the importance
of considering storage technical limitations and opportunities during revision of regulation
and market structure.
This would allow beneﬁcial participation of this technologies.
Modiﬁcation of market structures and creation of new markets for these new services can
“unlock the multiple beneﬁts of storage technologies”. As already said in some countries
and regions in US and Europe policies are in this direction [3].
1.4.4
Energy tariﬀs and taxation
With reference to fair market rules the service provided by battery units must be considered
and rewarded equally with other services. It considerable reasonable, in fact, that even a
small unit delivering grid services should not face taxes for energy consumption since it is
the result of the supporting action [5], [25]. In many cases, as already said, there is not
a clear deﬁnition of the role of storage unit and thus the economic value of BESS in the
ancillary service market is restricted [5].
1.5
Project description
The scope of this thesis work is to simulate the performances of a BESS unit in providing
primary regulation in the Nordic synchronous area. Main interest in on how diﬀerent
parameters impact on related business opportunities.
The focus is on the speciﬁc
containment reserve service FCR-N (Frequency-Controlled Reserve for Normal operation),
under requirements and condition of Eastern Denmark (DK2).
The choice come from two reason. First, as the literature review highlighted, battery
storage characteristics match the purpose of containment reserve and, under well designed
regulation and markets, can provide the fast balancing power needed in the future power
systems. Second, the project is inspired by the "Bornholm Smart grid Secured (BOSS)"
project [26], which aim is the operation of 1 MW/1 MWh battery to improve stability and
increase power quality in a system with high penetration of renewables, a power system
which hopefully resemble the power system of the future.
Main question driving the study are:
• How does a BESS unit perform technically and economically participating in the
FCR-N market in DK2?
7
==PAGE:18==
1. Introduction
• How and how much the main parameters deﬁning the system and its operation aﬀect
revenues?
• How and how much they aﬀect the capability of providing the contracted service?
• What is the proﬁtability of the project in the deﬁned scenarios?
After an introductive literature review and study of the topic, the work has been structured
as follow:
• First a analytical model is built, then simulation of the base cases are carried out.
In this simulation the behaviour and impact of taxes and eﬃciency of a storage unit
is examined.
• In the second step the impact of some of the main parameter is investigated to better
identify their relationship with the performance.
• In the third step a change in the assumption is made to deﬁne how the previous
results can be aﬀected by a slight change in regulation or strategy.
• While all the previous analysis are made on 2016 frequency data, in the fourth step
the eﬀect of speciﬁc pattern of frequency is researched using frequency record of two
additional years: 2017 and 2018. In connection with the fourth step the performances
in 2016, 2017 and 2018 are compared.
• In the end the lifetime and economic value of the investment is calculated to provide
a idea of the proﬁtability of such project.
Figure 1.1 summarize the various investigation made to provide a better visualization.
Performance analysis
BESS unit 1MW/1MWh
FCR-N in DK2
Taxes on 
electricity 
consumption
Efficiency 
level
Power 
offer
SOCstart
Optimal 
configuration
Modified 
regulation
Block 
operation
Frequency 
data
Economic 
data
Financial and 
Degradation 
Analysis
Availability
Revenues
Figure 1.1: Graphical summary of the project work.
1.6
Outline
Chapter 2 describe the frequency regulation services in Eastern and Western Denmark.
Chapter 3 contains the methodology, including the key assumptions fro which the
mathematical model is derived, how the simulation results are analyzed and description
of the diﬀerent scenarios. Chapter 4 describe and discuss the results of the simulations.
Chapter 5 include the summary and discussion of main results and chapter 6 the conclusion.
8
==PAGE:19==
2
AN OVERVIEW OF FREQUENCY REGULATION
SERVICES
Electrical demand and generation must be kept always in balance to avoid problems to
grid connected appliances and generators and to avoid system outages. The indicator of
such balance is the electrical frequency which has its nominal value when generation and
demand are equal. Thus, electrical frequency is one of the indicator of quality of power
supply.
To keep frequency at is nominal value, given the variability of load demand and generation,
some units are required to change their power set-point to restore the frequency if it deviates
from its nominal value. These units keep a certain amount of active power capacity ready
to be used for balancing purposes. The total active power kept as reserve is refereed to as
balancing power capacity. Frequency regulation is considered part of the ancillary services
that the grid needs to secure power system stability and to maintain an adequate power
supply.
It is the Transmission System Operator that is in charge to procure this balancing power
capacity and to deﬁne how this power has to be delivered. The regulation and requirements
framework for primary control regulation service changes from region to region and there is
still not a global accordance on the deﬁnition of the services and on procurement methods
[19].
There is, however, a general way to categorize frequency regulation services, based on the
response and operation time and it usually identiﬁes four levels of response, including the
inertia. Table 2.1 summarize them.
Inertia response for conventional synchronous generators is the natural resistance of
the rotating mass to change of rotational speed. Devices equipped with power electronic
can control their power output and for example they can be instructed to automatically
respond to change of ROCOF [27]. This is called synthetic inertia which simulate the
resistance of a rotational mass. Fast frequency response is considered comparable to inertia
response but it is proportional to frequency deviation.
Primary frequency control (PFC) or Frequency containment reserve (FCR) are a
relatively fast responsive services intended to maintain the frequency close to the nominal
value reacting faster to small deviations. In general primary control is also designed to
react to major generation outages and to stop the frequency drop.
Secondary frequency control (SFC) or Frequency restoration reserve (FRR) are
intended to restore the frequency and bring its value back in the allowed window or to
nominal value, after a contingency events. They should also take over primary frequency
9
==PAGE:20==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
control a relief those units from prolonged operation.
Tertiary frequency control are usually manual activated reserves which change units’
commitment to reach and maintain a new balance and an optimal dispatch of power
generation.
This general classiﬁcation of the frequency related services does not usually reﬂect the
services designed by each TSO to maintain stable frequency in their power systems. In
many power system in fact, the primary frequency control and secondary frequency control
are provided by diﬀerent multiple services. In the following section a focus in Eastern
Denmark (specially on FCR-N) is made. The frequency regulation in other power systems
are also brieﬂy described.
2.1
Frequency reserves in Eastern Denmark
Energinet.dk is the TSO in Denmark and deﬁnes the requirements and methods to procure
the frequency regulation services. The Danish power system is divided in two main regions:
Western Denmark (DK1) and Eastern Denmark (DK2). DK1 is part of the Regional Group
- Continental Europe (RG-CE) while DK2 is part of the Regional Group - Nordic (RG-N).
Regional groups are organization in Europe whose aim is to organize and guide TSOs in
the speciﬁc area of competence. Due to the fact that DK1 and DK2 are in two diﬀerent
synchronous areas they have diﬀerent services and regulations.
The frequency services and the market structure are described by Energinet.dk in "Ancillary
services to be delivered in Denmark - Tender condition" [28]. In both DK2 and DK1 the
tertiary frequency regulation is a manual reserve centrally coordinated by the TSO and
is called manual Frequency Restoration Reserve (mFRR). There is not a clear deﬁnition
for a proper secondary regulation service in DK2, combination of two types of primary
regulation services and manual activation of tertiary reserves is used instead.
Table 2.1: Diﬀerent services for frequency control. For each service general indication of
activation time and time for which it has to be provided are reported. Power electronic
connected units can provide synthetic inertia or fast response.
Service
Activation
Activation
time
Actuation
time
Provided 
with
Inertia Response
or
Fast response
natural (synchronous)
automatic (non-synchronous)
< 2s
seconds
Rotating mass
Power electronics
Primary control
(containement)
automatic
about 30s
minutes
Proportional
controller
Secondary control
(restoration)
automatic
or
manual
minutes
as long as 
required
PI controller
Manual dispatch
Tertiary control
manual
minutes
as long as 
required
Manual dispatch
10
==PAGE:21==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
2.1.1
Frequency containment reserves
In Eastern Denmark the primary frequency response is divided in two services: Frequency-
Controlled Normal operation Reserve (FCR-N) and Frequency-Controlled Disturbance
Reserve (FCR-D). Their speciﬁc goal are diﬀerent but the main common objective is to
keep the frequency at 50 Hz.
FCR-N
The Frequency-Controlled Normal operation Reserve is so called because it is
intended to react to every deviation from nominal frequency. A unit providing FCR-N
is required to automatically respond to the frequency deviation measured by its control
equipment. It means that, in DK2, to have access to the frequency regulation market
metering devices must be approved.
FCR-N is a symmetrical service: upward regulation (when frequency is below 50 Hz) and
downward regulation (when frequency is above 50 Hz) must be provided together. The
power response of the unit must be proportional to the frequency deviation in the range of
49.9 - 50.1 Hz, without deadband. Above and below this limits the oﬀered power must
be provided. The unit has 150 s to provide the full response and is required to operate
continuously. This activation time is linked to thermal unit capability. BESS and most of
power electronic connected units can respond under 1 second and thus can better provide
balancing for small frequency deviations and keep frequency closer to 50 Hz.
FCR-N is procured daily with a market mechanism by Energinet and the Swedish TSO
Svenska Kraftnät, one or two day in advance. Hourly bid with a minimum size of 0.3 MW
are sent to the TSOs which order them by price. Received bid are then accepted until the
capacity needed is covered at the lowest cost for the TSO. The accepted units are paid
with the price they oﬀered.
During FCR-N provision also energy as to be traded, the applied price depends on the
balancing market prices as it will be discussed in the methodology.
FCR-D
The Frequency-Controlled Disturbance Reserve is also primary frequency
regulation service but it is unidirectional: units are required to react to underfrequency
events larger than 49.9 Hz. Response time must be faster than FCR-N. Also FCR-D is
automatic and must follow its own measurement of frequency.
Tender condition for this service and other services are not further discussed, but the
public documentation "Ancillary services to be delivered in Denmark - Tender condition"
[28] provide all the details for each service.
2.2
Frequency reserve in Western Denmark
In DK1 frequency regulation services are similar to continental Europe. They are divided
in three groups.
Frequency-Controlled Reserve (FCR)
The primary reserve service in DK1 is
intended to keep frequency close to 50 Hz but in this case a deadband for operation
11
==PAGE:22==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
is used: no response is required between 49.98 and 50.02 Hz. This deadband can be used
by units such as storage to try to correct anomalous SOC condition.
Activation time is 15 s for the ﬁrst half of the required power output and 30 s to reach full
activation. Another major diﬀerence is the actuation time: the regulation must be provided
for minimum 15 minutes or as long as it is not substituted by a manually activated reserve.
After this period the plant has other 15 minutes to recover the reserve.
From battery point of view it means the after 15 minutes of intervention there are 15
minutes in which the battery can reestablish its SOC. [15] found that this is not healthy
for both the system and the battery. The research group point out that a system with this
behaviour will deliver frequency support for 15 minutes but if the deviation last longer
the units will suddenly shift from supportive to cause of imbalance when the 15 minutes
are over and restoration begin. This can be seen as an example of design that doesn’t
ﬁt with battery behaviour. A traditional thermal plant only interrupts support after 15
minutes but it doesn’t become an source of imbalance. The only way for a battery to
recover the reserve is absorb or consume power from the grid if it is not coupled with
back-up controllable generator.
Also FCR is procured via market mechanism. Anyway there are two separated market:
one for upward regulation and one for downward regulation.
Automatic frequency restoration reserve, aFRR
aFRR is the secondary reserve
used in case of severe deviations from balance and to substitute the primary frequency
reserve once the frequency has been stabilized. Secondary reserve must provide both
upward and downward regulation power as symmetrical service and they are automatically
activated responding to signals from Energinet.
Manual frequency restoration reserve, mFRR
Manual reserves are intended to
substitute aFRR and FCR in case of minor unbalances and are used to ensure balance in
case of failure of major units or interconnections. These service is provided by production
or consumption unit that are already generating or consuming and the operation set-point
is manually changed.
2.3
Primary frequency reserve in United Kingdom
The TSO of United Kingdom is National Grid (NG). In UK upward and downward
regulation services are divided in response and reserves; the ﬁrst (primary regulation
services) is intended to be faster and limit the frequency change while the second (secondary
regulation services) has slower activation and longer duration [18]. Figure 2.1 present them
graphically.
There are four services labeled as response: enhanced frequency response (EFR), primary
and secondary response and high response. These services are designed in order to allow a
unit to provide all of them simultaneously.
12
==PAGE:23==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
Figure 2.1: Services procured in UK. Positive indicated a positive change of power to
handle underfrequency and viceversa. From [18].
Primary and secondary response are required to be fully activated in 10 s and 30 s
respectively in case of underfrequency, primary reserve must remain active for 10 s while
secondary for up to 15 minutes. High response is also required to react in 10 s from the
event but in case of overfrequency.
Enhanced frequency response is a relatively new service designed to face the reduce system
inertia and increased variability of production [18]. Units are required to react to frequency
deviation (positive or negative) from 50 Hz with full response within 1 s.
NG recognizes that the future system will face reduced inertia due to increased penetration
of renewable and power electronic connected generation. This means that the frequency
will change faster and may reach alert state (maximum deviation from nominal frequency)
before the full activation of balancing units. To tackle this problem with primary and
secondary response the British TSO should procure additional reserves such that the total
response is correct before the 10 seconds. The alternative is the procurement of a faster
service as EFR.
Quicker response is preferred for two reasons. The ﬁrst is that the combination of the
enhanced, primary and secondary frequency response (or enhanced and high response for
overfrequency) require a lower power capacity compared to only primary and secondary
response. NG estimate that "550MW of enhanced, primary and secondary response can be
compared with 817MW of primary and secondary" [18].
Second reason is that to have a response able to stop frequency before the alert state,
primary and secondary response must be over-procured and once they are fully activated
the frequency will bounce from the lowest point reached to and higher one. The lower the
inertia the more severe the bounce. This is not healthy for the system and can be avoided
with the use of faster response. An example of simulated response of primary+secondary
and enhanced+primary+secondary is shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Summarizing the main reason to introduce a fast response service are lower inertia and
diﬃculties to handle it properly only with the combination of primary and secondary
response. Speciﬁcally:
13
==PAGE:24==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
Enhanced
Primary
Secondary
Primary
Secondary
Figure 2.2:
Comparison between over-procurement of primary+secondary and en-
hanced+primary+secondary combined response. Adapted from [18].
• faster response lowers the capacity procurement needed (no need of over-procurement),
• faster response avoid bounce eﬀects of frequency due to stronger but slow response,
• strong but slow response can become completely unable to stop frequency change
before it reach the maximum allowed deviation [29].
2.4
Primary frequency reserve in Germany
German and DK1 services are very similar as they use three level of frequency regulation.
Primary frequency regulation require a response to deviation between 49.8 - 50.2 Hz with
a deadband of ±0.01 Hz in which the unit power output may deviate from set point (for
example to reestablish the energy reserve). The unit must respond in maximum 30 s.
The service is contracted weekly. Unlike the danish market, energy is not traded when
providing primary reserve.
German regulation have speciﬁc rules for frequency regulation provision with storage units.
The main one regards the minimum and maximum allowed states of charge of the unit.
The unit must assure response for at least 30 minutes in every moment of the contracted
14
==PAGE:25==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
period. It means that the ratio of power oﬀer and energy capacity deﬁne a range of SOC
that assure energy provision in case maximum power output is required for at least 30
minutes. This is referred to as the 30 minutes criterion. As said in the introduction
European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) suggest
a 15 minutes criterion deﬁned in the same way. Figure 2.3 from [20] shows the comparison
of the two criterions. The ﬁgure clearly states that under the 30 minutes criterion it is not
possible to oﬀer a energy to power ratio smaller than one, and that if this ratio is equal to
1 the unit would not be able to deviate its SOC from 50% and thus to deliver the service.
Figure 2.3: Allowed SOC range with 15 minutes and 30 minutes criterion. Figure from
[20]. Note that the range depends on the ratio between power oﬀer and energy capacity
but eﬃciency is not taken into consideration by the authors.
This minimum and maximum SOC are required while the frequency progression is in
normal state. When frequency depart from normal progression the unit must deliver the
service for a time deﬁned by the used criterion (30 minutes in Germany). After this time
the unit is not required to deliver the service and once the frequency progression goes
back to normal state a period of 2 hours is allowed to reestablish the energy reserve and
start service again. Such a long time it is probably deﬁned considering the length of the
contracted periods that is 1 week. Frequency depart from normal operation if:
• a frequency deviation of at least 0.05 Hz last for 15 minutes,
• a frequency deviation of at least 0.1 Hz last for 5 minutes,
• frequency deviate of 0.2 Hz.
In order to respect the 30 minutes criterion storage units can use the 4 Degrees of Freedom
(DoF) which allow a operation diﬀerent from normal characteristic. The DoF are brieﬂy
explained below.
15
==PAGE:26==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
2.4.1
Degrees of Freedom
Overfulﬁllment
The power set-point deﬁned by the droop characteristic and thus by
power oﬀer and required response can be increased by up to 20%.
Deadband
When frequency is between 49.99 and 50.01 Hz no response is required, but
the unit can deliver the service anyway if it helps to maintain the SOC.
Provision rate
The required minimum time of 30 s for the response can be adjusted
within certain limit.
Scheduled transactions
The unit can trade in the Intraday market to deﬁne a new
set-point that will maintain the SOC in the required range. Intraday trading take place
every 15 minutes in Germany. This represents a quick tool to modify the BESS power
response and thus is considered the most eﬀective of the DoF [20].
The four degree of freedom allow to slightly change the energy content of the frequency
deviation and thus increase the possibilities to maintain the SOC inside the allowed range.
Further research on the topic may clarify if the large use of these DoF by a large number
of units negatively or positively impact system stability.
2.5
Frequency services in PJM
In USA the electric grid is operated and maintained by several Independent System
Operators (ISO) and Regional Transmission Organizations (RTO) which have the same
task of TSOs. PJM (Pennsylvania-New Jersey-Maryland) interconnection is the RTO of
one of the largest areas in North America.
2.5.1
Primary frequency regulation signal in PJM
In PJM regulation unit must automatically respond to a signal sent by the RTO that is
constructed to minimize the Area Control Error and thus minimize the imbalance between
generation, consumption and import/export. Traditionally there was a single signal for
frequency regulation, but in 2012 the signal was divided in two components, one faster
and one slower [30]. These two components are called RegD and RegA respectively. The
fast regulation signal was designed to be "energy neutral" over 15 minutes. It means that
energy storage units able to quickly respond to RegD signal can easily provide the fast
service required without problem related to energy capacity.
The idea of introducing such signals was to capitalize on the ability of storage fast response
while considering their inability to sustain operation for long duration [30]. As already
discussed in section 2.3 faster response reduces the amount of power required to contain
unbalances and thus reduces the total cost of frequency regulation. A certain quantity of
RegD procurement was identiﬁed as optimal to complement RegA reserve.
16
==PAGE:27==
2. An overview of frequency regulation services
This design of the RegD signal to obtain energy neutrality was not optimal since, in some
cases, units responding to RegA signal were required to counteract the response of RegD
units. This means that the RTO was paying two services cancelling each other.
The design of RegD and the amount of such regulation now considered sub-optimal were
correct. The amount of RegD power was reduced and energy neutrality over 15 minutes
substituted by a conditional energy neutrality: the RegD signal is now energy neutral only
if there is enough RegA capacity to sustain both imbalance and RegD needs [31].
These modiﬁcation signiﬁcantly reduced the manual corrections of the signal preventing
RegD to move excessively in the wrong direction, but it also reduced the ability of the whole
system to precisely follow the regulation signal. Anyway even though the precision was
lowered the ACE average was closer to zero meaning that the procured reserve improved
the ability to maintain system balance [30].
Storage operators in PJM’s regulation market started a complaint campaign claiming that
reduction of value given to RegD response reﬂects the previous design of the signal, but,
with the introduction of conditional energy neutrality, the new signal has a higher value
that should be recognized.
2.5.2
Regulation market in PJM
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission released the FERC Order 755 requiring system
operators to implement pay for performance payment in the frequency regulation market.
The performance of a unit refers to its ability to precisely follow the control signal received
by the TSO.
[14] provides an overview of the market mechanism in US. It shows that the traditional
payment received by a unit providing frequency regulation comes from these parameters:
• Regulation capacity Pbid, that is the power oﬀered in the regulation market and is
paid per MW,
• mileage M, that is the sum of the absolute movement of the control signal, it represent
the history of the response that the unit must provide,
• performance ratio p, that represent a percentage factor indicating how precisely the
unit followed the control signal.
Both capacity a mileage are paid but depending on the system operator the performance
ratio may be used to reduce both or just one of the payment. In the case of PJM there
is an additional characteristic, in fact, the mileage of a unit is divided by the mileage of
the RagA signal. Since the ration between RegD and RegA mileage is typically around 3
(RegD ramp much faster) RegD signal receive an higher payment with same capacity and
performance ratio [14]. Equation 2.1 shows the formula to calculate hourly payment λ in
PJM market design. λP and λM are respectively the power capacity price and the mileage
price deﬁned in the regulation market.
λ = p · C
 
λP +
M
MRegA
· λM
!
(2.1)
17
==PAGE:28==
3
METHODOLOGY
3.1
Operation set-point deﬁnition
In this study a BESS participating in the FCR-N market in DK2 is simulated. The unit has
to respond to deviation of frequency up to 50 ± 0.1 Hz without deadband. The operation
is continuous in the hours for which the service is sold. This is summarized in Table 3.1.
This means that, every deviation pf frequency from nominal value, requires a FCR-N unit
to provide power accordingly. Even if FCR-N allow a certain delay of response, BESS is
assumed to react as fast as possible to any frequency deviation.
Table 3.1: Requirements for FCR-N service.
Value
Unit
Activation time
150
[s]
Actuation time
continuously
-
Maximum deviation
± 0.1
[Hz]
Minimum deviation
0
[Hz]
Nominal frequency
50
[Hz]
Simulation are initially done on 2016 for which frequency data are provided by DTU. These
data have a resolution of 1 second and are used to deﬁne the power set-point of the BESS.
A storage system can act both as generator and load. If its power for no deviation is equal
to 0, when the frequency is between 50 Hz and 50.1 Hz the unit must consume power
while, when the frequency is between 49.9 Hz and 50 Hz the system must generate power.
Considering this balancing power from the grid point of view it will be negative (load)
in case of overfrequency, or positive (generator) in case of underfrequency as reported in
Equation 3.1. fup and fdw are the maximum (50.1 Hz) and minimum (49.9 Hz) frequency
values for FCR-N respectively.



P < 0
when f > 50 Hz
P > 0
when f < 50 Hz
(3.1)
To obtain the exact set point of the balancing power a droop characteristic is needed. The
droop characteristic deﬁnes the relation between power level and frequency deviation, and
is basically the proportional coeﬃcient of the controller of the unit. It is calculated using
equation 3.2.
R =
2 · Pbid
fup −fdw
(3.2)
18
==PAGE:29==
3. Methodology
where R is the Droop and Pbid is the power bid accepted in the FCR-N market. Note
that such formulation is possible since the service and thus the Droop characteristic is
symmetric with respect to 50 Hz, diﬀerent droop characteristic are used for diﬀerent
services. Following equation 3.3 the power requirement is deﬁned.
Pbal(t) = (50 −f(t)) · R
(3.3)
When the frequency reach 50.1 Hz the balancing power will be equal to −Pbid while at 49.9
it will be Pbid. Note that following equation 3.3, there is no limit to power requirements if
frequency assumes a value outside the FCR-N windows 49.9 - 50.1 Hz. When the frequency
rise above 50.1 Hz the BESS is still required to consume power but the level is limited at
−Pbid. In the same way when the frequency drops below 49.9 Hz the BESS is required to
generate a power equal to Pbid. This is summarized in equation 3.4.









Pbal(t) = −Pbid
f ≥fup
Pbal(t) = (50 −f(t)) · R
fdw < f < fup
Pbal(t) = Pbid
f ≤fdw
(3.4)
This and the sign convention are shown in Figure 3.1.
If a diﬀerent power bid is made every hour the absolute value of the response will be
diﬀerent but droop characteristic will remain the same in percentage values.
Figure 3.1: Droop characteristic for a system providing FCR-N
19
==PAGE:30==
3. Methodology
3.2
Availability payment and energy prices
As already explained, the BESS is required both to generate and consume power to
deliver the regulating service. Section 2.1 brieﬂy describe how the unit a unit is rewarded.
Considering only the operation, the revenues of such unit are made of two main part:
• revenues from the ancillary service market, that is the reward for keeping power
available and ready to balance the system
• revenues from the energy exchange in the balancing market.
These two sources of revenues are explained below.
3.2.1
Availability payment
The unit oﬀers some of its (or the whole) power capacity ready to deliver balancing in
response to frequency deviation. FCR-N power availability is rewarded with the pay-as-bid
mechanism. It means the the operator of the simulated BESS doesn’t have any incentive
in bidding its marginal price but instead it will be motivated in bidding a price that is
a trade-oﬀbetween high revenues and high probability of its oﬀer to be accepted. This
kind of evaluation can be made with some knowledge of the price and power proposed by
other players, but these information are not publicly available. Energinet publishes online
the weighted average of the availability prices for each hour of the year. For simplicity,
considering the goal of this study, the simulated units is considered always accepted as
balancing unit and the average prices are used to evaluate the availability payment it
receives.
3.2.2
Energy settlement
The second part of the revenues depends on the costs sustained by the BESS to acquire
the energy during charge and the revenues for the energy sold during discharge. Energy is
traded both to deliver the service and to restore the SOC.
To understand how the energy prices for a unit providing FCR-N are determined, it is
necessary to understand how the balancing market works in Denmark. It is important
anyway, to specify that the BESS does not participate actively in the balancing market,
instead the balancing market outcomes are used to deﬁne the prices of electricity that such
unit will face during its operation.
In the balancing market power is traded in order to correct errors between scheduled
generation and consumption and actual operation capability at the time of delivery. For
example it may happen that a unit is contracted for a certain power generation in the
day-ahead market, but it cannot actually operate at time of the delivery. In this situation
the market faces an imbalance between the contracted generation and consumption and
thus additional transaction are needed to recover the balance.
If the system needs more power, the ﬁrst players excluded at the day-ahead market clearing
will be asked to sell their power, but this will have a price higher than the day ahead price
(up-regulation price). If the system need less power, some of the sold power need to be
repurchased but this will be made at a lower price (down-regulation price). The price
20
==PAGE:31==
3. Methodology
deﬁned in this way are referred to as balancing prices and they of course diﬀer from the
day-ahead price. If there is need of up-regulation it means that some generation units are
required to produce more energy that what it was contracted the day ahead, this energy
will be sold at the up-regulation price. If a unit is intentionally producing the missing
energy it is a balancing unit and will receive a high price for this energy, if the unit is
causing the imbalance it will have to pay this price for the energy not produced. If there
is need of down-regulation the balancing unit either buys back some energy or consume
more but the price applied to this energy is lower than the day-ahead price, if a unit is
causing the imbalance it means it is producing too much energy and this extra production
worth less.
In Denmark a two-price settlement is used to diﬀerentiate intentional and unintentional
support of players. It means that if the system is imbalanced and the unit are causing the
imbalance or are intentionally helping the system the balancing price is applied. However,
it can happen the a unit set-point diﬀers from schedule but it unintentionally helps the
system, in this case the day-ahead price is used. This is done to avoid arbitrage opportunity
with participation in both day-ahead and balancing markets.
When the BESS is generating power to counter underfrequency it is considered intentionally
helping the system and thus the balancing price is applied. The same is valid when the
BESS consumes power to counter overfrequency. When it is restoring its SOC, either during
a failed hour or during a not contracted hour, the operation is considered an unintentional
support or a cause of the imbalance, depending on the system needs. In the ﬁrst case
the day-ahead price is used, in the second case the balancing price is used. Figure 3.2
summarize and better shows the energy prices applied to BESS depending on its operation.
Figure 3.2 shows that, when the BESS is helping the system on purpose, it is supposed to
face favorable prices compared to day-ahead prices, while if its operation is not intentionally
helping the system unfavorable prices are applied.
The comparison between frequency pattern and balancing prices shows that for some
hour of 2016 even if the measured frequency is mostly above 50 Hz, the balancing market
required up-regulation. In other hours down-regulation is required even if the frequency
stays mostly under nominal value. This is not totally strange since the balancing market
closes well before the actual operation and it is mostly a ﬁnancial market based on traded
power and not on physical power needs (namely the frequency deviation).
3.2.3
Taxes on electricity
For commercial and private consumer the electricity prices is made up of not only the
price resulting from the markets but also of diﬀerent taxes. The total charge on electricity
consumption in Denmark is made up of diﬀerent taxes and levies that increase the cost
deﬁned in the market. Here some of them are brieﬂy presented [32], [15]:
• Transmission grid tariﬀ. Its aim is to cover the distribution grid infrastructure cost
faced by the TSO
• System tariﬀ. It is intended to cover TSO’s cost for balancing responsibility.
21
==PAGE:32==
3. Methodology
Start
SOC 
Restoration
System 
needs
Down 
regulation
Down
regulation price
Up regulation 
price
What 
restoration?
Charging
Discharging
Up 
regulation
System 
needs
Up 
regulation
Down regulation
price
Day-ahead 
price
Down 
regulation
System 
needs
Up
regulation
Up regulation 
price
Down 
regulation
Day-ahead 
price
Causing Imbalance
Causing Imbalance
Unintentional support
Unintentional
operation
Intentional
operation
Yes
No
Figure 3.2: Deﬁnition of energy prices applied to the BESS delivering FCR-N service.
• Distribution grid tariﬀ. Is made of diﬀerent parts and it depends from the local
distribution system operator.
• PSO. Public Service Obligation is used to support initiative in the energy ﬁeld such
as renewables support schemes and research and development in the energy ﬁeld.
In addition to these taxes the indirect "value added tax" can be added as it is paid on
every good and service consumed [33]. The VAT has a ﬁxed value and is a percentage of
the price of the good (including other taxes). The current VAT is 25% in Denmark [34],
meaning that the ﬁnal cost of electricity (sum of electricity price and taxes) is increased of
25%.
In [35] the electricity prices during the last semester of 2018 are reported for each European
member state. Two type of electricity user are identiﬁed "households" and "non-households".
The interesting category is the second one as the BESS is a utility operated system. Prices
in EUR/kWh are reported without taxes, with electricity related taxes and with value-
added-tax (VAT).
Data on interesting countries are reported in Table 3.2 and Figure 3.3.
22
==PAGE:33==
3. Methodology
Table 3.2: Electricity prices and taxes for Denmark, some other counties and Europe
average. Note the VAT may diﬀer between various countries but the danish value of 25%
is always used in this table [36].
Country
no-Taxes
Taxes (no VAT)
Taxes + VAT
Denmark
0.059
0.081
0.101
EU-28
0.080
0.114
0.143
Euro area
0.080
0.119
0.149
United Kingdom
0.097
0.134
0.168
Germany
0.077
0.150
0.187
0,00
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,10
0,12
0,14
0,16
0,18
0,20
Denmark
EU-28
Euro area
United
Kingdom
Germany
Electricity prices for non-household consumers, first half 2018
(EUR per kWh)
Without taxes
Taxes without VAT
VAT (25%)
Figure 3.3: Electricity prices and taxes for Denmark, some other countries and Europe
average. Note the VAT is may diﬀer between various countries but the danish value of
25% is used in this table. Adapted from [36]
The author adds some consideration on the data provided.
• "Non-household" consumers are consumers with "annual consumption of electricity
between 500 and 2 000 MWh".
• Electricity price schemes diﬀer on the basis of the provider a may be result of
negotiation and bilateral contract. This especially true for large non-household
consumers. There is, therefore, no single price for electricity.
• The article shows an average of the prices in the analyzed semester.
• For non-household consumer VAT is not included as it is generally recoverable.
The same is true for other taxes/fees/levies that are not included in the the price
presented.
For the electricity price calculation in this thesis, the diﬀerence between electricity price
with taxes and the price without taxes is used. As result, when taxes are applied, the
electricity price is increased of 0.22 EUR/kWh, if also VAT is considered the ﬁnal price for
electricity is increased by 25%.
23
==PAGE:34==
3. Methodology
3.3
System losses and eﬃciency levels
The whole battery energy storage system is composed by many components that allow the
correct functioning, control and monitoring. Every component that is not a battery cell
or the power conversion unit (inverter) is considered an auxiliary. The main auxiliaries
are listed below, consumption of these elements contribute partially to the system global
eﬃciency:
• lighting,
• control system,
• protection systems,
• SCADA measurement and communication system,
• thermal management unit (TMU).
Many of these components consume a ﬁxed amount of power as they are always running
to provide constant monitoring (sensors and communication systems), security (alarm and
protection systems) or allow the plant management and operation.
Diﬀerently the TMU is used to maintain the battery racks and converter in acceptable
temperature range which minimize the degradation and maximize conversion eﬃciency.
TMU’s consumption is dependant on four main factors:
• The outside temperature inﬂuences how TMU has to operate and the thermal energy
ﬂux. It is independent on BESS operation.
• Internal plant temperature depends on BESS operation since it is determined by
joule losses which are dependant on the power throughput.
• Room thermal insulation.
• TMU own eﬃciency.
Since the studied system is not in existence and the simulation does not rely on a detailed
model the estimation of such consumption is hard as it requires a detailed design.
Anyway, some assumption can be made to simplify the problem.
For example if
the insulation is diﬀerent and the allowed temperature range is less restricted, TMU
consumption is less dependant on plant operation. A study conducted in Western Denmark
by the Danish Technological Institute [15] on a similar plant indicates that under this
assumption thermal conditioning consumption is not strongly related to BESS operation.
In this work this simpliﬁcation is used and the consumption indicated in [15] is used for
auxiliary consumption as constant value.
Auxiliaries are not the only elements contributing to system eﬃciency. Also the inverter
(or inverters) have a certain individual eﬃciency which reduce the actual power delivered
both towards the grid and towards the battery. Inverter eﬃciency is generally dependant
from the converted power level: normally the highest eﬃciency is close to nominal power
while converting low power levels gives lower eﬃciency. Moreover inverters have an idle
power consumption, it means that even when not in operation some power is consumed to
keep the component on and ready. In the case of continue power delivery for FCR-N it
24
==PAGE:35==
3. Methodology
is rare to have the inverter in stand-by but this minimum power consumption is always
present and aﬀects power conversion eﬃciency.
Obviously also battery itself has a certain eﬃciency.
The energy loss associated to
the battery are due to side unwanted reactions and to resistive losses during electricity
conversion. Battery eﬃciency is not easy to model as it depends on the current and voltage
used to charge or discharge the battery. As said in the introduction, battery modelling can
be quite complicated but high level of accuracy strongly increase the computational eﬀort.
To simplify the eﬃciency calculation in each moment of the simulated period, system
losses are modelled using the indication included in [16] and [15]. The former provide a
linear curve for inverter, battery rack and LV-panel losses as function of power level, for
a 630 kW/460 kWh BESS, but it does not mention the losses related to consumption of
TMU and other auxiliaries. These are instead taken from experimental result of the latter
reference.
Some simpliﬁcation are therefore made using such values:
• Non-auxiliary losses (battery, inverter and LV-panel) are considered linearly increasing
with the load (converted power).
• The losses curve is considered scalable from the original size of 630 kW to 1 MW
linearly.
• Auxiliaries and thermal management unit consumption is constant whatever the
load.
The resulting value of total losses (losses including auxiliary consumption) are referred
to as "realistic losses" since, even if approximated, they are obtained considering realistic
data. To analyze the eﬀect of losses on BESS performance two additional level of global
eﬃciency are deﬁned as shown in Table 3.3. Here Lmin refers to the total losses when no
power is converted (thus converter idle consumption and auxiliary consumption) and Lmax
refers to the total losses when nominal power is converted.
"Perfect Eﬃciency" refers to a system with neither losses nor additional consumption from
any of the used components. This is highly unrealistic but allows interesting consideration.
"Low Eﬃciency" refers to a system with high total losses. Since the used parameters does
not provide individual components contribution to total losses this level of eﬃciency use
losses that are increased from the realistic case. Values used in this case are not based on
any existing study or system but are artiﬁcially deﬁned to allow the comparison with a
realistic system and to show the impact of poor eﬃciency on both technical and economic
performance.
Table 3.3: Eﬃciency levels and related losses. Lmin and Lmax refer to converter, battery
and LV-panel related losses.
Perfect eﬃciency
Realistic Eﬃciency
Low Eﬃciency
Lmin [KW]
0
8
104
Lmax [KW]
0
48
144
Auxiliary Consumption [KW]
0
10
30
25
==PAGE:36==
3. Methodology
Figures 3.4 and 3.5 present the eﬃciency-load and losses-load curves respectively. The
eﬃciency is calculated with 3.5, where P is the load in MW, auxiliary is the "Auxiliary
Consumption" and L(P) are the losses which depend on P linearly and are between Lmin
and Lmax.
η =
P
P + auxiliary + L(P)
(3.5)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Load [MW]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Efficiency [-]
Efficiency curves
Low
Realistic
Perfect
Figure 3.4: Calculated power-eﬃciency curve for each eﬃciency level.
It is possible to see from 3.5 that due to the method used to deﬁne the "low eﬃciency level",
its losses curve is a simple translation of the realistic eﬃciency. In this way the created
curve keeps the same slope of the realistic losses curve meaning that it allows comparison
with a hypothetical system that has increased losses at both low and high level of load.
Figure 3.4 shows that ﬁxed losses not dependant from the load level, weight more at low
load levels as expected.
26
==PAGE:37==
3. Methodology
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
P [MW]
0
50
100
150
L(P) [kW]
Total losses curves
Low
Realistic
Perfect
Figure 3.5: Power-total losses curve L(P) for each eﬃciency level. Auxiliary consumption
is not included in this graph.
3.4
Parameters for performance evaluation
In this section the method to extract parameters to compare diﬀerent cases and scenarios
are presented and their calculation is explained. They are: average eﬃciency, failure rate
and percentage of unavailability.
All of them only depend on technical parameter such as size of the power bid, starting SOC
and eﬃciency level other than from the operational strategy used. Revenues calculation has
been explained, they are use to evaluate the economic performance of the unit. Technical
and economic performance together are used to evaluate the strategy and the regulation
framework.
3.4.1
Average eﬃciency
As already explained the eﬃciency of the system highly depends on the load level in every
second. It is highly variable for low load where eﬃciency curve is steeper, while it gets
more stable closer to nominal power.
To summarize the eﬃciency eﬀect of the system it is natural to deﬁne an average eﬃciency
for the operation that is calculated with equation 3.6.
ηaverage =
T
X
t=1
ηt
T
(3.6)
27
==PAGE:38==
3. Methodology
where ηt is the eﬃciency calculated with equation 3.5 at second t and T is the number
of seconds in the analyzed period. This way of calculating the average eﬃciency would
include also the periods of SOC restoration and possible periods the power exchange is 0.
Such periods are actually removed from the calculation to allow a better representation
of the average eﬃciency of the unit only when it delivers the contracted service. With
these consideration T is the total of seconds in 2016 excluding restoration and idle periods
occurring after failures.
Average eﬃciency is expected to increase with the power bid since it means that that BESS
will use a higher portion of the nominal power more often.
3.4.2
Failure rate
The failure rate is expressed as the percentage of the total contracted hours, in which the
BESS failed in delivering frequency service completely.
When the BESS is able to deliver the service for at least one second the corespondent
hour is considered failed. The number of this hour is compared to the number of hour of
contracted operation to give the failure rate as deﬁned in equation 3.7.
failure rate =
hours failed
hour of contracted operation · 100
(3.7)
3.4.3
Percentage of unavailability
Similarly to failure rate, the unavailability measure the actual time of failed operation.
The diﬀerence between the previous parameter is in the time step considered. For the
failure rate hours are considered to better relate the parameter and availability payment
revenues. Unavailability is instead measured on the actual time in which the BESS requires
restoration and does not deliver the contracted service and thus it is calculated on seconds.
Equation 3.8 is used
unavailability =
time of failed operation
total seconds in the contracted period · 100
(3.8)
This parameter is used for three main reason:
• better report the actual ability of the BESS to deliver grid service
• allow the evaluation of possible rewards based on performance
• compare actual regulation with alternative regulation where no penalty is applied for
failed operation
3.5
Base cases
For a system of 1MW/1MWh the maximum possible bid is the nominal power of the power
conversion unit (inverter) thus 1 MW. Accordingly to the regulation for FCR-N explained
in Section 2.1 the power bid cannot be lower of 0.3 MW.
28
==PAGE:39==
3. Methodology
The BESS is supposed to operate continuously without any planned interruption. Since
some frequency deviations last for hours and the BESS doesn’t have a period to reestablish
its SOC it is likely to have situation in which the battery is either too full to provide
downward regulation or too empty to provide upward regulation.
With these assumption the base case scenarios use the minimum power bid allowed as this
is expected to minimize the failures in service provision, while respecting the regulation.
The aim is to provide a starting point to evaluate the eﬀects of parameters change and
diﬀerent scenarios.
3.5.1
Operational strategy
Since the base case is used as starting point for the evaluation of performance the strategy
is quite simple. As said above the BESS operator bids every day 24 hours of service for
the next day of operation and the power bid is always 0.3 MW. In this way the BESS is
supposed to deliver FCR-N service in every hour of the year. The fact that the BESS is
bidding a power that would empty energy capacity in about 3 hours, doesn’t remove at all
the possibility of failure (namely battery too full or too empty to deliver service).
Deﬁnition of failed hour.
To deﬁne a base operational strategy considering such
failures, it is assumed the following: if in a certain second the battery is required to deliver
a certain amount of energy that will bring its SOC either over 100% or below 0% the
current hour is considered failed as the service is not delivered completely. This assumption
may be too strict as 1 second of missed service provision can be the diﬀerence between
incurring in a penalty or being rewarded with the availability payment. However, failure
is the result of prolonged and/or severe frequency deviation and it is expected that if
the system ask a regulation which empty (or ﬁll) the battery, it is going to require the
regulation of the same sign also for some time after BESS failure.
This said, in the model describing the BESS operation, to overcharge or to over-discharge
means that the current hour is a "failed" hour, the BESS will get a penalty and face
unfavorable energy prices for the whole hour since energy settlement is made on the hourly
net energy consumption.
SOC restoration
With this assumption on deﬁnition of failed hour, when the battery
reach 100% or 0% SOC a period of restoration starts. During restoration the BESS
consumes or deliver power in order to bring the SOC as fast as possible at the starting
value SOCstart, to be ready at the beginning of the next hour. This means that during
restoration the nominal power of 1 MW is used either to charge or discharge the battery.
For example if the battery reaches full capacity it will start to deliver 1 MW of power to
the grid as long as the SOC does not reach SOCstart or as long as a new hour of operation
begin. It may seems odd to stop the restoration of the battery even if the aimed value
SOCstart is not achieved, but the BESS may be able to successfully deliver regulation
service even starting with a diﬀerent SOC, if frequency pattern is favourable. Instead,
complete restoration may require a longer period then what is available between failure and
beginning of next hour, thus if restoration is always completed it may cause no service in
29
==PAGE:40==
3. Methodology
two consecutive hour, both considered failed. If restoration is not completed the following
hour starts with a SOC too high or too low and this may lead to another failure, but
there is still the opportunity of correct operation. More over for a certain amount of time
between the end of the failed hour and the eventual new failure the battery is delivering
the contracted service. This may decrease the actual time of unavailability.
If the restoration process achieve the wanted SOC value before the end of the hour, for the
remaining period the power output is 0 since service in this period is not rewarded and
losses and taxes are likely to generate costs more than revenues for exchanged energy.
3.5.2
Base case scenarios
There are a total of 3 base cases compared in the ﬁrst stage. They diﬀer in the eﬃciency
level assumed. Each level of eﬃciency is simulated under diﬀerent tax scheme. The three
tax scheme are:
1. No tax applied to energy consumed
2. Tax are applied but VAT is excluded
3. Tax and VAT are both applied
Comparison of 3 eﬃciency levels under 3 tax schemes gives 9 base cases scenarios where
the BESS operator sell 0.3 MW of available power for 24 hours of FCR-N service every day.
This is shown summarized in Figure 3.6. The speciﬁc conﬁguration is deﬁned by power
oﬀer and SOCstart and is referred to as base case conﬁguration.
Pbid = 0.3 MW
SOCstart = 0.5
24 hours every day
Low 
efficiency
No taxes
Taxes
Taxes+VAT
Real 
efficiency
No taxes
Taxes
Taxes+VAT
Perfect 
efficiency
No taxes
Taxes
Taxes+VAT
Figure 3.6: Summary of the 9 base cases. The service is sold for 24 h every day, in each
hour the power bid is 0.3 MW and the State Of Charge at the beginning of the simulation
and for restoration is half of maximum capacity (0.5 MWh).
30
==PAGE:41==
3. Methodology
3.6
Deﬁnition of a new regulation framework
Chapter 2 shows that even within Denmark itself, due to technical reasons, there are quite
diﬀerent approaches to frequency regulation services provision. In general there is not
yet a global accordance on the frequency services that a TSO must procure to secure
the supply in its area [37]. From area to area the implementation of a certain level of
frequency regulation (primary, secondary, tertiary) can be diﬀerent and sometimes one
level of regulation is missing (for example DK2 does not have a proper service for secondary
control).
Also the method of procurement and the related economic features diﬀer. Some TSOs
requires a compulsory provision or use bilateral contract to cover the needed reserve
capacity. Denmark and almost all European countries use market based mechanism that
are preferred to increase transparency and encourage competition.
From the literature review it can be understood that one of the barriers to storage-based
units to provide primary frequency control are the regulations, qualiﬁcation processes
and/or market design for this kind of service. In some cases the regulation and service
design are shaped on conventional synchronous generators capability and limits. For
example they allow slow response and require long time of actuation or high level of energy
throughput, these requirements ﬁt the limited power ramp and easy access to large fuel
storage of conventional plants.
A global regulation framework update is needed to face future increasing penetration of
non-synchronous and volatile generation since conventional generators and current services
can hardly face the future frequency stability issue. This changes should increase the
employment of fast-responsive units able to tackle the sudden small frequency deviations
due to reduced inertia, and also consider the barriers for limited energy capacity units.
Diﬀerent solutions have already been implemented in Europe. As presented in Chapter 2 in
Germany and in United Kingdom regulation undergoes to modiﬁcation or renovation. The
result in Germany was the deﬁnition of certain relaxation on power set-point deﬁnition to
allow a increased margin in SOC management. Moreover, under certain condition, a unit
with limited energy capacity is allowed to withdraw from the market to restore the energy
reserve and has 2 hour to bring SOC back in a permitted range. In UK the deﬁnition
of a new service was intended to improve balancing response, as required by the rise of
renewable penetration in the electric system and lowering inertia [38], [18].
3.6.1
New regulation
On the basis of what is said above, with expectation of future change in danish regulation
and especially to asses the eﬀect of regulation on BESS economic and technical performances
in FCR-N provision the current requirements are twisted in a new set of rules.
There are two main diﬀerences from current regulation:
1. If failure occurs the unit has a certain period of time called "restoration time" (RT)
to bring back the SOC to an appropriate level.
31
==PAGE:42==
3. Methodology
2. Penalties are removed, thus even is the BESS fully charged or depleted in a certain
hour it will receive the availability payment anyway and it will not face any cost.
Regarding 1 it is assumed that the appropriate SOC is the SOCstart. This is a simpliﬁcation,
in fact in Germany, for example, a SOC is considered appropriate if ensure that the unit
will provide the service for at least 30 minutes (30 minutes criterion) in Germany [20], or
15 minutes (15 minutes criterion) according to ENTSO-E network code [21].1
Regarding 2, even if the system does not face penalties, when a failure occurs its operation
won’t be intentional for at least part of the current hour. It means that from grid point
of view it is either causing a imbalance or contributing unintentionally. Because of this
assumption the energy prices will be deﬁned as shown in Figure 3.2 for unintentional
operation.
An important assumption is that the BESS never try to use more time than allowed for
SOC restoration since at this point penalties or warnings are likely to be applied anyway.
Another assumption regards the operation in case of restoration process faster than allowed
time. In this case the unit can either wait until end of allowed restoration time or start
immediately to provide service again.
The resulting operational strategy is depicted in Figure 3.7. This strategy is derived
from assumption of non violated restoration time and immediate service provision after
completed restoration. If restoration time is neither to short (in this case less than 30
minutes) to allow almost complete restoration the unit does not have problems with this
strategy, if the restoration time is signiﬁcantly longer (more than 1 hour) the unit may
prefer to stay idle in order to get the availability payment without need of operation.
Figure 3.7: Strategy for deﬁned new regulation framework.
3.7
Degradation and lifetime estimation
Battery lifetime is a important parameter for the complete evaluation of the project. The
lifetime of the battery is in fact determining how often it has to be replaced and thus how
often a new investment is necessary. From another point of view lifetime determine the
time horizon for the project to pay-back the investment and become proﬁtable.
The degradation of a lithium-ion battery reduce the power capability and the usable energy
capacity. The lifetime of a battery is generally considered as the period until the usable
energy capacity reaches 80% of the original size. Degradation mechanism can be divided in
two major factors: calendar degradation and cycle degradation [16]. Calendar degradation
32
==PAGE:43==
3. Methodology
can be attributed to the periods in which the battery is idle and to actual cells age, while
cycle degradation depend on the operation proﬁles thus number of charge and discharge,
the SOC reached and current used during these processes. Temperatures of the unit and of
the surrounding environment have eﬀect of both degradation mechanisms but it is assumed
the the Thermal Management Unit is able to maintain the unit always at the optimal
temperature.
Manufacturers can provide the degradation of the battery resulting from test and estimation
but these values are valid only for speciﬁc operation proﬁles [39]. Test operation is likely to
diﬀer from actual operation especially if the battery is used for frequency regulation [40].
Anyway a precise model able to predict the lifetime and the degradation of the battery
during operation is needed for a precise a reliable business model. As the interest in
static and large battery installation increases, also the number of studies of method
for degradation estimation increase. Anyway the understanding of the impact of specif
operation proﬁles on the degradation mechanics is still not mature [41].
[16] adapted a model based on accelerated test presented in [42] and [43]. The presented
model is also used for degradation estimation in this thesis. The model is considered
precise enough to provide an estimation of the lifetime of the battery and as consequence
of the economic value of such project.
Considering 20% as maximum energy capacity reduction the decrease of power capability
is less important and can be neglected. If more ﬁdelity on the long time simulation of the
BESS performance is required also the power fade must be considered.
The model used to estimate the calendar degradation follow the equation 3.9 which give
the energy capacity fade CFcal as function of average SOC during idle periods SOCave,idle,i,
cumulative time of idle Ti until the idle period i, length of the idle period ti and number of
idle periods N. It is assumed that the battery stays idle at SOCstart so this value is used
instead of SOCave,idle,i, the lower this value the lower the calendar ageing. The numeric
parameters used in equation 3.9 are obtained from [43].
CFcal =
N
X
i=1
0.1723 · e0.007388·SOCstart · 0.8 · t−0.2
(3.9)
Cycle ageing depend as said before from the number of cycles performed by the battery
and from the depth of each cycle. One cycle is deﬁned as the discharge from one SOC level
to another and charge the the ﬁrst SOC again. Equation 3.10 express the dependence of
the cycle ageing CFcycl from average SOC of the cycle SOCave,cycle, the depth of the cycle
cd and the number of cycles nc.
CFcycl = 0.021 · e−0.001943·SOCave,cycle · cd0.7162 · nc1/2
(3.10)
The lifetime provided by the manufacturer is calculated on a series of consecutive cycle of
the same depth, but in reality the depth of each cycle can diﬀer consistently from one to
another. Each cycle type contribute in a diﬀerent way to ageing: the deeper the cycle the
higher the contribution. Thus it is necessary to identify each type of cycle and its number
33
==PAGE:44==
3. Methodology
of occurrence ni. Note that the algorithm analyzes the recorded SOC and count discharge
cycle and charge cycle separately thus it counts the number of "half-cycle", this number
must be dived by 2 to reach the real number of cycle for each type. Rearranging equation
3.10 in equation 3.11 with CFcycl = 20% gives the number of cycle nck of a speciﬁc depth
cdk that the battery can perform before it reaches end of life. A similar method is used in
[13].
nck =
 20
0.021 · e−0.001943·SOCave,cycle · cd0.7162
k
2
(3.11)
Each type of cycle contributes to capacity fade based on the correspondent nck. Thus the
total capacity fade is calculated with equation 3.12 where the maximum number of cycle
types is M.
CFcycl = 20 ·
M
X
k=1
nk
nck
(3.12)
Two major manipulation of the model are proposed by [16]. The ﬁrst regards the small
cycles with depth lower than 5%. With this depth the number of possible cycle tends to
inﬁnity, since this is not close to reality this cycles are considered too small and counted as
idle periods. In fact, cycle with this depth would degrade the battery less than leaving it
idle. The seconds regards the speciﬁcation obtained from manufacturer which tested 3000
possible cycle with depth of 100%, since the model gives more than 8600 cycles for 100%
depth the whole set of calculated nck is scaled down to respect this limit.
As highlighted by [16] the model suﬀer from uncertainty for some reasons, the main ones
are reported below:
• The model is derived from laboratory test on a speciﬁc battery type and it may be
too speciﬁc.
• Calendar and cycle degradation are considered completely independent but calendar
ageing may happens also in during periods of operation.
• It is assumed that calendar ageing is not aﬀected by the period of time between one
idle period and the following and thus it is well measured with equation 3.9.
• Similarly the actual sequence of cycle with diﬀerent depth is not considered using
equation 3.10.
• The maximum number of cycle for each depth was scaled down linearly considering
the value obtained by the manufacturer at 100% depth of discharge.
3.8
Economic evaluation of the project
The calculation of yearly revenues can give an idea of the economic performance of the BESS
during the considered year. However, the economic evaluation of the project should consider
tho whole lifetime and the size of the investment. A project is considered economically
feasible if it is able to generate a value at least equal to the investment at the end of its
lifetime. The time horizon of the project involving a speciﬁc system may be selected based
34
==PAGE:45==
3. Methodology
on the component with the shortest lifetime. If a longer time horizon is chosen than the
cost of the substitution or regeneration of some components must be taken into account.
To evaluate the economic feasibility and proﬁtability of the simulated system the Net
Present Value (NPV) is used. The NPV is total value of all future incomes and expenditures
considering their present value. The present value gives to a certain cash-ﬂow in the future,
the value it has today. In fact any cash ﬂow (in or out) has a lower in future than today.
This is called discounting and it is made through the discount rate r. Equation 3.13 show
the formula to calculate the present value PrV of a speciﬁc cash-ﬂow C happening at year
t after the present year. The cash-ﬂow is the net value between income and expenditure.
The higher the discount rate the lower the present value of the future cash-ﬂow, the used
value for the discount rate is 4%. NPV is calculated with equation 3.14, the denominator
is called discount factor.
PrV =
C
(1 + r)t
(3.13)
NPV =
T
X
j=1
PrVt =
T
X
j=1
Ci
(1 + r)t
(3.14)
3.8.1
Investment and plant costs
The initial investment for the project includes various components and can be dependant
on the location and on the law in force. In this thesis the cost for the component of the
physical unit are only considered: the cost for the inverter or power conversion unit (PCS)
and cost of the battery cells. Fixed operation and maintenance costs are also considered as
a yearly expenditure. [44] is a complete and broad study on electrical storage costs, it also
include the lithium-ion batteries and identiﬁes an average investment of 795 EUR/kWh for
the storage section, 463 EUR/kW for the PCS and 6.9 EUR/kW/y for ﬁxed maintenance
costs. These value are likely outdated since the study as been submitted in 2014 and
lithium-ion battery prices have fallen drastically in the last years. [45] is a recent article
deﬁning the cost of batteries as halved in the last years. Since these costs do not refer to a
speciﬁc technology, the costs used in this thesis are presented in table 3.4 and are assumed
to be good estimation of the actual situation.
Component
Normalized cost
 [EUR/kWh] or [EUR/kWh]
Size 
[kW] = [kWh]
Total cost
[EUR]
PCS and Storage
800
800 000
Yearly O&M
6.9
6 900
1000
Table 3.4: Investment and O&M costs for the simulated unit.
35
==PAGE:46==
4
RESULTS
In this section the results for all simulations and calculations are presented and discussed.
Base cases result are presented ﬁrst with a comparison between the main parameters
deﬁning BESS performances. Afterwards the base cases are twisted to show the eﬀect of
diﬀerent operational conditions. Simulation results with frequency and economic databases
for diﬀerent years are then presented. Lastly the degradation and economic evaluation of 5
selected scenarios is discussed.
4.1
Base case
In this section the results from base cases simulation are presented. As said in Section 3.5
there are a total of 9 base cases which diﬀer for eﬃciency and/or tax scheme applied.
The ﬁrst basis for comparison are the revenues after one year of operation with the 2016
frequency and economic data. Table 4.1 summarize the numeric value of the revenues that
are graphically presented also in Figure 4.1. In Figure 4.1 the two parts composing the
total yearly revenues are also shown: revenues from energy exchange and revenues from
availability payment.
Perfect eﬃciency has of course the highest income compared with the others eﬃciency
levels if same tax scheme is applied.
Balancing market revenues are almost always negative indicating that expenditure for
charging energy exceeds income from sold energy. This is expected in all cases where taxes
are applied since they only increase the price for charging electricity. It is also expected
when the eﬃciency is lower the 100% since it means that less energy is sold to the grid
compared to the energy consumed to charge the battery. The average frequency for the
2016 is slightly under 50 Hz (49.9995 Hz) so it could be expected that in 1 year of operation
with perfect eﬃciency, more energy is sold that bought (suggesting positive revenue). This
alone cannot tell in advance the ﬁnal revenues from energy exchange for two reason: ﬁrst,
the diﬀerence between average and nominal frequency is almost null; second, the actual
hourly price for electricity vary importantly during the year and thus even if the same
"kWh" is sold and than bought the prices at which this happen can be diﬀerent and will
determine the ﬁnal revenue.
Summarizing, is not easy to estimate the revenues from the balancing market in advance
since it is too dependant on the speciﬁc pattern of prices for balancing energy and frequency
data and from their combination.
"Perfect eﬃciency - no tax" is the only scenario where energy related revenues are close
to zero. This scenario is the only one where positive revenues from energy exchange are
achieved. Nevertheless, these revenues are negligible compared to total and to revenues
36
==PAGE:47==
4. Results
from energy exchange in other scenarios. The absence of tax and low failure ratio leave the
opportunity to achieve positive revenues from energy trade. In fact no tax means smaller
diﬀerence between prices for energy sold and bought, and low failure rate implies higher
probability for the BESS to face favorable prices.
Low eﬃciency scenarios never achieve positive revenues. From Figure 4.1 it is possible
to note two main factor bringing to this result: considerably lower availability payment
compared to other scenarios and signiﬁcantly higher cost from energy exchange. The
elements aﬀecting energy revenues have been discussed above, in low eﬃciency case the cost
related to high losses is highlighted as expected. When the system has low eﬃciency it has
to buy more energy that what it sells, in addition it often fails and thus incurs unfavorable
prices for electricity. It is possible to say that low eﬃciency has a double negative eﬀect on
energy revenues: less advantageous prices and high extra expenditures to cover the energy
losses. Availability payment are also strongly aﬀected from low eﬃciency due to penalties.
Low eﬃciency scenarios have 34.61% of failure rate which means that for 3040 hours in
the year the BESS’ SOC is either too high or too low and the unit incurs in penalty.
Table 4.1: Main results from Base Cases simulations. Revenues under diﬀerent tax scheme,
failure rate, and average eﬃciency are reported.
Revenues [EUR]
Failure Rate [%]
Average eﬃciency [%]
no Tax
Tax
Tax + VAT
Low Eﬃciency
-18 015
-47 982
-66 027
34.61
34.68
Real Eﬃciency
52 678
41 192
35 691
6.63
68.37
Perfect Eﬃciency
62 803
54 893
50 333
3.87
100
Figure 4.1 presents also the failure rate of each eﬃciency with base case conﬁguration. As
already said "low eﬃciency" scenarios have the highest failure rate, such high unavailability
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Falure rate [%]
Revenue and failure rate Comparison
Low efficiency
Realistic efficiency
Perfect efficiency
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Revenues [EUR]
104
No tax
TAX
TAX+VAT
Energy rev.
Availability rev.
Failure rate
Failure rate = 34.61%
Failure rate = 6.63%
Failure rate = 3.87%
Figure 4.1: Revenues and failure rate comparison with base case conﬁguration. The empty
green bar represents the availability payment from the whole year (the same availability
payment is obtained no matter the tax level) while the empty blue bar represent the energy
revenues ("perfect eﬃciency no-tax" has slightly positive energy revenue).
37
==PAGE:48==
4. Results
is of course not acceptable by the TSO and the units is likely to be excluded from the
market. It is also true that such unit is not able to generate positive revenues and its
employment would not be considered from business point of view.
Realistic eﬃciency scenarios have a more reasonable failure rate of 6.63%. Energinet does
not provide a clear and unique way of understanding if such level of unavailability is too
high to allow the unit to participate in the market, but it can be considered problematic
since it indicates ﬂawed operation in 1 or 2 hours every day in average. It is also important
to consider that such systematic failure rate is known from design and thus be considered
unacceptable.
Not even Perfect eﬃciency scenarios reaches zero failure rate.
With the base case
conﬁguration (Pbid = 0.3MW and SOCstart = 0.5) the lowest failure rate achieved is
3.87%. This failure rate is not due to eﬃciency issue since all losses are zero in this case,
but it is liked to inherent limited energy capacity of the BESS. Due to continuous operation
it is not possible to deﬁne an energy capacity which ensure complete failure prevention but
it is possible to reduce failure rate at acceptable levels either reducing the power bid or
increasing the energy capacity. If the adopted strategy doesn’t imply continuous operation
there are opportunities to avoid failure completely.
System eﬃciency vary depending on the power requirement deﬁned by the instantaneous
frequency deviation. Figure 4.2 show the distribution of eﬃciency achieved during each
second of operation (restoration and idle periods are excluded), the average eﬃciency at
the end of the year is also reported. Since a perfect unit always achieves 100% eﬃciency
it is not useful to report the distribution and the average eﬃciency. Interesting result is
observed for realistic eﬃciency scenarios: even if the eﬃciency curve presented in Section
Figure 4.2: Distribution of instantaneous eﬃciency and average eﬃciency. Perfect unit’s
eﬃciency is not shown since it is always 100%.
38
==PAGE:49==
4. Results
3.3 is mostly above 80% the average system eﬃciency is 68%. Observing the eﬃciency
distribution in fact it is possible to see that sometimes the system works at really low
eﬃciency. Only during restoration process the nominal power of 1 MW is used (where the
system works at highest eﬃciency), but this periods are excluded from this graph. Since
the realistic system has still a good eﬃciency at power level above 0.1 MW, if taxes are
excluded, the impact on total revenues is not substantial.
The negative eﬀect of taxes is more important when the eﬃciency is reduced. In fact, taxes
increases the cost of the single kWh of electricity and thus impact more a system with
higher energy consumption.
The relatively small diﬀerence between availability payment in Perfect and Realistic
eﬃciency, indicates that trade of energy during frequency regulation provision is a
disadvantage for storage units.
Conventional unit do not face this problem as they
always sell and never buy electricity. If energy is bought for frequency regulation and is
sold back for the same reason, exemption from energy trade should be considered (as it
happens in Germany). Similarly since the unit is delivering a service to the grid taxes
should not be applied as for other balancing units.
4.2
Sensitivity to starting State Of Charge
In this section the results of simulation for diﬀerent value of initial State Of Charge
SOCstart are presented and analyzed, to consider only the eﬀect of this parameter the
power bid is kept constant at 0.3 MW as in the base cases. SOCstart is not only index
of the energy content of the battery at the beginning of the year but it is also the target
state of charge of the restoration process after every failure. It is thus important since
an optimal tuning of this parameter can reduce the failure occurrences and thus increase
technical performance and revenues.
The comparison is made mainly on total revenues and failure rate, these two parameter
will be used to individuate the preferred SOCstart.
The power set-point cannot change during contracted period since it is part of the oﬀer
made the day ahead. SOCstart instead may be freely change by the BESS operator to
better match its needs. In this simulation SOCstart is set at the beginning of the year and
it is not changed during operation. This is made for simplicity as change in this parameter
on short time basis need a minimal expectation of the future frequency deviation.
Realistic eﬃciency.
Figure 4.3 present the eﬀect of changing the starting SOC in case
of realistic eﬃciency and no Tax applied. The highest revenues and the lowest failure rate
are both obtained with a SOCstart of 0.8 (which correspond to 0.8 MWh).
Changing the tax scheme applied doesn’t change the optimal initial SOC. It is probably
due to the fact that SOCstart mostly aﬀect the failure rate, but the power oﬀer deﬁnes
energy exchange and thus energy revenues are not much aﬀected. Also from SOCstart
above 0.3 there is not much diﬀerence between various conﬁguration.
Resulting optimal SOCstart for both highest revenues and lowest failure rate, are quite
39
==PAGE:50==
4. Results
high if compared with the value of the base cases. Since eﬃciency is not perfect higher
initial energy allows longer time of operation. In fact, eﬃciency reduce energy input but
increase energy output and thus limit charge opportunities.
Low eﬃciency.
Results for low eﬃciency follow similar behaviour but the optimal SOC
is 0.95 for both revenues and failure rate. Figure 4.4 shows as example the case with no
taxes on energy. It is interesting that the lowest failure rate achieved is 25.81% that is still
unacceptable but considerably reduced compared to base case.
Perfect eﬃciency.
In case of perfect eﬃciency the result are quite diﬀerent. Figure 4.5
shows the case where no tax are applied. This eﬃciency (whatever the tax scheme) achieves
highest revenues with SOCstart = 0.5 and lowest failure rate with SOCstart = 0.6. The
lowest failure rate is 3.63%, while revenues are almost identical with these two SOCstart.
The extreme SOCstart of low eﬃciency and the almost neutral results of perfect eﬃciency
suggest that the optimal value for this parameter is mainly pushed up by losses which reduce
the energy that is actually saved during overfrequency periods. Since Perfect eﬃciency
still achieve a better failure rate with an initial charge higher than 50%, it is possible
to conclude that 2016 frequency pattern reward a unit readiness to face underfrequency
events.
Realistic and Low eﬃciency gives an odd results when analyzing the failure rate obtained
with SOCstart = 1. It is in fact expected that starting with completely charged battery
leads to failure easily due to small margin for charging. This expectation is met for Perfect
Yearly Revenue no Tax (real efficiency)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
SOCstart [-]
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Revenues [EUR]
104
5
10
15
20
25
30
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure 4.3: Variation of total Revenues and failure rate with SOCstart, in "realistic eﬃciency
- no Tax" scenario. Availability payment revenues and energy related revenues are also
shown. The best conﬁguration for both highest revenues and lowest failure rate is the
same with SOCstart = 0.8.
40
==PAGE:51==
4. Results
Yearly Revenue no Tax (low efficiency)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
SOCstart [-]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
Revenues [EUR]
104
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure 4.4: Variation of total Revenues and failure rate with SOCstart, in "low eﬃciency
- no Tax" scenario . Availability payment revenues and energy related revenues are also
shown. The best conﬁguration for both highest revenues and lowest failure rate is the
same with SOCstart = 0.95.
Yearly Revenue no Tax (perfect efficiency)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
SOCstart [-]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Revenues [EUR]
104
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure 4.5: Variation of total Revenues and failure rate with SOCstart, in "perfect eﬃciency
- no Tax" scenario . Availability payment revenues and energy related revenues are also
shown. The best conﬁguration for highest revenues is SOCstart = 0.5, for lowest failure
rate is SOCstart = 0.6.
41
==PAGE:52==
4. Results
eﬃciency as failure rate goes from less than 8% at SOCstart = 0.95 to more than 14% at
SOCstart = 1. In Figure 4.5 results for SOCstart lower than 0.05 are not shown but Figure
4.6 shows a certain symmetry (note that it is possible to set SOCstart = 0 only with perfect
eﬃciency due to losses, with other eﬃciency level it keeps the the BESS in failure state).
Very high SOCstart are expected to give high failure rate also with realistic and low
eﬃciency. Instead these two scenarios ﬁnd in higher SOCstart a better conﬁguration. These
results come from the characteristic operative strategy explained in Section 3.5.1 and
used for these simulations. In fact when SOCstart is 1 and the BESS reach full capacity
the restoration algorithm sees the target for state of charge reached and never start the
restoration process. BESS does not exchange power until a new hour begin but its SOC
decrease due to auxiliary consumption. In case of Perfect eﬃciency the BESS will be
full after the idle period. Thus for Realistic and Low eﬃciency scenarios the SOC at the
beginning of the hour after a failure is not 1, leaving a wider margin and reducing the
failure rate.
Figure 4.6: Comparison between failure rate and unavailability rate for perfect eﬃciency
scenarios varying SOCstart.
It can be said that such operational strategy distorts results of SOCstart sensitivity analysis
and in general of high and low starting SOC.
Considering these ﬁndings it is possible to assume that the optimal conﬁguration found for
Realistic and Low eﬃciency are not only inﬂuenced by the speciﬁc frequency pattern of
2016 (result visible in case of Perfect eﬃciency) but also highly aﬀected by combination of
losses and speciﬁc operational strategy.
42
==PAGE:53==
4. Results
4.3
Sensitivity to power bid
In this section the eﬀect of the size of the power bid on base cases revenues and performance
is investigated and the results are presented. To assure that the change of results are only
due to change of power bid, SOCstart regulation and operation strategy are equal to base
case scenarios.
Realistic eﬃciency
Figure 4.7 shows how revenues change with diﬀerent power bid and
compare it with the failure rate trend for a system with realistic eﬃciency if no taxes are
applied on energy consumption. Even though base cases results analysis suggested that a
higher failure rate brings to lower revenue due to increased occurrence of penalties, the
increased income for single contracted hour oﬀsets this economic loss enough to give an
optimal power bid of 0.9 MW. Anyway such power bid gives a failure rate that is deﬁnitely
unacceptable since BESS fails in average for 1 hour every four hour of operation. Even
considering the actual time of unavailability BESS is not delivering service for 13% of the
time.
Even if availability payment increases with bid size, the capability of the system to take
advantage of this increased revenue opportunity is limited by failure. Figure 4.8 shows
the ratio between achieved availability payment and the maximum availability payment
possible for each power bid.
The eﬀect of higher payment per hour is limited not only by increased failure rate, but also
increasing taxes on energy. This explains the reduction in optimal power bid under diﬀerent
tax schemes. In fact the energy revenues curve gets more and more steep increasing the
Yearly Revenue no Tax (real efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure 4.7: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Realistic eﬃciency. Best power bid for lowest failure rate is 0.1 MW, for highest total
revenues is 0.9 MW.
43
==PAGE:54==
4. Results
tax level as shown in Figure 4.9. Since availability payment doesn’t depend on taxes, the
added expenditure for energy is strong enough to reduce optimal power bid for revenues to
0.7 MW excluding VAT and to 0.6 MW including all taxes.
As expected the optimal power bid to achieve low failure rate (and thus unavailability
time) is the lowest one. In fact the lower the power bid the lower the energy exchanged
and thus the longer a deviation of the same sign can be sustained.
Low eﬃciency
Figure 4.10 shows that, if no taxes are applied, even a system with
really low eﬃciency can achieve positive revenues. The graph shows that, with the used
operational strategy, this happens also with the power bid that gives the minimum failure
rate. This minimum failure rate is anyway too high too make such unit acceptable. As
soon as taxes are applied the system is not able to achieve positive revenues with any
power bid.
Perfect eﬃciency
Perfect eﬃciency shows trends similar to realistic eﬃciency. The
optimal power bid is slightly lower. The reason for this is most likely due to absence of
disadvantage of working at partial load. For example when a unit with low eﬃciency
operate with a power oﬀer below 0.7 MW it achieves revenues that are considerably
lower compared to results with higher power oﬀer. It means that realistic a low eﬃciency
scenarios beneﬁt from high power oﬀer since this increase the average eﬃciency and thus
energy expenditures weight less on total revenues.
The optimal power bid is never inverter capacity because this value is to extreme and
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power bid [MW]
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
Ratio
Ratio between Av. payment and Maximum Av. payment  (real efficiency)
Figure 4.8: Ratio between the yearly revenue from availability payment received by the
BESS and the corresponding maximum revenues from availability payment for diﬀerent
power bids. Realistic eﬃciency case.
44
==PAGE:55==
4. Results
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power bid [MW]
-5
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
Energy revenues [EUR]
104
Comparison of energy revenues (real efficiency)
no Tax
TAX
VAT
Figure 4.9: Comparison of the energy revenues under diﬀerent tax schemes for power bids
from 0.1 MW to 1 MW.
factors reducing revenue due to failures become stronger than increased payment per hour.
45
==PAGE:56==
4. Results
Yearly Revenue no Tax (low efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure 4.10: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Low eﬃciency. Best power bid for lowest failure rate is 0.6 MW, for highest total revenues
is 0.9 MW.
4.4
New regulation results
In this section the performances of the BESS under the modiﬁed regulation are shown
and discussed. Results will be referred to as "new regulation results" (NR results) to
diﬀerentiate them from results under current regulation (CR).
To start the simulation the allowed restoration time (RT) must be deﬁned. For the following
results a RT = 1800s is assumed. It corresponds to 30 minutes of allowed restoration time
in which the unit can restore the state of charge without delivering the service and facing
penalties. This time is assumed to be realistic but of course a proper system analysis
should support the regulator choice. Moreover, this time allows a unit of 1MW/1MWh
without losses to reach 50% of energy capacity after any failure. Due to losses, such RT
will produce a restoration that ends early after failure in down-regulation (discharge at 1
MW + losses) and is always not completed after failure in up-regulation (charge at 1MW -
losses).
Table 4.2 and 4.3 show the comparison between the performance of a unit with realistic
eﬃciency under current and new regulations. If the power bid is 0.3 MW the diﬀerence in
revenue is already consistent. Under current regulation BESS gives the highest revenues
with a power bid of 0.7 MW (if only taxes and no VAT are applied). With such conﬁguration,
under new regulation, the BESS is able to almost double the revenues.
Revenues alone are not enough for the comparison since the capability of delivering the
service is vital for this system. Table 4.2 and 4.3 show that also the total time in which
the unit is not available is slightly reduced.
Figure 4.11 shows the same comparison for all the power bids but when no taxes are
46
==PAGE:57==
4. Results
applied, always for a realistic unit. It is important to note that in these ﬁgures the
unavailability rate is shown instead of the failure rate. This is done to compare a measure
of the actual time of missed support to power system more that an obligation related
parameter. Moreover, if the unit uses only RT to restore the SOC, the failure rate does
not allow any meaningful consideration.
Table 4.2: Comparison of realistic eﬃciency BESS performance with base case conﬁguration
under CR and NR.
Pbid = 0.3MW
Total revenues [EUR]
Unavailability [%]
SOCstart = 0.5
Tax appliaed (no VAT)
New Regulation
50 190
2.6
Current regulation
41 942
3.3
Table 4.3: Comparison of realistic eﬃciency BESS performance with Pbid = 0.7MW and
SOCstart = 0.5 under CR and NR. This speciﬁc power oﬀer is the preferred one under
current regulation, for realistic eﬃciency unit.
Pbid = 0.7MW
Total revenues [EUR]
Unavailability [%]
SOCstart = 0.5
Tax appliaed (no VAT)
New Regulation
127 300
8
Current regulation
72 370
9.4
Figure 4.11: Comparison of Total revenues and unavailability rate between new regulation
(NG) and current regulation in eﬀect (CR) for diﬀerent power bids. Realistic eﬃciency
and no tax scenario.
47
==PAGE:58==
4. Results
Realistic eﬃciency.
Figure 4.12 shows the dependency of revenues for a BESS delivering
FCR-N under new regulation. Since penalties are avoided, availability payment revenues
are not aﬀected by failures, and the expected linear growth with the power oﬀer is veriﬁed.
As expected from a system with realistic eﬃciency energy exchange always result in a cost,
this cost is really similar to the one faced under current regulation. Since without taxes
the energy cost is restricted, the total revenues do not diﬀer to much from availability
payments.
As saw in Section 4.3 as taxes increase the negative slope of the energy revenues increases
as well. Under new regulation this behaviour appears again and thus with higher taxes
the rate of increment of total revenues with the power bid is limited. Despite this, the
highest revenues are obtained with the highest power bid.
Yearly Revenue no Tax(real efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure 4.12: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "realistic eﬃcient" unit if no taxes are applied.
Perfect eﬃciency.
Performances of a unit with Perfect eﬃciency does not diﬀer too
much from realistic eﬃciency. Of course the revenue are increased due to lower energy
expenditure but the general trend is similar.
Low eﬃciency.
Due to removed penalties and respect of the allowed restoration time,
the unit always receives the availability payment thus yearly revenue from the reserve
commitment are always the same no matter the eﬃciency. A low eﬃcient unit achieves
lower revenues for increased energy expenditure. If tax are not applied the unit has
multiple power level to oﬀer in the FCR-N market to achieve positive revenues. Anyway,
its unavailability time is quite high compared to other eﬃciency levels.
Unavailability rate.
It is interesting to compare unavailability rates between diﬀerent
eﬃciencies. Figure 4.15 shows the unavailability rate changing the power bid for the free
48
==PAGE:59==
4. Results
Yearly Revenue no Tax(perfect efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure 4.13: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "perfect eﬃcient" unit if no taxes are applied.
Yearly Revenue no Tax(low efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
16
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure 4.14: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "low eﬃcient" unit if no taxes are applied.
49
==PAGE:60==
4. Results
eﬃciency levels. It is clear that the diﬀerence between a perfect and a realistic unit is more
and more reduced increasing the power bid (since BESS works closer to optimal power
level more often). Low eﬃcient unit never achieve an unavailability rate lower than 13%.
The fact that low eﬃciency unit achieve it’s lowest unavailability with a power oﬀer of 0.6
MW instead of 0.1 MW is due to losses which weight signiﬁcantly more in case low power
levels. In fact the high losses at low power levels make the unit consumption higher with
power oﬀer below 0.6 MW, this leads to more failure occurrences.
Figure 4.15: Comparison of unavailability between each eﬃciency level.
4.5
Optimal conﬁguration
In the previous sections the dependency of revenues, failure rate and unavailability to
power bid and target starting SOC has been presented. For each of the two parameters
it was possible to ﬁnd a conﬁguration maximizing revenues or minimizing unavailability.
In this chapter a similar analysis has been made but letting both the power bid and the
starting SOC able to change.
It was possible to create a matrix with all the possible combination of the two parameters
and to identify the one with the highest revenue or the lowest unavailability rate. There is
a limitation to this method which regards the computational eﬀort: the number of iteration
grows considerably depending on the precision required for each parameter. Since under
DK2 regulation the power bid can be changed in step of 0.1 MW and the BESS has a
nominal power of 1 MW, 10 power bids are simulated. It has been chosen to simulate
SOCstart from 0.1 to 0.9 with a 0.1 step. From the total of 90 conﬁguration the ones with
the lowest unavailability and the highest revenue for each tax scheme have been identiﬁed.
Table 4.4 reports the revenues and the unavailability rate. since three tax schemes are
simulated the conﬁguration to achieve the best revenues can change with the tax level
applied. Unavailability only depends on initial conﬁguration but related revenues diﬀers
under each tax scheme so all three results are reported.
50
==PAGE:61==
4. Results
Power bid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Revenues [EUR]
Unavailability rate [%]
no Tax
0.9
0.9
37 577
16.6
Tax
0.8
0.8
-561
15.5
Tax + VAT
0.8
0.8
-22 755
15.5
no Tax
0.5
0.9
16 062
13.7
Tax
0.5
0.9
-17 619
13.7
Tax + VAT
0.5
0.9
-37 750
13.7
Power bid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Revenues [EUR]
Unavailability rate [%]
no Tax
0.8
0.5
104 080
11.1
Tax
0.7
0.6
86 315
9.0
Tax + VAT
0.7
0.6
76 369
9.0
no Tax
0.1
0.4
22 454
0.1
Tax
0.1
0.4
20 027
0.1
Tax + VAT
0.1
0.4
18 637
0.1
Power bid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Revenues [EUR]
Unavailability rate [%]
no Tax
0.9
0.5
94 158
13.2
Tax
0.7
0.6
73 539
9.2
Tax + VAT
0.7
0.6
61 663
9.2
no Tax
0.1
0.9
15 464
2.1
Tax
0.1
0.9
9 447
2.1
Tax + VAT
0.1
0.9
5 922
2.1
Highest 
Revenues
Lowest 
Unavailability
Highest 
Revenues
Lowest 
Unavailability
Low efficiency
Perfect efficiency
Highest 
Revenues
Lowest 
Unavailability
Realistic efficiency
Table 4.4: Initial conﬁguration for highest revenues and lowest unavailability rate under
current regulation for each eﬃciency level.
It is interesting to note that with perfect eﬃciency the preferable starting SOC seems to
move towards an higher value increasing the power oﬀer. Figures 4.16 and 4.17 shows that
is almost impossible to deﬁne a real trend. SOCstart is too inﬂuenced by the actual pattern
of frequency (and prices). Thus a unit that can change its SOCstart during the operation
based on expected frequency deviation may achieve better performances. Under new
regulation, with high power oﬀer and SOCstart the unit easily fails because of full battery,
but since restoration is permitted for 30 minutes and without economic penalties high
revenues are still obtained. From ﬁgure 4.17 it may seems that high revenues are obtained
with high SOCstart and low unavailability with low SOCstart, increasing the power oﬀer.
However, diﬀerences in unavailability time and revenues with diﬀerent SOCstart for each
power oﬀer are almost negligible and thus, in this case, a trend for SOCstart does not have
real meaning.
Section 4.2 and ﬁgures 4.18 and 4.19 conﬁrm that with perfect eﬃciency, revenues are
barely aﬀected by SOCstart especially with low power bid or under modiﬁed regulation.
Table 4.5 shows the preferred conﬁguration under modiﬁed regulation. If penalties are
removed the maximum revenues are easily obtained bidding the maximum power possible
in the FCR-N market. High power oﬀers still result in a unavailability that is most likely
unacceptable by the TSO.
51
==PAGE:62==
4. Results
Figure 4.16: Preferred SOCstart with diﬀerent power oﬀers under current regulation for a
system with perfect eﬃciency. Revenues does not consider taxes.
Figure 4.17: Preferred SOCstart with diﬀerent power oﬀers under modiﬁed regulation for
a system with perfect eﬃciency. Revenues does not consider taxes.
52
==PAGE:63==
4. Results
Figure 4.18: Revenues (no taxes applied) for every conﬁguration under current regulation
for a system with perfect eﬃciency.
Figure 4.19: Revenues (no taxes applied) for every conﬁguration under modiﬁed regulation
for a system with perfect eﬃciency.
53
==PAGE:64==
4. Results
Power bid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Revenues [EUR]
Unavailability rate [%]
no Tax
1.0
0.9
181 980
16.3
Tax
1.0
0.9
145 110
16.3
Tax + VAT
1.0
0.9
122 920
16.3
no Tax
0.6
0.4
95 237
13.2
Tax
0.6
0.4
62 760
13.2
Tax + VAT
0.6
0.4
43 336
13.2
Power bid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Revenues [EUR]
Unavailability rate [%]
no Tax
1.0
0.9
221 440
12.8
Tax
1.0
0.9
200 330
12.8
Tax + VAT
1.0
0.9
187 680
12.8
no Tax
0.1
0.6
22 486
0.07
Tax
0.1
0.6
20 560
0.07
Tax + VAT
0.1
0.6
18 664
0.07
Power bid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Revenues [EUR]
Unavailability rate [%]
no Tax
1.0
0.9
212 290
12.7
Tax
1.0
0.8
188 030
12.7
Tax + VAT
1.0
0.8
173 480
12.7
no Tax
0.1
0.8
16 847
2.0
Tax
0.1
0.8
10 925
2.0
Tax + VAT
0.1
0.8
7 353
2.0
Realistic efficiency
Highest 
Revenues
Lowest 
Unavailability
Low efficiency
Highest 
Revenues
Lowest 
Unavailability
Perfect efficiency
Highest 
Revenues
Lowest 
Unavailability
Table 4.5: Initial conﬁguration for highest revenues and lowest unavailability rate under
modiﬁed regulation for each eﬃciency level.
54
==PAGE:65==
4. Results
4.6
Block operation
Considering the results obtained so far, in most of the scenarios the BESS unit is unavailable
for a unacceptable period of time especially when trying to maximize the revenues. There
is not a clear position on the maximum unavailability allowed for a balancing unit since
currently, the balancing power is mostly procured by dispatchable and conventional
generators which can easily predict their operating conditions and does not present a
limited storage. The TSO does not allow unit to systematically fail in providing the service,
it is more likely a exception acceptable a couple of time in a year of operation.
The results discussed show that only an ideal unit without losses can achieve a unavailability
time below 1% and still be proﬁtable.
In this section a operational strategy aiming to completely eliminate the failure is considered.
This approach has been also proposed in [16]. The continuous operation as balancing unit
easily depletes or ﬁlls the battery energy capacity since no period of restoration is allowed
during hours of contracted operation. If the BESS operator decides to oﬀer availability
only in some hours of the day, it can use the remaining time to reestablish SOC of the
battery to initial condition. The unit will provide balancing service in blocks and between
a block and the following it will take 1 hour to restore to SOC.
Depending on the size of the energy storage, the size of the power conversion unit and the
length of the operation block it is possible to identify a power oﬀer that will never cause
the SOC to reach the upper or lower limits. As suggested in [16] equation 4.1 can easily
give this bid Pbid, assuming perfect eﬃciency.
Pbid = (SOCmax −SOCmin) · Ebatt
2 · tblock
(4.1)
SOCmax and SOCmin are the maximum and minimum allowed state of charge, in this
case 1 and 0 are used but in reality lower maximum and higher minimum are used to
reduce battery degradation. Ebatt is the energy size in MWh and tblock is the duration of
the operation block in hours (this will give a power oﬀer in MW), the 2 at the denominator
is needed since the service has to be symmetrical and thus the available energy is half of
the usable energy size. The length of the operation block has to be a multiple of 1 hour
since this is the minimum time oﬀer, for the same reason the restoration is 1 hour long and
considering an actual nominal power of 1 MW this is enough to reestablish the SOC=0.5
whatever the state at the end of the last operation block.
This power bid ensure no failure as a frequency deviation equal or higher than +-0.1
Hz (FCR-N provision band) for a time equal to tblock is needed to eﬀectively use the
whole energy stored or ﬁll the empty capacity. This condition are quite extreme since
the combination of containment reserves (FCR-N) and disturbance reserves (FCR-D) is
procured to avoid such deviation.
With a energy capacity of 1 MWh and blocks of 1 hour the maximum power bid is 0.5
MW. This means that the availability payment received will be the half of the maximum
allowed by the converter size, and that the unit will operate for half of the time it could
have operated. This lead to an availability payment that is 1/4 of the maximum achievable.
55
==PAGE:66==
4. Results
Doubling the block length to 2 hours halves the power oﬀer (1/4 of the maximum power)
but does not double the available time due to the hour of restoration, in fact the unit will
operate for 2/3 of the day every day. The resulting availability revenues will be 1/6 of the
maximum achievable. Is it easy to understand that, how is shown in ﬁgure 4.20, the best
block length is 1 hour.
It is important to note that the power oﬀer obtained with equation 4.1 is valid also for
not perfectly eﬃcient systems only until a certain eﬃciency drop. In fact the frequency
deviation never require the use of the whole energy capacity for realistic eﬃciency. In case
of low eﬃciency scenario instead the failure rate reaches 0.2% and the minimum SOC
experienced would be -0.08. This is of course not allowed. Considering the asymmetrical
energy consumption conﬁrmed by a maximum SOC of 0.81, the change of SOCstart from
0.5 to 0.6 gives failure rate of 0 also for low eﬃciency scenario. Table 4.6 show the used
SOCstart, minimum and maximum SOC reached for each eﬃciency level.
Block operation has the important quality of reducing failure to 0, without assuming any
allowed restoration time or accepance of a certain level of unavailability. However, as
Figure 4.20 shows, the maximum availability payment revenues cannot be higher than 50%
of the maximum achievable, energy expenditures still need to be added. Figure 4.21 show
the comparison of revenues with diﬀerent eﬃciency and tax levels. It has to be considered
that during the restoration hour the price for electricity come from the balancing market
since BESS operation is considered unintentional (see chapter 3). This assumed since,
even if the operator knows that it will restore the SOC in that hour, it does not know the
amount of energy it will deliver or consume and thus it cannot plan this energy exchange
Figure 4.20: Maximum power oﬀer, operation time over maximum operation time ratio
and availability payment over maximum availability payment ratio with diﬀerent length of
operation block.
56
==PAGE:67==
4. Results
Table 4.6: SOC minimum and maximum with block operation for diﬀerent eﬃciency levels.
SOCstart
Minimum SOC
Maximum SOC
Low eﬃciency
0.6
0.02
0.91
Realistic eﬃciency
0.5
0.04
0.92
Perfect eﬃciency
0.5
0.08
0.96
the day ahead.
Revenue Comparison
Low efficiency
Realistic efficiency
Perfect efficiency
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Revenues [EUR]
104
No tax
TAX
TAX+VAT
Energy
Availability
Figure 4.21: Comparison of revenues achieved by diﬀerent eﬃciency levels using block
operation with diﬀerent tax schemes.
Figure 4.22 and Table 4.7 show the comparison of block operation performances with the
optimal conﬁguration and previous strategy, under current and modiﬁed regulation. The
scenario used for this comparison is realistic eﬃciency and no tax. Considering unavailability
obtained oﬀering 24 hours of service and the one obtained with block operation, the latter
strategy is likely to be the only feasible.
57
==PAGE:68==
4. Results
Figure 4.22: Comparison between current regulation (CR) and new regulation (NR)
optimum for highest revenues and lowest unavailability, and block operation. Revenues
and unavailability rate are shown. Realistic eﬃciency no tax.
Pbid [MW]
SOCstart [-]
Energy revenues [EUR] Avail. revenues [EUR] Total Revenues [EUR] unavailability [%]
CR best revenues
0.9
0.5
-8 691
100 143
91 452
13.3
CR lowest unavail.
0.1
0.9
-5 027
20 491
15 464
2.1
NR best revenues
1
0.9
-10 600
222 889
212 289
12.7
NR lowest unavail.
0.1
0.8
-5 442
22 289
16 847
2.0
Block operation
0.5
0.5
-6 885
55 901
49 017
0.0*
*Calculated on time of contracted service
Table 4.7: Comparison between current regulation (CR) and new regulation (NR) optimum
for highest revenues and lowest unavailability, and block operation. Revenues and its
components are shown with unavailability rate, power oﬀer and starting SOC. Realistic
eﬃciency no tax.
4.7
Sensitivity to frequency pattern
In this section the results obtained from simulation using frequency data for 2017 and 2018
are presented. The raw frequency data are obtained from PowerLabDK meters. These
data presented a discontinuous time-step for measurement and where not complete: some
periods ranging from some tens of minutes to some days where missing. Due to structure
of the database a 2s time-step has been chosen in the simulation to reduce the number of
missing occurrence. This can have a signiﬁcant impact on comparability of results for 2016
and following years. More over the data for 2016 have precision of mHz while 2017 and
58
==PAGE:69==
4. Results
2018 data have precision of 10 mHz. 2017 and 2018 frequency data have a considerably
lower quality compared to 2016 frequency data. The calculation made by the model can
work perfectly with diﬀerent time-steps but the results may be aﬀected and conclusion on
their comparison may be less meaningful.
2017 and 2018 miss 1.43% and 1.11% of the samples respectively. During theses missing
periods the analysis cannot be performed without excessive alteration of the databases.
This means that in some hour it is not known how the BESS performs and thus revenue
and failure rate for those periods cannot be calculated.
To allow the comparison between 2016 and following years, yearly revenues are scaled.
The scaling factor is the ratio between the number of hours in the year and the number
of hours for which simulation is possible. Failure rate is not scaled because it represents
a percentage of the simulated hours in which the unit fails. Hour without information
are already excluded from failure rate and unavailability calculation. It is assumed that
missing periods have the same failure rate and unavailability rate calculated for the rest of
the year thus the two parameter do not need to be scaled.
The following results come from simulation with the three diﬀerent frequency databases,
but to isolate impact of the frequency, the economic data i.e. availability prices and
balancing power prices used are from 2016. All scenarios and conﬁguration are simulated
under current regulation.
4.7.1
Frequency statistics
Frequency distribution of the three diﬀerent years is depicted in Figure 4.23.
The
distribution in 2016 follows a normal distribution, while 2017 and 2018 are slightly moved
to the left and to the right respectively compared to their average.
Table 4.8 report the mean and standard deviation for each year.
Table 4.8: Average value and standard deviation for each year.
Year
Average [Hz]
Standard deviation [Hz]
2016
49.9995
0.0457
2017
50.0004
0.0446
2018
50.0004
0.0439
59
==PAGE:70==
4. Results
Figure 4.23: Distribution of frequency values in the trhee year.
4.7.2
Eﬀect of change in power oﬀer
Similar simulation used to investigate the sensitivity of performances to the change of
the power bid are made with 2017 and 2018 frequency data and the trends of the three
years are compared. Not great diﬀerences are expected since the frequency statistic are
quite similar. Changing only the frequency pattern does not impact much the revenues (or
costs) related to the energy exchange as expected. It seems anyway that in 2016 energy
expenditure are slightly smaller increasing the power oﬀer. This can be the result of a
smaller energy throughput, a more favorable frequency pattern and/or favorable electricity
prices.
As far as availability payment are considered, when a low eﬃcient system is simulated,
2016 results show considerably lower revenues compared to other years. This is directly
linked to the failure rate that is similar in the three years for realistic and perfect eﬃciency
but higher for 2016’s low eﬃciency. Since frequency is not too diﬀerent when the yearly
statistic are considered, the reason is believed to lay in the speciﬁc pattern of frequency
and subsequent evolution of Stat Of Charge of the battery.
Results suggest that revenues are mainly driven by availability payments and thus by
failure rate. The low impact of frequency change on energy revenues can also be linked to
the fact that energy throughput of every single hour cannot be extremely diﬀerent due
to the small hourly energy exchange. Over the whole year the energy throughput is not
expected to diﬀer signiﬁcantly as it happens with frequency. Anyway due to the high
hourly variability of availability prices and to the presence of penalties, small changes of
operation pattern can have more weight on ﬁnal revenues.
4.7.3
Eﬀect of change in SOCstart
Similar simulation used to investigate the sensitivity of performances to the change of
starting SOC are made with 2017 and 2018 frequency data and the trends of the three
years are compared. Again the energy revenues are similar but this is obvious since the
power oﬀer is always the same and thus there is not enough margin for change the quantity
of energy exchanged.
60
==PAGE:71==
4. Results
An unexpected behaviour of the failure rate is detected. For low and real eﬃciency 2016
failure rate is considerably higher with low SOCstart, then it converges to similar values for
higher SOCstart. When perfect eﬃciency is considered the extreme failure rates expected
with high and low SOCstart are conﬁrmed only in 2016. In the following years there is
lower variance of the results.
4.7.4
Optimal conﬁguration sensitivity to frequency
Table 4.9 shows the optimal static conﬁguration to achieve either highest revenues or lowest
unavailability time for a unit with realistic eﬃciency. The simulation is run with 2016
availability and electricity prices but with 3 diﬀerent databases for frequency.
Two trends are visible: when highest revenues are the goal the preferred SOCstart is higher
in 2017 and 2018 then in 2016, lowest unavailability is achieved with high SOCstart = 0.9
in 2016 while in both 2017 and 2018 it stays at 0.6.
In general 2018 has higher revenues then the previous years, with 2016 having the worst
economic performance. It has to be considered that the comparison is not always made
with the same power oﬀer since optimal conﬁguration slightly change from year to year. It
means that, in some years, even if a higher power oﬀer leads to higher failure rate, the
additional revenues obtained oﬀset the penalties.
4.7.5
Block operation with diﬀerent frequency
Results obtained from block operation sensitivity to frequency are not expected to show
any particular diﬀerences between diﬀerent years since the economic data are the same
and the potential eﬀect of particular pattern of frequency value are removed. In fact the
unit does not oﬀer more than what it can deliver with a 100% conﬁdence and thus it never
reach extreme state of charge and more importantly it never fail. Even if frequency pattern
are diﬀerent the deviations are similar and there is less margin for diﬀerent operation.
(a) Real eﬃciency
(b) Perfect eﬃciency
Figure 4.24: Failure rate for diﬀerent SOCstart in 2016, 2017 and 2018.
61
==PAGE:72==
4. Results
2016
Tax Scheme
Power offer
SOCstart
Revenues
Unavailability
Failure rate
no tax
0.9
0.5
94 158
13.17
25.34
Tax
0.7
0.6
73 539
9.23
18.00
VAT
0.7
0.6
61 663
9.23
18.00
no tax
0.1
0.9
15 464
2.05
3.93
Tax
0.1
0.9
9 447
2.05
3.93
VAT
0.1
0.9
5 922
2.05
3.93
2017
Tax Scheme
Power offer
SOCstart
Revenues
Unavailability
Failure rate
no tax
0.8
0.8
97 884
10.65
20.47
Tax
0.8
0.8
75 238
10.65
20.47
VAT
0.7
0.9
62 337
8.87
20.47
no tax
0.1
0.6
14 985
1.93
3.64
Tax
0.1
0.6
9 163
1.93
3.64
VAT
0.1
0.6
5 512
1.93
3.64
2018
Tax Scheme
Power offer
SOCstart
Revenues
Unavailability
Failure rate
no tax
0.9
0.8
101 061
11.67
23.05
Tax
0.8
0.8
79 336
10.02
19.92
VAT
0.8
0.8
66 544
10.02
19.92
no tax
0.1
0.6
15 315
1.93
3.95
Tax
0.1
0.6
9 624
1.93
3.95
VAT
0.1
0.6
6 159
1.93
3.95
Best 
revenues
Lowest 
unavail.
Best 
revenues
Lowest 
unavail.
Best 
revenues
Lowest 
unavail.
Table 4.9: Realistic eﬃciency’s optimal conﬁguration with diﬀerent years frequency data
and 2016 economic data.
Figure 4.25 shows the result for realistic eﬃciency when no taxes are applied. It shows
that the expectation are conﬁrmed: performances do not diﬀer from year to year. Same
results are found for other eﬃciency levels.
Figure 4.25: Block operation sensitivity to frequency for a unit with realistic eﬃciency.
62
==PAGE:73==
4. Results
4.8
Comparison of diﬀerent year performance
The following section describe the comparison between the results under current regulation
in 2016, 2017 and 2018 using complete data i.e both frequency and prices of each year.
Results obtained under the inﬂuence of both diﬀerent frequency pattern, availability
payments and electricity prices, provides a better idea on how variable the performance of
the unit can be in diﬀerent years.
4.8.1
Availability prices comparison
To better compare the performances of the BESS unit in diﬀerent years it is necessary to
analyze the trend of availability prices per MW.
Since the FCR-N service is rewarded with a pay-as-bid scheme the prices published by
the Danish TSO represents the weighted average of the accepted oﬀers. Figure 4.26 shows
the daily and yearly average from 2015 to 2018 (all public available data). Some trends
are visible. The 2018 average price is considerably higher than for the previous years thus
higher revenue would be expected in this year. Also the daily average is higher in 2018
most of the time. 2018 has also the highest peaks during summer where prices reach 2 or
3 times the prices of the previous years in the same period. 2015 has the lowest average
over the year. [46] ﬁnd the reason for this, in the high amount of rain which allowed hydro
storage to provide more service than usual, increasing the competition and lowering the
prices. In every year it is possible to see more or less clearly the seasonal diﬀerences: during
winter prices are lower due to combined heat and power plants providing grid service while
producing heat for heating purposes [46]. Smaller number of unit providing balancing
power results in reduced competition and higher prices.
4.8.2
Optimal conﬁguration in 2017 and 2018
The optimal conﬁguration is found using frequency and economic data for 2017 and 2018
and assuming realistic eﬃciency. The results are summarized in table 4.10 where also
results from 2016 are reported. Using the economic data of each year leads to lower
revenues for 2017 due to lower payment for availability and generally higher failure rate
(as already found in sensitivity to frequency). Similarly, in 2018 average failure rate is
not the lowest but the strong increase in availability payments gives considerably higher
revenues. Higher availability payments also move the conﬁguration for highest revenues
towards lower power oﬀers. This trend is easily visible when the optimal conﬁguration for
low unavailability time is considered. In fact all scenarios use the same power bid of 0.1
MW and failure rate doesn’t diﬀer much. In 2018 resulting revenues are from 40% to 80%
higher than in 2016 and 60% to 300% higher than in 2017.
4.8.3
Block operation performance in 2017 and 2018
Using the economic data from 2017 and 2018 when simulating block operation, higher
revenues are expected in 2018. Figure 4.27 shows the comparison of the three years and as
expected 2017 has the lowest revenues and 2018 the highest. In the same ﬁgure the revenues
and unavailability time for each year optimal conﬁguration are reported to facilitate the
comparison.
63
==PAGE:74==
4. Results
Figure 4.26: Comparison of daily and yearly average of availability prices for FCR-N from
2015 to 2018.
Figure 4.27: Comparison of revenues and unavailability time for the optimal conﬁguration
for lowest unavailability, highest revenues and block operation. No taxes are applied and
the unit has realistic eﬃciency
64
==PAGE:75==
4. Results
2016
Tax Scheme
Power offer
SOCstart
Revenues
Unavailability
Failure rate
no tax
0.9
0.5
94 158
13.17
25.34
Tax
0.7
0.6
73 539
9.23
18.00
VAT
0.7
0.6
61 663
9.23
18.00
no tax
0.1
0.9
15 464
2.05
3.93
Tax
0.1
0.9
9 447
2.05
3.93
VAT
0.1
0.9
5 922
2.05
3.93
no tax
0.5
0.5
49 017
0.00
0.00
Tax
0.5
0.5
34 542
0.00
0.00
VAT
0.5
0.5
25 945
0.00
0.00
2017
Tax Scheme
Power offer
SOCstart
Revenues
Unavailability
Failure rate
no tax
0.8
0.8
86 989
10.65
20.47
Tax
0.8
0.8
64 343
10.65
20.47
VAT
0.7
0.9
51 539
8.87
20.47
no tax
0.1
0.6
13 124
1.93
3.64
Tax
0.1
0.6
7 303
1.93
3.64
VAT
0.1
0.6
3 611
1.93
3.64
no tax
0.5
0.5
43 155
0.00
0.00
Tax
0.5
0.5
29 372
0.00
0.00
VAT
0.5
0.5
20 673
0.00
0.00
2018
Tax Scheme
Power offer
SOCstart
Revenues
Unavailability
Failure rate
no tax
0.8
0.8
144 221
10.02
19.92
Tax
0.8
0.8
122 816
10.02
19.92
VAT
0.8
0.8
105 718
10.02
19.92
no tax
0.1
0.6
21 361
1.93
3.95
Tax
0.1
0.6
15 670
1.93
3.95
VAT
0.1
0.6
11 037
1.93
3.95
no tax
0.5
0.5
69 510
0.00
0.00
Tax
0.5
0.5
56 413
0.00
0.00
VAT
0.5
0.5
45 856
0.00
0.00
Block 
operation
Block 
operation
Block 
operation
Lowest 
unavail.
Best 
revenues
Lowest 
unavail.
Best 
revenues
Lowest 
unavail.
Best 
revenues
Table 4.10: Optimal conﬁguration in diﬀerent years using correspondent economic and
frequency data. Realistic eﬃciency under current regulation.
65
==PAGE:76==
4. Results
4.9
Results of the economic evaluation
In this section the results for the lifetime estimation and economic evaluation are presented.
From the various scenarios created and analyzed in this thesis, ﬁve of them are chosen as
representative and their economic value is calculated.
The ﬁve scenario chosen are:
• CR1 - Realistic eﬃciency conﬁguration giving highest yearly revenues under current
regulation when no tax are applied.
• CR2 - Realistic eﬃciency conﬁguration giving lowest unavailability rate under current
regulation when no tax are applied.
• Block - Realistic eﬃciency using block operation under current regulation when no
tax are applied.
• NR1 - Realistic eﬃciency conﬁguration giving highest yearly revenues under modiﬁed
regulation when no tax are applied.
• NR2 - Realistic eﬃciency conﬁguration giving lowest unavailability rate under
modiﬁed regulation when no tax are applied.
All chosen cases use realistic eﬃciency since this economic evaluation mainly aim to give
an quantitative idea of the lifetime and proﬁtability of the use of utility-scale BESS for
primary frequency control. At the same time no grid tax and VAT are applied to simulate
the most desirable scenario for the business case and thus provide a sort of benchmark
for the project. More over it is believed that in future all unit providing services to the
grid will be treated in the same way and thus taxes will not be charged on electricity
consumption.
Table 4.11 presents the results for the chosen scenarios. For each case the correspondent
unavailability rate, expected revenues and lifetime estimation are presented ﬁrst. The
estimated lifetime is calculated on the 2016 frequency and operation records. Revenues
are an average of the revenues obtained in the tree years. For each scenarios, the NPV
is calculated using the related lifetime as time horizon. To give an idea of the economic
performance the NPV is also calculated in case the lifetime is not the one estimated with
the degradation model explained in section 3.7 but is assumed as 5, 8 or 10 years. It is
assumed that during these periods no component needs replacement.
Considering the estimated lifetime as time horizon none of the considered scenarios achieve
a positive NPV meaning that none of the used conﬁguration lead to a proﬁtable investment.
The low unavailability conﬁgurations have too low revenue ﬂow, but the low stress on
the battery results in a lifetime of 3 or 4 times the lifetime with correspondent scenarios
conﬁguration for highest revenues. Conﬁgurations for maximum revenues rely on high
power oﬀer to capitalize on availability payments but this lead to increased cycle depth
and thus in cycle degradation. The diﬀerence in lifetime between CR1 and NR1 is due
to diﬀerent operational strategies: NR1 does not wait the end of the hour to start the
service again and this cause more cycle degradation. Despite the shortest lifetime, due
to considerably higher revenues NR1 is the scenarios with the lowest NPV. Again the
unavailability time has to be considered from a TSO point of view since it may prevent
acceptance of this kind of operation.
66
==PAGE:77==
4. Results
Scenario
Average 
Unavailability 
[%]
Average 
Revenues 
[EUR]
Estimated 
lifetime 
[y]
Estimated 
NPV 
[EUR]
NPV 
5 years lifetime 
[EUR]
NPV 
8 years lifetime 
[EUR]
NPV 
10 years lifetime 
[EUR]
CR1
11.3
108 456
4
-431 362
-347 891
-116 249
23 710
CR2
2.0
16 650
12
-708 496
-756 595
-734 356
-720 919
Block
0.0
53 864
8
-483 803
-590 925
-483 803
-419 080
NR1
11.6
240 340
3
-152 183
239 233
239 233
1 093 408
NR2
1.9
16 847
12
-688 449
-747 086
-747 086
-703 594
Table 4.11: Lifetime and economic calculation for the selected scenarios.
Compared to CR1, block operation has double lifetime but its revenues are almost halved.
The two results counter each other and the obtained NPV is similar to CR1. Unlike CR1
block operation ensure availability for the contracted hours without excessive reduction of
the NPV. This gives to block operation an important value: it is the only one between the
examined cases which ensure service under current regulation.
If the lifetime of the battery under NR1 scenarios is extended to 5 years the system achieves
positive NPV and it can thus be a business worth of consideration. This requires allowance
of 30 minutes brake to restore the SOC, more resilient battery cells and acceptance of more
than 12% of expected unavailability. With current regulation the lifetime of the battery
is more than double of the estimated one to achieve positive NPV. A wiser operational
strategy may achieve longer lifetime without reducing revenues considerably and may ﬁnd
a conﬁguration with positive NPV without need of changes in battery composition and/or
design. An optimization with maximum NPV as objective, may ﬁnd a better conﬁguration
without need of change in battery characteristic.
67
==PAGE:78==
5
RESULT DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY
In this thesis the performance of Battery Energy Storage System in the FCR-N market has
been investigated and the examination of the impact of the various parameters inﬂuencing
battery operation and proﬁtability has been carried out.
Base case
A base case conﬁguration has been deﬁned to estimate the eﬀect of eﬃciency
and taxes applied to electricity consumption. Between the three levels of eﬃciency deﬁned
a unit with realistic eﬃciency doesn’t show excessively bad performance compared to
an ideal unit with no losses. In fact, ﬁnal yearly revenues and number of hours with
ﬂawed operation do not diﬀer too much. However, a realistic unit requires an unavoidable
higher energy input during its operation to compensate for losses, the energy trade is
inherently imbalanced and assume importance as it lowers the total revenues obtained with
availability payments. This eﬀect is worsened by taxes since they increase only the price
for the bought energy. Conventional unit participating in the ancillary service markets are
not required to pay those taxes. Since the delivered service is the same, every unit must
be exempted by taxes to achieve technology neutrality. For units participating only in the
ancillary service market, energy exchange is a result of service delivery. Regulators and
policy makers in Denmark should consider removal of energy trade and its eﬀect on energy
markets. Current regulation framework in Germany does not consider energy settlement
for balancing units. This can easily be applied on convectional generators, while with
batteries providing multiple services it can become diﬃcult to separate the uses of the
energy consumed delivered and stored for diﬀerent purposes. Due to losses, energy trade
represents a barrier for storage units proﬁtability and can limit their capability of providing
the ﬂexibility needed by the system.
Sensitivity to SOCstart
Further investigation of speciﬁc parameter impacts followed
the base case analysis. The eﬀect of diﬀerent target SOC (SOCstart) was considered. Due
to the speciﬁc operational strategy which uses power set-point equal to 0 MW, the stored
energy was used to cover the continuous auxiliary consumption during idle periods. This
aﬀected the result obtained in case of low and realistic eﬃciency which indicates high
optimal SOCstart. However, not perfect eﬃciency cause asymmetrical use of the energy
capacity: energy stored is reduced while energy output is increased meaning that a unit
with higher energy stored than free capacity has higher possibility of withstand frequency
deviations. It can thus be said that the lowest the system eﬃciency the least symmetrical
will be its operation and conﬁguration. An alternative approach can also be used: the
BESS is a consumer with power set-point equal to its minimum auxiliary consumption and
it provides service deviating from this set-point. When losses are limited, either because
of high power oﬀer or high eﬃciency, SOCstart has low eﬀect on performances. This may
68
==PAGE:79==
5. Result discussion and summary
leave higher margin to reduce calendar ageing which increases when battery stays idle at
high SOC.
Sensitivity to power oﬀer
The base results suggested that, with the current regulation
using economic penalties in case of failed operation, increasing the power oﬀer means more
failures and thus causes increased economic losses. Of course increasing the power oﬀer also
increases the availability payment revenues oﬀsetting the eﬀect of penalties. The revenues
curve ﬁnd its maximum with quite high power oﬀers considered the energy capacity and
thus corresponds to an high rate of failure. Such unreliable units are most likely to be
excluded from the market. Even if the power oﬀer for minimum unavailability is used
the failure rate is still considerable. This is a clear signal that current regulation does
not keep in account the limited energy capacity of storage unit. In fact no mechanism
is provided to allow correction of the storage level. In Germany, where the frequency
services are similar to Danish services, some degrees of freedom are available to allow
better participation of storage units. In addition there is possibility of withdrawal when
the frequency deviation becomes unsustainable and must be corrected by secondary and
tertiary reserves, the allowed time for reserve recovery is then long enough to not cause re-
bounce of frequency deviation due to storage restoration. In the PJM controlled area a fast
signal with conditional energy neutrality is used to capitalize on fast response capability of
storage while considering limited energy. Such solution, while requiring complete redesign
of the European services, may be interesting if ﬂexibility from fast responsive unit is needed
in the system.
New regulation
Some small modiﬁcations are proposed to investigate the eﬀect of
diﬀerent regulation: a period of 30 minutes is allowed in case of failure to restore power
capacity without facing penalties. The deriving operational strategy uses the restoration
period to go back to target SOC but never prolongs this restoration more than allowed. In
this way penalties are never applied and the new framework presents increased business
opportunities. However, the new regulation fails in incentivizing a considerable lower
unavailability. Longer restoration time may push toward higher energy/power ratio of
installed units which can fail less often. In fact, it would be possible to restore a larger
energy capacity. Despite the beneﬁts for storage units, longer restoration time also means
less service procured that still need to be paid by the TSO. A combination of long restoration
time and reduction of payment proportional to the actual unavailability may be a solution
worth of consideration.
Block operation
In order to ensure no failure, a new strategy alternating 1 hour of
operation 1 hour of restoration was simulated. In this way the unit can oﬀer a power in
MW corespondent to half of its energy capacity in MWh and never fail (with reasonable
frequency deviations) if asymmetric behaviour due to losses are properly considered. This
characteristic makes this strategy viable under current regulation, anyway, it considerably
limits the revenues and thus business opportunity. As shown in the economic evaluation it
is not able to achieve a positive NPV, but its longer lifetime and secure availability are
valuable characteristic.
69
==PAGE:80==
5. Result discussion and summary
Optimal conﬁguration and diﬀerent years performances
The eﬀect of the speciﬁc
frequency data was also considered using frequency pattern of 2016, 2017 and 2018 and
comparing the already analyzed behaviour of the BESS unit. As expected, most of the
trend are similar since the three database does not diﬀer considerably under statistical
point of view. The diﬀerences observed are thus attributed to the speciﬁc pattern of
frequency.
In each year the combined eﬀect of diﬀerent power bid and SOCstart is analyzed to identify
the preferred conﬁguration to achieve either highest revenues or lowest unavailability. Two
main results are obtained: the lowest achievable unavailability time is 2% with realistic unit
and the preferred SOCstart highly depends on speciﬁc frequency pattern and not on power
oﬀer. The former indicates again the need for introduction of mechanism to control the SOC
during operation. The latter, considering the comparison between the three years, suggests
that the capability of forecast frequency deviation some hours ahead would give better
performance. Since frequency forecasts are not considerable, a strategy that minimizes
the eﬀect of the speciﬁc frequency patter must be designed. With the introduction of
regulations giving more operation ﬂexibility, or reducing the energy bias of frequency
(Germany and PJM respectively), these kind of strategies are more easily achievable and
can allow increased BESS use for frequency services. With such modiﬁcation the BESS
performances are more controllable and may considerably improve system stability and
ﬂexibility.
The variability of the availability payment strongly aﬀect the economic performance of the
unit. The high variability of the prices limit precise evaluation of an expected value that
allow the formulation of a reliable economic evaluation to identify business opportunities.
Degradation and NPV
Between the various scenarios and conﬁgurations the most
interesting are selected to evaluate the lifetime and thus the economic proﬁtability of the
system from a project perspective. The degradation model used indicates that the base
strategy highly deteriorates the battery when the conﬁguration tries to achieve highest
revenues and thus the system has a too short life to payback the initial investment. On the
other hand, a conﬁguration seeking lowest unavailability achieves longer lifetime but too
limited revenues. Not even block operation, which has medium level revenues and lifetime,
is able to achieve a positive NPV. If battery lifetime can be extended and/or investment
price keeps falling a BESS providing FCR-N in current danish regulation may become an
interesting business case.
Additional simulation with current model to identify the conﬁguration that minimizes the
NPV may be used as starting point for the development of a more complex strategy able to
achieve proﬁtability. Modiﬁcations of tender condition and requirements for unit providing
primary regulation in Denmark are expected, upgrading the current framework mainly
designed for conventional generators. In addition battery prices keep falling also due to
the contribution of the mobility sector. In future such BESS may become a remunerative
investment and thus proliferate increasing system ﬂexibility.
70
==PAGE:81==
5. Result discussion and summary
5.1
Discussion on assumptions
Many assumption have been made that may have aﬀected the value of results and their
discussion.
First the introduction of the penalties may be incorrect since no information are provided
by the TSO on such measure. Penalties play a considerable role in the model used for the
simulation and thus represent one of the most critical points. Moreover such penalties are
applied whenever the system has full or empty energy capacity for 1 second. This may be
too strict since the required response itself is 150 seconds. Anyway it is also considered not
too far from reality since most of the time when the battery reaches full o empty capacity
the frequency deviation will keep going in the same direction, prolonging the failure state
if restoration doesn’t begin.
The operational strategy is quite limited to simple bold operation of the unit. This was
used thought the whole study to investigate the impact of changing various parameters.
The strategy also counted on the whole capacity of the unit but this is likely not the case
since the use of the full capacity highly increases degradation. Limitation on the minimum
and maximum SOC should be included.
The reward for balancing capacity in the FCR-N market follows the pay-as-bid scheme. It
has been assumed that the BESS always oﬀers the average price published by Energinet,
but of course an increased price for the bid may increase proﬁtability. Anyway higher
prices for the availability may cause the unit to be excluded and the assumption of 100%
participation may become too strong.
Frequency databases for 2017 and 2018 have a diﬀerent precision and missing samples
compared with 2016. Missing periods may slightly aﬀect results comparison since the
percentage of missing sample is below 1.5%, but the diﬀerent time-step and measurement
precision may have grater impact.
As highlighted previously, highest lifetime and highest NPV have not been the objectives
of the analysis since they are estimated mainly to compare the economic return more than
to deﬁne an proper strategy. Revenue and unavailability have been considered to evaluate
system performance in the early stages of the study.
Since the degradation model cannot be validated, there are high uncertainty on lifetime
estimation and thus on the proﬁtability.
However, the ﬁnal result on the economic
evaluation of the project provides an idea of how the unit can improve its operation and
how close the various conﬁgurations are to economic feasibility.
Investment cost and maintenance cost need to be proved with further research since any
publicly available estimation of this value is either too old or not enough speciﬁc for the
considered technology.
71
==PAGE:82==
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The participation of a battery energy storage system (BESS) of 1MW/1MWh size in the
ancillary service market has been investigated. The service of choice is the FCR-N in DK2.
The choice reﬂects the belief that a fast responsive storage unit ﬁts well the purpose of
such service. The utilization of a simple strategy does not achieve high yearly revenues
and often fails in providing the contracted operation. A strategy avoiding completely the
failure can be used but it further reduces revenues and does not represent an economic
feasible option.
The main barriers found in the literature review are conﬁrmed in this study: biased energy
content of the frequency, old regulation framework and electricity taxes being the most
important. For a BESS system to be proﬁtable in the current FCR-N market a high power
oﬀer has to be used leading to a possibility of failure too high to consider the unit reliable.
Low power oﬀers (if permitted) reduce signiﬁcantly the interruptions of service and increase
lifetime of almost three times. Anyway, increased lifetime is not enough considering the
strong reduction of revenues ﬂow. Alternate block operation completely avoids the failures
but also limits economic opportunities. Due high reliability block operation is an interesting
trade oﬀbetween respect of current requirement and economic performance. It still doesn’t
represent a proﬁtable choice.
Deep analysis of the ancillary service market and of the various studies on the topic, as
well as the example given by many system operators, provide a vast and good base for
development of new services and markets. These should be designed to address future
needs of the power system, and to capitalize on the notable opportunities given by new
technologies. Between these technologies battery storage system and storage in general have
proved their potential and capability to provide services to address the coming challenges
related to power system transformation.
The research and development of technologies with improved characteristic and lower
cost are also fundamental to facilitate the transformation process but cannot alone solve
the issue. The new design of the regulation should not be intended to allow a certain
technologies or group of technology to better participate in the market. This would be the
result of regulation shaped in order to reward the service and ﬂexibility actually needed
by the power system, while keeping into account the limits of the technology that most
likely will deliver such support. This will unleash their full potential and beneﬁt. The
introduction of Enhanced Frequency Response in UK and of RegD signal in PJM are good
examples of moves to take advantage of fast response given by energy limited resources.
The German regulation is another example of integration of regulation ﬂexibility to increase
technology diversiﬁcation and related beneﬁts.
72
==PAGE:83==
6. Conclusion and future work
6.1
Future work
With a closer look to the work of this thesis some possible points for improvement are
presented:
• The only FCR-N provision in DK2 is investigated but a comparison of the economic
and technical performances in diﬀerent services and in diﬀerent markets may give a
broader understanding of how the current regulation may be improved.
• The strategies used for the simulation were simple and no signiﬁcant changes were
made to investigate possible beneﬁts of more complex control algorithm. Moreover
the limit on minimum and maximum SOC should be included for increased reality and
lowered degradation. Advanced Strategy should also consider not perfect knowledge
of the future.
• Further evaluation of the unit design may ﬁnd that diﬀerent sizes are preferred for
both increased performance and higher economic value.
• More complex battery models would give more precise results for a speciﬁc battery
composition and allow deeper analysis on technical parameters and performances.
However, a good trade-oﬀbetween precision and low computational eﬀort is necessary.
• The degradation model used was not validated and represent a simpliﬁcation of
a literature proposal based on accelerated tests. The derived uncertainty may be
removed by future development of a more accurate model.
• System stability must be accurately evaluated in case new regulation are proposed.
In the conducted work, system stability analysis were out of scope, but high level of
unavailability may cause grid problems and decreased power quality. Possible other
implementation of operation ﬂexibility must also be evaluated from system stability
point of view. This is especially true if the derived framework triggers the limited
energy units proliferation.
73
==PAGE:84==
LIST OF FIGURES
1.1
Graphical summary of the project work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1
Services procured in UK. Positive indicated a positive change of power to handle
underfrequency and viceversa. From [18].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Comparison between over-procurement of primary+secondary and enhanced+primary+secondary
combined response. Adapted from [18].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Allowed SOC range with 15 minutes and 30 minutes criterion. Figure from
[20]. Note that the range depends on the ratio between power oﬀer and energy
capacity but eﬃciency is not taken into consideration by the authors.
. . . . .
15
3.1
Droop characteristic for a system providing FCR-N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Deﬁnition of energy prices applied to the BESS delivering FCR-N service. . . .
22
3.3
Electricity prices and taxes for Denmark, some other countries and Europe
average. Note the VAT is may diﬀer between various countries but the danish
value of 25% is used in this table. Adapted from [36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Calculated power-eﬃciency curve for each eﬃciency level. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Power-total losses curve L(P) for each eﬃciency level. Auxiliary consumption
is not included in this graph.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Summary of the 9 base cases. The service is sold for 24 h every day, in each
hour the power bid is 0.3 MW and the State Of Charge at the beginning of the
simulation and for restoration is half of maximum capacity (0.5 MWh).
. . . .
30
3.7
Strategy for deﬁned new regulation framework. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1
Revenues and failure rate comparison with base case conﬁguration. The empty
green bar represents the availability payment from the whole year (the same
availability payment is obtained no matter the tax level) while the empty
blue bar represent the energy revenues ("perfect eﬃciency no-tax" has slightly
positive energy revenue). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Distribution of instantaneous eﬃciency and average eﬃciency. Perfect unit’s
eﬃciency is not shown since it is always 100%.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Variation of total Revenues and failure rate with SOCstart, in "realistic eﬃciency
- no Tax" scenario. Availability payment revenues and energy related revenues
are also shown. The best conﬁguration for both highest revenues and lowest
failure rate is the same with SOCstart = 0.8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Variation of total Revenues and failure rate with SOCstart, in "low eﬃciency -
no Tax" scenario . Availability payment revenues and energy related revenues
are also shown. The best conﬁguration for both highest revenues and lowest
failure rate is the same with SOCstart = 0.95. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
74
==PAGE:85==
List of Figures
4.5
Variation of total Revenues and failure rate with SOCstart, in "perfect eﬃciency
- no Tax" scenario . Availability payment revenues and energy related revenues
are also shown. The best conﬁguration for highest revenues is SOCstart = 0.5,
for lowest failure rate is SOCstart = 0.6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.6
Comparison between failure rate and unavailability rate for perfect eﬃciency
scenarios varying SOCstart. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.7
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Realistic eﬃciency. Best power bid for lowest failure rate is 0.1 MW, for highest
total revenues is 0.9 MW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.8
Ratio between the yearly revenue from availability payment received by the
BESS and the corresponding maximum revenues from availability payment for
diﬀerent power bids. Realistic eﬃciency case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.9
Comparison of the energy revenues under diﬀerent tax schemes for power bids
from 0.1 MW to 1 MW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.10 Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Low eﬃciency. Best power bid for lowest failure rate is 0.6 MW, for highest
total revenues is 0.9 MW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.11 Comparison of Total revenues and unavailability rate between new regulation
(NG) and current regulation in eﬀect (CR) for diﬀerent power bids. Realistic
eﬃciency and no tax scenario. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.12 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "realistic eﬃcient" unit if no taxes are applied.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.13 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "perfect eﬃcient" unit if no taxes are applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.14 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "low eﬃcient" unit if no taxes are applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.15 Comparison of unavailability between each eﬃciency level. . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.16 Preferred SOCstart with diﬀerent power oﬀers under current regulation for a
system with perfect eﬃciency. Revenues does not consider taxes. . . . . . . . .
52
4.17 Preferred SOCstart with diﬀerent power oﬀers under modiﬁed regulation for a
system with perfect eﬃciency. Revenues does not consider taxes. . . . . . . . .
52
4.18 Revenues (no taxes applied) for every conﬁguration under current regulation
for a system with perfect eﬃciency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.19 Revenues (no taxes applied) for every conﬁguration under modiﬁed regulation
for a system with perfect eﬃciency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.20 Maximum power oﬀer, operation time over maximum operation time ratio and
availability payment over maximum availability payment ratio with diﬀerent
length of operation block. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.21 Comparison of revenues achieved by diﬀerent eﬃciency levels using block
operation with diﬀerent tax schemes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.22 Comparison between current regulation (CR) and new regulation (NR) optimum
for highest revenues and lowest unavailability, and block operation. Revenues
and unavailability rate are shown. Realistic eﬃciency no tax. . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.23 Distribution of frequency values in the trhee year.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.24 Failure rate for diﬀerent SOCstart in 2016, 2017 and 2018. . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.25 Block operation sensitivity to frequency for a unit with realistic eﬃciency. . . .
62
75
==PAGE:86==
List of Figures
4.26 Comparison of daily and yearly average of availability prices for FCR-N from
2015 to 2018. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.27 Comparison of revenues and unavailability time for the optimal conﬁguration
for lowest unavailability, highest revenues and block operation. No taxes are
applied and the unit has realistic eﬃciency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.1 Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "realistic eﬃciency - Tax" scenario.
The best
conﬁguration is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate
(purple). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.2 Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "realistic eﬃciency - Tax + VAT" scenario. The
best conﬁguration is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate
(purple). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
A.3 Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "perfect eﬃciency - Tax" scenario.
The best
conﬁguration is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate
(purple) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.4 Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "perfect eﬃciency - VAT" scenario.
The best
conﬁguration is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate
(purple). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.5 Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "low eﬃciency - Tax" scenario. The best conﬁguration
is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple). . . . . .
84
A.6 Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "low eﬃciency - VAT" scenario.
The best
conﬁguration is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate
(purple). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.1
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Realistic eﬃciency and taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.2
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Realistic eﬃciency and taxes+VAT.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.3
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Low eﬃciency and taxes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.4
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Low eﬃciency and taxes+VAT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B.5
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Perfect eﬃciency and no taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.6
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Perfect eﬃciency and taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
B.7
Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Perfect eﬃciency and taxes+VAT.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.8
Ratio between the yearly revenue from availability payment received by the
BESS and the corresponding maximum revenues from availability payment for
diﬀerent power bids. Low eﬃciency case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
76
==PAGE:87==
List of Figures
B.9
Ratio between the yearly revenue from availability payment received by the
BESS and the corresponding maximum revenues from availability payment for
diﬀerent power bids. Perfect eﬃciency case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.10 Comparison of the energy revenues under diﬀerent tax schemes for power bids
from 0.1 MW to 1 MW. Low eﬃciency.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.11 Comparison of the energy revenues under diﬀerent tax schemes for power bids
from 0.1 MW to 1 MW. Perfect eﬃciency. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.1 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "realistic eﬃcient" unit if taxes are applied.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.2 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "realistic eﬃcient" unit if taxes and VAT are applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.3 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "low eﬃcient" unit if taxes are applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.4 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "low eﬃcient" unit if taxes and VAT are applied.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.5 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "perfect eﬃcient" unit if taxes are applied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C.6 Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "perfect eﬃcient" unit if taxes and VAT are applied.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
77
==PAGE:88==
LIST OF TABLES
2.1
Diﬀerent services for frequency control. For each service general indication of
activation time and time for which it has to be provided are reported. Power
electronic connected units can provide synthetic inertia or fast response. . . . .
10
3.1
Requirements for FCR-N service. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Electricity prices and taxes for Denmark, some other counties and Europe
average. Note the VAT may diﬀer between various countries but the danish
value of 25% is always used in this table [36]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Eﬃciency levels and related losses. Lmin and Lmax refer to converter, battery
and LV-panel related losses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Investment and O&M costs for the simulated unit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1
Main results from Base Cases simulations. Revenues under diﬀerent tax scheme,
failure rate, and average eﬃciency are reported. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Comparison of realistic eﬃciency BESS performance with base case conﬁguration
under CR and NR. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Comparison of realistic eﬃciency BESS performance with Pbid = 0.7MW and
SOCstart = 0.5 under CR and NR. This speciﬁc power oﬀer is the preferred
one under current regulation, for realistic eﬃciency unit. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Initial conﬁguration for highest revenues and lowest unavailability rate under
current regulation for each eﬃciency level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5
Initial conﬁguration for highest revenues and lowest unavailability rate under
modiﬁed regulation for each eﬃciency level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.6
SOC minimum and maximum with block operation for diﬀerent eﬃciency levels. 57
4.7
Comparison between current regulation (CR) and new regulation (NR) optimum
for highest revenues and lowest unavailability, and block operation. Revenues
and its components are shown with unavailability rate, power oﬀer and starting
SOC. Realistic eﬃciency no tax.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.8
Average value and standard deviation for each year.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.9
Realistic eﬃciency’s optimal conﬁguration with diﬀerent years frequency data
and 2016 economic data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.10 Optimal conﬁguration in diﬀerent years using correspondent economic and
frequency data. Realistic eﬃciency under current regulation.
. . . . . . . . . .
65
4.11 Lifetime and economic calculation for the selected scenarios. . . . . . . . . . . .
67
78
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1]
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Renewable Energy Fully
Competitive in Many Countries. 2016. url: https://unfccc.int/news/renewable-
energy-fully-competitive-in-many-countries.
[2]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2018. 2018.
[3]
International Energy Agency. Energy Technology Perspective 2017. 2017.
[4]
Ha Thi Nguyen et al. “Frequency Stability Enhancement for Low Inertia Systems
using Synthetic Inertia of Wind Power”. In: (2017).
[5]
ENTSOE. Energy Storage and Storage Services - ENTSOE position. 2016.
[6]
International Energy Agency. Status of Power System Transformation 2019 - Power
system ﬂexibility. 2019.
[7]
Garrett Fitzgerald et al. The Economics of Battery Energy Storage: How multi-use,
customer-sited batteries deliver the most services and value to customers and the
grid. 2015.
[8]
Energy Storage Assotiation. [Energy Storage] Grid Operations Beneﬁts. url: http:
//energystorage.org/energy-storage/energy-storage-benefits/benefit-
categories/grid-operations-benefits.
[9]
Seung Tae Cha, Qiuwei Wu, and Jacob Østergaard. “Frequency Stabilizing Scheme
for a Danish Island Grid”. In: 3rd IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies
(ISGT) IEEE (2012).
[10]
Fabio Massimo Gatta et al. “Application of a LiFePO4 Battery Energy Storage
System to Primary Frequency Control: Simulations and Experimental Results”. In:
Energies 2016, 9, 887 (2016).
[11]
M. Ramírez et al. “Battery Energy Storage for Frequency Support in the BCS Electric
Power System”. In: (2018).
[12]
K.C. Divya and J. Østergaard. “Battery energy storage technology for power
systems—An overview”. In: Electric Power Systems Research 79 (2009) 511–520
(2009).
[13]
Bolun Xu et al. “Optimal Battery Participation in Frequency Regulation Markets”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems (Volume: 33, Issue: 6) (2018).
[14]
Bolun Xu et al. “A Comparison of Policies on the Participation of Storage in U.S.
Frequency Regulation Markets”. In: (2016).
[15]
Danish Technological Institute. BESS Project - Smart grid ready Battery Energy
Storage System for future grid. Final Report. 2017.
[16]
Camilla Lund. “Techno-economic analysis of operational strategies for a battery
energy storage system installed in Nordhavn”. 2017.
79
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
[17]
B. Gundogdu et al. “A Battery Energy Management Strategy for UK Enhanced
Frequency Response”. In: 2017 IEEE 26th International Symposium on Industrial
Electronics (ISIE) (2017).
[18]
National Grid ESO. Future Requirements for Balancing Services. url: https://www.
nationalgrideso.com/document/88586/download.
[19]
Yann G. Rebours et al. “A Survey of Frequency and Voltage Control Ancillary
Services—Part I: Technical Features”. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER
SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 1 (2007).
[20]
Alexander Zeh et al. “Fundamentals of Using Battery Energy Storage System to
Provide Primary Control Reserves in Germany”. In: Batteries, 2016, 2, 29 (2016).
[21]
ENTSO-E. Article 156 comma 8 to 11 in: COMMISSION REGULATION (EU)
2017/1485 of 2 August 2017 establishing a guideline on electricity transmission
system operation. 2017. url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.L_.2017.220.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ:L:2017:220:
TOC#d1e234-1-1.
[22]
Claudio Brivio. “Battery Energy Storage Systems: modelling, application and design
criteria”. PhD thesis. 2017.
[23]
Giuliano Rancilio. “Battery Energy Storage Systems for Ancillary Services Provision”.
2017.
[24]
Andreas Thingvad et al. “Assessing the energy content of system frequency and
electric vehicle charging eﬃciency for ancillary service provision”. In: (2017).
[25]
Bjoern Christensen et al. “Integration of new technology in the ancillary service
markets”. In: (2018).
[26]
Bornholms Energi og Forsyning. BOSS - BOrnholm Smartgrid Secured. 2019. url:
https://beof.dk/om-os/udviklingsprojekter/boss-bornholm-smartgrid-
secured/.
[27]
Robert Eriksson, Niklas Modig, and Katherine Elkington. “Synthetic inertia versus
fast frequency response: a deﬁnition”. In: (2017).
[28]
Energinet. Ancillary services to be delivered in Denmark - Tender conditions. 2017.
[29]
Alexander Cooke, Kane Forkasiewicz, and Dani Strickland. “Energy Storage for
Enhanced Frequency Response Services”. In: (2017).
[30]
Thomas Lee. Energy Storage in PJM: Exploring Frequency Regulation Market
Transformation. 2017.
[31]
PJM Staﬀ. Implementation and Rationale for PJM’s Conditional Neutrality
Regulation Signals. 2017.
[32]
Lena Kitzing et al. The residential electricity sector in Denmark: A description of
current conditions. 2016.
[33]
Skat. Types of tax. url: https://skat.dk/skat.aspx?oid=2244282.
[34]
Skat. Calculate VAT on self-supply. url: https://skat.dk/skat.aspx?oid=
2246592.
80
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
[35]
Eurostat. Electricity price statistics. 2018. url: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/
statistics- explained/index.php?title=Electricity_price_statistics#
Electricity_prices_for_non-household_consumers.
[36]
Eurostat. Electricity prices for non-household consumers - bi-annual data (from
2007 onwards). url: http : / / appsso . eurostat . ec . europa . eu / nui /
submitViewTableAction.do.
[37]
Yann G. Rebours et al. “A Survey of Frequency and Voltage Control Ancillary
Services—Part II: Economic Features”. In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER
SYSTEMS, VOL. 22, NO. 1 (2007).
[38]
David Pratt. “50MW of Enhanced Frequency Response batteries go online in Britain
from VLC Energy”. In: (2018). url: https://www.energy-storage.news/news/
50mw-of-enhanced-frequency-response-batteries-go-online-in-britain-
from-vlc.
[39]
Maciej Swierczynski et al. “Primary Frequency Regulation with Li-ion Battery Energy
Storage System: a Case Study for Denmark”. In: (2013).
[40]
Gangui Yan et al. “A cost accounting method of the Li-ion battery energy storage
system for frequency regulation considering the eﬀect of life degradation”. In: (2018).
[41]
Holger C. Hesse et al. “Lithium-Ion Battery Storage for the Grid—A Review of
Stationary Battery Storage System Design Tailored for Applications in Modern
Power Grids”. In: (2017).
[42]
Daniel Ioan Stroe et al. “Accelerated lifetime testing methodology for lifetime
estimation of lithium-ion batteries used in augmented wind power plants”. In: (2014).
[43]
Daniel Ioan Stroe et al. “Degradation behaviour of lithium-ion batteries based on
ﬁeld measured frequency regulation mission proﬁle”. In: (2015).
[44]
Behnam Zakeri and Sanna Syri. “Electrical energy storage systems:A comparative
life cycle cost analysis”. In: (2014).
[45]
Claudia Pavarini. “Battery storage is (almost) ready to play the ﬂexibility game”.
In: (2019). url: https://www.iea.org/newsroom/news/2019/february/battery-
storage-is-almost-ready-to-play-the-flexibility-game.html.
[46]
Andreas Thingvad, Charalampos Ziras, and Mattia Marinelli. “Economic value of
electric vehicle reserve provision in the Nordic countries under driving requirements
and charger losses”. In: (2019).
81
==PAGE:92==
A APPENDIX FOR STARTING SOCstart, CR
In this Appendix the remaining resulting graphs from SOCstart sensitivity are reported.
Figure A.1: Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "realistic eﬃciency - Tax" scenario. The best conﬁguration is
highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple).
Figure A.2: Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "realistic eﬃciency - Tax + VAT" scenario.
The best
conﬁguration is highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple).
82
==PAGE:93==
A. Appendix for starting SOCstart, CR
Figure A.3: Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "perfect eﬃciency - Tax" scenario. The best conﬁguration is
highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple)
Figure A.4: Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "perfect eﬃciency - VAT" scenario. The best conﬁguration is
highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple).
83
==PAGE:94==
A. Appendix for starting SOCstart, CR
Figure A.5: Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "low eﬃciency - Tax" scenario. The best conﬁguration is
highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple).
Figure A.6: Variation of total Revenues, failure rate, availability revenues and energy
revenues with SOCstart, in "low eﬃciency - VAT" scenario. The best conﬁguration is
highlighted both considering revenue (red) and failure rate (purple).
84
==PAGE:95==
B APPENDIX FOR SENSITIVITY TO Pbid, CR
Yearly Revenue TAX (real efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.1: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Realistic eﬃciency and taxes.
Yearly Revenue Tax+VAT (real efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.2: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Realistic eﬃciency and taxes+VAT.
85
==PAGE:96==
B. Appendix for Sensitivity to Pbid, CR
Yearly Revenue TAX (low efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.3: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Low eﬃciency and taxes.
Yearly Revenue Tax+VAT (low efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.4: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Low eﬃciency and taxes+VAT.
86
==PAGE:97==
B. Appendix for Sensitivity to Pbid, CR
Yearly Revenue no Tax (perfect efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.5: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Perfect eﬃciency and no taxes.
Yearly Revenue TAX (perfect efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.6: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Perfect eﬃciency and taxes.
87
==PAGE:98==
B. Appendix for Sensitivity to Pbid, CR
Yearly Revenue Tax+VAT (perfect efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [MW]
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Revenues [EUR]
104
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
Failure rate
Figure B.7: Revenues and failure rate sensitivity to power bid (from 0.1 MW to 1 MW).
Perfect eﬃciency and taxes+VAT.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power bid [MW]
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.29
0.3
0.31
0.32
0.33
0.34
Ratio
Ratio between Av. payment and Maximum Av. payment  (low efficiency)
Figure B.8: Ratio between the yearly revenue from availability payment received by the
BESS and the corresponding maximum revenues from availability payment for diﬀerent
power bids. Low eﬃciency case.
88
==PAGE:99==
B. Appendix for Sensitivity to Pbid, CR
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power bid [MW]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Ratio
Ratio between Av. payment and Maximum Av. payment  (perfect efficiency)
Figure B.9: Ratio between the yearly revenue from availability payment received by the
BESS and the corresponding maximum revenues from availability payment for diﬀerent
power bids. Perfect eﬃciency case.
Figure B.10: Comparison of the energy revenues under diﬀerent tax schemes for power
bids from 0.1 MW to 1 MW. Low eﬃciency.
89
==PAGE:100==
B. Appendix for Sensitivity to Pbid, CR
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power bid [MW]
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
Energy revenues [EUR]
104 Comparison of energy revenues (perfect efficiency)
no Tax
TAX
VAT
Figure B.11: Comparison of the energy revenues under diﬀerent tax schemes for power
bids from 0.1 MW to 1 MW. Perfect eﬃciency.
90
==PAGE:101==
C APPENDIX FOR NEW REGULATION
Yearly Revenue TAX (real efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure C.1: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "realistic eﬃcient" unit if taxes are applied.
Yearly Revenue Tax+VAT (real efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure C.2: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "realistic eﬃcient" unit if taxes and VAT are applied.
91
==PAGE:102==
C. Appendix for New regulation
Yearly Revenue TAX (low efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
16
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure C.3: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "low eﬃcient" unit if taxes are applied.
Yearly Revenue Tax+VAT (low efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
13
13.5
14
14.5
15
15.5
16
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure C.4: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "low eﬃcient" unit if taxes and VAT are applied.
92
==PAGE:103==
C. Appendix for New regulation
Yearly Revenue TAX (perfect efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure C.5: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "perfect eﬃcient" unit if taxes are applied.
Yearly Revenue Tax+VAT (perfect efficiency)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Power offer [-]
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Revenues [EUR]
105
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [%]
Total
Energy
Avail. Payment
unavailability
Figure C.6: Total revenues, availability payment, energy revenues and Unavailability rate
for "perfect eﬃcient" unit if taxes and VAT are applied.
93
==PAGE:104==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Write ISBN XX-XXXXX-XX-X (or delete)
