==PAGE:1==
Dimitrios Semitsoglou-Tsiapos
Evaluation of Implementation
Aspects of Distributed Control and
Optimization Algorithms for Power
Systems Applications
Master Thesis, July 2019
==PAGE:2==
Dimitrios Semitsoglou-Tsiapos
Evaluation of Implementation
Aspects of Distributed Control and
Optimization Algorithms for Power
Systems Applications
Master Thesis, July 2019
==PAGE:3==
Evaluation of Implementation Aspects of Distributed Control and Optimiza-
tion Algorithms for Power Systems Applications,
Author(s):
Dimitrios Semitsoglou-Tsiapos
Supervisor(s):
Kai Heussen, Alexander Maria Prostejovsky, Charalampos Ziras
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
20 July 2019
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve MSc in Computer
Science and Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The
report represents 32.5 ECTS points.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This master thesis constitutes the result of research and cross-disciplinary work that took
place at the Risø DTU National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy of Denmark.
Everything that follows would had been entirely impossible without the contributions
and eﬀorts of my supervisors, who oﬀered much more than just their knowledge on
Power Systems. I would like to thank Kai Heussen for maintaining a well-focused, yet
spherical view of our context and goals, Alexander Maria Prostejovsky for his endless
patience, persistence and attention to detail, as well as Charalampos Ziras for his sharp
decision-making and support.
I also deem it necessary to acknowledge the contributions of Tue Vissing Jensen for his
unparalleled insight, multivariate thinking and truly deep comprehension of a broad range
of matters.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
Modern Power Systems are closely tied to intelligent control infrastructure for performing a
plethora of optimization operations. Increasingly complex and heterogeneous requirements
call for the distribution of these operations. Formulations of such solutions exist in literature.
However, no research on real-world implementations exist. Therefore, implementation-
and hardware-bound characteristics remain unknown. We evaluate some of these works in
terms of topological characteristics, network performance implications, stopping criteria
and design, and comment on implementation considerations. We also implement two
variations of such an algorithm and observe that the eﬀects of implementation decisions
can greatly inﬂuence its real-world performance characteristics.
ii
==PAGE:7==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Table of Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Focus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Optimization problems in Power Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Distributed solution descriptions and characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Common implementation considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Algorithm Selection and Analysis
14
3.1
Choice of algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Implementation gap analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Distribution network selection and preparation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Distributed Platform Design
20
4.1
Intrinsic factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Extrinsic factors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Development: Design process and decisions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Experiments and Results
37
5.1
Implemented case groups
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Hardware conﬁgurations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Base parameter tuning and testing variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Conclusions
49
6.1
Code availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
References
51
8
Appendix
55
iii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
INTRODUCTION
Power systems have been increasingly becoming more diverse in their anatomy and thus
more involved in terms of management. This is evident by the ever-increasing presence
of intelligent monitoring and control infrastructure that governs their operation. The
emergence of Distributed Energy Resources, as well as the penetration of new market
models and pricing schemes, shape the direction in which this infrastructure evolves.
1.1
Motivation
In an attempt to improve scalability, performance, robustness to failure and to preserve
privacy of the diverse actors involved in these systems, distributed monitoring and control
algorithms are frequently proposed in literature for various power systems applications.
However, industry adoption is lagging behind. In fact, academic testing is also lagging
behind. No work so far concerns itself speciﬁcally with implementation-aﬀected performance
characteristics of these algorithms by means of physically distributed experimentation. This
fact undermines the conﬁdence potential implementers in approaching the implementation
of these works.
1.2
Challenges
One challenge in obtaining spherical evaluations is that performance properties of
distributed algorithms cannot be suitably assessed in the typically monolithic industry
tools used for prototyping (e.g., MATLAB/Simulink). This is because these tools, as well
as the way in which implementations are typically constructed in them, are not suited for
evaluating the performance of these algorithms in a realistic manner.
Another related challenge is that among the proposed algorithms, in contrast to conventional
hierarchically distributed control, a much wider variety of communication patterns is
relevant for the respective distributed algorithms. With the variety of communication
topologies and sequences, also the requirements for the enabling distributed software
systems remain open.
1.3
Focus
This thesis focuses on analyzing the requirements, consequences and performance of
distributed monitoring and control algorithm implementations in such systems. The main
tasks addressed in this work are: (a) literature study of proposed algorithms and (b) the
implementation and benchmarking of selected algorithms.
1
==PAGE:10==
1. Introduction
The comprehensive literature analysis (a) aims at the identiﬁcation and analysis of
prominent distributed algorithms in terms of: characteristics, power system applications,
system topology and requirements for communication topology, logical hierarchies, network
performance implications, error recovery and suitable implementation patterns.
The second major task (b), is the practical implementation in a test environment
corresponding to SYSLAB’s ICT infrastructure, aiming at benchmarking and evaluation of
selected algorithms with the purpose of obtaining a deeper understanding of the necessary
implementation methodology and techniques, perform performance evaluation, as well as
to create reusable software components for future experimentation.
2
==PAGE:11==
2
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1
Optimization problems in Power Systems
In order to maintain (optimally) functioning power systems a wide range of optimization
problems need to be actively solved. In this section we will be introducing the subset of
these problems for which distributed implementations have been previously explored so as
to obtain an understanding of the scope, breadth and context of our research. Note that
not every optimization strategy needs to fall strictly under one of these categories.
We begin with problems solved using so-called “oﬄine” algorithms. This means that the
algorithm needs to decide (or, in the case of distributed computations: reach consensus or
achieve satisfactory convergence) on a set of set-points before that decision is applied to
the system.
Unit Commitment (UC) (transmission layer) A set of electrical loads demonstrate
diﬀerent consumption patterns. In order to meet these operational demands while
minimizing costs, it is in the direct interest of system operators to schedule the
operation of their generators appropriately. [1] The classic Unit Commitment problem
refers to the compilation of such a schedule. This contains the states in which each
generator shall be during a given period in the future (typically one day to one week).
For its compilation, factors such as ramp rates, (cold) start costs and operational limit
constraints of each production unit must be taken into consideration [1]. Additionally,
external factors may come into play, as in the case of renewable energy production
where production varies by nature. This means that knowledge of the aforementioned
system components’ characteristics and predicted production margins need to be
known at the time of computation. Therefore, any solution to UC also relies on the
ability to predict or know future loads.
Economic Dispatch (ED) (traditionally at the transmission layer [3]) Economic
Dispatch aims to minimize the total operating costs (including but not limited to
fuel consumption and transportation, labor, maintenance and loss curve) in relation
to the generated output (known as the “input-output characteristics”) by means of
unit prioritization and throttling [4, Ch. 7]. The end result result shall conﬁgure
the system in such a way that the total generation equals the total consumption
minus the losses. [5] It can be considered as a short-term strategy given the currently
enabled set of units (potentially as a result of Unit Commitment), or a longer term
strategy if the nature of the network allows. Through ED, power system operators
can also decide on reasonable locational marginal prices (LMPs) [3]. Particularly for
the case of renewable-based power generation, solving ED becomes a requirement
also for distribution grids due to the variability, uncertainty and concentration of
those sources [6].
3
==PAGE:12==
2. Literature review
Optimal Power Flow (OPF) (transmission layer) The Optimal Power Flow prob-
lem is a single-period (e.g., one-hour) problem [7] which aims to optimize system
performance according to speciﬁed objective functions [8]. These functions include
“total generation cost, system loss, bus voltage deviation, emission of generating units,
number of control actions, and load shedding while satisfying its power ﬂow equations,
system security, and equipment operating limits”, meaning that the conﬁguration
of a variety of devices on a network might need to be manipulated. [4, Ch. 8] The
overarching goal is to achieve eﬃcient allocation of resources in the system. [9]
Depending on how OPF is formulated, a set of power ﬂow equations need to be
satisﬁed for the problem to be solved. [8] The diﬀerentiating factor between ED
and OPF is that OPF does not ignore the (signiﬁcant) eﬀect that the dispatch of
generation has on bus voltages and the loading of transmission branches. [5]
Security-Constrained Unit Commitment (SCUC) (transmission layer) The term
security in power systems is used to describe “the ability of the system to withstand
sudden disturbances as they appear” [10]. In the case of the SCUC problem, security
refers to designing a UC schedule during the execution of which, the system can
withstand certain failures without causing disturbances to its desired operation and
reliability. [11] Adding such a constraint to UC implies that SCUC solves the problem
of security to the extent that an analysis comparing the risk and beneﬁt of failure
allows. Similarly to UC, the ability to gauge the probability and location of outages
is important.
Security-Constrained OPF (SCOPF) (transmission layer) Similarly to SCUC,
the term security in OPF also refers to taking constraints related to problems
such as “line and generation outages” [7] into consideration.
Optimal Voltage Control (distribution) refers to the active observation and control
of voltages throughout a grid with the aim of maintaining it within the acceptable
operational limits. It is necessary to take the voltage factor into consideration during
research because high distributed generation penetration can lead to “technical
impacts such as power and energy losses, voltage rise, and short-circuit levels” [12].
It is worth mentioning that voltage control can be tackled with using one of two
distinct architectures: Either with “oﬄine” or “online” algorithms. Here (a) “online”
refers to a closed feedback loop which interacts with the physical (electrical) system
in order to achieve the desired results, while (b) “oﬄine” refers to working with State
Estimation or via OPF snapshots of the system.
2.2
Distributed solution descriptions and characteristics
In this section, we examine the performance and networking characteristics of works
that solve one or multiple of the aforementioned distributed problems using appropriate
decomposition algorithms and execution strategies. To ease understanding and allow for
better comprehension, for each paper, we reformulate the information presented within
from the perspective of our analysis so as to distill knowledge that is relevant to our work.
We then present them from diﬀerent viewpoints in order to extract relevant categorizations.
This search is by no means exhaustive, but aims to sample papers for obtaining a research
direction.
4
==PAGE:13==
2. Literature review
[13] proposes an algorithm suitable for solving the Direct-Current OPF problem in
a multi-area (e.g., cross-country) context in order to achieve a global economic
optimum, without sacriﬁcing dispatching independence. The framework used is Dual
Decomposition using Lagrangian Relaxation and the authors adopt an OPF model
which approximates line losses in order to make the problem solvable.
Any number of interconnected areas may be involved, including an arbitrary number
of tie-lines between them, all of which must part-take in the optimization process. Part
of the solution is the conception of one or two ﬁctitious buses per interconnecting line.
The single-bus case requires the problem to be solved in a sequential (even though
distributed manner). In the case of two ﬁctitious buses however (each belonging to
one of the two connected areas), the problem is fully decomposed during set-up, at
which point necessary information regarding those buses is exchanged. Convergence
can also be checked locally, rendering termination independent from other areas.
[14] tackles the Economic Dispatch problem in the context of all three (tetriary, secondary
and primary) layers in the presence of demand response resources. The overarching
aim is to “capture the connection” between these participants so as to better
understand how market prices trickle down to consumers, while preserving the
privacy of the end-users’ dynamics. They propose two algorithms: a “day-ahead
scheduling” one (using gradient descent which is cited to have slow convergence)
and a “real-time adjustment” one to “compensate for the supply-demand balance
error in day-ahead scheduling” (“functional clearing” using “Dynamic Monitoring
and Decision Making Systems” [15] due to the need for faster response).
The subgradient algorithm involves a structured, nested, iterative process that is
initiated by the System Operator (SO). The SO sends a set of dual variables for the
desired time horizon to the Load Serving Entities (LSEs). LSEs, in turn, calculate
their own optimum generation and demand over that time period given their local
dynamics and constraints, thereby solving their part of the global dual problem. In
order to obtain the aforementioned demand vectors, however, each LSE is responsible
for retrieving the optimal energy consumption of its users’ smart meters. This is
achieved by having each smart meter solve yet another decomposed minimization
problem. Both these processes iterate until each process’ convergence criterion is
satisﬁed (the inner process needs to converge before the outer has a chance to check
for convergence and repeat).
The real-time algorithm uses the same SO, LSE and End-User/Unit layering for
communication. Like before, a vector of dual variables is sent to the LSEs. With
respect to this λt, the LSEs’ units calculate their price sensitivity for the following
time step. Given this information as well as their current state and local constraints
they solve for their capacity for supply or demand. This capacity is in turn sent
upstream to be cleared so that the globally optimal version of it can be calculated
and sent back down to be realized. This algorithm is meant to run in time steps in
the range of 5 to 30 minutes. However, the output it produces is meant for a range
always longer than that range. This frees the process from strict time constraints,
as long as the system is built so that it ﬁnishes before the last time frame is over.
Even for the case where a delay causes a time frame to be missed, no particular
recovery procedure needs to be done, since this is an optimization on top of an already
5
==PAGE:14==
2. Literature review
functioning system. As the authors note, however, the optimal time horizon needs to
be identiﬁed.
[16] constructs a method for solving the DC OPF problem to resolve optimal power ﬂows
and AC bus phase angles by leveraging a peer-to-peer ﬂavor of ADMM. Since some
of the involved devices may have non-convex constraints, the authors clarify that
only an approximation may be reached, in which case, it can be used as a starting
point for a more precise solution. The algorithm works for any meshed network, the
devices of which have been split into groups. The neighbors of these groups also
reﬂect each device’s algorithmic neighbors, with which small numeric vectors are
exchanged before every optimization iteration. The only other knowledge required
is the output of the previous iteration. Due to these parallel updates, convergence
time is independent of network size. The authors rely on the high performance [17]
of the resulting programs thanks to the solver generator used, CVXGEN [18], to
claim that “in practice, the actual solve time would clearly be dominated by network
communication latencies”.
[19] tackles the DC SCUC problem in the context of Independent System Operators (ISOs)
by leveraging ideas from the ATC technique. In this problem, the grid is composed
of a number of interconnected zones. A method similar to the one shown in [13] is
used to decouple these zones from requiring communication with one another by
inserting virtual ones between them during the creation of the problem. Therefore,
instead of inter-zone communication, only communication with a central coordinator
is required. This coordinator could in fact be one of the units as it only needs to act
as a point of communicating shared variables.
[20] aims to to solve the DC UC problem for an “multi-area power system with cross-border
trading in the presence of wind power uncertainty”. This means that geographical
parameters are also taken into consideration. An APP-based method is used, which
allows the authors to “cope with the non-separable quadratic terms introduced by
augmented Lagrange relaxation”. Additionally, they use the area-decoupling technique
from [13]. Unfortunately, only the single-ﬁctitious-bus-per-node-pair technique is
examined, which means execution is sequential. Regardless, the execution, as far
as step synchronization and communication requirements are concerned, is similar
to that of [13]. It is worth nothing that the authors found that in a simulated
execution, the required time to solve was 6- to 32-fold slower than a centralized
approach (inversely related to the size of the network) and for that reason they
propose a one-hour time step. Given the low iteration count however, this is a
computation-time-dominated process.
[3] is concerned with the Transmission and Distribution Coordinated Economic Dispatch
(TDCED), a version of ED which expands into the Distribution Grid. Therefore,
in addition to minimizing costs, the authors also aim to eliminate the boundary
mismatch and mitigate congestion. A technique that originates from OCD, dubbed
“Heterogeneous Decomposition” (HGD), is used. With HGD it is possible for each
involved area to communicate diﬀerent kind of information during the optimization
process. This reﬂects the nature of the interaction between the Transmission and
6
==PAGE:15==
2. Literature review
Distribution grids: distribution takes the form of “load injections at boundary buses”
and transmission is “usually regarded as a virtual source generating the price of
LMPs”. This is in turn reﬂected in the two steps in which the algorithm executes:
The DSOs each solve a Distribution ED (DED) problem emitting the boundary
injected power, and the TSO solves a Transmission ED (TED) problem generating
TLMPs of each boundary bus. Two versions of this technique are proposed; the
diﬀerence between them being the order in which these two problems (minimizations)
are executed. To help choose one for a practical implementation, the authors propose
using the one starting with the TED sub-problem, as it is easier to estimate initial
values for it. For either algorithm, convergence is checked on whichever Operator
which runs second. Additionally, as the authors note, there exist rare cases in which
the algorithm might diverge. This is analyzed and mitigated in [21].
[9] aims to improve the rate of convergence of distributed DC OPF of the C+I
decomposition from [22].
Brieﬂy put, [22] is a case of peer-to-peer neighbor
communication, at each iteration of which, “the buses send their phase angle, power
generation, and dual variables for the power balance and line ﬂow constraints to their
neighbors.” [8] The variable updates following this communication step also require
memory of the previous local iterations. The performance improvement is made
possible by inserting extra communication paths in order to propagate information
across the network more quickly. The main contribution of the work is ﬁguring out
exactly which communication paths need to be added, what information should be
transmitted and how that would be incorporated to the original pattern.
[23] extends the work of [16] to solve the DC SCOPF problem. That is, to minimize
operational constraints while simultaneously accounting for the probability of failures
or other grid degradation.
[24] formulates two methods for reactive power loss minimization in a linear feeder, by
leveraging the presence of photovoltaic power generation. One version uses ADMM
and the other the Dual Ascent method. These function on the Linearized DistFlow
model. Only the ﬁrst one is capable of taking voltage constraints into consideration,
which may or may not be necessary depending on the grid in question. Therefore,
the two algorithms are only comparable when ADMM is executed with voltage
constraints disabled (dubbed “ADMM-noV”), in which case they ﬁnd it to be much
faster due to the lower number of required iterations. It is worth noting that this
is despite the fact that Dual Ascent only requires simple algebraic operations to be
performed, in contrast to ADMM, where an optimization problem needs to be solved.
2.2.1
Electrical, computational and communication network topology
Electrical grid topology and grid subset: We observe a number of electrical grid
topologies: Meshed (arbitrary) networks ([16], [9], [23]), multi-layered grids ([14],
[3]) multi-area networks ([13], [19], [20]) and linear ([24]). Any of these networks
may potentially co-exist and interact with one another in the real world, but each
work has to assume or deﬁne the boundaries within which it is reasonable to concern
themselves with. For instance, when a linear grid is investigated, it is likely that
the algorithm invented can function without concerning itself with the presence of
7
==PAGE:16==
2. Literature review
branches stemming from some of the involved nodes. For this reason, we observe
that in all works, the grid subset connectivity that is involved maps one-to-one
to the electrical grid topology. Multi-layer network algorithms assume hierarchical
connectivity and multi-area algorithms tend to assume the presence of an arbitrary
number of tie-lines.
Computational node topology: Looking into the algorithm implementations in more
detail, we note that the node topology (that is, the location of nodes on which
computations take place and with which communication is performed) may diﬀer
from the grid topology. This is the case in the three multi-area algorithms where
optimization is calculated on per-area agents ([20]) or on the edge nodes ([[13] and
[20]). In the ﬁrst case, the involved nodes could be represented by electrical nodes,
but that is not necessary.
Communication topology: The communication topology demonstrates a slightly wider
breadth of variation in relation to the physical topology. In meshed topologies,
we observe several cases. (a) A subset of neighboring connections is chosen for
communication in [25], (b) communication is logically layered through nets in [16]
and [23], and (c) involves estabilishing communication links between non-adjacent
nodes based on the inﬂuence of their electrical characteristics ([9]]). In the case of
multi-area networks, we observe (a) the expected case of fully meshing neighboring
areas ([13], [20]) as well as (b) decoulping them via the use of a coordinator that
acts as a communication point ([19]). Both works that focus on hierarchical views of
the network follow the same pattern in their communication requirements. Finally,
the linear feeder in [24] restricts the communication of each node to its one or two
neighbors. It is important to note that in the meshed connections that we ﬁnd, each
node communicate the same information with all its neighboring entities, while the
linear setup in [24] requires diﬀerent data to be exchanged depending on the direction
of information exchange.
We summarize our ﬁndings above in Tab. 2.1.
8
==PAGE:17==
2. Literature review
Table 2.1: Topological characteristics of studied algorithms.
Paper
Electrical grid
topology
Involved grid subset
connectivity
Computational
node topology
Communication
Topology
[16]
Any
All
Mesh
Two layer1
[23]
Any
All
Mesh
Two layer2
[9]
Any
All
Mesh
Mesh
[13]
Multi-area
Edge nodes
Edge nodes
Mesh areas
[20]
Multi-area
Edge nodes
Edge nodes
Mesh areas
[19]
Multi-area
Edge nodes
Area agents
Zone agent-to-
coordinator
[14]
Three-layer
All
At each layer
boundary
Hierarchical
[3]
Two layer
(DSO, TSO)
All
At each layer
boundary
Hierarchical
[24]
Linear
All
All
Immediate
neighbor
connections
2.2.2
Impact of network performance on execution performance
Given that all the optimization algorithms we analyze are iterative in nature, network
performance necessarily aﬀects the time to completion. Depending on the communication
paths, number of iterations and data transfer requirements, the ﬁnal performance impact
of the network may diﬀer. Since we ﬁnd no algorithm where the amount of data transferred
per iteration between any given pair of nodes can be considered substantial by modern
networking standards, this actually appears to be a non-issue. Based on the two remaining
factors, we see roughly three classes:
• Minimal or low network impact: [13], [20], [3] [24] (“noV” variation) due to the low
number of iterations and [9] due to asynchronous updates, which spread out the
network traﬃc in the domain of time.
• Medium network impact: [16]3 and [23] due to synchronous updates, which potentially
translates to congestion on the (likely at least partially) centralized networking
equipment and [24] (voltage-constrained variation) due to the high number of
iterations combined with relatively long computation times.
• High network impact: [19] due to synchronised updates with the coordinator node.
This can cause ﬂuctuations in network performance (potentially by forcing force
packet retransmissions), depending on the network size.
2.2.3
Stopping criterion observability requirements
While the termination condition of an algorithm might appear unrelated to its performance
characteristics at ﬁrst sight, we ﬁnd that it can raise performance and communication
1Devices meshed through nets
2Devices meshed through nets
3Whether the authors’ claim that overall performance would be dominated by network latency remains
true with other, less performant solvers may need to be investigated.
9
==PAGE:18==
2. Literature review
concerns. If communications are constrained between select node pairs (e.g., in [24]), then
communicating state or detecting termination may be time consuming. If communications
are asynchronous (e.g., in [9]), then detecting convergence and correctly handling a
termination signal may be a complex process. One would have to strike a balance between
message count (if the termination process requires an extra layer of communications) and
delay-to-propagation (if the termination process piggy-backs on existing messages, but is
forced to wait for the next message to be sent). This can cause termination notiﬁcation
signals to be delayed, thereby requiring nodes to continue part-taking in the optimization
process even after they know it has ended, but their neighbors do not.
Although not all papers aim to include this information, we summarize our observations
in Tab. 2.2. We observe no relationship between this characteristic and those previously
examined. This could be attributed to the fact that one could potentially devise diﬀerent
types of stopping criteria for the same algorithm.
Table 2.2: Topological characteristics of studied algorithms.
Paper
Information required for stopping criterion
[23]
Local
[13]
Local
[16]
Global4
[9]
Global
[20]
Global
[3]
Master + notify5
[24]
Local (ADMM) / Not given (DA)
[19]
N/A
[14]
N/A
2.2.4
Necessity for error recovery
A ﬁnal performance and behavior-diﬀerentiating factor that we foresee is the necessity
for error recovery. To what extent it is required, and what the counter-measures need to
be, as well as how they are implemented can inﬂuence the distributed execution in the
presence of errors.
Algorithms with relatively quick iterations that deal with small-to-average time frames are
sensitive to the current conditions. This means that storing a state from which to resume
is not useful and restarting is often the only reasonable strategy. For algorithms where the
outcome is less sensitive to the current conditions, saving the state can be proven useful.
This can be achieved, for instance, via the de-facto snapshot-taking method described in
[26] followed by a second step for distributing that state back to the nodes once possible.
4The authors theorize that gossip algorithms could be used, but assert that this would be slow. Also
propose a mode where no termination is needed.
5Since there is only one TSO involved, this puts it in a natural position to coordinate the process. We
would in either case have it collect information regarding convergence in order to centrally terminate the
algorithm. The same goes for algorithm initiation as it makes the system simpler to control.
10
==PAGE:19==
2. Literature review
In case permanent node failures need to be handled on-the-ﬂy, recovery strongly depends
on the algorithm’s ability for operating in a degraded mode. That is, work with fewer
nodes, even if only sub-optimally. This is of particular relevance because has implications
for the network design and communications. For instance, in algorithms that rely on
neighbor communication, it must be possible for nodes not only agree on which those new
neighbors are without conﬂicts, but also be able to reach those the new neighbors.
We comment on the two cases where a more involved recovery strategy is most likely to be
necessary.
• In [15] it is not necessary that all market participants to take part in the optimization
scheme for it to be used. Given the volatility of the customers in such a set-up
and lack of control over the software implementation of every node, communication
failures and computational errors are inevitable. Therefore, we would argue that
also a method for functioning in the presence of communication errors and detecting
errors would be more valuable to devise early on, than in other, more static set-ups.
The optimization cannot be sensitive to errors in the lower stratums, or it is likely
to perpetually fail. The implementers would need to, at the very least, come up
with a method for generating reasonable answers for the querying upstream node,
potentially by analyzing historical data.
• In [16] the peer-to-peer nature of the algorithm makes failure handling potentially
problematic because if a node fails to respond within a given time period, this single
failure will prevent all units from moving to the next iteration. A (suboptimal)
solution would be for all nodes to time-out and restart the process, ignoring the
failed node(s) in the next run. Alternatively, if possible, the failure will have to be
absorbed by the neighboring groups. That is, a dummy response will have to be
assumed to have been broadcasted from the device(s) (how all nodes assume the
same value would then becomes the new problem). How either of these strategies
will aﬀect the optimization process needs to be studied, potentially with respect
to the eﬀect of the device on the electrical network (some devices may be greater
algorithmic or electrical contributors than others based on their characteristics).
2.2.5
High-level design grouping
We observe three major designs in use during the optimization process:
• Actively Coordinated Optimization (oAC) in which a coordinator is part of the
iterative process ([13], [14], [3]);
• Supervised Optimization (oS) in which a coordinator only initiates the process,
expects a result, or is used for messaging ([19]);
• Peer-to-peer Neighbor Optimization (oN) in which nodes only interact with their
assigned or physical neighbors ([13], [16], [20], [9], [23], [24]).
In some cases, such as [14], these designs are nested, but in any well-designed system they
would remain as independent as possible (i.e., one would only act as a signal for the other’s
initiation and not concern itself with its internals). Therefore we do not add these cases to
the above categorization.
11
==PAGE:20==
2. Literature review
To conclude, even though the speciﬁcs of each solving strategy shown above diﬀer in many
ways, the common denominator of seen patterns during their execution is an iterative
process during which nodes with local knowledge of state run local computations using
communicated variables (whether that process is synchronized in some manner or not).
2.3
Common implementation considerations
2.3.1
Complexity and correctness of implementation and realization
It is important to acknowledge that all the aforementioned works introduce complexity and
increased maintenance and monitoring requirements to the resulting system, as is the case
with every distributed or decentralized solution compared to its centralized counterpart.
For any given publication, the correctness of an algorithm may not have been fully veriﬁed,
its operational range and performance characteristics may need to be experimentally
discovered and its termination conditions may require exploration and may even cause
delays in its execution. Such information is critical for deciding whether an algorithm is
applicable to a speciﬁc system. Additionally, checking the correctness of the implementation,
altering the node topology or upgrading a decentralized system are often far more complex
and involved tasks compared to their centralized counterparts.
More speciﬁcally, in a centralized system, the communication protocol for (a) the required
measurements (requests to units) and (b) set-point commands (responses to units) are far
more resistant to change as they are most possibly plain electrical primitives. Even if they
do change, it is quite easy to design the communication protocols in such a way that the
eﬀort required in future migrations is minimized: If the requested data values are part of
the requests themselves, then simple request-reply protocols with very few assumptions
have good chances of remaining unchanged for a long time.
For these reasons it is not only expected but also reasonable that industry adoption is
lagging behind. That is not to say that implementations of such algorithms will not
be eventually adopted. However, from a practical implementation eﬀort and software
engineering point of view, it is crucial for these problems to be better understood and
tackled. While these algorithms attempt optimal solutions, software engineers strive for
simple, or even “obviously correct” solutions. That is because no amount of testing can
verify an implementation, but only disprove its correctness (except in the realm of formal
software veriﬁcation, which is an undertaking that the value of the required eﬀort would
need to be evaluated in itself).
2.3.2
Logging and monitoring
Monitoring distributed systems is a complex and challenging matter, especially considering
the fact that the term “monitoring” itself is vague. One must ﬁrst specify what they
expect to get out of monitoring by considering what information or problems they want to
be made aware of or act upon. In what follows we will be discussing this matter in the
context of algorithms similar to those presented above. We structure this by analyzing the
requirements for monitoring based on whether its meant for human consumption (after-
the-fact analysis and monitoring) or machine-oriented (for taking automated actions).
12
==PAGE:21==
2. Literature review
The case of machine-oriented monitoring is useful when setting up a system which is
capable of taking corrective actions on its own, given some logged data. This means
collecting information from the distributed system state and (potentially actionable) events
as they occur. The source of this data may be internal (from within the network itself) or
external (such as weather conditions or a new node being added).
Just like with most software, a central location from which this is handled would be the
most straightforward solution. Even for fully decentralized algorithms, the nodes can still
listen in for messages from a coordinator and integrate that information into their control
loop. This behavior needs to be programmed in advance. How frequently this information
needs to be gathered, which events correspond to what actions and, ultimately, how this is
implemented is inﬂuenced by the algorithm design. More precisely, the algorithm design
limits our ability to intervene. As an example, we take the multi-layered process in [14]. If
the SO decides to restart the process (e.g., because it lost the state or some parameter
changed), we need to have decided in advance on which layer and at what point in time this
would be handled. Should we choose to have it propagated it to the LSEs for immediate
handling, the end-user devices would also need to implement an early termination protocol.
Ideally, failures are discovered as early as possible, meaning that the nodes themselves
should detect as many faults they are able to. Note that on-the-ﬂy monitoring necessarily
comes with an increase in network traﬃc. To balance traﬃc and performance one needs to
compare how immediate the need to broadcast certain information with the consequences
of receiving it later or not receiving it at all is (in case a node fails before it empties its
buﬀer to the logging master).
When monitoring for human consumption, we can often be more tolerant of delays.
Depending on the purpose of monitoring, granularity may vary greatly. For example,
when debugging the internals of executions we likely need high log message transmission
frequency along with accurate timing information. On the contrary, when monitoring to
gauge the health of the system (in production or data collection mode), we are likely more
interested in the outcome of each optimization session, be it the decided set-point values
or overall performance metrics.
13
==PAGE:22==
3
ALGORITHM SELECTION AND ANALYSIS
3.1
Choice of algorithm
A fact that became evident during our exploration of the existing literature is that a
majority (though not all) of the published work does not aim to be used as a reference for
an implementation, experimental or otherwise. That is because they typically aim to solve
one, or few, very targeted, problems, such as improving the convergence rate of an existing
algorithm, tackle political reasons which constrain information exchange, or propose grid
optimization improvements to leverage (or, on the other end of the spectrum: amend the
problems of) the increasingly decentralized grid.
This is likely not due to any lack of interest from researchers to obtain a more spherical view
of their solution’s impact, but it is the nature of their work to instead push the boundaries
of exploration. This indeed translates to trying out diﬀerent topologies, leveraging diﬀerent
sources of information in their techniques, improving decomposition methods and so on.
When one is looking to explore the gap between publication results and their performance
in an actually distributed scenario, full applicability to the real world also falls second
in priority. What is more important is ﬁguring out how frequently used the observed
computational and communication requirements are. Focusing on and implementing the
most common ones allows us to obtain the insight and experience necessary to be able to
implement other broadly used algorithms in the future. That being said, taking knowledge
regarding the applications and applicability of the algorithm into consideration is crucial
for creating a relevant implementation and useful test-cases.
Therefore, we choose to implement an optimization strategy which. . .
• oﬀers us the ability to compare more than one distributed implementations of the
same problem. This will allow us to quickly evaluate any claims regarding relative
performance of computational time and communications time, as well as compare
any additional overhead;
• is solved using algorithms and methodologies that are widespread, so that our work is
as useful as possible for the purposes of reevaluating existing research and estimating
the performance of other methods in the future.
These criteria constrain the works available for experimentation to us, due to the fact
that most papers tackle diﬀerent problems, have diﬀerent sets of prerequisites, or make
incompatible assumptions about the environment. One paper however ﬁts these criteria
well as it already provides two diﬀerent implementations for the same problem: [24].
While the physical set-up of this problem (long, non-branching linear feeders) is not
widespread across the world, meaning the need for an implementation is not very likely, it
14
==PAGE:23==
3. Algorithm Selection and Analysis
gives us the opportunity to work with ADMM and Dual Ascent, both of which are widely
adopted.
3.2
Implementation gap analysis
We wish to extract performance characteristics of the algorithm in question. In order to
be able to conduct suﬃciently realistic and self-terminating executions of the algorithm for
that goal, we are missing two elements in terms of:
Assumptions regarding feasibility space: A scenario in a low-voltage (distribution)
setup, where PV-penetration is more relevant than a mid-voltage scenario (such as
the one used by the original authors). Such a scenario is also more similar in size
(including data network distances) to the physical setup that is available to us. This
leads us to the question of whether the algorithm is applicable in such a scenario and
by extension underlines the need for a feasibility space analysis as a future work. We
will be creating a linear feeder for this purpose in this chapter and create scenarios
for it in the following chapter.
System functionality: A method for checking for convergence without knowledge of
the centralized solution, as would be the case in an commercial implementation, is
necessary.1 We will showcase our solution to this problem in the next chapter.
3.3
Distribution network selection and preparation
To approximate the criteria we mention above, we leverage the IEEE 2015 European Low
Voltage Test Feeder, which also comes with respective load data.
3.3.1
Feeder linearization
As shown in Figure 3.1, this feeder’s topology is not linear. Therefore, it cannot be directly
handled by the algorithm. We transform the feeder in two passes. First, we replace inactive
node groups with a single cable that has the sum of the cables connecting them. This
results in a simpliﬁed version which we present in Figure 3.2. In the same Figure, we
show how merging was done for the second step: the feeder’s linearization. The technique
was to merge nodes along the longest path and keep only the cabling on that path. This
method ignores the eﬀect of the resistance and reactance of the cabling within the merged
groups. However, we know the physical size of the feeder to be small, and resistances to
be low, meaning we are not altering the system characteristics in a substantial manner.
This process results in a 25-node feeder (shown green). Note that this includes the root
node (node 0).
1We mention this as the original paper uses the centralized solution as a reference for showing
convergence. This is a perfectly valid and useful metric, but not suitable for our needs.
2Node 839 was skipped due to having no load associated with it and the characteristics of the adjacent
cables were summed up into a single cable.
15
==PAGE:24==
3. Algorithm Selection and Analysis
Figure 3.1: IEEE 2015 European Low Voltage Test Feeder topology
3.3.2
Energy generation scheme
The feeder’s data includes no energy production information. However, this is necessary to
perform any optimization, so we had to devise certain energy production characteristics.
We follow the original authors’ use-case and assume that production occurs via photovoltaic
panels for every load (house). We know that that for the optimization process to be (a) of
use and (b) possible, we need the total production to be comparable, in terms of scale, to
consumption. We choose 2kW generation per load (assuming approximately 3kW installed
power).
We also know that we will be requiring diﬀerent feeder lengths during experimentation so
as to evaluate the algorithms’ scaling properties. However, for optimization executions of
diﬀerent feeder-lengths to be comparable, these feeders will have to have corresponding
characteristics in terms of intra-node power-exchange requirements. In optimization terms,
this will later translate to a problem which behaves as similarly as possible (given the base
case which we do not change), regardless of the feeder length. This is useful for providing
a stable baseline for observing how the algorithm scales.
To achive the above we set the reactive capability of each load such that every other node
needs to “obtain” half of its required reactive power capability from its neighboring nodes.
How this is done is detailed in (3.1).
sg
j =



1.4pg
j
if jodd
q
pg
j 2 + 1
4qc
j
2
if jeven
(3.1)
where j corresponds to the Node ID. The base s(g) value of 140% of the load’s p(g) was
chosen as reasonable operating point that permits the use of the inverters’ reactive power
16
==PAGE:25==
3. Algorithm Selection and Analysis
Figure 3.2: Simpliﬁed linear feeder2
17
==PAGE:26==
3. Algorithm Selection and Analysis
capabilities.
All these decisions result in the setup in Tab. 3.1.
18
==PAGE:27==
3. Algorithm Selection and Analysis
Table 3.1: Linear feeder, in physical order. Cable characteristics (r and x) refer to the
cable preceding the node.
ID
p(c) (kW)
q(c) (kVAr)
# of loads
p(g) (kW)
s(g) (kW)
r (Ohm)
x (Ohm)
0
0.00
0.00
0
0.00
0.00
N/A
N/A
1
0.28
0.09
2
4.00
4.00
0.009812
0.001562
2
0.39
0.13
2
4.00
5.60
0.0056196
0.0008946
3
1.12
0.37
2
4.00
4.00
0.009366
0.001491
4
1.94
0.64
6
12.00
16.80
0.0059764
0.0009514
5
3.60
1.18
5
10.00
10.02
0.0039248
0.0006248
6
0.05
0.02
1
2.00
2.80
0.007672
0.002044
7
0.23
0.08
1
2.00
2.00
0.0011234
0.0002993
8
14.69
4.83
13
26.00
36.40
0.00137
0.000365
9
0.03
0.01
1
2.00
2.00
0.0020002
0.0005329
10
0.33
0.11
2
4.00
5.60
0.0020276
0.0005402
11
0.23
0.08
1
2.00
2.00
0.0072062
0.0019199
12
0.41
0.14
1
2.00
2.80
0.01817
0.0013904
13
0.05
0.02
1
2.00
2.00
0.01609
0.001232
14
0.05
0.02
1
2.00
2.80
0.0024934
0.0006643
15
11.09
3.64
3
6.00
6.27
0.0007398
0.0001971
16
5.81
1.91
2
4.00
5.60
0.0026304
0.0007008
17
0.05
0.02
1
2.00
2.00
0.002877
0.0007665
18
0.51
0.17
2
4.00
5.60
0.0051121
0.0008175
19
2.60
0.85
2
4.00
4.02
0.0071288
0.00114
20
2.26
0.74
2
4.00
5.60
0.012535
0.0009592
21
0.19
0.06
2
4.00
4.00
0.0091455
0.0014625
22
3.09
1.01
1
2.00
2.80
0.0201997
0.0020585
23
0.31
0.10
1
2.00
2.00
0.0094275
0.0006375
19
==PAGE:28==
4
DISTRIBUTED PLATFORM DESIGN
The design of our platform is inﬂuenced by two classes of requirements: (a) The algorithm’s
characteristics (and extensions derived from the solutions to its gap analysis), dubbed
“intrinsic” factors and (b) “extrinsic” factors, such as the available testbed hardware, as
well as our desire to create code that can be adapted to other use-cases.
4.1
Intrinsic factors
4.1.1
Convergence checking and algorithm termination
To obtain a more complete picture regarding the time-to-completion of each optimization
cycle, we also need a strategy for detecting system convergence and communicating that
fact to all the nodes.
At each step of the optimization process, a diﬀerent current optimal value for q(g) is
potentially reached by each node. Therefore, there is a new system conﬁguration to check
against on each iteration. Additionally, to avoid adding any communication requirements
to the system, we maintain the communication constraints placed by the original authors.
That is, that communication is only possible between adjacent nodes.
Since the optimization process is essentially synchronized between each node pair, it is
more convenient (from a signal handling point of view) if we implement a convergence
checking solution that is in-band with the optimization procedure (that is: its messages
would either become (a) part of the existing communication, or (b) be synchronously
interleaved with it). A strategy that would work out-of-band with the rest of the algorithm
would introduce challenges stemming from message delivery timing: we cannot ensure that
delivery of the termination message has a certain relationship with the iteration number
the unit is currently on.
The most straightforward and error-free method for checking and acknowledging this would
therefore be to pause the algorithm at some interval, check for convergence and then
resume (interleaved). This would be convenient because no state changes could occur until
the convergence check is complete, and therefore a class of errors is ruled out. However,
such as strategy would be particularly time wasting. To prevent this class of errors all we
need to ensure is that when a node proposes a value to be agreed upon, it is that same
value that is applied when convergence is globally accepted.
Taking the above into consideration, we choose to opt for making convergence-related
communications part of the existing communication protocol. Note that this is still at the
expense of some performance, as this communication has to wait for the computations of
the algorithms.
20
==PAGE:29==
4. Distributed Platform Design
The next question to consider is exactly what information needs to be exchanged and what
protocol that requires. Regarding the ADMM process, [27] mention that “a reasonable
termination criterion is that the primal and dual residuals must be small.” Therefore,
there is a concept of “local convergence” available to us, which can later use to decide
on global convergence. For the case of Dual Ascent, there is no optimization process to
extract such information from, but we may still use the rate of change (%) of q(g) per node
as a hint for local convergence. In both cases, we need to decide on an arbitrary value
diﬀerence threshold below which convergence is assumed. While this value will aﬀect the
time-to-completion, it does not aﬀect the overhead added by convergence checking per
iteration (which is minimal in our case).
Our ﬁnal strategy is as follows: each node propagates the result each its local check
upstream, until information reaches the root node. The root node then then bounces
the ﬁnal decision back downwards so that it is accepted. If this decision is that, indeed,
convergence has been achieved, then nodes shall exit their current process after forwarding
the message downwards. The consequences of this strategy is that we require memory
in which to store previous iterations’ values so that they can be applied. This memory
requirement is proportional to how far back in time we need to look-back for previous
values, which in turn is the maximum of (a) the minimum number of iterations required
to reach convergence and (b) how far down the chain the node is. The latter is because
the further away from the left-most node the node in question is, the more iterations
it will take for the termination message to reach it. In fact, each node i needs to seek
2i + 1 messages back. To safeguard against mistaking temporary convergence plateaus
as true terminations, we extend this strategy so that the root node only declares global
convergence after it has received all-positive local convergence checks for a number of
consecutive iterations. This entire process is illustrated in Figure 4.1.
4.2
Extrinsic factors
4.2.1
Networks and hardware available for experimentation
• We will begin our development and testing by using a single local machine to ensure
that everything we create can be locally tested for correctness (the methodology
around this is further discussed in Chapter 4.3.5). This single system will also be
used as a baseline for performance, so we include its basic characteristics: Intel(R) i7
4500U with 12GB of RAM.
• Once we have the distributed algorithm working on this personal computer, we
will verify our assumptions regarding network communications on a small network
comprised of four ARM boards (dubbed “SIMLAB”) equipped with a Ti AM33XX
at 1GHz each, all connected to the same proximal NetGear ProSAFE GS108 gigabit
switch. These nodes are exclusively available to us and we have been granted root
(superuser) access.
• Once the algorithms pass this preliminary test, we will move on to executing on
SYSLAB, DTU Risø campus’ power system network, comprising of 29 nodes, 2
of which were unavailable at the time of experimentation. However, the network
infrastructure is not clear. We were made aware that some of the buildings that the
nodes reside in are connected via ﬁber connection, but that there is also a secondary,
21
==PAGE:30==
4. Distributed Platform Design
Figure 4.1: Termination message propagation and state recovery (minimum consecutive
full local-convergence checks = 2).
22
==PAGE:31==
4. Distributed Platform Design
virtual network, through which some communication may take place. Whether this
secondary network is used at all times for certain network paths, or used based on
traﬃc rules is unknown to us. We therefore need to (a) obtain data on the network
performance itself and (b) check for irregularities of it during execution to know
whether any routing decisions aﬀect performance. Attempts to obtain information
about the gateways on the network failed, as they did not respond to any probing
with traceroute, tcptraceroute, traceroute-nanog, or nmap.
For a basic evaluation of the networking conditions, we have all nodes ping one another.
We pass this data to the neato ﬁlter of the Graphviz graph visualization suite [28] in order
to create an undirected graph. We use the logarithm of the round-trip packet time as
distance and also as inverse edge lightness. (Further details on how distances are translated
into two dimensions neato can be found in [29]). This results in Figure 4.2 and allows
us to visually check for network distance abnormalities. Nodes 16 and 17 clearly suﬀer
from communication problems, which we later found out is attributed to the fact that
they are part of mobile loads. We will be excluding them from regular testing because our
algorithm is not likely to be useful in such a scenario, but they might be useful candidates
as nodes on unstable links.
The hardware information of each node can be found in Table 8.1.
• To obtain information on how testing for performance on a personal computer
compares to a High Performance system, we will also be deploying our system on a
DTU-provided, shared, 125GB RAM and 20-core Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2660 v3 @
2.60GHz - based machine.
9
16
8
17
7
5
3
31
202
33
32
30
29
28
27
26
24
23
203
201
13
12
10
1
18
25
4
Figure 4.2: Node round-trip time outliers visualized
23
==PAGE:32==
4. Distributed Platform Design
4.3
Development: Design process and decisions
4.3.1
Algorithm execution sequence and communications
disambiguation
We implement all three solutions presented in the paper: Centralized, ADMM-based
and DA-based. Before we could start working on our ﬁrst distributed implementation,
ADMM, we needed to achieve a better understanding of the process itself and agree on
the intended functionality. To achieve that, we compressed the necessary computations
and data communications in a single diagram, Figure 4.3, which shows the ﬁrst iteration
of ADMM for a node in relation to its immediate neighbors. The aim here was to bring
together the usual mathematical representation of the algorithm with the communications
it depends on. Note that the Dual Ascent method has near-identical communication
requirements and the same number of steps.
In this ﬁgure:
• The center column represents the current node while the other two represent the
upstream and downstream neighbors (j-1 and j+1).
• We use color coding to signify variable groups and value transmissions. This helps
translate variables into encapsulating data structures (objects) in the code. It also
allows for easier scanning through the diagram to better understand what variable
group is used for what process. For instance, the contribution of Q- of node j+1 to
the Averaging step becomes obvious by tracing the use of blue-colored text.
• Every step has its output shown in the inner “Step output” column. The background
color used signiﬁes the lifetime of these variables. This way, the developer can tell if
they should be part of the interface between this and the next iteration (i.e., whether
they are needed for future computations). This helps decrease any accidental misuse
of no-longer-needed variables.
• Variables which need to be initialized (be it to a default value or through an estimation
process) are shown as underlined. To someone not versed with the internals of ADMM,
a missing variable might appear to be a programming mistake (e.g., a variable that
should already exist from some computation).
• Note that we include a preceding step to the algorithm. We found this to be a
necessary addition as it is the logical way in which nodes would obtain the necessary
value Pflowj+1 from their neighbors.
4.3.2
Asynchronous communication and execution strategy
Observe that the action of sending variables out of the current process is of no use to the
continuation of the node’s next immediate step: The output of Step 1 is sent to node j-1,
but Step 2 can execute regardless of when that happens. The same (lack of) relationship
exists between Step 3 and Step 1. This gives us good incentive to make communications
asynchronous from computations. We also observed similar behavior in other algorithms,
1Notice that this is a non-standard (e.g., UML) diagram. “The fundamental reason to use the UML
involves communication” [30], so we invent this diagram speciﬁcally to communicate a description of a
mathematical algorithm together with its communications.
24
==PAGE:33==
4. Distributed Platform Design
+                      )
+                     )
L AD M M
j
=
(         )2
V 2
0
(5b)
+
ρ
2
Qj
+(k) −Qj
+
ρ
 
2
 Qj
- (k) −
+
ρ
2
 Uj
+(k) −Uj
+
ρ
2
Uj
- (k) −Uj-1
+
λj
Q+(k)  Qj
+(k) −Qj
+ λj
Q-
 (k) Qj
- (k) −
+
λj
U+
(k)  Uj
+(k) −Uj
+ λj
U- (k) Uj
- (k) −
+ ρ (                                        )
−
ρ (                                             )
−
ρ (                                        )
−
ρ (                                              )
−
j-1
j
j+1
j != 0
j != 0
j != n
j ∉ {0,n}
j == 0
j == n
Step 1: ADMM
Step 2: Averaging
Step 3: Lagrange multipliers update
Step output
White frame: Iteration-lifetime storage 
Gray frame: Iteration-lifetime-exceeding storage
Underlined: Initialized as 0 on the ﬁrst iteration
j != n
j != 0
−
+ q(c)
j −˜sj ≤0
(4b)
−
+
−q(c)
j
−˜sj ≤0
(4c)
V 2
0
ϵ 2 −2ϵ ≤
≤V 2
0
ϵ 2 + 2ϵ 
(4e)
=
−2( rj-1
+
(4f)
st.
(            )
(            )
j != n
j != 0
= 2
2
1
=
=
0
0
Qj
- (k)
(
(
Qj-1
)2
)2
Uj-1
Qj-1
)2
)2
(
(
(
)2
)2
)2
)2
Qj
+(k)
Qj
+(k)
Qj
- (k)
Qj
- (k)
(
(
(
Uj
+ (k)
Uj
+(k)
Uj
- (k)
Qj
- (k))
Qj
+ (k+1)
Uj
+ (k+1)
Qj
- (k+1)
Uj
- (k+1)
Qj+1
+  (k+1)
Uj+1
+  (k+1)
Qj+1
-  (k+1)
Uj+1
-  (k+1)
Qj+1
-  (k+1)
Uj+1
- (k+1)
(
(
Qj  (k+1)
=
=
Qj (k+1)
Uj (k+1)
Uj (k+1)
Uj (k+1)
Qj  (k+1)
= 1
Qj  (k+1)
Uj (k+1)
Qj
+  (k+1)
Uj
+  (k+1)
Qj
-  (k+1)
Uj
-  (k+1)
Qj-1(k+1)
Uj-1(k+1)
Qj-1 (k+1)
Uj-1 (k+1)
+
+
+
λj
Q+  (k)
λj
Q-  (k)
λj
U+  (k)
λj
U-  (k)
=
=
=
=
λj
Q+  (k+1)
λj
Q-
  (k+1)
λj
U+  (k+1)
λj
U-
  (k+1)
xj-1
Qj
+  (k+1)
Uj
+  (k+1)
Uj
+  (k+1)
Qj+1
-  (k+1)
rj-1
Pﬂow(c)j =
pj
(c) 
pj
(g) 
-
+
Pﬂowj
=
Pﬂowj
Pﬂow(c)
j+1
Pﬂow(c)
j+1
Pﬂow(c)
j+1
Figure 4.3: ADMM equations and communications1
25
==PAGE:34==
4. Distributed Platform Design
so we consider it beneﬁcial to explore how such a design would work. We choose to
implement this behavior by spinning a separate thread for each connection (therefore two
additional threads per node in this case). While this is not the most resource-conserving
method available to us (AsyncIO would be an alternative), we (a) expect no considerable
performance impact from the execution overhead of just two threads and (b) welcome the
constraints it enforces upon us. Namely, a sequential protocol is the easiest-to-get-right
way of communicating with a thread (as opposed to signals) and this behavior matches
the strictness that we need to synchronize all these state machines (nodes). If we can
guarantee that the protocol is followed, then all bugs are a design fault, rather than an
implementation fault.
To communicate this information we proceed to draw out an overview of a 5-bus system’s
communications in Figure 4.4. We choose 5 buses because that is the minimum number
of nodes required to show all possible node positions. That is: a root and leaf bus, buses
right next to those, and a bus that has no connection to any terminating buses.
We use the same color coding as in the previous ﬁgure. In this diagram we can observe:
• The locally asynchronous communications:
Each unit is accompanied by the
aforementioned threads on its left and right sides. When a variable becomes available
for retrieval by a neighboring unit, its maximum lifespan in relation to that unit
is shown. The point of collection from the neighboring unit is indicated by the
siphoning shape.
2UML does not have equivalents for asynchronous communication in sequence diagrams, so we once
again invent a diagram type to highlight this particular feature.
j-1
j
j+1
0 (root)
slack
n (lea)
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
loop
Idle
Figure 4.4: ADMM network overview and asynchronous communications2
26
==PAGE:35==
4. Distributed Platform Design
• What part of the process is looping and which part is not, thus giving information
about how the subsequent iterations function.
• What output from the current iteration needs to be used for the next (shown by the
arrows returning information to the beginning of the loop).
• How inter-node variable dependencies aﬀect the order and timing of execution.
In Figure 4.5 we show how the interaction between a node and one of its neighbors is
implemented in more detail (switching the terms “Upstream” and “Downstream” would
result in the diagram for the other neighbor):
• Because the “Upstream Interface” is the ﬁrst point of coupling with the neighbor,
and the communications always have a speciﬁc sequence, message-order is already
checked at the interface level to ensure the node adheres to the protocol.
• Decoupling message handling from the local execution routine allows the routine
writer to “ﬁre-and-forget” messages (the thread will do any waiting for him) and
only await for message retrieval when necessary (the thread’s state machine will
request and retrieve the next incoming message as soon as it becomes available and
then wait to serve it back to the main thread).
There are two ways in which execution is interrupted and this diagram can also assist
explain these as well:
• The “Node Routine” that decides when it is time to move to the next set of iterations.
This happens when the algorithm reaches consensus for termination with all the
other units (detailed in Sec. “Convergence checking and algorithm termination”).
• The “Iteration Executor” can decide to terminate the set of iterations. This happens
when the preconﬁgured maximum number of iterations has been reached.
In order to (a) restart or (b) terminate the “Upstream Thread” in a clean manner, these
requests are part of the internal thread (“zmq (pickle)”) interface. For that reason, the
“Upstream Thread”’s “State Machine” waits for permission to continue before reaching
potentially terminal sections of the communication.
4.3.3
Convergence checking and termination protocol design
For convergence checking,
we implement the strategy already decided upon in
Section Convergence checking and algorithm termination. The actual communication
implementation for it is outlined in Fig. 4.6. While testing the convergence checking for
the ADMM-based algorithm, we observe that checking the rate-of-change of the dual and
primal variables against a single threshold might not be enough of an indication. For
that reason we also check the output value’s (q(g)) rate-of-change. This value is easier to
quickly tune for because it is expressed in Watts, which we can intuitively understand and
compare with our expectations for accuracy. Do note that it by itself is not a suﬃcient
indication of convergence.
27
==PAGE:36==
4. Distributed Platform Design
<<component>>
Local Unit
<<component>>
Main Thread
<<component>>
Iteration Executor
<<component>>
Rightward Interface
<<component>>
Node routine
<<component>>
Local Rightward Thread
<<component>>
Rightward Methods
<<component>>
Protocol Adapter
<<component>>
REQ socket
<<component>>
REP socket
<<component>>
State Machine
zmq
(pickle)
<<component>>
Remote Leftward Thread
zmq
zmq
Figure 4.5: Right-neighbor Communication Component Diagram
Figure 4.6: Overview of termination information piggy-backing algorithmic communications
28
==PAGE:37==
4. Distributed Platform Design
4.3.4
Software choices
Programming language and environment: The criteria for choosing a programming
language were driven by the goals of our work. We required:
• A project that can be picked apart and reused for further experimentation by
other researchers. This means that the language of choice must be at least
reasonably popular in the research community.
• A language ecosystem with as broad a selection of bindings to optimization and
network communication libraries as possible.
• A language that provides an easy way to write multi-process/threaded code
and/or (preferably) non-blocking I/O. This will be useful for being able to easily
implement diﬀerent communication strategies with as few added constraints as
possible (as in: The language should make it easy to implement what we mean
as opposed to what implement based on the thought model it natively supports).
A language that ﬁts the bill, with which we the authors are also familiar with, is
Python [31]. Not only is it broadly used and adopted (both in research and production
environments), it supports all our requirements. For most purposes, code in Python
can easily be made cross-platform as well, ensuring a low barrier of entry for any
developers who might not be using the target environment. An notable candidate
during our research was Erlang [32] as well as Elixir [33], which builds on top of
Erlang’s Virtual Machine. Erlang was speciﬁcally designed for creating extremely
high-reliability and high-throughput systems, built around message passsing. Due
to its roots in telecommunication infrastructure, it even supports zero-downtime
upgrades of distributed nodes though code hot-swapping out of the box. While
these characteristics are extremely valuable in a production environment, Erlang’s
functional programming style and actor model are likely to be confusing for newcomers,
not to mention that interoperability with optimization libraries appears to be non-
existent. That is not to say it is impossible, but would require a certain level of
expertise to work around.
Communication protocol: Regarding transport protocols, we need a library that:
• Eliminates the high eﬀort involved in working with bare network sockets.
• Does not constrain us to a certain platform or ecosystem. (As a counter-example
we mention Java Remote Method Invocation [34], which would constrain one to
the Java Virtual Machine.)
• Makes no assumptions regarding the serialization techniques used, as we wish
to remain as ﬂexible with our future options as possible.
• Provides the ability to work in brokered both and brokerless messaging modes.
This is so that:
– Experimentation between the two can be performed if needed.
– Brokerless messaging tends to be more simple, both during development (less
infrastructure to conﬁgure) and debugging (fewer moving parts to verify).
However, having the option to also use brokers is useful for the parts of a
system for which reliability of delivery is more important than performance.
For example, we might want to go brokerless for a high-iteration optimization
routine, but use a broker for sending results upstream.
29
==PAGE:38==
4. Distributed Platform Design
We choose the ZeroMQ library [35] which provides an extremely ﬂexible communication
framework. It takes away a lot of the low-level socket handling burden by providing an
asynchronous, conceptually higher-level interface to a multitude of abstract socket types. It
does so while maintaining compatibility with diﬀerent transports and enforcing no speciﬁc
communication pattern by providing a wide range of building blocks for any use-case
imaginable. It also oﬀers itself to building routing infrastructure through transport layering
[36] and authentication/encryption [37] meaning we can provide complete communication
solutions in code, regardless of the existing communication infrastructure, if needed.
Serialization protocol: For this work, we avoided any particular serialization protocol
and used C structs for all our network serialization/deserialization needs. For inter-
process (local) communication we choose Python’s native “pickle” format as it is
quick and requires zero eﬀort to work.
Convex optimization library: The ADMM version of our chosen paper requires solving
a convex problem with quadratic objective function and linear constraints. This
is a Quadratic Programming (QP) problem, for which a capable solver is needed.
While experimenting with diﬀerent packages, we found certain diﬀerentiating points
of interest to us:
• Performance. Other than the classes of problems that are possible to solve,
this is perhaps the most obvious characteristic. It is important to mention that
the status quo has been shifting towards code generating solvers due to the
dramatic speed-ups possible. CVXGEN claims performance several thousand
times greater than conventional solvers [18].
• Openness.
Solvers which provide no source code, a license permissive to
modiﬁcations and have no community support are more diﬃcult to pick up
by a research team: (a) Tracking down any bugs or general problems requires
commercial or academic support, (b) the available platforms target platforms
are likely limited until the vendor decides porting makes commercial sense and
(c) if the product is discarded or reaches its end-of-life the project might be
forced to seek a new one. An example where we ran into such problems was
the GEKKO solver [38]. Even though it was capable of solving the task at
hand, it was impossible to do so under our ARM-based nodes, because no ARM
version of the (bundled) IPOPT solver was available [39]. Similarly, CVXGEN
currently requires using a web service to generate the required solver. This
makes it more diﬃcult to experiment with it, reason about any potential issues,
and constraints independence.
• A programming interface that is intuitive to use and strikes a good balance
between the equations found in academic papers and software organization, as
it is meant to be placed between these two worlds.
Taking the above into consideration, we resolved to use the CVXPY modeling language
[40], which is an open-source eﬀort with plans for code generation in the upcoming
version, meaning that there is a good chance of beneﬁting from substantial performance
improvements in the future, without switching libraries.
Data logging: Due to the distributed nature of the application, we need a method for
aggregating data to a central location, so that we can observe progress and collect
30
==PAGE:39==
4. Distributed Platform Design
results for analysis. While, as mentioned, this is a separate eﬀort in itself, our needs
are limited to collecting values for temporary viewing. To achieve collection of data,
we use the networked data store redis [41]. Redis has interfaces for a wide range
of programming languages, has been proven to scale extremely well and follows the
same path as our other tools, which is to provide a good set of reasonable building
blocks. Even though it supports many advanced management features, bringing an
instance up and storing and loading data from it is trivial. For simplicity, we run
redis as a single, standalone service. This means that all nodes need to be able to
communicate with that central location (in this case, a personal computer).
Logging directly to this machine during algorithm execution results in two sources
of delays: (a) nodes have to wait for their message to get logged and (b) we load
the network, potentially causing delays in the algorithm’s packet delivery. Having
such inﬂuence on our performance metrics is unacceptable, so we employ a buﬀering
strategy when running in benchmarking mode: Each node buﬀers all the commands
it intends to send to the redis server until the end of iterations, at which points
it ﬂushes them all to it, in order. This buﬀering technique is illustrated in Fig.
4.7. Note that the code that calls our logging interface need not be aware of this
change. We simply replace the actual redis interface with one that buﬀers all requests.
Potential issues to keep in mind when using this technique is that (a) messages from
diﬀerent nodes no longer have any known arrival-time relationship between them and
therefore manipulating values stored by one node from another may (depending on
its nature) lead to race conditions that would otherwise not occur and (b) retrieving
data from redis during execution is impossible (unless locally buﬀered). Neither of
these features are typically required when logging. We do however note that any
potential need for retrieving data from redis for manipulation can be avoided by
using its atomic methods such as HINCRBYFLOAT, which increments a hash-ﬁeld value
by a given amount, without the client needing to ever know it3.
Execution environment constraints and deployment methodology: As mentioned
previously, we will be executing our program in three separate environments: Locally,
on a server, on our small network testing platform (SIMLAB), and then the more
realistically sized SYSLAB network. All these nodes are equipped with diﬀerent
ﬂavors of GNU/Linux. Our testing machine is running the Gentoo distribution,
SIMLAB nodes are running ArchLinux and so do the SYSLAB nodes. However,
SIMLAB is composed of ARM-based nodes, while SYSLAB is running x86. SYSLAB
is the only environment in which we have no administrative (root) rights. While
these systems are somewhat similar, we require that environment our code executes
under is as similar as reasonably possible. We also which to have as little overhead
as possible.
Our main concern when working in multiple environments is to ensure that any
compiled dependencies (e.g., lapack and cblas - required by numpy) and requirements
(e.g., Python itself) are of the same versions on all target machines and compiled as
similarly as possible. Nowadays, multiple methods of deploying software in Virtual
Environments exist (as opposed to Virtual Machines), albeit each having a a slightly
3For example, if we wish to summarize the amount time spent on a process by multiple nodes on redis
itself, we are still able to do that free of race conditions.
31
==PAGE:40==
4. Distributed Platform Design
Figure 4.7:
Simpliﬁed sequence diagram of logging buﬀering logic.
Final value for
“total_time” on redis is 4.8.
diﬀerent set of goals. We mention (a) Docker (focused on application development
lifecycle and CI/CD, but requires administrative access to install), Vagrant (focused
on development) and LXC (a less opinionated approach, centered around executing
Operating Systems, not applications). While these frameworks come with certain
merits, our main focus is to not only achieve reproducibility, but also ﬂexibility: It is
useful to be able to change any compilation settings, swap out dependencies or install
diﬀerent versions to test with. We might also be eventually interested on the eﬀect
of compile-time options in performance. If we were to distill our requirements, we
need is a user-level package management system with support for compiling packages
to ﬁt any arising needs. Arguably one of the best solutions is the Portage package
management system [42], originating from the Gentoo Linux Operating System.
Since Portage is typically ran as a system-level package manager, this leaves us with
the issues of (a) running it on systems on which we have no administrative privileges
(b) not changing the package manager on systems where we do, as we do not own
them. To solve this we use two diﬀerent solutions depending on the system. On
SIMLAB, where we do have administrative access, we use the chroot [43] (“change
root”) command to run our application in a Gentoo environment that comes with
all the relevant dependencies. We can create this environment transparently and
entirely on our local machine despite the diﬀerence in CPU architecture by using
QEMU’s user-space emulation [44]. On SYSLAB, there is no architecture diﬀerence,
but no root access, which rules chroot out. The solution (while staying true to our
requirements) is to use Gentoo Preﬁx [45]. Gentoo Preﬁx is a way to install Gentoo
Linux on any directory under many UNIX-like operating systems. Installation is
done by means of bootstraping on the host machine and localized binary execution
32
==PAGE:41==
4. Distributed Platform Design
is achieved by setting RPATH (More details can be found by refering to [46]).
4.3.5
Implementation and execution details
In order to maintain separation of concerns in our codebase, we bring everything together
in a multi-layer architecture as shown in Figure 4.8.
This architecture and its components lend themselves well to our project goals:
Render our implementation as easy to check as possible: It must be easy to
check that we are implementing what we earlier agreed to. At this development
stage, this is more important, than, for instance, unit testing, because unlike many
other classes of software, we have very limited ways of checking that the process is
executing correctly at any given time. That is, until the system does converge, we
have no deﬁnitive indication of whether it ever will. (One can monitor the dual and
primal variables in the case of ADMM, but that is only empirical). Therefore, to
make the implementation as clear to follow as possible:
• We ﬁnd that three diﬀerent computation node types exist in this paper and
we directly reﬂect this in the code. Each of them executes a separate routine,
instead of all three being expressed in the same function with diﬀerent code
paths. This is at the cost of code maintenance and some duplication, but makes
checking the order of execution trivial.
Experiment Runner
Bus and Connection Loader
Iteration Executor
Results Grapher
Strategy-speciﬁc module (ADMM or Dual Ascent)
Remote Node Interfaces
Bus-speciﬁc Routine
Bus Middleware (Scaling and adaptations)
Equation and Optimization Implementations
Node
Call-order Enforcer
Timing Observer
SVG Logger
Figure 4.8: Local software architecture
33
==PAGE:42==
4. Distributed Platform Design
• To visually check the ﬂow of information in our implementation, we have our
code automatically ﬁll in the values of ﬁgure 4.3 during execution as an ad-hoc
logging target. The resulting SVG document helped us verify communications
and debug problems with the entire team present, while having to only glance at
one page. Note that for this method to work correctly it is essential to perform
logging into this document at the exact points in code that the variables
represent. For instance, if a variable is shown twice in the ﬁgure, it must also
be logged twice in the code at the respective lines. An example of such output
can be found in 8.1.
It must also be possible to create and locally test new scenarios, try out diﬀerent
value scaling strategies and modify the core of the implementation as needed:
• This means making the code easily approachable to modiﬁcations within the
realm of the problem at hand, by means of decoupling these features from
other details of the implementation. This is where clear layering comes into
play. For instance, the variable wrapping classes (instantiated at program
initiation) are responsible for scaling/descaling their internal variables: i.e., this
behavior is encapsulated. These scaling methods are in fact only called by the
“Bus Middleware”, meaning that the actual implementation (“Equation and
Optimization Implementations”) needs not know about them.
• To make it possible to run all code and scenarios locally, even if they involve
multiple nodes, we ensuring the uniqueness of every single network port used
by the nodes. This is the only way to run all nodes under the same machine,
without having to emulate more network interfaces.
We also highlight certain software engineering recommendations we applied that we
ﬁnd to be particularly relevant in distributed systems of this nature:
• Containing state to prevent bugs caused by lingering data: Each execution
of the “Bus-speciﬁc routine” represents one optimization iteration. We would
normally use recursion to carry the program state to the next iteration. Instead,
we have each iteration return the next instance of itself to the executor. This
is necessary in place of direct recursion (i.e., to call itself) because the Python
programming language has no support for Tail Call Optimization (TCO). Deep
recursions would exhaust memory or blow the stack, whichever comes ﬁrst.
Having an executor also provides a point for cleanly inspecting the state, which
is useful for graphing results at the end of every iteration as shown in Figure
4.9.
• Failing early: To prevent putting any out-of-order (from the perspective of the
algorithm) messages on the wire, we enforce at run-time that the state machine
behind each network socket is always called with the correct order. This is
particularly useful because we have a chance to debug network problems before
they are manifested as network problems.
4.3.6
Design extensibility and adaptability checking
To verify that our design can be easily adapted to be applicable in contexts of diﬀerent
communication topologies, we contributed to its use as a platform for developing a project
34
==PAGE:43==
4. Distributed Platform Design
Figure 4.9: Objective and q(g) graphing of a node during an ADMM execution. Green
points denote that the node has detected local convergence.
which requires fully meshed communications. This was of particular interest to us because
meshed networking topologies are rather wide-spread according to our literature search.
The work in question is that of [25], which constitutes an experimental implementation
of [47]. In contrast to our implementation, this work requires asynchronous (although
iteration-bound) communications, where every node transmits to and receives from all
neighboring nodes on every iteration (the deﬁnition of “neighbor” here is deﬁned in the
referenced paper, but is of no particular importance to us). An iteration ran once a second.
The symmetric nature of this pattern makes naive implementation susceptible to race
conditions. To solve this, we swap out our existing networking module for a new one which
works as follows: Each unit spawns N “receiver”-type processes (where N is the number
of neighbors) and one “transmitter”-type processes. The “receiver” processes initiate a
connection with all neighboring “transmitter” processes. Once a “transmitter” processes
has been reached by all neighboring nodes, then and only then it replies with the node’s
current value. This method facilitates for virtually parallel transmission, while intrinsically
ensuring that all communications of a single iteration are complete before the next iteration
is tried by any node. This time, we opt for using AsyncIO due to the potentially high
number of neighboring nodes. All “receivers” and “transmitters” of each node run under
the same AsyncIO context, which blocks as a whole until communications are complete (it
is acceptable for the thread under which they run in each node to busy-wait). This process
is illustrated in Figure 4.10.
35
==PAGE:44==
4. Distributed Platform Design
Figure 4.10: Symmetric communications from the perspective of a single node’s “transmitter”
process.
36
==PAGE:45==
5
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
5.1
Implemented case groups
We earlier constructed a linear feeder to use when benchmarking, yet we still need to create
exact scenarios for it. This constitutes deciding on appropriate generation capacities
To get a complete picture regarding the algorithm’s performance characteristics, we examine
its behavior from the perspective of two layers:
• An algorithm-centric layer, through which we can draw conclusions regarding the
eﬀects of algorithmic and network complexity imposed by the algorithm itself.
• An implementation-centric, though which we can investigate the eﬀects of hardware
and software choices, network delays and eﬀect of tuning parameters.
5.2
Hardware conﬁgurations
For each layer, we use a diﬀerent hardware conﬁguration and sets of feeder lengths. This
is because we are constrained in our choice of hardware based on our requirements.
For the implementation-centric benchmarks we need to experiment on an as
homogeneous node set-up as possible. We predominantly have two CPU models in
our network: 14 Intel(R) Atom(TM) D525 and 7 Intel(R) Celeron(R) J1900 (See Tbl.
8.1). Given that the root node does not need to execute any complex computations,
even in the case of ADMM, we can have feeders of up to 8 nodes long, while still
being able to entirely execute run on either hardware platform (even though we only
have 7 J1900, the root node can be of higher speciﬁcations due to low requirements).
Another factor to control for is to ensure that the network paths chosen are of
certain characteristics. Since the message frequency requirement trumps payload
size, this characteristic is round-trip time. Given the ping information we have
previously collected, it is trivial to perform a graph search and obtain a series of
pairs of nodes within these ranges. However, we ﬁrst need to get an idea of which
ranges are available to us so that we can adjust our search accordingly. We render
these relationships in 5.1 and 5.2. Based on these results, we generate set-ups with
characteristics those of Table 5.1. The Ping and Ping mdev (Median Deviation)
values refer to those of each required pair, not grid totals.
37
==PAGE:46==
5. Experiments and Results
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
ping (ms)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
mdev (ms)
pair
Atom - Celeron
Celeron - Celeron
Celeron - Core2
Atom - Atom
Atom - Core2
same
not same
same
Figure 5.1: Ping times among all nodes (excluding those found to be irregularly ping-wise-
distant)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
ping (ms)
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
mdev (ms)
pair
Atom - Celeron
Celeron - Celeron
Celeron - Core2
Atom - Atom
Atom - Core2
same
not same
same
Figure 5.2: Ping times among fastest nodes (ping-wise)
38
==PAGE:47==
5. Experiments and Results
Table 5.1: Input parameters used for node graph search for use with the implementation-
centric benchmarks. (5 ≥N ≥8)
Setup Name
Node CPUs
Ping window (ms)
Ping mdev window (ms)
celerons
1×Core2 + (N-1)×Celeron
0.35±.15
0.01±.01
atoms
1×Core2 + (N-1)×Atom
0.90±.70
0.01±.03
celerons/1atom
1×Core2 + (N-2)×Celeron + 1×Atom
0.35±.15
0.01±.01
For the algorithm-centric benchmarks: We are not able to construct longer hardware-
homogeneous chains of nodes than 15. However, this number is rather limiting
for characterizing how the algorithm scales when the feeder length varies, so we
are forced to use a mixed-hardware setup.
If our assumption that the entire
optimization’s performance is roughly bound by the slowest node is correct (which
we will experimentally check in the algorithm-centric benchmarks), then the exact
combination of nodes used should not matter, so long as there is a slowest common-
denominator unit involved.
Regardless, we use a 3:2 ratio of D525 and J1900
processors for our tests. We do not interleave their order to rule out having a
hardware pattern that overlaps with the electrical pattern that we constructed in
Sec “Energy generation scheme”.
The electrical characteristics of each algorithm-centric cases are presented in Fig 5.3, 5.4
and 5.5.
Note that our V-constrained and non-V-constrained solutions are the same. This is because
under no circumstances and conﬁguration settings did we manage to get the distributed
implementation to converge when voltage constraints were binding (i.e., ϵ < voltage(p.u.)
holding for any node). However, even without a binding constraint, we ﬁnd that the
algorithm performance is penalized, as the nodes still have to agree on their neighboring
nodes’ voltages before convergence is achieved.
5.3
Base parameter tuning and testing variables
ADMM optimizer execution feasibility and parameter scaling: The ADMM al-
gorithm requires the use of an optimizer. To avoid unnecessary optimization failures
due to numerical problems, we scale all used variables. All voltages are scaled using
Vbase = V0 , powers are scaled using Sbase = 104 due to dealing with up to tens of
kW, and resistances and reactances are scaled with Zbase = Vbase2
Sbase .
ADMM can be tuned via the ρ constant as shown in 4.3. As per the original author’s
recommendation we instead use two separate ρ’s: ρU and ρQ. One for U-based
and one for Q-based variables respectively. Using dimensional analysis we decide
on scaling them using rhoQ =
ρQ
x
Sbase and rhoU = ρU
x
Sbase
V0
where ρQ
x and ρU
x remain
as variables for tuning testing. Through experimentation we choose to maintain
rhoU
x = rhoU
x
10 . We base these choices on observing the progression of individual
executions.
Dual Ascent parameter choice: This version of the algorithm can be tuned using the α
parameter. We experimentally ﬁnd α = 3×10−5
Sbase
to achieve suﬃciently fast convergence
39
==PAGE:48==
5. Experiments and Results
0
1
2
3
4
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
kW
qg V-constrained
qg noV
qc orig
pg
pc
0
1
2
3
4
Node ID
1.0000
1.0005
1.0010
1.0015
1.0020
1.0025
V (p.u.)
Real
Linearized DistFlow
Solution; V-constrained
Solution; non-V-constrained
Figure 5.3: Electrical characteristics and optimization solution to 4-node feeder
40
==PAGE:49==
5. Experiments and Results
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
kW
qg V-constrained
qg noV
qc orig
pg
pc
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Node ID
1.000
1.002
1.004
1.006
1.008
1.010
1.012
V (p.u.)
Real
Linearized DistFlow
Solution; V-constrained
Solution; non-V-constrained
Figure 5.4: Electrical characteristics and optimization solution to 12-node feeder
41
==PAGE:50==
5. Experiments and Results
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
kW
qg V-constrained
qg noV
qc orig
pg
pc
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
Node ID
1.0000
1.0025
1.0050
1.0075
1.0100
1.0125
1.0150
1.0175
1.0200
V (p.u.)
Real
Linearized DistFlow
Solution; V-constrained
Solution; non-V-constrained
Figure 5.5: Electrical characteristics and optimization solution to 22-node feeder
42
==PAGE:51==
5. Experiments and Results
for our set-up regardless of the feeder length (The truly optimal value is indeed a
function of it, but the variance in required iterations is low).
Network parametrization: To test with varying network conditions, we will be
artiﬁcially increasing the delay of every communication by 50, 100 and 200ms.
Architecturally this is done at the socket level.
5.4
Results1
We initiate our exploration of the data we collected by checking that the “Core” part of
algorithmic executions of ADMM (i.e., the run of the optimizer, which is undoubtedly the
most CPU-intensive part of our executions) are consistent in their timing. Consistency in
this regard provides us with a stable performance baseline so that we are able to reason
about other performance aspects more freely. We do indeed conﬁrm this property as shown
in Fig. 5.6. Note, however, the diﬀerent behaviors between platforms: While the Xeon
and i7 conﬁgurations perform the fastest, the i7 conﬁguration demonstrates a slightly
wider variance (along with numerous outliers in the samples). This is expected due to
the necessary context switching that a two-core CPU has to perform in order to simulate
muliple nodes. The Atom processors also have a high number of outliers in the results,
which can be possibly, though not deﬁnitively with no further testing, to a low cache size
(thus sometimes requiring data to be reloaded to the cache). We also see that the value of
ρ has negligible eﬀect.
Next, we go through the eﬀect of network delays on the same experiments. Given our
previous observations on the lack of eﬀect on “Core” time) of ρQ
x , we arbitrarily ﬁx its
value to 1.0 (we remind that ρU
x is ﬁxed in relation to it for all tests). What becomes
evident from the results in 5.7 is that network delays do play a major role in the average
per-iteration performance of all involved algorithms. This eﬀect is in more pronounced
the faster the core of the algorithm is (We know this from the previous graph, where
V-constrained ADMM is slower than non-V-constrained ADMM, which is in turn slower
than Dual Ascent). In fact, the impact of this eﬀect would had not been as obvious
from a graph displaying only the setup comprised of only Atom processors, which are the
processors which set the performance ceiling for our algorithm-centric setup.
We therefore move on to investigate this eﬀect on our algorithm-centric setup. The reason
why this is important knowledge to obtain from our work is because it directly answers
a potential algorithm implementor’s question regarding the performance relationship
between how the algorithm scales on a single machine compares to scaling on a networked
environment. However, the anwser to this question cannot be complete just by looking at
the per-iteration performance. It is the time-to-completion that is of interest for algorithm
selection purposes. Our ﬁndings can be found at in Fig. 5.8. We observe that the eﬀect
of network delays on local executions can be an order of magnitude higher than that
of distributed executions. From this diagram we additionally notice that this response
somewhat ﬂattens out past a 50ms added delay, especially for easier to solve problems
(ADMM noV and Dual Ascent).
1All ADMM Voltage-constrained scenarios failed to complete within 10000 iterations when ρQ
x was set
to 0.01, and due to time limitations, the number of required iterations for these experiments are missing
from the results, along with values that rely on this knowledge.
43
==PAGE:52==
5. Experiments and Results
While these results are positive for overall performance, this observation is conﬂicting
with the assumed expectation that time would increase at least linearly with delays. Our
investigation on the matter leads us to try re-running our tests without the asynchronous
communications scheme from Sec. “Asynchronous communication and execution strategy”.
Thus we ﬁnd the source of our observations to indeed be this implementation decision as
illustrated in Fig. 5.9.
44
==PAGE:53==
5. Experiments and Results
Figure 5.6:
ADMM “Core” optimization performance and consistency on the
implementation-centric setup.
45
==PAGE:54==
5. Experiments and Results
Figure 5.7: Average iteration perfrormance across network delays on the implementation-
centric setup.
46
==PAGE:55==
5. Experiments and Results
Figure 5.8: Increase of total optimization execution time relative to no-added-delay scenario
of each case
47
==PAGE:56==
5. Experiments and Results
Figure 5.9:
Per-iteration performance comparison between independent and non-
indenepndent communication implementations
48
==PAGE:57==
6
CONCLUSIONS
Putting the literature review, our implementation considerations and observations of our
work’s results all together, we reach the conclusions below.
Most published work is not ready for implementation to the degree one would expect. This
is due to certain areas of relevant considerations missing or being implied. We observe
a number of areas for improvement with regards to ease of implementation, functional
feasibility and performance analysis:1:
• There is often a lack of feasibility space analysis and the convergence issues we faced
demonstrate its value;
• Because there is usually no straightforward way of checking that an implementation
corresponds to a given model, veriﬁcation can be challenging. We recommend that
invariants of the optimization process be stated clearly and/or concrete examples
and executions are given. These have the potential to greatly aid with testing and
debugging. We showcase how such information could be used to debug problems
(Fig. 8.1);
• A termination criterion (if necessary) and the way it is communicated and handled
may need to be part of the proposed solution itself, because, as we have shown (Sec.
“Convergence checking and algorithm termination”), diﬀerent termination methods
may apply to diﬀerent algorithms, topologies and networks;
• Clear diagrams showcasing computations and related communications are very helpful
for comprehension. We demonstrate a set of useful diagram characteristics that
mitigate this problem (Fig. 4.3);
• Creating distributed implementations can help locate and reason about the
implications of any information that needs to be communicated that would
otherwise go unnoticed (See Pflowj+1 in Sec. “Algorithm execution sequence and
communications disambiguation”).
• We show that software methods and implementation decisions (such as the
asynchronous communications presented in this work) can have a major eﬀect (either
positive or negative) to ﬁnal performance (See Sec. [Results]);
• Depending on the system requirements and algorithm characteristics, the existence
and exact technique of error recovery may of high importance and also paramount
to the algorithm’s performance boundaries (See Sec. “Necessity for error recovery”).
We also draw attention to other necessary concerns that are relevant to implementations
of such systems:
• We underline the complexity that is inherent to distributed system implementations
1This list does not apply to any single paper in its entirety, but refers to our observations from the
body of literature we have examined as a whole.
49
==PAGE:58==
6. Conclusions
as motivation for reconsideration of the cases in which distribution of computations
is necessary;
• We categorize the logging requirements of these systems based on their practical
goals and evaluate their usefulness.
Given our results from the implemented algorithms we conclude the following:
• Knowledge of local execution performance can be potentially misleading with regards
to (a) processing performance and (b) the implications of networking delays on total
execution speed. We propose the inclusion of a computing-performance-over-network-
performance analysis, as the one presented herein.
• It is possible to create software infrastructure that can greatly assist in performing
distributed experiments of varying distributed algorithms, even if their communication
requirements vary (Sec. “Design extensibility and adaptability checking”).
6.1
Code availability
One of our project goals was to create software that can be adapted for testing diﬀerent
optimization algorithms. The codebase is available on a request-for-access basis from DTU
Elektro.
50
==PAGE:59==
7
REFERENCES
[1] R. Kerr, J. Scheidt, A. Fontana, and J. Wiley, “Unit commitment,” Ieee Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems, vol. PA85, no. 5, pp. 417 –&, 1966.
[2] J. Zhu, “Unit commitment,” Optimization of Power System Operation, 2015.
[3] Z. Li, Q. Guo, H. Sun, and J. Wang, “Coordinated economic dispatch of
coupled transmission and distribution systems using heterogeneous decomposition,” Ieee
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 7390114, 4817–4830, 2016.
[4] Optimization of power system operation. Wiley, 2014.
[5] A. Wood and B. Wollenberg, Power generation, operation and control. Wiley, 1984, p.
444 s.
[6] A. Olson et al., “Halfway there: Can california achieve a 50,” Ieee Power and Energy
Magazine, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 7131660, 41–52, 2015.
[7] A. Kargarian et al., “Toward distributed/decentralized dc optimal power ﬂow
implementation in future electric power systems,” Ieee Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2574–2594, 2018.
[8] D. K. Molzahn et al., “A survey of distributed optimization and control algorithms for
electric power systems,” Ieee Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2941–2962,
2017.
[9] J. Mohammadi, G. Hug, and S. Kar, “Role of communication on the convergence rate
of fully distributed dc optimal power ﬂow,” 2014 Ieee International Conference on Smart
Grid Communications, Smartgridcomm 2014, pp. 7007620, 43–48, 2015.
[10] R. Pred, N. Balu, and D. Curtice, “Enhancing power system security,” Epri Journal,
vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 25–31, 25–31, 1990.
[11] J. D. Guy, “Security constrained unit commitment,” Ieee Transactions on Power
Apparatus and Systems, vols. PAS-90, no. 3, pp. 1385–90, 1385–1390, 1971.
[12] A. Keane et al., “State-of-the-art techniques and challenges ahead for distributed
generation planning and optimization,” Ieee Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 28, no.
2, pp. 1493–1502, 2013.
[13] A. J. Conejo and J. A. Aguado, “Multi-area coordinated decentralized dc optimal
power ﬂow,” Ieee Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1272–1278, 1998.
[14] J. Y. Joo and M. D. Ilić, “Multi-layered optimization of demand resources using
lagrange dual decomposition,” Ieee Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 6670130,
51
==PAGE:60==
7. References
2081–2088, 2013.
[15] M. D. Ilić, L. Xie, and J. Y. Joo, “Eﬃcient coordination of wind power and price-
responsive demand - part i: Theoretical foundations,” Ieee Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 5762580, 1875–1884, 2011.
[16] M. Kraning, E. Chu, J. Lavaei, and S. Boyd, “Dynamic network energy management
via proximal message passing,” Foundations and Trends in Optimization, vol. 1, no. 2, pp.
73–126, 73–126, 2014.
[17] J. Mattingley, Y. Wang, and S. Boyd, “Receding horizon control: Automatic generation
of high-speed solvers,” Ieee Control Systems, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 52–65, 2011.
[18] J. Mattingley and S. Boyd, “CVXGEN: A code generator for embedded convex
optimization,” Optimization and Engineering, vol. 13, Mar. 2012.
[19] A. Kargarian, Y. Fu, and Z. Li, “Distributed security-constrained unit commitment
for large-scale power systems,” Ieee Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 30, no. 4, pp.
6917065, 1925–1936, 2015.
[20] A. Ahmadi-Khatir, A. J. Conejo, and R. Cherkaoui, “Multi-area unit scheduling and
reserve allocation under wind power uncertainty,” Ieee Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 6689354, 1701–1710, 2014.
[21] Z. Li, Q. Guo, H. Sun, and J. Wang, “A new lmp-sensitivity-based heterogeneous
decomposition for transmission and distribution coordinated economic dispatch,” Ieee
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 931–941, 2018.
[22] P. Hug Gabriela (Pittsburgh, “Distributed methods and software for balancing supply
and demand in an electric power network,” 9760957September-2017 [Online]. Available:
http://www.freepatentsonline.com/9760957.html
[23] S. Chakrabarti, M. Kraning, E. Chu, R. Baldick, and S. Boyd, “Security constrained
optimal power ﬂow via proximal message passing,” Clem U Powe, 2014.
[24] P. Šulc, S. Backhaus, and M. Chertkov, “Optimal distributed control of reactive
power via the alternating direction method of multipliers,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 968–977, Dec. 2014.
[25] A. P. Lukas Ortmann Saverio Bolognani and K. Heussen, “Fully distributed peer-to-
peer optimal voltage control with minimal model requirements (unpublished),” IEEE-INST
Electrical Electronics Engineers Inc, 2020.
[26] K. Chandy and L. Lamport, “Distributed snapshots - determining global states of
distributed systems,” Acm Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 63–75,
1985.
[27] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed optimization
and statistical learning via the alternating direction method of multipliers,” Foundations
52
==PAGE:61==
7. References
and Trends in Machine Learning, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–122, 2010.
[28] J. Ellson, E. Gansner, Y. Hu, E. Janssen, and S. N. et al, “Graphviz - graph visualization
software,” Graphviz. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available: https://www.graphviz.org/about/
[29] E. R. Gansner, Y. Koren, and S. North, “Graph drawing by stress majorization,” in
Graph drawing, 2005, pp. 239–250.
[30] M. Fowler and K. Scott, UML distilled: A brief guide to the standard object modeling
language, second edition, object technology series. Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999, p.
185 s.
[31] G. van Rossum, “Python tutorial,” Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica (CWI),
Amsterdam, CS-R9526, May 1995.
[32] J. Armstrong, “Making reliable distributed systems in the presence of software errors,”
PhD thesis, Mikroelektronik och informationsteknik, 2003.
[33] J. V. et al, “Elixir,” elixir. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available: https://elixir-lang.org/
[34] Oracle, “Remote method invocation home,” Oracle. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available:
https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/tech/index-jsp-136424.html
[35] iMatix, “Distributed messaging - zeromq,” iMatix. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available:
http://zeromq.org/
[36] M. Sústrik, “ØMQ: The theoretical foundation,” 250bpm, Jul. 2011 [Online]. Available:
http://250bpm.com/concepts
[37] iMatix, “CurveZMQ - security for zeromq,” iMatix. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available:
http://curvezmq.org/
[38] L. Beal, D. Hill, R. Martin, and J. Hedengren, “GEKKO optimization suite,” Processes,
vol. 6, no. 8, p. 106, 2018.
[39] L. Advanced Process Solutions, “IPOPT for local solve,” GitHub. Jan-2019 [Online].
Available: https://github.com/BYU-PRISM/GEKKO/issues/50
[40] S. Diamond and S. Boyd, “CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling language for convex
optimization,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 17, no. 83, pp. 1–5, 2016.
[41] S. S. et al, “Redis,” Redis Labs. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available: https://redis.io/
[42] Z. Medico et al., “Project:Portage,” Gentoo Linux. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available:
https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Portage
[43] D. M. et al, “GNU coreutils 8.31,” GNU Operating System.
Mar-2019 [Online].
Available: https://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/manual/coreutils.pdf
[44] QEMU, “QEMU version 3.1.50 user documentation: QEMU user space emulator,”
QEMU. Jun-2019 [Online]. Available: https://qemu.weilnetz.de/doc/qemu-doc.html#
53
==PAGE:62==
7. References
QEMU-User-space-emulator
[45] B. Xu, G. Amadio, F. Groﬀen, and M. H. et al, “QEMU version 3.1.50 user
documentation: QEMU user space emulator,” QEMU. Jun-2019 [Online].
Available:
https://qemu.weilnetz.de/doc/qemu-doc.html#QEMU-User-space-emulator
[46] D. E. Pettenò, “The why and how of rpath,” Flameeyes’s Weblog. Jun-2010 [Online].
Available: https://flameeyes.blog/2010/06/20/the-why-and-how-of-rpath/
[47] S. Bolognani, R. Carli, G. Cavraro, and S. Zampieri, “Distributed reactive power
feedback control for voltage regulation and loss minimization,” Ieee Transactions on
Automatic Control, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 6930779, 966–981, 2015.
54
==PAGE:63==
8
APPENDIX
Table 8.1: SYSLAB node hardware information
Node ID
Processor
Ethernet Controller
Negotiated speed (Mbps)
9
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
8
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
7
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
4
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
33
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
3
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
29
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
28
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
27
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
26
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
25
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
24
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
18
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
17
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
16
Intel Atom™D525
Intel 82574L
100
5
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
32
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
31
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
23
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
13
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
12
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
10
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
1
Intel Celeron J1900
Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 (rev 06)
100
203
Intel Core™i5 M 520
Intel 82577LM (rev 06)
100
202
Intel Core™i5 M 520
Intel 82577LM (rev 06)
100
201
Intel Core™i5 M 520
Intel 82577LM (rev 06)
100
30
Intel Core™2 Duo E6750
Intel 82566DM-2 (rev 02)
1000
1Some variables have not been replaced in this instance due to an omission we did not manage to
correct in time for submission.
55
==PAGE:64==
8. Appendix
Figure 8.1: Example of debugging an ADMM execution via logging to SVG.1
56
==PAGE:65==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
