==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Listening Eﬀort and Cognitive Functioning:
Developing a Virtual Reality Solution
MSc THESIS
DTU Management
Engineering Systems Author:
Silvia Fern´andez Suelves (s173504)
Supervised by:
Fran¸cois Patou, DTU
Anja Maier, DTU
35 ECTS
July 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Recent studies show that the diﬃculty of following a conversation when there is
competing noise could be an early sign of cognitive decline. The purpose of this
work has been to develop a system that can be used by both researchers and clin-
ical neuropsychologists to measure the cognitive eﬀort required for a test subject
to understand and repeat a sentence with competing noise. To do so, a software
application is complemented with the use of a Virtual Reality setting and embedded
infrared eye-tracking cameras which measure pupil dilation during the test.
The designed test is divided in two tasks: a set of 20 sentences in quiet and another
set of 20 sentences mixed with white noise that the subjects have to listen to and
repeat. These sentences are randomized and follow the standards of the English
Hearing In Noise Test (HINT) so they represent sentences normally used in daily
life. The test is performed under controlled luminosity levels and the pupil diameter
data collected from the cameras during the two subsequent tasks is processed and
analysed so the results are shown automatically.
The system design follows a user-centered approach of the Product Development
Process: from Stakeholders analysis and listing of requirements to sketching of the
user-interaction ﬂow and user-interface with the goal of making the result easy-to-
use while providing a powerful tool that meets the needs of the potential end-users.
The system has been validated by running a small sample experiment with ﬁve
participants and letting a potential end-user use the system in order to assess his
opinion through a Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ).
2
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This work has been carried out at DTU Management Engineering from February
2019 to July 2019 for a total of 35 ECTS. The goal of this project is to develop
a proof of concept Listening Eﬀort Test system by integrating hardware (Virtual
Reality setting and infrared eye-tracking cameras) and related software in a user
interface application created using Matlab. This thesis is required for acquiring the
Master of Science degree in engineering from the Technical University of Denmark.
I would like to thank my supervisors, Anja Maier and Fran¸cois Patou for their
advice and guidance during the development of this thesis. Also, I would like to
thank Kacper Kosikowski for helping on setting up the Virtual Reality environment
and making my workplace much more comfortable. I want to mention Pierre-Yves
Hasan, who gave me good advice on dealing with pupillometry data thanks to his
broad knowledge in this area. Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends
who have been always there to make things easier.
I declare to be the only author of the work presented in this thesis.
Silvia Fern´andez Suelves
Lyngby, 29 May 2019
3
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
6
1.1
Link between listening eﬀort and dementia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Thesis scope and objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Methodological Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Reader’s Manual
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Literature Review
10
2.1
Listening Eﬀort Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.1
Physiology of the pupil response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Listening Eﬀort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.3
Pupil size measurement: Pupillometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Preliminary summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methods
16
3.1
System deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
Stakeholders analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
The Listening Eﬀort Test system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
The Listening Eﬀort Test tasks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
System requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Context of use and User Needs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Requirements deﬁnition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
User experience design (UX) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
User/test-subject interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3.2
User/System interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.3
User Interface design (UI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Technical implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.1
System connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.2
Luminosity Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.3
Mixing sound and noise
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4.4
Implementing the test tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4.5
Analyzing the Pupillometry data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.5
System validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5.1
Experiment Simulacrum design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5.2
Usability Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.6
Preliminary Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
==PAGE:5==
4
Results
44
4.1
Listening Eﬀort Test Application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.1
Initial screen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.2
Preparation screen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.3
Listening Eﬀort Test tasks screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.4
Results screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Listening Eﬀort Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.1
Calibration Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2.2
Tasks Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Usability results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Preliminary Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Conclusion
59
5.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
References
63
A Appendix
66
A.1 Initial questionnaire for a potential end-user: The researcher . . . . .
66
A.2 Calibration Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.3 Listening Eﬀort Tasks Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.4 Example of the generated Report (.pdf) after running the Listening
Eﬀort Test using the system developed in this work. . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.5 Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) and Interview
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The starting point of this work is a hypothesized association between listening eﬀort
and cognitive function, the former potentially being cognitive decline such as in
mild cognitive impairment or dementia. From this context we anticipate the need
of research tools to carry future investigations in this direction. The main goal of
this thesis is to tackle this need with the development of a proof-of-concept system
that could be used as a research or potential diagnostic tool to assess listening eﬀort
in a point-of-care setting. To the best of our knowledge, this need has not been yet
addressed in the shape of a software application for Listening Eﬀort Testing using
Pupillometry.
This section exposes the theoretical background underlying this thesis, the objectives
of this work and the methodological approach followed to accomplish them.
It
concludes with an overview of the remainder of the thesis.
1.1
Link between listening eﬀort and dementia
Dementia is a cognitive disorder characterized by a progressive decline of the supe-
rior cognitive capacities such as memory, attention, language and problem solving.
It is most common among the elderly although it is not associated to the natural
ageing process. About 47 million people were diagnosed with dementia in 2015 and
due to the increasing longevity worldwide, this number is projected to triple by 2050
(Prince et al. 2016).
This condition not only aﬀects the individuals who witness how their abilities are
gradually lost but also their families and friends who realize their changes in be-
haviour and have to take care of them while their loved one lose independence and
quality of life. In addition, dementia constitutes a great burden to society because
of the medical costs of a condition with such a high incidence in health and social
care.
For a long time dementia has been considered neither preventable or treatable, but
recent studies show encouraging progress in managing this condition and reducing
its overall burden. A recent Lancet paper on dementia prevention, intervention and
care (Livingston et al. 2017) lists several potentially modiﬁable risks factors that
may reduce the risk of developing the disease or its burden later in life. Among
these factors, which range from cardiovascular disease to lifestyle and education
6
==PAGE:7==
(Norton et al. 2014), social isolation and hearing loss during mid-life (45-65 years
old) account for a higher relative Population Risk Percentage (1.9% PAF) than obe-
sity or hypertension (Norton et al. 2017). This is highly relevant because of the
important prevalence of peripheral hearing loss among mid-life adults.
The focus of this project will be central hearing loss, which refers to the superior
cognitive process that allows a ﬂuent understanding of words and sentences and their
meanings, especially in a noisy environment. The diﬃculty of following a conversa-
tion when there is competing noise does not improve with peripheral ampliﬁcation
(George A. Gates 2012) such as the use of hearing aids. Central hearing loss can
nevertheless be an early sign of Alzheimer’s disease.
(G.
A. Gates et al. 2002)
Hence, the detection of an impaired speech perception when there is background
noise would determine an onset of the disease even when clear symptoms are not
shown yet. Since central auditory areas have been proved to be aﬀected in later
stages of Alzheimer’s disease (Sinha et al. 1993), it seems plausible to considerate
this theory and start a deeper research on this relation.
Listening involves auditory and cognitive processing and mechanisms such as at-
tention, working memory and speed of processing have an inﬂuence in the quality
of the information we are able to retrieve from a conversation. Pupillometry (i.e
the measurement of pupil size) during speech-in-noise listening is a way to physio-
logically quantify how eﬀortful the speech understanding is. As will be extensively
described in the ensuing literature review, the dilation or constriction of the pupil
is an involuntary reﬂex reaction that is shown after the activation of cognitive supe-
rior pathways such as the ones involved in working memory or attention. This work
takes advantage of this fact and integrates a test of listening eﬀort using pupillom-
etry that could be used for research or to be included in a diagnostic protocol for
neuropsychologists working with patients at risk of developing dementia.
1.2
Thesis scope and objectives
This projects aims at the implementation of a proof-of-concept hardware/software
solution meant to enable the execution of a Listening Eﬀort Test coupled to Pupil-
lometry in a point-of-care setting. The system revolves around Virtual Reality (VR)
and headsets embedding infrared eye-tracking cameras used to measure pupil dila-
tion during the test tasks realization.
The goals settled for this thesis are listed bellow:
• Development of a software/hardware system that serves to perform listening
eﬀort tests on adult test-subjects.
• Explore the suitability of VR-embedded pupillometry to gain insight on the
cognitive eﬀort it takes to understand speech with competing noise.
• Design a user interface and user experience for the main software application
so that the graphical layout matches the purpose of a healthcare/research
application (UI) and so that the interaction between the application and the
user is smooth and intuitive (UX).
7
==PAGE:8==
• Follow a standard, rigorous development process and test the system against
potential ﬁnal users.
1.3
Methodological Approach
This thesis has a very deﬁned starting point: the existence of an envisioned future
need on the lack of tools for the Listening Eﬀort Testing. Due to the recent studies
pointing out a possible relation between a great listening eﬀort and cognitive de-
cline, it is plausible to think that tools like this will be necessary sooner or later to
tackle this research question. In this work, we develop a proof-of-concept system for
testing on Listening Eﬀort.
Pupillometry is a physiological and potentially objective way to measure the cog-
nitive eﬀort associated to a higher level of cognitive resources allocated for the
listening to speech-in noise in test-subjects with potential risk to developing demen-
tia. Therefore, the thesis starts with a deep literature research on the physiology of
pupil reaction to diﬀerent stimuli.
Once this background has been established, this work follows a linear process of sys-
tem development. First, it analyses potential stakeholders in order to have a general
vision of their interests and needs to have into account and to which degree they
should be taken into account. Then, the main components of the envisioned system
are presented and the Listening Eﬀort Test tasks that the system shall be allowing
to perform are designed with the aim of generating data that provides enough in-
formation to assess the level of listening eﬀort.
From this point, it starts a process of potential end-user needs envision with the
interview to a researcher working in the hearing psychology ﬁeld. Also, the con-
text and intended use for the system are reviewed. From these sources, a list of
functional and non-functional requirements is extracted. Then we start the design
of the user experience by analyzing the interactions between the end-user and the
test-subject and the ones between the end-user and the system. On another hand,
the user interface of the main system software application is designed taking into
account some basic psychological principles and the goal of making the system as
simple and straight-forwards as possible.
Once implemented, the system is tested in two diﬀerent ways: by running a small
experiment on ﬁve participants in order to extract some information over the data
obtained and its potential to assess Listening Eﬀort and by letting a potential end-
user run a test using this system and answering a Post-Study System Usability
Questionnaire (PSSUQ) and small interview.
Figure 1.1: Timeline of the this project main milestones.
8
==PAGE:9==
1.4
Reader’s Manual
This reader’s manual sections seeks to allow the reader to have a mental structure of
the thesis and the parts of which it is constituted. Each chapter is concluded with
a preliminary summary to allow the reader to catch up.
Chapter 2 goes through the phisiology of the pupil response to diverse stimuli.
This is used as a basis to understand the main concepts used in the development of
this thesis system: Pupillometry and Listening Eﬀort.
Chapter 3 covers all the steps followed for the Listening Eﬀort Test system design
and implementation from stakeholders analysis to its more technical details.
Chapter 4 show the results obtained: 1) the main application ﬁnal screen ﬂow
and interface design, 2) The results from the experiment simulacrum 3) results on
usability from the system testing with a potential end-user.
Chapter 5 concludes the project by discussing the process followed and the results
obtained.
Also, it points out the system main limitations and looks forward to
possible future works.
9
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
2.1
Listening Eﬀort Measurement
Listening eﬀort is deﬁned as the deliberate allocation of mental resources to overcome
obstacles in goal pursuit when carrying out a listening task, (M. K. Pichora-Fuller
et al. 2016). From this deﬁnition it can be extracted that listening eﬀort not only
relates to the objective diﬃculty of the task (for instance, in a very low Signal-To-
Noise ratio speech) but also it is related to the amount of cognitive resources an
individual needs to make use of to succeed on the task completion.
This project is centered on creating a system capable to measure listening eﬀort
in a physiological manner by looking at the pupil size change during the perfor-
mance of an eﬀortful task. This section goes through the concepts needed for the
understanding of the main technique used in the system: pupillometry.
2.1.1
Physiology of the pupil response
In this section, a brief explanation of the human eye’s anatomy and function is going
to be done, then the mechanisms of pupil dilation or constriction will be exposed
and the respective neural pathways that lead to these changes in the pupil size will
be described. We will go through the main causes of pupil size change and focus
on how highly demanding cognitive tasks aﬀect to the pupil size and how these
observations can be used to infer on diﬀerent psychological processes. For instance,
how the pupil response can be an indicator of cognitive eﬀort while listening and
trying to follow a conversation.
The human eye
The human eye is a complex organ that works as a light sensor and receives all the
visual information that surround us by means of the photoreceptor cells located in
the retina. These cells are activated with light and through diﬀerent neural pathways
send the information to superior cognitive pathways that in turn will translate it to
a conscient distinction of colours and depths and further on to the recognition of
shapes and objects with their associated meanings. This is an organ with a constant
interaction with the environment.
The iris is the circular and coloured layer in the eye that by changing its diameter,
10
==PAGE:11==
changes the pupil size thus controlling the amount of light that reaches the retina.
This is done thanks to the presence two types of muscles in the iris front layer known
as stroma. One of these muscles is the sphincter pupillae which contracts the pupil
in a circular direction thus causing the pupil to constrict. On the other hand, there
are a set of dilator muscles called the dilator pupillae that when contracting pull the
inner side of the iris outward.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: 2.1a: Scheme of the visible part of the eye. 2.1: a) When the iris sphincter muscle
(green) contracts, it tightens the inner side of the iris, thus causing the pupil to constrict. b) When
the iris dilator muscle (yellow) contracts, it pulls the inner side of the iris outward, thus causing
the pupil to dilate. Image from Mathˆot 2018
The pupil refers to an opening in the centre of the eye where the light passes
through and hits the photoreceptors at the back of the eye. So, the pupil is normally
seen black because the interior of the eye is black. The human pupil diameter can
vary between 2 and 8 mm so the amount of light that enters the eye can change by
a factor of 16 (Mathˆot 2018).
Neural pathways
Pupil dilation and pupil constriction are controlled by two distinct: the parasympa-
thetic constriction pathway and the sympathetic dilation pathway.
• The parasympathetic constriction pathway controls the iris sphincter
muscle, a muscle encircling the pupil which reduces its size when contracted.
The parasympathetic nervous system is involved in keeping the body balanced
in relaxed conditions so when at rest, the pupil will be normally constricted.
• The sympathetic dilation pathway controls the iris dilator muscles, a group
of ﬁbers oriented radially in the iris which constricted increase the pupil size.
The sympathetic nervous system is involved in the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response of
the body so the pupils will dilate under arousal.
11
==PAGE:12==
Causes for a change in pupil size
The pupil diameter can change as a response to a wide variety of stimuli. This
section consists of a quick review of the three main ones: the pupil light response,
the pupil near response and the psychosensory pupil response.
The pupil light response
The pupil is constricted with brightness and dilated with darkness. This response is
initiated in the photoreceptors which when activated with light, start the neuronal
pathways that lead to the contraction of either the sphincter muscle or the iris di-
lation muscles.
However, there are many cognitive inﬂuences to this response that can vary the
degree to which the pupils react to the sudden change of light.
Among others,
the level of visual awareness and the subject’s attention and interpretation of the
visualized environment can also inﬂuence the pupil size. Also age has some inﬂu-
ence on the level of pupil reaction to light. Despite this, the relation pupil diame-
ter/luminescence is robust enough so it’s been possible to create a uniﬁed formula
that takes into account some of these factors (Watson and Yellott 2012). Regarding
its functionality, a dilated pupil allows more light to get into the retina while pupil
constriction increases depth of ﬁeld and acuity.
Figure 2.2: Pupil dilates when there is scarce light and constricts when there is a lot of light.
The pupil near response
The pupil constricts when looking to an object that is close and dilates when looking
to an object that is far-away. However, these are not the only adaptation to distant
or close focus points, the eye experience vergence, an inward or outward rotation
of the eye and accommodation, the curving or the ﬂattening of the eye’s lens. The
main purpose of the pupil dilation for nearby objects is said to be to increase depth
of ﬁeld.
The psychosensory pupil response
The pupil size also varies in response to excitement or stimuli that arise a thought
or emotion in the subject (Jackson. Beatty 1982). In this case, the pupil dilation is
driven by both sensory and psychological stimuli since the subjective interpretation
of the stimuli plays a key role. This eﬀect has been observed when a sudden event
12
==PAGE:13==
occur such as a strong sound or pain that trigger an orienting response activating
the sympathetic nervous system and thus the neural pathways that lead to dilation
(Friedman et al. 1973).
Also, mental eﬀort and arousal has shown to dilate the pupils. For instance, after
asking a subject to perform mental calculations the pupil dilates in proportion to
the diﬃculty of the calculations (Ahern and Jackson Beatty 1979). There are many
diﬀerent stimuli that can lead to pupil dilation due to high cognitive activity and
between them there is the cognitive eﬀort of following a conversation in a noisy
environment.
Under controlled pupil light response (PLR) and pupil near response (PNR), the
pupil response will reﬂect the sum of all processing demands associated with the
task being performed in relation to available cognitive resources (Jackson. Beatty
1982; Fish and Granholm 2008). It will be the result of the sympathetic dilation
pathway activation which involves many cognitive-related parts of the brain. The
pupil response related to cognitive stimuli is shown to be non-linear thus being small
for easy and very diﬃcult tasks and having its maximum in diﬃcult yet achievable
tasks (Ohlenforst et al. 2017). This leads us to the observation that the pupil’s
dilation also reﬂects the willingness of the subject to put eﬀort on a task because it
is worth it and the eﬀort will pay oﬀ.
2.1.2
Listening Eﬀort
Low speech audibility due to background noise puts people in a situation in which
they have to make use of more cognitive resources in form of working memory than
what they would normally need to follow a clear speech (M. Kathleen Pichora-Fuller
2003). In these cases, the person will have to maintain a high level of attention
in order to compensate for the poor Signal-To-Noise Ratio (SNR) of the speech,
leading to mental distress and fatigue. The measure of the degree to which a listener
needs to make use of extra cognitive resources indicates the cost at which a certain
performance level has been reached (Wingﬁeld, Tun, and McCoy 2005). The higher
the eﬀort, the greater the fatigue and tiredness the individual will experience, this
leading to less resources available for other daily tasks and less motivation to endorse
in social activities. The former being detected as a risk factor for cognitive decline.
Figure 2.3: Eﬀortful listening during the day has been reported to produce levels of fatigue that
makes people less interested in social activities and can lead to isolation (R. et al. 1988).
In order to measure the cognitive load of speech comprehension, several studies
have been using dual-task experiments in which, for instance, the subject had to
memorize some digits then hear a speech fragment and ﬁnally repeat the memo-
rized digits (Rakerd, Seitz, and Whearty 1996). In these studies, it is assumed that
the second task demands is inversely related to the speech-in-noise comprehension
task demands (Wingﬁeld, Tun, and McCoy 2005). The eﬀort needed to accomplish
these tasks was evaluated considering the number of correct repetitions and personal
13
==PAGE:14==
interviews. However, two experiment participants might obtain the same results ex-
erting diﬀerent amounts of eﬀort to do so. These experiments are diﬃcult to control
and the amount of eﬀort reported can be rather subjective and diﬃcult to compare.
For this reason, physiological measurements such as pupil size tracking are gaining
attention as objective ways to measure the mental eﬀort needed for speech com-
prehension in adverse conditions. (Wickens 2002; Verney, Granholm, and Marshall
2004).
2.1.3
Pupil size measurement: Pupillometry
Pupillometry is a technique which measures the pupil’s size and reactivity. It has
been used in medicine for a long time now as part of the clinical examination in
patients with possible neurological injuries and has applications in psychology.
This study makes use of the pupillometry technique to measure the cognitive load
of speech-in-noise comprehension versus speech-in-quiet. Automatic pupillometry
relies on scene and infrared cameras to record images of both eyes. Later, through
an image processing software it is possible to detect the pupils and measure their
size in every time frame. The algorithm does not depend on the corneal reﬂection,
and works with users who wear contact lenses and eyeglasses The pupil change due
to cognitive load ranges between 0.1 and 0.5 mm depending on the task (Laeng,
Sirois, and Gredeb¨ack 2012).
In the system used in this project, both hardware and software used to perform
pupillometry are from Pupil Labs, this brand has an adds-on infrared eye-tracking
cameras adapted to the HTC Vive Virtual Reality system and also oﬀers an open
source software containing the needed algorithms to detect the pupil size either in
pixels units or mm.
Figure 2.4: .
Vizualization of pupil detection algorithm. 1) Eye image converted to grayscale, user region of
interest (white stroke rectangle), and initial estimation of pupil region (white square and dashed line square.) 2)
Canny edge detection (green lines.) 3) Deﬁne “dark” region as oﬀset from lowest spike in histogram within eye
image. 4) Filter edges to exclude spectral reﬂections (yellow.) and not inside “dark” areas (blue) 5) Remaining
edges extracted into contours using connected components and split into sub-contours based on curvature continuity
criteria (multi colored lines). 6) Candidate pupil ellipses (blue) are formed using ellipse ﬁtting 7) Final ellipse ﬁt
found through an augmented combinatorial search ( ﬁnally ellipse with center in red) - supporting edge pixels drawn
in white. Figure and description of the pupil detenction algorithm from: (Kassner, Patera, and Bulling 2014)
14
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Preliminary summary
Listening eﬀort not only relates to the objective diﬃculty of a given listening task but
it is also related to the amount of cognitive resources an individual needs to allocate
in order to succeed in the task completion. The activation of the cognitively superior
neural pathways during the eﬀortful task realization leads to a pupil response in form
of slight dilation.
The human eye is a complex organ that works as light sensor and receives all the
visual information that surround us. The visible part of the eye is constituted by
the sclera (white part), the iris (colored part) and the pupil, which is an opening in
the centre of the eye where light passes through and hits the photoreceptors at the
back of the eye. Two types of muscles present in the iris contract leading to either
dilation or constriction of the pupil size.
Luminosity variation is the major cause of pupil size change. A lot of light causes
the pupil to constrict whereas scarce light causes a pupil dilation because a dilated
pupil allows more light to get into the retina and a constricted pupil improves depth
of ﬁeld and acuity. By changing the level of light, one can determine the complete
dynamic range of pupil size. This relation has been modeled and summarized into
a uniﬁed formula.
Pupillometry is a technique that measures pupil’s size and reactivity. Automatic
pupillometry relies on scene and infrared cameras to record images of both eyes. An
algorithm for automatic pupil detection is used to obtain a pupil size measure per
unit of time. The pupil change due to cognitive load ranges between 0.1 and 0.5
mm depending on the task.
15
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Methods
In this chapter, we describe the diﬀerent steps and considerations taken to build
the Listening Eﬀort Test system. First, the system deﬁnition stating the context
and motivations behind this development process are going to be exposed. The
main stakeholders will be reviewed and the focus will be put on the ﬁnal users
and their needs in order to list the system requirements and main features.Then
we are going to make an overview of the system components and we are going to
deﬁne the two Listening Eﬀort Test tasks that the investigated subject will have
to perform. Also, the considerations taken regarding the user interface design and
the user experience design are explained and exposed with the sketches used during
the development process.
Afterwards, we are going to make an overview of the
technical implementation of the system. Finally, the usability test carried out with
one potential end-user is presented as well as a brief explanation of the experiment
design to validate the tool.
3.1
System deﬁnition
As it has been exposed in the introduction and literature review sections, there are
some hints on a possible link between central hearing loss (i.e a symptomatic large
listening eﬀort for speech comprehension) and dementia.
This scenario brings light to a need for tools that allow and facilitate research in this
direction. Also, and in case the link is shown to be conﬁrmed and great listening
eﬀort can be used as a prodromal symptom of cognitive decline, medical doctors will
need these tools to evaluate their patients and be able to gather enough information
to take action and prevent or slow down the progress of the disease.
The main purpose of this project is to develop a proof-of-concept system enabling
Listening Eﬀort Testing at the point-of-care. The development process that will
follow seeks to obtain a robust tool designed to be intuitive and easy to use taking
into account the backgrounds of the potential end-users so it can be used by people
with the most technical background but also by people who is not familiarized with
Virtual Reality or Pupillometry. The test should be simple and the automatic results
at the end of it should be enough to have a foundation for further investigations
maybe with other complementary tests.
Here it is a small summary of this product deﬁnition:
16
==PAGE:17==
• What? A Listening Eﬀort Test (LET) system.
• Why? Because there is a crescent need of a system that allows to investigate
on a possible link between listening eﬀort and cognitive decline and if this link
was conﬁrmed, because healthcare practitioners will need a tool to test for
great listening eﬀort in patients at risk of developing dementia.
• How? Measure of cognitive eﬀort by pupillometry while performing the Lis-
tening Eﬀort Test described in the next section. Pupillometry will be done
with embedded infrared eye-tracking cameras in a Virtual Reality set-up that
will be controlled by a software application.
• What is needed to use it? The person that is about to use the system will
possess the necessary equipment: computer, VR set-up and eye-tracking cam-
era and all the necessary software will be installed in the mentioned computer
together with the Listening Eﬀort Test application.
• Who will use it? Researchers and healthcare practitioners, mostly neuropsy-
chologists.
• Value: An easy to use and intuitive research/diagnosis system that guides
the users to perform Listening Eﬀort Testing without having to worry about
the hardware and extra software needed because it already coordinates all
the involved components automatically. This will allow them to test on sub-
jects/patients in a quick and smooth way and will provide them with valuable
information on the cognitive eﬀort the test subject needs to put on speech
understanding. This information can be highly relevant for deciding on best
course of treatment and preventive actions in the case of the healthcare prac-
titioner and gaining scientiﬁc insight and understanding in the case of the
researcher.
3.1.1
Stakeholders analysis
Before to start thinking on how to implement the product idea, it is of great interest
to reﬂect on the main actors that are going to be involved in the process and will
have an inﬂuence on the project outcome. This could be either because they are
going to supervise the product development process, because they are the end-users
for which the product is intended or because they are the potential buyers of the
product. This section exposes these actors and reﬂects on why they are important
and the diﬀerent levels of consideration they have to receive during the process.
Envisaged end-users
Since one of the goals for this project is to develop a proof-of-concept system, the
foremost actors to take into account are the end-users. We want to demonstrate the
applicability and usability of a system which added-value can justify its use and at
the same time its advantages surpass the beneﬁts of using other tools or method-
ologies. In this case, the ﬁnal user will be the researcher who wants to investigate
on early signs for pathological cognitive decline or the clinical neuropsychologist
who wants to perform the test on his patients in order to get valuable information
17
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: The envisaged end-users will be the agents with the most impact and inﬂuence during
the development of this proof-of-concept. Customers will have also impact when it comes to the
design and features of the system (for instance, having a modular system that can be sold by parts
can increase the interest of the potential customers. Although the Medical Device Regulatory
Agencies don’t play a key role in this work, they will potentially have this power in the future and
it is important to keep the quality and safety standards in mind.
for a diagnosis on a possible future dementia. Ideally, the conceptualization and
design of the software application would be iterative, with constant feedback from
the users and putting their needs and goals under the spotlight of the project as it
is suggested to be done in a Goal-Directed Design methodology (Goodwin 2011).
In this project, a researcher in cognitive hearing science has been asked to answer
a questionnaire at the beginning of the process without having seen any prototype
of the application and after using it for the ﬁrst time with the tool already ﬁnished
(see Appendix). The feedback from the usability questionnaire though, would have
been of great relevance as an input for a subsequent iteration of the application User
Interface (UI) and User Experience (UX) design.
They will be key actors during the development process and their needs and inputs
have to be taken into account during the whole process. The section on System
Requirements will focus on this stakeholder as it lists the User Needs from which
the system requirements and features are established.
Customers
In the scenario of the proposed Listening Eﬀort Test system, the person who would
pay for ﬁnal product most probably is not going to be the same as the ﬁnal user.
The researcher or the neuropsychologist may ask for it to their institution, but it is
the manager of the institution who has to see enough value in the system to approve
its purchase and use. Therefore, in the speciﬁc case of the Listening Eﬀort Test
system there are three possible situations:
1. The institution does not have the necessary equipment (VR setup and eye-
tracking cameras) so they will need to buy both hardware and software.
2. The institution already has a VR setup that can be reused but not the eye-
tracking cameras so they will need to buy the software application and the
18
==PAGE:19==
integrated cameras.
3. The institution already has all the equipment so they will only need to buy
the software application.
Given the state-of-the-art on Virtual Reality applications in healthcare and in
particular in neuropsychology, which is very limited, the most likely situation in
the near future is the ﬁrst one: the institution will have to buy the whole setup
including the needed hardware and software application. This is the reason why
its so important to take into account the customers situation and vision to manage
the project and build the product. They need to feel that buying the product is an
investment for which the beneﬁts and outcomes will pay oﬀ.
This is, it should be considered the system as modular and the software application
that integrates its components should be compatible with equipment from diﬀerent
distributors so it can be used even if the institution where is it to be installed already
has VR setup from another brand or they want a cheaper version. Also, it should
be open to add new features if there are new demands so the code must be good
enough to be reused or modiﬁed.
Medical Devices regulatory agencies
The need for a regulatory agency certiﬁcation for this particular system depends
on its intended use. Assuming the hardware components HTC Vive Virtual Reality
setting and Pupil Labs eye-tracking cameras already have been regulated following
the needed safety standards and certiﬁed before their commercialization, it would
not be needed further certiﬁcation for their used applied in research. The hardware
is not being modiﬁed in this project and their behaviour is only slightly modiﬁed
for the purpose of the Listening Eﬀort Test system.
However, if the research stage shows promising results and the intended use of the
system includes to be used as a diagnostic tool or a tool that helps the physician
on taking decisions over a treatment, then it would be important to consider which
standards does the product has to follow to get the certiﬁcations needed for its
commercialization. In this scenario, it would be needed to add regulatory-related
requirements in order to meet the quality and safety standards of the regulatory
agency in charge of controlling the medical devices industry in the region we want
to commercialize it. This uis, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) to commer-
cialize in Europe, U.S Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) to commercialize in
the United States of America and the National Medical Products Administration
(NMPA) to do so in China. Although in this work the intended use of the system
developed is mainly focused on research applications, regulatory agencies are an im-
portant stakeholder that can play a key role in the success of future releases of the
project.
3.1.2
The Listening Eﬀort Test system
Next, is going to be described the building blocks of the system: its components
and the designed tasks for the Listening Eﬀort Test.
As seen in ﬁgure 3.2, the prototype of system will be composed of a hardware
19
==PAGE:20==
part containing an HTC Vive Virtual Reality set-up(a) and PupilLabs embedded
eye-tracking cameras(b). On another hand, there will be a software part with the
Matlab application developed during this work(c) which will be formed by a User-
Interface or front-end layer to interact with the user and a back-end layer. This
Matlab application will be able to run and control the Unity’s C# scripts(d) con-
trolling the Virtual Reality engine graphics and the Pupil Capture software(e) from
PupilLabs which is controlling the eye-tracking cameras. The interactions between
the system components will be further explained in the Technical Implementation
section.
Figure 3.2: The Listening Eﬀort Test system developed in this project integrates both hardware
and software. The hardware part is composed of an (a) HTC Vive VR set-up and (b)embedded
infrared eye-tracking cameras from PupilLabs.
The software part is composed of a (c)Matlab
application, (d)Unity software and (e)PupilLabs application Pupil Capture
In the system used in this project, both hardware and software used to perform
pupillometry are from Pupil Labs, this brand has an adds-on infrared eye-tracking
cameras adapted to the HTC Vive Virtual Reality system and also oﬀers an open
source software containing the needed algorithms to detect the pupil size either in
pixels (2D) units or mm (3D). The cameras have a tracking frequency of 200 Hz and
an image resolution of 192x192 (PupilLabs ads-on eye-tracking cameras, VR/AR
n.d.).
3.1.3
The Listening Eﬀort Test tasks
All the elements presented in the previous section serve in the system to perform
Listening Eﬀort Tests. The Matlab application interface designed in this project,
integrates all these elements and guides the operator through the necessary steps to
complete the two tasks of the test successfully. Although an actual listening eﬀort
test with the purpose of demonstrating a link with dementia could be more complex,
in this proof-of-concept solution its design has been kept simple in order to prioritize
20
==PAGE:21==
its eﬃciency and easiness of use.
Basically, as represented in ﬁgure 3.3, it consists on a set of 20 sentences in English
that the subject hears one by one through the integrated headsets that come together
with the VR googles. After each sentence, the subject has to repeat what he/she has
understood and the operator running the test marks whether the repeated sentence
matches the actual sentence or not. This procedure is done two times: in the ﬁrst
task, the sentences are reproduced in-quiet (i.e without competing noise) and in
the second task the sentences recordings are mixed up with white noise in a ﬁxed
Signal-to-Noise ratio. All the sentences are random and follow the standards used
for a Hearing in Noise Test (HINT) (Nilsson, Soli, and Sullivan 1994).
Figure 3.3: After the sound of each of the 20 sentences in a task, the test-subject will have
to reproduce what he understood from the sentence.
While the task is on-going, the cameras
embedded in the VR goggles will be recording so the pupil size data can be extracted. There will
be two tasks: one containing sentences in-quiet and another one containing sentences mixed up
with noise. The results will be shown automatically after the realization of the tasks.
During each task, the eye-tracking cameras are recording and the pupil diame-
ter is extracted thanks to the built-in software from Pupil Labs (PupilLabs ads-on
eye-tracking cameras, VR/AR n.d.), the camera’s provider. This data is later on
processed and used to compare the pupil dilation between the in-quiet listening task
and the task with competing noise.
In the ﬁgure bellow it is shown the sequence of events taking place during the task
containing sentences with competing noise. This has been done following the advice
exposed in Winn et al. 2018. In order to have some time to ﬁnd the baseline pupil
dilation at the beginning of each sentence, there will be some time where the record-
ing only reproduces the noise so there is no surprise eﬀect and the subject is able to
adapt and normalize the noise so the pupil reaction when the sentence with noise
is played will answer only to listening eﬀort. Also, there should be some retention
time after the end of the stimulus so the test-subject is forced to make use of their
working memory to repeat the sentence. The test-participant will be notiﬁed on the
possibility to repeat the sentence by a auditory stimulus (’beep’).
Despite its simplicity, this test already provides valuable information on the question
of interest. A great part of project’s workload then is on the implementation and
21
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Events of a basic pupillometry experiment measuring listening eﬀort and the ones used
during the two tasks of our system. Image extracted from Winn et al. 2018.
design of a platform that coordinates all the elements needed to perform the test
and facilitates the user work so they can focus on the test-subject and test’s results
interpretation.
3.2
System requirements
In order to develop useful and usable systems we have to understand user needs
and contexts, represent them in user requirements and maintain a focus on user
requirements throughout the development. (Coble and Kahn 1997)
With this user-centered design philosophy in mind, this section is going to start
with a review of the context and their main users needs in order to determine which
are the system requirements.
3.2.1
Context of use and User Needs
In order to have a good foundation to start designing the application, it is important
to analyse the context in which this tool is going to be used.
Researcher context and needs
A PhD student is working on ﬁguring out whether there is a relation between in-
creased listening eﬀort and cognitive impairment or dementia in subjects with no
hearing loss shown in the traditional tests. For this reason, she has decided to start
a set of listening eﬀort tests to a number of subjects. Most of them are middle-aged
people without clear signs of cognitive decline although she also wants to test on sub-
jects with diagnosed dementia.
She is in her Lab where she has prepared the VR headset with embedded infrared
eye-tracking cameras together with the 3D position trackers of the VR setup. When
the subject has arrived, a 46 year old man, she receives him and explains a little bit
what the experiment is about. After helping him to put the VR googles on and adjust
the headsets, she goes to her desktop where she is going to run the guided Listening
Eﬀort Test application designed in this project.
22
==PAGE:23==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.5: 3.5a) Lab with all the necessary hardware prepared for the test. 3.5b) HTC Vive
Virtual Reality goggles. 3.7c) VR googles and second 3D position tracker.
23
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Test-subject wearing the Virtual Reality headsets and one of the 3D position trackers.
Part of the following needs have been extracted from the feedback received in
the Researcher’s preliminary questionnaire (see Appendix) about some presupposed
needs.
• She wants to be able to annotate the name, age and sex of the participant.
• She wants to be able to calibrate the VR luminosity so she ﬁnds a brightness
level in which the pupil is dilated halfway between its maximum and minimum
size because she knows that light is one of the main causes that makes a pupil
to dilate and she wants to control this factor.
• She wants to be able to calibrate the headsets volume level.
• She wants to be able to train the test-subject with a couple of sentences with
and without noise so he doesn’t get surprised and knows exactly what he needs
to do when the real test starts.
• She wants to run the test and be able to annotate when the test-subject is
repeating the reproduced sentences correctly or not.
• She wants to visualize and save the results obtained from pupillometry in-
cluding a statistic comparison of the pupil dilation with and without noise
tasks.
The neuropsychologist
A neuropsychologist is about to receive in his oﬃce a patient who claims having
diﬃculties to remember small things from time to time. He says that his mother
had Alzheimer and is afraid of being aﬀected by the same disease in the future. He
comes in and the physician makes him a small interview to get to know him better.
After the protocolary cognitive tests, he informs the patient that he is going to test
his listening eﬀort during a speech-in-noise task. He leads the patient to the room
corner where he has the VR set up installed and after explaining a little bit about the
test he helps him to put the VR headset on and adjust it so he can see clear what is
24
==PAGE:25==
displayed on the screen. Afterwards, he goes back to his desktop to run the software
application designed in this project.
The following needs have been presupposed because of the impossibility of having
an interview with an actual clinical neuropsychologist.
• He wants to be able to annotate the name, age, gender and some observations
made during the previous interview.
• He wants to be able to follow all the necessary steps to perform the test in a
very simple way.
• He wants to obtain clear results and be able to save them.
• He wants that the patient feels as comfortable as possible.
As showed in the user needs points, whereas the researcher will have more tech-
nical demands, the neuropsychologist would focus more on the system usability and
results since he isn’t so aware of the actual workﬂow and its technical demands such
as the reason why calibration is needed. The challenge is to ﬁnd a design that suits
both parties.
3.2.2
Requirements deﬁnition
According to IEEE standard 729 (IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering
Terminology n.d.), a requirement is deﬁned as:
• A condition or capability needed by a user to solve a problem or achieve an
objective.
• A condition or capability that must be met or possessed by a system or sys-
tem component to satisfy a contract, standard, speciﬁcation or other formally
imposed documents
• A documented representation of a condition or capability as in 1 and 2.
Also, they can be classiﬁed in functional, non-functional and domain speciﬁc
requirements. In here, all of the needed requirements are going to be listed although
not all of them implemented in the course of this project.
Functional requirements
• The system shall be able to get the name, age, gender and observations of the
subject.
• The system shall be able to calibrate the Virtual Reality headset luminosity.
• The system shall be able to adjust the volume of the headsets.
• The system should be able to calibrate the volume.
• The system shall be able to train the subject before starting the actual test.
25
==PAGE:26==
• The system shall be able to record the subject’s pupil size while performing
the task.
• They system shall be able to play a sentence and allow the operator to mark
it as correctly or incorrectly repeated by the subject.
• The system shall be able to play a sentence mixed with white noise at a
determined Signal-to-Noise-Ratio.
• The system shall be able to run a whole set of 20 sentences without noise
recording the eyes to get pupillometry data.
• The system shall be able to run a whole set of 20 sentences with noise while
recording the eyes to get pupillometry data.
• The system shall be able to process the data from the eye-tracking cameras.
• The system shall be able to present the results visually by means of plots.
• The system shall be able to extract some basic statistical characteristics from
the resulting curves.
• The system shall be able to extract statistical comparison between the tasks
of sentences repetition without and with noise.
• The system shall be able to show the results obtained and save them in an
external document.
Non-functional requirements
• The system shall be self-explanatory in its use.
• The system shall be reusable with other hardware like another VR brand or
eye-tracking camera.
• The system shall be scalable so the program can be extended to more tasks
to determine listening eﬀort.
• The system shall contain tasks that doesn’t take too long to perform.
• The system shall be comfortable for the test subject.
• The system shall be documented with a user manual.
3.3
User experience design (UX)
Until here, we have got an overview of what would be the user context and needs
and we have derived from it the requirements that the system should accomplish to
meet those needs.
In a system willing to integrate many components from both hardware and soft-
ware, it is important to analyze the steps and situations that the user will have to
go through during the test in order to be able to design a system that makes the test
26
==PAGE:27==
run as smooth as possible. Now we are going to start thinking on which system/user
and end-user/test-subject interactions would take place during the test. We refer
to the user as the person in charge of carrying the experiment, either a researcher
or a neuropsychologist, and the test-subject could be a selected participant for an
experiment or a patient. However, we use the terms user and test-subject to gener-
alize since the interactions will be very similar and the design of the user experience
is the same for both.
First, we are going to consider the user interaction with the test-subject.
3.3.1
User/test-subject interaction
In the three drawings shown in the ﬁgure 3.7b, it has been illustrated three moments
in which the user and test-subject are interacting. The ﬁrst one (a) is right at the
beginning of the experiment when there is the ﬁrst encounter and the user gives a
small explanation of the experiment. After that, most probably the user would make
a small interview to the test-subject in order to register his personal information
and any possible remark. It could be useful to write down whether the test-subject
has any particular condition that could inﬂuence the results from the experiment.
It is assumed that, at this moment, the system would be up and running with all
the devices turned on and the needed software would have been executed.
In the second drawing (b), it can be seen that the user is helping the test-subject to
put on the Virtual Reality setting. For this, it is important that the user knows well
how to adjust the headsets so the test-subject is comfortable. Also, the user must
know that the Virtual Reality headsets have several degrees of freedom but that the
one related to the distance between the eyes and the screen must not be modiﬁed
because the cameras would not catch the eyes properly. Also, the user should be
able to visualize what is on the VR screen. This is, the Unity interface controlling
the VR display should be opened in the user’s laptop.
Finally, in the third drawing (c), the system is already on-going through luminosity
calibration or the test tasks have already been started. In this situation, the user
will need to be close enough to the test-subject in order to be able to talk: he will
need to indicate the start and end of the calibration and tasks and also the user
needs to hear clearly when the test-subject repeats sentences. Another option could
be a lab with a system of communication. Also, in this situations the user will
be interested on checking whether the Virtual Reality display is the correct (Unity
should be visible) and check that the cameras are recording during the calibration
and tasks (Pupil Capture should be visible).
27
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.7: Drawings extracted from a story board representing the diﬀerent moments of interaction
between the user and the test-subject.
Situation
Lessons learned / Needs
Initial interview
- Need to have the hardware and software up and
running.
- The user will want to write down the answers and
obsevations extracted from the interview.
VR headsets adjustment
- The user knows all the possible ways to adjust the
VR headsets
- The user knows that the distance between eyes
and screen must be kept constant or adjusting it looking
at the cameras display.
- Need to have Unity and Pupil Capture software
running and visible.
Calibration / Tasks
- The user and the test-subject must be able to
communicate during the calibration and task realization.
- Need to have Unity and Pupil Capture software
running and visible.
Table 3.1: Summary of the main learnings extracted from the analysis of interactions between the
user and the test-subject during the experiment.
28
==PAGE:29==
3.3.2
User/System interactions
Another type of interaction that will occur during the experiments is the interaction
between the user and the system. The former referring mainly to the integrative
software application developed in this work. The application must contain all the
elements necessary to make the communication with the user smooth and easy.
Like in a conversation, the user asks to perform an action and the system should
answer to this petition by either performing the action or by communicating why
it is not possible and providing some other actions to perform. Also, colours and
timing of the actions taking place in the user interface can be a way to communicate
important functionalities. In this section we will go through some examples in which
the interactions between user and system will be relevant for the Listening Eﬀort
Test success.
1. The ﬁrst example refers to the action of closing the application. As it can be
an unintended action, it is very important to make sure that this is what the
user wants to do and if so, then closing the application as shown in ﬁgure 3.8
Figure 3.8: The action of closing the application, as it is very compromising, should be controlled.
2. Another example of communication between the user and the system is in the
tasks windows. We are going to assume that the interface where the Listening
Tasks are going to be performed has buttons to annotate whether the sentences
are repeated correctly or not. The user should not click the buttons at least
until the test-user can repeat the sentence (i.e once the sound is ﬁnished and
there has been at least two seconds of silence or retention time). In order to
avoid that, it is useful to disable the buttons so they are still visible but the
user cannot click them (ﬁgure 3.9a). This way, we also avoid that the user
clicks them unintentionally and there is a mistake in the results.
Following the same line of action, once the task has started is very important
that the user does not make use of the buttons to go to the next screen or
back. Therefore, they will be disabled while the task is ongoing as shown in
ﬁgure 3.9b
3. Another point in which the system and user will interact is when the user has
to insert some compulsory data. For instance, to identify himself or herself in
the ﬁrst screen, it seems logical that the main identiﬁer, which for simplicity
29
==PAGE:30==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9
would be the name, was compulsory. And so, if it is left blank the system
should prevent to go further on the screens ﬂow and throw a warning message.
4. Also, when there is a waiting time, for example due to the data processing
during the calibration, it is important to provide some information about what
is going on in the software back-end to the user. Otherwise, the user could
think something wrong happened. Also, this can be used to allow to cancel
the process on the run.
3.3.3
User Interface design (UI)
Up to this point, we have gone through a lot of steps to give shape to the future
application and write down all the functionalities it needs to have. Also, in the
previous section we have been able to build a temporal structure of the system use
throughout a experiment and this will clearly be used as a map for the implementa-
tion of the system’s software application. However, a last step is needed and this one
takes care of the more aesthetic and visible part of the system: the user interface.
Although it is preferable to develop a beautiful application than a not so pretty
one, in an application like the one treated here, it is of greater interest that the user
interface is very functional than very beautiful. Anyhow, the design shall facilitate
the interaction with the system and make things easier. There is a lot of non verbal
communication that can be done through a good design and everything counts to
achieve that: the buttons placement, the size of them, the colors used, etc.
There are diﬀerent sources of information regarding on the decisions that need to be
made to design the interface of a software application. As seen in this work’s Ap-
pendix, in the preliminary questionnaire done to the researcher, it was asked which
30
==PAGE:31==
applications (either computer or mobile phone) were the ones she used the most.
Her answer was ’Facebook’, ’Microsoft Outlook’ and ’Whatsapp’. This question was
done because of the psychological principle of ”Mental Models”(Experience 2018).
This principle states that people normally have preconceived expectations of how
an experience will be. They already have been using a lot of software applications
before so they have a mental model of how an interaction should be. To proof that,
think about how awkward is the interaction with an ’Apple’ device for someone who
has never used it before because he/she is only familiar with Microsoft and Android.
Although the purpose of Facebook and Microsoft Outlook applications is too dif-
ferent to ours to really apply to this principle and be able to get direct inspiration
from them, we can still retrieve useful information. For instance, if she uses a lot
Facebook and Outlook, then she is very familiarized with the concept of having a
proﬁle where you can insert and modify your data.
Figure 3.10: Examples of healthcare related software applications.
Following the same principle, a little bit of research on medical/health related
software applications has been done in order to get to know more of what it is
expected from a health related application (3.10). Also, from talking with other
researchers that were performing experiments in the Acoustics Labs in DTU at
the same time when this application was developed, we could extract that what a
researcher wants is eﬀectivity and simplicity. And that they care a lot about the
test-subject level of comfort during the tasks.
Figure 3.11: Answer to a question related to the UI design extracted from a questionnaire done to
a potential end-user.
While designing the user interface, other psychology principles have been taken
into account. For instance, the ”Psychology of colours” principle has been used
31
==PAGE:32==
to decide on which shades of color would be used for the background and buttons
in order to align with what is usual in healthcare related applications. Also, the
colors used have been decided using information from the researcher’s questionnaire
as it is shown in ﬁgure 3.11. In this application, while the background and buttons
have greenish/blueish shades, the logo of the product is done in purple as it is the
element that relates directly with psychology (ﬁgure 3.12). Visual communication
through colours has been also used to inform on task completion. For instance, in
the preparation screen previous to the beginning of the task there are a bunch of
buttons each of them representing a task that should be done before the beginning
of the test main tasks. In order to communicate step completion, the button changes
color to a darker shade of green once it has been used.
Figure 3.12: Logo for the Listening Eﬀort Application. Purple as it is the colour that inspires the
concept of ”Psyschology” to a potential end-user. The headsets represent the listening eﬀort part
of the test and the circuit represents the neural connections that are activated during an eﬀortful
task that evokes cognitive eﬀort and in consequence, pupil dilation.
Another principle used is the Law of proximity from ”Gestalt Principles of Visual
Perception” has been applied by using panels to group the related items in the
results screen. The Dual-Coding theory which states that important messages can
be reinforced by combining a visual message and a written description, has also been
used: while the task is on-going, the test-subject can only repeat the sentences after
they hear a ”beep” sound, it was considered that the user would need to know when
this happens so it is communicated with a ”lamp” that changes from red to green
when the subject can answer. At the same time, there is a tag informing that this
lamp is used to know when the subject can repeat the sentence (ﬁgure 3.13).
Figure 3.13: Example of application of the Dual-Coding theory to the UI design.
The design of the User Interface was mainly based on the lessons learnt from the
previous interactions analysis for the elements needed and on the diﬀerent sources
of information at our disposal for the more aesthetic and usability related aspects:
the end-user preliminary questionnaire, examples of other healthcare applications
and the psychology principles from Experience 2018. Using these, the ﬁrst sketches
on how the User Interface was going to look like were done (ﬁgure 3.14).
32
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.14: a) Initial screen including the idea of a logo. b) Preparation screen: already containing
the Insert subject data, trainings, calibration and check connections subscreens. c) and d) Tasks
screens e) Results screen
33
==PAGE:34==
3.4
Technical implementation
Besides the interaction and interfaces design of the Matlab application, one of the
challenges of this system implementation is the coordination and integration of its
diﬀerent components. The Matlab application back-end has established connections
with the Virtual Reality set-up and eye-tracking cameras that enables the display
of the desired scenes in the Virtual Reality screen or to start and stop recording
whenever it is needed. In this section, we are going to review the technology that
makes it possible. Also, we are going to point out the importance of the luminosity
calibration and how it has been implemented. The mix up of sound and white noise
with a ﬁxed Signal-To-Noise ratio is going to be explained ant the data processing
along with the result obtention are going to be brieﬂy exposed.
3.4.1
System connections
The ﬁrst thing needed to start programming was to be able to establish the con-
nections between software and hardware so they can be controlled from the Matlab
application. Thanks to the previous work of Kacper Kosikowski in his Master the-
sis, some of the necessary scripts for starting and stopping the eye-tracking camera’s
recording and to initiate a scene on the Virtual Reality headset screen were already
available to use.
Figure 3.15: Simpliﬁed scheme of the relations between the system components. From the Matlab
LET application, there is a two-directional connection with Unity and PupilLabs ’PupilCapture’
software respectively. From this intermediate software, the system communicates to the hardware
in a unidirectional manner.
Therefore, in order to control the Virtual Reality display headsets, the system
connects to Unity by subscribing to it using its port and network. Then, it is pos-
sible to send and receive messages from Unity that are recognized thanks to its C#
34
==PAGE:35==
scripts. Basically, these messages are used to run scenes that have been previously
deﬁned in Unity like the luminosity calibration scene that will be explained later on
in this section.
On another hand, the application controls the cameras by ﬁrst running the Pupil Capture
software automatically from Matlab using the system() command line. Then again
it subscribes to the software via port and network and establishes a connection
through which messages can be sent and received. In this case the messages are
used to start and stop recording and to write annotations during the recordings so
they can be used as timestamps to identify determined events like the start of a
sound or the end of repetition in the recording extracted data.
3.4.2
Luminosity Calibration
As explained in the literature review, one of the determining factors that inﬂuence
the pupil size is the level of light or luminosity. It has been demonstrated that as
an involuntary reﬂex, the muscles in the eye constrict or relax so the pupil is at
its maximum dilation when in complete darkness and then it reduces its size when
there is light. In order to control this factor and maximize the information we can
retrieve from pupillometry, we are interested on using a level of luminosity that
corresponds to the pupil intermediate level of dilation between its maximum and its
minimum, (i.e its dynamic range). This way, with a ﬁxed luminosity, it has more
margin to increase or decrease size due to cognitive factors. As already mentioned,
this is one of the great advantages of using Virtual Reality headsets to perform this
task: they allow us to control dilation due to luminosity wherever the test is going
to be performed.
To implement the calibration, it has been programmed a luminosity sweep from
complete darkness (luminosity ¯0 ) to the maximum level of brightness (luminosity
¯1). The transition between levels was set to be linear so there aren’t abrupt changes
that can interfere in the normal pupil size changes due to luminosity. This function
in the C# scripts of the luminosity scene in Unity has sweep duration, initial and
ﬁnal levels of brightness, number of levels and step change duration as input param-
eters. In order to choose these parameters it has been needed to do a compromise.
On one hand, the more levels of brightness during the sweep, the more data points
of pupil size we would collect later so the more accurate the calibration would be.
However, having more steps also meant the calibration duration was going to take
longer so it could result in a little bit of discomfort for the test-subject. Therefore,
after some tests and results observation we found out that the best option was to
have 12 steps and 60 seconds of sweep duration while the duration of change would
be of 2 seconds as represented in the ﬁgure 3.16.
While the luminosity sweep is running and the level of brightness in the VR
headset is changing, the subject is asked to stare at a green cross located in a plane
right in from of him (ﬁgure 3.17). This way, the recorded images are of better quality
and contain more information.
As it is going to be explained later on, the data from the recordings is saved
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.16: Plot of the luminosity sweep used to calibrate the VR headset luminosity. It is done
in 12 steps with a change duration of 2 seconds and a total duration of 60 seconds
Figure 3.17: Luminosity Scene from Unity right before starting the sweep.
in a particular location of the computer. Then this data is collected into .csv ﬁles
containing the raw measurements of the pupil dilation per eye provided by the
PupilLabs software.
Automatically, the application ﬁnds the .csv ﬁles from the
last recording and it imports the data into the Matlab application. This data is
deblinked, smoothed and normalized as it is shown relative to a baseline value of
dilation. This value is taken from the beginning of the calibration when the headsets
screen is completely black.
3.4.3
Mixing sound and noise
The Listening Eﬀort Test second task is equal to the ﬁrst task where the test-subject
has to repeat sentences as they understand them but with the diﬀerence that in this
second task the sentences are mixed with white noise. The audio ﬁles used in the
former task are the results of the summation of the audio signal and white noise
at a ﬁxed Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). In this version of the application the user
can’t change the SNR from the interface because we want to use exactly the same
one for all the participants in order to compare the results. The SNR has been ﬁxed
at 8dB. However, the Matlab function that has been programmed here to mix the
signals has as input parameter the SNR so it wouldn’t be too complicated to change
it programmatically or add the option to modify it in the user interface in a future
version of the system.
36
==PAGE:37==
Here it is explained how the signals were scaled in order to obtain the desired SNR.
To begin with, we know that the SNR is deﬁned as:
SNR = P signal
dB
−P noise
dB
(3.1)
And that the power in dB of the noise signal is:
Pnoise = 1
T
T
X
t=1
noise2(t)
(3.2)
P noise
dB
= 10logPnoise
(3.3)
So, once computed the P noise
dB
we can ﬁnd the value of the desired P signal
dB
by substi-
tuting in the equation 3.1. Then we can derive the power of the signal by inverting
the logarithm:
P signal′ = 10
P signal′
db
10
(3.4)
And so we know that:
P signal′ = 1
T
T
X
t=1
(x∆signal)2(t)
(3.5)
Where x is the scaling factor of the audio signal to obtain the desired SNR. And
ﬁnally:
x =
s
TP signal′
PT
t=1 signal2(t)
(3.6)
Therefore, by multiplying this factor to the audio signal and then adding both sig-
nals, we would obtain the desired noisy signal at 8dB SNR.
Also, the mixed audio signal contains two seconds of only white noise at the begin-
ning of the sound as pre-stimulus time to establish the baseline dilation as indicated
in the ﬁgure 3.4. The two seconds duration has been chosen doing a compromise
between the necessity of this prestimulus time and the user interest of a short and
comfortable test for the subjects. Also, this time length has been used successfully
in previous studies (Kan and Winn 2016).
Finally, the function contemplates the possibility of clipping when adding the two
signals and so it checks that the resulting signal does not contain values higher than
1 and throws a warning if so. In order to avoid this eﬀect, the maximum SNR al-
lowed is 11dB. Since we are interested on having a low SNR, this limitation should
not bring further issues.
3.4.4
Implementing the test tasks
The two main tasks were programmed in order to obtain a pupillometry recording
of the eyes that can be further analysed by the Matlab application. To do so, it was
required to have a unique recording of the 20 sentences of each task with annotations
at the moment of the sound start and at the moment of button pressed (i.e when the
user gives feedback on whether the repetition was correct or not). Also, the list of
sentences had to be chosen randomly and it had also to contemplate the possibility
of repeating a list in the following task and avoid it. With these directives, the
pseudocode used to implement the tasks in the application has been the following:
37
==PAGE:38==
Algorithm 1 Listening Eﬀort Test tasks
1: sentenceslist ←random(list)
2: sendmessage(startrecording, pupil)
3: for 1 : numberOfSentencesInList do
4:
Wait2secondsforrecover
5:
sendMessage(startSound, pupil)
6:
reproduceSound
7:
waitForSoundToFinish
8:
waitForWRONG/RIGHTButtonPressed
9:
sendMessage(buttonPressed, pupil)
10: end for
11: sendMessage(stopRecording, pupil)
Figure 3.18: First tasks pseudocode on a board.
3.4.5
Analyzing the Pupillometry data
Once the recordings from the embedded infrared cameras have been saved automat-
ically, some steps of data processing need to be done before obtaining data that can
be visualized and interpreted. In this section, we will comment on these steps. The
software application developed in this project integrates and makes use of preexist-
ing pupillometry data processing software provided by Oticon Medical. However,
it has been needed to be adapted to the type of test we are performing and the
characteristics of the data obtained.
Extracting pupil data from the recordings
The ﬁrst step on the data processing is to obtain numerical data from the recordings.
Pupil Capture software automatically saves a folder containing the recording and
associated ﬁles. However, in order to obtain a treatable ’.csv’ ﬁle containing the
’timestamps’ and associated ’pupil diameters’ per eye, it is needed to literally open
this folder or literally ’Drop’ the folder into a second Pupil Labs commercialized
open source software called ’Pupil Player’. The aim of the project was to obtain
the results automatically and to minimize the user intervention in the background
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.19: Screenshot of an eye with the automatically detected pupil encircled. The pupil is
detected by the pupil detection algorithm explained in the section 2.1.3. The screenshot was taking
while the recording of a task was on-going.
process, so we had to ﬁnd a way to avoid that the operator had to do this step
manually after each test.
At our disposal there was a code written in Python that was able to automatically
take the folders containing all the necessary ﬁles and process them to generate
two .csv ﬁles: one containing the pupil diameters, timestamp, eye id and level of
conﬁdence on the result; the other one containing the annotations and respective
timestamps that have been sent from the Matlab application during the recordings.
Later on, these annotations will be used to segment the sentences on the tasks
recordings. However, running this code manually was needing also the operator
intervention and translating the whole code to Matlab language would had been very
costly and time consuming. We found out that it was simpler and more eﬃcient
to run the program by directly accessing the command line from Matlab, as it
has been done to initially execute Pupil Capture software. This method has several
advantages, for instance, it avoids to create and deal with bugs when there is already
a tool that has been proved to work correctly.
Data processing
Once the .csv ﬁles have been obtained, it is possible to import the raw data to
Matlab. Since the ﬁles are named following a speciﬁc pattern and using the date and
number of session, this is done automatically by ﬁnding the corresponding ﬁles in the
speciﬁed folder. There are diﬀerent ways of processing the data using the existing
Matlab algorithms for pupillometry data analysis and it can be easily modiﬁed by
choosing its parameters (ﬁgure 3.21). First of all, the recording of the whole task
duration is segmented in sentences plus repetition duration by using the annotations
done and their timestamps. For the data of this project and after some tests using
diﬀerent methods, the parameters shown in ﬁgure 3.21 have been chosen.
This
means that the data is deblinked by using the Median Absolute Deviation Method
to detect the blinks as explained in Kret and Sjak-Shie 2019 and 10−3 seconds are
deleted around the detected blinks. Whenever the missing data is more than 50%
of the total, the sentence is omitted. After deblinked, the data is reconstructed by
using spline interpolation or linear interpolation if spline is not possible to perform.
Then, the data is low pass ﬁltered with an averaging ﬁlter of duration 0.05 seconds,
39
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.20: Steps followed for data processing. Source: Winn et al. 2018.
as speciﬁed in the ’spanMA’ parameter. This data processing steps are described in
ﬁgure 3.20. Finally, the data is normalized in relation to the mean pupil diameter
of the baseline time with a divisive method. Both the time span of the baseline and
the method can be chosen parametrically.
Figure 3.21: Parameters used for pupillometry data processing.
Obtaining results
The steps described in the previous section have been done twice in the application:
ﬁrst for the calibration data and then for the data coming from the two test tasks.
In the case of the calibration, we were only interested on the normalized time series
data.
From this data it is retrieved a number of vectors corresponding in time
with the luminosity steps used during the luminosity sweep. We compute the mean
value of each of this vectors and use a Matlab built in function to ﬁt a third order
polynomial curve to it. Finally, we ﬁnd the maximum and minimum values of this
curve and look for the average point of this two. From this value of dilation we
extrapolate the value of luminosity that is going to be used during the test tasks.
40
==PAGE:41==
On another hand, for the listening eﬀort tasks data, we are interested on having
further information. From it we obtain the mean curves and the Peak Pupil Dilation
(PPD) and the time this Peak Pupil Dilation occurs with their respective standard
deviations. The time range in which the PPD is searched is also deﬁned in the input
parameters and it ranges between the end of the retention time (2 seconds) and the
end of the sentence repetition.
3.5
System validation
In order to check that the system works and it is usable, once the main software
application has been implemented, it is put at use in two ways: on one hand, a
simulacrum of experiment was run in which the participants were tested using the
Listening Eﬀort Test system. On the other hand, the system was used and evaluated
by a potential end-user.
3.5.1
Experiment Simulacrum design
There are many considerations to take into account for the participant inclusion
to a listening eﬀort test with pupillometry research experiment (Winn et al. 2018).
Factors like hearing status, pharmacological eﬀects or caﬀeine, eye diseases or any-
thing that aﬀects visual ﬁxation among others can intercept on the correct pupil
diameter measurement which can lead to misleading results. Also, it has been seen
that older participants have a generally weaker response to light. However, this can
be controlled by calibrating the luminosity level for every test-subject as described
in previous sections.
The main goal of the experiment carried during this project was to proof the va-
lidity of the system and demonstrate that it is eﬀective and could be used in large
Listening Eﬀort experiments. The system was tested upon ﬁve participants, with
ages compressed between 24 and 36 years old. They all stated to not be under
pharmacological treatment, and not having any hearing problem. Although some of
them were wearing glasses, they did not need them for these tasks were they only
had to look straight at one static cross.
3.5.2
Usability Questionnaire
In the second part of the system validation, a potential end-user made use of the
Listening Eﬀort Test system developed in this work to test one of the participants
of the experiment. She is a PhD student who is going to investigate on the possible
link between listening eﬀort and dementia and how this could change the clinical
paradigm and protocols if conﬁrmed. Therefore, she could be very much interested
on using a tool like the one developed in this work.
Before starting the test, she is given only basic instructions on how to use the
system. For instance, that she needs to run an initial scene in Unity in order to
allow our application to establish a connection with it. She also is encouraged to
use the Unity display to see what is happening in the Virtual Reality headsets screen
and the infrared cameras display to check that everything works as expected and
41
==PAGE:42==
the camera properly catches the eyes and automatically detects the pupils. Besides
this, once the application is running with the initial screen, she has been completely
left alone and she has had to use the application out of her intuition.
The usability of the test has been assessed by asking the researcher to complete
the standardized Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) as it was
deﬁned in Lewis 1992. Additionally to the items proposed in the PSSUQ, four open
questions have been included. These questions give the user the freedom of giving
personal opinions on the system strengths and weaknesses and the user’s overall
opinion.
42
==PAGE:43==
3.6
Preliminary Summary
In this project a Listening Eﬀort Test system is going to be developed. The reason
for that is that there is a crescent need of a system allowing to investigate on an
hypothesized link between listening eﬀort and cognitive functioning such as in Mild
Cognitive Decline. In order to do so, the pupil response on a speech-in-noise task
is going to be evaluated using a technique called ’Pupillometry’. This is going to
be carried by a system that integrates both hardware (Virtual Reality set up with
embedded infrared eye-tracking cameras) and software (PupilCapture and Unity)
into a software application developed in Matlab that controls all these elements and
guides the operator through the needed steps to perform the Listening Eﬀort Test.
The stakeholders that have the greatest inﬂuence on this system design and imple-
mentation are the envisaged end-users: researchers and clinical neuropsychologists.
Also, customers have to be taken into account since they would be the ones taking
the necessary decisions to purchase the system. Finally, having in mind Medical De-
vices Regulatory Agencies is a healthy approach to developing this proof-of-concept
because regulatory requirements would be needed in future system versions.
The Listening Eﬀort Test consist on the realization of two main tasks: in each of
these tasks, the test-subject have the VR headsets on and is asked to stare at a ﬁxed
cross. Then, a set of 20 sentences are reproduced and the test-subject is asked to
repeat them after the end of each of them. The diﬀerence between the two tasks
resides in the fact that in the second task the sound has been mixed up with white
noise whereas in the ﬁrst task the sound is reproduced in quiet.
In order to generate a list of system requirements, we have envisioned the potential
end-users context and intended use of the LET system so we have better understood
their needs. Also, it was possible to get a researcher to answer a preliminary ques-
tionnaire on which features of the supposed system she would be more interested
in. In order to design the User Experience (UX), we went through the interactions
between the User and the Test-Subject and also the interactions between the User
and the System that would take place during the test execution. Finally, the User
Interface (UI) design was based on some of the answers from the preliminary re-
searcher’s questionnaire, inspiration from healthcare related existent applications
and some basic Psychological concepts normally used in UI design.
Details on the technical implementation of the system connections, luminosity cali-
bration, the mixing of sound and white noise, the implementation of the test tasks
and the analysis of the Pupillometry data have been exposed in this chapter.
The developed LET system has been tested in two ways. First, a small sample
experiment with ﬁve participants has been carried out in order to proof that this
system can be used to obtain pupillometry data and information from a listening
eﬀort test. Second, the system has been used and evaluated by a potential end-
user. This evaluation has been done by asking her to answer a Post-Study System
Usability Questionnaire and four open questions.
43
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4
Results
This chapter is going to go through the resulting system and in concrete we will
show the software application and its resulting User Interface. From the small cohort
experiment, the data obtained will be shown. Finally, the results of the end-user
questionnaire on usability are also going to be shown.
4.1
Listening Eﬀort Test Application
The resulting application is a completely functional prototype of software applica-
tion for running listening eﬀort tests using Pupillometry on a Virtual Reality set up.
It integrates all the hardware and software elements of the system (Virtual Reality
set-up and embedded cameras) in order to:
1. Automatically run the needed parallel software.
2. Automatically establish connections to facilitate bidirectional communication
with Unity (for the Virtual Reality set-up control) and PupilCapture (for the
cameras control).
3. Check the connections so the user can detect which one is the cause of a
possible Error.
4. Perform luminosity calibration of the VR headsets in order to ﬁnd the lumi-
nosity level that corresponds to the middle point of the pupil dilation dynamic
range.
5. Train the test-subject on the tasks he will have to perform during the test.
6. Automatically start and stop recording the eyes with the infrared eye tracking
cameras at the beginning and end of each task.
7. Perform the sequence of actions needed for each Listening Eﬀort Test task,
including sending messages to have the annotations needed to process the
data.
8. Automatically process the time series data from the cameras recordings and
show the results.
44
==PAGE:45==
9. Generate a pdf report containing all the data from the operator and test-
subject and also all the plots and statistical results from the calibration and
the experiment tasks.
Now, the list of requirements generated during the application development pro-
cess as described in section 3.2 are going to be retaken in order to check wether these
requirements have been accomplished and have resulted in application features or
not.
Figure 4.1: Table of functional requirements and stating wether they have been accomplished or
not in the version of the Listening Eﬀort Test system developed in this work.
The non-functional requirements will be considered in the Conclusions chapter,
once the Experiment and Usability results have been exposed.
45
==PAGE:46==
In the ﬁgure 4.2 it can be seen the ﬂow of the main application screens. It is
formed by ﬁve main screens: the initial screen, the preparation screen, the task in-
quiet screen, the task with-noise screen and the results screen. The ﬂow is intended
to be mainly unidirectional but there is the possibility on moving to the previous
screen in all but the second task (with-noise) screen. The interactions and screen
ﬂow is based on the lessons learnt from the analysis of the interactions between
User/Test-Subject and User/System. As discussed in the UI design section, the
colours used are shades of blue and green in a way which is consistent with the
information previously gathered about what is expected on a healthcare application
and what we want to transmit to the user. This application relies on changes of
colour in the buttons to indicate whether a task has been done or to indicate the
current position in the test workﬂow.
46
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.2: Screens ﬂow for the Listening Eﬀort Test Application developed with Matlab.
47
==PAGE:48==
4.1.1
Initial screen
When the application is run, it automatically executes PupilCapture (i.e the software
controlling the eye tracking cameras) and establishes connection with this software
and Unity.
This way, the operator is able to control what is happening in the
diﬀerent elements of the system and check that everything works properly (ﬁgure
4.5). The application User Interface launches with an initial screen that presents
the logo and name of the application and asks to insert ’Name’ and ’Profession’
of the user. The former is selected through a drop down menu with the options:
’Researcher’, ’Physician’ and ’Other’. Whenever the user ’Name’ box is left empty,
he won’t be able to Log In and a Warning window will be thrown.
Figure 4.3: Screenshot of the user’s computer screen after the Listening Eﬀort Application has
been run. It executes PupilCapture and allows the user to visualize in real time the image from
the infrared eye-tracking cameras. It also connects with Unity and launches a gray plane display.
4.1.2
Preparation screen
This scenario represents the previous step to the beginning of the experiment which
comprises two listening eﬀort tasks with pupillometry. It is organized in 6 actions
that are not compulsory though they are recommended. Originally, the buttons are
light blue and they turn to a darker shade of green-blue when the step has been
completed so the user gets visual information on which are the remaining steps
(ﬁgure 4.4).
Check connections
First, it is possible to check whether the connections are correctly established by
clicking to the button ’Check Connections’. It will inform on whether the connection
with the PupilCapture software or the Unity software has been lost so the user can
ﬁx it.
48
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.4: Preparation Screen with two, three and four out of six steps done. The buttons change
color when its task has been completed
Insert Subject Data
Then there is the ’Insert Subject Data’ button which leads to a small sub-screen with
the empty ﬁelds for ’Name, Surname, Age, Gender and Observations’, all related to
the test-subject. Whenever the ﬁelds ’Name’, ’Surname’ or ’Age’ are left empty, a
Warning message will be thrown as they are compulsory ﬁelds. However, there is the
possibility to cancel the process without further consequences. This sub-screen is
intended to be ﬁlled during the small interview between the user and the test-subject
previous to the beginning of the test.
Figure 4.5: Screenshot of the warning message when trying to save the Subject Data without ﬁlling
the ’Name’, ’Surname’ or ’Age ﬁelds.’
49
==PAGE:50==
Calibration
This button runs all the algorithm described in section 3.4.2. First, it starts record-
ing and displays the luminosity sweep on the VR headsets screen. Then it saves
the data and process it by deblinking, interpolating and smoothing it. Also, it nor-
malizes the data with respect to the baseline so the ﬁrst seconds are 0 and the rest
of the data represents the change on pupil size relative to this baseline. All this
process is reﬂected on a ’Progress bar’ as shown in ﬁgure 4.6 (a). Once the process
is ﬁnished, another sub-screen is opened showing the calibration results (4.6 (b)).
In this sub-screen, it can be seen a plot with the data after being processed (left
plot) and the data after splitting it in luminosity steps so we obtain a boxplot, also
the third order polynomial model and the selected luminosity value based on this
model. After observing these results, the subject has the possibility to ’Accept’ or
’Reject’ them. If they are accepted, the luminosity of the VR headsets during the
experiment tasks will be the selected luminosity during the calibration.
Figure 4.6: (a) Screenshot of the interface while the calibration is on-going as shown in the progress
bar with the state ’Starting data processing...’. (b) The data has already been processed and the
calibration results are shown in a sub-screen where the user can ’Accept’ or ’Reject’ them.
Training
Another optional step previous to the test is to train the subjects (ﬁgure 4.7). It
is possible to have a small simulacrum of the two tasks on the test before actually
starting them. In these sub-screens, the same sentence visualization and the lamp
indicating that the subject is allowed to repeat the sentence are shown. However,
there is no buttons for right/wrong and the eye cameras are not recording. Only
one sentence is reproduced after the click of ’Start training’ but there is no limit on
the times this button is clicked. Also, the user can ﬁnish the training by clicking
on ’Finish training’. The training button on the main Preparation screen will only
turn darker if the ’Start training’ button has been pressed at least once.
4.1.3
Listening Eﬀort Test tasks screen
The task’s screen is simple but it contains diﬀerent informative elements in order to
provide useful information on how the test is developing. Once the user has clicked
’Start’, the test begins and the cameras start the recording. It is possible for the user
50
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.7: (a) Training sub-screen for the sentence without noise. (b) Training sub-screen for the
sentence with noise.
to check whether this is true because the Pupil Capture software will remain open
and should be visible (ﬁgure 4.9). Also, the user can check in the Unity interface
whether the VR display is correct (Gray background and the green cross).
Each of the sentences reproduced is displayed on the screen so the user can check
if the repetition is correct or not. While the sentence is being played and until the
subject is able to repeat it (beep sound), the buttons for ’Right’ and ’Wrong’ are
disabled and the ’lamp’ is shown red. Once the subject hears the sentence, then
the buttons are active ant the ’lamp’ turns green. Also, there is a sentence counter
showing the task progress.
Figure 4.8: Screenshot of the user’s computer screen while performing the test tasks.
4.1.4
Results screen
The last screen of the application consist on the automatic presentation of the results
obtained from the Listening Eﬀort Test tasks. Once the data has been processed as
explained in section 3.4.5, we obtain the pupil diameter curves for the 20 sentences
51
==PAGE:52==
and their means.
They are all displayed in three plots but the user can choose
which one they want to visualize by selecting the preferred option in exclusive radio
buttons. Also, the screen shows the Performance % from the repetitions correctness,
the Peak Pupil Dilation (PPD) and it Standard deviation and the time that this
PPD occurs and its Standard Deviation. This for both the in-quiet task and with-
noise task. Finally, there is an option to perform Growth Curve Analysis to further
compare the results from the two tasks.
However, this functionality is not yet
implemented and it has been left for a future version of this application.
Figure 4.9: The three type of plots that can be shown in the results screen: in-quiet and with-noise
tasks mean curves together; in-quiet task mean curve; with-noise task mean curve
Figure 4.10: Results screen showing the plots with the mean curves and the 20 sentences processed
data for either inQuiet+withNoise, only inQuiet and only withNoise tasks pupillometry data. Also
it shows the results of the performance and PPD/tPPD for both inQuiet and withNoise. It allows
to generate a pdf report with these results and the test-subject data gathered during the interview.
The functionality for Growth Curve Analysis is not yet implemented.
52
==PAGE:53==
4.2
Listening Eﬀort Test Results
As mentioned in the section 3.5 on System Validation, one of the actions taken in
order to assess the eﬀectivity of the system has been to run a small experiment with
a sample of ﬁve participants. Here, we show the results from the pupillometry data
generated after running the Listening Eﬀort Test system with all of them.
4.2.1
Calibration Results
In ﬁgures A.1 and A.2 it can be seen the plots generated after running the luminosity
sweep in the Virtual Reality screen and recording the pupillometry data. On the left
plot, there is the pupil diameter data over time after being processed (i.e deblinked,
interpolated, low pass ﬁltered and normalized to the baseline). The plots on the
right show a boxplot of the data after being split to twelve parts corresponding to
the twelve luminosity levels used for the sweep. Also, it shows the ﬁtted curve of
the third order polynomial that is modeling the data from the twelve mean pupil
dilation values, one per each step. Finally, it marks the mean dilation value between
the maximum and minimum of model from which the selected luminosity level can
be extrapolated. Here, only the results for participants one and two are shown while
the rest of plots can be found in the Appendix.
Figure 4.11: Participant 1 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
Figure 4.12: Participant 2 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
In the table 4.1 the selected luminosity values for the ﬁve participants are shown.
These values have a mean of 0.2880 and standard deviation of 0.0514.
53
==PAGE:54==
Participant
Selected Luminosity Value
#1
0.2466
#2
0.291
#3
0.3746
#4
0.2547
#5
0.2729
Table 4.1: Numerical results for the experiment Luminosity Calibration.
4.2.2
Tasks Results
Bellow, it can be seen the resulting plots for the In-Quiet and With-Noise tasks.
They contain the mean curves and the 20 sentences with pupil diameter data after
its processing. Also, two tables that contain the Peak Pupil Dilation and time at
which this Peak Pupil Dilation occurs together with their Standard Deviations for
both the task in-Quiet and the task with-Noise. Here, it is only shown the results for
the two ﬁrst participants, the rest can be found attached in the Appendix. Finally,
two tables are generated in order to summarize the results in terms of Peak Pupil
Dilation values and their time of occurrence values.
Figure 4.13: Participant 1 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
54
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.14: Participant 1 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
Figure 4.15: Participant 2 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
Figure 4.16: Participant 2 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
55
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.17: Summary of the numeric results of the Listening Eﬀort Test task experiment (a) PPD
and tPPD values along with the standard deviations for the in-quiet task. (b) PPD and tPPD
values along with the standard deviations for the with-noise task.
4.3
Usability results
As it has been said, after allowing a potential end-user to run a Listening Eﬀort Test
using the system developed in this project, it was asked to answer the Post-Study
System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) and four open questions. The question-
naire and open questions along with the answers can be seen in the Appendix.
However, some parts of it are going to be pointed out here together with some ob-
servations made during the course of the experiment.
The test was carried by the same researcher that answered the preliminary ques-
tionnaire and she is a cognitive hearing scientist involved in research related to the
hypothesized link between listening eﬀort and cognitive functioning. Therefore, she
already has some idea of what this system is all about. As said in the Methods
chapter, she was only given some instructions about how to make use of the Pupil
Capture software showing the real time images coming from the infrared cameras
and Unity showing the Virtual Reality screen display. After that, she carried the ex-
periment on her own. We observed that she was stuck two times: at the beginning,
she was not sure on whether the name that the system was asking for in the ﬁrst
screen was supposed to be hers or the test-subject name. After observing that right
after there was the ﬁeld for ’Profession’, she understood that she was supposed to
introduce her name and proceeded successfully. Also, when performing the training,
she did not realize that it was enough with a couple or three trials and she kept
running the training expecting that the system would communicate something. Be-
sides this two moments, the experiment carried on without further incidences as she
could ﬁnd what were the steps to take at each moment. She commented that she
was sure that the next time she would use it she wouldn’t have problems at all.
From the PSSUQ, it can be observed that the overall punctuation is higher than
ﬁve. One standing for ’Strongly agree’, seven standing for ’Strongly disagree’ and all
the seventeen aﬃrmations in the questionnaire being positive characteristics. The
question that she punctuated worse (with a ﬁve) is: The system gave error messages
that clearly told me how to ﬁx problems. However, there were no errors during the
course of the experiment, therefore one could think she was meaning this by punc-
tuating it low (i.e she was disagree with the fact of having errors).
From the open questions we got highly valuable information. The main strength
of the system she point out that was its simplicity as it has very little clutter. On
56
==PAGE:57==
the other side, as a weakness, she stressed that some extra instruction would have
been needed to make it easier for new users. However, she answered aﬃrmatively
to question on whether she would like to use the system for her research. Finally,
she made some very useful comments on extra features that could be good to have
in a future version of the system:
• Making it more clear when the last sentence of the task has been reached.
• Making it a stand-alone application.
• Providing more user instructions.
57
==PAGE:58==
4.4
Preliminary Summary
The implementation of a Listening Eﬀort Test (LET) system has been done and it
shown in this chapter. The functionality of the system is summarized in nine points
with aﬃrmations on the system capabilities, each of them comprising many features.
The list of functional system requirements shown in chapter three is recovered in
order to analyze which of them have been accomplished. As shown in ﬁgure 4.1,
twelve out of ﬁfteen requirements have been successfully implemented.
The system’s main application screens ﬂow is shown in ﬁgure 4.2. The system con-
tains ﬁve main screens: The initial screen, the preparation screen, the task in-quiet
screen, the task with-noise screen and the results screen. The preparation screen
gives access to ﬁve sub-screens: the check connections screen, the insert data screen,
the calibration screen and the two training screens. The task screens have two states:
before starting the task and when the task is on-going. The results screen has an
option of generating a pdf report encapsulating all the results and test-subject in-
formation collected throughout the test. The results for the LET tasks was also
summarized over the tables in ﬁgure 4.17.
The results from the experiment simulacrum are shown in the section 4.2 split be-
tween calibration results and tasks results. For the calibration results, the mean
selected luminosity value for the ﬁve participants calibration has been 0.2880 with
a standard deviation of 0.0514.
The usability results are in general satisfactory: when the potential end-user as-
sumed the role of operator in one of the experiment tests, there were no problems
and the user could intuitively perform the test with little instructions. Also, the an-
swers to the Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire answer were positive and
she pointed out very useful insights on the system strengths and weaknesses. She
state that she would like to use the system in her research.
58
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
5.1
Discussion
In this work, it has been designed and implemented a proof-of-concept system which,
through the integration of hardware and software, enables the execution of a Lis-
tening Eﬀort Test coupled to Pupillometry in a point-of-care setting.
The idea of this project and the creation of a solution to assess Listening Eﬀort
by pupillometry using a Virtual Reality setting comes from the need to investigate
on the relation between Listening Eﬀort and cognitive functioning. Since it has
been seen that, hypothetically, a great listening eﬀort when hearing sentences with
competing noise could be a prodromal symptom for Mild Cognitive Decline or even
dementia, there is a real need on starting research in this direction. So, the utility
of a system such as the one developed in this project is certain.
Peripheral hearing loss, the type of hearing loss related to physical problems in the
ear anatomy is the most popular type of hearing loss and has multiple tests that
serve to evaluate it such as the Pure-Tone test. The Hearing-In-Noise Test (HINT)
evaluates central hearing loss by determining the subjective threshold of intelligi-
bility percentage that a given person can handle and still understand speech with
competing noise. However, listening eﬀort is deﬁned as the deliberate allocation of
mental resources to overcome obstacles in goal pursuit when carrying a listening
task thus it does not take into account the performance level but the cost at which
this performance level has been reached. To the best of our knowledge, there are no
standardized tests to evaluate this and no systems that can serve for this purpose.
The listening eﬀort test designed consists in the realization of two tasks, each of
them containing twenty sentences in English following the HINT standards. After
each sentence, the test-user will have to repeat the sentence and in doing so they
will be unconsciously making use of their working memories and attention. The ﬁrst
task contains sentences in quiet so it is assumed to not require too many cognitive
resources, the second task contains sentences mixed up with white noise. In front
of a more diﬃcult task, it is hypothesized that the allocation of cognitive resources
will be higher than average for those people suﬀering from high listening eﬀort on
adverse conditions. Then, this test is hypothesized to serve to identify this potential
prodromal symptom for cognitive decline in patients at risk of developing it.
59
==PAGE:60==
The design of this system has been done using a user-centered approach and pri-
oritizing the development of a tool easy-to-use yet capable of providing powerful
information regarding listening eﬀort. The process has been linear and it starts
with the stakeholders analysis which settles the background of any system develop-
ment. It helps to have in mind who are the main actors behind the development
process so the success of the system will take place when their interests have been
met. Although three main groups of stakeholders have been identiﬁed, this system
has been build with the goal of satisfying the end-user needs.
The envisaged end-users have been the researchers interested on tackling the previ-
ously mentioned research question and clinical neuropsychologists. On a hypothe-
sized situation in which the link between listening eﬀort was to be conﬁrmed, clini-
cal neuropsychologists could use the test as part of a protocol on detecting patients
at-risk of developing dementia. These two groups of end-users have served as inspi-
ration to frame the use of the system in their respective contexts and intended use
of the system. Also, from the researchers it has been possible to have a preliminary
interview that gave further insight. From these, it has been enlisted a number of
user needs from which the system requirements have been deﬁned.
The User Experience and User Interface design have taken place after the gathering
of information from diﬀerent sources, in some cases from a simple brainstorming
session with paper and pen and the imagination to envisage the situations that the
end-user would go through the course of a experiment using the LET system.
The resulting software application integrating all the system components has allowed
us to perform a small experiment and run the test over a handful of test-subjects.
The system has automatically processed the pupillometry data and provided with
several plots showing the pupil response over the test tasks execution together with
their Peak Pupil Dilation and the time they are taking place. From these results,
it can be observed that although there is a very small diﬀerence, the Peak Pupil
Dilation use to be higher in the task with sentences in competing noise. Also, it can
be observed that the curves show two peaks, one on the course of the sound and
the other one taking place while the test-subject is repeating the sentences. This is
consistent with the observations made in previous similar studies (Winn et al. 2018).
Also, it can be observed that in three out of the ﬁve experiments, the mean curve
resulting from the task with-noise is shown to have slightly higher values during
the sentence listening. This makes sense and could be showing the higher level of
cognitive resources allocation to perform the second task. The variability among
users is quite small for the Peak Pupil Dilation value but the variability for the time
this Peak Pupil Dilation occurs is very high, particularly in the second task results.
The calibration results are consistent with the modeled response in Watson and Yel-
lott 2012 as the curves for the processed data show a sigmoid shape ﬁt quite good
into a third polynomial model. The values for the selected luminosity have a mean
of 0.2880 and a standard deviation of 0.0514, which is quite small and consistent
with the fact that all the participants were of the same age range. As a curiosity, it
can be pointed out that the third participant was the older one having 36 years old
and indeed he was the one showing the most diﬀerent value of selected luminosity.
The data extracted from the calibration and test tasks is consistent and supports
60
==PAGE:61==
the idea that Pupillometry is a good methodology to objectively measure listening
eﬀort. Since all the test-subjects participating in the experiment were young and
stated to not have any problem of hearing loss or sign of fatigue due to high eﬀorts
to follow conversations in their daily routines, it make sense that the data doesn’t
show relevant diﬀerence between tasks.
Out of the system evaluation from a potential end-user, we can conclude that the
system designed has accomplished its goal of being simple and easy to use. The
researcher executing the test did not show evident signs of stress or of being lost
while using the system and she accomplished all the tasks and scenarios successfully.
She stated that she would like to use the system in her research. Also, she pointed
out some improvements that would have been a very good starting point for a future
version of this system.
Overall, it can be concluded that during the course of this project, all its goals have
been accomplished. Although there is a great need for further system testing, the
results obtained from both the experiment and the usability testing show a good
basis to think that we are on good track.
5.2
Limitations
Despite of the good initial results, it is important to point out several limitations of
this system. To begin with, we have had scarce information sources for the design
of the test and User experience. It would have been very useful to work side by side
with at least a representatives from the two main groups of end-users. Ideally, we
would have had contact with more than one representative from each group since
having only one opinion can lead us to develop a personalized product that does not
meet the general interest of his represented group.
Also, ideally we would have had more than one iteration as it has been shown that
the insight of an end-user on the design is very much useful and points out need
that could be easily forgotten by the designer that is already so familiarized with
the system.
Another important limitation is the development of the main system software ap-
plication and the one containing the UI in Matlab. Matlab is a language intended
to be used for data treatment and mainly back-end operations.
Again, it is important to have in mind that the system has been tested seeking a
proof-of-concept and we should be very careful when extracting conclusions from
them, both for the experiment part which instead of ﬁve participants would have
need at list twenty-ﬁve, and the usability testing, which again, with only one par-
ticipant it is very easy to fall into personal opinions not representative enough.
5.3
Future work
This project is the answer to some initial questions on how we could tackle the need
for a solution to test on listening eﬀort. In turn, it opens a lot of questions for future
works.
61
==PAGE:62==
To begin with, the usability testing already has envisaged a second version of the
system with some improvements, some of them really easy to implement such as
the message at the end of each of the tasks in order to communicate that the last
sentence has been reached and that the user can proceed with the next step. Also,
including more instructions for the user would not be too diﬃcult.
Once reached a point where there has been many iterations and the feedback from
a large sample of potential end-users is satisfactory enough, then it would be a step
forward to make it a stand-alone application as it would be much easier to deliver
it to the point-of-care.
Also, in order to facilitate the development and improve the design, we would like
to transition to another programming language, being C a good candidate for doing
so.
Finally, in order to provide a more complete system, the Listening Eﬀort Test could
be complemented with a Cognitive Test assessing the test-subject Working Memory.
This test could take advantage of the Virtual Reality setting used and make it more
interactive. Both test could be integrated in a speciﬁc system designed to provide
all the necessary information to assess the possible relation between listening eﬀort
and cognitive functioning.
62
==PAGE:63==
References
Friedman, D. et al. (1973). “Eﬀect of stimulus uncertainty on the pupillary dilation
response and the vertex evoked potential.” In: Electroencephalography and Clin-
ical Neurophysiology 34.5, pp. 475–484. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-
4694(73)90065-5.
Ahern, Sylvia and Jackson Beatty (1979). “Pupillary responses during information
processing vary with Scholastic Aptitude Test scores.” In: Science 205.4412,
pp. 1289–1292. doi: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.472746.
Beatty, Jackson. (1982). “Task-evoked pupillary responses, processing load, and the
structure of processing resources.” In: Psychological bulletin 91.2, pp. 276–292.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.91.2.276.
R., H´etu et al. (1988). “Qualitative analysis of the handicap associated with occu-
pational hearing loss.” In: British journal of audiology. 22.4, pp. 251–264. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1167/12.10.12.
Lewis, J. R. (1992). “Psychometric evaluation of the post-study system usability
questionnaire: The PSSUQ.” In: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Er-
gonomics Society Annual Meeting 36.16, pp. 1259–1260. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1177/154193129203601617.
Sinha, U. K. et al. (1993). “Auditory system degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease”. In:
Neurology 43.4, pp. 779–779. doi: https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.43.4.779.
Nilsson, M., S. D. Soli, and J. A. Sullivan (1994). “Development of the Hearing in
Noise Test for the measurement of speech reception thresholds in quiet and in
noise.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 95.2, pp. 1085–
1099. doi: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.408469.
Rakerd, B., P. F. Seitz, and M. Whearty (1996). “Assessing the cognitive demands
of speech listening for people with hearing losses.” In: Ear and hearing 17.2,
pp. 97–106.
Coble Janette M., John Karat and Michael G. Kahn (1997). “Maintaining a focus on
user requirements throughout the development of clinical workstation software.”
In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pp. 170–177. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/258549.258698.
Gates, G. A. et al. (2002). “Central auditory dysfunction may precede the onset of
clinical dementia in people with probable Alzheimer’s disease.” In: Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society 50.3, pp. 482–488. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1046/j.1532-5415.2002.50114.x.
Wickens, C. D. (2002). “Multiple resources and performance prediction.” In: Theo-
retical issues in ergonomics science 3.2, pp. 159–177. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1080/14639220210123806.
63
==PAGE:64==
Pichora-Fuller, M. Kathleen (2003). “Cognitive aging and auditory information pro-
cessing.” In: International journal of audiology 42.2, pp. 26–32. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.3109/14992020309074641.
Verney, S. P., E. Granholm, and S. P. Marshall (2004). “Pupillary responses on the
visual backward masking task reﬂect general cognitive ability.” In: International
Journal of Psychophysiology 52.1, pp. 23–36. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijpsycho.2003.12.003.
Wingﬁeld, A., P. A. Tun, and S. L. McCoy (2005). “Hearing loss in older adulthood:
What it is and how it interacts with cognitive performance.” In: Current direc-
tions in psychological science 14.3, pp. 144–148. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.0963-7214.2005.00356.x.
Fish, S. C. and E. Granholm (2008). “Easier tasks can have higher processing loads:
Task diﬃculty and cognitive resource limitations in schizophrenia.” In: Interna-
tional Journal of Psychophysiology 117.2, p. 355. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1037/0021-843X.117.2.355.
Goodwin, Kim. (2011). Designing for the digital age: How to create human-centered
products and services. Indianapolis, IN 46256: Wiley Publishing Inc.
Gates, George A. (2012). “Hearing impairment and incident dementia and cognitive
decline in older adults: the Health ABC Study.” In: Otolaryngology–Head and
Neck Surgery 147.1, pp. 1–2. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/0194599812446282.
Laeng, B., S. Sirois, and G. Gredeb¨ack (2012). “Pupillometry: A Window to the
Preconscious?” In: Perspectives on psychological science 7.1, pp. 18–27. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691611427305.
Watson, Andrew B. and John I. Yellott (2012). “A uniﬁed formula for light-adapted
pupil size.” In: Journal of vision 12.10, pp. 12–12. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1167/12.10.12.
Kassner, M., W. Patera, and A. Bulling (2014). “Pupil: an open source platform
for pervasive eye tracking and mobile gaze-based interaction.” In: ACM interna-
tional joint conference on pervasive and ubiquitous computing: Adjunct publica-
tion, pp. 1151–1160. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691611427305.
Norton, S. et al. (2014). “Potential for primary prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: an
analysis of population-based data.” In: The Lancet Neurology 13.8, pp. 788–794.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70136-X.
Kan, A. and M. B. Winn (2016). “Using pupillometry to investigate the better ear
advantage.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 140.4, pp. 3269–
3269. doi: https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4970374.
Pichora-Fuller, M. K. et al. (2016). “Hearing impairment and cognitive energy: The
framework for understanding eﬀortful listening (FUEL)”. In: Ear and Hearing
37, 5S–27S. doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000000312.
Prince, M. et al. (2016). World Alzheimer report 2016: improving healthcare for
people living with dementia: coverage, quality and costs now and in the future.
http://www.alz.co.uk/.
Livingston, G. et al. (2017). “Dementia prevention, intervention, and care.” In: The
Lancet 390.10113, pp. 2673–2734. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(17)31363-6.
Norton, S. et al. (2017). “Hearing impairment and incident dementia and cognitive
decline in older adults: the Health ABC Study.” In: The Journals of Gerontology:
Series A 72.5, pp. 703–709. doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/glw069.
64
==PAGE:65==
Ohlenforst, B. et al. (2017). “Impact of stimulus-related factors and hearing impair-
ment on listening eﬀort as indicated by pupil dilation.” In: Hearing Research
351.2, pp. 68–79. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2017.05.012.
Experience, Abu (2018). 13 Psychology Principles All UX designers should know.
Ed. by uxbert.com. [Online; seen 15-June-2019]. url: https://uxbert.com/ux-
psychology-principles-design-ux/.
Mathˆot, S. (2018). “Pupillometry: Psychology, physiology, and function. Journal of
Cognition”. In: Journal of Cognition 1.1, pp. 276–292. doi: http://doi.org/
10.5334/joc.18.
Winn, M. B. et al. (2018). “Best practices and advice for using pupillometry to
measure listening eﬀort: An introduction for those who want to get started.” In:
Trends in hearing 22. doi: https://doi.org/10.1177/2331216518800869.
Kret, M. E. and E. E. Sjak-Shie (2019). “Preprocessing pupil size data: Guidelines
and code.” In: Behavior research methods 51.3, pp. 1336–1342. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.1177/1745691611427305.
IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology (n.d.). https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=159342. Accessed: 2010-
06-20.
PupilLabs ads-on eye-tracking cameras, VR/AR (n.d.). https://pupil-labs.com/
products/vr-ar/tech-specs/. Accessed: 2010-06-25.
65
==PAGE:66==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Initial questionnaire for a potential end-user:
The researcher
66
==PAGE:67==
Researcher questionnaire 
 
Context 
As a researcher, you are on a stage of your project in which you want to perform a experiment 
to a set of 20 subjects, all of them with no sign of peripheral hearing loss. In this experiment 
you want to observe the amount of cognitive load it takes to the subject to understand a 
sentence with competing noise. You want to use pupillometry in order to do so and you need a 
software interface that allows that.  
 
General questions 
 
• 
How long have you been working in research?  
4 months  
• 
Mention a scientific research in which you have been involved either during your 
studies or research time. Which tools/tests where you using?  
Survey methods 
SPSS analysis software 
 
• 
How familiarized are you with the concept of pupillometry? 
Not at all 
 A little bit X 
I know it well 
I’m an expert 
 
• 
How familiarized are you with Virtual Reality Settings?  
Not at all 
A little bit (I‘ve  used 
it once) 
I know it well ( I’ve 
used it 2-3 times) X 
I’m an expert (I’ve 
used it moret han 3  
times) 
 
• 
How familiarized are you with Hearing In Noise Test (HINT)?  
Not at all 
A little bit X 
I know it well 
I’m an expert 
 
• 
Have you ever used Matlab Applications to perform experiments before? 
Yes 
No X 
 
• 
If so, how many times? 
One time 
2-3 times 
>3 times 
 
==PAGE:68==
• 
As a researcher, how relevant do you think it is a software application to perform your 
experiments?  
Not relevant, I prefer 
to arrange all the 
components myself 
and obtain only the 
pupillometry raw 
data. 
Relevant BUT I only 
need a back-end 
logic program that 
allows to control the 
hardware from 
Matlab. 
Quite necessary.  I 
would like to have a 
simple interface 
which I can easily 
modify from Matlab 
code. 
X 
Very needed. I’d like 
to have an stand-
alone tool that 
guides me throught 
the experiment steps 
and shows me 
results right-away. 
 
• 
If any of the options given in the previous answer fit with your idea, can you please 
specify it here?  
 
 
Needs/Demands 
 
• 
How important do you think it is..... 
 
- 
That the tool is self explanatory: 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. 
Very important. X 
 
- 
That the tool contains a manual: 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. X 
Very important. 
 
- 
That the calibration steps for the eye tracking camera are guided: 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. X 
Very important. 
 
In the original design of the tool, the Listening Effort is evaluated in quiet and in noise with a 
predetermined SNR, how important do you think it is..... 
- 
That it is possible to change the SNR when in noise 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. X 
Very important. 
 
- 
That it is possible to add more tests with different SNR 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. X 
Important. 
Very important. 
 
- 
That the results are shown automatically after the tests have been done 
Not important at all. 
Not too much.  
X 
Important. 
Very important. 
 
==PAGE:69==
- 
Possibility to see both raw and processed data graphically 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. X 
Important. 
Very important. 
 
- 
 Possibility to repeat some of the test if the data does not look good 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. X 
Very important. 
 
- 
Possibility to save the results 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. 
Very important. X 
 
- 
Show statistics of the comparison between quiet and in-noise  
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. 
Very important. X 
 
- 
That the test doesn’t take too long (less than 30 minutes) 
Not important at all. 
Not too much. 
Important. 
Very important. X 
 
• 
As a researcher, indicate other needs and important features you think that a tool of 
these characteristics should have: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
User Interface design 
 
• 
Which of the following colors do you relate with healthcare?  
1) 
 
 
 
 
2)  
 
 
 
 
3) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
 
4) 
 
 
 
 
5)  X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Which of the following colors do you relate with psychology?  
 
1) 
 
 
 
 
2)  
 
 
 
 
3) X 
 
 
 
 
4) 
 
 
 
 
5)  
 
 
 
 
User experience design 
 
• 
Could you please mention three apps (mobile phone apps, web apps, desktop apps...) 
that you use in your daily life? Do you think they are intuitive and easy to use?  
Microsoft Outlook 
Facebook messenger 
Whatsapp 
==PAGE:71==
 
• 
During the test, the patient will be seeing the Virtual Reality screen and wearing 
headsets. How would you prefer that the patient receives the instructions necessary to 
go through the test?  
 
Orally. I want to be able to 
explain him/her all the steps 
he/she has to follow during 
the test. 
Orally but I want that he/she 
also receives some automatic 
instructions through the VR 
screen. X 
Only by automatic 
instructions through the 
screen/headsets. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
A.2
Calibration Results
Figure A.1: Participant 1 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
Figure A.2: Participant 2 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
Figure A.3: Participant 3 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
72
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.4: Participant 4 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
Figure A.5: Participant 5 plots obtained for Luminosity Calibration.
73
==PAGE:74==
A.3
Listening Eﬀort Tasks Results
Figure A.6: Participant 1 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
Figure A.7: Participant 1 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
74
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.8: Participant 2 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
Figure A.9: Participant 2 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
75
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.10: Participant 3 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
Figure A.11: Participant 3 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
76
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.12: Participant 4 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
Figure A.13: Participant 4 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
77
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.14: Participant 5 plots obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. (a) Combined plots for
in-quiet and with-noise tasks. (b) In-Quiet task results. (c) With-noise task results.
Figure A.15: Participant 5 numerical results obtained for the Listening Eﬀort Tasks. PPD stands
for Peak Pupil Dilation and tPPD stands for time at which this PPD occurs. (a) In-Quiet task
results (b) With-noise task results.
78
==PAGE:79==
A.4
Example of the generated Report (.pdf) after
running the Listening Eﬀort Test using the
system developed in this work.
79
==PAGE:80==
Listening Effort Test Report
Subject: Marianna Tzachsan Identifier: 66
DTU Research Lab
28-Jul-2019
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 1. Operator and Participant Information
1.1. Operator information
Name: Silvia Fernández
Profession: Researcher
1.2. Patient/Participant information
Name: Marianna       Surname: Tzachsan
Age: 26       Gender: Feminine
Observations:  She normally use glasses.
1
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 2. Calibration Plots and Result
Selected level of ilumination:  0.27425
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time[sec]
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
Normalized pupil dilation
Pupil size processed data
2
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 2. Calibration Plots and Result
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Luminosity level
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
Normalized pupil dilation
Pupil Dilation Average per Step / Curve fitting / Selected Luminosity Level
3
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 3. Result plots from Pupillometry
3.1. Combined results plot: Quiet and Noise
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Normalized time
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Normalized pupil dilation
Mean Pupil Dilation
Noise OFF
Noise ON
4
==PAGE:85==
Chapter 3. Result plots from Pupillometry
3.2. Results in-Quiet
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [sec]
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Normalized pupil dilation
Mean Pupil Dilation
Noise OFF
 
Percentage of correct repetitions: 100
PPD: 0.089288       std: 0.062356
tPPD: 7.526       std: 2.7965
5
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 3. Result plots from Pupillometry
3.3. Results in-Noise
0
5
10
15
Time [sec]
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Normalized pupil dilation
Mean Pupil Dilation
Noise ON
 
Percentage of correct repetitions: 100
PPD: 0.11431       std: 0.062757
tPPD: 9.148       std: 4.4042
6
==PAGE:87==
A.5
Post-Study System Usability Questionnaire
(PSSUQ) and Interview Results
87
==PAGE:88==
Post Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Overall, I am satisfied with how easy it is to use this system. 
 
 
        3 
2. he system was simple to use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         2 
3. I could effectively complete a Listening Effort Test using this system.                               2 
4. I was able to complete a Listening Effort Test quickly using this system.                         1    
5. I was able to efficiently complete a Listening Effort Test using this system.                     2 
6. I felt comfortable using this system.   
 
 
 
 
 
         3 
7. It was easy to learn to use this system.    
 
 
 
 
         3 
8. I believe I could become productive quickly using this system.    
 
         1 
9. The system gave error messages that clearly told me how to fix problems.   
         5 
10. Whenever I made a mistake using the system, I could recover easily and quickly.          3 
11. The information (such as on-screen messages) provided with this system was clear.     3 
12. The information was effective in helping me complete the tasks and scenarios.             2 
13. The organization of information on the system screens was clear.                                     2 
14. The interface of this system was pleasant. (* see Note)                                                        2 
15. I liked using the interface of this system. (* see Note)                                                           2 
16. The system has all the functions and capabilities I expect it to have.                                 3 
17. Overall, I am satisfied with this system. 2 
Note: The ‘interface’ includes those items that you use to interact with the system (Matlab 
application, Virtual Reality headsets, Lab set up). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STRONGLY 
AGREE 
STRONGLY 
DISAGREE 
1  
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7                       N/A      
==PAGE:89==
Interview to the end-user 
 
- 
Could you tell what did you liked the most about this system?  
I liked  how simple the application’s interface was, there was very little clutter. 
 
- 
Could you tell what did you liked less about this system?  
Sometimes some extra instructions (for new users, for example) were not included, as it is so simple.  
 
- 
Would you like to use a system like this for your research?  
Yes, I would! 
 
- 
Do you have any other thoughts about the system you would like to mention? 
Making it more clear when the last sentence of the HINT test has been reached. 
Making it a stand-alone application at some point would be great. 
Providing some basic user instructions, such as ‘place headset on the participant’, etc., for those who 
are really new to the system may help with usability . 
