==PAGE:1==
Quantitative characterisation of T fol-
licular helper cells in porcine lymph
nodes after immunising with Staph.
Aureus proteins in different adjuvants
Masters thesis in Pharmaceutical
design and engineering
By:
Nicolai Frejvald Petersen (s134910)
Supervisors:
Professor Gregers Jungersen
Gitte Erbs, Post Doc
==PAGE:2==
1
Abstract
Staphylococcus Aureus infections are becoming an increasingly bigger problem, espe-
cially in hospitals where patients already have other health problems, and therefore
may be more susceptible to infections. Treatments with antimicrobial drugs may
lead to multi-resistant strains, which means that the need for other treatment op-
tions such as vaccines is increasing. Research shows that activation of TLR8 results
in diﬀerentiation of T follicular helper cells which in turn directs diﬀerentiation of
B cells into memory B cells and plasma cells. This makes TLR8 activation an inter-
esting target for vaccine adjuvants. The aim of this project is to develop a method
of quantifying TFH cells in samples from pigs vaccinated with diﬀerent TLR8 ac-
tivating adjuvants. This is done by stimulating, staining and analysing the cells
using ﬂow cytometry. The results indicate that TFH cells can indeed be quantifyed
using the proposed method, and that adjuvant formulations consisting of CAF01 +
CL075, CAF01 + R848 or bacterial RNA increase the percentage of TFH cells, while
adjuvant formulations consisting of alum or CAF01 alone reduce it.
Page 1 of 48
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
3
3
Background
4
3.1
Overview of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus . . . . . . .
4
3.2
MRSA vaccine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Cell stimulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Flow cytometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Previous research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Materials and Methods
14
4.1
Animal study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Preparation of samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Cell stimulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.4
Cell staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.5
Flow cytometry and gating strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Results
23
5.1
Cell staining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
TFH cell quantiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Discussion
28
6.1
Animal study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2
Flow cytometry and cell staining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
Cell stimulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Conclusion
31
8
Appendix
34
8.1
FlowJo Batchreport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
8.2
Lab protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Page 2 of 48
==PAGE:4==
2
Introduction
In recent times, Staphylococcus aureus infections have become an increasingly bigger
problem, especially the strains that have evolved resistance towards antimicrobial
drugs, such as Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus, also known as MRSA.
Since the treatment of such strains with normal antimicrobial drugs exerts a se-
lective pressure towards developing even more resistance, such treatments can be
problematic. It is therefore important to look for other ways to prevent infections,
such as vaccines.
This project is part of a larger research project with the objective of investigating
possible ways to create a eﬃcacious MRSA vaccine. One possible way of achieving
this is by activation of Toll-Like Receptor 8 in the hosts immune cells, which has
been shown to increase the potency of immune responses.
This project will be testing samples from an animal study performed with the goal
of ﬁnding a suitable adjuvant formulation for such activation of TLR8, however,
the underlying immunological mechanisms of what happens in the immune system
during such a treatment is beyond the scope of this project, and thus will only
be described superﬁcially. Instead, the aim of this project is to ﬁnd a method of
quantifying T follicular helper (TFH) cells in samples from draining lymph nodes.
These TFH cells are of interest in the TLR8 adjuvant study, as they can indicate
whether or not the TLR8 activation was succesful. In addition to this, the TFH cells
play a role in diﬀerentiation of B cells into memory B cells and antibody-producing
plasma cells, and thereby help creating a potent immune response.
Page 3 of 48
==PAGE:5==
3
Background
3.1
Overview of Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) is a species of bacteria that,
as the name suggests, has developed resistance to common antimicrobials such as
methicillin. While an MRSA infection is harmless in many cases, serious cases can
cause diseases such as osteomyelitis, pyogenic infections and infective endocarditis
[1]. In fact, three diﬀerent S. aureus carriage patterns have been identiﬁed. It has
been found that approximately 20% of the population are persistent carriers, while
up to 60% are intermittent carriers without showing symptoms. The most common
place to ﬁnd such an asymptomatic S. aureus infection is the nostrils of the nose.
The last 20% of the population are so-called noncarriers, and never carry S. aureus.
However, it is possible for a person to change their pattern of carriage between the
age of 10 and 20, as persistent carriage is more often seen in children compared to
adults [2].
Especially in hospitals, S. aureus infections are becoming an increasingly bigger
problem. This is in part because patients in hospitals may be exposed to conditions
that can increase the risk of infections in areas of the body where it may cause dis-
eases. An example of such a condition is dialysis treatment, where the patients have
an invasive device in the bloodstream. A study from the United States showed that
the incidence rate for MRSA infections was increased 100 fold for dialysis patients
compared to the general population [3]. The environment in hospitals, with patients
that may have compromised eﬀectiveness of the immune systems, and are treated
with antimicrobials create a selective pressure towards MRSA and multi-drug re-
sistant Staphylococcus aureus strains [2]. A study has shown that persistent and
intermittent carriers of non-resistant S. aureus strains have an inherent protection
against colonisation of MRSA strains. However, the study also showed that if these
patients where treated with antimicrobial drugs, this protective eﬀect declined, and
allowed for a higher chance of infection with resistant strains [2].
It has also recently been found that S. aureus strains that commonly infect live-
stock such as pigs can be transferred to humans. A study by Øyvind Omland and
Leif Hoﬀman [4] has investigated occupational acquisition of MRSA strains in farm
workers in the region of North Jutland in Denmark during the years 2008 and 2009.
Page 4 of 48
==PAGE:6==
The study found that out of the 109 cases of MRSA noted during the time, 18 were
classiﬁed as occupational. Of these, 16 were farmers or farm workers, who were all
tested positive for the strain CC398, with 3 being infected and 13 being carriers.
The remaining 2 cases where hospital nurses from the local hospital, who were carri-
ers of other strains. Since the strain CC398 is predominantly found in pigs, it poses
an increased risk of transmission for people working with pigs on a daily basis.
Figure
1:
Prevalence of both Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) in meats sampled during a study across three
states in the United States. The bars represent diﬀerent types of pork products, with the dark
parts on the bottom representing cases of MSSA, and the lighter parts representing cases of MRSA.
The numbers on top of the bars indicate the total number of the speciﬁed product type, including
samples that were not found to carry S. aureus [5].
In addition to posing a risk of occupational transmission to farm workers, MRSA
infections can also stem from ingestion of pork products carrying the bacteria. S.
aureus is estimated to be the cause of approximately 185.000 cases of food poisoning
in the United States annually [5]. An examination of 395 samples of raw pork from
36 diﬀerent retail food stores in three States in the United States was carried out by
Page 5 of 48
==PAGE:7==
O’Brien et al. The results showed that S. aureus was isolated from 256 (64,8%) of
the samples, with 26 of these being MRSA strains. The prevalence of both MRSA
and Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) in several diﬀerent types
of pork products are illustrated in ﬁgure 1. The 26 MRSA positive samples were
collected from 15 out of the 36 stores, within all three States [5].
3.2
MRSA vaccine
Since the use of antimicrobial drugs for treatment of other bacterial infections is
already resulting in a selective pressure towards the emergence of MRSA strains,
which can be diﬃcult to treat, there is an urgent need of non-antimicrobial ways
to reduce the spread of such strains. One approach to solving this problem is to
develop a prophylactic vaccine that can help prevent S. aureus infections [1].
The role of a vaccine is to induce acquired immunity against a speciﬁc pathogen,
by activating an immune response without actually making the host sick. This is
achieved by exploiting the human immune systems ability to create so-called im-
munological memory after being exposed to antigens. This immunological memory
ensures that the hosts immune system can react quickly after being re-exposed to
the antigen, thus avoiding symptoms. An eﬀective vaccine will trick the immune
system into reacting as if the host is being infected, and thereby stimulating the dif-
ferentiation of high-aﬃnity memory B- and T-cells [6, 7]. This antigen-stimulated
diﬀerentiation of naive B cells into memory cells or antibody-producing plasma cells
is known as humoral immunity. After diﬀerentiation, the memory B cells will circu-
late the blood and lymphoid systems in an attempt to detect a subsequent infection
by the same pathogen. Meanwhile, the plasma cells will start producing large quan-
tities of neutralising antibodies that will speciﬁcally bind to the original antigen[6, 7].
Two of the most common types of bacterial vaccines are live attenuated vaccines
and inactivated, or killed, vaccines. Inactivated vaccines consist of bacteria that
have been inactivated or killed prior to admninistration to the patient. The idea is
that the vaccine still contains all the antigens that a living infection would, and the
immunesystem should thereby recognise the antigens during subsequent infections,
but since the bacteria in the vaccine have been inactivated they can not replicate
in the host, and thereby will not result in disease. Live attenuated vaccines con-
Page 6 of 48
==PAGE:8==
tain living vaccines that have been modiﬁed in a way that renders them unable to
replicate in the host. Such modiﬁcations can include auxotrophy, which means the
pathogen is unable to synthesise a compound necessary for replication[8], or in the
case of anti-virus vaccines, the pathogen can be cultured in another host species,
and thus replicates poorly in humans [7], this case is described further in ﬁgure 2.
However, since the pathogens are still alive, they may still pose a potential risk of
symptomatic infection. Vaccines that have been attenuated can mutate back into
active variants, and thereby cause the disease they seek to prevent. Live attenuated
vaccines can also pose a risk in patients with compromised immune systems, such
as sick patients, children or the elderly [7].
Figure 2: Illustration of a method to produce a live attenuated vaccine against a viral pathogen.
The ﬁrst picture shows virus particles isolated from a human host being replicated in human cells.
The next picture shows the virus particles from the human cells being introduced into a new type
of host cells. The third picture shows that the virus particles mutate in order to better grow in the
new host cell type. The ﬁnal picture shows that the virus particles can no longer grow eﬀectively
in human cells, and can therefore be used as a live attenuated vaccine. Figure from [7].
In order for a vaccine to be eﬀective, it must induce a strong humoral immune
response. A study by Ugolini et al.[8] has shown that activation of the Toll-Like
Receptor 8 (TLR8) by, for example, bacterial single stranded RNA is critical in in-
ducing a potent humoral response. The study found that some pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) are present only in live microbes. These are known
as viability-associated PAMPs, or Vita-PAMPs, and play a key role in determining
the scale of the humoral immune response resulting from the detection of a foreign
antigen. It was found that presence of Vita-PAMPs particularly had an eﬀect on
the diﬀerentiation of follicular T helper cells (TFH cells), which are important in
germinal center response and B cell diﬀerentiation. Research done during the study
showed that in several cases, live attenuated bacteria had a higher activation of
TLR8, and therefore also a higher diﬀerentiation of TFH cells. It was found that
Page 7 of 48
==PAGE:9==
after detection of single stranded RNA by TLR8, the aﬀected monocytes produced
and secreted IL-12 cytokines [8]. These cytokines induce the diﬀerentiation of naive
CD4+ T-cells into TFH cells [6]. TFH cells have been found to express a range of
eﬀector molecules, including CXCR5, IL-21, ICOS and CD40L. These molecules are
then used to bind and induce diﬀerentiaton of B cells into both memory B cells and
antibody-producing plasma cells [6], this signalling pathway is illustrated in ﬁgure
3. This indicates that only vaccines that consist of live attenuated bacteria that
can produce mRNA will be succesful in inducing TFH cell diﬀerentiation and the
resulting strong humoral response. However, experiments carried out by Ugolini et
al. showed that the activation of TLR8 by the synthetic agonists R848 and CL075
could also potently promote diﬀerentiation of TFH cells.
Figure 3: Illustration of the signalling pathway that results in antibody-producing plasma cells
after detection of live bacteria. The ﬁgure shows TLR8 in monocytes being activated by ssRNA
produced by live bacteria. This results in secretion of IL-12 cytokines from the monocytes, which
activates nearby naive CD4+ T-cells. This activation in turn results in the T-cell diﬀerentiating
into a Tfh cell with higher expression of the eﬀector proteins CXCR5, IL-21, ICOS and CD40L
which are all required in order to diﬀerentiate naive B cells into both memory B cells and plasma
cells. The Tfh cell can then bind to a naive B cell using ICOS-ICOSL, CD40-CD40L and TCR-
MHC class II binding. In addition to this, the Tfh cell secretes IL-21 cytokines which are also an
important factor in B cell diﬀerentiation. In the end, this results in an antibody-producing plasma
cell. Figure from [6].
In addition to the IL-12 cytokines secreted by TLR8 activated monocytes, the tran-
scription factor called B cell lymphoma 6 has been proven to play a large role in the
diﬀerentiation of naive CD4+ T cells into TFH cells [9]. Expression of Bcl6 is induced
by the presence of the cytokine IL-21, which is also upregulated in TFH cells. The
role of Bcl6 was shown to be inhibition of diﬀerentiation of the naive CD4+ T cell
into TH1, TH2 and TH17 cell lineages, and thereby increasing the diﬀerentiation
into TFH cells. The study showed that upregulating transcription factors that lead
Page 8 of 48
==PAGE:10==
to diﬀerentiation of TH1, TH2 and TH17 cells signiﬁcantly inhibited production of
Bcl6 [9]. This makes Bcl6 another ideal marker for distinguishing TFH cells from
other T helper cells.
When designing a vaccine system, it is not only important to consider the antigens
that the host immune system should be able to recognise. Vaccines can contain ad-
ditives whose purpose it is to increase the potency of the vaccine. Such additives are
called adjuvants, which is a term derived from the Latin word adjuvare, which means
to help [10]. The most commonly used adjuvant is aluminium salt, also known just
as Alum, which has been used for more than 70 years, and was the only adjuvant
approved for use in human vaccines for a long time [10].
Another type of adjuvant type is the Cationic Adjuvant Formulation (CAF) plat-
form.
This family of adjuvants was developed by Statens Serum Institut (SSI)
approximately 20 years ago, due to a need for safe, novel adjuvants that could trig-
ger the right type of response. The CAF platform is based on liposomes made of
dioctadecylammonium (DDA) [11]. DDA has been known to have adjuvant prop-
erties since the 1960’s and has been used in experimental vaccines. The ﬁrst type
of stable CAF suitable for clinical development was the CAF01, which is the DDA
liposome base combined with α, α-trehalose 6,6-dibehenate (TDB) which is a syn-
thetic analog to a mycobacterial glycolipid, and promotes strong immune responses.
Alone, DDA induces both antibody and cell mediated immune responses, however,
with the addition of TDB, it promotes diﬀerentiation of CD4+ T cells and good
antibody response [11].
3.3
Cell stimulation
In this project, cell samples consisting of many diﬀerent cell types will be examined.
In order to identify the TFH cells among the whole cell population, they will be
characterised by the intracellular proteins speciﬁc to this type of cells, such as IL-21
and Bcl6 [7, 9]. To ensure that these proteins are present in high enough concentra-
tions that it is possible to measure them, the cell samples will need to be stimulated
prior to the measurements. A very common method to stimulate production of in-
Page 9 of 48
==PAGE:11==
tracellular cytokines and transcription factors is the combined treatment of Phorbol
Myristate Acetate (PMA) and ionomycin [12, 13, 14]. PMA is a Protein Kinase C
activator, which induces a signiﬁcant activation in lymphocytes and subsequent tran-
scription of several genes, including cytokines. Ionomycin is a calcium ionophore,
which increases the intracellular level of calcium ions. This increased level of calcium
ions have been shown to increase the production of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines in T
cells. While these two compounds work as activators when used alone, their eﬀects
have been shown to increase signiﬁcantly when used together [13]. However, some
research points to the fact that stimulation with PMA and ionomycin for longer
durations (48 hours), can cause activation-induced cell death in lymphocytes [15].
3.4
Flow cytometry
The main method of analysing samples in this project will be ﬂow cytometry, also
known as Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). This method can examine
individual particles based on the way they interact with light from a series of lasers,
as they pass through the laserlight, the light is scattered. A ﬂow cytometer is made
up of three distinct subsystems. The ﬁrst system is the ﬂuidics system. The purpose
of the ﬂuidics system is to transport the liquid sample from the testtube into the
machine, and then separate the particles in the sample so that they can be examined
one by one. This is done using high pressure and a very narrow nozzle. The second
subsystem is the optics system, which consists of a series of lasers, ﬁber optic cables,
ﬁlters and detectors. The purpose of this system is to create the light beams of
the correct wavelengths, after the light has hit a particle it is directed through the
ﬁber optic cables into the detector array. The detector array consists of ﬁlters and
detectors. The ﬁlters will only allow a narrow range of wavelengths to pass through
into the detector, while other wavelenghts are reﬂected onto the next ﬁlter. This
is to ensure as many possible data points as possible, while also ensuring that the
detectors are only exposed to light of the correct wavelength. Finally, the electronics
system converts the signal collected by the detectors into electronic data that can
be analysed on a computer [16]. A simpliﬁed overview of the subsystems can be
seen in ﬁgure 4.
The diﬀerent detectors in a ﬂow cytometer can detect diﬀerent parameters. The
ﬁrst two parameters are called Forward Scatter and Side Scatter, also known as
FSC and SSC respectively. FSC measures the degree of light scatter along the path
Page 10 of 48
==PAGE:12==
Figure 4: Simpliﬁed overview of the three subsystems in a ﬂow cytometer. The ﬂuidic system
transports the sample into the ﬂow cell one cell at a time. The optics system sends beams of
laserlight into the path of the cells, so the degree of light scatter and the wavelengths of emitted
light can be measured. Finally the electronics system converts the signal collected by the detectors
into electronic data that can be analysed using a computerprogram. Figure from [16].
of the laser, while SSC measures the degree of scatter perpendicular to the path
of the light [17]. The FSC is inﬂuenced by the size of the particle passing through
the light. The intensity of the signal is proportional to the diameter of the particle.
The SSC is caused by the granularity of the internals of the particle. Because of
this, the SSC is useful for distinguishing between cells of varying granularity, such as
lymphocytes and monocytes, with higher signal intensity meaning a higher internal
complexity [16]. The ﬁnal type of detector is used to detect ﬂuorescence. The lasers
can excite a wide range of so-called ﬂuorochromes. A ﬂuorochrome is designed to
absorb light of one wavelength and the emit light of another wavelength. It is the
light emitted by these ﬂuorochromes that are passed on into the detector arrays.
Since the light emitted has a speciﬁc wavelength it will pass through some ﬁlters,
and pass through one. This means that the same laser can excite more than one ﬂuo-
rochrome in a sample, as long as the emitted light goes to diﬀerent detectors [16, 17].
The ﬂuorochromes used to analyse the samples can be attached to antibodies. These
antibodies are designed to bind to speciﬁc proteins or cell markers in or on the cells
in the sample, that can help distinguish the diﬀerent cell types from each other [16].
Once all the data has been collected, it can be analysed using a computerprogram
such as FlowJo. In this program, the examined cells are sorted into diﬀerent pop-
ulations based on the various signal values that have been measured, for example
whether it has high or low granularity or whether or not it gave a signal for a ﬂu-
orochrome attached to a certain protein. This process is called gating, and is done
Page 11 of 48
==PAGE:13==
as step by step [16].
The ﬁrst step is usually to sort the dead cells from the living ones. This can be
done if the staining scheme has included a ﬂuorochrome that binds to markers on
dead cells. The next step is to sort single cells from doublets. As some cells can have
a tendency to stick together all the way through the ﬂuidics system, it is important
to remove these cells from our population, as they can skew the result. This is
done by comparing the FSC-height to the FSC-area. The next step is to compare
the FSC and the SSC to ﬁnd the cell population that has the degree of granular-
ity that the cells of interest are expected to have. Finally the antibody-conjugated
ﬂuorochromes can be used to remove cells that do or do not express the proteins
that has been stained [16, 17]. An example of a gating strategy can be seen in the
materials and methods section.
3.5
Previous research
The experiments performed in this project will be related to research done in a
study by Ugolini et al. [8], in order to be able to compare results, and to build on
the ﬁndings from the study. The study is comprised of many diﬀerent experiments,
however the ones that are of most interest to this project are the ones investigating
TFH cells and the expression of proteins speciﬁc for them. Since the human and
porcine immune systems have many similarities, including the expression and func-
tion of TLR8, studies were carried out on both human cell samples and porcine cell
samples.
Figure 5 shows an analysis of expression of IL-21 and Bcl6 using data generated
by ﬂow cytometry of human CD4+ T cells after being stimulated with the super-
antigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B for 5 days. It is clear that samples that have
been treated with live attenuated bacteria (labelled EC) have a higher expression of
IL-21 than samples treated with control and heat killed bacteria (labelled HKEC).
Figure 6 shows a similar analysis of expression of IL-21 and Bcl6 in samples from
porcine lymph nodes (LN) and spleen. In the lymph node samples, both live and
heat killed bacteria (ST and HKST respectively) increase the expression of Bcl6 over
the control sample. In the spleen, only samples treated with live bacteria have an
increased expression of IL-21 and Bcl6 over the control, while the samples treated
Page 12 of 48
==PAGE:14==
with heat killed bacteria actually show a lower expression. This could indicate that
the detection of Vita-PAMPs, and thereby activation of TLR8, play a signiﬁcant
role in TFH cells in both human and porcine cells. However, it should be noted that
the increased expression does not result in a separate population of positive cells
in neither ﬁgure, but merely results in slight movement or shoulder on the existing
population.
Figure 5: Flow cytometry analysis of human CD4+ T cells after 5 day stimulation with staphy-
lococcal enterotoxin B (superantigen). Expression of Bcl6 and in particular IL-21 is increased in
samples treated with live attenuated bacteria (EC) compared to the control and the heat killed
bacteria (HKEC). Figure adapted from [8].
Figure 6: Flow cytometry analysis of samples from porcine lymph nodes (LN) and spleen after
immunization with either saline control, live bacteria (ST) or heat killed bacteria (HKST). Ex-
pression of Bcl6 is increased in lymph node samples treated with HKST, but even more so with
live ST compared to control. In spleen samples expression of both IL-21 and Bcl6 is increased in
samples treated with live ST, but not with HKST. Figure adapted from [8].
Page 13 of 48
==PAGE:15==
4
Materials and Methods
4.1
Animal study
The basis for the experiments carried out in this project is an animal study con-
ducted on 25 pigs. The purpose of this animal study was to investigate the eﬀect
of ﬁve diﬀerent adjuvant formulations when given with the same vaccine against
Staphylococcus aureus, with the intention that the adjuvant activate TLR8 and thus
induce a more potent humoral immune response [8]. The vaccine consisted of 3
recombinant proteins produced by Evaxion, a company collaborating on this study.
The recombinant proteins were selected based on an In Silico antigen prediction
method [1]. This prediction found 35 novel proteins as potential protective candi-
dates. Unfortunately, for the sake of protecting intellectual property, which of the
the proteins were selected for the vaccine in this study is conﬁdential.
The 25 pigs were divided into ﬁve randomised groups, one for each adjuvant for-
mulation. The formulations were Alum, CAF01 alone, CAF01 + CL075, CAF01
+ R848 and bacterial RNA. As alum was the ﬁrst approved adjuvant for use in
human vaccines, this is included as a control to compare the other formulations to
[10]. CAF01 is a newer adjuvant formulation that has shown great potential in in-
ducing higher antibody and T helper cell responses [11]. It is used both on its own,
but also along with two diﬀerent synthetic TLR8 agonists, CL075 and R848. Both
of these synthetic analogs have previously been shown to induce diﬀerentiation of
TFH cells [8], and have therefore been chosen for this study. Finally bacterial RNA
which is a Vita-PAMP known to activate TLR8 has been included as an adjuvant [8].
All 25 pigs were stabled in one pen approximately one week before the vaccina-
tion. When the pigs were ﬁve weeks old, they were vaccinated with a subcutaneous
injection in the area behind the ear. In connection with the vaccination, blood sam-
ples were taken from the v. jugularis.
Four weeks after the initial vaccination, a booster was given. Again, blood samples
were collected in connection with the vaccination.
A week after the vaccination, new blood samples were collected.
Page 14 of 48
==PAGE:16==
After a total of 6 weeks from the vaccination, ﬁnal blood samples were collected,
and the pigs were euthanised. After euthanasia, tissue samples were taken from the
injection site, and the draining lymph nodes were excised. After excision, the lymph
nodes were put in 50mL tubes with medium consisting of RPMI (Gibco, ref61870-
010) + 2% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS) (Gibco, ref 10500-064) and 1% Pen-strep.
4.2
Preparation of samples
After being collected, the samples (both tissue and blood) are brought back to the
lab, where they are prepared to be frozen. This preparation is done in a sterile
environment in a LAF-bench. The lymph node is taken out of the 50mL tube with
a tweezer and placed in a petridish containing a small amount of medium (RPMI
+ 2% Fetal Calf Serum (FCS) and 1% Pen-strep). Approximately one third of the
lymph node is removed and put in formaldehyde.
The remaining two thirds of the lymph node is scraped in order to extract the cells.
After this extraction process, the cells were pipetted into a 50mL tube through a
70µm cell strainer. When all the cells had been extracted from the lymph node
and strained, the tubes were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes at 15 degrees
centigrade using a ThermoFischer ST 40R centrifuge, and washed twice using phos-
phate buﬀered saline (PBS) with 2% serum, being centrifuged again between washes.
After the second wash, the cell count was measured using a Chemometec Nucle-
oCounter NC-200.
After counting, the tube was centrifuged again, and FCS was added to achieve a
concentration of 2*107 cells/mL. 500µL was added to as many 1.8mL NUNC tubes
as possible. Each NUNC tube had 500µL of cold freezing medium (RPMI + 20%
DMSO) added. All tubes were put in a -80 degree freezer for at least a day, and
then transferred to a nitrogenfreezer.
The collected blood samples were also prepared for freezing. The ﬁrst step was
to dilute the blood 1:1 in sterile PBS + 2% FCS. 50mL purple StemCell SepMate
Page 15 of 48
==PAGE:17==
tubes were prepared by adding 15mL of lymphoprep through the small hole in the
bottom. The diluted blood was added carefully on top of the lymphoprep until a
total volume of 50mL per tube. The tubes were then centrifuged at 1200g for 20
minutes.
After centrifuging, the supernatant was poured into 50mL tubes, and washed twice
with sterile PBS + 2% PBS, being centrifuged at 300g for 8 minutes between washes.
After the second wash, 5mL lysis buﬀer was added to each tube. 3 minutes after
adding lysis buﬀer, the tubes were washed and centrifuged twice again, and the cell
count was measured using a Chemometec NucleoCounter NC-200.
After counting, the tube was centrifuged at 1500rpm for 5 minutes at 15 degrees
centigrade, and FCS was added to achieve a concentration of 2*107 cells/mL. 500µL
was added to as many 1.8mL NUNC tubes as possible. Each NUNC tube had 500µL
of cold freezing medium (RPMI + 20% DMSO) added. All tubes were put in a -80
degree freezer for at least a day, and then transferred to a nitrogenfreezer.
Before the samples could be worked on, they had to be thawed in the correct way to
ensure that the cells didn’t die. The thawing procedure is the same for both lymph
node and blood cells.
The frozen cells were resuspended in RPMI + 10% FCS by adding a small amount to
the tube, pipetting gently up and down a couple of times and then transferring the
liquid to a 50mL tube, repeat until all the sample had thawed and been transferred
to the 50mL tube. After this, the cells were washed twice with RPMI + 10% FCS
medium being centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes between washes.
After the second wash, the tubes were topped up to 15mL with medium, and the
cell count was measured.
After counting, the tube was centrifuged at 1500rpm for 5 minutes at 15 degrees
centigrade, and RPMI + 10% FCS medium was added to achieve a concentration
Page 16 of 48
==PAGE:18==
of 106 cells/mL.
4.3
Cell stimulation
The objective of this project is to ﬁnd a method of quantifying TFH cells in lymph
node samples. In order to do this, speciﬁc markers for TFH cells need to be iden-
tiﬁed. The studies described in section 3 mention several surface and intracellular
molecules that distinguish them from other CD4+ T cells, such as CXCR5, ICOS
and Bcl6. However, in order to relate the ﬁndings of this project to the ﬁndings
presented in the paper by Ugolini et al. [8], IL-21 and Bcl6 has been chosen as the
proteins of interest.
To make sure that the TFH cells in the sample can be distinguished from the other
cell types present in the sample, they need to be stimulated to produce IL-21 and
Bcl6. Since many studies, including the one carried out by Ugolini et al. use a com-
bination of PMA and ionomycin to stimulate in vitro cytokine and transcription
factor expression in lymphocytes, this is also the method chosen for this project.
However, after consulting with one of the authors of the paper by Ugolini et al. it
was decided to also use brefeldin A and monensin, both of which inhibit transport
of intracellular proteins out of the cells. This was done in order to ensure that the
produced IL-21 and Bcl6 molecules were not transported out of the cells, but stayed
inside it, to ensure that they could be used for ﬂuorochrome binding.
The stimulation was done on 24 well ThermoFischer Nunclon plates. 2*1mL of cell
suspension were transferred to the plates, resulting in one stimulated and one un-
stimulated sample from each pig. In addition to this, remaining sample from all pigs
were pooled and 1mL/well added to six wells on each plate to be used as calibration
controls. The complete setup consisted of three plates, two plates with 16 samples
from eight pigs, and one plate with 18 samples from nine pigs, with each plate also
having six calibration control samples.
Once the samples had been added to the plate, 10 µL PMA was added to every
other well for a ﬁnal dilution of 20000:1 and a well concentration of 50ng/mL, and
10 µL ionomycin for a ﬁnal dilution of 1000:1 and a well concentration of 1µg/mL.
Page 17 of 48
==PAGE:19==
After mixing the wells by gently pipetting up and down a couple of times, the plates
were placed in an incubator (Thermo Scientiﬁc Forma Steri-Cult CO2 incubator) at
37 degrees and 5% CO2.
After being in the incubator for half an hour, the plates were taken out. 10 µL
brefeldin A (BFA) for a ﬁnal dilution of 500:1 and 10 µL monensin for a ﬁnal di-
lution of 50000:1 was added to every other well. After mixing the wells by gently
pipetting up and down a couple of times, the plates were placed in an incubator at
37 degrees and 5% CO2 for an additional two and a half hours.
The plates were removed from the incubator, and the samples were pipetted from
the plates and into FACS tubes. After transferring the ﬁrst mL from the plate, 1
mL FACS buﬀer (PBS + 0.5% FCS) was added to the well, gently pipetted up and
down, and then also transferred to the same FACS tube in order to ensure that as
much of the remaining sample was recovered. When all samples were transferred
to FACS tubes, they were centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes and washed twice
with 2 mL FACS buﬀer.
4.4
Cell staining
In order to be able to detect the TFH cells on the ﬂow cytometer, the cells have to be
stained using antibody-conjugated ﬂuorochromes. To narrow down the population
before looking at IL-21 and Bcl6 expression, a few additional antibodies were chosen,
namely CD3, CD4, CD8 and a Live/Dead marker to remove any dead cells. These
antibodies were chosen since TFH cells are CD4+, which means they must also be
CD3+ and CD8-, and all cells that do not comply with this can be removed.
The ﬁrst step in staining the cells is adding the antibodies for the extracellular
proteins. The amount of antibodies added to each FACS tube were 1µL anti-CD3,
2µL anti-CD4, 1µL anti-CD8 and 0.1µL Near-IR Live/Dead marker. However, as
the anti-CD3 antibody used in this project was unlabelled, which means it did not
have a conjugated ﬂuorochrome, a secondary antibody had to be added later. In
addition to this, the calibration control samples were so-called ﬂuorescence minus
one (FMO) controls, which means that they each had all but 1 of the ﬂuorochromes
added. Finally a set of single stained controls (SSC), which only had 1 ﬂuorochrome
Page 18 of 48
==PAGE:20==
eacg were made. The FMO controls were used to ﬁnd the background noise for a
negative signal, and the SSC controls were used to create compensation, in case a
small amount of the signal of one ﬂuorochrome reached another detector.
After the ﬁrst 4 antibodies were added, the samples were covered with tinfoil to
shield them from light, and put in the fridge to incubate for half an hour. After
incubating, the cells were washed twice in FACS buﬀer, being centrifuged at 1500
rpm for 5 minutes after each wash.
After the second wash, the labelled secondary antibody that binds to the unlabelled
anti-CD3 was added. 0.2µL were added to each tube except 1 FMO and the SSC
controls that were not CD3. The samples were covered with tinfoil to shield them
from light, and put in the fridge to incubate for half an hour again. After incubat-
ing, the cells were washed twice in FACS buﬀer, being centrifuged at 1500 rpm for
5 minutes after each wash.
In order to allow the last antibodies to reach the intracellular cytokines, the cells
must be permeabilised. This was done using the BD Biosciences ﬁxation/permeabilization
kit. 250µL ﬁxation/permeabilization solution was added to each sample and vor-
texed using a tabletop vortexer. After being vortexed, the samples were covered in
tinfoil and left in the fridge for 20 minutes. After incubating, the cells were washed
twice in 1xPerm buﬀer from the ﬁxation/permeabilization kit, being centrifuged at
1500 rpm for 5 minutes after each wash.
After the second wash, the cells are permeabilised, and the antibodies can bind to
the intracellular proteins. Each sample tube has 0.5µL anti-IL21 and 2µL anti-Bcl6
antibodies added, and again only the relevant controls. After adding the antibod-
ies, the tubes are once more covered in tinfoil and put in the fridge to incubate for
half an hour. After incubating, the cells were washed twice in 1xPerm buﬀer, being
centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes after each wash.
The ﬁnal step was to ﬁx the cells since the ﬂow cytometry could not be done immedi-
ately after the staining process. This was done by adding 250µL 4% paraformalde-
hyde solution to each tube and incubate with tinfoil at room temperature for 10
Page 19 of 48
==PAGE:21==
minutes. After ﬁxing, the cells were washed twice with FACS buﬀer. Finally, 250µL
FACS buﬀer was added to each tube, after which they were left in the fridge, covered
in tinfoil, until analysis on the ﬂow cytometer.
4.5
Flow cytometry and gating strategy
Flow cytometry analysis was done on a BD Biosciences LSRFortessa and was the
only method of analysis used on the samples. For the stimulated and unstimulated
tubes, as much as possible of the sample was measured, in order to get as much data
as possible for each sample. For the SSC controls, the machine has a predetermined
amount of data needed to calculate the compensation. For the FMO controls, not
all of the sample was measured, as the controls only need enough data points to
distinguish the positive and negative populations.
The gating strategy for this experiment aims to ﬁnd living, single cell lymphocytes
that are CD3+, CD4+, CD8-, IL-21+ and Bcl6+. The ﬁrst gate is to separate
the living cells from the dead. This is done by showing a histogram over the NIR
Live/Dead marker, and placing a narrow gate on the negative population. This is
done because the Live/Dead marker binds to dead cells, and thus anything that
yields a signal is dead.
The next gate separates single cells from doublets or aggregates of cells. This is done
by plotting FSC-A compared to FSC-H. Single cells will have a linear relationship
between the height and the area of the FSC, and thus are located on a linear diago-
nal on the plot. The lower left corner is also discarded, as this is just contains debris
and is too small to be viable cells. Anything below the diagonal are cell doublets.
The third gate separates lymphocytes from other cell types, as well as removing
more debris. This is done by comparing FSC-A to SSC-A. As can be seen in ﬁgure
7, the lymphocytes form a welldeﬁned population around the lower middle of the
plot.
Now the actual ﬂuorochrome gating starts. The ﬁrst of these gates is around the
Page 20 of 48
==PAGE:22==
CD3+ population. The plot shows CD3+ and SSC-A. The CD3+ cells form a nice
population in the lower right corner.
The next gate is diﬀerent from the previous in that the plot has a ﬂuorochrome on
both axis. The gate is separating CD4+CD8- cells from the rest. The gate is a
crossgate, with the vertical line separating CD8 positive and negative cells, and the
horizontal line separating CD4 positive and negative cells.
The ﬁnal gate is the one ﬁnding the TFH cells that are the main focus of this
experiment.
The gate is a polygon that covers most of the plot, except for the
main population in the lower left corner. The idea behind this gate is to investigate
the diﬀerence in expression of both IL-21 and Bcl6 in the remaining cells between
samples that have been stimulated and samples that have not. In theory, lymph
nodes that have many TFH cells should show a greater diﬀerence in IL-21 and Bcl6
expression between stimulated and unstimulated samples than lymph nodes that do
not have a lot of TFH cells.
Page 21 of 48
==PAGE:23==
Figure 7: Simple overview of the gating strategy for ﬂow cytometry data analysis. The ﬁrst
picture shows a gate separating live cells from dead using the NIR Live/Dead marker. The second
picture shows a gate selecting single cells and removing doublets and debris, using FSC-A and
FSC-H. The last picture in the top row shows a gate around lymphocytes using FSC-A and SSC-
A. The ﬁrst picture in the second row shows a gate separating CD3+ and CD3- cell populations,
using the CD3 binding ﬂuorochrome and SSC-A. The next picture shows a crossgate separating
both CD4 and CD8 populations. The vertical line separates CD8+/- and the horizontal separates
CD4+/-. The ﬁnal picture shows the gate that ﬁnds the TFH cells by surrounding the population
of Bcl6-IL-21- cells.
Page 22 of 48
==PAGE:24==
5
Results
Samples from the animal study tested in this project had been previously investi-
gated before the start of this project. Speciﬁcally, the antibody response was tested
by ﬁnding the titer of antibodies towards the 3 recombinant proteins in the vaccine.
The results of this is shown in ﬁgure 8. The titer of antibodies generally increased
with time as the pigs were ﬁrst vaccinated and subsequently boosted. The highest
antibody titer was found towards protein 8 in pigs treated with either CAF01 alone
or CAF01 along with one of the synthetic TLR8 agonists CL075 and R848.
Figure 8: Results from antibody response test. Blood samples from the pigs were tested in order
to ﬁnd the titer of antibodies towards the 3 recombinant proteins used in the vaccine. The highest
antibody titer was found towards protein 8 in pigs treated with either CAF01 alone or CAF01 along
with one of the synthetic TLR8 agonists CL075 and R848. Figure provided by Louise Martinsen,
PhD student.
5.1
Cell staining
After analysing the data from ﬂow cytometry in FlowJo, it has become clear that
something has gone wrong with the NIR Live/Dead marker. In some samples it
yields a very clear distinction between living and dead cells, but in other samples,
the data is useless as can be seen in ﬁgure 9. The data from the cell count is shown
in table 1, which shows that the cell viability ranges from 43.5% to 69.8%, and thus
the Live/Dead histograms should yield roughly the same results
However, the following gates also inherently sort out dead cells, as these have a
tendency to aggregate and have granularity diﬀerent to lymphocytes. This is shown
in ﬁgure 10, where the Live/Dead gate has been expanded to include the entire
population. The single cell gates and lymphocyte gates are unchanged from the
Page 23 of 48
==PAGE:25==
Table 1: A table showing the results of the cell counts performed immediately after thawing the
samples. The cell concentration is the measured value after the cells have been suspended in 15mL
medium. The cell viability is the percentage of living cells measured by the machine. The amount
of living cells in each sample was calculated in order to ﬁnd out how big a volume the cells should
be suspended in to reach a concentration of a million cells/mL.
gating strategy example in section 4. The ﬁnal picture in ﬁgure 10 shows the same
plot as the ﬁrst picture, however, only the cells inside the lymphocyte gate are
included. As can clearly be seen, all the dead cells have been removed even though
the Live/Dead marker was not used. Based on this, further analysis of the ﬂow
cytometry data will be done without taking the Live/Dead marker into account.
Apart from the Live/Dead marker, the other ﬂuorochromes yielded good results
with clear distinction between positive and negative populations in all samples. An
example analysis is shown in ﬁgure 11. However, as was explained in the background
section, the study by Ugolini et al.
[8] indicated that the intracellular staining
would not give clear distinction but only a slight shift of the population or an added
shoulder, as can be seen in ﬁgures 5 and 6.
Page 24 of 48
==PAGE:26==
Figure 9: 3 diﬀerent Live/Dead histograms. The ﬁrst histogram is an example of good separation
between live and dead cells, while the other two histograms show samples where the Live/Dead
marker for some reason did not yield proper results.
Figure 10: Elaboration of the analysis shown in ﬁgure 7 in the gating strategy part of section
3. The same sample is used in both ﬁgures, however in this ﬁgure the Live/Dead gate in the ﬁrst
histogram has been expanded to cover the entire population. The gates in the two middle diagrams
have not been changed. The ﬁnal histogram is identical to the ﬁrst one, however only the cells
population achieved through the 2 middle gates is included. As can be seen, this gating strategy
(without using the Live/Dead marker) has also removed the dead cells from the population.
5.2
TFH cell quantiﬁcation
Since the positive and negative populations of cells were not always located in ex-
actly the same place on the plots, the gates had to be adjusted for all samples.
However, gates for stimulated and unstimulated samples from the same pig had
identical gates. This was done in order to be able to compare results from the two
samples, which only makes sense if the results are acquired using the same method.
In order to ﬁnd out if the stimulation had increased the percentage of IL-21+Bcl6+
cells, the diﬀerence between stimulated and unstimulated samples across groups
were investigated. The results of this can be seen in table 2.
Page 25 of 48
==PAGE:27==
Figure 11: Example of a full analysis of one of the samples. The diagrams follow the revised gating
strategy after excluding the Live/Dead marker from the analysis. The gates have clear separation
of positive and negative populations. However, as described previously, the intracellular staining
might not give clear distinction but only a slight shift of the population or an added shoulder.
Page 26 of 48
==PAGE:28==
Table 2: Summary of the results from ﬂow cytometry and subsequent analysis in FlowJo. Stimu-
lated and unstimulated samples from the same pigs were compared, and the increase or reduction
in IL-21+Bcl6+ cells are shown, along with the mean percentage increase and standard deviations
of this for the ﬁve diﬀerent groups.
The results show that the stimulation increased the mean concentration of IL-
21+Bcl6+ cells in pigs treated with CAF01 + CL075 by 29% with a standard
deviation of 18%, CAF01 + R848 by 20% with a standard deviation of 30% and
bacterial RNA by 22% with a standard deviation of 45%, and reduced the concen-
tration in pigs treated with alum and CAF01 alone by 8% in both groups, with
standard deviations of 40% and 15% respectively.
Page 27 of 48
==PAGE:29==
6
Discussion
6.1
Animal study
The animal study was carried out on 25 pigs divided into ﬁve groups of ﬁve animals.
This is not a very large sample size. However, since studies with pigs are quite
expensive compared to studies on smaller animals such as rodents, and the study
was speciﬁcally related to porcine infections, that is a compromise that had to be
made. Ín order to verify the results of the study, the experiments would probably
have to be carried out again to achieve a bigger sample size.
Since the study only involved vaccination and a booster before euthanasia, and no
symptomatic infection, the size of the draining lymph nodes were not very large. In
some pigs, the lymph node only contained enough cells for 1 cryovial to be ﬁlled,
which means that subsequent repeats of the experiment would need to be carried
out without these samples. In addition to this, the overall low amount of samples
made experiment optimization inconvenient, as it would either have to be done using
samples from other studies, or use some of the limited samples from this one, neither
option being optimal.
6.2
Flow cytometry and cell staining
Overall the cell staining seem to have gone well. The CD3/4/8 stainings proved
succesfull and yielded good separation of positive and negative populations in all
samples.
The staining of the intracellular cytokines did not yield very good separation, but
this was expected, as this was also the case in a similar study using the same anti-
bodies [8]. For future experiments it might be advantageous to ﬁnd other antibodies
or ﬂuorochromes that yield a better distinction between populations for the intra-
cellular proteins.
Finally, the Live/Dead marker gave results of varying quality. This could be due to
improper storage of the antibody between experiments, as this particular antibody
Page 28 of 48
==PAGE:30==
has to be stored in a freezer, while the other antibodies used can be stored in a
fridge. Fortunately, as is shown in ﬁgure 10, it was possible to remove the dead cells
from the population using following two gates, and thus disregarding the Live/Dead
marker should not pose a problem for the ﬁnal result.
The results of ﬂow cytometry and following analysis indicate that quantiﬁcation of
TFH cells is indeed possible with the method used in this project. The group treated
with alum as adjuvant had an 8% mean reduction of TFH cells after stimulation.
In this study, alum was included as a baseline control as it is the oldest approved
adjuvant and new formulations should at least be able to induce a better response
than it. The reduction in concentration in the stimulated sample may be a result
of activation-induced cell death from being treated with PMA and ionomycin as
described by [15].
The group treated with CAF01 as the only adjuvant also had an 8% mean reduction
of TFH cells after stimulation. CAF01 as an adjuvant has been shown to especially
stimulate the diﬀerentiation into Th1 cells [11]. This diﬀerentiation has been shown
to inhibit Bcl6 transcription which plays a key role th TFH cell diﬀerentiation [13],
which might explain the lower concentration.
The two groups treated with CAF01 and a synthetic TLR8 agonist (CL075 and R848
respectively) both showed an increase in TFH cell concentration of 20% or higher.
These two groups were also two of the three that showed the highest antibody titers
towards the vaccine proteins in blood samples (see ﬁgure 8), which supports the case
that these treatments should increase TFH cell concentration. In addition to this,
the study by Ugolini et al. [8] showed that CL075 and R848 were the only synthetic
TLR8 agonists to induce TFH cell diﬀerentiation.
Finally, the group treated with bacterial RNA as an adjuvant showed an increase
in TFH cell concentration of 22%. Since bacterial RNA is the activator of TLR8 in
actual bacterial infections, it should come as no surprise that it could also activate
TLR8 when used as an adjuvant.
The mean increases and reductions in TFH cell concentration of the groups makes
sense, based on the research described in the background section.
However, all
Page 29 of 48
==PAGE:31==
ﬁve groups have very standard deviations of the mean. This means that there is
high variations in the data, with each group having at least one sample being very
diﬀerent than the others. This can be a result of many things, such as individual
variations in the test animals, human errors in the lab or even the fact that the
result is aﬀected by a parameter that has not been investigated. If it is a result from
variations in samples or human error, repeating the experiment with bigger sample
sizes could reduce the standard deviations, and make the results more valid.
6.3
Cell stimulation
The stimulation of the cells using PMA and ionomycin to increase transcription
of IL-21 and Bcl6, and subsequent treatment with BFA and monensin to stop the
products leaving the cell seems to have worked as intended. It could be argued that
the relatively short stimulation time could be one of the reasons for the high stan-
dard deviation in the results, indicating that some samples take longer to respond
to the stimulation than others, and thus show a lower increase in TFH cell con-
centration. However, this stimulation procedure was selected after consulting one
of the authors of the paper by Ugolini et at. [8], and reportedly showed good results.
With more time and higher amounts of samples available, it could be interesting to
test the eﬀects of longer stimulation times, as well as other methods of stimulation,
such as staphylococcal enterotoxin B.
Page 30 of 48
==PAGE:32==
7
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to ﬁnd a method of quantifying TFH cells in samples
from draining lymph nodes from pigs that had been vaccinated against Staphylococ-
cus aureus using diﬀerent adjuvant formulations, after stimulating and staining the
cells.
During this report, the mechanisms behind diﬀerentiation of TFH cells in both in-
fections and vaccine situations have been investigated as well as in vitro stimulation
of these.
The technology behind ﬂow cytometry and FACS has been explained.
This knowledge has then been used to prepare and test samples from a previously
performed animal study. The samples and their origin have been presented. In the
lab, the samples have been thawed, stimulated and stained in order to measure the
concentration of TFH cells, after which the samples were analysed using ﬂow cytom-
etry.
The results from this analysis shows that it was indeed possible to quantify TFH cells
in the samples. Furthermore, the results also showed that using CAF01 + CL075,
CAF01 + R848 or bacterial RNA as adjuvants increased the concentrations of TFH
cells by 29%, 20% and 22% respectively, while using either alum or CAF01 alone
reduced the TFH cell concentration by 8% in both cases. This indicates that using
adjuvant formulations that activate TLR8 in host immune cells in vaccines can help
increase the potency of the humoral response. However, the means of all ﬁve groups
had very high standard deviations, which makes the result less credible. With more
time, the cause of the high standard deviation could be investigated, and ways to
achieve more reliable results could be pursued.
Page 31 of 48
==PAGE:33==
References
[1]
Karina Juhl Rasmussen et al. “Proteome-wide antigen discovery of novel pro-
tective vaccine candidates against <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> infection”.
In: Vaccine 34.38 (2016), pp. 4602–4609.
[2]
J Kluytmans, A van Belkum, and H Verbrugh. “Nasal carriage of Staphylo-
coccus aureus: epidemiology, underlying mechanisms, and associated risks.”
In: Clinical Microbiology Reviews 10.3 (1997), pp. 505–520.
[3]
A. Collins et al. “Invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infec-
tions among dialysis patients - United States, 2005”. In: Morbidity and Mor-
tality Weekly Report 56.9 (2007), pp. 197–199.
[4]
Øyvind Omland and Leif Homann. “Occupational acquisition of methicillin-
resistant staphylococcus aureus in humans - A description of mrsa carrier and
infected cases from the region of north jutland in Denmark”. In: Annals of
Agricultural and Environmental Medicine 19.4 (2012), pp. 637–640.
[5]
Ashley M. O’Brien et al. “MRSA in conventional and alternative retail pork
products”. In: Plos One 7.1 (2012). Ed. by Bernhard Kaltenboeck, e30092.
[6]
Stuart G. Tangye. “Is it dead or alive? TLR8 can tell news-and-views”. In:
Nature Immunology 19.4 (2018), pp. 324–326.
[7]
Kenneth P. Murphy et al. Janeway’s immunobiology. Garland Science, 2012,
xix, 868 s. : isbn: 0815342438, 9780815342434.
[8]
Matteo Ugolini et al. “Recognition of microbial viability via TLR8 drives
T<sub>FH</sub> cell diﬀerentiation and vaccine responses”. In: Nature Im-
munology 19.4 (2018), pp. 386–396.
[9]
Roza I. Nurieva et al. “Bcl6 Mediates the Development of T Follicular Helper
Cells”. In: Science 325.5943 (2009), pp. 1001–1005.
[10]
Shuaibu Abdullahi Hudu, Saadatu Haruna Shinkaﬁ, and Shuaibu Umar. “An
overview of recombinant vaccine technology, adjuvants and vaccine delivery
methods”. In: International Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
8.11 (2016), pp. 19–24.
[11]
Gabriel Kristian Pedersen, Peter Andersen, and Dennis Christensen. “Im-
munocorrelates of CAF family adjuvants”. In: Seminars in Immunology 39.C
(2018), pp. 4–13.
[12]
Karmen Stankov et al. “Expression analysis of genes involved in apoptosis, pro-
liferation and endoplasmic reticulum stress in ionomycin/PMA treated Jurkat
cells”. In: Journal of B.u.on 17.2 (2012), pp. 369–376.
Page 32 of 48
==PAGE:34==
[13]
A Lagoo, C K Tseng, and S Sell. “Molecular signals in B cell activation. I. Dif-
ferential refractory eﬀects of incomplete signaling by ionomycin or PMA relate
to autocrine IL-2 production and IL-2R expression”. In: Cellular Immunology
127.2 (1990), pp. 483–96, 483–496.
[14]
Yu Gao et al. “Transcriptome analysis of porcine PBMCs after in vitro stimu-
lation by LPS or PMA/ionomycin using an expression array targeting the pig
immune response”. In: Bmc Genomics 11.1 (2010), p. 292.
[15]
Sheng Han et al. “PMA and ionomycin induce glioblastoma cell death: activation-
induced cell-death-like phenomena occur in glioma cells”. In: Plos One (2019).
[16]
Natasja WulﬀPedersen. “Flow Cytometry”. In: Course material for DTU
course: 24101 Assaytechnology ().
[17]
Ian Taylor. “Getting started with FlowJo”. In: FlowJo online training material
(). url: https://www.flowjo.com/learn/flowjo-university/
flowjo/getting-started-with-flowjo/58.
Page 33 of 48
==PAGE:35==
8
Appendix
8.1
FlowJo Batchreport
Page 34 of 48
==PAGE:36==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
7,51
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2585_Stimuleret_001.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
9182
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,9
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2585_Ustimuleret_002.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
7675
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
7,12
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2586_Stimuleret_010.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2893
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,93
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2586_Ustimuleret_011.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
8179
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,1
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2588_Stimuleret_012.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2669
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,9
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2588_Ustimuleret_013.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2667
==PAGE:37==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,44
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2591_Stimuleret_014.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
6210
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
8,25
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2591_Ustimuleret_015.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
7438
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,1
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2594_Stimuleret_016.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2952
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
15,2
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2594_Ustimuleret_017.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
6888
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
8,84
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2596_Stimuleret_018.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4093
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2596_Ustimuleret_019.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4262
==PAGE:38==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
7,10
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2597_Stimuleret_020.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
8511
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,55
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2597_Ustimuleret_021.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
6925
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,4
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2599_Stimuleret_022.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
1549
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
7,71
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
2599_Ustimuleret_023.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2815
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,2
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2576 Ustimuleret_001.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4879
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
15,1
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2576 stimuleret_002.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4283
==PAGE:39==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,98
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2577 stimuleret_004.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
3478
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
13,8
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2577 ustimuleret_003.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
3866
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
7,86
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2582 stimuleret_006.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
3436
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
5,10
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2582 ustimuleret_005.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4040
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,03
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2584 stimuleret_008.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
11844
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
5,34
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2584 ustimuleret_007.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
10019
==PAGE:40==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
12,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2589 stimuleret_010.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2936
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,18
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2589 ustimuleret_009.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
3344
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,5
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2590 stimuleret_012.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2127
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
6,50
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2590 ustimuleret_011.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
1708
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
19,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2593 stimuleret_014.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
1495
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
12,9
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2593 ustimuleret_013.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
1452
==PAGE:41==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,99
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2595 stimuleret_016.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
3504
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,00
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
LN_2595 ustimuleret_015.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2410
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,2
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2578 stim_002.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
7201
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
6,58
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2578 ustim_001.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4391
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
13,8
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2579 stim_004.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
5218
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
12,6
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2579 ustim_003.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
5755
==PAGE:42==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,2
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2580 stim_006.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
3856
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
17,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2580 ustim_005.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2354
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
14,5
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2581 stim_008.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2594
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
8,27
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2581 ustim_007.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
2562
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,4
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2583 stim_010.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
12651
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2583 ustim_009.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
12191
==PAGE:43==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
12,1
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2587 stim_012.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4877
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
10,9
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2587 ustim_011.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
5681
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
14,8
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2592 stim_014.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
7064
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
13,7
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2592 ustim_013.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
6129
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2598 stim_016.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
11439
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
9,51
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2598 ustim_015.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
10774
==PAGE:44==
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,3
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2600 stim_018.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
5087
IL-21+, Bcl-6+
11,2
0
103
104
Comp-PE-A
0
-10 2
102
103
104
Comp-FITC-A
Specimen_001_2600 ustim_017.fcs
CD4+, CD8-
4509
==PAGE:45==
8.2
Lab protocols
Page 44 of 48
==PAGE:46==
Purification and cryopreservation of porcine 
PBMCs using StemCell SepMate 
Before start: 
- 
Prepare cryomedium and store at 4°C 
- 
Prepare PBS/FCS solution  
- 
Label ALL tubes and fill SepMate tubes with Lymphoprep 
1. Dilute blood 1:1 in sterile PBS/2% FCS 
 
2. Add 15ml lymphoprep to each 50ml purple StemCell SepMate tube – add through the hole in the 
bottom.  
 
3. Carefully add diluted blood on top – do not exceed the max volume of 50 ml 
 
4. Spin down (20min, 1200g, breaks on) 
 
5. Keep supernatant, pour it into fresh 50ml falcons 
 
6. Wash x 2 in sterile PBS/2%FCS by topping up to 50 ml – combine two tubes after first wash. 
Centrifuge settings: 300g (~1500rpm), 8 min. 
 
7. If cells are very red, then need to lyse the red blood cells. 5 ml per tube for max 2-3 minutes  → 
look at the color of the pellet. Wash twice afterwards 
Lysis buffer: 
20x dilution of the non-sterile buffer i.e. dilute 20 times in milliQ water. Sterile filter through 0.45µm 
filter. (unless we already made the 20x buffer sterile, then just mix with sterile milliQ) 
 
8. Resuspend cells in PBS/2%FCS prior to counting 
 
9. Cells are centrifuged (1500rpm, 5min. 15°C) and diluted in cold media (100% FCS) to a conc. of 2* 
107 cells/ml 
 
10. 500 µl cells are aliquoted into 1,8 ml NUNC tubes. 
 
11. Add 500 µl cryomedia to each tube. Flick the tubes and store on ice. 
 
12. Transfer tubes to Mr. Frosty or sealed polystyrene (flamingo) box and place in -80°C freezer for a 
day or more. 
 
13. Transfer frozen vials (keep on dry ice) to nitrogenfreezer. 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
Thawing of Cells 
 
Freezing medium 
RPMI-1640 with 20 % DMSO. Keep the freezing mixture at 4°C 
Der kan anvendes DMSO i ampuller, som er sterile. Tjek grundigt, hvis der anvendes andre former for 
DMSO. 
 
Thawing of Cells 
1. Warm RPMI complete medium (with 10% FBS) in 15 ml tube to 37°C in a incubator before beginning 
thawing procedure 
 
2. Take cells from the nitrogen tank and store them on dry ice until thawing 
 
3. Resuspend cells in warm media (use a steril pasteur pipette and pipette media up and down in the 
freezing tube)  
 
4. Wash cells 2 x with 10ml media (1500 rpm, 5 min) 
 
5. Determine cell number and viability  by counting the cells with Neubauer-counting chamber and trypan 
blue or by cell counter 
 
==PAGE:48==
Lymphocyte staining protocol 
1. Thaw cells according to the thawing protocol. 
 
2. Count cells and resuspend to a concentration of 106 cells/ml in RPMI/10%FBS  
 
3. Add 1ml cell suspension to wells (containing 106 total cells). Gently swirl the plate clockwise 
and counter clockwise to mix.    
 
4. Plate out cell stimuli (dilute in RPMI/10% and add (well concentration 50ng/ml for PMA and 
1µg/ml for Ionomycin) 
 
5. Add buffer (RPMI/10%) until 1ml 
 
6. Incubate cultures at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 30 minutes.   
 
7. Add 10 ug/ml Brefeldin A (diluted to a WD of 1000 ug/ml and add 10ul per well) and 
monensin. Gently swirl the plate clockwise and counter clockwise to mix. Incubate for 2,5 
additional hours.  
 
8. Remove the plates from the incubator 
 
9. Resuspend wells for single stain controls (SSC) and FMO and transfer to FACS tubes, top up 
with PBS/0.5%FBS  
 
10. For the extra L/D tube, add a few sprays of ethanol. 
 
11. Resuspend samples wells and transfer to FACS tubes. 
 
12. Centrifuge at 1500rpm for 5 minutes and wash cells twice in 2 ml PBS/0.5%FBS  
 
13. Add 100 µl PBS/0.5%FBS to each tube. 
   
14. Pool the L/D and extra L/D tubes. 
 
15. Add extracellular antibodies to tubes: 
 
Antibody 
CD3 
CD4 
CD8 
L/D 
µl/tube 
1 µl 
2 µl 
1 µl 
0,1 µl 
 
16. Incubate 30 min in the fridge covered in tin foil.  
  
17. Wash twice in 2 ml PBS/0.5%FBS  
 
18. Add 0.2 ul BV421 IgG secondary antibody to tubes containing CD3 antibody (dilute 1:10 and 
add 2 ul).   
==PAGE:49==
19. Incubate 30 min in the fridge covered in tin foil. 
 
20. Wash twice in 2 ml PBS/0.5%FBS  
 
21. Fix cells by resuspending each tube in 250 ul fixation/permeabilization solution (BD 
Biosciences), vortex and incubate 20 min in the fridge, covered in tin foil 
 
22. Prepare 1xPerm buffer (BD Biosciences) by diluting in 10x stock in milliQ water 
 
23. Wash twice in 1 ml 1xPerm buffer 
 
24. Add 100 µl 1xPerm buffer to each tube. 
 
25. Add intracellular antibodies to tubes: 
 
Antibody 
IL-21 
Bcl6 
µl/tube 
0,5 µl 
2 µl 
 
26. Incubate 30 min in the fridge covered in tin foil. 
 
27. Wash twice in 1 ml 1xPerm buffer 
 
28. Optional if going straight to flow: fix cells by adding 250 ul 4% PFA, incubate 10 min at RT, 
covered in tin foil. Wash twice in 2 ml PBS/0.5%FBS 
 
29. Cells should be resuspended by adding 250 ul PBS/0.5%FBS prior to acquisition on the flow 
cytometer. 
 
