==PAGE:1==
Joint Classification in horse images
Oldouz Majidi
(s163502)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 321
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Within Machine learning, this thesis focuses on Classification for medical images by
using Deep learning techniques such as Neural Networks. The research main goal is
detecting anomalies in horse bone. These anomalies are most common in knee and
it occurs in joint. This research is about joint classification in horse images. The
thesis presents two overall approaches which is two Convolutional Neural Networks.
The first Convolutional Neural Network identifies the joint position in every medi-
cal image. The second Convolutional Neural Network classifies the images into two
different classes.
The images with fragment and images without fragment.
Both
Convolutional Neural Networks are trained and tested then tried to get the highest
validation accuracy as possible.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis tells you all you need to know about the joint classification in horses’ bones
project which is prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation.
Kongens Lyngby, July 27, 2019
Oldouz Majidi
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor Prof. Søren
Hauberg for the necessary guidance and valuable support throughout this research
project, for his patience, motivation, and immense knowledge. His guidance helped
me in all the time of research and writing of this thesis. Learning from his knowledge
helped me to become passionate about my research topic and I could not have imag-
ined having a better advisor and mentor for my M.Sc. study.
Besides my supervisor, I would like to thank the rest of my thesis committee: Dr.
Casper Lindegaard, Dr. Stine Jacobsen, and Dr. Susanne Andersen for their insight-
ful comments and encouragement, but also for some questions which motivated me to
widen my research from various perspectives and for providing me the Data. Without
their precious support, it would not be possible to conduct this research.
And finally, last but by no means least, I would like to thank my family: my parents
and to my brother and sister for supporting me spiritually throughout writing this
thesis and my life in general.
Thanks for all your encouragement!
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Data
7
2.1
Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Data Preprocessing:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Feature Extracting: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Localization CNN
9
3.1
Bounding box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Classification CNN
27
4.1
Spatial Transformer Networks(STN): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Conclusion
37
A An Appendix
39
Bibliography
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Over many years, one of the most significant and highest priority sectors in the world
is the healthcare sector. In this section, people, regardless of cost, expect the highest
level of care and service. Also, effective health care can help a significant portion of
the economy, the progress, and the industrialization of a country. Healthcare is the
enhancement of health via the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease. Nowa-
days the importance of healthcare is obvious for everyone but how can we improve
and optimize health care systems and arise the performance of health facilities by
using computers and new techniques?
In the past few years, Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence have progressed
faster. ML and AI techniques have played a significant role in the medical area such
as image segmentation, medical image processing, computer-aided diagnosis and so
on. New techniques of machine learning are able to extract useful information from
the images and show that information effectively and efficiently. Machine learning
contributes and facilitates doctors that they can diagnose and predict accurate and
quicker the risk of diseases and prevent them in a good time.[RNZ18]
Medical Image Classification is one of the main techniques in Computer-Aided Di-
agnosis (CAD) systems which this project is about the joint classification in taken
X-ray images of horse bones.
1.1
Research Aim
Computer Vision is able to extract useful information from images. It includes some
options like object detection, image classification and so on. This powerful field of
study makes computers able to understand and see the content of images by de-
veloping different technologies. Computer vision has a wide variety of applications
which medical image analysis is one of them. The aim of medical image analysis is
to investigate the image by details and then reveal internal structures hidden by the
skin and bones, then exploit some useful information in order to diagnose and treat
disease.[Broa] Investigating medical images by details can be a difficult and complex
task. It also needs more focus and attention. Doctors are humans and they may
make a mistake when analyzing these kinds of images.
How can doctors analyze
these medical images by detail without making a mistake and do that more carefully
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
and more efficiently? Here, Machine learning has the best solution for this problem
which improves doctors capabilities and makes examining the medical images more
clear and more accurately.
Classification
Classification is important and major in the machine learning area. The main goal
of classification is to predict a class y from some inputs x. This technique is used for
image classification, medical diagnosis, sentiment analysis, and many other different
tasks. The intent of Image classification is dividing an image to too many pixels and
analyze the pixels carefully and then assign these pixels of the images to classes or
categories of interest.[LI13] The aim of this project is to identify lesions in horses
joint by analyzing the medical images and then extracting some useful information
from these images.
Medical image classification
In this project, deep learning techniques are used in order to do medical image classifi-
cation which is one of the most essential issues in image recognition. The main goal of
medical image classification is to classify images into different classes in order to help
doctors to diagnose and treat the disease. This technique has two steps totally: The
step one extracts useful features from the data and the second step builds a model
which can classify the images by using the extracted feature from step one.[LD18] In
this project joint part is extracted in every image and then in the second step these
extracted images are classified by a neural network model.
Osteochondral lesions
In this project, there are two different types of images in the data. Images which
includes healthy bone of horse and images which has ”Osteochondral Lesions” or ”Os-
teochondritis Desssicans” and this project helps to solve this problem by classifying
these images in two different classes. The osteochondral lesion often happens in the
ankle and knee mostly but it can also happen in any joint.
”Such lesions are a tear or fracture in the cartilage covering one of the bones in a joint.
The cartilage can be torn, crushed or damaged and, in rare cases, a cyst can form in
the cartilage. In the knee, such cartilage damage can occur between the femur (thigh
bone) and the tibia (shin bone). In the ankle, osteochondral lesions usually occur on
the talus, which is the bone that connects the leg to the foot.”[Parb]
Causes and Risk Factors
”Usually, an osteochondral lesion occurs when there is an injury to the joint, especially
if there is an ankle sprain or if the knee is badly twisted. Individuals who play sports
such as soccer, football, rugby, and golf may be at risk of an osteochondral lesion.
Although the cause of such lesions is unknown, they may involve a genetic predispo-
sition to such a condition. They also may be caused by abnormal bone development,
especially when they occur in children. Repetitive trauma has also been associated
with the development of such lesions.”[Parb]
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Research Aim
3
Deep learning methods are used in this project. Two Neural Networks are built and
trained then get the highest validation accuracy as possible as can.
Both of the networks are Convolutional Neural Network. CNN is chosen because it
is the most successful neural network for image analysis until now and it is also an
important tool for object detection.
The first Convolutional Neural Network model is able to recognize the joint position
on the image and then the second Convolutional Neural Network model is able to
classify images into two-classes. The results and accuracy shows both models are
successful in localization and classification.
In general, learning divided by 3 parts which are:
• Supervised learning
• Unsupervised learning
• Reinforcement learning
In supervised learning, both input and output are known and supervised learning
learns the mapping function from the input x to the output y. When a new input
x is given then it can predict the output y because the aim is to approximate the
mapping function. Classification and regression are supervised learning.
In Unsupervised learning, learn something about the distribution of some input data
without having known output like clustering and association mining. In this method,
algorithms learn to inherent structure from the input examples.
In Reinforcement learning, Learn actions based on rewards. [Brob]
Medical images classification is a supervised method because the output variable
is a category or class, such as “disease” and “no disease”. This method is based on
probability distribution models which can be parametric or non- parametric like K-
nearest neighbor, Euclidean classifier, decision tree and so on.[LI13]
In this project Data is some X-ray images of horses’ bones( with fragment and with-
out fragment). The main goal of the project is Joint Classification in order to de-
tect anomalies in the horses’ bones. The classification process consists of five major
steps which are image acquisition, pre-processing, feature extraction, classification,
and evaluation.
Data is collected from Copenhagen University and pre-processed
like resizing the images. For building a good neural network model different deep
learning techniques are used. Models are trained and evaluated with choosing hyper-
parameters that work best on the data in order to get the best results and the highest
validation accuracy.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
The chosen random image from each DICOM images which shows its own specific
ID at the top of every image in Figure 1.1. These images are taken in different posi-
tions of horses’ legs and some of them consist the whole part of a horse leg and some
images consists a half part of a leg, but all the images include joint. Joint is located
in different positions and also in different areas in the images. Every image includes
just one leg and one joint.
Figure 1.1: Random Image from Each X-Ray Class.
The center of the joint is clicked manually and separately in each image and get co-
ordinates of (x, y) plus images’ own ID and those are saved in a separate file.
Like:
[[(301.4683590875643, 143.079838116262)],′ ./Data/S620596/620596_LH_oblique_0001.png′].
The first item shows the coordinates of the center of a joint and second item shows
that images’ own ID.
Images are split to the training, validation set and test images. and they are rescaled
to different sizes 32x32, 128x128, 500x500.
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Research Aim
5
Every image is a big grid of numbers between [0, 255] and what the computer sees is
exactly that big grid of the numbers between [0, 255]. It is shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: .
Let an image has 4 pixels and 3 different classes( Leg, Arm, and Neck) be considered
then linear classifier will be:
f(x, W) = Wx + b
(1.1)
where W is weights or parameters and x is input and b is bias. Figure 1.3 shows an
example of a linear classifier.[Yeu]
Figure 1.3: Linear Classifier.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks:
Convolutional Neural Network is built of neurons which consists of learnable weights
and biases. These neural networks are similar to ordinary neural networks which so
often are called CNNs or ConvNets. Every neuron gets some inputs and then executes
a dot product and pursues it with a non-linearity if necessary. A single differentiable
score function expresses in the whole network.[c23]. CNN consists of a convolutional
neural network, local connectivity, and weight sharing. It consists of three main lay-
ers which are Convolutional Layer, Pooling Layer, and Fully-Connected Layer.
Architecture:
Figure 1.4: Architecture of the Convolutional Neural Network.
Localization and Classification with Conventional Neural Networks
Totally, CNN has two steps where the first step is feature pre-processing which turns
the input images into something that the algorithm can clarify more efficiently then
the second step is classification which trains the algorithm to map the input images
to the given classes and learn the fundamental relationship.
Two Convolutional Neural Networks models are built is this project:
• The first CNN model is about localization which is able to recognize the position
of the joint in the X-ray images.
• The second CNN model is about classification which is able to classify the im-
ages to two different classes. Class of fragment images and class of no fragment
images.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Data
2.1
Data Acquisition
Data is gathered and selected by Dr. Casper Lindegaard, Dr. Stine Jacobsen and Dr.
Susanne Andersen from Copenhagen University(veterinarian section).
Data consists of almost 310 DICOM image from horses’ legs. Some of these images
include healthy joint(bones without fragment in the joint) and some of them include
unhealthy joint(bones with fragment in the joint). The number of healthy joint im-
ages are more than the number of unhealthy joint images. The images are taken in
different positions of horses’ bones and There are some text, stamp on the images.
Every horse image has its own specific ID. Images are in different folders and labeled
with their own particular IDs. Besides the data, there are also two CSV files which
include four columns and some information. The first column includes the filename
which shows every images’ name. The second column is about the quality of the
images where 1 means the best quality and 3 means the worst quality. The third
column consists of information about the PI fragment Y/N where ”Y” means Yes,
this image has fragment and ”N” means no, this image has not fragment. The fourth
column includes some information about the description of any other findings.
The size of images are different in the data and they need Data Preprocessing before
putting in Neural Network as input images.
2.2
Data Preprocessing:
For increasing the performance of the classification algorithm, data needs to pre-
process. Data Pre-processing is an action that performs on raw data and obtains
the best recital. Cropping, scaling and filtering the images are some options of data
pre-processing. All DICOM images are re-scaled to 500x500 size then the center of
the joint is clicked manually and achieve coordinates of (x, y) plus images’ own ID.
Those are saved in a separate file.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Data
Figure 2.1: clicking on the center of the joint.
Data is split into the train, validation, and test set and choose hyper-parameters
on val and evaluate on test.
For localization CNN, 310 images with both fragment and without fragment are used
totally. 250 for the training set, 31 for validation set and 29 for the test set.
For classification CNN, 280 images are used totally. Images are in two different fold-
ers. A folder to train set and another folder to test set. Every folder(train set and
test set folder) is also split into two different folders with label 1 and 0. A folder with
label 1 includes images with a fragment ( where consists 66 images to the training set
and 14 images to the test set) and folder 0 includes images without fragment ( where
consists 176 images to the training set and 24 images to the test set). Hyperparame-
ters are chosen based on working best on the data.
2.3
Feature Extracting:
Data includes a lot of different regions. The DICOM images mostly consist of the
whole leg of the horse. There are also some text and noise in the images which is
not needed in this case and may confuse the classification CNN model if it works
on a different huge number of regions. The Osteochondral lesion is most common in
the knee joint. For classifying the images with Osteochondral lesion and without the
Osteochondral lesion, just the joint part is needed in every image and because of that,
this part is extracted in every image. That makes the job easier.
Framework For programming in this project, Python programming language is used
and also Pytorch as a Python-based scientific computing package is applied for a re-
placement for NumPy to use the power of GPUs and a deep learning research platform
that provides maximum flexibility and speed. For training the CNN model on GPU,
HPC in DTU support and help.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Localization CNN
The localization Convolutional Neural Network model: The model is a feed-
forward network which takes the images as input, feeds it through several layers one
after the other, and then at the end gives the output.
The model includes some
learnable weights and it iterates over the input images and calculates Loss in order
to measure the difference between the predicted coordinates by the output of the
model and the target. The model applies the backpropagation step into the param-
eters of the model then updates the weights by using Adam optimizer to minimize
the computed Loss function in order to get output values closer to target values. For
computing the Loss Function, Mean square Error is applied which compute the mean-
squared error between the output and the target.[Pyt]
The CNN model process is like:
Figure 3.1: Convolutional Neural Network.
where C1, S2, C3, S4 are feature maps in Figure 3.1 and
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Localization CNN
input size of image: 500x500
C1 : 6 channels, 496x496
S2 : 6 channels, 248x248
C3 : 16 channels, 244x244
S4 : 16 channels, 122x122
C5 : 120, F6 : 84, output : 2
These values are calculated such following:
C1 = imagesize −filtersize + 1 = 500 −5 + 1 = 496
(3.1)
S2 = (imagesize −filtersize + 1)
2
= (500 −5 + 1)
2
= 248
(3.2)
C3 = S2 −filtersize + 1 = 248 −5 + 1 = 244
(3.3)
S4 = (S2 −filtersize + 1)
2
= (248 −5 + 1)
2
= 122
(3.4)
where image size is equal with 500 and filter size is equal with 5.
The CNN model contains:
The DICOM images of horse bones which are used as an input into the model. Every
input image is a tensor with shape 1 channel, 6 output channels, 5x5 square convolu-
tion. All images are resized to (image width) x (image height) = (500 × 500).
The stride is equal with (1, 1). Number of convolutional kernels, the width, and
height of kernels which are hyper-parameters are 5 × 5.
The CNN model also includes a local pooling layer which decreases the dimensions
of the data. It combines the outputs of neuron clusters at one layer into a single
neuron in the next layer. Local pooling combines small clusters which 2 x 2 in this
model. The reason for choosing small clusters is because the larger generate will gives
worse results. Max pooling computes and uses the maximum value from each of a
cluster of neurons at the prior layer. Max pooling is also the most common one for
the classification tasks. In classification tasks, it is not the main issue where exactly
==PAGE:21==
3 Localization CNN
11
a feature is present and also taking the largest value (by the max pooling) makes the
model invariant to the small translations.
Max pooling decreases the spatial size of the feature map as it is shown in Figure 3.2.
This an example of 2x2 max pooling with stride 2. This kind of max pooling is very
common in Convolutional Neural Networks.
Figure 3.2: Architecture of 2x2 Max pooling.
Fully connected layers:
Fully connected layers connect every neuron in one layer to every neuron in another
layer that means neurons in this layer have full connections to all activations in the pre-
vious layer. It is in principle the same as the traditional multi-layer perceptron neural
network (MLP). As it is shown in Figure 3.1 there is a full connection between S4 and
layer C5 where in features are equal with 238144 (channels×S4×S4 = 16×122×122)
and out features are equal with 120 and also a full connection between layers C5 and
F6 where in features are equal with 120 and out features are with 84. At the end,
there is a full connection between F6 and output where in features equal with 84 and
output is equal with 2.
The output of the CNN model is a function like:
f(x) = f3(f2(f1(x)))
(3.5)
where x is the input and f(x) is the output of the neural network model, which pre-
dicts (x, y) coordinates.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Localization CNN
The architecture of that is like:
Figure 3.3: Architecture of the model output.
In the CNN model, the Rectified Linear Unit(ReLU) is used as activation function.
ReLU function is the most common used activation function in neural network models
where,
σ(z) = ReLU(z) = max(0, z)
(3.6)
[Sha] , and its derivative is:
σ′(z) =
{ 1
x>0
0
x≤0
(3.7)
The reason for choosing ReLU as activation function, if Sigmoid is chosen as activa-
tion function it may happen vanishing gradient problem. ReLU is also most popular
with CNNs and very simple because it just converts all negative pixel values to 0. As
it mentioned in equation (3.6) it is equal with ReLU(input) = Max(0, input).
Figure 3.4: Activation function is used in the CNN model.
==PAGE:23==
3 Localization CNN
13
Loss Function
The choice of loss functions can be different on different tasks.
If the task is re-
gression then the best choice of loss function can be MSE or L1. In such cases like
two-class/multi-class classification then the best choice of the loss function is Binary
cross-entropy/Cross-entropy. In this model, the Mean Square Error(MSE) loss func-
tion is used in order to compute the error between the target and the output of the
model.
Backpropagation
Convolutional neural network has two steps which is forward propagation step and
then backpropgation step. CNN do backpropagation many times in order to minimize
the loss and get the predicted output value as close as possible to the target value.
Optimizer step
For optimization, some different popular algorithms such SGD(stochastic gradient
descent) and Adam(Adaptive Moment Estimation) is tested and then Adam is chosen
in order to update network weights iterative based in training data. Adam optimizer
is a combination of RMSProp and momentum. The reason for choosing Adam opti-
mizer because it is more effective and also achieves good results faster.
Learning rate is = 0.0001 .
Epochs
When all data has been shown to the network once it is called an Epoch. In this
model number of epochs are equal with 1000. After an epoch CNN model begins
sampling all the data over again.
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Localization CNN
The Convolutional Neural network Architecture:
Figure 3.5: ConvNet.
Figure 3.6: ConvNet Architecture.
Figure 3.5 and 3.6 show the architecture of the CNN model where the type of layers
and shapes of outputs are explained with more detail before.
==PAGE:25==
3 Localization CNN
15
Training the CNN model:
The localization CNN model is trained with number of epochs = 1000. At the be-
ginning Train loss is equal 1.887, Validation loss is equal with 0.994 and Test loss is
0.642. Then these values are decreasing and ending with Train loss is equal 0.009,
Validation loss is equal with 0.204 and Test loss is 0.172 finally.
The results of training for all collected data( images with fragment and without frag-
ment)with a number of epochs equal with 1000 is shown in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Plot of training.
The Plot in this Figure shows x and y axis where the x axis is a number of epochs
from 1 to 1000 and y axis shows Loss function for three different train, validation
and test set with the color blue, orange and green respectively. The results in the
plot looks good and reasonable because it starts with the error equal with 1.8 and
it is decreasing to 0.009 at the end. Loss function is minimizing and it means the
predicted output value of Convolutional Neural Network is becoming more closer and
closer to the target value.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Localization CNN
Figure 3.8 shows a histogram of loss. As it is shown in this figure the loss is minimiz-
ing.
Figure 3.8: Histogram of Loss.
Results: The Convolutional Neural Network is successful at localization. It is able to
recognize the joint position correctly almost in every image.
==PAGE:27==
3 Localization CNN
17
Theses are some examples of input images and extracted joint part images by the
output of the CNN model.
Figure 3.9: Results of localization by Convolutional Neural Network.
Figure 3.9 shows some examples of localization by the CNN model. The left images
are input images to the model and the right images shows the extracted joint by
the output of model which is predicted (x, y) coordinates by Convolutional Neural
Network.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Localization CNN
Here shows some example images with target and predicted (x, y) coordinates by
Localization Neural Network model for two different kinds of data to measure and
clarify the difference between the two coordinates better in each image.
Note that the size of all images are the same and all of them are 500x500.
Data with fragment:
Here, there are some images which shows the line at the joint.
This line is the
difference between the target coordinates and predicted output coordinates by the
Localization Neural Network. In most cases, this difference is very low and this line
seems like a point.
For example: Figure 3.10 shows an image with two different
coordinates and draw a line between these coordinates where the coordinates of the
target is (321, 165) and coordinates of the model output is (314, 162).
(The quality of this image is equal with 2. Source from CSV file).
Figure 3.10: Difference between the target and predicted output.
==PAGE:29==
3 Localization CNN
19
Some more cases in the data with fragment in Figure 3.11:
The first image from the left has coordinates of the target (235, 174) and coordinates
of model output (228, 174) and the image at the right side has coordinates of the
target (330, 251) and coordinates of output is (308, 247).
Both coordinates of the target and predicted coordinates are very close and this shows
the Convolutional Neural Network is successful at localization (predicting the right
position of the joint in every image) even the joint is located in different positions in
different images.(The quality of both images are 1 which means perfect).
Figure 3.11: Difference between the target and predicted output.
Data without fragment:
These images also show the difference between the two coordinates in Figure 3.12
where the left image’s target coordinates is (335, 90) and its predicted coordinates is
(332, 111) and the right side image’s coordinates is (322, 110) for target and (331, 111)
for the output of the model. The quality of theses images are 3 and 1 from the left
to the right respectively. The difference between the coordinates in the right image
is lower than the left side image.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Localization CNN
Figure 3.12: Difference between the target and predicted output.
A worse case in an image which happened rarely and it is shown in Figure 3.13
where the coordinates of the target is (216, 230) and the predicted coordinates by
CNN model is (328, 109). The difference between these two coordinates are high and
CNN couldn’t predict the right position of the joint very well in this case.
(The quality of this image is equal with 2).
Figure 3.13: Difference between the target and predicted output.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Bounding box
21
Problems:
First, the quality of images are considered to see if it effects the performance of the
model or not. As it is mentioned before at Data chapter, Data is gathered from two
different veterinarian sections by Dr. Casper Lindegaard and Dr. Stine Jacobsen
which includes images without fragment and also another section by Dr. Susanne
Andersen which data includes images with a fragment. Both data consists of two
CSV files that show the images IDs and the qualities of the images.
The data sent by Dr. Susanne Andersen have higher qualities. The quality of these
images are 1 which means perfect and the data collected by Dr. Casper Lindegaard,
Dr. Stine Jacobsen has a poor quality which is 3 in some cases(Source from CSV
file). 3 means poor quality and there are also a lots of noise in these images such
text, big stamp and also horseshoe. With observing different cases, it is concluded
that the quality of images do not influence the model’s performance. In some cases,
an image with quality 2 had better prediction than an image with quality 1(which
means perfect).
With comparing the coordinates in each image separately and also for both data
with fragment and without fragment, it is concluded having more data is important.
With more data model can train on more images and learns better and better. The
results of extracted output images in Data without fragment has better than the data
with a fragment. Even the quality of data with a fragment is much better than and
also there are not too much noise in these images but it still gives some worse results.
In the images are collected by Dr. Casper Lindegaard, Dr. Stine Jacobsen, CNN
model performs better and is more successful at localization of the right position of
the joint. The difference between target and output is lower in the case.
More data effects the neural networks models directly and increases the performance
of the model and obtains better results.
3.1
Bounding box
Coordinates of (x, y) is obtained by CNN model where this model is successful at pre-
dicting the right position of the joint almost in every image. All of these coordinates
which is the output of the CNN model plus their own image id are saved in a file. In
order to draw a bounding box around the joint part in every image, the saved file is
used (which includes (x, y) coordinates and the image id).
These obtained coordinates make it easier to calculate the coordinates of the upper
left and also coordinates of the bottom right which is needed for drawing a bounding
box around the different positions of the joint in every image. Figure 3.14 shows a
bounding box with more detail and makes it more clear.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Localization CNN
Figure 3.14: Bounding Box.
In this Figure, (x, y) is the predicted coordinates of CNN model and coordinates of
the upper left is (a, b) which is equal with:
{
a = x - δ
b = y + δ
(3.8)
and coordinates of bottom right is (c, d) which is equal with:
{ c = x + δ
d = y - δ
(3.9)
The yellow line in the Figure is δ which is equal with 110 so all images have same
bounding boxes size which is 220x220. (All images size are 500x500).
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Bounding box
23
Note: In some special cases in the data, there are some images where joint is
located at the corner of image like Figure 3.15:
Figure 3.15: Joint is located at the corner of image.
These image makes problem when drawing the bounding boxes around the joint. In
order to solve this problem in the y axis:
{
max (y- δ, 0)
max (y+ δ, 110)
(3.10)
is used which makes a bounding box around the joint with size 220x220 without mak-
ing a problem.
These bounding boxes (which is included the joint part) are extracted from the images
and saved in a separate file in order to be the input images for the next Convolutional
Neural Network model in the next chapter (Classification CNN).
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Localization CNN
Images with fragments and bounding box around the joint in Figure 3.16:
Figure 3.16: bounding box around the joint without fragments.
and extracted joint part of those images in Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17: The extracted of the joint part from the images.
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Bounding box
25
Images without fragments and bounding box around the joint in Figure 3.18:
Figure 3.18: bounding box around the joint without fragments.
and extracted joint part of those images in Figure 3.19:
Figure 3.19: The extracted of the joint part from the images.
Extracted images(joint part) for the next chapter’s CNN model in order to classify
the images into two different classes.
Class of images with fragment and class of
images without fragment.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Classification CNN
Image classification is one of the most significant parts of digital image analysis which
performs the role of a discriminant. It can be discrimination of one class against others.
When the case is two-class classification it can be discriminant value negative for one
class where it shows by 0 and positive for another class where it shows by 1 so often.
Two class classification is mostly used in medical sciences in order to the recognition
of cancer, diabetes, fragment and so on. The discriminant function f(cj, x), where x
is a feature vector and cj is class where (j = 1, 2, 3, ....k)
• For two-class case,
{ f(x)>0
x∈c1
f(x)<0
x∈c2
(4.1)
• For multi-class case,
fl(x) < fj(x), x ∈cj, (l = 1, 2, ...L), l ̸= j
(4.2)
[Para]
The Convolutional Neural network Architecture:
For classification some different architecture are used to observe different results and
then chose the architecture which gives the best result. First, a simple convolutional
neural network is tested. The architecture of this network is like following which
consists of two convolutional layers and ReLU as an activation function. The size of
input images are 220x220.
The training set includes 242 DICOM images where 176 images include no fragment
and 66 images include a fragment.
The test set includes 38 DICOM images where 24 images include no fragment and 14
images include a fragment.
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Classification CNN
The architecture of this model is shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: ConvNet Architecture.
In Figure 4.2, 4 images are shown with their own label which is a fragment, No
fragment, fragment, and fragment respectively from the left to the right.
Images
with fragment are labeled with ”1” and no fragment is labeled with ”0”.
Figure 4.2: The results of the joint classification in horses’ bones.
==PAGE:39==
4 Classification CNN
29
Figure 4.3: Ground Truth and Prediction .
In Figure 4.3, the first image from the left shows an image with its own label. The
label is 0 and this image has no fragment. Then the image in the center is the ground
truth which has also no fragment and then the network can predict correctly which
is no fragment in the image.
Results: This Convolutional Neural Network classifies the images to two different
classes with fragment and no fragment as it is showed in Figure 4.3 but the problem
is the accuracy of the network is too low. Test accuracy of this network for 80 test
images is 63% which is not so high.
The model is trained with a number of epochs equal with 1000 with optimizer SGD,
Figure 4.4: Results.
learning rate equal with 0.001 plus momentum equal with 0.9. In epoch, one loss
function is equal with 0.640 and at the end(when epoch is 1000) the loss function is
equal with 0.708. It seems this neural network learns nothing because loss function
is not minimizing as it is obvious from the results and plot in Figure 4.4.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Classification CNN
ResNet Architecture:
For getting better classification results with highest test accuracy, another Neural
Network is tested.
This network is called ”Residual network” which is one of the successful networks in
deep learning because it:
• ”Won 1st place in the ILSVRC 2015 classification competition with top-5 error
rate of 3.57
• Won the 1st place in ILSVRC and COCO 2015 competition in ImageNet De-
tection, ImageNet localization, Coco detection and Coco segmentation.
• Replacing VGG-16 layers in Faster R-CNN with ResNet-101. They observed a
relative improvements of 28
• Efficiently trained networks with 100 layers and 1000 layers also.”[Pare]
The design of ResNet is often using 3x3 filters and down sampling with Conventional
Neural Network layers with stride 2 and also global average pooling layer and a 1000-
way Fully connected layer which is included Softmax at the end.
Figure 4.5: ResNet Architecture,Source:[Parc].
The picture for Figure 4.5 is taken exactly from [Parc] which shows 34 residual layers
and includes 16 residual blocks.
==PAGE:41==
4 Classification CNN
31
Every ResNet block which is called ”building block” in more details is like:
Figure 4.6: ResNet Architecture in more details, Source:[Pard].
The picture for Figure 4.6 is taken exactly from [Pard] which shows 3 building blocks.
Each blocks consists convolutional layers with 3x3 kernel size.
Residual connections:
Here, is residual learning ( a building block):
Figure 4.7: Residual block, Source: [Parc].
The picture for Figure 4.7 is taken exactly from [Parc]. ResNet reformulates the lay-
ers as learning residual functions with reference to the layer input particularly. It has:
Y (x) = F(x) + x
(4.3)
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Classification CNN
When the identity mapping is optimal then it is easier to push the residual to zero
than to fit the identity mapping by a stack of nonlinear layers.
There are two different residual connections which depend on the dimension of input
and output.
• ”if input and output have same dimensions then residual block function will be:
y = F(x, {Wi}) + x
(4.4)
where, x is input and Wi is weight layer.
• if input and output have not same dimensions then residual block function will
be:
y = F(x, {Wi}) + Wsx
(4.5)
where, Ws is extra parameter which is added in this case”.[Pare]
The ResNet model consists 34 residual layers where every block includes convolution,
batch normalization which is equal with 32 and ReLU as activation function. Kernel
size is 3x3, stride is equal with 1 and padding equal with 1 in this model. Softmax is
used at the end.
Number of training in each iteration which is Batch size is equal with 32 for both
training and test sets. The size of input images are 208x208. The result of training
ResNet model is like the following:
For the extracted images by the target coordinates:
Target coordinates are the manually clicked (x, y) coordinates at the center of joint
position. The accuracy of the model when it starts to the training is:
At the beginning, the training accuracy is 64% and the test accuracy is 63.2%.
The model also gets the best result of accuracy when it obtains 100% in the test
set. Number of epochs is put equal with 70. Model gets the accuracy of the training
around 95.9% and the accuracy of testing around 97.4% in epoch 70 as it is shown in
Table 4.1.
Accuracy
Train set
Test set
At the Beginning
64.0%
63.2%
Best ones
96.7%
100%
At the end
95.5%
97.4%
Table 4.1: Table of Accuracy.
==PAGE:43==
4 Classification CNN
33
Figure 4.8 shows a plot where x axis is number of epochs which is equal with 70
and y axis is the accuracy of the training and testing with orange and blue colors
respectively. The accuracy of the model is increasing with training more and more.
The results shows that the ResNet model is success in medical image classification.
Figure 4.8: Accuracy of the extracted images with target coordinates.
This model can classify the images with fragment and without the fragment in the
joint in every image with the highest accuracy which is equal with 100%.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Classification CNN
For the extracted images by the predicted coordinates:
Predicted coordinates are the (x, y) coordinates by the output of localization CNN
model. The accuracy when model starts to the training is:
At the beginning, the train accuracy is 71.1% and the test accuracy is 63.2%.
The model also gets the best result of accuracy when it obtains 97.4% in the test set
and then it continues training and gets the accuracy of the training around 97.9%
and the accuracy of testing around 94.7% as it is shown in Table 4.2.
Accuracy
Train set
Test set
At the Beginning
71.1%
63.2%
Best ones
97.9%
97.4%
At the end
97.9%
94.7%
Table 4.2: Table of Accuracy.
Figure 4.9 shows a plot of train and test accuracy with two different colors. Orange
for train error and blue for test error. Both train and test accuracy are increasing.
Figure 4.9: Accuracy of the extracted images with predicted output coordinates.
==PAGE:45==
4 Classification CNN
35
This model can classify the images with fragment and without the fragment in
the joint in every image with the highest test accuracy 97.4%. Number of epochs = 70.
Results shows that the ResNet model is successful at classifying the image into two
different classes but it may be some images which is classified wrong.
Problem, where the ResNet model has a wrong Classification:
Figure 4.10 shows an example image of wrong classification.
The images are shown in this part are too dark and it is difficult to see if there is a
fragment in the image or not. The image may has not include a fragment but can
be classified as fragment image. In this part, a doctor is needed to help us but as I
guess there is no fragment in this image and it is classified as fragment image which is
wrong or maybe the image consists fragment and the fragment is covered by darkness
because the image is too dark.
Figure 4.10: An example of wrong classification.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Classification CNN
4.1
Spatial Transformer Networks(STN):
For further work in this research,
”Convolutional Neural Networks define an exceptionally powerful class of models,
but are still limited by the lack of ability to be spatially invariant to the input data
in a computationally and parameter efficient manner. A new learnable module, the
Spatial Transformer, which explicitly allows the spatial manipulation of data within
the network. This differentiable module can be inserted into existing convolutional ar-
chitectures, giving neural networks the ability to actively spatially transform feature
maps, conditional on the feature map itself, without any extra training supervision
or modification to the optimisation process.”Paper by Max Jaderberg [J+15]
Figure 4.11 shows a process of STN for Localization and Classification CNN.
Figure 4.11: Simple process of STN for localization and classification.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this project, two Convolutional Neural Networks are implemented. The first CNN
model is built in order to do localization. This model shows its strong ability at
localization by analyzing the input images and then identifying the right position of
joint almost in every image. The second CNN model which is ResNet model is built
in order to do classification. ResNet model is a successful model and it shows its
highest capability when comes to the test accuracy equal with 100% with a batch
size equal with 32 for both train and test set. Neural Networks always would like to
have more and more data. Even data is limited in this research and techniques like
data augmentation is useless in this case but both Convolutional Neural Networks are
successful in their job. In the Localization Neural Network model, by using optimizer
and backpropagation step the loss function is minimizing and model can predict and
recognize the position of the joint in data correctly. The Classification Convolutional
Neural Network can classify the images to two different classes which are class of
images with fragment and class of images without fragment. With training more the
accuracy of the ResNet model is increasing. When it starts to training, the accuracy
of the network is 63 % and then it continues and obtains the test accuracy equal with
97%, 99% and 100% at the end.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
The appendix consists some Data, jypternotebook files as .ipynb, some python scripts,
and the outputs of training the model.
==PAGE:50==
40
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[Broa]
Jason Brownlee. Computer Vision. https://machinelearningmastery.
com/what-is-computer-vision/.
[Brob]
Jason Brownlee. Learning. https://machinelearningmastery.com/what-
is-computer-vision/.
[c23]
c231n. CNN. http://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-networks/.
[J+15]
Max Jaderberg, Karen Simonyan, Andrew Zisserman, et al. “Spatial trans-
former networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems.
2015, pages 2017–2025.
[LD18]
ZhiFei Lai and Huifang Deng. “Medical Image Classification Based on Deep
Features Extracted by Deep Model and Statistic Feature Fusion with Mul-
tilayer Perceptron ”. In: Comp. Int. and Neurosc. 2018.
[LI13]
Saima Anwar Lashari and Rosziati Ibrahim. “A framework for medical
images classification using soft set”. In: Procedia Technology 11 (2013),
pages 548–556.
[Para]
Participant. Image Classification. http : / / www . csre . iitb . ac . in /
~avikb/GNR401/DIP/DIP_401_lecture_7.pdf.
[Parb]
Participant. Osteochondral Lesions. https://www.cedars-sinai.edu/
Patients/Health-Conditions/Osteochondral-Lesions-Osteochondritis-
Dessicans.aspx.
[Parc]
Participant. ResNet. https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-
to-resnets-c0a830a288a4.
[Pard]
Participant. ResNet detail. https://towardsdatascience.com/understanding-
and-visualizing-resnets-442284831be8.
[Pare]
Participant. ResNet Implementation. https://medium.com/@14prakash/
understanding-and-implementing-architectures-of-resnet-and-
resnext-for-state-of-the-art-image-cf51669e1624.
[Pyt]
Pytorch. Neural Networks. https://pytorch.org/tutorials/beginner/
blitz/neural_networks_tutorial.html.
[RNZ18]
Muhammad Imran Razzak, Saeeda Naz, and Ahmad Zaib. “Deep learning
for medical image processing: Overview, challenges and the future”. In:
Classification in BioApps. Springer, 2018, pages 323–350.
==PAGE:52==
42
Bibliography
[Sha]
Himanshu Sharma. Activation Function. https://medium.com/@himanshuxd/
activation- functions- sigmoid- relu- leaky- relu- and- softmax-
basics-for-neural-networks-and-deep-8d9c70eed91e.
[Yeu]
Fei-Fei Li Justin Johnson Serena Yeung. Images analyzed By Computer.
http://cs231n.stanford.edu/slides/2017/cs231n_2017_lecture2.
pdf.
