==PAGE:1==
MASTER THESIS - SPRING 2019
Creating competitive advantage by
international partnerships for sustainable
initiatives – A case of Adidas
Group
S-number
Name
s093234
Camilla Engstrøm Jensen
Supervisor:
Jason Li-Ying
==PAGE:2==
CONTENTS
i
Contents
1
Introduction to project
1
1.1
Relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem statement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Summary of project
4
2.1
English
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Background
6
3.1
Football apparel as an advertisement billboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Restrictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Promotion and Sustainability - a correlation of awareness . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Method and Tools
11
4.1
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2.1
Porter’s ﬁve forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2.2
PESTEL analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2.3
SWOT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.4
Business Model Canvas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.5
Partnership Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.6
Breadth and Depth of partnerships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5
Case: Adidas
21
5.1
Market research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.1
Market share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1.2
Rivalry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.3
PESTEL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.4
SWOT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
ii
5.2
Current Business Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Marketing and targeted consumer segments (Adidas vs. Nike . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Partnerships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4.1
Adidas X Parley
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Customer’s opinion
44
6.1
Results from questionnaire and comparison to theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Uncertainties and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusion
52
8
Discussion
54
Bibliography
55
Appendix
59
A Market shares
59
A.1
Market shares of top 5 European leagues (full tables 2018/2019) . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:4==
1
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT
1
1
Introduction to project
1.1
Relevance
”Football is a world religion”
- Zeelo (2019)
[18]
With more than four out of 10 people consider themselves soccer fans [16], which equals to 3,1
Billion people on a global scale, football takes the lead as the most popular sport worldwide.
With this follows a multi Billion industry where major players in the market of football apparel
compete for market shares.
”The global reach of football, or soccer, is unequalled among sports in terms
of value to media and sponsors.”
- The Nielsen Company (2018)
[15]
In an increasing global market with numerous online marketing options, branding an image
of a company has become increasingly competitive as well. Years ago, a brand was evaluated
through sales of products, where as today they are increasingly being evaluated on social me-
dia marketing and reach, which forces the companies to consistently promote themselves in the
most appealing way for their consumers, including branding themselves as environmentally and
socially responsible.
”A brand’s prestige and image is easily built or ruined in an instant with the
speed at which ideas and impressions can be developed online,”
- - Adam Wright, an Account Executive at a leading sport & entertainment agency.
[17]
==PAGE:5==
1
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT
2
To do so, sponsorships, collaborations and partnerships are inevitable. The companies have to
come up with marketing solutions appealing to their consumers, which lies beyond their own
capabilities.
It is therefore highly relevant to explore how companies within the football apparel industry can
position themselves as market leaders considering through partnerships which appeals to the
consumer of today’s society.
1.2
Scope
Due to the complexity and dynamics of the football apparel industry, the project is focusing on
the market of apparel only, with a main focus on the ﬁve biggest Leagues in Europe, due to
the participating clubs being the ones with the largest global fan bases and highest values, and
primarily rely on information from 2017 to 2019. [18].
The focus is further limited to brand marketing, hence neglecting actual sales of football ap-
parel due to limited access to detailed sales number. Therefore, the reach and interactions with
potential consumers will act as ”sales”. The project includes a market research, primarily based
on social media, an external and internal analysis of Adidas, one of the biggest actors in the
market, and ﬁnally a partnership analysis of a recent established partnership, promoting and
creating awareness on sustainability in football apparel.
1.3
Problem statement
The relevance, scope of the project and the research prior to the project lead to the following
problem statement:
How can Adidas stay as a market leader and keep improving their
sustainable image through collaboration with other organisations?
The overall problems statement leads to several underlying research questions:
• How is the potential market for football apparel in terms of competitors, market shares
and branding?
• How does Adidas differ from Nike in terms of branding and marketing?
==PAGE:6==
1
INTRODUCTION TO PROJECT
3
• How does the Adidas X Parley partnership work in terms of network and services?
• How is the Adidas X Parley partnership and their product portfolio being promoted and
which effect does the promotion have?
• How is the Adidas X Parley partnership classiﬁed in terms of closeness of relation and
what are the pros and cons accordingly?
• How has the Adidas X Parley partnership developed from 2017 to 2019 in terms of breadth
and depth?
• How does the future for the Adidas X Parley partnership and portfolio look like?
==PAGE:7==
2
SUMMARY OF PROJECT
4
2
Summary of project
2.1
English
In the growing, marketing oriented and dynamic global market surrounding football apparel,
long term competitive advantage through customer preferences is essential when competing for
market shares. The purpose of this project is to determine how Adidas can stay as a market
leader and keep improving their sustainable image through collaboration with other organisa-
tion.
To determine the above, a market research is conducted using Porters Five Forces and PESTEL
to illustrate the competitive environment. The research shows an oligopoly market with 5 main
competitors: Adidas, Nike, Puma, Umbro and New Balance, with Adidas and Nike as the far
biggest. A comparison between some of their marketing videos on YouTube reveals a differ-
ence in targeted end-customers, with Adidas targeting the more intellectual and conscious end
customer where as Nike targets the more ego-oriented customer.
As a way to differentiate itself from Nike, Adidas has partners up with Parley for Oceans.
Their partnership is explored by mapping the engaged network and deﬁning the closeness of
the partnership by breadth and depth, which illustrates a close collaboration between the two
organisation.
To evaluate their common marketing strategy, a questionnaire is derived amongst potential end
customers, revealing that there is potential for a competitive advantage through their strategy,
but execution of it can be improved by for instance including football boots in their common
product portfolio.
==PAGE:8==
2
SUMMARY OF PROJECT
5
2.2
Danish
I det voksende, markedsføringsorienterede og dynamiske globale marked omkring fodboldtøj
er langsigtet konkurrencefordele gennem kundepræferencer afgørende, n˚ar man konkurrerer
om markedsandele. Form˚alet med dette projekt er at undersøge og redegøre for, hvordan Adi-
das kan forblive markedsleder og forbedre deres bæredygtige image ved hjælp af samarbejde
med andre organisationer. For at bestemme ovenst˚aende gennemføres en markedsundersøgelse
ved hjælp af Porters Five Forces og PESTEL til at illustrere det konkurrenceprægede miljø.
Undersøgelsen viser et oligopolmarked med følgende 5 konkurrenter i toppen: Adidas, Nike,
Puma, Umbro og New Balance, med Adidas og Nike som de langt største. En sammenligning
mellem deres markedsføringsvideoer p˚a YouTube viser en forskel i m˚algrupperne, hvor Adidas
er henvender sig til det mere intellektuelle, selvbevidste og oplyste kundesegment, hvor Nike er
m˚alrettet mod det mere ego-orienterede kundesegment.
En m˚ade for Adidas at differentiere sig fra Nike p˚a, er at samarbejde med Parley for Oceans.
Deres samarbejde undersøges nærmere ved at kortlægge det involverede netværk og deﬁnere
partnerskabets relation ved hjælp af ”breadth and depth”, hvilket illustrerer et tæt samarbejde
mellem de to organisationer.
For at evaluere deres fælles markedsføringsstrategi udsendes et spørgeskema blandt potentielle
slutkunder, der afslører, at der er potentiale for en konkurrencefordel gennem deres strategi,
men udførelsen af den kan forbedres ved for eksempel at inkludere fodboldstøvler i deres fælles
produktportefølje.
==PAGE:9==
3
BACKGROUND
6
3
Background
3.1
Football apparel as an advertisement billboard
”Athletic uniforms are more than just jerseys.
The uniform is everything a team stands for.”
- Diego Maradona
Football is commonly known as the most popular sport worldwide [16] and includes a broad
variety of businesses. Besides innovative technology to improve performance, the football
kits, players wearing them, stadiums and merchandise have also transformed into a way of ad-
vertising or communicating statements, values or global issues, especially during major sports
events like the European football Championship, The Summer Olympics and Champions League.
According to Maurice Charles, senior associate at Stevens & Bolton LLP, athletes have the
power to inﬂuence in a large scale. When addressing the European football Championship and
The summer Olympics in Rio, both in 2016, in an article, published by LawInSport [14], he
states:
”Granted, two very different events and audiences, but each event comes with
its own proﬁle and ability to appeal to large groups of people, elements which
make them both a sponsor’s dream and a potential platform for the expression
of ideas and values.”
- M. Charles (2016)
[14]
At ﬁrst, the kits and the players were used to promote their sponsors only, by playing with
visible logos on the apparel. In recent years, the apparel and players have also been used to pro-
mote a variety of political and global issues statements, such as ”equal rights for homosexuals”
and ”no to racism”, as the following examples show.
==PAGE:10==
3
BACKGROUND
7
(a) Multiple players stating no to racism in a campaign
(b) Ronaldo displaying a shirt with the statement of ”no to racism” during a match
(c) Rainbow colored captain arm band and laces
Figure 1: Global statements directed at racism and homophobia in football (campaigns launched by
FIFA, UEFA and Premier League).[24]
==PAGE:11==
3
BACKGROUND
8
3.2
Restrictions
Even though, football players and their clubs are great statement billboards, not all types of
statements are legal. While some statements and advertisements are allowed, some will be
sanctioned by FIFA or UEFA, for instance if a club is directly inﬂuencing ongoing political
issues (local, national or international), sanctions may be given, while overall global statements
for equality, environment etc. are legal. Determination of whether the statement is directly
political or value-based is individually evaluated by FIFA or UEFA in each case.
”In short, any statement of a non-sporting nature may well fall for
consideration under the relevant rules, and the absence of a clear deﬁnition of
what constitutes a ‘political statement’ brings an additional element of
subjectivity into the interpretation of the rules themselves.”
[14]
When addressing some earlier examples of political statements on football kits in the article and
the way they are promoted, Maurice Charles sums it up as follows:
”In each case, these examples demonstrate the unique position that athletes
occupy, especially given press coverage of major events.”
- M. Charles (2018)
[14]
3.3
Sustainability
Due to global warming and climate change, the sustainability aspect has become a well known
global term which most industries are aiming to promote and hereby gain customer preferences
by creating an image of being more sustainable and/or environmentally responsible than their
competitors as well as complying to criteria set by governments. This is also the case in the
sports apparel industry, where apparel is being produced in more sustainable manners, produc-
tion sites are cutting on emissions and chemicals, products are made partially or fully from
==PAGE:12==
3
BACKGROUND
9
sustainable and/or reused materials and brands are promoting several of the Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals, set by UN to be achieved by 2030.
Figure 2: The 17 SDGs set by UN to be reached by 2030 [12]
As a production company, it makes sense to use the SDGs (Sustainable Development Goals)
set by UN as a promotion tool, since the production sites are often underlying strict rules from
governments to comply to the goals, as well as the customer also acquires a wider knowledge of
the goals and their purpose, resulting in customers becoming more aware of own consumption.
3.4
Promotion and Sustainability - a correlation of awareness
Transforming into a production company which is both complying to meet the goals and pro-
mote the progress and initiatives at the same time, might not only make the company able to
continue at status quo but also gaining market shares by customer preferences related to sus-
tainability.
To brand the progress towards meeting the SDGs, the companies need to promote themselves
in the best way possible, imaging themselves as the more sustainable solution on the market.
In the sports apparel industry, the best marketing partner for speciﬁc products are the famous
athletes within their speciﬁc sport, which will target the most relevant potential end customer.
==PAGE:13==
3
BACKGROUND
10
For instance, more sustainable running shoes are promoted by advertisements or campaigns
featuring a famous runner and more sustainable football apparel is promoted featuring famous
football players and/or their clubs, like Messi as an individual player and Manchester United as
a club etc.
Not only are the top European clubs and players involved in promoting sustainability for their
sponsors, also smaller local clubs across Europe are used as local advertisement billboards. An
example hereby is Lyngby BK, a smaller team in the lower third of the highest league in Den-
mark are promoting sustainability through their 2019 shirts, made by Adidas, but sponsored by
Unisport. The shirts are made of 100% reused materials, including ocean waste plastic, and
each shirt has its own SDG printed on the front and each player acts as an ambassador for the
SDG he is wearing.
Figure 3: Each player on Lyngby’s 1st team has been selected for a speciﬁc SDG as a sort of
ambassador for that particular goal. [25]
In the following, this project will pursue to provide insights to why partnerships and sponsor-
ships are crucial to promote the sustainability image and create a competitive advantage from
it.
==PAGE:14==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
11
4
Method and Tools
4.1
Methods
The project will be carried out primarily using literature studies as quantitative research method.
For the theoretical part of the project, different sources of literature will be used to set the
theoretical background for the analysis. The following analytical part will be conducted mainly
from public online sources of literature. For the evaluation part of the project, a qualitative
research will be done in the form of a questionnaire for a particular end customer segment.
The ﬁrst step of the analysis part the project is to conduct an external analysis of the market
and Adidas Football. A market research is conducted to determine the exact market position of
Adidas and its competitors, which provides insight using Porter’s Five forces and a PESTEL
analysis, based on public online information. Market shares are determined by followers on
social media, hence this is the procedure sponsors use. [11]
The second step of the analysis part of the project is to conduct an internal analysis to get an
insight to Adidas Football as a company (or department of a company, reviewed as somewhat
independent). This is done by conducting a SWOT analysis with inputs from the previously
conducted external analysis combined with information from Adidas publications, primarily its
most recent annual report [10].
Third step of the analysis part of the project will be to gain a deeper insight into the partnership
revolving the kits from the 2019/2020 season. Exploring the network, classiﬁcation, breadth
and depth of a partnership created to develop and manufacture the kits, will provide insights
to how substantial partnerships can be and what can be achieved or lost for Adidas by creating
partnerships.
Fourth step of the analysis part of the project is evaluation. This is done by conducting a
questionnaire directed at end customers within a speciﬁc segment and comparing the results in
the foregoing analysis to results. In this case, the survey is directed towards football players on
all levels and football fans of different degree, i.e. potential end customers. The results from the
survey will act as foundation for comparison, providing a tool for evaluation and conclusion.
Final step is to determine whether Adidas should keep doing more initiatives like the more
==PAGE:15==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
12
environmentally sustainable kits. This will be done by looking into the most recent discoveries
and long term perspectives of a few other plausible solutions: one which expands the way and
amount of Ocean Plastic which can be collected.
4.2
Tools
4.2.1
Porter’s ﬁve forces
Porter’s ﬁve forces is a widely known strategic tool, created by Michael E. Porter, and is used
to gain a simpliﬁed overview of competing markets. In this project it will be used to get an
overview of the market within football apparel and the competition between the 3-4 largest
manufacturers globally. It will give insights to the biggest actors on the market and be the
foundation for choosing one of them to focus on for further analysis.
Brief explanation of content in each block [6]:
• Threat of entry.
- how easy it is for new competitors to
enter the market. Several barriers for en-
tering the market might be present.
• Bargaining power of buyers.
- this block deﬁnes the power customers
might have on the market, for instance
on price.
• Threat of substitutes
- this block deﬁnes how high the risk is
for a competitor to retrieve customers by
offering a similar product which might
satisfy customer needs better.
• Bargaining power of suppliers
- this block deﬁnes how much power
suppliers have on the market, which in-
cludes numbers of suppliers and prices.
• Industry rivalry
- this block deﬁnes how many competit-
ors are in the market and how competit-
ive they are.
==PAGE:16==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
13
Figure 4: Porter’s ﬁve forces model [6]
4.2.2
PESTEL analysis
As stated in the previous chapter, promoting and selling football apparel highly relies on ex-
ternal factors, which a PESTEL analysis will provide an insight to. The PESTEL analysis
provides a deeper and more focused insight into which forces impacts the particular manufac-
turer. Like Porter’s Five Forces, this model is being used to provide a more detailed overview
of the current situation for the speciﬁc manufacturer without going in further detail.
==PAGE:17==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
14
Figure 5: PESTEL analysis model [5]
The PESTEL Analysis includes external macro factors, such as Political, Economic, Social,
Technological and Environmental factors, which combined creates the overall threats and op-
portunities, which can be transferred into a SWOT analysis.
The macro factors in each block can include [5]:
• Political.
Government stability and likely changes
Bureaucracy
Corruption level
Tax policy (rates and incentives)
Freedom of press
Regulation/de-regulation
Trade control
Import restrictions (quality and quant-
ity)
Competition regulation
Government involvement in trade unions
and agreements
Consumer protection and e-commerce
Laws regulating environment pollution
==PAGE:18==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
15
• Economic.
Growth rates
Inﬂation rate
Interest rates
Exchange rates
Unemployment trends
Labor costs
Credit availability
Level of consumers’ disposable income
Monetary policies
Price ﬂuctuations
Stock market trends
• Social.
Health consciousness
Education level
Attitudes toward imported goods and
services
Attitudes toward work, leisure, career
and retirement
Attitudes toward product quality and
customer service
Attitudes toward saving and investing
Emphasis on safety
Lifestyles
Buying habits
Religion and beliefs
Attitudes toward “green” or ecological
products
Attitudes toward and support for renew-
able energy
Population growth rate
Age distribution
Sex distribution
Average disposable income level
Social classes
• Technologicial.
Basic infrastructure level
Rate of technological change
Spending on research & development
Technology incentives
Legislation regarding technology
Technology level in your industry
Access to newest technology
Internet infrastructure and penetration
• Environmental.
Weather
Climate change
Air and water pollution
Recycling
Waste management
Endangered species
==PAGE:19==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
16
• Legal.
Anti-trust law
Discrimination law
Copyright, patents / Intellectual prop-
erty law
Consumer protection and e-commerce
Employment law
Health and safety law
Data Protection
4.2.3
SWOT
After transferring the results from the PESTEL analysis into the external blocks of the SWOT
model (opportunities and Threats), it is relevant to have a brief insight to the internal factors of
Adidas. This is done by ﬁlling in the Strengths and Weaknesses blocks.
Figure 6: SWOT model
==PAGE:20==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
17
Each of the 4 blocks in the SWOT model includes: [4]
• Strengths:
- factors that give an edge for the com-
pany over its competitors.
• Weaknesses:
- factors that can be harmful if used
against the ﬁrm by its competitors.
• Opportunities:
- favorable situations which can bring a
competitive advantage.
• Threats:
- unfavorable situations which can neg-
atively affect the business.
4.2.4
Business Model Canvas
From this point, a clear overview of factors impacting the particular manufacturer and its market
has been established and the current Business Model can be derived to have a full overview of
the company.
The 9 building blocks of the Business Model are: [1]
• Customer Segments:
- Who is the company selling to? (B2C,
B2B, proﬁles)
• Value Proposition:
- How can the product or service satisfy
customer needs? (What makes it valu-
able to the customer?)
• Channels:
- How does the company sell, commu-
nicate and/or distribute the product or
service?
• Customer Relationships:
- How does the company establish a re-
lationship with each customer segment?
• Revenue Stream:
- How does the company make money?
• Key Resources:
- Which resources are the company’s
most valuable?
• Key Activities:
- What is the most valuable things, the
company does?
• Key Partnerships:
- Who could the company not create
value without and who supplies the com-
pany with goods or services?
• Cost Structure:
- What does the company spend money
on? (the other building blocks)
==PAGE:21==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
18
The Business Model will provide valuable information regarding the company Strategy as well
as focus for further research.
4.2.5
Partnership Classiﬁcation
Inputs for classiﬁcation of the partnership is provided from the structure of the partnership, the
company business model and strategy. Classiﬁcation of the partnership will provide valuable
information about pros and cons of the particular partnership. Not all pros and cons will be
relevant or present in all partnerships. [7]
==PAGE:22==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
19
Figure 7: Partnership classiﬁcation (Erik Nilsson, 2018)
==PAGE:23==
4
METHOD AND TOOLS
20
4.2.6
Breadth and Depth of partnerships
Applying the results from the partnership analysis and market research, the following model
can be derived to determine the breadth and depth of the particular partnership. The original
model provided by Glasby, J. and Dickinson, H. [3] was created to deﬁne partnerships in the
health care industry and therefore, the parameters do not ﬁt the sports industry. As a result, the
original model has been modiﬁed to ﬁt this particular analysis.
(a) Original model.
(b) Modiﬁed model.
==PAGE:24==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
21
5
Case: Adidas
Adidas has become a leading brand when it comes to football wear. The company was foun-
ded in 1924 by Adi Dassler. He founded the company making running shoes for athletes in
his mother’s kitchen in Germany. he then re-founded the company in 1949 and employed 47
workers. Already in 1954, Adidas became famous for their football shoes. They created a
football shoe with screw-in-studs, which helped the German national team win the world cup.
From then on, Adidas was a familiar brand regarding football shoes, but their ﬁrst apparel was
produced for runners in 1967. Adidas continued to innovate equipment for athletics and even-
tually became a known brand within non-athletics as well. However, in 1992, the company
almost faced bankruptcy as most of the Dassler family had passed away. A new CEO took over
and turned Adidas a marketing company instead. Through partnerships, buying other brands
(Solomon) and marketing, combined with focusing on improving and inventing equipment for
athletes only, Adidas had a comeback. After the year of 2000, even more innovations were
done at Adidas. Under the new CEO of Adidas-Solomon AG, they started doing environmental
innovations. They also started to reach out to non-athletes again, this time using athletes to
promote their vision: Impossible is nothing. One of these were all time football legend, David
Beckham. In 2006, Salomon leaves Adidas to join forces elsewhere and Adidas acquire Ree-
bok instead and Adidas is renamed Adidas AG. As it is stated on Adidas’s homepage: ”When
you are already great, how do you become even better? You keep on training. Or join forces
with someone who complements you and your strengths.”, Adidas kept acquiring brands within
several sport areas and promoted themselves through Lionel Messi and David Beckham in the
”All in”-campaign.
From only producing and selling equipment for athletes, Adidas changed to a marketing corpor-
ation with many partners across different areas of sports and engaged in improving the lives of
consumers by introducing sports into their lives through fashion items. They have transformed
into a company with impact on every types of lives. They speak to consumer’s sense of achieve-
ment and goal setting and therefore has the ability to make awareness on a global scale. Adidas
has therefore taken several initiatives towards educating consumers and making awareness on
different areas of sustainability, for instance gender equality in sports and ocean pollution.
==PAGE:25==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
22
5.1
Market research
5.1.1
Market share
The market shares of sponsorships can be deﬁned in 2 ways:
• Market shares in relation to number of clubs sponsored.
• Market shares in relation to size of potential merchandise market segment.
In the following, both markets will be explored to determine differences in market perception,
identify dominating competitors and differences in competitors’ marketing strategies.
Basis for the analysis are the 2018/2019 season results combined with the signed 2019/2020
season sponsorships in the ”Big 5” (i.e. the sponsorships might correlate with the latest ranking
in each of the ﬁve biggest leagues in Europe.) and Champions League.
The research is narrowed down to only including the top teams in each league. The full overview
of each ”Big 5” league is found in appendix A.1.
Market shares in relation to number of clubs sponsored
Shirt sponsors of the top clubs in Champions League 2018/2019
Adidas
Nike
Puma
New Balance
Umbro
Ajax
Tottenham
Dortmund
Liverpool
Schalke 04
Real Madrid
Atletico Madrid
Man. City
Porto FC
Juventus
Paris
Man. Utd.
Barcelona
Lyon
Roma
Bayern Munich
Market shares
37,5%
31,25%
12,5%
12,5%
6,25%
Table I: source: footyheadlines.com
==PAGE:26==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
23
The research shows that Adidas is the leading sponsor of clubs reaching ”Round of 16” in
Champions League 2018/2019, sponsoring 6 clubs in total. Second is Nike, sponsoring 5, third
is Puma and New Balance, both sponsoring 2 teams and lastly, Unbro, sponsoring one club.
This correlates to market shares of 37.5%, 31.25%, 12,5% and 6.25%.
Figure 9: Market shares divided between the 5 competing sponsors in Champions League 2018/2019
The diagram shows that Adidas was leading the Champions League market, closely followed
by Nike, who has the same market share as Puma, New Balance and Umbro combined.
Turning focus towards the ”Big 5” European leagues, market shares for the 3 biggest competit-
ors (Adidas, Nike and Puma) is listed below. The 3 competitors are determined by the overall
numbers of sponsorships of clubs with a top 5 ranking in their league (Top 6 for Premier League,
since the 2018/2019 results did not depict the usual outcome with Manchester United ﬁnishing
in 6th place.)
==PAGE:27==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
24
Shirt sponsors of top teams in Europe 2019 and their rank in each national league
Top leagues
Adidas
Nike
Puma
Premier League
Man. Utd. (6)*
Chelsea (3)
Man. City (1)
Arsenal (5)
Tottenham (4)
La Liga
Real Madrid (3)
Barcelona (1)
Valencia (4)
Atletico Madrid (2)
Ligue 1
Lyon (3)
Paris (1)
Marseilles (5)
Bundesliga
Bayern Munich (1)
Leipzig (3)
Dortmund (2)
Gladbach (5)
Serie A
Juventus (1)
Inter Milan (4)
AC Milan (5)
Table II: source: footyheadlines.com
* Manchester United has been included since it is considered one of the top teams in Premier League
and it is unusual for them to end i 6th place, as they did in the 2018/2019 season.
Market shares in relation to size of potential merchandise market segment.
In a growing e-commerce market, social media is close to being the primary source of outgoing
information from football clubs. Since there is no precise globally registration of fan segments,
an mean of measure is to compare their followers on social media, in this case, Instagram was
chosen, since most social media commercial advertisement is done through that particular me-
dia platform.
”Hays doesn’t look for a single return on investment ﬁgure for its sponsorship,
but Douglas-Home said social media shares and likes as well as client and
staff engagement are tracked.”
- recruitment consultancy Hays, co-sponsor of Manchester City.
[11]
Not all clubs have an ofﬁcial Instagram account (four in total), so data is then collected on Face-
book as a secondary social media.
==PAGE:28==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
25
Market shares in relation to followers on Instagram in July 2019:
Fan base/market potential of top teams in Europe 2019 in each national league* (M)
Top leagues
Adidas
Nike
Puma
Total
Premier League
30,1
17,8
13,9
14,9
5,3
82
(= 45)
(= 23,1)
(28,7)***
La Liga
75,6
74,5
0,68
7,6
158,38
(= 82,1)
(20,4)***
Ligue 1
1,1
23
0.1**
24,2
(1,5)***
Bundesliga
17,4
0,4**
7,8
1**
26,6
Serie A
29,4 mio
15,1**
6,1
50,6
(3,7)***
Champions League
(44,1)
Table III: Top 5 teams in each of the 5 biggest national leagues in Europe in the season of 2018/2019.
* Based on followers of ofﬁcial channels on Instagram and/or Youtube for each club.
** No ofﬁcial Instagram account (alternative source: Facebook).
*** Followers of ofﬁcial league Instagram accounts.
The research shows that Adidas is the leading sponsor of Premier League, while Nike is leading
sponsor in La Liga. The total numbers of followers indicates that La Liga has a bigger potential
market than Premier League. However, the numbers of followers on the League accounts,
shows the opposite. The reason for these misaligned data might be that several fans follow
several clubs and only individual clubs instead of the League. Despite that, these data are valid,
since advertisement will reach each follower, Nike and Adidas might just advertise to the same
potential customers.
==PAGE:29==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
26
5.1.2
Rivalry
Porters ﬁve forces
Figure 10: Porter’s ﬁve forces for the top of football apparel industry
• Threat of entry.
- It is hard to enter the market as a sponsor for top football teams in Europe. It costs a lot
to get a contract and as new to the market, the competitor has to gain market share from
a well established brand.
• Bargaining power of buyers.
- The buyers can be divided into two groups: the clubs and the fans. The clubs have high
power as a buyer, since they are the ones having to accept or reject sponsorship proposals.
The fans have low to none power. They simply follow the club they support.
• Threat of substitutes - Threat of substitutes is high, since all brands produce similar
products with little differentiation. Therefore, a brand can easily be taking over from
another if the deal is sufﬁcient. However, when it comes to the biggest clubs, deals are so
expensive that only Nike and Adidas have the ﬁnances to compete. in this situation, threat
==PAGE:30==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
27
of substitute is medium, since long term contracts are usually signed between sponsor and
club.
• Bargaining power of suppliers - Power of suppliers is low to medium, since there are
a variety of suppliers providing similar goods. However, in some cases, the supplier
acts as a partner providing differentiated goods and the partnership is part of the product
branding. In this case, the power of supplier is high.
• Industry rivalry - To sum up the model, the main competitors can be divided into two
groups: the 2 leaders of the market in close rivalry (Nike and Adidas) and 3 smaller
actors competing for the rest of the top 5 market. This points towards an oligopoly market
system with a ﬁxed number of buyers. However, if not only taking top 5 rankings into
account, it would point towards a more perfect competition as can be seen in the complete
overview of the leagues in Appendix A.1.
==PAGE:31==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
28
5.1.3
PESTEL
The PESTEL analysis of Adidas will provide a more detailed overview of external factors with
an impact or potential impact on Adidas as a football apparel brand.
Sources: [8][5]
Figure 11: PESTEL model for Adidas
• Political.
A long variety of political aspects have the opportunity to impact Adidas as a global
company:
– Government stability:
”Brexit” might have an impact on Adidas, since they sponsor several teams in
Premier League.
– Tax policy (rates and incentives):
Tax policies have to be taken into account when exporting and setting product prices.
Adidas solves this issue by outsourcing distribution to local departments with local
management who has insights to the local tax systems, prices etc.
==PAGE:32==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
29
– Consumer protection and e-commerce:
Different countries have different laws regarding consumer protection related to
sales and e-commerce. As a company selling products on a global scale, it is es-
sential that each supply network is adapted to the local laws and regulations. Adidas
solves this by adding this aspect to the outsourced local distributor.
– Freedom of speech:
In some countries, media is being censored which can impact Adidas’ marketing
methods: In China, social media like Facebook are banned and potential consumers
can not access the marketing materials broadcasted.
• Economic.
Both global and local economics can affect Adidas as a manufacturer and distributor. It
can potentially distort the revenue stream or disrupt the local market, if not taken into
consideration.
– Inﬂation rate, exchange rates, labor costs and level of consumers’ disposable
income:
Pricing and salaries has to be done according to local inﬂation rate and well fare.
If not done sufﬁciently, it can potentially distort a local market from the rest of the
organisation’s markets and create an imbalance in revenue. Adidas, again, solves
this by outsourcing the responsibility to the local distributors with local insights.
• Social.
Social impacts on Adidas includes the company’s corporate social responsibility
– Health consciousness:
The health consciousness plays a big role when it comes to selling sportswear. To
make consumers buy the products, they need to have a desire to live healthy and
exercise. As a market leader and well known sports brand, Adidas has the power to
inﬂuence the levels of health consciousness through marketing campaigns in general
but when it comes to fan merchandise, the customer segment is a bit different. In this
case, it is about supporting a football club, not exercising and therefore the impact
of health consciousness decreases.
==PAGE:33==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
30
– Education level:
For Adidas, the local education level plays a role in a variety of aspects. It affects the
level of salaries to employees, since a high education level, means higher salaries.
However, Adidas promotes education, especially in third world countries and edu-
cation towards solving environmental issues. So education levels have both negative
and positive impact on Adidas, since it sets the level of salaries but also provides a
way for Adidas to promote their image.
– Attitudes toward imported goods and services:
Since Adidas is selling and distributing sportswear and fan merchandise on a global
scale, the local attitude towards imported goods is essential. If the attitude is bad,
Adidas might have difﬁculties getting a proper local market share. Since the attitude
plays a big role in theory, in reality most populations are open minded regarding
imported goods like fan merchandise from football clubs. This is due to the fact that
Adidas is the only brand selling and distributing merchandise from the clubs they
sponsor, so local manufacturers can not substitute the goods without it being illegal.
– Attitudes toward work, leisure, career and retirement:
As a global company, Adidas is highly affected by local attitudes towards work,
leisure, career and retirement, since it affects their local outsourced businesses and
how they operate. Local attitudes has an impact on how they operate because Adidas
strives to be a desired work place. If Adidas does not comply to local attitudes, the
work place will be less desirable for employees and it can potentially damage the
image of Adidas.
– Attitudes toward customer service:
Attitudes towards customer service has an impact on Adidas, since it sets require-
ments to how, especially local departments, should interact with customers. In some
countries, a high level of customer service is a desire from consumers, it requires
more from Adidas than in countries where high service levels are not an import-
ant requirement for customer satisfaction. Within football merchandise, customer
service is required to be able to support the customer in relation to customized mer-
chandise (for instance club shirts with prints from a speciﬁc player).
==PAGE:34==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
31
– Lifestyles:
The impact of lifestyles goes hand in hand with health consciousness. If an active
and healthy lifestyle is desired, Adidas has a better opportunity to target customers
through campaigns and advertisements and increase sales. However, in relation to
football merchandise, this plays a smaller role, since sales of merchandise depends
on club support and not as much on personal lifestyle.
– Attitudes towards speciﬁc sports.:
The local attitude towards speciﬁc sports has an impact on Adidas by inﬂuencing
sales of speciﬁc products. In some countries, football is not as big a sport as in other
countries. So the products offered and their according sales are inﬂuenced by the
attitudes towards that particular sport.
– Attitudes toward “green” or ecological products and renewable energy:
The global attitude towards environmental sustainability has a major impact on Adi-
das. If Adidas strive to be a desired brand on a global scale, it has to brand itself as
a company aiming towards more sustainability. It impacts the focus of some of the
products and their campaigns and advertisements.
• Technological.
Since Adidas is striving to be a market leader within apparel using state-of the art techno-
logy, a variety of technological aspects can impact Adidas both positively and negatively.
– Basic infrastructure level:
Since Adidas is distributing sportswear on a global scale, both international, national
and local, infrastructure has to be considered. It has an impact on delivery times and
costs.
– Rate of technological change:
The rate of technological change has an impact on Adidas, since it provides an op-
portunity for development. However, if the rate is too high, it might have a negative
effect, meaning that Adidas might not be able to keep up.
– Legislation regarding technology:
With new technologies, new restraints follow. Causes for this are numerous, but
==PAGE:35==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
32
either way, it affects the freedom Adidas could have to chose and use technology.
– Technology level in the industry:
As a global company, Adidas is impacted by the technology level in several ways.
A high technology level in the industry of football apparel might increase level of
competition. A low technology level might affect Adidas in a positive way by de-
creasing competition, but it can also force Adidas to provide the technology.
– Access to newest technology:
Some technologies might be out of reach for Adidas. This could either be due to
existing contracts with competitors, patents or documentation.
– Internet infrastructure and penetration:
Since Adidas is using social media and online channels as a main source of digital
promotion, the infrastructure and penetration requirements has an impact. Related
to ”freedom of speech”, censoring online media and decreasing penetration impacts
Adidas in a negative way, since online promotional materials are being restricted or
decreased.
• Environmental.
With an increasing focus on environmental pollution and sustainability, a variety of en-
vironmental issues have increasingly greater impact on Adidas.
– Weather:
As a sportswear manufacturer, local weather has a big impact on Adidas. Adidas has
to adapt to changes in weather regarding football apparel, since it is not beneﬁcial
to promote outdoor football boots during winter in regions where snow is covering
most football pitches or where summer is too hot to play football, hence the clubs
are on summer break. Regarding extreme weather conditions, they impact Adidas
by reducing sales in periods where sport is not possible locally, for instance during
heavy rain and following ﬂoods.
– Climate change:
The climate change impacts Adidas on a high level and in different ways. As stated
above, extreme weather conditions affects sales, which occurs more often due to
==PAGE:36==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
33
climate change. Also the focus on climate change and increased awareness amongst
consumers impacts Adidas through sales rates and marketing opportunities for more
sustainable products.
– Air and water pollution:
Air and water pollution are partly connected to climate change. Air pollution is a
contributor to climate change and water pollution affects the marine life. Therefore,
the impact on Adidas is high, hence it changes how Adidas should approach product
development and provides an opportunity for branding Adidas as contributor to a
better environment by reducing air pollution from production sites and investing in
preventing ocean pollution.
– Waste management:
Waste management goes hand in hand with climate change and pollution. By im-
proving waste management, for instance by reusing materials, pollution and thereby
contribution to climate change is decreased. However, it requires more control with
outsourced production.
• Legal.
To be able to distribute apparel on a global scale, both local and international laws have
to be considered. These laws affect Adidas both internally and externally.
– Discrimination law:
Discrimination law requires for Adidas to have a global work environment without
any discrimination of gender, sexuality, race etc.
– Copyright, patents / Intellectual property law:
Legal papers restricting opportunities for Adidas, requires for Adidas to do partner-
ships with suppliers. Regarding design, development and sales of Adidas products,
Adidas has to prevent others from copying them and thereby steal what Adidas has
created. To do so, Adidas has to spend resources towards legal papers as patents and
conﬁdentiality agreements.
– Health and safety law:
Health and safety law impacts Adidas in different ways. One of them being use
==PAGE:37==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
34
of chemicals in both production and product. In several countries, there are laws
restricting use of chemicals in products which might present a health risk. In pro-
duction, both health and safety of employees are factors. In some countries the laws
on health and safety are stricter than others, which might impact the planning of
production sites.
– Data Protection:
Adidas is using e-commerce as a sales platform and when ordering from their web-
site, personal information, including credit card information, is send to Adidas. Adi-
das is therefore required by law to handle these information correctly.
5.1.4
SWOT
Figure 12: SWOT analysis based on selected inputs from market analysis.
The previous analysis’ of Adidas provides valuable information which can be summarized and
assembled a SWOT analysis. While the PESTEL analysis mainly provides external input, in-
ternal input can partially be derived from Adidas’ solutions to comply or minimize the impact
==PAGE:38==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
35
of the external factors. Not all factors will be included in the SWOT. A few factors from each
research and analysis is included [8] [4].
• Strengths:
– Well established, global and strong brand
The strength and value of the Adidas brand has been created over a longer period of
time.
– High quality products
The brand is known for creating high quality products, both regarding performance
and materials.
– Access and rights to advanced technology
Adidas gains access to state-of the art technology by partnering up with organisa-
tions. Adidas also own rights to its own internally developed technologies, which
prevents market competitors from copying.
– Strong ﬁnancial position
Adidas is one of the most valuable sports brands and has the ﬁnancial status to outrun
most competitors when it comes to product development or signing sponsorships,
creating even more revenue to Adidas.
– Global network
Adidas has a substantial global network providing outsourcing of manufacturing,
distribution/retail and marketing.
• Weaknesses:
– High prices
As well as Adidas is known for high quality products, the prices follow. Adidas is
amongst the 2 most expensive brands in the market related to football apparel and
club merchandise.
– High costs
Adidas counts for some of the most expensive sponsorship deals in history of foot-
==PAGE:39==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
36
ball. Even though fan bases are somewhat stable, Adidas is investing a substantial
amount in clubs which might not meet expectations (i.e. Manchester United in
2018/2019) and sales might decrease.
– Outsourced manufacturing
Adidas has outsourced most of its manufacturing and is primarily focusing on product
development. However, this means that Adidas is vulnerable to manufacturing de-
cisions that can affect the Adidas brand image.
• Opportunities:
– Differentiation by sustainability
Adidas is in a position to differentiate itself from competitors by partnering up with
sustainability organisations (already ongoing).
– Partnerships
The strength of the Adidas brand, ﬁnancial position and opportunity to differentiate
itself by sustainability creates increasingly wider opportunities for partnerships and
hereby entering a sustainability focused market while outsourcing.
• Threats:
– Substitution from Nike
Adidas and Nike are the main competitors in the market of football apparel and club
sponsorships.
– Supplier power
By outsourcing manufacturing and partnering up with other organisations supplying
Adidas production, suppliers gain more power.
5.2
Current Business Model
To sum up the analysis of Adidas, the gathered info combined with information from the Adidas
Group [8] is gathered in a current business model canvas for Adidas Football, which provides a
full overview of Adidas in relation to football apparel:
==PAGE:40==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
37
Figure 13: The Business model of Adidas Football
==PAGE:41==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
38
5.3
Marketing and targeted consumer segments (Adidas vs. Nike
Both Adidas and Nike are about as equal in the football industry as can be and they even
promote their products, events and launch their campaigns in the same manner on social media
and platforms like YouTube. What differs between the two is their target consumer. Comparing
campaigns on YouTube, it is obvious that Adidas and Nike are targeting end consumers with
different desires and mindsets.
Nike seems like they are targeting football players who desire to boost their egos by advert-
isements and campaigns where idols show off trick skills and are superior to their opponents.
These elements are featured in for example a boot commercial featuring Ronaldinho doing
amazing crossbar challenge (where the player hits the crossbar of the goal from a certain dis-
tance). In this case, the ball hits the crossbar, comes back perfectly and Ronaldinho hits the
crossbar again and again [19]. Theoretically, this imprints the thought of wanting to be like
Ronaldinho with these Nike boots. In other promotional videos, Nike promotes Neymar as the
coolest street football player doing tricks [20]. Theoretically, this would have the same effect as
the video featuring Ronaldinho. Besides videos featuring superstars, Nike produces a series of
videos on how to learn tricks and skills, which also appeals to the more ego oriented consumer.
On the other hand, Adidas seems to be targeting the more intellectual and consciousness con-
sumer, by promoting team work, sustainability and personal development and a feeling of be-
longing. An example, directly opposite of the Nike approach, is the ”Never Follow” campaign
. Several videos have been launched in this campaign, featuring superstars like Pogba and ¨Ozil,
but all with the same slogan: ”I don’t want to be you, I just want your boots” [21][22]. An-
other example is the campaign from 2016 with the slogan: ”Create Your Own Game”, featuring
Messi and several players from Adidas sponsored clubs in Europe [23].
When comparing the to competitors, they seem very similar, but their target consumer differs
from each other, which means that Adidas will possibly search for differentiation from Nike
even further, but to do so, Adidas needs to focus even more on the intellectual and consciousness
consumer. This can be done theoretically be done by partnering up with an organisation which
appeals to this type of consumer segments.
==PAGE:42==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
39
5.4
Partnerships
From the business model of Adidas Football and the partnership identiﬁcation, some focus
points regarding partnerships are selected for further research:
Figure 14: The Business model of Adidas Football
==PAGE:43==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
40
5.4.1
Adidas X Parley
• Partner:
The partnership with Parley is chosen due to the ground breaking hype surrounding it
in the sports apparel industry combined with the fact that it is a new partnership (only 2
years old) and still developing.
• Key Resources:
The global network is chosen hence it possibly is the most relevant resource Adidas can
provide Parley in their partnership.
• Value Proposition
Materials and club support is chosen because it possibly is what will make end custom-
ers buy the kits launched. As stated previously, attitudes towards quality and ”green”
products plays a role in selling products to the end customer. Club support is essentially
an important preference when promoting initiatives through club sponsorships.
• Channels
Sponsorhsips play a major role when promoting in the sports apparel industry. With foot-
ball being the biggest sport in the world, reaching potential end customers by sponsoring
their favorite team or player is essential. Sponsorships act as a mean to inﬂuence potential
end customers, in this case, supporters of the clubs and/or players.
• Cost Structure
Since Adidas will provide funding to Parley for R&D, the costs towards R&D might
increase increase. More promotion and bigger campaigns as the partnership develops
will automatically increase sponsorship costs.
• Customer segments
Targeting football players and supporters by creating shirts in collaboration with Parley.
Since the kits is only for football, the partnership and promotion might not target other
customer segments.
==PAGE:44==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
41
Partnership Network
To get a proper overview of the Adidas X Parley partnership and how services ﬂow between
organisations, the network of organisations and sectors impacted by the partnership is illustrated
in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: The network of the Adidas X Parley partnership.
==PAGE:45==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
42
Figure 16: lassiﬁcation of the Adidas X Parley collaboration/partnership.
==PAGE:46==
5
CASE: ADIDAS
43
Considering the info from exploring the Adidas X Parley network illustratd in ﬁgure 15, it seems
as if the relation between the two is a combination of both collaboration and alliance/partnership
as illustrated in ﬁgure 15. This is due to the low dividing of risks combined with close collab-
oration regarding product development. Both organisations will most likely receive positive
gains from the close collaboration, with only Adidas taking medium risks regarding increased
costs. How great of a risk it is in total is not known, since no exact data is public. However,
since materials might be cheaper to buy through Parley and a potentially higher sales rate due
to greener image, the increased cost of promotion might be possible to neglect.
From this result, it is possible to determine the breadth and depth of the partnership which is
illustrated in ﬁgure 17 together with the breadth and depth of the same partnership in 2017,
when it was recently established.
Figure 17: The breadth and depth of the Adidas X Parley collaboration/partnership
==PAGE:47==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
44
6
Customer’s opinion
A questionnaire was send out in private football networks to receive an indication of whether the
approach taken by Adidas Football has worked as intended. The questionnaire took the respond-
ents approximately 9 minutes in average to answer and consisted of 10 questions, where some
were yes/no questions, some were questions where the respondent had to write his own answer
or choose amongst some options. The questionnaire consisted of questions which searched to
give real life insights to the customer segment, market, marketing and inﬂuence. The ques-
tionnaire was shared with more than 500 football players and/or fans, but was answered by 23
respondents (21 males and 2 females) in the age of 19 to 41 years (avg. 25,5 years), which is
enough to paint a picture. 22 out of 23 were located in Denmark and the questionnaire does not
distinguish between location and nationality (some respondents were exchange students from
other countries and continents). Only 1 respondent was not located in Denmark (female foot-
ball player from the Netherlands), so the questionnaire can be said to be studying national male
behavior in Denmark.
6.1
Results from questionnaire and comparison to theory
First question was to ﬁll out personal info (name, age, gender etc.)
Second question was regarding their relation to football. The question was divided into 6 op-
tions, where the respondent could answer more than one. The options were:
• Player (medium - high level)
• Player (low - medium level)
• Player (fun - low level)
• Former player
• Serious football fan
• Regular football fan
==PAGE:48==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
45
A majority answered ”Player - (low - medium level) which might be due to the networks the
questionnaire was shared with (clubs and teams primarily on the same level).
Figure 18: Respondents’ relation to football.
Third question was asking the respondent to list how many brands of football apparel they knew.
All 23 answered this question. Considering the market analysis, the result was not surprising.
The three brands that most respondents mentioned to know were: Adidas (22), Nike (22) and
Puma (19). This aligns with the previous market research in section 5.1.1
.
==PAGE:49==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
46
Figure 19: Percentage of respondents who were familiar with the sports brand
The fourth questions was related to which brands the respondents personally preferred buy-
ing/using. 22 respondents answered this question. (It has to be noted that not all respondents
answered on all preferences.) In regards to boots, both Adidas and Nike were preferred by
approx. 50% of the respondents. In regards to shirts, Nike took the lead, since some of the
”other” answers were meant as ”I don’t know”. Nike shirts were preferred by approx. 7 of the
respondents, where Adidas shirts were only preferred by 3 (this is not directly in relation to
club support shirts and was meant to refer to neutral football shirts). Regarding shorts, Adidas
took the lead again with 7 of the respondents preferring Adidas short against 4 preferring Nike
shorts. Balls were included, since both of the companies also produce and sell balls for major
events and leagues. 7 respondents preferred Adidas balls where only 1 preferred a Nike ball.
However, most respondents answered that they preferred Select when choosing footballs.
==PAGE:50==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
47
Figure 20: caption
In relation to the fourth question, the respondents were then asked to explain their preferences
as the ﬁfth question. 21 respondents answered this question. The most common reasons behind
the stated preferences were quality (8), ﬁt/comfort (7) and previous experiences (3).
Figure 21: caption
To turn focus towards marketing, the sixth question asked the respondents how many of the
mentioned brands they could recall having seen advertisement or campaigns for/from. 21 re-
spondents answered this question. Not surprisingly, Nike, Adidas and Puma took the lead with
==PAGE:51==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
48
20, 19 and 10 respondents. This aligns with the ﬁndings in the market research in section 5.1
and the resulting market shares illustrated in ﬁgure 13.
Figure 22: caption
To turn focus towards greener initiatives and their marketing, question seventh and eighth were
linked together, asking the respondent if they would buy the more sustainable shirt, costing 15
Euros more than the less sustainable shirt. 22 answered the seventh question with 12 wanting to
buy the more sustainable shirt against 11 wanting to buy the cheaper shirt. The ones choosing
the less sustainable and cheaper shirt was then asked if they would change their mind if the
more sustainable shirt was promoted by their favorite club and/or player. For some reason, 13
answered this question, even though only 11 were supposed to (which needs to be taken into
account), but the result was that 6 would change their mind when inﬂuenced by their favorite
club or favorite player.
==PAGE:52==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
49
Figure 23: caption
Figure 24: caption
Finally, the ninth and tenth question focused on one speciﬁc shirt and aimed to shed light on the
impact of promotion and marketing for awareness. The ninth question asked the respondent if
he was a Manchester United fan. 23 respondents answered this question, where 6 said yes.
==PAGE:53==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
50
Figure 25: caption
They were then asked if they knew that the Manchester United 3rd shirt in season 2018/2019
were made from ocean waste plastic in collaboration with Parley. Surprisingly, not one respond-
ent was aware of this.
6.2
Uncertainties and Limitations
As mentioned along the way through the presentation of the results, some uncertainties are to
be taken intro account:
• Reach of the questionnaire and reluctance to participate.
As mentioned, the questionnaire was shared in personal football networks, reaching more
than 500 amateur football players on fun-medium level, former players and football fans.
However, only 23 responded (despite more than 300 were registered as having seen the
posts). In organisations dealing with statistics, respondents are often offered some sort
of compensation for participation, which can provide incentives to participate. However,
that was not an option in this case.
• Survey Platform limitations.
Using the free Survey Monkey platform for simple questionnaires sets some boundaries
to how questions can be set up and how it can be analyzed. This means that in this case
it was not possible to restrict the respondents to only give one answer to some of the
==PAGE:54==
6
CUSTOMER’S OPINION
51
questions and multiple answers to others. Another limitation was that the free Survey
Monkey only provides questionnaires with up to 10 questions, which limits how deep the
research can be conducted. To include more questions, it can only be done by asking the
respondent to comment on his answer additionally.
• Types of respondents.
The group of respondents were pretty similar to each other. This is related to the reach
issues described previously. The questionnaire therefore provided very similar responds
and very similar point of views.
• Respondents. As seen, not all respondents answer all questions or read the questions
properly. This creates uncertainties which can reduce the quality of the questionnaire.
==PAGE:55==
7
CONCLUSION
52
7
Conclusion
The market and competition within the football apparel industry is highly dynamic and things
can potentially change direction within 1-2 years. within recent years, digital marketing has
changed from advertisements in relation to sports events to brands branding themselves through
their own channels, through social media and media platforms like YouTube. This way type of
marketing is increasing and so are the risks that follows, since the brands are more independent
in promoting themselves. Partnering up with organisations that can appeal to the desired poten-
tial customer segment is therefore an essential part of marketing strategies in today’s society to
compete for the market shares.
There are currently 5 major players in the market of football apparel as illustrated in ﬁgure 13
with Adidas leading the market, closely followed by Nike and Puma coming in third. This leads
to the conclusion that the market of football apparel is in fact an oligopoly market, with few
major players. Since Adidas and Nike are the 2 market leaders who compete against each other
for the leading position, their marketing approaches were researched. As stated in subsection
5.3, their marketing approaches are quite similar to each other. One thing is different: their
targeted end customer. whereas Nike is targeting the ego-oriented football player, Adidas is
targeting the intellectual and consciousness football player or fan.
That is the difference, which Adidas exploits by partnering up with Parley for Oceans. Parley
for Oceans provides Adidas with a ”feel good”-vibe which they can promote to improve their
image towards the consciousness football player or fan. Parley also provides Adidas with new
technology in reusing ocean waste plastic as an alternative to traditional polyester and this way,
providing Adidas with a solution to comply to increasingly more strict international legisla-
tions in regards to environmental sustainability. In return, Adidas provides Parley with a global
marketing option to raise awareness on the issues and Parley for Oceans.
As a marketing mean, the Adidas sponsored clubs and athletes are signed to wear the Adidas
X Parley apparel as advertisement billboards. Digital promotion lies mostly in the hands of
Parley, but is send out through the Adidas channels, as well as Parley’s own channels. A ques-
tionnaire was done by 23 respondents to determine whether the marketing for the Adidas X
Parley partnership had the desired effect of raising awareness and appeal to the consciousness
==PAGE:56==
7
CONCLUSION
53
end customer. The results from the questionnaire, presented in section 6 revealed that it did not
have the desired effect, but it did have the potential, since respondents were likely to chose the
more sustainable version (despite more expensive) of a club shirt and approx 50% of the ones
who would not, were open to changing their minds if promoted properly. However, none knew
about the Adidas X Parley for Oceans sustainable club shirts, sponsored to Manchester United,
the most valuable club in the world.
Despite the seemingly failed marketing approach of the Adidas X Parley partnership, they
continue to become even closer. From 2017 to 2019, the partnership has grew signiﬁcantly
closer, from being more of a supplier or charity case to a close collaboration, as more products
were made from the Parley Ocean plastic which is illustrated i ﬁgure 17. The close collabor-
ation/partnership has some advantages as well as disadvantages, as listed in ﬁgure 7. In this
case, the most relevant advantages are the fast access to technology between the two partners,
whereas the most relevant disadvantage is the potential lack of costs and time control for Adi-
das. However, strict rules may have been set on this matter in the contract, which was not
accessible for this project.
The partnership seems to be thriving on the current path. However, as the questionnaire il-
lustrated in section 6, Adidas was not the preferred as a shirt supplier, unless they are club
merchandise. In relation to Adidas as preferred football apparel brand, boots are seemingly the
direction to take for the Adidas X Parley partnership, as it was the kind of apparel, which most
respondents preferred as brand.
==PAGE:57==
8
DISCUSSION
54
8
Discussion
Lack of relevant data due to limited accessibility
The project was conducted only on public information and therefore, relevant data for the ana-
lysis have been absent, such as detailed cost structures, sales numbers and the Adidas X Parley
partnership contract. Lack of these information have potentially distorted the analysis in one
direction, where as the reality might look different. The analysis illustrates a nearly romantic
relationship between the two partners, which might not be as smooth in reality.
Scope
Due to time limitations in regards to the project plan, the area of research was narrowed down
to only including the football apparel market surrounding sponsorships in regards to marketing.
However, Adidas and Parley collaborate in several other areas of the sports apparel industry
which, if had been included in the scope of the project, could potentially affect the classiﬁca-
tion as well as breadth and depth of the partnership.
Models
The choice of models were executed in regards to available data. In case all relevant data had
been accessible, other more detailed models may have been chosen for the analysis of Adidas
and Adidas X Parley.
Modiﬁcations
Since not all the preferred models were originally derived for similar analysis, modiﬁcation had
to be conducted. When modifying a model, the liability of the results rely on the author’s level
of understanding the model. In this case, the model illustrating breadth and depth were modiﬁed
to ﬁt this particular analysis by changing the horizontal axis into numbers of products launched.
In this case of modiﬁcation, the horizontal axis did not have a major impact on the results.
Evaluation
To evaluate the results from the analysis, a questionnaire was chosen. However, semi struc-
tured interviews with relevant stakeholders would have been preferred as primary approach. A
questionnaire would have been conducted, despite the number of respondents would have been
preferred to have been higher, considering the reach the questionnaire had. Using a question-
naire with only 23 respondents, all from the same geographical area, is durable, but the less
amount of respondents results in more unreliable data, since it might not be a proper represent-
ing of the market.
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
Bibliography
Books:
[1] Osterwalder, A. and Pigneur, Y.:
Business Model Generation.
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (2010).
[2] Jones, G. R. and George, J. M.:
Essentials of Contemporary Management.
McGraw-Hill/Irwin (2013), ﬁth edition, chapter 5.
Scientiﬁc and Business Articles:
[3] Glasby, J. and Dickinson, H.:
Greater than the sum of our parts? Emerging lessons for UK health and social care.
International Journal of Integrated Care. (2008)
https://www.ijic.org/articles/10.5334/ijic.246/
[4] Ovidijus, J.:
The Structure of a Good SWOT.
Strategic Mangement Insight (2013).
https://strategicmanagementinsight.com/tools/swot-analysis-how-to-do-it.html
[5] Ovidijus, J.:
PEST & PESTEL Analysis.
Strategic Mangement Insight (2013).
https://strategicmanagementinsight.com/tools/pest-pestel-analysis.html
[6] Porter, M. E.:
How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
56
Harvard Business Review (1979).
https://https://hbr.org/1979/03/how-competitive-forces-shape-strategy
[7] Nilsson, E.:
Business Growth and How to Grow (draft).
DTU Executive School of Business (2018).
Websites and Online News Articles:
[8] Adidas Group- Ofﬁcial information about Adidas:
https://www.gameplan-a.com
https://www.adidas.com
https://www.adidas-group.com
[9] Adidas Group
https://www.adidas-group.com/en/sustainability/managing-sustainability/partnership-
approach/#/2001/2013/collaborations-and-memberships/
[10] Adidas Group:
Annual Report 2018.
https://report.adidas-group.com/acceleration-plan
[11] CNBC News
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/05/05/what-does-a-business-get-from-sponsoring-a-premier-
league-soccer-team.html
[12] UN:
UN Sustainable Development Goals to be reached by 2030:
www.un.org
[13] Richards, L.:
5 Different Types of Market Systems .
Chron (2019).
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/5-different-types-market-systems-25818.html
(last visited: July 24th)
[14] Charles, M.:
Politics and sport: How FIFA, UEFA and the IOC regulate political statements by
athletes.
LawInSport (2016).
https://www.lawinsport.com/topics/sports/item/politics-and-sport-how-ﬁfa-uefa-and-the-
ioc-regulate-political-statements-by-athletes
(last visited: July 24th)
[15] The Nielsen Company:
Soccer Is Still the World’s Most Popular Sport and Still Growing
Nielsen.com (2018)
https://www.nielsen.com/pk/en/insights/article/2018/fan-favorite-the-global-popularity-
of-football-is-rising/
[16] Boudway, I.:
Soccer Is Still the World’s Most Popular Sport and Still Growing
Bloomberg Business (2018)
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-06-12/soccer-is-the-world-s-most-
popular-sport-and-still-growing
[17] Brandwatch Team:
How does sponsoring the premier league work out for Barclays.
Brandwatch (2019)
https://www.brandwatch.com/blog/how-does-sponsoring-the-premier-league-work-out-
for-barclays/
[18] Zeelu:
The top 15 biggest and most supported football teams in the world.
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
58
Zeelu.co (2019)
https://travel.zeelo.co/the-top-15-biggest-and-most-supported-football-teams-in-the-
world/
YouTube:
[19] Ronaldingho trick shot video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6JdxaDDzb8
[20] Neymar mixtape video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AzfzV-ZZ64w
[21] Never Follow - ¨Ozil:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HmtRqEQoE4Q
[22] Never Follow - Pogba:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kKRmbS b250
[23] Create Your Own Game:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5PhEyGj3xq8
Sources of Pictures:
[24] FIFA ”Say No to Racism”:
http://yousense.info/72616369736d/racism-in-football-still-a-signiﬁcant-problem-
says.html
Anti-homophobia campaign in Premier League:
https://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/what-rainbow-laces-campaign-you-
11573660
[25] Lyngby Boldklub:
https://lyngby-boldklub.dk/2019/02/28/lyngby-boldklub-vil-skabe-synlighed-om-fns-
verdensmaal/
==PAGE:62==
A
MARKET SHARES
59
Appendix
A
Market shares
A.1
Market shares of top 5 European leagues (full tables 2018/2019)
Premier League
Club
Rank
Sponsor
Manchester City
1
Puma
Liverpool
2
New Balance
Chelsea
3
Nike
Tottenham Hotspurs
4
Nike
Arsenal
5
Adidas (2019/2020)
Manchester United
6
Adidas
Wolves
7
Adidas
Everton
8
Umbro
Leicester City
9
Adidas
West Ham
10
Umbro
Watford
11
Adidas
Crystal Palace
12
Puma
Newcastle United
13
Puma
Bournemouth
14
Umbro
Burnley
15
Umbro
Southampton
16
Under Armour
Brighton
17
Nike
Aston Villa
P
Kappa
Norwick City
P
Errea
Shefﬁeld United
P
Adidas
==PAGE:63==
A
MARKET SHARES
60
Serie A
Club
Rank
Sponsor
Juventus
1
Adidas
Napoli
2
Kappa
Atalanta
3
Joma
Inter
4
Nike
Milan
5
Puma
Roma
6
Nike
Torino
7
Joma
Lazio
8
Macron
Sampdoria
9
Joma
Bologna
10
Macron
Sassuolo
11
unknown
Udinese
12
unknown
SPAL
13
unknown
Parma Calcio
14
Errea
Cagliari
15
Macron
Fiorentina
16
le Coq
Genoa
17
Kappa
Brescia
P
unknown
Lecce
P
M908
Hellas Verona
P
Macron
La Liga
Club
Rank
Sponsor
FC Barcelona
1
Nike
Atletico Madrid
2
Nike
Real Madrid
3
Adidas
Valencia
4
Puma
Getafe
5
Joma
Sevilla
6
Nike
Espanyol
7
Kelme
Atletico Bilbao
8
New Balance
Real Sociedad
9
Macron
Real Betis
10
Kappa
Alaves
11
unknown
SD Eibar
12
Joma
Leganes
13
Joma
Villarreal
14
Joma
Levante
15
Macron
Real Valladolid
16
Adidas
Celta de Vigo
17
Adidas
Osasuna
P
Hummel
Mallorca
P
unknown
Granada
P
unknown
==PAGE:64==
A
MARKET SHARES
61
Ligue 1
Club
Rank
Sponsor
PSG
1
Nike
Lille OSC
2
New Balance
Lyon
3
Adidas
Saint-Etienne
4
Le Coq
Marseilles
5
Puma
Montpellier
6
Nike
Nice
7
Macron
Stade de Reims
8
Umbro
Nimes Olympique
9
unknown
Stade de Rennais
10
Puma
Strasbourg
11
unknown
Nantes
12
New Balance
Angers
13
Kappa
Bordeaux
14
Puma
Amiens
15
Puma
Toulouse
16
Joma
Monaco
17
Kappa
Dijon
18
Unknown
Metz
P
Brest
P
Nike
Bundesliga
Club
Rank
Sponsor
Bayern Munich
1
Adidas
Dortmund
2
Puma
Leipzig
3
Nike
Leverkusen
4
Jako
Gladbach
5
Puma
Vﬂ. Wolfburg
6
Nike
Frankfurt
7
Nike
Werder Bremen
8
Umbro
Hoffenheim
9
Joma
D¨usseldorf
10
Uhlsport
Hertha BSC
11
Nike
Mainz
12
Lotto
Freiburg
13
Hummel
schalke 04
14
Umbro
Augsburg
15
Nike
Paderborn
P
Saller
Union Berlin
P
Macron
K¨oln
P
Uhlsport
Table IV: Market shares of top 5 European leagues
