==PAGE:1==
Virtual Reality-Based Interactive
3D Modelling using Signiﬁers
Lars Kofod Jensen, s134838
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project concerns extending the feature set of a Virtual Reality 3D box
modelling system based on signiﬁers, allowing for the creation of more expres-
sive models. The common way of modeling 3D objects in VR happens with
a selection-action or tool-based approach, which reduces the immersive feeling
of VR and slows the modelling process. This project utilizes a signiﬁer-based
approach of having signiﬁers indicate ways of interacting with the model by
symbolizing common aﬀordances of everyday objects.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute at the Technical University of Den-
mark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Computer
Science and Engineering.
Lyngby, 13-July-2019
Lars Kofod Jensen, s134838
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my two supervisers, Jakob Andreas Bærentzen and Jeppe
Revall Frisvad, for guiding me through this master project and presenting me
for such a cool project.
Additionally, I would like to thank my family and friends for providing me with
plenty of motivation throughout the last 6 months.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Signiﬁers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Feature List . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
System Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
9
2.1
D. Norman - "The Design of Everyday Things" . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Triangle-Triangle Intersection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Extended System Features
15
3.1
Collision Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Face Bridging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Measuring Band
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Vertex and Plane Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Test
31
4.1
Test Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
User Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Expert Model Creations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Test Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Conclusion
41
5.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
A Test Protocol
45
B User Tests
47
B.1
Test Person 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
B.2
Test Person 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
B.3
Test Person 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
B.4
Test Person 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
C Triangle-Triangle Intersection Code
63
D Oculus Touch Controller Mapping
69
Bibliography
71
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
With the advance of technology in Virtual Reality and the commercialization
of products such as Oculus Rift, HTC Vive, Samsung Gear VR and Playsta-
tionVR, the boundaries of Virtual Reality are really being tested. The main
design challenges for VR applications are to create an immersive and comfort-
able experience for the user by trying to simulate real life. The use of traditional
2D user interface surfaces, to navigate an application and explore its possibili-
ties are an annoying experience in VR and prevents the user from being totally
immersed. The UI in many modern VR applications has therefore been embed-
ded into diﬀerent real life objects to simulate intuitive use. This means that
instead of choosing tools from a drop-down menu and apply them, the tools will
simply already surround you in the VR application waiting for you to interact
with them.
In a book by D. Norman called "The Design of Everyday Things"[No13], a
term, aﬀordances, is used to describe how an agent sees his/hers possibilities for
interacting with an object and a term, signiﬁer, is used to describe something
perceivable that indicates appropriate use of an object. A door, for instance,
has the aﬀordance to many people of being opened, which is signiﬁed by a
door handle. With this in mind, a VR 3D box modelling system has, prior to
this project, been developed at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU),
which tries to make use of signiﬁers to indicate intuitive ways of interacting with
the box. Many VR modelling systems such as Google Blocks[Go] and Oculus
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
Medium[Oca] can’t abstain from using some kind of ﬂoating 2D user interface,
in order to present the user with their many diﬀerent modelling options and
tools. The system at DTU therefore tries to incorporate as many intuitive ways
of interacting with the box through the diﬀerent signiﬁers, in order to make
the modelling process faster and the experience completely immersive. The big
challenge for the system is therefore to compete with other modelling systems
and create high quality models, without having to navigate through a big options
and tools menu.
The purpose of this master project is, therefore, to work on the VR box mod-
elling system from DTU and allow for more expressive and precise model cre-
ations. This should be done by extending the functionality of the system by
presenting new ways of interacting with the signiﬁers. Especially precision fea-
tures was sought out to create more symmetric models and collision detection
to prevent users from turning the model into a polygon soup. The system is
developed in Unity and uses Oculus Rift as VR equipment. For the remainder
of the introduction the original system will be explained in detail before moving
on to the design and implementation of the new features. Results from user
tests and expert model creations will be presented and used to evaluate the new
features. In the end, the state of the system will be discussed along with future
improvements.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Signiﬁers
3
1.1
Signiﬁers
The signiﬁers are the interaction points of which the user can manipulate the
model and can be put into the following categories:
• Vertex handles: A sphere shaped object placed at each corner of the
model.
• Face handles: A torus shaped object placed at the center of each model
face.
• Edge latches: A ring shaped object that can be either open or closed
and is placed at each model edge.
• Worktable signiﬁers: A platform located below the model containing
sphere shaped rotation handles and load, save, undo and redo buttons.
The signiﬁers placed on the model can be seen in ﬁgure 1.1, showing how they
appear to the user in the modelling process. Additionally, the worktable can be
seen in ﬁgure 1.2, appearing beneath the model.
Figure 1.1: Model signiﬁers
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Worktable placed below model
1.2
Feature List
The feature list is based on how a user can interact with the model through the
signiﬁers. The grabbing of vertex and face handles can be done by squeezing the
hand trigger (see appendix D). Initially, the original system had the following
features.
• Move vertex: by grabbing a vertex handle, the user can manipulate the
position of the associated model vertex.
• Edge collapsing: by placing a vertex close to another vertex, the edge
between the two will collapse.
• Edge loop: grabbing two adjacent vertex handles and twisting the edge
connecting them will split the corresponding face loop in two.
• Move face: grabbing a face handle makes the user able to transform,
extrude and rotate the corresponding face. Face extrusion and rotation
happens at a certain threshold, when the face is pulled or twisted. Addi-
tionally, performing a normal extrusion is possible by directing the extru-
sion close to the face normal.
• Interlocking faces: by ﬂicking the index ﬁnger on an edge latch, the
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Feature List
5
edge latch will switch between an open and closed state. A closed edge
latch will interlock the two faces on either side of the edge.
• Move multiple faces: grabbing a face handle of an interlocked face set
will enable the user to move around the entire face set.
• Load/save model: pressing the load/save buttons on the worktable will
respectively load or save the model to one of three diﬀerent locations.
• Undo/redo: pressing the undo/redo buttons placed on the worktable will
undo or redo the last operation the user performed on the model.
• Rotate model: By grabbing on of the sphere handles on the side of the
worktable, the user can rotate the model.
• Scale and translate model: By grabbing two sphere handles on the
worktable the user can scale and translate the model.
• Navigation: Though not signiﬁed by any object, the user can navigate
around the model by using the thumbsticks of the controllersD.
In this project the feature list was extended with this new set of features:
• Collision detection: Performing an operation which makes two faces of
the model collide will trigger the collision detection and the operation will
be denied.
• Face bridging: Grabbing one face handle and colliding it with another
will create a bridge between the two faces in the model.
• Measuring Band: Performing a face extrusion along the face normal
will result in a visual measuring band texture appearing on the side of
the extruded face. Holding down the thumb, on the controller performing
the extrusion, will make the extrusion snap to the ticks of the measuring
band.
• Vertex alignment: A vertex alignment snap happens when the user
grabs a vertex handle with one hand and with the other hand touches
(not grabs) another vertex handle with an open hand gesture. This will
align the two vertices along the two axes spanning the least amount of
distance between the two vertices. An open hand gesture is performed by
raising thumb and index ﬁnger from the controller.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
• Plane alignment: Grabbing a face handle with one hand and touching
(not grabbing) a face handle with the other hand will align the face associ-
ated with the ﬁrst face handle to the plane of the face associated with the
other face handle. As with vertex alignment snap, the "touching" needs
to be done with an open hand gesture.
1.3
System Architecture
The developed features for this project has been implemented in what you can
deﬁne as a sub system of the VR modelling system. Therefore, ﬁgure 1.3 il-
lustrates the ﬂow of how the user interacts with the model for that given sub
system and how this aﬀects the model. The other part of the system that has
been omitted, in this illustrations, is the user interaction with the worktable.
This includes the rotations handles and all buttons placed on the worktable,
load, save, undo and redo. The system architecture for the original system has
remained the same throughout the project.
Figure 1.3: Sub system architecture
• OVRAvatar Hand: This is the hand representation of the user, in the VR
environment, simulated by the user holding the controller. This is where
all user input to the system comes from, for manipulating the model.
• InteractableObject: An object the user can interact with through the
OVRAvatar Hand, which enables the user to interact with the model.
• VertexHandle Controller: An InteractableObject, which can be used
to perform vertex operations on the model.
==PAGE:17==
1.3 System Architecture
7
• FaceHandle Controller: An InteractableObject, which can be used
to perform face operations on the model.
• Edge Latch Controller: An InteractableObject, which can be used
to perform multiple face operations simultaneously.
• Controls Manager: The overlying control unit of the above three InteractableObjects.
Responsible for instantiating, updating and removing them from the model
mesh.
• Extrudable Mesh: The class containing a Unity mesh representation of
the model, also called an Indexed Face Set, which is used to render the
model in unity. Additionally, it’s got a reference to a half-edge mesh data
structure of the model, which is referred to as the Manifold. All operations
coming from the InteractableObjects are sent to the Extrudable Mesh
and is performed on the Manifold. The Manifold is then converted into
a Unity mesh and is rendered for the user, showing the new changes to the
model.
• Manifold: The half-edge mesh data structure of the model, which through
a wrapper class IManifold can access a C++ library and utilize fast half-
edge mesh operations.
• IManifold: The wrapper class exposing the functionality of the C++
library so as to be utilized in Unity C# scripts.
• GEL DLL: A C++ dynamic link library compiled from GEL[B], containing
half-edge based functionality for the manifold.
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this theory section I will outline the core design concepts of aﬀordances and
signiﬁers for this modelling system, in addition to other concepts that are also
relevant to take into consideration when developing new features. After this, I
will present some theory behind a triangle-triangle intersection algorithm used
for the new collision detection feature.
2.1
D. Norman - "The Design of Everyday Things"
In the book "The Design of Everyday Things", D. Norman introduces some
concepts, when it comes to evaluating the design of objects that we humans
interact with, that are relevant for this project. The following is a list of these
concepts.
• Aﬀordances: "The term aﬀordance refers to the relationship between a
physical object and a person... An aﬀordance is a relationship between the
properties of an object and the capabilities of the agent that determine just
how the object could possibly be used."[No13].
==PAGE:20==
10
Theory
• Signiﬁers: "For me, the term signiﬁer refers to any mark or sound,
any perceivable indicator that communicates appropriate behavior to a per-
son."[No13].
• Feedback: "...some way of letting you know that the system is work-
ing on your request.", "Feedback - communicating the results of an ac-
tion..."[No13].
• Constraints: "Constraints are powerful clues, limiting the set of possible
actions.
The thoughtful use of constraints in design lets people readily
determine the proper course of action, even in a novel situation."[No13].
• Discoverability: "Is it possible to even ﬁgure out what actions are pos-
sible and where and how to perform them?"[No13].
As brieﬂy mentioned in the introduction aﬀordances and signiﬁers are the design
foundation for this VR modelling system. An aﬀordance can be described as
what a person is aware of and is able to use an object for. As mentioned in
the book, D. Norman uses an example of a chair, which to all people has the
aﬀordance of sitting on and for the majority of people the aﬀordance of lifting
it. However, to some people, could be old and weak, lifting the chair is not an
aﬀordance to them.
Signiﬁers are used to make people realize how they can use an object.
D.
Norman also mentions an example of this, by stating that the ’push’ sign placed
on a door, indicates that the door can be pushed. This example he determines
as a deliberate and intentional signiﬁer. Where an unintentional or accidental
signiﬁer, he mentions, could be people leaving trails in ﬁelds or snow landscapes
that will signify a direct path to others.
These two concepts were used when creating the original VR box modelling
system. Where, for instance, the face handles should signify that a face can
be ’pulled’ and hopefully that this is an aﬀordance most people have to such a
handle.
Another important thing about the design of objects, D. Norman mentions as,
the feedback provided to the user upon receiving a request. He mentions that
this feedback should be immediate and informative and uses an example of
bad feedback as the button placed at pedestrian crossings, which people keep
spamming because of a lack of feedback. Additionally, he also mentions that
feedback can be too much, for instance when a washing machine beeps in the
middle of the night and disturbs the sleeping owner. Or in cases where too many
signals are being presented to the user, each indicating something important, so
that the user ignores them all.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Triangle-Triangle Intersection
11
Additionally he mentions the concept of constraints and their beneﬁts to the
design of objects, by presenting the user with a proper course of action. Four
constraint types are mentioned, but one of them is Physical Constraints, which
is explained like this: "Physical limitations constrain possible operations. Thus,
a large peg cannot ﬁt into a small hole."[No13]. He uses an example of a bad
design, which doesn’t utilizing physical restriction, by referring to cylindrical
batteries, which can be inserted in two ways, one of which is wrong and damaging
to the equipment. A physical constraint in the design of the battery, should only
allow to insert it correctly and this way guide the user and prevent confusion.
Discoverability is the concept of ﬁguring out what diﬀerent actions are possible
and what the state of the product is. He states that discoverability of a product
results from appropriate use of the other concepts mentioned previously, among
a few other concepts not mentioned here. A good application of aﬀordances,
signiﬁers, feedback and constraints, belonging to a design, form a good basis
for discovering the capabilities of the product. Discoverability is the essence
of what this VR modelling system should strive for, which would mean that
ﬁrst time users will ﬁnd the system intuitive and adapt quickly to the diﬀerent
features. Extended features for this system should therefore be evaluated and
discussed in terms of the aﬀormentioned concepts.
2.2
Triangle-Triangle Intersection
For the implementation of collision detection to the system, it was required to
be able to check if a triangle intersects another triangle in the model mesh.
The following triangle-triangle intersection algorithm[M7] was used because it
provided a clear way of doing exactly this and was referred to many times when
doing research. The algorithm is made up of 4 steps to determine an intersection
between two triangles.
• Step 1: Compute both plane equations. Calculating the plane equation
for both triangles makes it possible two compute the signed distances for
all three points of a triangle to the other triangle.
• Step 2: Compute the signed distances. An intersection can only occur if
triangle 1 has points on both sides of the plane equation of triangle 2 and
vice versa. When comparing the points of triangle 1 to the plane equa-
tion of triangle 2, for instance, one point needs to have a negative signed
distance and another point needs a positive signed distance. Otherwise,
all points are placed on one side of the plane equation and therefore no
intersection is possible.
==PAGE:22==
12
Theory
• Step 3: Compute the intersection line and project all vertices onto it. If
step 2 doesn’t reject a possible intersection, then we compute the inter-
section line between the two planes. A possible intersection between the
triangles has to happen along this intersection line.
• Step 4: Compare triangle intervals on the intersection line. By project-
ing two of the edges for each triangle onto the intersection line, you get
an interval for where a triangle intersects the intersection line.
Doing
this for both triangles and checking if the intervals overlap, is enough for
determining whether two triangles intersect.
Starting out with step one, we need to compute the plane equation for both
triangles. The formula is similar to the one in the paper in which this algorithm
is based on. Same goes for all the other formulas used in the other steps. Some
quick notation for the formulas. π1 and π2 are the plane equations for triangle
1 and 2 respectively. N1 and N2 are the normals of each plane. V 1
0 , V 1
1 and V 1
2
are the vertices of triangle 1, T1, and V 2
0 , V 2
1 and V 2
2 are the vertices of triangle
2, T2.
π1 : N1 · X + d1 = 0
N1 = (V 1
1 −V 1
0 ) × (V 1
2 −V 1
0 )
d1 = −N · V 1
0 .
(2.1)
This is how the plane equation is computed for triangle 1 and the same should
be done for triangle 2. X corresponds to any given point on the plane.
dV 2
i = N1 · V 2
i + d1
(2.2)
This formula shows how to calculate the signed distances to the vertices of T2
from the plane equation of T1. If the three signed distances all have the same
sign (positive or negative), then the triangles don’t intersect. The paper is a
little diﬀerent in this case and also requires none of the signed distances to be
zero before rejecting an intersection of the triangles. The diﬀerence in approach
concerns the instances where triangles touch, but don’t ’go through’ each other.
In our system, as mentioned earlier, triangles are glued to each other along the
edges and in our case shouldn’t indicate a collision. Another issue to notice is
ﬂoating point imprecisions. This makes the algorithm report very small triangle
intersections that we can’t prevent in our model mesh. Therefore, it is necessary
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Triangle-Triangle Intersection
13
to introduce an epsilon value, as suggested in the paper, which assigns a signed
distance to zero if it was within epsilon range of zero. This means that we allow
very small triangle intersections in our system based on the epsilon value. This
is one of the perks when implementing a collision detection algorithm. You get
to choose exactly what corresponds to a collision. Important to notice that this
step should be done the other way around as well. The vertices of T1 should also
be compared to the plane equation of T2. Assuming that we haven’t rejected
the two triangles intersect, we continue to step 3.
We have concluded from the previous steps that both triangles have vertices
on either side of the plane equation of the other triangle. Therefore, a possible
intersection must happen along an intersection line (L) with the direction (D)
that is equal to the cross product of the two plane normals. Finding a point
existing on both plane equations along with D gives us the equation for L. Step
3 is therefore about projecting the vertices of each triangle onto L. With this
information, you can take two vertices from T1 that are placed on diﬀerent sides
of the plane equation of T2 and calculate the intersection point between the edge
of the two vertices and L. This is possible since you know the distance from
each vertex to L. Doing this for both triangle edges of T1, that intersect the
plane equation of T2, you will have two points on L that form an intersection
interval. Compare the intersection interval for each of the triangles on L and if
they overlap it is because the triangles intersect each other. Computing these
intervals and comparing them is step 4. In the paper, however, they mention
that projecting the intervals onto the axis most parallel to D doesn’t change the
result of the overlap test. Therefore, we do as the paper shows and project the
vertices onto the axis most parallel to D as seen in equation 2.3.
pV 1
i =





V 1
ix,
if|Dx| = max(|Dx|, |Dy|, |Dz|)
V 1
iy,
if|Dy| = max(|Dx|, |Dy|, |Dz|)
V 1
iz,
if|Dz| = max(|Dx|, |Dy|, |Dz|)
, i = 0, 1, 2.
(2.3)
Equation 2.4 shows how to compute the intersection for the edge between V 1
0
and V 1
1 and L. The other point of the interval, t2 can be computed likewise
for the other edge going between V 2
0 and V 1
1 , assuming that those are the two
edges that intersect L. That is, V 1
0 and V 1
2 are placed on one side of the plane
equation of T2 and V 1
1 on the other. This interval should then be compared to
the interval of the intersection between T2 and L. If the two intervals overlap,
there is a collision.
==PAGE:24==
14
Theory
t1 = pV 1
0 + (pV 1
1 −pV 1
0 )
dV 1
0
dV 1
0 −dV 1
1
(2.4)
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Extended System Features
In this section the design and implementation of the extended system features
will be explained, accompanied with illustrations of how they appear in the sys-
tem. The extended features include collision detection, face bridging, measuring
band, vertex alignment and plane alignment.
3.1
Collision Detection
We decided to add collision detection on the model as a way of avoiding it
from collapsing in on itself. This means that if the user performs an operation
which makes two faces of the model intersect each other, the operation will
be rejected.
Such an operation could be performed by dragging a vertex or
extruding a face across another part of the model. It is important to note that
this feature in theory only limits the actions of the user and doesn’t introduce
a new way of interacting with the model. However, this way we make sure that
the user doesn’t mess up the model and complicate future operations. It can be
very diﬃcult for a user to interact with a collapsed model, when the diﬀerent
signiﬁers are tangled up in each other. Additionally it is potentially diﬃcult
to design new modelling features, when you have to assume the model can be
collapsed in an inﬁnite number of ways. Essentially, we knew that we needed
==PAGE:26==
16
Extended System Features
to add this constraint to the system and to compensate the user we needed
to introduce a way of bridging faces of the model. Bridging faces of the model
changes the genus of the model object and will be introduced later in the report.
It’s important to note, that with collision detection, we are starting to induce
some physical constraints to the system, in which we try to enforce the ’correct’
way of interacting with the model. This should further give the user a better
understanding of how the model should be perceived.
3.1.1
Design
At ﬁrst the idea was to use some build-in collision detection from Unity, but for
our exact problem, Unity seemed to come a little bit short. The only collider
type that ﬁt our model is the mesh collider. The remaining collider types
are generic shapes, which we can’t use for a model which constantly changes
shape. Assigning a mesh collider for the whole mesh, however, doesn’t help
us, since checking a collider colliding with itself doesn’t make any sense. The
last option was to assign a mesh collider to each face in the model, this would
however require a lot of new colliders to a system that is already packed with
colliders.
It is possible to structure the diﬀerent colliders in diﬀerent layers
and avoid unnecessary collision computations, but there is still another issue.
For mesh colliders to collide with each other, they must be convex and these
types need to have a non-zero volume. This means that all the face colliders
will have a thickness when they are assigned a plane mesh. This will not work
for our system where faces are glued to each other and a collision should not
trigger because of that. Additionally, it is important to note that mesh colliders
only detect collisions from one side. This means that if the user performs an
operation that forces a face or vertex back through the mesh, then a collision
will not necessarily be detected.
Since a simple solution couldn’t be found with Unity’s collision detection it was
decided to make collision detection from scratch. The model mesh is structured
in Unity as a list of vertices, where each sequence of three vertices form a
triangle. Therefore, the ﬁnal solution to this problem consists of extracting all
triangles and check for each possible pair if they intersect each other. One of the
advantages of this solution is being able to check for mesh collisions instantly,
whenever it is suitable. Instead of having Unity, which is event-based, trigger
on a collision after an illegal action has been performed, it is possible to test the
action ﬁrst. Another advantage is when implementing such an algorithm you
control yourself what is considered a collision and you can alter it to suit your
needs.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Collision Detection
17
3.1.2
Implementation
Apart from the few implementation changes to the algorithm mentioned in the
theory subsection, the algorithm has been implemented in C#, seen in appendix
C, with some inspiration from the following C code[Gu]. As of now the collision
detection is used to validate the Mesh of the model. This is done by taking
all the triangles of the model mesh and run the triangle-triangle intersection
algorithm on each possible pairing.
The user will experience the collision detection, after he/she has performed an
operation that makes two mesh triangles intersect. The program will respond
to a collision by reverting the last operation coming from the user. An example
of this is visible in ﬁgure 3.1.
(a) Initial model
(b) Model collision
(c) Operation reversion
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a collision and a operation revert
There are many other ways to indicate a collision to the user, than simply
reverting the operation.
For instance would it also be possible to highlight
intersected faces, so the user gets an idea of why the operation was not allowed
by the system. The highlight could consist of colliding faces getting a subtle
red color for a brief moment, brief enough for the user to recognize it and then
fade away.
In most cases, users will probably understand why an operation
was reverted, when they try to drag a face handle or vertex handle across the
entire model, but for more subtle cases it would probably beneﬁt the user with
some feedback. Another way of handling collisions could, instead of reverting an
operation all the way back, be a small alteration to the operation, that doesn’t
lead to a collision. For instance, reverting the operation to the point before
collision or maybe change the direction of the operation. This would however
lead to more collision checks, to ﬁgure out which alterations are valid, which for
larger models will be more expensive.
An important note on collision detection in general is to make sure it is eﬃcient.
As models grow larger and larger the collision checks will require more resources
==PAGE:28==
18
Extended System Features
and slow down the program when an operation has to be veriﬁed. One option
to make collision detection faster is to implement it into a lower level language.
Another, an more eﬃcient option is to minimize the number of triangle inter-
section tests. This implementation performs collision detection by comparing
all triangles to each other, this can be optimized. When a user performs an
operation, usually, the majority of triangles remain the same. Therefore, in-
stead of comparing all triangles to each other, one can omit intersection checks
between triangles unaﬀected by the user operation. This accounts for a lot of in-
tersection checks and to take advantage of this, each possible type of operation,
in the system, performed by the user, should specify a set of aﬀected triangles
that need checking for collisions.
Put into perspective, moving a vertex af-
fects 6 triangles and extruding a single face aﬀects usually around 10 triangles.
In a model consisting of 500 triangles, which normally would require around
5002
2
= 125000 intersection tests, these two simple operations would be roughly
reduced to around 3000 and 5000. This is a signiﬁcant performance boost, but
these two operations are also one of those aﬀecting the least amount of triangles.
Inserting an edge loop or extruding multiple faces can potentially aﬀect much
more.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Face Bridging
19
3.2
Face Bridging
As a result of introducing collision detection to the program, which restricts
the user from joining diﬀerent parts of the model, it was decided to introduce
the face bridging feature. Joining parts of the model is relevant for creating
models with diﬀerent genus like, a cup with a handle, where the handle forms
a ’hole’ in the model. Face bridging is therefore introduced as the ’correct’ way
of changing the genus. As the name indicates, face bridging is used to create a
bridge, consisting of new faces, to connect the model through two faces placed
somewhere on the model. This feature leads to the beneﬁt of operating on a
connected model, for models with a genus higher than zero, where the diﬀerent
features of the program can be properly utilized.
3.2.1
Design
Initially the design for changing the genus of the model wasn’t face bridging
as introduced earlier. The initial idea was much more expressive and involved
merging vertices. Basically, it was supposed to be that one could create a bridge
by simply merging vertices. Then if two adjacent vertices were forming a bridge,
the edges between them would be connected as well. If all edges around two
faces were connected, then and only then would there be a face bridge. This
design would allow the user to connect the model through vertices, edges and
faces, giving the user more control of how precisely, for instance a handle of a
coﬀee cup could be connected to the rest of the model.
The idea of connecting the model this way was eventually discarded. One of the
reasons for this was the uncertainty of how connecting a model through vertices
would work in corresponds to the program and the half edge datastructure of
the manifold. Another reason became clear when comparing this design to a
limited version, where only face bridging was a possibility. Then it was obvious
that the initial design was a too ’low-level’ operation, meaning it would require
too many operations in order to bridge a face, which was believed, in most cases,
to be the intention of the user. To keep this feature simple, the design ended
up being face bridging.
In the GEL library there is a functionality for bridging two faces which requires
the id of each face and a list of vertex pairings. The next issue then became
how the user should indicate a face bridging operation to the system. The ﬁrst
proposal also became the ﬁnal solution and involved taking advantage of the
face handles associated to the faces of the model. Grabbing a face handle and
colliding it with another face handle, will make the other handle light up and
==PAGE:30==
20
Extended System Features
if the user lets go of the face handle, a face bridging operation is performed.
The highlight of the other handle is used as feedback to the user, to indicate
the handles are touching and should signify the merging of the two faces. A
downside to this design is, if the user wants to put two faces really close to each
other, without bridging them, he/she has to make sure the handles don’t collide.
However, since the design seemed really intuitive and that this issue probably
wouldn’t be a big problem to the user, it was chosen.
3.2.2
Implementation
First of all a new Dynamic Link Library (DLL ﬁle) had to be compiled of GEL,
since the original one, used for this project, didn’t contain the functionality for
bridging faces. Therefore, the version of the GEL project, used for this program,
needed to be imported into Visual Studio with the face bridging functionality
added from the GEL library on GitHub. A guide for creating DLL ﬁles was
found in Microsoft’s Docs[Gu] and the latest version of GEL was taken from
GitHub[B].
Compiling the DLL ﬁle should be done in a x64 format, so it’s
compatible with Unity. I also had to compile a LIB ﬁle of the newest version
of GEL and use it as a dependency in the Visual Studio project to link the
functions for the DLL compilation process. Instructions on creating the LIB ﬁle
is speciﬁed in the ’README’ ﬁle in the GEL repository on GitHub.
Now that the face bridging functionality was accessible to the program in a
newly created DLL ﬁle, it became a matter of how to utilize it. For the user
to successfully insert a bridge between two faces, the following criteria and
procedure was implemented.
• Distinct neighbourhood: This is a criteria making sure that a bridge
will not be inserted between two faces if they have adjacent faces in com-
mon. Additionally, they can also not be direct neighbours.
• Vertex pairing: This step pairs up the vertices of each face to deﬁne the
actual bridge.
• Facing faces: For each vertex pairing, the line between the two vertices
can not deviate from either face normal with more than 90 degrees.
• Collision detection: If the bridge collides with the rest of the model, it
will not be inserted.
Once the user grabs a face handle and releases it onto another face handle
(colliding face handles), the face bridging procedure begins between the two
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Face Bridging
21
faces. The ﬁrst step ’Distinct neighbourhood’ is a criteria, deﬁning two sets of
faces that can not have faces in common. These two sets are deﬁned individually
as a face and its adjacent faces. The reason for this constraint can be divided
into two. The ﬁrst being that direct neighbours have common vertices and a
face can therefore not be introduced between these vertex pairings. The second
reason concerns cases where the two faces being bridged have an adjacent face in
common. Introducing a bridge in this case will result in two identical faces lying
on top of each other. This then results in a false representation of the model to
the user and two face handles will be nested. This operation is not discarded
by the collision detection for the same reasons as faces can be connected along
their edges. If a face does not ’go through’ another face, there is no collision.
The next step ’Vertex pairing’ matches the vertices from one face to the other
in pairs. These vertex matches deﬁnes the edges forming the bridge between
the two faces. This procedure is therefore important, since the bridge should
consist of faces not colliding with each other. If the two faces have a diﬀerent
number of vertices, one having 3 and the other 4, then the bridge will not
be inserted. Otherwise it’s all about making the correct pairings. The initial
thought to this problem was ﬁnding one vertex pair, that ’had’ to be paired,
and then match the remaining vertices by traversing one face clockwise and the
other counterclockwise. This approach would provide some sort of anchor for
the remaining pairings. The idea of creating an anchor by pairing the two closest
vertices was quickly discarded, because of cases where the obvious bottom of
one face was level to the obvious top of the other. This would eventually result
in a bridge where its faces would collide with each other. Without being able
to ﬁnd a solution to this problem in a similar manner, I stumbled upon another
way of doing this. It became clear that this was a simple assignment problem
of minimum-weight matching. This means that the cost of each vertex pairing
is equal to the euclidean distance between the two and the overall cost of vertex
pairings should be minimum. Since a face bridging operation should only match
6 or 8 vertices, the minimum assignment problem can easily be brute forced,
this is because faces are limited to 3 and 4 vertices.
The third step compares the lines of the vertex pairings from previous step and
makes sure that they don’t deviate 90 degrees from either face normal. This
was done for each face by looking at the outgoing vectors, simulating the vertex
pairings and make sure that the dot product between them and the face normal
isn’t less than zero. The reason for this step is that a bridge should connect a
model on the outside surface. Before this constraint is was however possible in
some cases to make a valid hole through the model, but in other cases that hole
would ruin the model, making it look cut up. Making these constraints, to avoid
weird face bridging operations should prevent the user from being confused of
the face bridging feature. The last step before a face bridge is inserted is checking
for collision. If there are none, then the face bridge will be inserted.
==PAGE:32==
22
Extended System Features
To show how the face bridging implementation looks from the user’s point of
view an illustration is visible in ﬁgure 3.2.
(a) Face extrusion
(b) Colliding handles
(c) Successful face bridge
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the face bridging feature
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Measuring Band
23
3.3
Measuring Band
With collision detection being implemented and therefore constraining the user
from making polygon soup models, a completely unorganized mesh with lots
of intersections, there suddenly exists a nice environment for the system to be
expanded with new features. The initial plan for this project was to expand
the system with precision features, which would allow users to make symmetric
models. Therefore, the ﬁrst precision feature being introduced is the measuring
band.
The measuring band allows for the user, when performing a normal
extrusion, to see exactly how far the extrusion has been made by presenting the
user with small extrusion ticks. This measuring band texture appears on the
side faces of the extruded face. This feature enables the user to perform precise
normal extrusion operations, which can be used to create symmetric rectangular
model structures.
This is an important feature, since the user can create a
symmetric rough sketch of his model and afterwards use other operations for
applying more detail.
3.3.1
Design
As with the face bridging feature, I had an initial idea of making the feature
much more expressive.
It involved much more information presented in the
extrusion texture by also simulating the angle of an extrusion operation away
from the face normal. The reason for this was to make this feature a bigger tool
to the user and allow for repeating exact extrusion operations away from the
face normal.
It became clear however, that this would be much more diﬃcult to implement
and the results wouldn’t probably beneﬁt the user. When extruding a face, the
user can both rotate and translate the face. This meant that the angle with
which a face is rotated should be indicated to the user. Additionally, in cases
where the face is only translated, there should be two angles to describe the
extrusion operation. Therefore, in order for the user to replicate any extrusion
operation possible, he would at least need the information of 3 angles and an
extrusion length.
This is too much information to present to the user on a
texture and it is impossible to replicate such an extrusion operation with the
VR controllers. This is also assuming the user can actually remember all the
information from the previous extrusion. This design would only work in theory,
because it is too complex. This is an example, of too much feedback provided
to the user and could probably result in the user ignoring it all and therefore,
not taking advantage of it.
==PAGE:34==
24
Extended System Features
The ﬁnal design was therefore much simpler, an was limited to creating a mea-
suring band texture for an extrusion operation along the face normal. In order
for the user to snap the normal extrusion to the measuring band ticks, a hand
gesture operation was introduced, where the user would need to lower his thumb
onto the controller performing the operation. This also means that raising the
thumb from the controller will result in a continuous extrusion. The measuring
band should function as a simple feedback mechanism, so the user is clearly
informed of the extrusion length, while performing the operation. Addition-
ally, the measuring band should signify the possibilities of making symmetric
rectangular structures and thereby encouraging the user to do so.
3.3.2
Implementation
To get the visual eﬀect of a measuring band to appear on the mesh, some
research had to be done in order to implement it. While doing some research,
I stumbled upon similar issues in the unity community, where people needed
to have dirt stains appearing on a character or have the visual eﬀects of bullet
holes on a wall. A suggestion to solving these problems was to have a semi
transparent GameObject, with a dirt stain or bullet hole, put inﬁnitely close to
where it was meant to go. Meaning, to simulate a bullet hole on a wall, you will
simply oﬀset a semi transparent plane, with only the bullet hole on it, in front
of the wall where it should be placed. The oﬀset should be as little as possible
without leading to z-ﬁghting.
With this in mind I simply put a slightly oﬀset GameObject on top of each of the
side faces of the extrusion, from where I could draw the texture. In the begging
I used a simple texture pattern, consisting of black stripes, to test the trans-
parency of the GameObject. The 2D texture was made by setting pixel values
to Color.black and Color.clear, where ’clear’ would represent a transpar-
ent pixel. To actually get the eﬀect of a transparent surface, some parameters
needed changing in the shader associated with the GameObject. A Standard
unity shader was assigned to the gameobjects with a Cutout transparency pa-
rameter enabled, to cut out the clear pixels.
Once the correct transparency settings of these gameobjects were made, I could
continue to make the measuring band texture and discarding the test texture.
The measuring band texture is made as a 80x15 2D texture, with black and
clear pixels, which can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
The measuring band is divided into 10 unit lengths, which gives associations to
the metric system. The texture is Clamped vertically and Repeated horizontally,
which gives the eﬀect of extruding the measuring band along with the face extru-
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Measuring Band
25
Figure 3.3: Measuring band texture
sion. Therefore, the vertices and uv coordinates of the measuring band gameob-
jects needs to be updated each frame. Ten ticks of the measuring band corre-
sponds to the length of the initial box presented to the user when starting the
system. Once a face is being extruded, a method InitializeMeasuringBands
is called, which for each adjacent face initializes a measuring band by creat-
ing a gameobject with the measuring band texture. If the user extrudes the
face away from the face normal, the method DestroyMeasuringBands will be
called.
As long as the extrusion happens along the normal, each frame the
method UpdateMeasuringBands will be called, which updates the vertex and
uv coordinates of the measuring band gameobjects.
Snapping to the individual ticks of the measuring band happens by lowering the
thumb onto the controller performing the operation. This hand gesture along
with the implemented measuring band can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4.
(a) Extrusion with tick snapping
(b) Extrusion without tick snapping
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the measuring band and tick extrusion feature
As you can see from the avatar hand grabbing a face handle in ﬁgure 3.4a and
3.4b, the thumb is positioned diﬀerently in each case, which respectively leads
to a tick extrusion and a continuous extrusion. For really exploring the VR
experience, the thumb gesture was used in contrast to holding down a button or
the index trigger of the controller. This should hopefully give a more immersive
==PAGE:36==
26
Extended System Features
experience to see your hand gestures have an impact on the modelling process.
The reason for choosing the thumb for this, was to mimic the use of real life
pocket measuring bands, where a measurement can be locked by pressing down
your thumb. Even though this doesn’t snap to the individual unit lengths, it
might be intuitive for the users to use the thumb this way.
Additionally, this feature also applies when extruding multiple faces along the
face normal. As visible in ﬁgure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: The measuring band for extruding multiple faces
For multiple face extrusions the measuring band texture will only show on the
sides of the grabbed face. Alternatively it could appear on the sides of each
extruded face, but this could potentially be many and that doesn’t seem neces-
sary for the user to have so many repetitions of the measuring band. Potentially
also very annoying, because of too much feedback. Extruding a 3x3 block by
grabbing the face handle in the center, therefore, results in no measuring bands
appearing to the user. The user will in this case, have to grab one of the other
face handles to see the measuring band.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Vertex and Plane Alignment
27
3.4
Vertex and Plane Alignment
Since the measuring band with tick extrusions enables the user to make sym-
metric rectangular models, symmetry is also desired for non-rectangular models.
For this reason a vertex and plane alignment feature was added to the system
to help the user apply symmetry with operations other than normal extrusions.
The vertex alignment feature aligns two vertices along the two axes spanning
the least amount of distance between the two. This is very useful when the
user wants to make even vertex corrections across the model, for instance, when
aligning the roof top of a house. The plane alignment feature aligns two faces of
the model, meaning the faces will be put in the same plane and have the same
orientation. This allows the user to make face extrusion away from the face nor-
mal parallel to each other, for instance when making the sides of a staircase, or
it can simply be used to align the sides of a roof. Additionally, plane alignment
can be used to quickly repeat a tick extrusion, which is useful when extruding
the legs of a chair. Both of these features should become very beneﬁcial to the
user, when making symmetric alterations to a rectangular base model structure.
3.4.1
Design
As with the two previous features, I had a much more extensive idea for the
design of the precision features to the system. This idea came along before im-
plementing the measuring band feature and involved having a semi transparent
3D grid that the user could snap vertex and face operations to. I saw the grid as
a way for the user to enforce symmetry on the model, by simply being immersed
into a 3D graph paper. This single grid feature, would then, to a certain extend,
contain the same capabilities, as the three precision features, measuring band,
vertex alignment and plane alignment. The grid would of course be limited to
its discrete unit lengths, but it would be a feature with a lot of possibilities
for the user to enforce diﬀerent kinds of symmetry. Additional options for the
grid could of course be imagined, like setting it on and oﬀand changing its unit
lengths.
The major downside for this grid approach would be how the user experienced
the grid. Is it even pleasant for the user to be immersed in a 3D grid, while
operating on the model? If this isn’t the case, then this solution wouldn’t work.
There are of course many ways of trying to present the grid to the user and
to design it in a way the user might ﬁnd comfortable. It seemed risky to put
all eggs in one basket for this feature, when multiple simpler features could
perform something similar. This precision feature was therefore discarded and
substituted with three other features.
==PAGE:38==
28
Extended System Features
As mentioned in the start of this section, vertex and plane alignment was chosen
as precision features for the system. The next issue then became how the user
should indicate such an operation to the system. Obviously, the user had to
specify the two vertices or faces that should be aligned. Vertex handles already
have a dual operation, where you grab two adjacent vertices and insert an edge
loop, so it couldn’t be done this way. Even though face handles didn’t have a
dual operation, it was important to be consistent across these two alignment
features and make them similar, as to make it less confusing for the user and
minimize recall. The solution for vertex alignment was therefore to use two
hands simultaneously to ’touch’ one vertex and ’grab’ another vertex. This way
of indicating two vertices also has the additional beneﬁt of indicating which
vertex should be aligned to which. The ’touched’ vertex should hence remain
stationary and the ’grabbed’ vertex should be aligned to the other. In order to
not perform a vertex alignment when inserting an edge loop, an open-handed
hand gesture was introduced.
The user performs the open hand gesture by
raising the thumb and index ﬁnger from the controller.
This means that in
order to perform a vertex alignment, the ’touching’ hand needs an open handed
gesture. The way the user indicates a plane alignment operation is exactly the
same as for vertex alignment, with the small diﬀerence of interacting with face
handles instead. The open handed gesture is therefore currently a symbol of an
alignment operation in the system.
3.4.2
Implementation
For the system to register an alignment operation it all starts from the point
where a user grabs a vertex or face handle. Once this happens, the following
procedure is run for vertex or plane alignment operations.
• GrabControl: The GrabControl, which is a script assigned to the OVRAvatar
Hand, for the other controller, than the one grabbing an InteractableObject,
is checked to see if it has collided with a similar InteractableObject. If
this is the case, then the hand state of the GrabControl, which can switch
between three hand states EMPTY, TOUCHING and HOLDING is checked to see
if it currently in TOUCHING.
• Hand gesture: If the hand state of the GrabControl is TOUCHING, then
the hand gesture from the controller is checked to see if it’s an open handed
gesture. This is done through the OVRInput API for Oculus Touch con-
trollers, by checking if OVRInput.Touch.Any is false for that speciﬁc con-
troller.
• Vertex/Plane alignment: If the hand gesture was open handed in the
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Vertex and Plane Alignment
29
previous step, then the vertex/face associated to the grabbed InteractableObject
will be aligned to the vertex/face of the touched InteractableObject.
Vertex alignment is done by giving the grabbed vertex the same coordinates
as the touched vertex in the dimensions they were closest to each other. As an
example, let’s say vertex A has the following coordinates A = (2, 5, 8) and vertex
B has these coordinates B = (3, 6, 16). Then if vertex B should be aligned to
vertex A, then the new coordinates of vertex B will be B →(2, 5, 16). This
means, in this cases, that vertex B will be put directly 8 lengths behind A in
the Z axis.
For plane alignment each vertex associated to the face of the grabbed face handle
will be projected onto the plane of the face associated to the touched face handle.
The plane being aligned to, is deﬁned by the center and normal of the face.
Both feature operations, implemented into the system, are illustrated from the
perspective of the user in ﬁgure 3.6 and 3.7.
(a) House with uneven rooftop
(b) Before vertex alignment
(c) After vertex alignment
(d) House with even rooftop
Figure 3.6: Illustration of the vertex alignment feature
Here ﬁgure 3.6 shows how to align the rooftop of a house. The operation showed
in sub ﬁgure 3.6b and 3.6c is repeated to align the far end of the roof top and
==PAGE:40==
30
Extended System Features
results in sub ﬁgure 3.6d. Notice how the right avatar hand has an open handed
gesture and the left hand grabs the vertex that needs to be aligned. Vertex
alignment, additionally, shows its great beneﬁts, as it can be used sequentially
to align a vertex with two other vertices. For instance, in ﬁgure 3.6, to ﬁrst
align a roof top vertex to the gable of the house and then align it with vertices
along the roof top.
(a) Initial extrusion
(b) Plane alignment while extruding
(c) Adjacent faces
(d) Plane alignment without extrusion
Figure 3.7: Illustration of the plane alignment feature
For plane alignment in ﬁgure 3.7, ﬁgure 3.7a and 3.7b show a plane alignment
operation, where the left hand is extruding a face and the right hand is used to
feel a face handle, which then aligns the two faces in the same plane. In ﬁgure
3.7c and 3.7d a slight variation is performed of the plane alignment operation
compared to the previous. Here the plane alignment operation is used to align
two adjacent faces, which therefore doesn’t involve an initial extrusion of either
face.
These two alignment features will probably be very diﬃcult to discover by a
new user and this is because they aren’t signiﬁed by anything. It was not trivial
to introduce such a signiﬁer and therefore, their discoverability is expected to
be low.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Test
The tests for the system and the new features involve 4 ﬁrst time user tests and
some model creations made by myself. The 4 user tests have been performed
with a test protocol described in the next section and involve a small discover-
ability test of the basic functionality of the signiﬁers. Two design tests where
the users were asked to create a house and a chair and in the end a creativity
test where people could model what they wanted. Then entire feature set was
introduced between the discoverability test and the design tests. This was done
because it would potentially take many hours for the test users to discover all
the advanced features needed for creating the models in the design test. The
interesting part about this test is therefore to see how quickly they adapt to the
new features and if they ﬁnd them intuitive.
4.1
Test Protocol
The original test protocol, used for the tests, can be found in Appendix A
and was made together with my project supervisor Jakob Andreas Bærentzen,
who designed the high level aspect of the protocol.
The following is a brief
description of it. All tests were timed and notes were taken while supervising
the test subjects.
==PAGE:42==
32
Test
• Before the tests started all the test subjects were introduced to the con-
trollers and the relevant controller inputs were explained.
• The small discoverability test started by having the test subjects recreate
a sketch of a tetris ’T’ shaped ﬁgure with a slightly raised vertex at the
top. This was to introduce them to the simple operations of grabbing and
moving a face and vertex handle.
• After the discoverability test all the features of the system was introduced
to the test subjects and tried out in practise.
• The design tests then started where they were asked to recreate ﬁrst a
house and then a chair from the sketches seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
• Following the design tests, the test subjects were allowed to model what-
ever they liked in the creativity test.
Below are the design sketch models the test subjects were asked to recreate.
Figure 4.1: Design test models sketched by Jakob Andreas Bærentzen
==PAGE:43==
4.2 User Tests
33
4.2
User Tests
The 4 novice user tests can be seen in appendix B, which presents some gen-
eral comments on the diﬀerent tests of each test subject along with screenshots
of their models. There is no speciﬁc test data from the user tests, other than
screenshots of their models, since it is diﬃcult to measure how intuitive the
features were to the test subjects. I will therefore evaluate the new features
according to how I saw the test subjects use them.
Collision detection: Each test subject, in one way or the other had some
confusing experiences with the collision detection. This was illustrated by the
test subjects trying to repeat the same operation and didn’t understand why
it kept being rejected. Cases of this involved trying to intrude faces along the
bottom of the model, especially when trying to make the door for the house in
the design test. Another case was when trying to extrude a single face parallel to
the rest of the model, which made the sides collide. In some cases, especially for
test subject 3, he managed to make parallel single extrusions, that he thought
were connected. However, they were separated by a very small gap, which let
to tiny collisions when future operations were made.
The tests shows that collision detection would beneﬁt from providing feedback
on a collision, by, as suggested in the implementation, highlighting collided faces.
This way, it should communicate to the user why an operation was rejected and
they wouldn’t need to repeat rejected operations as many times as they did in
the tests. However, the big problem with collision detections as it is now, is
that an operation at ﬁrst can seem possible, but when the user lets go of the
vertex or face handle, then it is being rejected. The solution to this, should
be to perform collision detection checks while an operation is being made and
not only after. This way, the model will simulate a true physical constraint like
that of a real life object and lead to much less confusion. Alternatively, the
system should oﬀer additional features to resolve these confusing instances, so
the intention of the user is fulﬁlled, instead of rejected.
Face bridging: Face bridging was used for all test subjects to create the chair,
except for test subject 4 who seemed to have forgotten the feature. Test person
1 and 2 found it really intuitive and had no issues inserting the operation. This
might be do to the feedback of highlighting the collided handles used to signify
the operation. Test subject 3 was skeptic to use the face bridging operations for
the chair, since he couldn’t insert one to form the window of the house, because
==PAGE:44==
34
Test
a collision was triggered. He needed the face bridge for the house because he
in contrast to the others made it hollow. This comes to show that the missing
signiﬁer for collision detection can make a user sow doubt into the other system
features. This illustrates the importance of good design. Apart from test subject
4, the others seemed to know that they had to perform a face bridge operation
on the chair, since it was an obvious consequence of seeing the sketch.
In cases where users haven’t been given the face bridging introduction it might
take some time to discover this feature, but also in case of test subject 4, to
rediscover it. An interesting approach to signifying a face bridging operation,
instead of using a highlight when they collide, could be to change the appear-
ance of the other face handles. This way, when the user grabs a face handle then
maybe the remaining face handles could be replaced with hooks. This would
probably lead the user to try placing a face handle onto a hook and this way
discover the feature. A downside to this approach would be the plane alignment
feature, since touching the hook with the other hand would result in a plane
alignment and people would probably get confused.
Measuring band: The measuring band feature was used all the time, by the
test subjects, to perform even extrusion around the model.
Whether it was
used with a raised or lowered thumb, they all used it with the intention of
creating symmetry to the model. Test subjects 1, 2 and 3 almost always used
a lowered thumb to perform tick extrusions and test subject 4 used a raised
thumb. These diﬀerences, I believe, correlates to how comfortable the subjects
were with holding the controllers. This is because test subject 4 had major
issues with this. Additionally, it didn’t seems as though the other test subjects
remembered that they could raise their thumb, but why would they, when they
wanted to make precise extrusions. With the measuring band, the test subjects
also seemed encouraged to perform longer extrusions. This was however really
diﬃcult for all of them, since it is diﬃcult to keep a long extrusion along the
normal.
The measuring band is a really great signiﬁer, which instantly indicates the
aﬀordance of performing precise normal extrusions, while providing continuous
feedback. In addition to this it invited the users to think about symmetry in
their model creation. Whether users are quick to realize that they can raise
their thumb to perform a continuous normal extrusion is diﬃcult to say.
It
seemed, though, that when people didn’t use their dominant hand, they tended
to raise their thumb, which is really beneﬁcial to discover and then fully utilize
the functionality of the measuring band.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 User Tests
35
Vertex alignment: Vertex alignment was used by all the test subjects except
test subject 3.
This might have been because all the other test subjects in
the ﬁrst design test used it to form the roof of the house, where test subject
3 started by creating the foundation of the house and didn’t get to forming
the roof. This goes to show that, it can be diﬃcult to remember all individual
features in a large feature set, even though it has been introduced and tried out
in practise. Test subject 2 and 4 had confusing moments underway, when they
thought vertex alignment could be used to align vertices out of the x, y or z
direction. They ended up ﬁguring it out and used it extensively, also subject 1,
to make corrections along the model for both house and chair. The use of the
open hand gesture for the vertex alignment seemed to function well and it made
sense to them which vertex to grab and which one to touch.
The beneﬁt of vertex alignment was clear to the test subjects, apart from subject
3, and indicates that the functionality of vertex alignment is good. The vertex
alignment feature is, however, something that might be really hard to discover.
It is well separated from the other features, by being a dual handed operation
and by using an open handed gesture, but this also makes it easily hidden to
new users. It would be interesting to perform really long discoverability test
sessions, to test some of these new features. Ways to signify vertex alignment
to the user seems diﬃcult, but like with the suggestion for face bridging, the
appearance of the other vertices could maybe be altered slightly, once a vertex is
grabbed, to indicate the possibilities of a dual interaction. Signifying the open
hand gesture needed, however, seems almost impossible, at least not intuitive.
Plane alignment: Was used immediately by test subject 1 and 2, to align
the legs of the chair, but test subject 3 had diﬃculties making the precise dual
hand operation needed to keep the grabbed face handle in normal extrusion
and the leg would become uneven. Test subject 4, didn’t use plane alignment
at all. Other than that, plane alignment wasn’t really used for any of the test
subjects. In contrast to vertex alignment, the beneﬁt of using plane alignment
wasn’t as clear. Maybe diﬀerent design challenges would make plane alignment
seem more useful.
As with vertex alignment this feature is really hard to discover and nothing
signiﬁes it. Therefore, plane alignment and vertex alignment needs to be intro-
duced to the user. It is also not clear that plane alignment can be performed
without needing to extrude a face ﬁrst, but instead using the order of feeling one
handle and then grabbing another. This also might indicate the need of being
able to keep an extrusion along the normal, without having to have a steady
hand. One thing that was a big plus with plane alignment was the fact that
none the users used it for the house in the ﬁrst test, but three of them used
==PAGE:46==
36
Test
it for the chair. This might be because the feature was executed similarly as
vertex alignment and therefore easier to remember.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Expert Model Creations
37
4.3
Expert Model Creations
To illustrate the use of the implemented features, I made some model creations
which are visible below. For ﬁgure 4.2 I have created my own interpretation
of the models from the test protocol design test. In ﬁgure 4.3 I have tried to
compare the system to Minecraft[Mo] by creating cube models.
(a) House model
(b) Chair model
Figure 4.2: My recreations of the design test models
For both the house model in ﬁgure 4.2a and chair model in ﬁgure 4.2b, the
measuring band feature was used to create the needed partitions in both models.
For instance, when forming the seat of the chair and creating the body of the
house. Face bridging, which enables user to change the genus of an object, was
used to form the window of the house and to connect the chair back. Vertex
alignment enabled the alignment of the roof top and the chair back, which is
really useful when collapsing edges and when in general applying symmetry to
parts of the model that are not rectangular. Plane alignment was necessary to
create the even surface of the house roof and to create the overhangs to the
roof (eaves). Additionally, plane alignment allowed me to quickly repeat precise
normal extrusions of the measuring band, when forming the chair legs.
It is really diﬃcult to compare the system to state of the art modelling tools
for both 2D and VR. This is because modelling tools like Google Blocks[Go],
Oculus Medium[Oca] and Maya[Au] all contain a very large feature set, allowing
for very complex models. However, while experimenting with model creation
in the system, it was clear to me that the system could easily be compared to
Minecraft models. I have tried to illustrate this by creating two models, that
have the Minecraft cube structure, and they can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3. Minecraft
is a hugely popular open world game because, among other things, of their cube
modelling approach. Because of the newly implemented features, face bridging
and the measuring band, the system is now really close to being able to create
==PAGE:48==
38
Test
(a) Fort made out of cubes
(b) Tower made out of cubes
Figure 4.3: Illustration of Minecraft like models
the same models as in Minecraft. The only thing missing is the ability to ’close’
holes or say, lower the genus of a model object. As an example, looking at the
house model in ﬁgure 4.2a, I couldn’t form a ﬂoor, because face bridging only
allows for increasing the genus.
4.4
Test Conclusions
Here is a quick sum up for the user tests and general comments to the perfor-
mance of the system as a whole.
• While expanding the feature set of the modelling system, it is now clear
that the system has moved further into expert user territory.
This is
because more complex models with precise symmetry requires some ex-
perience to ﬁgure out the right sequence of operations, which is apparent
from the user test results. Additionally, new user have more features to
learn and many of them are diﬃcult to discover and requires an introduc-
tion along with experience to get used to. To really get an idea of where
the program actually stands at this point, extensive discoverability tests
needs to be performed.
• Collision detection needs to either provide feedback or happen constantly
as to not confuse the user. Vertex and plane alignment needs to be signiﬁed
in some way, to enhance their discoverability. The measuring band and
face bridging works well and is intuitive, though face bridging could be
signiﬁed a bit more.
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Test Conclusions
39
• Many of the test subjects used a lot of time to create the design models and
in almost all cases didn’t mind performing the last alignment operations to
perfect their model. Additionally, only one test person did a long creativity
test, because the test subjects were to exhausted at this point. This might
all indicate, that the user experience in general is a bit exhausting.
• Many of the test subjects made a lot of geometry for their models and this
resulted in a somewhat laggy experience. The scalability of the system
should eventually be addressed.
• The system, with the new features, can now be used to create diﬀerent
types of symmetric models and is very close to being able to replicate
Minecraft models. Other types of creative model creations also presented
themselves, for instance with test subject 1 trying to spell his own name.
Appendix B ﬁgure B.4.
==PAGE:50==
40
Test
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to allow for more expressive model creations by
extending the feature set of a Virtual Reality 3D box modelling system. The
extended system is now able to create symmetric rectangular model structures
with a genus greater than zero. Additionally, the system is now also capable, to
a certain extend, of creating symmetric models for non-rectangular structures.
This includes models such as chairs with a tilted back and houses with rooftops
extended with eaves.
The user test results, in general, showed that the system has moved further
into expert user territory. This was apparent from the time spent on creating
the design models compared to the end results. New users need to gain some
experience of the system in order to ﬁgure out the best course a action. Better
use of constraints could have done the job, which leads us to collision detection.
Collision detection made users believe certain operations where possible, when
they weren’t, which made them doubt certain features and led to a general frus-
tration and confusion. Collision detection should have been utilized to simulate
a true physical constraint, by being performed constantly and give the users a
feeling of a real physical model object. This should thereby enhance the discov-
erability of the other features and lead to a better understanding. The need for
a redesign of collision detection can be supported by referring to the principle
of least astonishment. "If a necessary feature has a high astonishment factor, it
may be necessary to redesign the feature."[Co84].
==PAGE:52==
42
Conclusion
Using a signiﬁer based approach to create a modelling tool is great for enhancing
the immersive feeling of VR and performing fast model operations. However, in
order to extend such a system with new features and staying true to the approach
of using signiﬁers, great ingenuity of the designs are required. In order not to
overcrowd the model with diﬀerent types of signiﬁers, each signiﬁer should be
able to indicate multiple aﬀordances to the user. Many of the system extended
features are based on signiﬁers being used together, which isn’t a naturally
indicated aﬀordance for them. Mode changes could be a solution to this, by
for instance changing the appearance of signiﬁers, when the user grabs a vertex
or face handle. The problem of introducing new features is also a matter of
how many diﬀerent ways to indicate a unique operation. For this reason hand
gestures where introduced, which works great for executing an operation, but
lacks discoverability. In order to raise the discoverability of hand gestures, one
might look into their use in modern technology with regards to scroll, swiping
and zoom motions.
Using this signiﬁer approach, for a modelling tool in Virtual Reality, is really
diﬃcult for obtaining a large feature set and requires an ingenious design. Addi-
tionally, as shown by the user tests, VR still leads to quick exhaustion and takes
some time getting used to. It will therefore take a lot of eﬀort and research to
show that VR can oﬀer the best solution for future modelling tools.
5.1
Future Work
• Simulation of physical constraint: Collision detection should happen
constantly to simulate a physical constraint and allowing for better discov-
erability of the system features. Therefore, scaling improvements needs to
be made as mentioned in the implementation for collision detection.
• Hand gesture research: In order to interact with the model in more
ways, I suggest doing some research into hand gestures by taking advan-
tage of the aﬀordances many people have to smart devices.
• Discoverability testing: To get a good estimate of the diﬀerent fea-
ture designs in the system, extensive discoverability tests are required to
determine useful alterations or discards of current system features.
• Scalability: In order for the users to create larger models, optimizations
are needed in certain aspects of the current system. Collision detection
should only check for collisions between mesh triangles aﬀected by an
operation and the remaining mesh. The global scale listener, which is used
to update the size of signiﬁers, relative to controller distance, takes up to
many resources and should be optimized or redesigned. Object pooling, for
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Future Work
43
signiﬁers, only function for operations other than ’Undo/Redo’, because
of an edge-loop related bug, that can make the system crash.
• Minecraft: Functionality for closing holes, without creating parallel faces,
would be a really useful feature for creating hollow models and would allow
user to make Minecraft structures.
==PAGE:54==
44
Conclusion
==PAGE:55==
Appendix A
Test Protocol
The following is the test protocol for testing our VR 3D modeling system.
Throughout the test, the facilitator should make notes of what is being said. In
this case, it is also a think aloud test. All tests are also timed.
1. Discoverability test: Use the simple test from the ﬁrst iteration of the pa-
per where users are asked to reproduce a very simple model without instructions
regarding the system. Only instructions should be about the VR equipment. In
particular, the buttons on the touch controller should be explained. Before the
discovery test, the test person needs the following information:
• Explain that the controllers function as your hands. Explain the function
of the primary hand trigger and thumbsticks.
Explain that remaining
controller inputs do nothing.
Test procedure:
1. Show test model.
2. Start clock and let test person start.
3. Put down a timestamp for when the model has been successfully repro-
duced or when the test person has given up.
==PAGE:56==
46
Test Protocol
4. Comment on the resulting model and how the test person performed with
the program features (problems/successes).
2. Design test: In the second test, users are asked to design a couple of more
complicated objects based on illustrations. The users are asked to reproduce
these objects as precisely as possible. The user needs at this point to have a good
understanding of how vertex handles, face handles and edge latches work. Before
the design test, the test person needs the following information and should take
about 10 minutes:
• Explain the more advanced feature set (vertex snap, plane snap, face bridg-
ing, tick extrusion, edge loop, edge latches and edge collapse).
• Make the test person perform all operations of the advanced feature set
before starting the test. For the test person to remember the advanced
feature set it is important to have them visualised.
Test procedure:
1. Show test model of a house.
2. Start clock and let test person start.
3. Put down a timestamp for when the model has been successfully repro-
duced or when the test person has given up.
4. Comment on the resulting model and how the test person performed with
the program features (problems/successes).
5. Repeat protocol for chair model
3.
Creativity test: In the third and ﬁnal test, users are asked to create
whatever they fancy. Nothing further is explained at this point, but the test
user is asked about his or her creation and what they are thinking and trying.
The user is also encouraged to experiment with the features throughout the
process. While this test is also timed, it is clear that the time taken for this test
is going to depend on how ambitions the user is.
At the end, users are asked about their favorite and least favorite aspect of the
system.
==PAGE:57==
Appendix B
User Tests
B.1
Test Person 1
No modelling experience prior to test, little VR experience. DTU student.
Discoverability test:
- Managed to create the simple test model in 2’50".
- Immediately grabbed the face handle to perform tick-extrusions intuitively
- Thought he could grab edge-handles and manipulate edges. Used a bit of
time trying this
- Finally looked to a vertex handle and ﬁnished the model with one opera-
tion
- He used the thumbsticks to navigate the VR space, instead of using the
turntable
Before starting with the design test, the test person was given instructions on
how to perform all the program features and tried all of the operations in prac-
tice. This feature introduction took 12 min.
==PAGE:58==
48
User Tests
Design test (house illustration):
- Created the house model in 28’23"
- Started oﬀby creating the roof with edge-collapsing and vertex alignment
- When creating the roof, he initially thought that locked edge-latches could
be used to move multiple vertices
- Used many edge-loop operations to divide the model into smaller pieces
instead of extruding it. This led to gigantic handles relative to the model
and made it diﬃcult for the rest of the modelling process.
- Created the window by pushing in a face
- Couldn’t do the same with the door, since a collision was triggered at the
bottom of the model mesh
- proceeded to create the door by moving vertices after struggling with the
door for a long time
- Tried to align vertices in the end, but the handles were really big compared
to the model and he gave up
Design test (chair illustration):
- Created the chair model in 34’35"
- He made the seat of the chair by using edge-loop operations instead of
extrusion, which again made the handles disproportionately big compared
to the model
- Proceeded to do the ﬁrst leg with tick-extrusion and the remaining with
plane-snapping. Spend very little time on modelling the legs and to great
eﬀect
- The back of the chair was made with extrusion operations away from the
face normal, which made it diﬃcult to have a symmetric back from front
perspective
- A lot of vertex and plane snapping was used to create a symmetric back
from side perspective
==PAGE:59==
B.1 Test Person 1
49
Creativity test:
- Spend approximately 40 minutes to spell his own name
- Realized he couldn’t have multiple models, so he connected the letters
with face-bridging
- Used a lot of vertex alignment
- Started to use the turntable more, instead of using the thumbsticks
Figure B.1: Test person 1
==PAGE:60==
50
User Tests
Figure B.2: Test person 1
Figure B.3: Test person 1
==PAGE:61==
B.1 Test Person 1
51
Figure B.4: Test person 1
==PAGE:62==
52
User Tests
B.2
Test Person 2
No modelling experience prior to test, some VR experience. DTU student.
Discoverability test:
- Managed to create the simple test model in 1’24"
- Understood the use of vertex and face handles instantly and had no prob-
lems creating the test model
After the discoverability test all the program features was introduced to the test
person and tried out in practice. This feature introduction took 10 min.
Design test (house illustration):
- Created the house model in 26’48"
- Tried to create the house foundation only using single face extrusion.
Needed to undo process and use mass-extrusion because of collision detec-
tion
- Had problems with mass-extrusion along the face normal, which lead to
an undo operation and relocking edge-latches
- Used edge collapsing to form the roof and immediately proceeded to align
the vertices
- Also thought that edge-latches aﬀected vertex movement.
- Displayed great control of edge-latches by using mass-extrusion to form
the front of the house. Extruded faces around the window and door.
- Had trouble aligning the front of the house with the roof, since the roof
was aligned in the beginning. Thought vertex alignment could help her
align vertices up along the roof.
Design test (chair illustration):
- Created the chair model in 32’45"
==PAGE:63==
B.2 Test Person 2
53
- Started by extruding a 4x4 grid to form the seat
- Had problems forming the ﬁrst leg with a long extrusion along the normal,
since the operation is diﬃcult to keep in normal snap. Made four small
extrusions instead
- Like test person 1, she without hesitation used plane alignment for the
remaining legs
- Realized the seat should have been 5x5 and ﬁxed it by inserting an edge-
loop and made vertex alignment corrections
- Like the ﬁrst test person, the back was diﬃcult to align i front perspective
but intuitive to align in side perspective
- Only used vertex snapping for the back
Creativity test:
- Spend 8 min for the creativity test
- Created a small basket-like object
- Was a bit exhausted from previous tests
==PAGE:64==
54
User Tests
Figure B.5: Test person 2
Figure B.6: Test person 2
==PAGE:65==
B.2 Test Person 2
55
Figure B.7: Test person 2
==PAGE:66==
56
User Tests
B.3
Test Person 3
Small amount of modelling and VR experience prior to test. DTU student.
Discoverability test:
- Managed to create the simple test model in 2’02"
- Understood the use of vertex and face handles, but was a bit confused by
the edge latches, which he tried to grab.
- Tried to rotate the model by grabbing it, eventually discovered how to
rotate the model by using the turntable.
After the discoverability test all the program features was introduced to the test
person and tried out in practice. This feature introduction took 10 min.
Design test (house illustration):
- Failed creating the house model and stopped after 29’21"
- Had issues keeping a lengthy face extrusion in normal snap
- Created the foundation of the house with parallel single face extrusions
instead of utilizing the edge latches to extrude multiple faces at once.
- The above approach led to a false representation of the model, where
the user thought the single extrusions were connected, which let to small
collisions when performing future operations
- Tried to make ﬁxes by inserting edge-loops, but the model grew very big
and laggy and he decided to restart
- Created the house foundation with mass extrusion by utilizing edge latches
- Couldn’t insert the edge-loop he wanted to in many cases, resulting in a
big model and much frustration
- Was therefore not able to make the partitions of the model needed to form
the window with a face bridge
Design test (chair illustration):
==PAGE:67==
B.3 Test Person 3
57
- Created the chair model in 18’40"
- Started by forming the back of the chair
- Connected the back of the chair into the seat with face bridging
- Used mass extrusion to form the seat
- Found a hack of using the right navigation stick to perform lengthy normal
extrusions for the chair legs
- Tried to use plane snapping for the remaining legs, but it was diﬃcult to
keep a normal extrusion while using the other hand to feel another face
handle
- Created a tilt to the chair back by using the edge latches to make the
whole back rigid
- Almost completely ignored vertex alignment
Creativity test: Was to exhausted to make a creativity test
Figure B.8: Test person 3
==PAGE:68==
58
User Tests
Figure B.9: Test person 3
==PAGE:69==
B.4 Test Person 4
59
B.4
Test Person 4
Little modelling experience and no VR experience. DTU student.
Discoverability test:
- Managed to create the simple test model in 2’39"
- The controllers didn’t feel natural for him and he had trouble navigating
- Tried to grab the model by using the index ﬁnger
- Once he knew how to grab the modelling with the inside of his hand,
vertex and face handles were very intuitive
After the discoverability test all the program features was introduced to the test
person and tried out in practice. This feature introduction took 17 min.
Design test (house illustration):
- Created the house model after 12’58"
- Used edge collapse to form the roof
- Was initially confused about vertex alignment and didn’t realize vertex
alignment could only happen along the xyz axes, but eventually used it to
align the rooftop
- Inserted edge-loops instead of performing extrusions, leading to a big dis-
proportion in size between model and handles
- Tried to create the door with an intrusion, which collided with the bottom
of the model. Fixed it by extruding the bottom of the model so no collision
would occur
- Had problems inserting an edge-loop as he intended to, but eventually
succeeded in order to intrude a window
- Didn’t decide to use the alignment features to align the sides of the house
Design test (chair illustration):
==PAGE:70==
60
User Tests
- Created the chair model in 13’18"
- Started by forming the seat of the chair with small intrusions and vertex
alignment
- Again used edge-loops instead of extrusions to partition the seat, leading
to big handles
- Couldn’t perform a steady normal extrusion to create the ﬁrst leg of the
chair, used vertex alignment to ﬁx it
- Did this for the remaining legs of the chair
- Had a laggy experience because of many inserted edge loops
- Created the back of the chair with a small tilt, by using mass extrusions
- Didn’t create rills in the back with face bridging, but tried brieﬂy with
intrusions
Creativity test:
- Spend 5’30" to model a vehicle
- Used a few extrusion operations for body and then a lot of edge-loops
- Extruded 4 wheels and a top above the windshield
- Didn’t at any point lower his thumb to make precise extrusions
==PAGE:71==
B.4 Test Person 4
61
Figure B.10: Test person 4
Figure B.11: Test person 4
==PAGE:72==
62
User Tests
Figure B.12: Test person 4
==PAGE:73==
Appendix C
Triangle-Triangle
Intersection Code
public bool triangle_triangleIntersection(Vector3 v1, Vector3
,→v2, Vector3 v3, Vector3 v4, Vector3 v5, Vector3 v6)
{
double epsilon = 0.00001;
var N1 = Vector3.Cross((v2 - v1), (v3 - v1));
float d1 = Vector3.Dot(-N1, v1);
float sd1, sd2, sd3;
sd1 = Vector3.Dot(N1, v4) + d1;
sd2 = Vector3.Dot(N1, v5) + d1;
sd3 = Vector3.Dot(N1, v6) + d1;
if (Math.Abs(sd1) < epsilon)
sd1 = 0.0f;
if (Math.Abs(sd2) < epsilon)
sd2 = 0.0f;
if (Math.Abs(sd3) < epsilon)
sd3 = 0.0f;
if (sd1 * sd2 >= 0.0f && sd1 * sd3 >= 0.0f && sd2 * sd3 >=
,→
0.0f)
==PAGE:74==
64
Triangle-Triangle Intersection Code
{
return false;
}
var N2 = Vector3.Cross((v5 - v4), (v6 - v4));
float d2 = Vector3.Dot(-N2, v4);
float sd4, sd5, sd6;
sd4 = Vector3.Dot(N2, v1) + d2;
sd5 = Vector3.Dot(N2, v2) + d2;
sd6 = Vector3.Dot(N2, v3) + d2;
if (Math.Abs(sd4) < epsilon)
sd4 = 0.0f;
if (Math.Abs(sd5) < epsilon)
sd5 = 0.0f;
if (Math.Abs(sd6) < epsilon)
sd6 = 0.0f;
if (sd4 * sd5 > 0.0f && sd4 * sd6 > 0.0f && sd5 * sd6 >=
,→0.0f)
{
return false;
}
short index;
float max, bb, cc;
float vp1, vp2, vp3, up1, up2, up3;
var D = Vector3.Cross(N1, N2);
index = 0;
max = Math.Abs(D.x);
bb = Math.Abs(D.y);
if (bb > max)
{
max = bb;
index = 1;
}
cc = Math.Abs(D.z);
if (cc > max)
{
max = cc;
index = 2;
}
==PAGE:75==
65
vp1 = v1[index];
vp2 = v2[index];
vp3 = v3[index];
up1 = v4[index];
up2 = v5[index];
up3 = v6[index];
float t1;
float t2;
float u1;
float u2;
// first triangle
if (sd4 * sd5 > 0.0f)
{
t1 = vp1 + (vp3 - vp1) * (sd4 / (sd4 - sd6));
t2 = vp2 + (vp3 - vp2) * (sd5 / (sd5 - sd6));
}
else if (sd4 * sd6 > 0.0f)
{
t1 = vp1 + (vp2 - vp1) * (sd4 / (sd4 - sd5));
t2 = vp3 + (vp2 - vp3) * (sd6 / (sd6 - sd5));
}
else if (sd5 * sd6 > 0.0f || sd4 != 0.0f)
{
t1 = vp2 + (vp1 - vp2) * (sd5 / (sd5 - sd4));
t2 = vp3 + (vp1 - vp3) * (sd6 / (sd6 - sd4));
}
else if (sd5 != 0.0f)
{
t1 = vp1 + (vp2 - vp1) * (sd4 / (sd4 - sd5));
t2 = vp3 + (vp2 - vp3) * (sd6 / (sd6 - sd5));
}
else if (sd6 != 0.0f)
{
t1 = vp1 + (vp3 - vp1) * (sd4 / (sd4 - sd6));
t2 = vp2 + (vp3 - vp2) * (sd5 / (sd5 - sd6));
==PAGE:76==
66
Triangle-Triangle Intersection Code
}
else
{
return true;
}
//second triangle
if (sd1 * sd2 > 0.0f)
{
u1 = up1 + (up3 - up1) * (sd1 / (sd1 - sd3));
u2 = up2 + (up3 - up2) * (sd2 / (sd2 - sd3));
}
else if (sd1 * sd3 > 0.0f)
{
u1 = up1 + (up2 - up1) * (sd1 / (sd1 - sd2));
u2 = up3 + (up2 - up3) * (sd3 / (sd3 - sd2));
}
else if (sd2 * sd3 > 0.0f || sd1 != 0.0f)
{
u1 = up2 + (up1 - up2) * (sd2 / (sd2 - sd1));
u2 = up3 + (up1 - up3) * (sd3 / (sd3 - sd1));
}
else if (sd2 != 0.0f)
{
u1 = up1 + (up2 - up1) * (sd1 / (sd1 - sd2));
u2 = up3 + (up2 - up3) * (sd3 / (sd3 - sd2));
}
else if (sd3 != 0.0f)
{
u1 = up1 + (up3 - up1) * (sd1 / (sd1 - sd3));
u2 = up2 + (up3 - up2) * (sd2 / (sd2 - sd3));
}
else
{
return true;
}
if (t1 > t2)
{
==PAGE:77==
67
if (t1 <= u1 && t1 <= u2)
return false;
if (t2 >= u1 && t2 >= u2)
return false;
return true;
}
if (t2 > t1)
{
if (t2 <= u1 && t2 <= u2)
return false;
if (t1 >= u1 && t1 >= u2)
return false;
return true;
}
return false;
}
==PAGE:78==
68
Triangle-Triangle Intersection Code
==PAGE:79==
Appendix D
Oculus Touch Controller
Mapping
Figure D.1: Controller mapping taken from Oculus website[Ocb]
==PAGE:80==
70
Oculus Touch Controller Mapping
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[Au]
Autodesk Maya, https://www.autodesk.eu/products/maya/overview.
[B
J. A. Bærentzen, GEL, https://github.com/janba/GEL.
[Co84] Cowlishaw, M. F.: The design of the REXX language. IBM Systems
Journal 23.4 (1984), 1984.
[Go]
Google Blocks, https://vr.google.com/blocks/.
[Gu]
Guide for compiling a Dynamic Link Library in Visual Studio,
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/walkthrough-creating-
and-using-a-dynamic-link-library-cpp?view=vs-2019.
[Mo]
Minecraft, https://www.minecraft.net/en-us/.
[M7]
Möller, Tomas: A fast triangle-triangle intersection test.
Journal of
Graphics Tools, 1997, 1997.
[No13] Norman, D.: The Design of Everyday Things: Revised and Expanded
Edition. Basic Books, 2013.
[Oca]
Medium, https://www.oculus.com/medium/?locale=en_US.
[Ocb]
OVRInput, https://developer.oculus.com.
