==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Water and Environmental Technology
Production of high-value animal protein feed from urban
bio-waste
Supervisor (s):
Irini Angelidaki (iria@env.dtu.dk)
Panagiotis Tsapekos (ptsa@env.dtu.dk)
Student: Evangelos Pallis (s172195)
Copenhagen
July 26, 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis has been submitted as a ﬁnal fulﬁllment for obtaining a
Master of Science in Environmental Εngineering at the Technical University
of Denmark. The oﬃcial workload of this project is 32.5 ECTS and was
conducted in the department of environmental engineering at DTU during
the period from 27/02/2019 to 26/07/2019.
The project was supervised by Professor Irini Angelidaki and co-supervised
by postdoc Panagiotis Tsapekos. For patiently assisting me in the laboratory
and answering my questions throughout the process of writing the report I
would like to thank the Phd student, Xiao Zhan. Special thanks to the tech-
nicians Hector Hernan Caro Garcia, Sinh Hy Nguyen, Mikael Emil Olsson
and Hanne Bøggild.
2
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The concept of microbes utilization as supplement for animal feed as well as
the nutrient recovery from several waste streams have been explored in the
past. In this project, is explored the potential of municipal biowaste valoriza-
tion coupling anaerobic digestion and Single Cell Protein (SCP) production
using a mixed culture of Methane Oxidizing Bacteria (MOB) in semi contin-
uous reactor. The liquid eﬄuent from AD (digestate) is utilized as growth
medium. Biologically upgraded methane (biomethane) utilized as carbon
source to the bacteria while nitrogen supply accomplished from ammonia
recovery achieved by electrodialysis cell. Also Copper (Cu) concentrations
tested as an enhancing parameter for MOB growth.
Three batches, one semi continuous and one electrochemical experiment
conduced in this project. From the ﬁrst batch, results showed that digestate
exhibited lower methane yield compared to dAMS while biomethane can
safely replace pure CH4.
Next experiment revealed that the absence of
micronutrients (e.g. Cu, Fe, Mg), from the medium is limited factor for
SCP production. Last batch experiment indicated the Cu at concentrations
100 µgCu/L, 250 µgCu/L and 500 µgCu/L, enhance the production of the
bacteria while at 1000 µgCu/L concentration, MOB exhibits a longer lag
phase. In semi continuous operation, SCP produced out of biomethane and
Electrochemical Extracted Ammonium (ECEA). Biomethane can replace
the synthetic one without any aﬀection to the mixed culture. The essential
Amino Acids (AA) produced compared to ﬁshmeal and soybean meal. The
strain Methylomonas found to be the most dominant species in the mixed
culture.
3
==PAGE:5==
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
SCP
Single cell protein
MOB
Methane oxidizing bacteria
OD
Optical density
HRT
Hydraulic Retention Time [days]
CDW
Cell Dry Weight
MMO
enzyme Methane MonoOxygenase
pMMO
particulate membrane bound Methane MonoOxygenase
sMMO
soluble Methane MonoOxygenase
GC
Gas Chromatography
ECEA
Electrochemical Extracted Ammonium
μ
Growth rate [d-1]
Y
Yield coeﬃcient
AA
Amino Acids
Rpm
Rounds per minute
dAMS
diluted Ammonium Mineral Salt
dAMS
diluted Ammonium Mineral Salt
Kl a
Gas transfer coeﬃcient
PHB
Polyhydroxybutyrate
EPS
Exopolysaccharide
TSS
Total Suspended Solids
TAN
Total Ammonium Nitrogen
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
3
List of Figures
8
List of Tables
9
1
Introduction
10
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.1.1
Protein Food Demand & Supply
. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2
Single Cell Protein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3
Resources & Nutrients recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.1
Methane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3.2
Food waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
1.3.3
Nitrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.4
Nutrients recovery by electrochemical systems . . . . .
17
1.4
Single Cell Protein Production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4.1
Operational Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.4.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.5
Cell biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.5.1
Methanotrophs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.5.2
Theoretical relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
1.5.3
Physiology of the Methanotrophic bacteria
. . . . . .
22
1.6
Commercial partners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
1.7
Aim of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2
Materials and Methods
26
2.1
Considerations for experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.1
MOB mixed culture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.2
Growth Medium, dAMS & digestate . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.3
Gas mixture-substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.2
Experiments set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.1
Nitrogen Extraction with Electrolysis
. . . . . . . . .
27
2.2.2
Batch experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.3
Analytical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2.4
Semi-continuous operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Results-Discussion
37
3.1
Ammonia Recovery from digestate by Electrochemical system
37
3.2
Batch experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.1
Batch 1: Screening process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.2
Batch 2: Electrochemical Extracted Ammonia & Nu-
trients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2.3
Batch 3: Copper concentration . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
==PAGE:8==
3.3
Semi-continuous operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Conclusions
49
5
Future Work
50
6
References
51
7
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
1
Daily protein supply by world region, measured in grams of
protein per person per day, Source: FAO . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Feed conversion eﬃciencies and protein contents of major an-
imal food, Source: Smil, 2002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methane concentration evolution from 1987 to May 2019,
Source: NOAA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Distribution of food losses and waste along the supply chain,
Source: FAO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Anthropogenic nitrogen cycle proportional to current Haber-
Bosch ﬁxation (100 Mt), Source: Matassa et al., 2015
. . . .
17
6
Nitrogen recycling system, Source: Matassa et al., 2015
. . .
17
7
Overview of aerobic and anaerobic methane oxidation, Source:
Kalyuzhnaya 2016
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
8
Overview of methanotrophs and methanotrophic metabolism,
Source: (Marina et al., 2015)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
9
Overview of methanotrophs and methanotrophic metabolism,
Source: (Glass et al., 2012)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
10
Experimental conﬁguration of the Electrochemical reactor for
Nitrogen recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
11
Scheme of Electrochemical reactor for Nitrogen recovery . . .
28
12
Headspace change and gas sampling equipment . . . . . . . .
31
13
Optical density sampling equipment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
14
Display of semi-continuous reactor set up
. . . . . . . . . . .
33
15
Semi-continuous reactors set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
16
pH values over time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
17
Cell Dry Weight growth for batch 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
18
Cell Dry Weight growth with and without nutrients addition
40
19
Visual performance of biomass growth in several copper con-
centrations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
20
OD measurements for biomass growth in examined copper
concentrations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
21
pH variation during the examined periods of the semi-continuous 43
22
Daily biomass growth in semi-continuous for R1 and R2 . . .
43
23
Bacterial relative abundance (%) of mixed methanotrophic
culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
24
Comparison of amino acid proﬁle of Fishmeal, Bioprotein,
Soybean meal and present work which collected in the last
period of semi-continuous operation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1
World population and meat production 1950 - 2050 . . . . . .
11
2
Overview of diﬀerent microorganism for protein production
and added-value product formation, Source: S. Matassa et
al., 2016
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Amino acid composition of soybean meal and ﬁshmeal [g/16
g N} . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Examples of methanotrophic microorganisms, and their op-
timum growth conditions. Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), Ex-
opolysaccharide (EPS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Overview of Batch set ups examining combinations of growth
mediums and substrates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Seasonal variation of Cu in digestate. Adjustment to ammo-
nia level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Cu concentrations levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Semi-continuous parameters tested . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Digestate characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
10
Performance overview of batch set
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
11
pH values at the start and end of the batch experiment
. . .
40
12
Overview of semi-continuous performance. Biomass and am-
monium uptake yields
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
9
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
It is undeniable that the world has experienced a huge progress during the
last century. Humans welfare has increased tremendously leading however
to a distressing resource depletion. Challenges, such as climate change, pop-
ulation increase, deforestation and urbanization ordain from the mankind a
solid reaction with a holistic approach over the issues.
Contrary to the increased welfare though issues such as poverty, hanger
and malnutrition are still a reality for 800 million people (El Abbadi & Crid-
dle, 2019). On top of that, global population is projected to exceed 11 billion
by 2100 and 2 billion people expected to be undernourished by 2050 (UNO-
United Nations, 2017). Parallel to that, it is a fact that food system has
changed recently including new dietary preferences and patterns of overcon-
sumption meaning that the insurance of food supply for the planet without
jeopardizing the system’s capacity is an issue which puts the humanity into
a diﬃcult position. Currently, the food production system occupies 30% of
ice-free land as well as 70% of the available freshwater (Aiking, 2011). Re-
ports mention that 5.000.000-10.000.000 hectares of forest are lost every year
because of deforestation (Foley, et al., 2011). Likewise, biodiversity erosion,
water scarcities, soil depletion, high levels of greenhouse gas emissions and
loss of species are some other negative trends arising as well.
On the other hand, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the
United Nations organization aims to end hunger as well as ensure access
to safe, nutritious and suﬃcient food by 2030 for all people (UNO-United
Nations, 2017).
The issue though still exists whether we can involve all
stakeholders into a dialogue about the hard policy choices that need to be
made.
1.1.1
Protein Food Demand & Supply
In 1798, Thomas Robert Malthus, an English cleric and scholar, published
the book ”An Essay on the Principle of Population”, supporting that as
the population would increase with geometrical pace and food production
would only grow arithmetically, this would result in starvation, unless births
rate were controlled. During the middle of the 20th Century though, Green
Revolution has managed to encounter this issue by increasing agricultural
production world widely, including high-yielding varieties of cereals, espe-
cially dwarf wheats and rices. Besides that, the world has experienced a
dramatically shift to the dietary preference in the last century due to the
economic development. A considerable evidence to that is the ﬁve-time raise
for meat production during the last 50 year as shown in Table 5 (Aiking,
2011), along with the increase daily protein supply which depicted in Figure
10
==PAGE:12==
1 (FAO).
Table 1: World population and meat production 1950 - 2050
Year
World population (billion)
Meat production (billion kg)
1950
2.7
45
2000
6.0
229
2050
9.1
465
Figure 1: Daily protein supply by world region, measured in grams of protein
per person per day, Source: FAO
Another signiﬁcant aspect of the protein food which needs to be taken
into consideration is the conversion factor which depends on the animal type.
Not all the animals metabolize the feed in the same level of eﬃciency. A
serious consequence of this ineﬃcient conversion from plant to meat protein
is the waste of 85% of the crops produced in the world resulting to an sig-
niﬁcant nutrient loss. Figure 2 summarizes the feed conversion eﬃciency of
the basic livestock.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2: Feed conversion eﬃciencies and protein contents of major animal
food, Source: Smil, 2002
1.2
Single Cell Protein
Single Cell Protein (SCP) is a term that ﬁrst used from MIT workers in
1968 to describe the production of food from unicellular organisms though
mostly applied for fungal products (R.B. Vasey et al.,1984). Later on, the
term revised, meaning today the protein produced by microorganisms such
as fungi, algae, yeast and bacteria. All these microorganisms can produce
added value products ﬁtting to animal and human consumption as well.
Microorganisms can assimilate nourishment substances from several waste
streams, producing a nutritional food alternative in a more eﬃcient way
and decreasing the environmental pressure. The nutritional value of each
microorganism have been evaluated in the past. Table 2 summarizes the
characteristics of each category.
Table 2: Overview of diﬀerent microorganism for protein production and
added-value product formation, Source: S. Matassa et al., 2016
Microorganism
Average crude
protein content
(% CDW)
Nucleic acids
Nutritional value
Added value
by-products (% CDW)
Remarks
Algae
40 - 60
3 - 8
Compares favourably
to egg, soy and
what protein. Cell wall
digestibility is an issue
• Microbial oil (50–70%)
• Carbohydrates (up to 70%)
• Vitamins
Triacylglycerides (TAG) can
replace partly vegetable oils in
food products. Poly unsaturated
fatty acids (PUFA) are of interest
for health applications
Fungi (Filamentous
and Yeast)
30 - 45
7 - 10
Amino acids and
digestibility of
mycoprotein is similar
to egg and milk
• Carbohydrates
• Pullulan
• Xylitol
• Astaxanthin
High unsaturated/saturated fatty
acids and low fat content makes
them highly suitable for
human nutrition
Bacteria
50-70
8 - 12
Amino acids and
digestibility
is similar to those
of ﬁshmeal
• Internal storage
• polymers (PHB)
• Ectoine
• Lipids
• Extracellular polysaccharides
• Growth medium
12
==PAGE:14==
The nutritional value of the SCP is deﬁned by the amino acid composi-
tion. Amino acids (AA) are the building block for proteins. In total there
are 20 AA that used to synthesize the proteins of the living organisms. AA
are separated into two categories, nutritionally essential (namely cysteine,
histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine,
tryptophan, tyrosine, and valine) and non-essential. The ﬁrst group is de-
termined as those AA that are inadequately synthesized by the human body
and must be supplied from the diet in order to meet the optimal require-
ments. The second category are those AA that ideally can by synthesized
by the human body, and need to by provided to the organism in suﬃcient
amount in to order to maintain its basic functions (e.g., reproduction and
disease prevention) (Wu G., 2009).
Table 3: Amino acid composition of soybean meal and ﬁshmeal [g/16 g N}
, Source: Øverland et al., 2010)
Essential amino acids
Soybean meal
Fishmeal
Cysteinine + cystine
1.5
0.9
Histidine
2.7
2.5
Isoleucine
4.7
4.7
Leucine
7.5
7.9
Lysine
6.1
8.2
Methionine
1.3
3
Phenylalanine
5
4.1
Threonine
3.9
4
Tryptophan
1.4
0.9
Valine
4.8
5.3
Tyrosine
3.8
3.2
Moreover, AA except from their vital role as protein building blocks, they
also are regulating factors of key metabolic pathways which are important
for the immunity system in the organisms, the growth as well as reproduc-
tion (Wu G., 2009). For example, tyrosine, is the precursor for the synthesis
of thyroid hormones which are necessary to regulate the metabolism (Wu
G., 2009). Methionine, is another example of an nutritionally essential AA
because of its phosphatidylcholine cell signaling function which coordinates
the activities of the cell (Wu G., 2009). Last, Leinonen et al., (2019), report
that lysine is a limiting plant based amino acids, stressing out the impor-
tance of sustainability in the way of protein production.
13
==PAGE:15==
Several studies, proposed a methanotrophic bacteria cultivation for the
production of SCP as those bacteria present amino acid proﬁle similar to
the conventional animal feed (Rasouli et al., 2018). Table 3 presents the
essential AA composition of soybean meal and ﬁshmeal which used mainly
as animal feed.
1.3
Resources & Nutrients recovery
1.3.1
Methane
Methane is a gas which contributes 28 times more than carbon dioxide to
the greenhouse (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014). It is
formed by both geological and biological processes. Figure 3 illustrates the
increasing trend of methane production the last 45 years. Apart from this
negative aspect, methane is a promising energy resource that curries a lot of
potentials. The bio-conversion of methane into added value products such as
SCP is a promising way to mitigate both malnutrition and climate change.
Methane appeared to be a beneﬁcial substrate for SCP production due to
its selectivity and low toxicity.
Figure 3: Methane concentration evolution from 1987 to May 2019, Source:
NOAA
14
==PAGE:16==
1.3.2
Food waste
FAO (2011) reports that almost 30% of all the food produced is being wasted
along the food chain from production to consumption. All this wasted food
actually correspond to a signiﬁcant waste of land, water, energy and agri-
cultural inputs, and cause the emission of millions of tonnes of greenhouse
gases. Figure 4 illustrates this phenomenon for all of the regions around the
world.
Figure 4: Distribution of food losses and waste along the supply chain,
Source: FAO
This general situation is also depicted on the increase of the organic wastes
produced every year in European Union (EU). The realization of the pos-
sible prospects of food waste as a resource, forced the society to come up
with some solutions on this issue. A public awareness has raised consider-
ing thε perspective of energy recovery, developing new strategies that will
successfully achieve this target. A remarkable example on that is the Copen-
hagen Municipality, which recently started to collect the stream of Source
Separated Municipal Organic Waste (SSMOW). This organic stream carries
a lot of potentials of exploitation for energy and nutrients recovery due to
presence of soluble carbohydrates, proteins and lipids. However, the source
separation is not executed 100% correctly, resulting to some impurities inside
the stream (e.g. plastics) which needs to be sorted out before the ﬁnal usage.
After pre-treatment, SSMOW stream is fed as substrate into Anaerobic
Digestion reactors, producing biogas as ﬁnal product. The liquid eﬄuent
from this process, called digestate, can be delivered as growth medium for
SCP production, due to the fact that still contains trace elements and nu-
trients that can be retrieved.
15
==PAGE:17==
Upgraded biogas-Biomethane
As mentioned above, the ﬁnal product of AD is the biogas. Two main
components exist is biogas, methane (50 - 80%) and CO2 (30 - 50%). How-
ever, small amounts of hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S), H2, N2, NH3 and siloxanes
can be found as well (Chen et al., 2015).
Biogas upgrade through CO2
ﬁxation is a process that aims to produce a high caloriﬁc value fuel (Angel-
idaki et al., 2018). Biomethane, can be utilized as carbon source for SCP
production, replacing the synthetic one that is used since today.
1.3.3
Nitrogen
One of the most important nutrient for microorganisms development is ni-
trogen. N2 is the building block of all metabolizing tissues and enzymes
that control the chemistry of organisms (Smil et al., 2002). It is met in
forms such as, organic nitrogen, ammonia (NH3), ammonium (NH4+), ni-
trite (N2) and nitrate (N3). The greater amount of N2 is produced by the
Haber & Bosch process and it is integrated into synthetic fertilizers as am-
monia (NH3) along with phosphorous, potassium. According to FAO, the
world fertilizer consumption at 2013, was 111 MT nitrogen as N, 19 MT
phosphorous as P, and 26 MT potassium as K (FAO, 2008).
The current food supply system is facing an alarming issue regarding the
N2 as a nutrient resource. Of the nitrogen used as fertilizer, only a small
percentage is consumed as a human protein. Many are the causes of the
losses such as runoﬀ, leaching, ammonia volatilization, and denitriﬁcation.
Figure 5 demonstrates the anthropogenic nitrogen ﬂow. As it is illustrated
the amount of losses make up from 50 to 70% of the initial amount of nitro-
gen supplied as fertilizer (Matassa et al., 2015).
The potentials of nutrients recovery, especially for the case of N2 are ex-
tremely signiﬁcant. Nowadays, waste water treatment plant have upgraded
their systems in order to retrieve as much nutrients as possible from their
incoming material (Matassa et al., 2015). Recently, another way of recycling
nutrients is gaining more advocates. The utilization of microbes is a way
of assimilating nutrients in form of protein, from several waste streams and
putting them back to the food supply system through animal feed or even
human feed. Figure 6 propose such a system of circular economy.
16
==PAGE:18==
Figure 5: Anthropogenic nitrogen cycle proportional to current Haber-Bosch
ﬁxation (100 Mt), Source: Matassa et al., 2015
Figure 6: Nitrogen recycling system, Source: Matassa et al., 2015
1.3.4
Nutrients recovery by electrochemical systems
Electrolysis process have gain an increasing interest as a novel technology
of recovering valuable substances (e.g. VFAs, lactic acid ammonium) from
waste streams or producing energy in form of electricity by exploiting the
electrochemical energy of the components (Palanisamy et al., 2019). Some
of the essential terms regarding those systems are anode & cathode cham-
ber, electrodes as well as the ion exchange membrane in order to apart the
compartments. These are diﬀerentiate depending on the target of the set-up.
17
==PAGE:19==
1.4
Single Cell Protein Production
In most cases SCP production process takes place inside fermentation re-
actors where the microorganisms utilizes the carbon source and nutrients,
producing biomass rich in protein content. In this study a mixed culture of
Methane Oxidizing Bacteria (MOB) employed in order to accomplish this
aim using the same principles of fermentation mentioned before. Several pa-
rameters aﬀect the growth of the microorganisms which are discussed below
in detail.
1.4.1
Operational Conditions
• pH & Temperature
Several studies have been carried our about SCP production using
MOB. Most known methanotrophs grow in moderate pH (5-8) and
temperature ranges between 20◦C and 35◦C however, some species
that has been isolated found to be grown at alkali or acid environ-
ment pH>9.0 and pH<5 accordingly as well as thermophilic and psy-
chrophilic conditions T < 15◦C and T > 40◦C respectively (Jeremy
D. et al., 2010).
• Growth & Dilution rate
These two parameters aﬀect the operation of any biomass production
system especially when there is continuous feeding. Growth rate value
must always be above of dilution rate to avoid biomass wash out.
Growth rate of MOB have been reported up to 0.3–0.4/h (Jeremy D.
et al., 2010).
1.4.2
Limitations
• Gas–liquid mass transfer
One of the most important factors that plays vital role for the growth
of the biomass is the transfer of the gas into the liquid phase. The
aerobic cultivation of the SCP requires both oxygen and methane to
be delivered inside the liquid. Both of the substrates have low sol-
ubility in water increasing the total cost of the operation. Reactors
modiﬁcations focuses their eﬀorts to achieve smaller-size bubbles in
order to increase the gas–liquid interfacial area either by increasing
the agitation speed or modify the impellor design (Fei et al., 2014).
The CH4 to O2 ratio also aﬀects the mass transfer coeﬃcient (KLa)
in methanotrophs along with the partial vapor pressures of CH4 and
O2 when the culture condition changed from methane limited culture
to oxygen-limited culture (Fei et al., 2014).
18
==PAGE:20==
• Risk of Explosion
Another limitation when utilizing methane gas as carbon sourse is the
danger of explosion. Methane’s lower explosive limit is 5% (vol/vol)
and upper explosive limit 15% (vol/vol). In the scenario of <100%
gas utilization eﬃciency, a ﬂammable gas mixture in the headspace
can occur leading to severe accidents.
• Contamination
Growing an pure culture of methanotrophic bacteria poses the danger
of contamination. Extra cost can arise due to obligatory sterilization
processes. This in not applied for the case of mixed bacterial communi-
ties which show a robust performance. Studies have reported also that
the existence of heterotrophs in the cultivation, help to the detoxiﬁ-
cation of excess methanol and provide vitamins to the methanotrophs
(Piejaet al., 2017).
1.5
Cell biology
1.5.1
Methanotrophs
Methanotrophs are gram-negative bacteria which have the ability to utilize
methane as their sole carbon source for energy. They are mostly isolated
from sewage, bogs, wetlands,lake basins or ruminants (Fei et al., 2014).
Furthermore, some methanotrophs can grow in aerobic and anaerobic envi-
ronment using O2 or sulfate/nitrate as electron donors accordingly.
To date, two major groups are used to categorize the aerobic methan-
otrophs, Group I and Group II. These terms have replaced the former cat-
egories which were used “Type I”, ”Type II” and ”Type X”.
Group I,
(Gammaproteobacteria, formerly Type I and X) which utilize mostly the
ribulose monophosphate (RuMP) cycle for single carbon assimilation and
Group II (Alphaproteobacteria, formerly Type II) using the serine cycle to
assimilate single carbon. Apart from these two groups though, recent stud-
ies have also discovered a new sub-category of aerobic methanotrophs, a
thermoacidophilic aerobic methanotroph phylum namely, Verrucomicrobia
which can assimilate carbon at the level of CO2 using the Calvin Benson
Bassham cycle (Fei et al., 2014). Figure 7 and 8 illustrate an overview of
the bacteria categories along with the main genera of each category.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 7: Overview of aerobic and anaerobic methane oxidation, Source:
Kalyuzhnaya 2016
Figure 8:
Overview of methanotrophs and methanotrophic metabolism,
Source: (Marina et al., 2015)
20
==PAGE:22==
According to Kalyuzhnaya et al.(2015), Gammaproteobacteria (Group I)
are more suitable for SCP production due to their high growth capabilities
and higher yields than Alphaprotebacteria (Group II) which demonstrate
slower growth and lower yields. On the other side Group I presents high
sensitivity to ammonia and spontaneous cell lysis (Kalyuzhnaya, 2016). It
has been also reported that Gammaproteobacterial methanotrophs are gen-
erally performs better when there is high ratios of O2 to CH4 whereas Al-
phaproteobacterial were found to operate with the opposite ratio of supplied
gas mix.
One of the most common used strain for commercial SCP production is
Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath), which belongs to the class of Gammapro-
teobacteria. This speciﬁc bacteria is type X and therefore express both en-
zymes for the RuMP and Serine pathway, and does also express both MMO
enzymes (sMMO and pMMO). Table 4 presents some examples of methan-
otrophic microorganisms, as well as their optimum growth conditions.
Table 4: Examples of methanotrophic microorganisms, and their optimum
growth conditions. Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), Exopolysaccharide (EPS)
Species
Topt
◦C
pHopt
Products
Taxonomy
Methylomonas pelagica
25
6.5–7.0
PHB
Group I
Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b
30
6.8–7.2
PHB
Group II
Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath)
45
6.8
Lipids
Group I
Pseudomonas methanica
30
6.9
EPS
Group I
Methylobacter modestohalophilus 10s
25
6.5
Cell mass
Group I
Methylomicrobium species 4G
30
8.0–8.5
Cell mass
Group I
Kalyuzhnaya and other co-workers (2006) report that in industrial scale,
the bio-conversion of methane has been proven to be achieved mostly in
aerobic conditions due to eﬃciency reasons. Furthermore, it has been esti-
mated that aerobic methanotrophs consume 35% (0.6Gt) of the global CH4
produced per year, where anaerobic ones consume 18% (0.3Gt) (Glass et al.,
2012). However, the cost of oxygen has been a costly parameter, increasing
the ﬁnal price of methane conversion per one ton of methane (Kalyuzhnaya,
2016). On the other hand the anaerobic conversion of this feedstock would
require a signiﬁcant introduction of sulfate or nitrate into the cultivation
environment (Kalyuzhnaya, 2016) creating thus volatile sulfur compounds,
such as H2S. This can cause a serious environmental impact unless there
could be a invented a sustainable process for H2S to be converted back to
sulfate or elemental sulfur (Kalyuzhnaya, 2016).
21
==PAGE:23==
1.5.2
Theoretical relationship
MOB utilizing methane as their sole carbon source. The biomass forma-
tion is expresses by the stoichiometric reaction (1). Based the reaction (1),
the theoretically optimum of O2:CH4 ratio is 1.45 v/v (Khoshnevisan et
al., 2018), however according to unpublished data, the optimum gas ratio is
O2:CH4 60:40, showing higher methane yields.
CH4+1.45O2+0.105NH3 ⇒0.48CO2+1.69H2O+0.52C1H1.8O0.5N0.2 (1)
1.5.3
Physiology of the Methanotrophic bacteria
MOB acquires two diﬀerent isoenzymes of methane monooxygenase (MMO)
for their ﬁrst oxidation step that converts methane into methanol (Kalyuzh-
naya, 2016). These two enzyme systems are: a soluble cytoplasmic complex
(soluble methane monooxygenase, sMMO), which is found in a subset of
known methanotrophs only, and the second system is a membrane-bound
particulate system (particulate methane monooxygenase, pMMO) which is
found in almost all known methanotrophs (Fei et al., 2014). Moreover the
need of metal elements is essential in order to metabolize the carbon source.
Glass et al. (2012) report that copper (Cu) and iron (Fe) availability aﬀects
the metabolic pathways of bacteria. Speciﬁcally, when there is excess of Cu,
in concentrations that exceed 0.85 to 1 μmol g[ −1] (dry weight), CH4 catal-
ysis is accomplished by the pMMO enzyme expression forming a membrane
bound with Cu or Fe and demonstrating a relatively high lipid content (Fei
et al., 2014). On the other hand, the sMMO is only expressed under low-
copper conditions (Chistoserdova et al., 2005). Most Gammaproteobacterial
methanotrophs require higher levels of copper for growth than do Alphapro-
teobacterial (Fei et al., 2014). When Cu is limited, methanotrophs replace
it with Fe utilizing sMMO enzyme to synthesize protein. Figure 9 shows the
metal content of the enzymes involved in aerobic methanoptophy (Glass et
al., 2012).
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 9:
Overview of methanotrophs and methanotrophic metabolism,
Source: (Glass et al., 2012)
It has been reported also that nitrogen source aﬀect the MMO activity
as well. Particularly, nitrite (Ν2) produced from the oxidation of ammo-
nia (NO3) by methanotrophs results to a strong inhibition of the process
than the ammonia itself while NH4 displayed less inhibitory eﬀects on the
MOB (Fei et al., 2014). However, high concentrations in NH4 have negative
inﬂuence in the cultivation as well due to the fact that NH4 is a competi-
tive inhibitor of methane, binding on the active site of pMMO (Cantera et
al.,2017).
23
==PAGE:25==
Why Methanotrophs
MOB and especially Group I, also known as the Gammaproteobacteria
are in the case of SCP the most relevant group. This group possesses high
growth capabilities and higher yields than group II (Kalyuzhnaya et al.,
2015).
This makes the group generally preferable when producing SCP.
Group I does however generally display unstable growth, high sensitivity to
ammonia and spontaneous cell lysis (Kalyuzhnaya, 2016). Group II shows
more robust growth in lab, but generally displays slow growth and lower
yields. Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath) has been established as strain of
methanotrophs for commercial SCP production. This strain is currently be-
ing used in the production of the products “Uniprotein” and “Feedkind”.
M. capsulatus is type X and thus expressing both enzymes for the RuMP
and Serine pathway, and does also express both the soluble sMMO and par-
ticulate pMMO (Kalyuzhnaya et al., 2015).
Mixed culture
Mixed methane oxidizing bacteria (MOB) have a beneﬁcial behaviour in
their coexistence with other kind of bacteria, either by making better the
growth conditions or by diminishing inhibitory factors (Jiang et al., 2016).
Another plus of choosing a consortium of methanotrophic bacteria is the
decreased vulnerability to the contamination comparing with a pure culture.
1.6
Commercial partners
In 1970s Imperial Chemical Industries produced methanol based SCP (namely
Pruteen) for animal feed making use of the bacterium Methylophilus methy-
lotrophus.
The end product contained up to 70% protein and was used
in pig feed (Johnson, 2013). Two new companies have also joined to the
commercialization of SCP produced on methane.
UniBio A/S and Ca-
lysta Inc. utilize natural gas and methanotrophic bacteria to bio-convert
methane to animal feed protein. Speciﬁcally, UniBio A/S using a patent
U-loop reactor reports a productivity of 4 kg m3/h, producing UniPro-
tein with 70% protein, which has been approved for use in animal feed
(http://www.unibio.dk/company/subpage-1/).
Calysta Inc.
operated in
the UK from 2016 producing FeedKind, which like UniProtein , is used in
animal feed. However, all of the commercial endeavors, utilize pure chem-
icals and natural gases, therefore compromising the economic feasibility of
the production process. An eﬀort for nutrients recovery and re-usage, in a
circular economy model, is crucial these days. Unibio’s future development
plans includes the exploitation of biogas produced from urban biowastes as
carbons substrate for the SCP production.
24
==PAGE:26==
1.7
Aim of the project
The aim of this project is to produce high-value animal protein feed. Several
bioenergy technologies have been brought together in order to accomplish
that. During the project, both batch and semi-continuous experiments took
place.
A batch experiment conducted as a screening process in order to eval-
uate the performance of the mixed culture in combinations among growth
medium and carbon source. DAMS and pre treated digestate were used as
growth medium while synthetic CH4 along with biomethane were used as
substrate.
Furthermore, digestate used as a feed solution in an electrochemical sys-
tem in order to recover nitrogen in form of ammonia (NH3) and further
introduce it as a nitrogen source to the methanotrophs in a semi-continuous
cultivation.
Another objective of the study was to ﬁnd out if the electrochemically
extracted nitrogen (ECEA) solely, retrieved from the electrochemical reac-
tors, was adequate to grow MOB in without the external addition of micro-
nutrients (Cu, Fe, Mg). The speciﬁc experiment, took place in batch test.
Batch experiment also curried out as part of the project in order to ex-
amine how copper’s (Cu) concentration in the growning medium inhibits or
enhances the growth of the mixed culture.
Last, an experiment in semi-continuous reactors conducted in order to
assess the performance of the inoculum by varying several parameters. The
target in this case was to evaluate the progress of SCP using biomethane
instead of synthetic CH4, as carbon source, as well as ECEA as nitrogen
source. Dilution rate was also tested as a parameter.
25
==PAGE:27==
2
Materials and Methods
In this project, Methane Oxidizing Bacteria (MOB) were used to produce
high value animal protein.
The study investigated several parameters in
order to assess the overall process. More details will be given below.
2.1
Considerations for experiments
2.1.1
MOB mixed culture
The initial mixed MOB culture was a mixture of isolated inoculum from
compost, soil, anaerobic sludge and other samples from water treatment
plants (Hoefman et al., 2014). The bacteria were ﬁrst re-activated in 250
ml serum bottles using dilute Ammonium Mineral Salt (dAMS) as a growth
medium.
2.1.2
Growth Medium, dAMS & digestate
A mineral salt solution is used to provide the bacteria with all the essential
metals, minerals and nutrients, necessary for the metabolism of the biomass.
DAMS is the growth medium that prepared in the lab for the MOB culti-
vation. The recipe was retrieved from a previews study of (Dedysh et al.,
2011). DAMS medium was synthesized by pure chemical compounds and
was selected for control test of the bacteria growth. The medium contained
per liter, 15.28g MgSO4·7H2O, 6.64 g NH4Cl, 2.292 g CaCl2·2H2O, 0.5
mL of 0.1% (w/v) FeNaEDTA solution, 71.7 g Na2HPO2·12H2O, 38.2 g
KH2PO4 and 1.0 mL of trace elements solution.
Digestate was also used as growth medium after speciﬁc pre-treatments,
of centrifugation (14000, rpm24 min), ﬁltration (0.2μm ﬁlter) and steriliza-
tion (20 min at 125◦C). After this treatment cascade, the ﬁnal product was
diluted with deionized water in order to decrease the ammonium concen-
tration to 28 mgNH4-N/L and be consistent with the nitrogen content of
dAMS medium. This was tested in the cultivation as nutrition medium for
the growth of the methanotrophs.
2.1.3
Gas mixture-substrate
Two types of methane used in this project: Firstly, synthetic methane, orig-
inated from natural gas sources and secondly upgraded biogas (biometnane)
(>95%). The second type of CH4 is biologically upgraded methane via ex-
situ process which retrieved from a DTU project. O2 supplied by Air Liquide
A/S (Taastrup, Denmark). The gas ratio supplied to the MOB was O2 to
CH4 (60:40 v/v).
26
==PAGE:28==
2.2
Experiments set up
2.2.1
Nitrogen Extraction with Electrolysis
This experiment aimed at ammonia (NH3) recovery from the digestate using
electrochemical reaction. The digestate has a high level in reactive nitrogen
in form of ammonium (NH4) (2378.1 mg/L) which through the electrochem-
ical system is oxidized to ammonia.
The reactor used had two chambers (anode & cathode) of 250 mL each.
The dimensions of each chamber were 8*5*5 cm. The anodic electrode was
made of a titanium alloy coated with IrO2 while the cathodic was a woven
wire mesh made from titanium, coated with 0.5 mg cm2 Pt. The membrane
used was a Cation Exchange Membrane (CEM). Digestate was inserted as
feed solution to the anode chamber and a buﬀer solution was inserted to the
cathode. A battery applied an electric current of 3.5 Volts to the system.
Figure 10 represents the layout of this experiment.
Figure 10: Experimental conﬁguration of the Electrochemical reactor for
Nitrogen recovery
The working principle of the reactor is based on the oxidation-reduction
reaction. Speciﬁcally, the ammonium in the digestate is oxidized in the an-
ode compartment driven by the forced ﬂow of electrons from the anode to
the cathode electrode. CEM allows only the transport of positively charged
ammonium ions to the cathode compartment. Figure 11 illustrates the fun-
damentals explained above.
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 11: Scheme of Electrochemical reactor for Nitrogen recovery
2.2.2
Batch experiments
• Batch 1: Screening process
In this batch test were examined several combinations of medium and
substrate at 25◦C. DAMS and digestate were used as growing medium
and pure CH4 and biomethane were used as carbon source. This test
conducted as screening process in order to get some insights about the
performance of the MOB to those parameters. Table 3 contains all
the experiment sets tested in this batch.
Table 5: Overview of Batch set ups examining combinations of growth medi-
ums and substrates
No
medium
Substrate
1
DAMS
Pure CH4
2
DAMS
Biomethane
3
Digestate
Pure CH4
4
Digestate
Biomethane
28
==PAGE:30==
• Batch 2: Electrochemical Extracted Ammonia & Nutrients
This batch set investigated the importance of the additional nutrients
into the growth medium. After the treatment of the digestate with
electrochemical systems for ammonium recovery, the retrieved solution
was examined as a growing buﬀer without the addition of nutrients.
• Batch 3: Copper concentration
This experiment performed to discover the copper concentration that
could inhibit or enhance the growth of the MOB using digestate as
medium. Digestate was collected all over the year from a DTU pi-
lot reactor which was fed with municipal biopulp, and demonstrated
seasonal variations in Cu content. These ﬂuctuations in Cu level are
explained by the fact that the reactor was gradually fed with higher
organic matter, thus the digestate was more concentrated over time.
Particularly, in Spring, digestate exhibited the lower Cu concentration
of 25.1 µg/L. The examined range was deﬁned after the adjustment
of Cu into the ammonium level (28mgNH4/L) which has been deﬁned
from the dAMS. According to that, the new lower level of Cu, and ini-
tial level of examined concentrations, was 0.61 µg/L. However, when
we dilute to 28 μg/L, it is obvious that Cu values for the seasons are
insigniﬁcantly diﬀerent compared to the dAMS copper concentration
which 39 μgCu/L. Table 6 presents the seasonal variation of Cu in
digestate as well as the Cu content after the down scaling it to the
dAMS ammonium levels.
Table 6: Seasonal variation of Cu in digestate. Adjustment to ammonia
level
Season
Initial conc.
[μgCu/L]
Cu [μgCu/L]
(adjust to 28 μg/L)
Spring
25.1
0.61
Winter
396.4
3.45
Summer
235.6
3.63
Autumn
111.6
1.40
The range of the examined concentrations determined from literature
review. Speciﬁcally, Boiesen et al. (1993) reported that Cu in concen-
tration 300 g/l, inhibited the methane degradation of a mixed culture
of MOB, due to toxicity of copper-amine complexes. On the other
hand, Cantera et al. (2016) in a study with the strain Methylomonas
observed that an increase in Cu concentration from 0.05 to 25 μM in-
creased the factors qmax and Ks of the methanotrophic communities.
29
==PAGE:31==
According to those values of Cu seven more levels were investigated
during this batch test. The second level represent the Cu concentra-
tion of dAMS. Table 7 presents the aforementioned Cu concentrations.
Table 7: Cu concentrations levels
Cu Levels
Conc. [μgCu/L]
Molarity [μM Cu]
1
0.61
0.01
2 ( dAMS)
39
0.6
3
100
1.6
4
250
3.9
5
500
8
6
1000
16
7
2000
31
8
4000
63
2.2.3
Analytical methods
This part describes the process of setting up and maintaining the batch ex-
periments mentioned above.
Equipment
• 250 ml serum bottle
• Rubber septum stopper
• Aluminum cap and sealer
• 100ml syringe with valve and needle
• Gas bag
• Minisart R⃝NML Syringe Filter 0.2 μm
Process
Before the start of each experiment the whole equipment (serum bottles,
rubber stoppers, aluminum caps, growth medium) was autoclaved at 120oC
for 20 min. The inoculation of the mixed culture into the bottles, took place
in a ﬂow bench, after it has been wiped oﬀwith 1% rodalon solution.
The total and working volume of each serum bottle was 250 mL and 100
mL accordingly, containing 97 ml of medium and 3 ml of inoculum. Af-
ter the sealing, and ﬂushing with N2, the gas in head space was replaced
with substrate using syringe, needle, ﬁlter and a valve. 70 ml of the current
30
==PAGE:32==
headspace replaced by 70 ml of the prepared gas mixture from the gas bag.
The mixed culture was cultivated at 25◦C and 150 rpm using a shaken in-
cubator.
Sampling and maintenance
During the batch experiments, two parameters measured daily. Optical
Density (OD) and gas content in the headspace. Speciﬁcally, 1ml of liquid
sample was taken twice a day from the serum bottles in order to quantify
the growth of the microorganisms. The gas consumption in the bottles was
monitored once a day by gas chromatography (GC). The gas samples were
taken before and after the headspace change.
Vacum vials of 3 ml 10%
H3PO4 had been prepared and 3 ml of gas sample was injected to each vial
for the measurement. Figure 12 and 13 demonstrate the equipment needed
for the sampling process of the batch sets.
Figure 12: Headspace change and gas sampling equipment
Figure 13: Optical density sampling equipment
31
==PAGE:33==
Apart from OD and GC measurements, NH4-N and pH values were also
deﬁned during the tests.
For all the above measurements, samples were
taken at the starting and at the ending day of the experiment.
2.2.4
Semi-continuous operation
In this part of the project the cultivation of the mixed culture took place in
a semi-continuous reactor with daily feeding operation. Speciﬁcally, in every
run period, a gas-bag of deﬁned volume was prepared in order to supply the
gas-mix into the reactors. Depending on the biomass performance, if the
gas-mix was depleted the gas-bag could be reﬁlled before the end of the run
period. More details about this experiment will be given in the following
sections.
• Equipment
– 2 L glass chamber ﬁtted with septum plugs and lid
– Magnetic stirrer with stirring bar
– Tubes. with ﬁttings
– Gasbags of measured volume ﬁtted with gas outtake and intake
– Diﬀuser
– Pump
– 0.2μm ﬁlter
– 100 ml bottle with silica gel and ﬁtted with septum plugs
– Tin foil
Process
The glass chamber, septum plugs, stirring bar, tubes and the diﬀuser
were autoclaved at 120
oC for 20 min. The experiment is then assembled
in a laminar ﬂow bench, which have been wiped oﬀwith 1% rodalon. The
reactor chamber is ﬁtted with 4 tubes, a tube for gas in, a tube for gas
out, a tube for medium in, and a tube for medium outtake. The tube for
gas in, is connected to the corresponding gasbags and in a diﬀuser inside
the reactor. The diﬀusers were made by marprene tube penetrated with
numerous of 0.3 mm needle diameter. The tube for gas out, is led from the
reactor to a 100 ml bottle with silica gel. A new tube goes through a 0.02
μm ﬁlter, and then connected to the gasbag. The gas is recycled though the
in-tube and out-tube by a pump. The tube for medium in and out are both
is closed with a clam, when they are not in use. A stirring bar is placed in
the reactor and the reactor is placed on a magnetic stirrer, 1800 ml of the
32
==PAGE:34==
medium is poured in the reactor chamber, and 90 ml of MOB seed is placed
in the medium. Figure 14 and 15 illustrate the semi-continuous set up.
Figure 14: Display of semi-continuous reactor set up
Figure 15: Semi-continuous reactors set up
Working periods
The experiment had been separated in diﬀerent periods in which some
of parameters such as substrate and medium, varied.
Aim of this was
to evaluate the performance of the MOB and optimize the protein pro-
duction.
Speciﬁcally, the experiment was splitted into six periods.
The
ﬁrst period, the reactor operated in batch mode with dAMS as medium
33
==PAGE:35==
and synthetic CH4 as substrate, in order to grow a suﬃcient amount of
MOB biomass and avoid the wash out of the biomass.
After that, sub-
strate and medium alternated between the two reactors for the next two
periods where in R1 the medium replaced by Electrochemical Extracted
Ammonium (ECEA) medium and in R2 the synthetic CH4 replaced by
biomethane. During the next periods, both of the reactors were operating
with biomethane and ECEA and decreased dilution rate. Speciﬁcally, the
examined dilution rates were 0.20, 0.10 and 0.05 d−1, however the medium
solution up concentrated considering the levels of NH4-N in order to main-
tain a stable nitrogen supply to the mixed culture [D=0.20d−1→28mgNH4-
N/L][D=0.10d−1→54mgNH4-N/L][D=0.05d−1→112mgNH4-N/L]. Table
8 summarizes the data above.
Table 8: Semi-continuous parameters tested
Reactor
medium
Substrate
HRT
[d]
Dillution rate
[d−1]
medium/day
[ml/d]
Batch
R1
dAMS
Pure CH4
R2
dAMS
Pure CH4
5
0.20
Period I
R1
dAMS
Pure CH4
R2
dAMS
Pure CH4
5
0.20
360
Period II
R1
ECEA
CH4
R2
dAMS
Biomethane
5
0.20
360
Period III
R1
ECEA
Biomethane
R2
ECEA
Biomethane
5
0.20
360
Period IV
R1
ECEA
Biomethane
R2
ECEA
Biomethane
10
0.10
180
Period V
R1
ECEA
Biomethane
R2
ECEA
Biomethane
20
0.05
90
Sampling and maintenance
During the continuous operation of experiment two parameters have been
measured daily, OD and pH value. Furthermore, the gas-bags had to be
reﬁled, depending on the biomass activity, and new medium was also been
prepared.
Part of the maintenance was also a visual inspection of the reactors to
34
==PAGE:36==
check about leakings in gasbags or the tubes, diﬀuser’s clogging as well as any
other type of complication that could be occurred during the experiment.
At the end of every period, samples were taken from eﬄuent for NH4-N
measurements and amino acid analysis. The volume which was left inside
the gasbags were also determined as well as the gas content of the reactors
headspace.
Freeze dry and biomass
The determination of the biomass which produced in every period was de-
ﬁned with the freeze dry process. Samples from the reactors were collected
at the end of every period. After centrifugation two times and removal of su-
pernatant, 50 ml of biomass was put in an Eppendorf tube and then scaled.
The samples were ﬁrst freeze at −18◦C and then were put in freeze drier at
−101◦C and vacuum 0.013m bar until no humidity left. An Eppendorf tube
contained only distilled water was also put in freeze drier as a control. The
dried biomass was scaled and the value of biomass was deﬁned as g/L.
Microbial analysis
Triplicate samples (20 mL) of the inoculum were collected from the semi-
continuous reactor.
Genomic DNA was isolated and puriﬁed using the
PowerSoil R⃝DNA Isolation Kit (QIAGEN Bioinformatics, Germany). The
measurement of the quality and quantity of DNA extracts operated with
NanoDrop (Thermo Scientiﬁc). The V4 region of microbial 16S rRNA genes
was ampliﬁed using 515F/806R primers and sequenced by Illumina MiSeq
platform. NCBI 16S ribosomal RNA database (Megablast) was used to con-
ﬁrm the sequences (Johnson et al., 2008).
Amino acid proﬁle analysis
Amino acid proﬁle was measured using High-performance liquid chro-
matography (HPLC). Necessary biomass amount collected from the reactors
and freeze dried in order to attain at least 10 mg of samples. 6 ml of HCl
acid were poured to the samples and put into a microwave tube and then
ﬂushed with nitrogen for 5 minutes to prevent oxidative degradation. Hy-
drolysis was performed in a microwave (Anton Paar Multiwave 3000,AT) at
500 W and 150 C for 30 min, followed by HCl evaporation using the same
microwave, at 600 W for 20 min. A commercial amino acid mix (AAS18,
Sigma-Aldrich) was used to calibrate the machine (D’Este et al., 2017).
It should be noted that tryptophan and cysteine are degraded during
hydrolysis and cannot be measured. Glutamine and glutamic acid and as-
pargine and aspartic acid are measured as sum parameters.
35
==PAGE:37==
Growth rate
The growth rate was calculated by conversion to logarithmic growth phase
using y=a ebx, where “y” is the biomass at end of logarithmic growth and
“a” is the biomass at time zero (Huang et al., 2019). “b” stands for the
bacteria growth rate (h−1).
Optical Density measurement
The Optical Density (OD) measured on a DR3900 Laboratory Spec-
trophotometer at 600nm. The procedure is described below:
• Zeroing the spectrophotometer with distilled water
• 1ml sample was put into Eppendorf tube and then shaken with the
vortex for 10sec so all the suspended solids is evenly distributed in the
sample
• The sample was poured into a 10mm cell
• Absorbance was measured at wavelength of 600nm.
TAN measurement with “Ammonium Test” kit
For NH4-N in the range of 2.0-75.0 mgNH4-N/L, an “Ammonium Test”
kit is used, it comes with 2 reagents and an autoselector for the photometer
used for the test. The procedure is described below:
• 5 ml of reagent NH4-1 is added to a test tube
• 0.2 ml of sample is added to the tube
• 1 level microspoon of reagent NH4-2 is added to the tube
• The mixture is left to stand for 15min (reaction time)
• Pure into a 10mm cell and measure in a photometer
Gas Chromatography
6 mL vials with vacuum and a rubber septum are prepared by adding
3ml of 1M phosphoric acid to each, using a thin needle and 3 mL of sample
as well. Phosphoric acid din not allow the gas sample to leak out from the
vial. Before each measurement, the chromatographs had to be calibrated
with samples of known concentrations (5%, 40%, & 60% CH4). After the
calibration, 200 μL of gas sample is inserted to the injection point. After
the run time the software provided the values of gas concentration.
36
==PAGE:38==
3
Results-Discussion
3.1
Ammonia Recovery from digestate by Electrochemical
system
In this experiment, digestate was introduced as feed solution into an elec-
trochemical system and nitrogen recovery in form of ammonia (NH3) took
place. Digestate is a nitrogen rich waste stream with increased organic load.
The characteristics of the feed solution are presented on Table 9. Moreover,
pH values were recorded during the test in order monitor the progress of the
experiment. The pH values across the electrochemical system are shown in
Figure 16.
Table 9: Digestate characteristics
Sample
Ammonia
(mg/L)
pH
Conductivity
(ms/cm)
TS
(g/L)
VS
(g/L)
Digestate
2378.7
7.58
23.2
41.3
28.2
Figure 16: pH values over time
37
==PAGE:39==
The initial pH value of digestate which fed in the anode chamber was
approximately 8. After the current applied to the system, the pH started to
decrease in the anode compartment and increase in the cathode one. At the
end of the experiment, the pH value in the cathode chamber reached 12 and
in anode decreased to 2. The reason of this ﬂuctuation is the ammonium
ions crossing the CEM forced by current. The faster the pH decreased in
anode chamber the better performance the system exhibits, recovering more
Nitrogen in form of NH3.
Overall, the ammonia recovered from the system was 40% indicating
that the electrochemical system can be further optimized in two directions.
Firstly, in order to achieve higher levels of ammonia recovery and secondly,
in order to retrieve from the digestate all the necessary micronutrients that
will support SCP production without the external any addition.
An important factor that aﬀects the current generation and thus the over-
all performance of those systems is the electrode type. Several electrodes
have been proposed for this reason (e.g. activated carbon, graphene, car-
bon paper/felt/ﬁber brush) that needs to be tested for the optimization of
nutrients recovery through electrochemical systems. Moreover, CEM, strip
solution along with system conﬁguration are also signiﬁcant factors that
could be optimized for the accomplishment of the aims mentioned above.
For instance, Abo-Ghander et al. (2009) propose a modiﬁed electrodialytic
cell that recovers copper from waste streams.
3.2
Batch experiments
3.2.1
Batch 1: Screening process
This experiment investigated the SCP formation examining diﬀerent sub-
strates (synthetic CH4 & biomethane) and growth medium (dAMS & diges-
tate). The speciﬁc batch set was used a screening process in order to assess
the performance of the examined mixed culture of MOB. The determina-
tion of SCP production is directly related to the bacteria growth, therefore
daily measurement of the Optical Density (OD) at 600 nm was taking place.
Using the Freeze Dry method which explained above, we correlated the OD
values with the Cell Dry Weight (CDW), thus we can estimate the growth of
the biomass daily. Last, the ammonium concentration were all adjusted to
dAMS levels (28 mg NH4-N/L). Figure 17 , demonstrates the performance
of the MOB for all of the four combinations tested.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 17: Cell Dry Weight growth for batch 1
Table 10: Performance overview of batch set
Batch
CDW
(g/L)
Yield
(g/g CH4)
μ max
(h−1)
DAMS+CH4
0.598
0.47
0.0756
DAMS+Biomethane
0.610
0.43
0.0808
Digestate+CH4
0.256
0.31
0.0189
Digestate+Biomethane
0.263
0.28
0.0295
As it can be observed from Figure 17 and Table 10, using dAMS as
growth medium had better results than digestate. Speciﬁcally, those sets,
dAMS+CH4 & dAMS+Biomethane, produced 0.598 g/L and 0.610 g/L
of biomass accordingly, exhibiting also higher growth rates than digestate,
0.0756 h−1 and 0.0808 h−1 respectively, and achieving higher yield values
than the rest two sets. This is attributed to the lower-than the optimum-
levels of micronutrients such as Cu (39μg/L) from the digestate, which pre-
vent the bacteria to assimilate the carbon source.
Table 11 presents the pH ﬂuctuation.
CO2 is the last product of the
oxidation of methane from the methanotrophic bacteria. A set of enzymes
called Formate dehydrogenases (FDH) are catalyzing the formic acid to CO2
as the last step of the aerobic methane oxidation (Hanson et al., 1996). The
CO2 dissolves and reacts with medium inside the bottle leading to carbonic
acid (H2CO3) formation.This has as a result the pH drop in the solution.
39
==PAGE:41==
Table 11: pH values at the start and end of the batch experiment
Batch
pH initial
pH ﬁnal
DAMS + pure CH4
6.8
6.35
DAMS+Biomethane
6.8
6.31
Digestate+ pure CH4
6.8
6.38
Digestate + Biomethane
6.8
6.42
This experiment, gave some insights about digestate used as growth medium
for mixed methanotrophic bacteria. Since, nitrogen sourse was the same in
all tests (28 mg NH4-N/L,) reveals that digestate has limited levels in some
other essential elements (Cu, Fe) which aﬀected the growth of the bacteria.
3.2.2
Batch 2: Electrochemical Extracted Ammonia & Nutrients
This batch examined the growth of MOB in ECEA medium with and with-
out the addition of nutrients. The bottle with the nutrients stabilized at 0.76
g/L of biomass production while the one without nutrients had no biomass
growth. Figure 18 demonstrates the progress of the MOB cultivation for
this experiment.
Figure 18: Cell Dry Weight growth with and without nutrients addition
It is obvious that the absence of micro elements from the medium solution
is crucial for the growth of the MOB. The inoculum was incapable of oxidize
CH4 without the presence of micronutrients and especially Cu and Fe. The
batch set with the added nutrient solution exhibited a biomass production
of 0.76 g/L while the value of yield was 1.09 g/g-CH4.
40
==PAGE:42==
As mentioned in section 3.1, the electrochemical system could be op-
timized in terms of nutrients recovery selectivity of the CEM, recovering
in this way the necessary micronutrients from the feed solution (digestate),
therefore eliminating the requirement of nutrients addition into the retrieved
solution. An example of such an endeavor is reported by Christiaens M.
(2017) and her coworkers, where they optimized an electrochemical system
for ammonia recovery as gas mixtures of NH3/H2 which further utilized as
substrate for SCP production.
3.2.3
Batch 3: Copper concentration
This batch test examined the cultivation of the mixed culture of MOB in
several copper concentrations using digestate as growth medium and dAMS
as control growth medium. The initial concentration deﬁned form the Spring
digestate which has the lowest content of Copper. Figure 19 and 20 illus-
trate the progress of the experiment.
Figure 19: Visual performance of biomass growth in several copper concen-
trations
In total 8 levels of Cu concentrations were investigated in this experi-
ment. A bottle with dAMS as medium was used as control/reference point.
A study carried out by Nunes et al. (2016) suggested that the optimum level
of Cu is 6μM for every 1 g/L biomass. According to the previews batch ex-
periments that performed in this project the average biomass production
was 2.84 g/L meaning that 17.04 μM of Cu is the optimum level for the
speciﬁc mixed culture.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 20: OD measurements for biomass growth in examined copper con-
centrations
The bacteria showed strong inhibition at the levels of 2000 µgCu/L (31
µM) and 4000 µgCU/L (63 µM). This is probably due to the fact that those
levels of Cu concentration inside the inoculation over exceed the optimum
range and dissolves, making the MMO unable to use all the available Cu
contributing to the mechanism of contact killing. This mechanism activates
when the element surfaces with bacteria disrupting in this way the cell mem-
brane integrity (Grass et al., 2011).
At a concentration level of 1000 µgCu/L, MOB experienced a small inhibi-
tion showing longer lag phase (60h) but eventually reached at 0.668 OD600
value, performing even better that the control batch. This also comes to
agreement with the ﬁndings of the study of Nunes at al., (2016) that dis-
cussed above.
In the concentrations of 100 µgCu/L (1.6 µM), 250 µgCu/L (3.9 µM)
and 500 µgCu/L (8 µM), copper enhanced the mixed culture’s performance
indicating the necessity of Cu inside the cultivation solution.
A remarkable outcome from this batch experiment is the fact that in order
for this speciﬁc culture to grow, the copper concentration levels of dAMS
medium (39 µgCu/L or 0.6 μM) is the lower concentration that should be
applied. The test showed that the bacteria performance is enhanced when
Cu exist in higher level than this of dAMS. This is justiﬁed by Nunes et al
(2016) study who stated than the expression of either sMMO or pMMO is
activated at Cu concentrations greater that 1.5μM.
42
==PAGE:44==
3.3
Semi-continuous operation
During the semi-continuous operation, the pH have been monitored daily.
Figure 21 illustrates how the values ﬂuctuated by the time of periods. As ex-
plained above the drop of pH is part of the last step of the aerobic methane
oxidation. Generally, the optimum pH range for aerobic methanotrophic
bacteria is between 6.5 and 7.5 even though these values can change de-
pending on the species (Cantera et al.,2017). When pH dropped below 6.5
an alkaline solution of NaOH (0.1M) was used to increase it again.
Figure 21: pH variation during the examined periods of the semi-continuous
Figure 22: Daily biomass growth in semi-continuous for R1 and R2
43
==PAGE:45==
Figure 22 presents the biomass production in gCDW/L during the semi-
continuous operation for the two reactors. The ﬁrst ﬁve days of the cultiva-
tion, the reactors were operating in batch mode meaning no medium feeding.
During this time-span a suﬃcient formation of bacteria was achieved. The
purpose of running this period was to grow enough inoculum for the rest of
the experiment to avoid the potential wash out from the occasional medium
feeding. In Period I, dilution rate of was 0.20 d−1 and both reactors oper-
ated with dAMS and synthetic CH4. R2 had better performance than R1
reaching to 2.44 gCDW/L while R2 maximum biomass production was, 1.99
gCDW/L. This is attributed to the gas feeding tube which has clogged for
24h. However the quality of SCP was not suﬃcient due to limited supply of
O2 which ”stressed” the mixed culture to accumulate other forms of prod-
ucts, such as lipids and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (Strong et al., 2015). More
discussion on that will is provided below in ”amino acid analysis” section.
In Period II, dilution rate was 0.20 d−1 as well, R1 was fed with ECEA and
synthetic CH4 and R2 with dAMS and biomethane. Both reactors reached
the same level of methane yield, 0.39 and 0.43 gCDW/gCH4 respectively.
The slight diﬀerence is due to some issues with the feeding pump which did
not work properly for 12h. In Period III, dilution rate was 0.20 d−1. R1 and
R2 were both fed with ECEA and synthetic CH4 and . The reactors exhib-
ited the same performance yielding an identical biomass production of 0.50
and 0.51 gCDW/gCH4 respectively. This period, methane yield increased
compared to the previews one in both reactors due to the absence of serious
problems during the operation.
In Period IV the only parameters changed was the dilution rate which
decreased from 0.020 to 0.10 d−1. However the ECEA up concentrated in
NH4-N levels in order to maintain a consistent nitrogen source throughout
the whole experiment.
In that case, R1 doubled its biomass production
(0.94 gCDW/gCH4) while R2 stayed stable (0.50 gCDW/gCH4). This is
attributed to the clogging of the gas feeding tube which eliminated the gas
supply to the MOB.
Overall, the highest SCP production in semi-continuous operation for
both reactors was noticed at Period V where the system operated with
ECEA as growth medium, biomethane as carbon source and 0.05 d−1 di-
lution rate.
Speciﬁcally, R1 reached 1.05 and R2 0.92 gCDW/gCH4.
A
remarkable observation over this experiment is the fact that when the dilu-
tion rate decreased from 0.20 d−1 to 0.05 d−1 the values of methane yield
increased and the yield on ammonium uptake decreased. In higher values of
dilution rate, probably the culture was washed out being unable to assimilate
the available amount of CH4 resulting to lower values in yields. Moreover,
if we consider the economic factor, decreased dilution rates translated into
44
==PAGE:46==
less chemicals and less cost of dilutions since it can be fed a signiﬁcant
high concentrated nitrogen source (e.g. digestate) without the danger of
bacterial inhibition. However in terms of productivity, lower dilution rates,
corresponds to less productivity per unit of time and risk the possibility
of nutrients depletion. Thus, the optimization of the process, via a multi-
factor system is extremely vital for SCP production. Table 12 presents the
performance of the semi-continuous operation during all the run periods for
a clearer overview.
Table 12: Overview of semi-continuous performance. Biomass and ammo-
nium uptake yields
Yield
Biomass/CH4
[g/g]
Yield
Biomass/NH4-N
[g/g]
Dilution rate
d−1
R1
Batch
0.34
77.76
Period I
0.46±0.02
14.48±1.45
0.20
Period IΙ
0.39±0.07
15.26±2.00
0.20
Period IIΙ
0.50±0.05
15.88±1.32
0.20
Period IV
0.94±0.05
9.39±0.47
0.10
Period V
1.05±0.05
6.86±0.34
0.05
Yield
Biomass/CH4
[g/g]
Yield
Biomass/NH4-N
[g/g]
Dilution rate
d−1
R2
Batch
0.29
54.77
Period I
0.48±0.06
14.57±3.41
0.20
Period IΙ
0.43±0.07
14.54±1.39
0.20
Period IIΙ
0.51±0.05
15.15±2.12
0.20
Period IV
0.50±0.03
9.58±0.48
0.10
Period V
0.92±0.05
10.99±0.55
0.05
45
==PAGE:47==
Bacteria Community Analysis
This section contains the composition analysis that performed to observe
the methanotrophic strains dominated in the mixed culture of methan-
otrophic bacteria.
Figure 23: Bacterial relative abundance (%) of mixed methanotrophic cul-
ture
As it can be observed from the Figure 23, 42% of the culture is comprised
of Methylomonas. This strain belongs to Group I (Gammaproteobacteria)
and usually utilize ribulose monophosphate (RuMP) cycle for single carbon
assimilation. Its predominant existence in the mixed culture is explained
by a study of Fei et al, (2014) which reports that Gammaproteobacterial
methanotrophs are associated with high ratios of O2 to CH4. During the
project, the gas ratio maintained at 60:40 O2:CH4. However, it should be
stated that the growth media used in this study, were low in copper content,
something that aﬀects negatively the growth of Gammaproteobacterial, and
also contributing to the expression of sMMO instead of the pMMO which
in turn decreases the carbon eﬃciency factor (CEF) (Fei et al., 2014).
The second dominant species of methanotrophic bacteria which occupies
mixed culture is Methylophilus, with a percentage of 33%. This one belongs
to Betaproteobacteria and their existence in the inoculum is justiﬁed by the
non growth-rate limiting levels of ammonia in the medium (Windass et al.,
1980). Methylophilus employs the glutamine synthetase pathway for the as-
similation of ammonia (Dworkin et al.,2006).
46
==PAGE:48==
Amino Acid analysis
Figure 3.3 demonstrates the amino acid proﬁle of the cultivated mixed
culture. The presented sample is from the last run period of semi-continuous
operation (Period III). During this time, the culture produced the highest
amount of protein content (51%) which is calculated by the sum of the
amino acids. As it can be observed from the graph, the SCP produced in
this work, contains all the essential amino acids that used for animal feed.
Speciﬁcally, lysine, valine, leucine, glutamine & glutamic acid, aspargine &
aspartic acid and phenylalanine were found to comprised 54% of the total
protein. According to H¨ulsen et al. (2018), glutamic and aspartic acid along
with lysine and leucine are the major amino acids in ﬁshmeal and soybean.
Moreover Leinonen et al., (2019) report that lysine is a limited AA in terms
of availability from plant-based sources at the global level in a 10-year time
span.
Figure 24: Comparison of amino acid proﬁle of Fishmeal, Bioprotein, Soy-
bean meal and present work which collected in the last period of semi-
continuous operation
However, the protein content was not the same during the whole opera-
tion time of the semi-continuous reactor. The mixed culture started to be
active during the Batch 1 (section 3.2). At this time the protein content was
only 30% of the biomass. Same performance exhibited also during the batch
mode in the semi-continuous operation. During these periods, both reactors
47
==PAGE:49==
faced several complications mentioned above, which led to limited oxygen
supply. When this happens, methanotrophic bacteria tend to accumulate
other forms of products, such as lipids and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (Strong
et al., 2015). The AA proﬁle started getting improved as soon as the system
stabilized. Speciﬁcally, from the middle of Period II and further, the pro-
tein content of the biomass was increased to 50% forming the essential AA
proﬁle for animal feed. Thus, it is crucially important to maintain a robust
microbial community for SCP production and also improve the operational
conditions of the system.
A noteworthy outcome from this experiment is that biologically upgraded
CH4 (biomethane) as well as ECEA, can equally replace pure CH4 as a car-
bon source and dAMS as nitrogen source to the mixed culture, without
compromising the function of the semi-continuous reactors neither the SCP
production.
For an improved control of the fermentation process it is suggested that
several parameters could be online monitored.
Such parameters are dis-
solved O2 in the liquid phase, CH4 concentration in the headspace as well
OD and pH for a better control of the process.
Furthermore, the enhancement of CH4 solubility into the liquid phase of
cultivation is an important factor as well. This can be achieved by improv-
ing the diﬀusers that used for the mass transfer of CH4 from gas to liquid
phase of the cultivation.
Last, reactor conﬁguration and design is a pivotal factor for SCP pro-
duction and further improvements must take place as a future work. Some
suggestions on that could be improvements that will support better mixing
properties of substrate and bacteria, oﬀering to the methanotrophs enough
time to assimilate the carbon source in the submerged cultivation eliminat-
ing the risk of explosion due to excess CH4 in the headspace. That can
be achieved by either increase the pressure or the temperature inside the
reactor, although this option might compromise the economic feasibility of
the project.
48
==PAGE:50==
4
Conclusions
• The study accomplished to produce animal protein feed using biomethane
as substrate and ECEA as nitrogen source supplied in the mixed cul-
ture. Speciﬁcally, the usage of biomethane instead of raw had no aﬀect
on the MOB since the higher yield on methane achieve during Period
V (1.05gCDW/gCH4). Furthermore, a decrease in the dilution rate re-
sulted in a increase in the yield meaning that the biomass was washed
out during the ﬁrst three periods.
This is attributed to the reac-
tor’s conﬁguration since the gas feeding system (manually penetrated
marprene tube) and mixing properties restrained the MOB from the
fully assimilation of the carbon source.
• The protein content of the experiment reached its higher quality the
Period III of the semi continuous operation. This is attributed to sev-
eral complications of the reactors’ set up at during the experiment
(e.g.
clogging).
However, analysis demonstrated that the essential
amino acid proﬁle formed, similar to ﬁshmeal and soybean meal.
• Nitrogen recovery in form of ammonia accomplished from EC, however
the eﬃciency of the recovery was relatively low (40%). Moreover, the
retrieved solution from the electrochemical system was lacking some
of the essential micronutrients for the cultivation of MOB.
• Copper concentration in levels of 100 µgCu/L (1.6 µM), 250 µgCu/L
(3.8) and 500 µgCu/L (8 µM), enhanced the mixed culture’s perfor-
mance, while at a concentration level of 1000 µgCu/L, MOB experi-
enced a small inhibition showing longer lag phase.
49
==PAGE:51==
5
Future Work
• Inject CH4 and O2 separately into the reactor system for better control
of the gas ratio ﬂow and avoidance of explosion risk.
• Utilize better diﬀusers into the cultivation to increase KLa coeﬃcient
of CH4 and O2 in the medium.
• Install a online sensor monitoring inside the reactor to measure in real
time parameters such as CH4 in the headspace, dissolved oxygen in
the liquid phase along with OD and pH.
• Optimize electrochemical reactor parameters (cathode & anode elec-
trode, CEM) for selective recovery on micronutrients.
• Grow a more robust mixed culture before the inoculation into the
reactors.
• Apply higher dilution rates while maintaining a consistence and robust
mixed culture.
• Investigate ammonia inhibition levels of the mixed culture in order
to up concentrate the ammonia content fed in the cultivation, thus
eliminating the cost of dilution.
• Test iron (Fe) as a limiting or enhancing factor for SCP production.
50
==PAGE:52==
6
References
Abo-Ghander, N. S., Rahman, S. U., % Zaidi, S. M. J. (2009). A Modiﬁed
Electrodialytic Cell to Recover Heavy Metals from Wastewater. Portugaliae
Electrochimica Acta. https%://doi.org/10.4152/pea.200603367
Aiking, H. (2011). Future protein supply. Trends in Food Science and
Technology. https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2010.04.005
Barker, A. V., % Pilbeam, D. J. (2015). Handbook of Plant Nutrition,
Second Edition - Google Boeken. CRC Press.
Bewersdorﬀ, M., % Dost´alek, M. (1971). The use of methane for produc-
tion of bacterial protein. Biotechnology and Bioengineering.
https%://doi.org/10.1002/bit.260130104
Boiesen, A., Arvin, E., % Broholm, K. (1993). Eﬀect of mineral nutrients
on the kinetics of methane utilization by methanotrophs. Biodegradation.
https%://doi.org/10.1007/BF00695118
Boland, M. J., Rae, A. N., Vereijken, J. M., Meuwissen, M. P. M., Fis-
cher, A. R. H., van Boekel, M. A. J. S., . . . Hendriks, W. H. (2013). The
future supply of animal-derived protein for human consumption. Trends in
Food Science and Technology. https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2012.
07.002
Cantera, S., Lebrero, R., Garc´ıa-Encina, P. A., % Mu˜noz, R. (2016). Eval-
uation of the inﬂuence of methane and copper concentration and methane
mass transport on the community structure and biodegradation kinetics of
methanotrophic cultures. Journal of Environmental Management.
https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.02.002
Chen, X. Y., Vinh-Thang, H., Ramirez, A. A., Rodrigue, D., % Kaliaguine,
S. (2015). Membrane gas separation technologies for biogas upgrading. RSC
Advances. https%://doi.org/10.1039/c5ra00666j
Christiaens, M. E. R., Gildemyn, S., Matassa, S., Ysebaert, T., De Vrieze,
J., % Rabaey, K. (2017). Electrochemical Ammonia Recovery from Source-
Separated Urine for Microbial Protein Production. Environmental Science
and Technology. https%://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b02819
Dedysh, S. N., % Dunﬁeld, P. F. (2011). Facultative and obligate methan-
otrophs: How to identify and diﬀerentiate Them. In Methods in Enzymol-
ogy. https%://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-386905-0.00003-6
51
==PAGE:53==
Dworkin, M., Falkow, S., Rosenberg, E., Schleifer, K.-H., % Stackebrandt,
E. (2006). The Prokaryotes - Volume 5: Proteobacteria: Alpha and Beta
Subclasses Martin. The Prokaryotes: A Handbook on the Biology of Bac-
teria. https%://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-30741-9
El Abbadi, S. H., % Criddle, C. S. (2019). Engineering the Dark Food
Chain. Environmental Science and Technology.
https%://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b04038
Fei, Q., Guarnieri, M. T., Tao, L., Laurens, L. M. L., Dowe, N., % Pienkos,
P. T. (2014). Bioconversion of natural gas to liquid fuel: Opportunities and
challenges. Biotechnology Advances.
https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2014.03.011
Foley, J. A., Ramankutty, N., Brauman, K. A., Cassidy, E. S., Gerber, J.
S.,bJohnston, M., Zaks, D. P. M. (2011). Solutions for a cultivated planet.
Nature. https%://doi.org/10.1038/nature10452
Glass, J. B., % Orphan, V. J. (2012). Trace metal requirements for mi-
crobial enzymes involved in the production and consumption of methane
and nitrous oxide. Frontiers in Microbiology. https%://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2012.00061
Grass, G., Rensing, C., % Solioz, M. (2011). Metallic Copper as an An-
timicrobial Surface. Applied and Environmental Microbiology.
https%://doi.org/10.1128/aem.02766-10
Hanson, R. S., % Hanson, T. E. (1996). Methanotrophic bacteria. Mi-
crobiological Reviews.
Huang, S.T., Goh, J.L., Ahmadzadeh, H., Murry, M.A. 2019. A rapid
sampling technique for isolating highly productive lipid-rich algae strains
from environmental samples. Biofuel Research Journal, 6(1), 920-926.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Climate Change
2014 Synthesis Report - IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report.
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Re-
port of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. https%://doi.
org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324
Jiang, H., Duan, C., Jiang, P., Liu, M., Luo, M., % Xing, X. H. (2016).
Characteristics of scale-up fermentation of mixed methane-oxidizing bac-
teria. Biochemical Engineering Journal. https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.
52
==PAGE:54==
bej.2015.12.001
Kalyuzhnaya, M G. (2016). Chapter 13 - Methane Biocatalysis: Select-
ing the Right Microbe A2 - Eckert, Carrie A. In Biotechnology for Biofuel
Production and Optimization.
https%://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63475-7.00013-3
Kalyuzhnaya, Marina G., Puri, A. W., % Lidstrom, M. E. (2015). Metabolic
engineering in methanotrophic bacteria. Metabolic Engineering.
https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2015.03.010
Matassa, S., Batstone, D. J., H¨ulsen, T., Schnoor, J., % Verstraete, W.
(2015). Can direct conversion of used nitrogen to new feed and protein help
feed the world? Environmental Science and Technology.
https%://doi.org/10.1021/es505432w
Matassa, S., Boon, N., Pikaar, I., % Verstraete, W. (2016). Microbial
protein: future sustainable food supply route with low environmental foot-
print. Microbial Biotechnology.
https%://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.12369
Najafpour, G. D. (2007). Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology.
Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology. https%://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-52845-2.X5000-9
Nunes et al., J. J. (2016). ENHANCED PRODUCTION OF SINGLE
CELL PROTEIN FROM M. capsulatus (BATH) GROWING IN MIXED
CULTURE. Journal of Microbiology, Biotechnology and Food Sciences.
https%://doi.org/10.15414/jmbfs.2016/17.6.3.894-899
Øverland, M., Tauson, A. H., Shearer, K., % Skrede, A. (2010). Evalua-
tion of methane-utilising bacteria products as feed ingredients for monogas-
tric animals. Archives of Animal Nutrition.
https%://doi.org/10.1080/17450391003691534
Palanisamy, G., Jung, H. Y., Sadhasivam, T., Kurkuri, M. D., Kim, S. C.,
% Roh, S. H. (2019). A comprehensive review on microbial fuel cell tech-
nologies: Processes, utilization, and advanced developments in electrodes
and membranes. Journal of Cleaner Production.
https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.02.172
Pieja, A. J., Morse, M. C., % Cal, A. J. (2017). Methane to bioprod-
ucts: the future of the bioeconomy? Current Opinion in Chemical Biology.
https%://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.10.024
53
==PAGE:55==
S., H., D., V. D. H., N., B., P., V., % P., D. V. (2014). Niche diﬀerenti-
ation in nitrogen metabolism among methanotrophs within an operational
taxonomic unit Microbial biochemistry, physiology and metabolism. BMC
Microbiology.
Smil, V. (2002). Nitrogen and food production: proteins for human diets.
Ambio.
Strong, P. J., Xie, S., % Clarke, W. P. (2015). Methane as a resource:
Can the methanotrophs add value? Environmental Science and Technology.
https%://doi.org/10.1021/es504242n
UNO-United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aﬀairs, P. D.
(2017). World Population Prospects The 2017 Revision Key Findings and
Advance Tables. World Population Prospects The 2017.
https%://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004
Windass, J. D., Worsey, M. J., Pioli, E. M., Pioli, D., Barth, P. T.,
Atherton, K. T., . . . Senior, P. J. (1980). Improved conversion of methanol
to single-cell protein by Methylophilus Methylotrophus. Nature.
https%://doi.org/10.1038/287396a0
54
