==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
From Molecule to Process:
Multiscale Modeling of Liquid-Liquid
Phase Transfer Catalysis
Master’s Thesis
Abhimanyu Pudi
Process and Systems Engineering Center (PROSYS)
Department of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering
July 13, 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Phase transfer catalysis (PTC) is an important intensiﬁed extraction-reaction process and
a powerful tool applied in a vast array of chemical synthesis applications. This technique
allows for reactions that are generally not feasible through conventional synthesis routes
by introducing a heterogeneous transfer catalyst that can transfer a reactant species across
two immiscible phases. These biphasic conditions enable novel synthesis routes, higher
yields, and faster reactions, while also facilitating the separation of certain species. The
economic viability and successful large-scale implementation of such processes are heavily
contingent on the design and modeling of the systems under consideration.
Relying solely on experiments is both time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, a well-
founded prediction and design tool is highly desirable. Although a few attempts have
been made to create case-speciﬁc and generic models for PTC, they suﬀer from either the
lack of modeling considerations or the lack of thermodynamic model parameters. These
limitations restrict the solution space to design new PTC-based processes. In the present
work, these limitations are overcome by developing a multiscale modeling framework that
employs diﬀerent tools at diﬀerent scales of time and space, starting at the level of elec-
tronic structures. The developed framework consists of three modeling units: physical
and chemical equilibrium, transfer and reaction kinetics, and material and charge con-
servation. Quantum chemical methods, such as DFT-COSMO, and statistical mechanics
based thermodynamic model, COSMO-RS, are employed to predict the partition and re-
action equilibria of the neutral and ionic molecular species in nearly any PTC system.
Transfer and reaction kinetics are described by non-elementary rate laws, while balance
equations are incorporated for diﬀerent reactor conﬁgurations. All the model equations
describing the three units of the framework are formulated and solved in a Python-based
optimization environment, Pyomo.
To the knowledge of the author, this is the ﬁrst attempt at integrating computational
chemistry into a process design framework to model any biphasic system. The constructed
multiscale framework is applied to a chosen case study that is relevant to the reﬁning
industry.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface & Acknowledgements
This thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master
of Science in Chemical & Biochemical Engineering at the Technical Uniersity of Denmark
(DTU). The work was conducted under the supervision of Assistant Professor Seyed
Soheil Mansouri and Associate Professor Martin Andersson at the Process and Systems
Engineering Centre (PROSYS) in the period between February and July 2019.
This research originally stemmed from the hard work and passion of Vahid Shadravan.
The progress wouldn’t have reached its current stage without him, and I would like to
thank him for helping me make the initial steps into this project. I would also like to
convey sincerest thanks to my supervisors, Seyed and Martin. They patiently sat through
countless discussions with me, provided valuable guidance and suggestions, and patiently
waited while I took time to break through the many hurdles we faced during the course
of this project. On top of it all, they went above and beyond to support me through the
recent diﬃcult times, and there are not enough words to express my utmost gratitude.
Although the duration of this thesis has been a challenging period marked by ambitious
goals, it has been made easier by the love and support of my family and friends. I would
like to particularly acknowledge the positive impact made by a few dear friends: Basil,
Pranoy, Adem and Emmely. Each of them have lifted my mood in diﬀerent ways and
helped me stay sane. Lastly, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to my parents
and family who have sacriﬁced and suﬀered through a lot to put me in this position.
Nothing would have been possible without their presence in my life.
I hereby declare that the work presented in this document is based on
research carried out by the authors.
Signature (initials): A.P.
Date: 13/07/2019
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface & Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Process Intensiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Property Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Group Contribution Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Computational Chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2.2.1
Monte Carlo Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2.2.2
Molecular Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2.3
Quantum Chemical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2.3.1
Molecular Orbital Ab Initio Methods
. . . . .
13
1.2.2.3.2
Semi-Empirical Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.2.2.3.3
Density Functional Theory . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.3
Thesis Motivation, Scope and Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.2
Working Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.3.3
Project Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.3.4
Gantt Chart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
Literature Review
19
2.1
Liquid-Liquid Phase Transfer Catalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.1
Applications of PTC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.1.1.1
Active-Ion Transfer Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.1.1.2
Catalysed-Ion Transfer Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.1.1.3
Free-Radical Transfer Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.1.2
Existing Modeling Approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.2.1
Reaction Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.1.2.2
Phase Equilibrium Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2
Liquid-Phase Thermodynamics: Solvation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.2.1
Explicit Solvation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2.2
Implicit Solvation Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.2.3
Hybrid Models or QM/MM/Continuum Models . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.2.4
Predictive Capabilities of Continuum Solvation Models . . . . . . .
32
2.2.5
GC Methods Vs. COSMO-RS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3
Methods
35
3.1
PTC Modeling Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
Model Selection and Modiﬁed Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2.1
Turbomole
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.2.2
COSMOtherm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
iii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
iv
3.2.2.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2.2.2
Phase Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2.2.3
Reaction Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.3
Pyomo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.3.1
Model Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.4
Solution Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4
Case-Speciﬁc Implementation
47
4.1
Overall Process Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
PTC System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Model Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.4
Solution Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Analysis & Discussion
52
5.1
Phase Partitioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Reaction Energy Barriers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Conclusion
54
Bibliography
55
Appendices
65
Appendix A - Python Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Advances in computing have enabled major progress in computational chemistry and bio-
chemistry, computational materials design, computational ﬂuid dynamics, process synthe-
sis, planning and scheduling, model-based process control, fault diagnosis, and real-time
process optimization.
This has been further propelled by parallel advances in funda-
mental chemical physics theory, mathematics, operations research, and computer sci-
ence—including computational techniques for simulation and optimization of chemical
systems [17]. Evidently, computing has already played a key role in modern chemical
engineering, essentially giving rise to the sub-discipline of process systems engineering
(PSE).
Computational chemistry and PSE play a major role in providing new understanding and
development of computational procedures for the simulation, design, and operation of
systems ranging from atoms and molecules to industrial-scale processes. The enormous
span of scales of space and time that range from computational chemistry to process
systems engineering can be visualized with the “chemical supply chain” shown in Figure
1.1 [68]. The supply chain starts with the chemical products of interest to the industry,
being synthesized and characterized at the molecular level. Subsequent steps aggregate
these molecules into clusters, particles, and ﬁlms—as single and multiphase systems that
ﬁnally take the form of macroscopic mixtures. At the process engineering scale, the ﬁgure
illustrates the design and analysis of production units that are integrated into a chemical
process, which in turn is part of a site with multiple processes. Finally, this site is part
of the commercial enterprise that is driven by market considerations and demands the
inclusion of the product quality. The multiple scales of this chain are a fact of life in
chemical sciences and technology [30]. Despite being part of the same overarching ﬁeld,
chemistry and chemical engineering have generally remained two distinct areas working
at diﬀerent scales; while computational chemistry focuses on the small scale, PSE focuses
on the intermediate and large scales.
However, over the past two decades, it has become increasingly clear that the modeling,
design and development of new and innovative reaction and separation processes requires
going below the scale of unit operations—the holy ground of traditional process engi-
neering—towards the underlying molecules, clusters and their behavior that make up the
functions/tasks carried out by the unit operations [5, 17, 28, 61].
This trend of moving beyond traditional chemical engineering has emerged because the
concept of unit operations, although useful for the precise diﬀerentiation of a process
into the subsequent sequential process steps and automatically connecting them with the
apparatuses which perform these operations, inherently restricts the solution space to the
limited number of well-known “ready solutions” that are available [28]. To overcome these
limitations, engineers and industrial researchers have been working on novel equipment
and techniques that potentially could transform our concept of chemical plants and lead
1
==PAGE:7==
1.1. PROCESS INTENSIFICATION
2
Figure 1.1: Time and Length Scales of the Chemical Supply Chain [68]
to compact, safe, energy-eﬃcient, and environment-friendly sustainable processes. These
developments share a common focus on “process intensiﬁcation” which is an approach that
has been around for quite some time but has truly emerged only in the past few years as
a special and interesting discipline of chemical engineering [14]. In this regard, bridging
computational chemistry and PSE to achieve process intensiﬁcation could qualitatively
change the way chemical products and processes are designed.
1.1
Process Intensiﬁcation
Process intensiﬁcation (PI) can be deﬁned as ”any engineering development that leads
to a substantially smaller, cleaner, safer, and more energy-eﬃcient technology” [82]. The
application of this concept in process system engineering is most often characterized by
a signiﬁcant reduction in plant volume, production costs, waste generation, and also get-
ting improvements, even in orders of magnitude, on process performance and eﬃciency
including the reduction of environmental pollution problems [81]. In recent years, pro-
cess intensiﬁcation has attracted considerable academic interest as a potential means for
process improvement and to meet the increasing demands for a sustainable production
[61, 80, 94]. A variety of intensiﬁed operations developed in academia and industry creates
a large number of options to potentially improve chemical and biochemical processes.
PI targets dramatic improvements in chemical manufacturing by reimagining existing
operation schemes into ones that are both more precise and eﬃcient than existing oper-
ations [94]. PI frequently involves combining separate unit operations such as reaction
and separation into one operation resulting in a more eﬃcient, cleaner, and economi-
cal manufacturing process. At the molecular level, PI technologies signiﬁcantly enhance
mixing, which improves mass and heat transfer, reaction kinetics, yields, and speciﬁcity.
These improvements translate into reductions in equipment numbers, facility footprint,
and process complexity, and, thereby, minimize cost and risk in chemical manufacturing
facilities [73].
==PAGE:8==
1.1. PROCESS INTENSIFICATION
3
At the core of PI is the optimization of process performance by focusing on molecular level
kinetics, thermodynamics, and heat and mass transfer. Gerven and Stankiewicz (2009)
[101] provide four guiding principles for PI:
• Maximize eﬀectiveness of intramolecular and intermolecular events (e.g., dynami-
cally changing conditions to attain kinetic regimes with higher conversion and se-
lectivity).
• Provide all molecules the same process experience (e.g., plug ﬂow reactor with uni-
form, gradient-less heating).
• Optimize driving forces at all scales and maximize the speciﬁc surface areas to which
they apply (e.g., increase transfer surface area through microchannel designs).
• Maximize synergistic eﬀects from partial processes (e.g., aﬀecting reaction equilib-
rium by removing products where and when they are formed).
PI designs can be considered transformative if they achieve all or few of these molecular-
level optimal conditions. Reactors that enable precise control of the reactor environment
could dramatically increase yields, conversions, and selectivity.
This in turn reduces
material, energy, and carbon intensities, minimize puriﬁcation needs, and reduce waste
disposal burdens [5, 80]. Additionally, PI technologies could enable the manufacture of
products that otherwise could not be safely or successfully made [3, 94].
According to Stankiewicz and Moulijn (2000), PI can be divided into two broad areas
that overlap to a certain extent [94]:
• Process-intensifying equipment, such as novel reactors, and intensive mixing, heat-
transfer and mass-transfer devices.
• Process-intensifying methods, such as new or hybrid separations, integration of re-
action and separation, heat exchange, phase transfer or phase transition (in the so-
called multifunctional reactors), techniques using alternative energy sources (light,
ultrasound, etc.), and new process-control methods (like intentional unsteady state
operation).
Figure 1.2: Reaction Mechanism for a Generic Phase Transfer Catalysis System
[44]
However, this is only one of several possible classiﬁcation schemes proposed in the lit-
erature. From a mechanistic point of view, another classiﬁcation diﬀerentiates between
(drastic) quantitative improvements on the one hand and improvements as a result of
qualitative changes on the other hand [28].
Micro-reaction technology, monolithic re-
actors and reactive separations are examples of the ﬁrst category, since they allow for
a signiﬁcantly improved mass and heat transfer, while in principle the same physico-
chemical mechanisms still apply as in conventional apparatuses. The second category
comprises alternative forms of energy supply for chemical reactions such as microwaves
==PAGE:9==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
4
and ultrasound; the use of new reaction media such as ionic liquids, micro-emulsions and
supercritical phases; the use of new auxiliary agents such as phase transfer catalysts (Fig-
ure 1.2); etc. All these measures involve substantial qualitative changes in the process
since new (additional) mechanisms come into play in these processes [28].
Commercial applications of PI date back to the 1970s. Static mixers, which are ubiquitous
today, were early PI inventions [94]. Other early PI technologies deployed reactive distilla-
tion (Figure 1.3), including Eastman Chemical Company’s tower reactor, which integrated
ﬁve processing steps in the production of methyl acetate from methanol, achieving an 80
% reduction in energy and a large reduction in capital costs [34]. In the chemical indus-
try, reactive distillation, divided wall column distillation, and reverse ﬂow reactors have
been commercialized each with more than 100 installations [35]. Drivers for PI innova-
tion include the potential for reduction in feedstock cost, capital expenditure, energy, and
safety issues. On the other hand, challenges in the implementation of intensiﬁed designs
for the chemical industry include complexity of modeling and scale-up, such that ineﬃ-
cient over-design often remains as the engineering approach to managing lack of certainty
[14, 61].
Figure 1.3: Reactive Distillation
1.2
Property Prediction
Crucial to the implementation of any chemical process on a large scale is the knowledge of
the physical properties of the components in the system. Due to the extensive time and
resource consumption involved in experimentally determining such properties, there is a
persistent lack of information to design new reaction and separation processes. Therefore,
in those cases that deal with the unavailability of experimental liquid-phase properties,
predictive methods need to be investigated. Predicting property values for reactions is
done mainly using group contribution (GC) methods or computational chemistry.
1.2.1
Group Contribution Methods
GC methods are arguably the most popular empirical quantitative structure-property
relationship (QSPR) models. They are based on the idea of predicting target properties
for a large number of molecules using only a small set of building blocks called structural
groups [27]. That means any compound can be divided into fragments, usually atoms,
bonds or group of atoms, etc. Examples of simple structural groups are CH3, CH2, OH
==PAGE:10==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
5
and CH2Cl. An illustration of the division of a molecule of ethanol into atomic, bond and
group fragments is presented in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: Division of ethanol molecule into atomic, bond and group structural
fragments [51]
Each structural group contributes a predeﬁned amount to a given property of a target
molecule (for instance, the melting temperature). The structural group contribution is
constant regardless of the molecule it is in and of the environment the molecule is in.
A target molecular property for a given molecule is determined by summation of the
structural group contributions multiplied by their number of occurrences. For instance,
to calculate the melting temperature for ethanol will require summation of the melting
temperature group contributions of a CH3, a CH2 and an OH structural group. The
transferability and additivity of these speciﬁed structural group contributions is therefore
a crucial assumption [51]. A generic formulation of property calculation of a molecule in
GC methods can be shown as:
X =
X
i
niXi
(1.1)
Here, X is the total value of a property of the molecule, Xi is the contribution of a group
i, and ni is the number of such group in the molecule. Figure 1.4 shows how eq. 1.1 works
in the case of ethanol for a hypothetical property.
The additivity assumption requires the contributions of the predeﬁned structural groups,
used to predict target properties of a speciﬁed molecule, to be independent of each other
and results in many isomers being treated as indistinguishable molecules. For instance,
target properties for both 2-pentanol and 3-pentanol will be determined from contribu-
tions of two CH3, two CH2, one CH and one OH structural groups. Therefore, when
considering transferability, it should be noted that GC methods are only approximate.
Since the structural groups are assumed to be independent of each other, proximity eﬀects
between neighbouring structural groups are not taken into account [27]. The accuracy of
this approach increases with increasing distinction of groups and the larger a molecule,
the higher the signiﬁcance of proximity eﬀects [27]. For instance, in the pentanol example
mentioned above, the positions of the OH and CH groups are not considered, but if a
more advanced GC method is developed and both of the groups are assigned within a
further group (e.g, CH3CH2CHOH), properties can be predicted for isomers; the larger
==PAGE:11==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
6
group can be used for 3-pentanol, but not for 2-pentanol. These larger groups can help
take into account some proximity eﬀects.
This has led to an approach that refers to simple structural groups as ﬁrst-order groups
and introduces higher-order groups [69, 15]. In Constantinou & Gani (1994) [15], only
second-order groups are introduced, while in Marrero & Gani (2001) [69], second- and
third-order groups are introduced. The higher-order groups capture, to a certain degree,
proximity eﬀects and are obtained by combining lower-order groups as building blocks.
One such case is when second-order groups use ﬁrst-order groups as building blocks.
Examples of ﬁrst-order groups are COOH, CH and NH2. An example of a second-order
group is CHCOOH. A third-order group is then, for instance, CH(NH2)COOH. COOH
and CH, as ﬁrst-order groups, are included as building blocks of CHCOOH, a second-
order group. CHCOOH and NH2 are in turn building blocks of the third-order group,
CH(NH2)COOH [69]. A few examples of recently developed GC methods are discussed
below.
In their work, Constantinou & Gani (1994) [15] discussed GC predictions for boiling
temperature, melting temperature and standard enthalpy of vaporization, among others.
Constantinou et al.
(1995) [16] extended this approach to predict the acentric factor
and liquid molar volume at 298 K. In 2001, this work was further extended by Marrero
& Gani (2001) [69] to a new GC approach where estimation of macroscopic properties
took place at three levels. The third-order groups were introduced to incorporate larger
groups, considered to be fragments of compounds, for cases in which ﬁrst- and second-
order groups are insuﬃcient. This enables the prediction of the properties for complex
heterocyclic and large polyfunctional acyclic compounds. In another development, Kolsk´a
(2005) [52] presented a group contribution method to estimate the enthalpy and entropy
of vaporization of pure organic compounds, while Modarresi et al. (2008) [72] reported
the development of GC-based models for prediction of Hansen solubility parameters.
There are many ways to deﬁne structural groups. For example, Stefanis et al. (2004) [98]
proposed a second-order GC method, based on that of Constantinou et al. (1995) [16],
to predict properties for more complex structures. This was done by introducing further
ﬁrst-order groups. Group contributions were established for the octanol-water partition
coeﬃcient, total Hildebrand solubility parameter at 298 K and ﬂash point.
1.2.2
Computational Chemistry
Theory and modeling methods in the ﬁeld of computational chemistry can be broadly
classiﬁed into four groups, depending on the length and time scales to which they apply
(Figure 1.5) [31]: (a) the electronic scale of description, in which matter is regarded as
made up of fundamental particles (electrons, protons, etc.) and is described by quan-
tum mechanics; (b) the atomistic level of description, in which matter is made up of
atoms, whose behavior obeys the laws of statistical mechanics; (c) the mesoscale level,
in which matter is regarded as composed of blobs of matter, each containing a number
of atoms; and (d) the continuum level, in which matter is regarded as a continuum, and
the well-known macroscopic laws (equations of continuity and momentum conservation,
constitutive equations such as Fourier’s law for heat ﬂow, etc.) apply.
Three main types of approaches covering the ﬁrst three levels in computational chemistry
are introduced here: Monte Carlo, molecular dynamics and quantum chemistry.
The
==PAGE:12==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
7
Figure 1.5: Theory and simulation scales in computational chemistry [31]
fourth level concerning continuum solvation models are discussed in the next chapter.
1.2.2.1
Monte Carlo Methods
A Monte Carlo (MC) simulation is used to solve numerically the statistical mechanical
equations by using a probabilistic treatment. It is used to calculate average values of
properties [9]. Conﬁgurations of a system of particles (an ensemble) are generated by
moving randomly an arbitrary particle from an arbitrary, but feasible, conﬁguration to a
new conﬁguration. The new positions of the particles in a conﬁguration allow calculation
of a new potential energy and other properties [57]. If the new conﬁguration has a lower
energy than its previous conﬁguration, the new conﬁguration is accepted and becomes the
initial point for the next iteration. However, if the new conﬁguration has a potential en-
ergy higher than its previous conﬁguration, then the Boltzmann factor exp(−∆Eel/kBT)
is compared to a number randomly generated between zero and one (∆Eel is the poten-
tial energy between the initial and new conﬁguration). If the factor is larger than the
randomly generated number, the new conﬁguration is accepted as the new initial point
for the next iteration. If the conﬁguration is rejected, its initial conﬁguration is again the
next iteration’s starting point. This approach is known as the Metropolis algorithm [70],
ensuring a Boltzmann type distribution of the sampled conﬁgurations. The algorithm
therefore allows exploration of the overall phase space, even that of a higher energy, al-
lowing the system to move away from locally identiﬁed minima [26]. Usually molecules
are represented at an atomic or higher level (i.e., united atom or coarse-grained level).
A MC simulation begins with an equilibration phase, which is then followed by a pro-
duction phase during which the average properties of interest are calculated. For the
equilibration phase, appropriate parameters (such as total energy) are monitored until
stable, and once the system is in equilibrium, the production phase commences [57].
MC calculations are typically used to determine equilibrium properties of matter, but
they can also be used to address dynamical properties. For example, by implementing
the approach in a transition state theory framework, the rate constant of a reaction can
be determined [100]. A more detailed review is provided by several well-known sources
==PAGE:13==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
8
[31, 39, 57].
1.2.2.2
Molecular Dynamics
In molecular dynamics (MD), particles move under their own intermolecular forces and
adhere to Newton’s second law [31, 63]. That is, as time progresses, a trajectory deﬁning
the coordinates and velocities of the particles of the system with respect to time can
be calculated. Particles are treated as classical particles within the Born-Oppenheimer
assumption (discussed further below) and the system Hamiltonian depends only on the
position and momenta of the particles [63]. The energetic interactions between the par-
ticles are described by force ﬁelds; for instance, the transferable intermolecular potential
models for water, alcohols and ethers developed by Jorgensen and co-workers [40, 41].
Simulations are initiated by choosing the initial positions of all atoms to be in or close to a
local minimum of the potential energy, as this avoids large forces at the beginning of the
simulations [31].
However, for complex molecular systems (for example, biomolecular
systems) energy minimization techniques may be required (for example, the steepest
decent method). Initial velocities are sampled from a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution
with a random number generator [31].
Computational cost, energy conservation required of the modelled system and time-step
needed dictate the method to be chosen. To conserve energy of the modelled system,
a time step needs to be approximately 1/10th of the characteristic time of the fastest
vibration in the system [31].
Because of the small time steps that need to be taken
for MD simulations (and current computer advances), studying events or phenomena for
more than a microsecond is diﬃcult [31]. However, each iteration allows the calculation
of thermodynamic system properties, such as energy and pressure, and since time is
explicitly accounted for, this type of simulation allows calculation of non-equilibrium
properties, such as diﬀusion coeﬃcients [63].
Molecular dynamics, by its formulation, is derived to conserve energy, and therefore, it
is most naturally formulated in the microcanonical (N, V, E) ensemble. Monte Carlo, by
its most natural formulation, is in the canonical ensemble (N, V, T). In both methods,
periodic boundary conditions are commonly used to reduce boundary eﬀects. A schematic
representing these two major methods of atomistic molecular simulation is shown in Figure
1.6. A more thorough mathematical description of these methods can be found in sources
such as Gubbins and Moore (2010) [31] and Cramer (2004) [18].
1.2.2.3
Quantum Chemical Methods
Quantum chemistry is the application of principles and equations of quantum mechanics
(QM) to the study of molecules. It is a very powerful tool to study the properties of
molecules and their reactions. In the recent years, development in quantum chemical
methods, especially that of density functional theory (DFT) methods [18], has made it
possible for quantum chemical calculations to reach accuracies comparable to those ob-
tained in experiments for molecules of moderate sizes. Unlike GC methods, QM methods
do not require prior knowledge of structural parameters. This makes them particularly
useful for the design and analysis of new or rarely synthesized molecules.
The rapid
development of computer technologies has greatly encouraged chemists to use quantum
==PAGE:14==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
9
Figure 1.6: Schematic illustration of Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics [31]:
Pacc is acceptance probability to move from one conﬁguration to another, u is the
conﬁgurational potential energy, and k is Boltzmann’s constant
chemistry to understand, model, and predict molecular properties and their reactions,
properties of nanometer materials, and reactions and processes taking place in biological
systems [29].
The concept of quantum mechanics is brieﬂy introduced here. However, it is by no means
a comprehensive review. Further information can be found in several well-known sources
[18, 39, 57].
Quantum mechanical approaches are based on solving the time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation. The nonrelativistic Schr¨odinger equation for the wavefunction of a single par-
ticle (for example, an electron) is expressed as:
[−¯h2
2m∇2 + V ]Ψ(r, t) = i h
2π
∂Ψ(r, t)
∂t
(1.2)
where ¯h(= h/2π) is the Dirac constant, Ψ(r, t) is the time-dependent wavefunction at
position r (where r is a position vector such that r = xi + yi + zi) at time t, m is mass
of the particle, i is the square root of −1, h is the Planck’s constant, V is an external
ﬁeld (for example, electrostatic potential due to the nuclei of a molecule), and ∇2 is the
Laplacian operator in Cartesian coordinates as give by:
∇2 = ∂2
∂x2 + ∂2
∂y2 + ∂2
∂z2
(1.3)
For (bound) systems where the external potential is time-independent, the wavefunction
can be written as [57]:
Ψ(r, t) = ψ(r)T(t)
(1.4)
==PAGE:15==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
10
where ψ(r) is a spatially-dependent function and T(t) is a time-dependent function. Sub-
stituting this in Equation 1.2, we get:
−¯h2
2mT(t)∇2ψ(r) + V (r)ψ(r)T(t) = i¯hψ(r)∂T(t)
∂t
(1.5)
Rearranging so that all the spatial terms are on the left and the time-dependent terms
on the right, we get:
−¯h2
2m
1
ψ(r)∇2ψ(r) + V (r) = i¯h 1
T(t)
∂T(t)
∂t
(1.6)
The only way this equation can be satisﬁed is if both sides are equal to the same con-
stant that is independent of time and position.
This constant turns to be a possible
energy Etot of the particle [18, 57]. Considering only the LHS of the equation with slight
rearrangement, we have:
[−¯h2
2m∇2 + V (r)]ψ(r) = Etotψ(r)
(1.7)
This particular equation is called the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation. It is com-
mon to rewrite the equation in terms of an operator called the Hamiltonian, ˆHtot, such
that:
ˆHtotψ(r) = Etotψ(r)
(1.8)
where ˆHtot is composed of kinetic and potential energies as follows:
ˆHtot = −¯h2
2m∇2 + V (r)
(1.9)
In general, for a poly-electronic system of N electrons and M nuclei, ˆHtot contains pairwise
attraction and repulsion terms [57] such that:
ˆ
Htot = ˆTn + ˆTe + ˆVnn + ˆVne + ˆVee
(1.10)
where ˆT and ˆV refer to kinetic and potential energies, e refers to electrons and n to
neutrons in the nuclei.
While the Schr¨oodinger equation oﬀers an in-principle exact description of the behavior
of electrons in molecules, subject to neglect of relativistic eﬀects, it is intractable to solve
for realistic systems without approximations [39]. A few of them are described here.
Born-Oppenheimer Approximation:
The Schr¨odinger equation can only be solved exactly for a basic system, such as the
hydrogen atom. Any system larger than a hydrogen atom requires a solution of a three-
body problem, to which no exact solutions are possible. Therefore, solutions obtained
for polyelectronic systems are approximations to the exact solutions of the Schr¨odinger
==PAGE:16==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
11
equation. The most common approximation made by most ab initio methods is the Born-
Oppenheimer (BO) approximation. Here, the motion of the electrons is decoupled from
the motion of the nuclei. Since the masses of the nuclei are three orders of magnitude
larger than those of the electrons, it is assumed that electrons adjust instantaneously to
positions of the nuclei, ignoring the nuclei momenta. Thus, for the BO approximation,
the electronic wavefunctions can be determined by assuming ﬁxed nuclei. By using the
BO approximation, the terms explicitly taking into account electrons are the only ones
considered [88], resulting in Equation 1.8 simplifying to:
ˆH = ˆTe + ˆVne + ˆVee
(1.11)
Using this approximation, Equation 1.8 becomes:
ˆHψ(r) = Eψ(r)
(1.12)
where E is the electronic energy excluding nucleus-nucleus interactions. It must be noted
that BO approximation doesn’t actually exclude the term ˆVnn. Quite frequently, ˆVnn(R)
is neglected in the above equation, which is justiﬁed since ˆVnn(R) is just a constant that
depends on distance R between nuclei and shifts the eigenvalues only by some constant
amount [18, 39].
Slater Determinant:
An appropriate functional form for the wavefunction of a polyelectronic system needs
to adhere to the anti-symmetry principle; the electrons are indistinguishable and by ex-
changing pairs of electrons, the wavefunction changes sign [39]. In addition, a one-electron
wavefunction must account for electron spin. A one-electron wavefunction is deﬁned by
spin orbitals χ, that are the product of a spatial function σ (referred to as a spatial orbital
– φ will represent atomic orbitals, whilst ψ will represent molecular orbitals) and a spin
function α or β (α and β determine the direction of the spin). An appropriate form for
expressing the wavefunction is by means of the Slater determinant. For N electrons in
spin orbitals χ1, χ2, ..., χN, the wavefunction is shown as [39]:
ψ =
1
√
N!

χ1(1)
χ2(1)
. . .
χN(1)
χ1(2)
χ2(2)
. . .
χN(2)
...
...
...
...
χ1(N)
χ2(N)
. . .
χN(N)

(1.13)
where χi(N) is a function depending on space coordinates i and spin coordinates of elec-
tron N, and 1/N! is the normalizing factor for the wavefunction. The Slater determinant
adheres to the anti-symmetry principle and Pauli exclusion principle, which states that
two electrons of the same spin cannot occupy the same spatial orbital. That is, if in
Equation 1.13 two rows are identical, the determinant vanishes [57].
Linear Combination of Atomic Orbitals:
In molecular QM calculations, spatial molecular orbitals are generally determined by
means of a linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) approach. Each spatial molec-
ular orbital is determined as a sum of single electron orbitals:
==PAGE:17==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
12
ψi =
K
X
ν=1
cνiφν
(1.14)
where ψi is spatial molecular orbital i, φν is the ν-th single electron orbital from a set
K, and cνi is a coeﬃcient. φν are called basis functions and often correspond to atomic
orbitals [57]. This set of K single electron orbitals form a ‘basis set’ [57]. The variational
principle states that the energy calculated from an approximate wavefunction will be
always greater than or equal to the energy from the exact wavefunction (Sheldon 2004)
[39, 88]. Therefore, the lower the energy predicted by an approximate wavefunction, the
closer the prediction to the real energy. This is implemented by searching for the set of
coeﬃcients in Equation 1.14 for a given basis set and wavefunction similar to Equation
1.13 for which the energy is a minimum [39].
Two types of functions have been implemented to approximate atomic and molecular
orbitals, namely, Slater and Gaussian functions. Slater-type orbitals (described by Slater
functions) have been identiﬁed as unsuitable for molecular orbital calculations, since in-
tegrals can be diﬃcult or impossible to calculate.
Thus, the commonly implemented
Gaussian-type orbitals have replaced the Slater-type orbitals. Gaussian functions are ex-
pressed in the form exp(αr2) and their advantage is computational in nature—a product
of two Gaussian functions results in a single Gaussian function. The disadvantage of such
a type of function is that one such function cannot approximate a Slater function accu-
rately. This problem is overcome by representing atomic orbitals by linear combination
of Gaussian functions:
φν =
L
X
i=1
diνφi(αiν)
(1.15)
where diν is the coeﬃcient of the primitive Gaussian function, φi has the exponent αiν,
and L is the number of functions set for the expansion. Gaussian functions are called ‘un-
contracted’ or ‘primitive’ when the coeﬃcient and exponent are varied, but this procedure
requires signiﬁcant computational resources and has resulted in the use of ‘contracted’
Gaussian functions [57]. Contracted functions make use of constant, predetermined co-
eﬃcients and exponents for the calculation. A more detailed explanation regarding this
can be found in Leach (2001) [57] and Jensen (2017) [39].
The set of ﬁnite basis functions used in Equation 1.15 are referred to as a basis set—the
set of (nonorthogonal) one-particle functions used to build molecular orbitals. When the
ﬁnite basis is expanded towards an (inﬁnite) complete set of functions, calculations using
such a basis set are said to approach the complete basis set (CBS) limit. In general, the
larger a basis set, the more accurate the calculation [39, 57]. Basis sets are commonly
expressed in the shorthand form. One example is 6-31+G(d), implying that six Gaussian
functions are used to describe the core orbitals and the valency orbitals are represented
by four Gaussian functions—the contracted part by three Gaussian functions and the
diﬀuse part by one Gaussian function. The ‘(d)’ indicates use of polarization functions
on heavy atoms, whilst the ‘+’ indicates use of highly diﬀuse functions for molecules
that have signiﬁcant electron density oﬀtheir nuclear centres (for instance, anions and
molecules with lone pairs). Another example is TZVP which refers to triple-zeta valence
plus polarization, implying that the basis set contains a single set of polarization functions
and splits each valency orbital into three functions.
==PAGE:18==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
13
Self-Consistent Field Theory:
To determine a value for E in Equation 1.12, a self-consistent ﬁeld calculation is carried
out. A polyelectron molecular system is treated as a set of spin orbitals [88]. Electron-
electron interactions are expressed as a single electron interacting with a mean ﬁeld of
the other electrons. Therefore, each single electron wavefunction is dependent on a mean
ﬁeld of wavefunctions that depend on all other single electron wavefunctions. This is
called the Hartree-Fock approximation [57]. This problem is solved iteratively for reﬁned
wavefunctions and, when converged, the system is called self-consistent.
Quantum chemical methods can be generally classiﬁed into three groups:
1. Molecular orbital ab initio methods
2. Semi-empirical methods
3. Density functional theory methods
1.2.2.3.1
Molecular Orbital Ab Initio Methods
Methods that do not include any empirical or semi-empirical parameters in their equa-
tions—being derived directly from theoretical principles, with no inclusion of experimental
data—are called ab initio methods. In molecular orbital quantum mechanical calculations,
the electrons of an atom or molecule are explicitly represented, allowing the derivation of
properties that are dependent on the electronic distribution. However, it does not imply
that the solution is an exact one; they are all approximate quantum mechanical calcula-
tions. It means that a particular approximation is rigorously deﬁned on ﬁrst principles
and then solved within an error margin that is qualitatively known beforehand [57].
The approximations involved range from simpliﬁed forms of the ﬁrst-principles equations,
which are easier or faster to solve, to approximations limiting the size of the system (for
example, periodic boundary conditions) to fundamental approximations to the underlying
equations, which are required to achieve any solution to them at all [39]. For example,
most ab initio calculations make the Born–Oppenheimer approximation described above.
In principle, ab initio methods eventually converge to the exact solution of the underlying
equations as the number of approximations is reduced. In practice, however, it is impos-
sible to eliminate all approximations, and residual error inevitably remains. The goal of
computational chemistry is to minimize this residual error while keeping the calculations
tractable [57].
For large systems, pure ab initio calculations are still very expensive [39].
In many
practical applications, we are only interested in the properties of a few molecules of a
system or part of a large molecule. Many calculations are therefore only limited to these
molecules or part of a large molecule.
These studies can provide us with very useful
information, but there are often cases where the eﬀects from the surrounding molecules
or the remaining part of a large molecule cannot be neglected. Typical examples involve
the properties of a solute molecule in a solvent. If we use quantum chemistry to calculate
the properties of the solute molecule and neglect the eﬀects from the solvent molecules,
the properties obtained correspond only to those of the isolated solute molecule [18].
The most common molecular orbital ab initio method employed is the Hartree-Fock (HF)
theory where a polyelectron wavefunction is represented in the form of a single Slater de-
==PAGE:19==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
14
terminant [39]. However, its usefulness is limited because of complete neglect of electron
correlation. There are several other types of correlated wavefunction-based approaches
[29]: second-order Moller–Plesset perturbation theory (MP2), with an emphasis on the lo-
calized version of this methodology; methods based on the coupled-cluster ansatz, focusing
on the widely used CCSD(T) (coupled cluster with single, double, and triple perturbative
excitations) variant; and multireference perturbation methods, such as CASPT2 (com-
plete active space with second-order perturbation theory). Each of these approximations
has a diﬀerent computational scaling with the number of electrons and is (arguably) the
method of choice for diﬀerent types of problems [39].
1.2.2.3.2
Semi-Empirical Methods
In the early days, quantum chemists developed mostly semi-empirical molecular orbital
methods for the study of large systems [57]. These methods are based on the HF method
formalism but often involve many empirical parameters that are optimized by reproducing
the properties of some reference molecules [60]. Usually, the parameters are accurate for
the systems they are parameterized for. The cost of performing an HF calculation scales
formally as the fourth power of the number of basis functions [39].
This arises from
the number of two-electron integrals necessary to solve HF equations. Semi-empirical
methods reduce the computational cost by reducing the number of these integrals. This
is generally achieved by a form of diﬀerential overlap (DO) approximation which neglects
all or some products of basis functions that depend on the same electron coordinates when
located on diﬀerent atoms [39]. Few such methods are intermediate neglect of diﬀerential
overlap (INDO) techniques, modiﬁed intermediate neglect of diﬀerential overlap (MINDO)
models, and modiﬁed neglect of diatomic overlap (MNDO) model.
However, for many properties, such as the relative energies of diﬀerent conformations of
a large molecule, the bonding energy, and structure of a hydrogen-bonded system, the
results from semi-empirical calculations are not reliable. This limits their applications
to large systems, especially those where hydrogen bonds are important. In recent years,
many ﬁrst-principles quantum chemistry methods aimed for large molecular systems have
been introduced [39].
1.2.2.3.3
Density Functional Theory
Density functional theory (DFT) is an alternative approach to the molecular orbital HF
ab initio approach. Single electron wavefunctions are taken into account, but only the
total electronic energy and overall electron-density distribution function are computed,
as the Hohenberg and Kohn theorem [9, 37, 57] states that “all properties of a molecular
system in its ground state can be derived from the electron-density distribution function”.
In DFT, the electronic energy Etot is expressed as:
Etot(ρ) = Te(ρ) + Enn(ρ) + Ene(ρ) + Eee(ρ) + EXC(ρ)
(1.16)
where Te is the electronic kinetic energy, Enn is the internuclear repulsive energy, Ene is the
nuclear-electronic attractive energy, Eee is the interelectronic repulsive energy and EXC
is the exchange and correlation energy. Enn, Ene and Eee are functionals of the electron-
distribution function only, where a functional transforms a function into a number (for
==PAGE:20==
1.2. PROPERTY PREDICTION
15
example, a function between can be transformed into a number, such as its area) [9, 57].
There is no formal derivation for EXC (but the Hohenberg and Kohn theorem has proved
its existence) and therefore approximations are made [88].
Because the electron density depends on only three coordinates (as opposed to the 3N
coordinates of N electrons), the computational eﬀort required to solve the equations of
DFT is comparable with that required for Hartree–Fock theory, thus rendering DFT
highly attractive from the point of view of computational implementation.
However,
the correct functional of the energy is unknown and has to be constructed by heuristic
approximation.
A number of exchange-correlation functionals have been proposed to
incorporate exchange and correlation contributions [57] and they exist in the forms of
local density approximations (LDA) (e.g., Vosko et al. (1980) [104]) or gradient-corrected
functionals (e.g., Becke (1988) [6]). LDAs depend on a uniform electron density, while
gradient-corrected functionals depend on gradients of density at a speciﬁed position in
space [57]. However, neither of the two methods is observed to have a major advantage
over the other. It has, however, become more common to implement hybrid Hartree-
Fock/density functional methods, which incorporate a fraction of the HF exchange energy
and further exchange and correlation contributions from elsewhere, for example, LDAs,
etc.
An example of such a hybrid functional is the B3LYP functional made up from
functionals by Vosko et al. (1980) [104], Lee et al. (1988) [58] and Becke (1988) [6].
Hybrid functionals also incorporate gradient corrections but add an empirically ﬁtted
admixture of exact Hartree–Fock exchange. Although there are diﬀerences between the
individual functionals in each class, the diﬀerences between classes are substantially larger
[29].
The total electronic energy Etot is determined by the variational principle, and Buncel et
al. (2003) [9] give a useful overview of how to solve for Etot by DFT. As a ﬁrst iteration,
an approximate electron-density function can be derived by means of a “simpliﬁed” ab
initio calculation in which electrons do not interact with one another, and so that the
electron-density function is obtained from:
ρ(r) =
N/2
X
i=1
|ψi(r)|2
(1.17)
Taking into account further terms from Equation 1.17 in later iterations and determining
ψi using orthonormal single electron wavefunctions leads to reﬁnement of the electron-
density function to converge to Etot.
This subsection on quantum chemistry can be summarized by considering which quantum
chemistry methodology is the current method of choice for various types of modeling
problems in computational chemistry.
For accurate studies of small molecules in the
gas phase, CCSD(T) and related methods are the approach of choice, perhaps combined
with less expensive methods to carry out geometry optimization and/or obtain basis set
convergence. For investigation of reactive chemistry in medium to large systems, DFT
is at present the best approach, in some cases it is possible to check a truncated model
of the actual system by using coupled-cluster-based methods (although typically not at a
benchmark level). MP2 methods are generally useful for studying nonbonded interactions
in both small and large systems and in developing molecular mechanics force ﬁelds; these
types of calculations are highly relevant in biology and materials science problems. DFT
==PAGE:21==
1.3. THESIS MOTIVATION, SCOPE AND OUTLINE
16
can be used also in the investigation of conformational and hydrogen bond interactions,
provided that the accuracy limitations are understood [29].
1.3
Thesis Motivation, Scope and Outline
Applying the principles of PI, the present work focuses on development of a generic
PTC modeling framework and, consequently, a speciﬁc case of PTC where PSE and
computational chemistry are required to eﬀectively understand, model and optimize the
chemical process.
1.3.1
Problem Statement
Hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) is a highly toxic chemical that is found as an impurity or an
inhibitor in many petrochemical, chemical and biochemical processes. In fact, it is clas-
siﬁed as a hazardous industrial waste. Environmental and/or process constraints often
require the removal of this compound to trace amounts. This is usually accomplished by
capturing H2S and later oxidizing it to elemental sulfur, a process generally referred to
as sulfur recovery.
Worldwide, compliance with environmental regulations has contributed to increased sulfur
recovery, which is likely to steadily increase for the foreseeable future.
In their 2019
annual publication of Sulfur, the United States Geological Survey estimates that the
largest increases in sulfur production during the next ﬁve years are expected to take place
in India, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Recovered elemental sulfur is produced primarily during the processing of natural gas and
crude petroleum. Due to the depletion of sweet oil and gas reserves around the world,
players in the O&G industry are increasingly looking toward sour ﬁelds to meet our energy
needs. In the past 2–3 decades, sulfur production has consistently outpaced the demand
leading to the large stockpiles of block sulfur waste in countries, such as Kazakhstan and
Canada.
In addition, H2S is a frequently occurring compound in biochemical processes, such as
biogas processing and wastewater treatment, due to the biological degradation of organic
matter.
These processes also employ same or similar strategies of converting H2S to
elemental sulfur, adding to the increasing sulfur inventory around the world.
A vast
amount of this waste inventory is dumped in landﬁlls every year.
At a time when the European industry is striving to achieve a zero-waste and circular
economy, sulfur disposal poses a serious barrier to such a transition. Therefore, it is vital
to develop a viable alternative to the practice of converting H2S to elemental sulfur.
1.3.2
Working Hypothesis
This project investigates one such alternative process of converting H2S to value-added
products. Since alkanolamine-based processes are widely used for the removal of acid
gases from gaseous streams, it is assumed that the capture of H2S from a gas phase to
liquid phase uses an aqueous alkanolamine solution. Among the various alkanolamines,
==PAGE:22==
1.3. THESIS MOTIVATION, SCOPE AND OUTLINE
17
methyldiethanolamine (MDEA) has gained widespread commercial acceptance as the sol-
vent of choice for the selective removal of H2S. Therefore, the H2S-rich aqueous MDEA,
obtained from a gas-liquid absorber, is considered as a starting point in the present study.
Traditional approach for the next step is the use of a stripping column to separate H2S
and regenerate MDEA. MDEA is then sent back to the absorber while H2S is directed
towards further process steps to convert it to elemental sulfur. However, the regeneration
step requires high operational costs. In order to overcome the drawbacks of the current
processes, principles of PI are applied. Here, phase transfer catalysis (PTC) is explored
as the cornerstone for the capture and utilization of H2S. One major advantage of this
route is the ability to target a wide variety of products, instead of only elemental sulfur
or inorganic sulfates.
Using liquid-liquid PTC, the H2S-rich aqueous phase is put in contact with an organic
phase containing a benzyl halide to produce benzyl mercaptan in the presence of a PT
catalyst such as TBAB. The objective is to model the complex interlinked phenomena—
multiple reactions in each phase and partitioning of various species between the phases—
occurring in such a system.
Since many of the components in this system cannot be
described by the commonly-used thermodynamic models (NRTL, UNIFAC, etc.) due to
the lack of required parameters, a quantum chemical framework is used for this purpose.
As there is little to no experimental data on the process under study, quantum chemistry
allows for a relatively rapid assessment of the process to be designed without the need
for numerous expensive experiments. It is expected that the current study would point
towards not only the feasibility of the proposed process but also the best combination of
components (solvent and catalyst) for the process.
1.3.3
Project Plan
Part 1: Literature Review
The ﬁrst part of the project will be a thorough review of literature on the applications
of PTC, the existing methods for modeling a PTC system, and the currently available
methods for modeling the corresponding system thermodynamics. The insight gained
would potentially contribute towards understanding and modeling multiphase reaction-
extraction systems at both molecular and process levels.
Part 2: Development of a Generic PTC Reaction Model
A generic modeling framework for PTC systems would be developed.
Part 3: Development of a Case-Speciﬁc PTC Reaction Model
Consequently, a completely predictive or semi-empirical model for the simultaneous ex-
traction and conversion of H2S in a PTC system would be developed.
This involves
choosing a speciﬁc catalyst and organic solvent and modeling the resulting system. The
model development will be carried out in a systematic approach to manage the complex-
ity of the inextricably intertwined phenomena occurring in the multiphase, multireaction
system under study.
==PAGE:23==
1.3. THESIS MOTIVATION, SCOPE AND OUTLINE
18
Part 4 (Optional): Solvent Selection within a Deﬁned Search Space
In the next part of the project, the eﬀect of the organic solvent on the performance of the
reaction will be evaluated. A subsequent solvent selection will be carried out to pick the
best candidate that will optimize the set criteria or to rank a choice of candidates based
on the same criteria.
1.3.4
Gantt Chart
The decomposed parts of this project are presented in a Gantt chart to monitor and plan
the progress of the work at hand. The Gantt chart can be seen in ﬁg. 1.7.
Year
2019
Week
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
Part 1
Part 2
Part 3
Figure 1.7: Gantt Chart illustrating the project plan
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
This chapter serves as a review of the general aspects of phase transfer catalysis and
QM-based solution thermodynamic models.
2.1
Liquid-Liquid Phase Transfer Catalysis
Phase transfer catalysis (PTC) is a general methodology applicable to a great variety of
reactions in which inorganic and organic anions, carbenes and other active species react
with organic compounds [64]. PTC systems facilitate intimate contact of reactants that
would not normally interact, usually because of phase solubility limitations. It allows
these reactions to proceed quickly and with great selectivity, and hence, raw materials
are used eﬃciently [3, 92, 97].
The basic principle of PTC is that the reactions are performed in heterogeneous two-
phase systems with negligible mutual solubility of the phases. Organic reactants, neat
or in organic solvents, are in liquid organic phase whereas inorganic salts or base form
the inorganic phase. Ionic reagents may be dissolved in the aqueous phase (liquid–liquid,
LL-PTC) or used in the form of powdered solids (solid–liquid, SL-PTC) suspended in the
organic medium. The catalyst, located in the organic phase, acts as a source of lipophilic
cations and continuously introduces the reacting anionic species in the form of lipophilic
ion pairs into the organic phase. Thus, phase transfer (PT)-catalyzed reactions, although
carried out in heterogeneous systems, proceed to a substantial extent in homogeneous
solutions [64]. A simple illustration of LL-PTC is shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Simple Illustration of LL-PTC
In most cases, PT catalysts can be tailored to the reaction system and are commercially
available at relatively low cost [3]. Typical PT catalysts are quaternary ammonium and
phosphonium salts. Other lipophilic, stable organic cations (e.g. trialkylsulfonium and
19
==PAGE:25==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
20
tetraalkylarsonium) can also function as PT catalysts [64]. Another category consists
of neutral organic molecules able to form relatively stable complexes or solvates with
cations, such as Na+ or K+, thus producing lipophilic cationic species able to introduce
anions into nonpolar organic phase. Typically, crown ethers and cryptands are used for
this purpose [78, 92], but ethers of poly(ethylene glycol)s or even some solvents, such as
HMPT, DMSO or DMF, can behave similarly [64]. In the absence of these catalysts, the
reaction proceeds at a very low rate, if at all.
Various factors such as partition and structure of the catalyst, reactivity of ion pairs in
low-polarity organic medium, and hydration of anions are of paramount importance for
the outcome of the PTC process [3].
This type of a two-phase system oﬀers numerous advantages, such as high yields and
purity of the products, operational simplicity, mild reaction conditions, suitability for
large-scale synthesis and the environmentally benign nature of the reaction system [3, 92].
This is particularly attractive owing to the increasing number of environmental laws as
PTC processes always produce much less industrial waste and consume less energy when
compared with traditional processes [64]. Therefore, PTC processes are widely used for
a wide range of applications in laboratory organic synthesis and industries concerning
pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and polymers [3, 36, 64, 92].
However, the downside of PTC is the need to quantify exacting reaction conditions and
parameters that are diﬃcult to uncover and, in some cases, are counterintuitive [3, 97]. In
a 1998 comprehensive review of the ﬁeld from an engineering perspective [74], the authors
lamented the lack of published theoretical process modeling for scale-up and concluded
that this has hurt the commercialization potential of PTC. Although the next two decades
have seen some progress in terms of mathematical modeling of PTC systems [4, 79, 89],
availability of accurate thermodynamic parameters still proves a major limitation.
2.1.1
Applications of PTC
In this section, PTC refers to both phase transfer catalysis and phase transfer catalyst,
depending on the context. The ﬁrst known commercial use of a PTC system was reported
by Rueggeberg et al. (1946) [85] for the production of benzyl benzoate from benzyl chlo-
ride and sodium benzoate catalysed with diethyl- and triethylamines as PTC. Since then,
the approach has been applied to various types of organic synthesis paving the way for
novel reaction routes and selection of faster and/or cheaper catalysts. Some important
examples include active ion transfer systems where active quaternary ammonium salts are
transferred as from an aqueous phase to allow substitutions for the oxidation of oleﬁns,
the borohydride reduction of ketones, the hydrolysis of esters, and cyanide displacement
processes [13, 95, 96]. In addition, there are oxidizing agent transfer systems where the
transferred species catalyze reactions in the organic phase, such as alkyl chloride and
nitrile formation, and benzoin condensation [4, 22, 102]. Finally, in free-radical assisted
reactions, the PTC carries or creates free radical species for enhancing product properties
or avoiding hazardous chemicals and severe reaction condition for halogenation, polymer-
ization, and alkylation reactions [21, 43, 53]. These cases demonstrate that PTC systems
allow ﬂexible and easier operation, yield higher production, and, while not eliminating
added solvents, can avoid those which may be hazardous or expensive.
==PAGE:26==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
21
2.1.1.1
Active-Ion Transfer Systems
The biggest application area of the PTC system is the transferring of the active ions across
the interface for substitution reactions. Some important examples include halogenations
and cyanation.
Halogenation:
The halogenation reaction is the addition of one or more halogens to an organic com-
pound. The halogenated products are used in pharmaceutical, chemical, and agricultural
industries. PTC-induced halogenations in biphasic systems have been reported in several
publications.
• Starks (1971) [95] used methyltrioctylammonium (CH3(C8H17)3N+) to catalyze the
reaction of chlorooctane to bromooctane and iodooctane.
The organic phase is
formed by the halooctane itself, the product yield reaches 95% after 1 hour.
• Dillow et al. (1996) [22] present the production of benzyl bromide (C7H7Br) from the
reaction between benzyl-chloride (C7H7Cl) and potassium bromide (KBr) catalyzed
by tetraheptylammonium ((C7H15)4N+). The reaction is carried out in a two-phase
mixture of supercritical carbon dioxide and acetone at 50 and 70 ◦Cand 200 bars.
The reactions reach 50% conversion in 20-60 hours with maximum conversion of
around 65% in 100 hours.
• Landini et al. (1977, 1978) [55, 56] reported using tetraalkylammonium and phos-
phonium (R4N+ and R4P+) as PTCs, which contain 12-16 carbon atoms, to catalyze
the reaction of n-octyl methanesulphonate (C8H17OSO2ME) with potassium chlo-
ride, bromide, and iodide in water-chlorobenzene two-phase mixture.
• Vander Zwan and Hartner (1978) [103] employed methyltrioctylammonium for cat-
alyzing the reaction of benzyl-chloride (C7H7Cl) with potassium ﬂuoride in the
water-acetonitrile two-phase mixture. The reaction half-life is 42 hours, with maxi-
mum conversion greater than 95% and yield above 90%.
• Royer and Husson (1985) [84] used tetrabutylammonium ((C4H9)4N+) and crown
ether to catalyze the reaction of 2-butyl-2-(2-chloroethyl)-1,3-dioxolane (C9H17ClO2)
with potassium iodide in the water-toluene mixture. They achieve 74% yield of the
product (2-butyl-2-(2-iodoethyl)-1,3-dioxolane, C9H17IO2), which is an intermediate
for the production of Gephyrotoxin compound.
• Schreiner et al. (2001) [90] obtained 11-92% yields of complex halogenated products
such as Bromoadamantane ((C10H15Br) using tetrabutylammonium ((C4H9)4N+)
as a catalyst in the water-ﬂuorobenzene mixture.
• Yuﬁt and Zinovyev (1999) [108] employed methyltrioctylammonium to catalyze the
reactions of bromohexane with potassium chloride and n-octylmethanesulphonate
with potassium chloride, bromide, iodide, and ﬂuoride in the water-toluene biphasic
mixture. They observed ﬁrst-order behaviour of the overall reaction rates, where
iodide has the highest rate and ﬂuoride is not reactive.
Cyanide Displacement:
Cyanide displacement or cyanation process is the attachment or substitution of a cyanide
group (CN) on various substrates to produce nitrile compounds. Nitriles are mainly used
in pharmaceutical industry, as more than 30 nitrile-containing medicines are currently
==PAGE:27==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
22
prescribed for a diverse variety of medicinal indications in 2010 [24]. Moreover, some
organic nitriles such as adiponitrile, an important precursor to the nylon polymer, are
produced on a large scale. PTC-induced cyanation processes in biphasic systems have
been reported in several publications.
• Aside from halogenation, Starks and co-worker [95, 96] used methyltrioctylammo-
nium (CH3(C8H17)3N+) to catalyze the production of nitriles from secondary and
tertiary alkyl halides, cyclohexyl, n-octylmethanesulfonate, and halooctanes. The
reactions give 85-90% yield of cyanide products, with 95% conversion reached within
4 hours.
• Landini et al.
(1978) [56] used tetraalkylammonium catalyse the reaction of n-
octyl methanesulfonate, in the water-chlorobenzene mixture. The reaction follows
ﬁrst-order kinetic with higher reaction rate compared to halogenation processes.
• Vander Zwan and Hartner (1978) [103] also used methyltrioctylammonium for cat-
alyzing the reaction of benzyl chloride and bromohexane with potassium cyanide
(KCN) in the water-acetronitrile mixture. The reactions half-lives are 2.20 and 0.98
hours for benzyl chloride and bromohexane reactions respectively.
• Chandler et al. (1998) [13] employed tetraheptylammonium ((C7H15)4N+) to cat-
alyze the reaction of benzyl chloride with potassium cyanide in two phases that are
created from supercritical CO2 and the reactant itself. The reaction reaches 100%
conversion after 10 hours, with ﬁrst-order kinetic behaviour.
• Makosza and Fedorynski (2003) [64] reported using triethylbenzylammonium (TEBA)
catalyze the acyl cyanide and cyanohydrin derivative, as shown in Figure 2.2, in
water-dichloromethane mixture with 74% and 92% conversion respectively.
Figure 2.2: Makosza’s replacement reactions [64]: (A) acyl cyanide production;
(B) cyanohydrin production
Other Displacement Reactions:
Besides halogens and cyanide, PTC can also be used for displacements of other active ions
or groups such as nitrite (NO2 –), cyanate (NCO–), hydroxide (OH–) [95]; thiocyanate
(SCN–), azide (N3 –) [56]; acetate (OAc–) [103]; and sulphide (S2 –) [93].
2.1.1.2
Catalysed-Ion Transfer Systems
Phase transfer catalysis can also be used to transfer the catalyzed-ion across the liquid-
liquid interface from the aqueous phase to initialize the oxidation reaction in the organic
==PAGE:28==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
23
phase. In these reactions scenarios, the active PTCs are not spent but constantly cat-
alyzing the reaction between the organic compounds. Some important examples include
benzoin condensation, alkylations and hydrolysis reactions.
Benzoin Condensation:
Yadav and Kadam (2012) [107] proposed using tetramethyl- and tetrabutylammonium
((CH3)4N+ and (C4H9)4N+) as catalyst for the benzaldehyde condensation reaction to
create benzoin.
Figure 2.3: Benzoin Condensation Process [4]
Alkylation:
Conventionally, these reactions require organic alkylating agents such as organometallics
or carbenes [3]. The use of PTC systems for the alkylation reactions has been reported in
several publications. The PTC-induced alkylation help eliminating the use of expensive
or highly unstable alkylating agents by transferring alkyl ion from the aqueous phase to
initiate the alkylation in the organic phase [4].
• Makosza and Fedorynski (2003) [64] presented the alkylations and dialkylations of
benzyl cyanide with primary alkyl halides, secondary alkyl halides, and dihaloalka-
nes catalyzed by tetraalkylammonium PTCs in a biphasic mixture of water-benzene.
The reactions, employed PTCs, and achieved conversion are shown in Figure 2.4.
• De Zani and Colombo (2012) [21] employed a tetrabutylammonium salt to catalyze
the reaction between 4-tert-butyl phenol and benzyl bromide in a continuous plug-
ﬂow reactor containing water-dichloromethane mixture as shown in Figure 2.5. They
achieved 100% conversion with 1.25 mL/min ﬂow rate of raw material and resident
time 4 minutes.
• Vanden Eynde and Mailleus (2001) [102] presented the PTC-induced productions
of aryl ethers. The most notable results are shown in Figure 2.6, consist of (a)
the production of 1,2-dimethoxybenzene from the reaction between 1,2-benzenediol
and methyl iodide; (b) the production of 4-nitroanisole from the reaction between
==PAGE:29==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
24
Figure 2.4: Makosza’s alkylations reactions [64]: (a) Alkylation of benzyl cyanide
with primary alkylhalide, (b) Dialkylation of benzyl cyanide with secondary alkyl-
halide, (c) Alkylation of benzyl cyanide with cycloalkylhalide, (d) Alkylation of
2-phenylbutanenitrile with dihaloalkane, (e) Alkylation of benzyl cyanide with di-
haloalkane
Figure 2.5: De Zani’s alkylation reaction [21]
==PAGE:30==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
25
4-nitrophenol and iodomethane; and (c) the production of (hexyloxy)benzene from
the reaction between phenol and 1-bromopentane, which have 90%, 90%, and 95%
conversion respectively. The employed PTC is a tetrabutylammonium salt, and the
two liquid phases are created by immiscibility between water and the reactant itself.
Figure 2.6: Vanden Eynde’s alkylation reactions [102]
• Lygo and Andrews (2004) [62] used quaternary ammonium salts to catalyze the
production of imines compounds and Cassani et al. (2009) [12] also employed the
quaternary ammonium salt to catalyze the Mannich reaction.
Hydrolysis:
Aside from condensation and alkylations, PTC is also used to transfer the nucleus-seeking
agents for hydrolysis reaction across the interface.
• Starks (1971) [95] reported the use of quaternary ammonium salts for catalyzing
the hydrolysis of long-chain esters to carboxylic acids in mixed esters-water systems
and sulphonyl chlorides to antibacterial sulphonamides drugs in the water-dodecane
mixed biphasic system.
• Wang et al. (2012) [106] used tetrabutylammonium and benzyltributylammonium
to initialize the hydrolysis of 4-methoxyphenylacetic acid butyl ester in the mixtures
of water and three organic solvents (chlorobenzene, n-hexane, and dibutyl ether),
as shown in Figure 2.7. They achieved maximum conversion around 99% in hexane,
with tetrabutylammonium gives the fastest overall reaction rate.
Figure 2.7: Hydrolysis of 4-methoxyphenylacetic acid butyl ester [106]
2.1.1.3
Free-Radical Transfer Systems
PTC can also be used to initiate free radical reactions of long chain organic compounds.
==PAGE:31==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
26
• Starks (1971) [95] presented the use of quaternary ammonium salts to initialize the
oxidations of 1-octene and 1-decene in mixtures of water and benzene or water and
toluene. The oxidizing agent is potassium permanganate (KMnO4), the reaction is
highly exothermic and auto-catalytic after the initialization. The reaction completed
within 0.5 hours, with 91% yield of the carboxylic acids products.
• Kaur et al. (2011) [43] used tetrabutylammonium ((C4H9)4N+) to initialize the
polymerization of styrene, methyl methacrylate, and acrylonitrile in the water-
benzene biphasic mixture. Potassium persulfate is used as an initiator; yields of
homopolymers products of polystyrene (PS), poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA),
and polyacrylonitrile (PAN) are 23%, 8.5%, and 62% respectively.
2.1.2
Existing Modeling Approaches
This section presents models of the PTC systems reported in publications, especially for
those discussed in the previous section.
Process design and analysis via simulation require mathematical models to describe the
physical and chemical equilibria and rate behaviour of a system. In the case of PTC,
any model-based design-analysis tool must deal with the reaction kinetics and equilibria
in two coexisting liquid phases as well as estimate partitioning of many chemical species
(solvents, reactants, products, and PTC). Further, the modeling is often complicated by
a lack of experimental data.
Due to the wide and diverse applicability of phase transfer catalysis, mathematical mod-
eling of these systems is highly crucial for successful implementation. Previously, a simple
data-based model was reported by Samant et al. (2001) [86] for the design of PTC systems.
Piccolo et al. (2012) [79] and Anantpinijwatna et al. (2016) [4] proposed a model-based
framework for the design of reacting systems with phase transfer catalysis, where they
successfully used models for partition coeﬃcients of species in the two co-existing phases
to predict the distributed amounts of PTCs. The main limitation of their model-based
framework was the limitation to chemical systems for which the model parameters had
been obtained. In addition, several other models involving tetraalkylammonium ions in
PTC systems with limited application range have been developed [7, 77].
2.1.2.1
Reaction Models
Landini et al (1978) [56] used simple ﬁrst-order reaction rate law, as shown in Equation
2.1, for describing the halogenations and active ions (including cyanide) displacements
reactions in the biphasic water-chlorobenzene mixture. Vander Zwan and Hartner (1978)
[103] also assume ﬁrst order reaction rate law for the calculations of processes half-lives of
halogenations and acetate displacement processes. Later Dillow et al. (1996) [22] modiﬁed
Landini’s equation for their halogenations in supercritical CO2-acetone system by adding
the reversible term, as shown in Equation 2.2.
rj = kj[S][QX]
(2.1)
rj = kj[QX]([S] −[S]E)
(2.2)
==PAGE:32==
2.1. LIQUID-LIQUID PHASE TRANSFER CATALYSIS
27
where rj is the reaction rate of reaction j, kj is the ﬁrst-order rate constant of reaction
j, [QX] is the concentration of the PTC, and [S] and [S]E are the concentrations of the
substrate at any given time and at equilibrium, respectively.
Yuﬁt and Zinovyev (1999) [108] adopted the enzyme-promoted reaction rate, equation
2.3, for calculating the amount of the halogenated products at any given time.
[P] = k2k3[E]0t
k2 + k3
+ k22[E]0{1 −exp[−(k2 + k3)t]}
(k2 + k3)2
(2.3)
where [P] is the product concentration, [E]0 is the initial concentration of raw material,
t is time, and k2 and k3 are the adjustable rate constants.
Starks and Owens (1973) [96] used the lumped-phase kinetic-equilibrium equation for the
cyanation of simple halide molecules. Their equation is a simpliﬁed pseudo-ﬁrst order
reaction equation:.
ln ( P
P0
) = −( kK
r + K )Q0t
(2.4)
where k is the ﬁrst order rate constant, K is the equilibrium constant, Q0 is the initial
amount of PTC, r is the ratio between active and inactive ions, and P and P0 are the
amounts of product at any time and at the beginning of the reaction respectively.
Yadav and Kadam (2012) [107] have made a detailed analysis of benzoin condensation
process with the assumption that it is controlled by only one rate-determining step; there-
fore, the model turned out to be ﬁrst order:
X
1 −X = kP0NQt
(2.5)
where X is the conversion and N Q is the amount of PTC.
Similarly, Wang et al. (2012) [106] also describe the hydrolysis of 4-methoxyphenylacetic
acid butyl ester by pseudo-ﬁrst order reaction rate equation:
−ln (1 −X) = kt
(2.6)
These reactions equations of the PTC-based systems have simple ﬁrst order, or modiﬁed-
ﬁrst order reaction rate equations. Although the model could match the measured data
fairly well, they have limited application toward the prediction and design of these complex
PTC systems. Moreover, none of the above-mentioned models is included predictive, or
even correlative, thermodynamic models into consideration.
Samant et al. (2004) [87] proposed a design procedure for liquid-liquid phase transfer
catalysis (LL-PTC) systems from process system engineering perspective. The mathe-
matical model is developed for the stirred cell reactor while assuming ideal behaviour of
the PTC phase equilibrium, ﬁrst order reaction rate and a well-mixed organic phase. The
model analysis is done through Damkohler number and ideal partition coeﬃcients. The
guidelines for ﬂowsheet selection, comparison of PTC, and solvent selection recommen-
dation are presented. Although this model is still far from widely applicable with PTC
==PAGE:33==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
28
systems, it gives more information on the eﬀect of the solvent and PTC to the conversion,
partition, and overall reaction rate.
In contrast to the rest of the publications, Piccolo et al. (2012) [79] and Anantpinijwatna
et al. (2016) [4] presented a generic modeling framework that used elementary kinetic rate
equations for kinetic reactions and equilibrium equations for equilibrium reactions. Their
modeling framework could also take into account the diﬀerent reaction rate equations
proposed above by other publications.
2.1.2.2
Phase Equilibrium Models
The calculation of partition coeﬃcient (Pi) is one of the most important features for a
successful application of the constructed model. The partition coeﬃcient is deﬁned as the
ratio of the concentrations of a chemical species in the two phases at equilibrium. Piccolo
et al. [79] used the following equation for calculating partition coeﬃcients:
Pi = γiα
γiβ
(2.7)
where Pi is the partition coeﬃcient of the species i, γiα and γiβ are the activity coeﬃcients
of the species i in the respective phases α and β.
However, most PTC reaction systems models do not include the partition coeﬃcient into
consideration, or omit the calculation by assuming a constant coeﬃcient. As discussed
in the previous section, only Samant et al. (2004) [87] include the partition coeﬃcient
into consideration. But, they assumed ideal behaviour in order to avoid dealing with
complex activity coeﬃcient model. Concerning PTC systems, there is currently only one
predictive model for the activity coeﬃcient calculation available in an open literature:
Anantpinijwatna et al. (2016) [4] developed a new model based on UNIFAC called e-
KT-UNIFAC that expanded the thermodynamic parameter set of UNIFAC to predict
the activity coeﬃcients and partition coeﬃcients for a few PTC systems. However, the
parameter set is expanded only to a few additional species, limiting the application of the
model.
2.2
Liquid-Phase Thermodynamics: Solvation Models
Molecular modeling and simulation has emerged as a powerful and insightful tool for
chemical engineers to accurately evaluate the properties of molecules and materials, map
out various chemical and biochemical phenomena, and design processes based on atomic-
level knowledge pertinent to the system under investigation.
In this context, solvation models are used to introduce solvent eﬀects in the form of solute-
solvent interactions to determine the free energies and potential energies associated with
solutes in solution (liquid phase). However, liquid phase predictions of thermochemistry
and rate constants are not yet widely applied for reactions, as there is no consensus on how
to determine all relevant solvent eﬀects [38]. The result is that there are various models
available to the user, but each having its own speciﬁc advantages and disadvantages. In
all the solvation models, the solutes are treated explicitly, but the solvent eﬀects are
incorporated in diﬀerent ways [39].
==PAGE:34==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
29
Diﬀerent a priori methods have been proposed for the calculation of the solvation free
energy within a quantum mechanical framework; they diﬀer mainly in the representation
of the solvent molecules around the solute: from a large number of solvent molecules to
an inﬁnite dielectric continuum (Figure 2.8).
Figure 2.8: Representation of the solvent from diﬀerent solvation model categories;
from discrete to continuum models. White dots represent molecules or atoms cal-
culated by quantum mechanics, coloured dots by force ﬁeld. Green represents a
dielectric continuum [38]
In Figure 2.8, the diﬀerent approaches that have been considered in order to represent
the solvent in developing solvation models are summarized. There are methods that treat
the solvent explicitly (a,b,c), where the solute is surrounded by a large number of solvent
molecules. In these cases, the solute and solvent can be treated with the same model (a,b)
or with diﬀerent models (c), where the solvent molecules are represented via a classical,
molecular mechanics force ﬁeld, while a quantum view of the solutes is adopted. Another
category is that consisting of methods that treat the solvent implicitly (f); here the solvent
is considered to be a continuum described by a small number of solvent properties and
only the solute is treated with an explicit representation of its molecular and electronic
structure. Finally, there are methods that lie in between these two extremes where only
a limited number of solvent molecules around the solute are treated explicitly either with
molecular mechanics (MM) (d) or with quantum mechanics (QM) (e) and the rest are
treated implicitly [38].
Conceptually, the solvation process can be divided into three steps [76]:
cavitation,
dispersion-repulsion and electrostatics:
∆Gsolv = ∆Gcav + ∆Gvw + ∆Gele
(2.8)
Firstly, a cavity is formed within the solvent to accommodate the solute. The energy
corresponding to the formation of this cavity is known as energy of cavitation, denoted
by ∆Gcav.
Once the solute is in the cavity, dispersion-repulsion (also referred to as
van der Waals, ∆Gvw) forces act between the solute and the solvent molecules. These
two contributions, ∆Gcav and ∆Gvw, are usually referred to as the non-electrostatic
contribution. As the last step, a charge distribution of the solute in the solvent is created
and this is the electrostatic contribution ∆Gele to the solvation free energy. This term
includes two components: the work required to transfer the solute’s charge distribution
==PAGE:35==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
30
from the gas phase to the liquid phase, and the work required for the polarization of the
solute’s charge distribution by the solvent.
2.2.1
Explicit Solvation Models
Explicit solvation models consider the solute surrounded by the solvent molecules, which
are modelled discretely. There is an inﬁnite number of ways in which solvent molecules
can be arranged around the solute and, in order to sample over all possible conformations
and obtain an average value of the solvation free energy and other properties, Monte Carlo
or molecular dynamics algorithms are used.
The molecular interactions in this kind of systems can be represented at three diﬀerent
levels: pure quantum mechanics (QM) (Figure 2.8a), pure classical mechanics (MM)
(Figure 2.8b), and mixed quantum and classical mechanics (QM/MM) (Figure 2.8c),
where the solute is treated with QM but the solvent modelled with a MM force ﬁeld.
QM methods treat both the solute and the solvent at the quantum mechanical level. A
widely-used QM method is the Car-Parrinello method [11]. These methods may be very
accurate, but they are usually too computationally expensive due to the large number
of MC or MD moves required for a suﬃcient sampling of the solvent space.
On the
other hand, it is more common to use pure classical MM methods, where parameterized
force ﬁelds are used to describe molecular interactions. The classical MM treatment is
very useful for providing, not only the free energy of solvation, but also structural and
dynamic information which is diﬃcult to obtain from other techniques [76].
In cases like chemical reactions where changes in the electronic state take place, e.g. bond-
breaking, bond-forming, charge transfer, electronic excitation, MM force ﬁelds are unable
to provide good predictions and QM calculations are necessary. In order to capture as
many solvent eﬀects as possible while limiting the computational cost, QM/MM methods,
that combine QM and MM calculations, have been proposed [59, 91]. A QM/MM method
treats a localized region with QM and the surroundings with MM. QM/MM methods are
widely used when studying biological systems [76, 91]. It is an especially relevant time
for these methods. The 2013 Nobel prize in Chemistry was given to three scientists that
worked on computational studies of biological systems using mainly QM/MM methods
[20, 42].
One of the major limitations of explicit solvation models is the lack of classical force
ﬁeld potentials that are able to satisfactorily reproduce the solvent behaviour, such as
long-range dielectric eﬀects. Other limitations include the parameterization of the force
ﬁeld potentials and, naturally, the challenge of sampling the conﬁgurational space of
all possible solvent molecule positions [39].
Discrete solvation models provide a very
detailed description of the system and their predictions are sometimes in better agreement
with experimental data compared to continuum solvation models [2, 38]. Nevertheless, it
must also be noted that although MM or QM/MM calculations are faster than pure QM
calculations, they are still signiﬁcantly more computationally expensive when compared
to continuum solvation methods or empirical methods.
==PAGE:36==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
31
2.2.2
Implicit Solvation Models
Continuum solvation (or implicit solvation) models treat the solute at the QM level,
whereas the solvent is considered as a uniform polarizable medium. The solute is placed
in a suitably shaped cavity in the medium.
Five aspects diﬀerentiate the continuum
models [39]:
1. How the size and the shape of the cavity are deﬁned.
2. How the cavity/dispersion contribution is calculated.
3. How the dielectric medium is described.
4. How the charge distribution is deﬁned.
5. How the solute is treated (i.e. with QM or MM).
The ﬁrst continuum solvation models developed by Born (1920) [8] were mainly based
on considering the electrostatic eﬀects by characterizing the solvent by a scalar, static
dielectric constant, and on assuming a linear response of the solvent to a perturbing
electric ﬁeld. These kinds of models provide a satisfactory description of the bulk phase,
however, they are not able to represent the ﬁrst-solvation-shell eﬀects, i.e. the eﬀects
occurring in the close area around the solute, as the properties of the solvent molecules
in the ﬁrst-solvation-shell area diﬀer from the solvent properties in the bulk. One of the
approaches that was proposed to tackle this problem and has been widely applied is the
solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) approach [39]. The SASA is deﬁned as the area
traced out by a centre of a ball, whose radius is the eﬀective half width of the ﬁrst solvent
shell, rolling over the surface of a solute. How this area is calculated diﬀers from model
to model [18].
An important concept when referring to solute polarization in solution is the reaction
ﬁeld. The reaction ﬁeld is the electric ﬁeld that the polarized solvent exerts on the solute.
When this is included in the solute Hamiltonian, the electric moments of the solute change,
resulting in further changes in the polarization of the solvent, etc. The approach used to
iterate to self-consistency is called the self-consistent reaction ﬁeld (SCRF) method.
One of the most commonly used methods today is the polarizable continuum model
(PCM) (or DPCM for dielectric PCM) introduced by Miertuˇs et al. (1981) [71] that com-
bines SCRF with a boundary element problem with apparent surface charges (ASC). In
PCM, a van der Waals cavity formed by overlapping spheres with empirically determined
radii is considered. A more recent version of PCM is the integral equation formalism PCM
(IEFPCM) [18], where the ASC are calculated with the use of the electrostatic potential,
instead of the normal component of the electric ﬁeld that is used in DPCM. Another
popular and widely used model is COSMO (conductor-like screening model) developed
by Klamt and Sch¨u¨urmann (1993) [48]. In COSMO, the surrounding medium is described
as a conductor, i.e. it assumes inﬁnite dielectric constant, to determine the ASC, which
then are scaled by a function of the real dielectric constant. Klamt (1995) [45] extended
COSMO to COSMO-RS, where RS stands for real solvents. In COSMO-RS, interactions
between the molecular surfaces of all the molecules in the liquid are modelled using the
screening charge of densities. Starting in 1991, a series of generalized Born-type solvation
models were developed [19, 67], under the name SMx, where x represents the diﬀerent
versions. One of the basic concepts of SMx models that the partitioning of the solvation
free energy into two parts, instead of the three-contribution expression given in Equation
==PAGE:37==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
32
2.8 earlier: the term that accounts for shorter range polarization and non-electrostatic
eﬀects, like cavitation (C), dispersion (D) and changes to the solvent structure (S) caused
by the solute, and the term that accounts for the polarization of the medium, for changes
in the electronic structure of the solute and for changes in the nuclear coordinates.
2.2.3
Hybrid Models or QM/MM/Continuum Models
In order to predict better the interactions between the solute and nearby solvent molecules,
QM/MM/continuum methods represent a number of solvent molecules in the close vicinity
of the solute with MM force ﬁelds and the rest of the solvent treated as a continuum.
This approach is chosen in some cases since the ﬁrst solvent shell molecules exhibit prop-
erties drastically diﬀerent to those of the bulk solvent medium and this may sometimes
result in better predictions [19]. However, this approach increases the number of degrees of
freedom of the calculation and is computationally more expensive than implicit solvation
models, especially as it requires solving for local minima conformations. Such calculations
therefore require statistical sampling to determine the equilibrium system properties.
The issue generally plaguing these models is the precise deﬁnition of the boundary between
the MM and the continuum region that keeps the ﬁrst solvation shell electronic wave-
functions from overlapping with the continuum. QM/MM/continuum methods include
the general liquid optimized boundary (GLOB) model and the solvated macromolecule
boundary potential (SMBP) model developed for biomolecules [39].
2.2.4
Predictive Capabilities of Continuum Solvation Models
Comparing the accuracy of the various solvation models is not a trivial issue [38]. It
is diﬃcult to obtain an estimate of the errors associated with solvation models from
the literature, as authors compare solvation free energy predictions for diﬀerent sets of
solvents. Depending on the solvent set used, some solvent behaviour may not have been
captured in the parameterization of the dielectric continuum solvation models, decreasing
the predictive capability for that particular type of solvent. As a result, solvation models
will perform best for the set of solvents used to parameterize them [32, 50]. A wrong choice
of parameters may also lead to false conclusions [50]. Moreover, the theories used for the
parameterization are diﬀerent for each model; it is very important that the QM method
used should match the method used for the parameterization of the non-electrostatic
terms [50]. Finally, the lack of suﬃcient experimental data to compare with is another
hurdle, as there are systems that are diﬃcult to measure [38].
Ribeiro et al. (2010) [83] used the SM8, SM8AD and SMD solvation models to predict
solvation free energies for the SAMPL2 test set organized by OpenEye Scientiﬁc Software.
It was shown that absolute average errors of 1.3, 2.0 and 2.6 kcal/mol were obtained for
the aqueous free energies of 30 out of 31 compounds, respectively.
Marenich et al. (2009a) [66] introduced the SMD solvation model (the most recent in
the SMx solvation model series where D stands for density). The authors parameterized
the solvation model with a training set of 2821 solvation data. This data included 112
aqueous ionic solvation free energies, 220 solvation free energies for 166 ions in acetonitrile,
methanol and dimethyl sulfoxide, 2346 solvation free energy data points for 318 neutral
solutes in 91 solvents (where 90 solvents are of a non-aqueous nature and the other solvent
==PAGE:38==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
33
is water) and 143 transfer free energies for 93 neutral solutes between water and 15 organic
solvents. It was found that SMD (incorporated in GESOL [65]) exhibited absolute average
errors between 0.6 and 1.0 kcal/mol for solvation free energies of neutral solutes included
in the training set.
Similarly, Marenich et al.
(2009b) [67] introduced the SM8AD solvation model and
claimed that an absolute average error of 0.59 kcal/mol could be achieved on average
for 2560 solvation free energies of aqueous and non-aqueous neutral solutes included in
the training set. The authors conducted a comparison of the SM8AD solvation model im-
plemented in MN-GSM 1, IEF-PCM using UA0 in Gaussian 03, IEF-PCM using UAHF
radii in Gaussian 03 and the Poisson-Boltzmann self-consistent reaction ﬁeld solver in
Jaguar. It was found that the absolute average errors were 1.8, 9.9, 3.8 and 2.7 kcal/mol,
respectively.
The publication was scrutinized by Klamt et al. (2009) [50] and the authors made clear
that one of the major reasons for the poor performance of the other solvation models was
due to them not being parameterized for the solvation free energies tested by Marenich
et al. (2009b) [67]. It was shown that COSMO-RS [48, 45] exhibited an absolute average
error of 0.48 kcal/mol when predicting the solvation free energies of all neutral solutes
for the training set of the SM8 solvation model, which exhibited an absolute average
error of 0.59 kcal/mol. Klamt et al. (2009) [50] also showed that when using the IEF-
PCM solvation model for the MST (Miertuˇs-Scrocco-Tomasi) version [71] (parameterized
only for water, octanol, chloroform and tetrachloromethane), the absolute average error
is 0.64 kcal/mol for non-aqueous solvation and 1.01 kcal/mol for aqueous solvation when
restricted to the subset of experimental data of the solvents used to parameterize the
IEF-PCM model.
With respect to the native purpose of solvation models, i.e., with respect to the prediction
of the free energies of solvation, COSMO-RS in its COSMOtherm implementation has
currently proven to be the most accurate [50, 46]. The mean unsigned deviation of 0.48
kcal/mol achieved on a dataset of 2436 solvation energies is considered to be an upper
limit of the accuracy because the experimental data most likely also include a considerable
contribution to the error [46].
It is diﬃcult to compare the true predictive capability of all implicit and explicit methods,
but as was demonstrated in Nicholls et al. (2008) [75], implicit methods are less expensive
and their predictive capability may not be far oﬀfrom explicit approaches. The low sol-
vation free energy errors exhibited by COSMO-RS model results in it being the preferred
solvation model to predict the reaction rate constants. Therefore, using an implicit sol-
vation model (such as COSMO-RS) in combination with experimental veriﬁcation, may
result in quantitative predictions of liquid phase thermodynamics.
2.2.5
GC Methods Vs. COSMO-RS
As mentioned already, lack of thermodynamic parameters for activity coeﬃcient models
(e.g. NRTL) poses a severe limitation to model the reaction system in commercial process
simulators such as Aspen Plus. Property estimation, via group-contribution methods such
as UNIFAC, is hindered by the unavailability of group interaction parameters for sulfur-
based groups. Tetrabutylammonium bromide, tetrabutylammonium hydrofulﬁde, benzyl
mercaptan, etc., are some of the compounds that are diﬃcult or impossible to model
==PAGE:39==
2.2. LIQUID-PHASE THERMODYNAMICS: SOLVATION MODELS
34
using activity coeﬃcient or GC models. Therefore, it is imperative to obtain experimental
thermodynamic data or to have a predictive thermodynamic model that requires fewer
parameters than activity-coeﬃcient models.
COSMO-RS is an alternative to structure-interpolating group contribution methods such
as UNIFAC. In the COMSO-RS model, a liquid is regarded as a corresponding ensem-
ble of pairwise-interacting surface segments whose charges are obtained from quantum
mechanical COSMO calculations. A self-consistent solution of the partition function for
calculating the chemical potential is enabled by applying the free segment approximation,
in which a molecule’s surface is divided into segments, which can be paired independently
[45]. Despite the loss of steric information of the system, COSMO-RS provides reliable
results for small molecules as shown already.
It has become very popular and widely used in chemical engineering for all kinds of
phase equilibrium predictions (vapor liquid, liquid–liquid, solid–liquid) and for the eﬃcient
screening of solvents and additives for chemical process optimization [46]. The strength of
COSMO-RS compared to the more conventional chemical engineering tools, such as group
contribution methods, is its broad homogeneous applicability from simple compounds to
complicated, multifunctional, or novel chemical compounds.
It has also been applied
successfully used in the accurate prediction of reaction equilibria and reaction kinetics.
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
Methods
This chapter presents the solution procedure to model a generic PTC system. In the
ﬁrst section, the overall framework used and the modeling approach are presented. In
the second section, the speciﬁc methods and models employed, along with the solution
algorithm, are discussed.
3.1
PTC Modeling Framework
This section outlines a step-by-step procedure to formulate and solve a PTC modeling
problem is introduced. This procedure is presented in a general aspect that is independent
of the thermodynamic model used.
Anantpinijwatna et al. (2016) [4] developed a systematic biphasic modelling framework
based on model generation method of Cameron and Gani [10]. The framework serves to
reduce the complexity of the modeling problem into a series sub-problems. A schematic of
the various steps in the framework can be seen in Figure 3.1. The process modelling starts
with deﬁning the modelling objectives, followed by model construction, model analysis
and model solution according to a derived numerical solution strategy. The model equa-
tions are classiﬁed in terms of balance equations, constitutive equations and conditional
equations.
Prior to biphasic model construction, information on the reactive system is collected. The
involved chemical species can be classiﬁed into homogeneous species (those that stay in
only one phase) and heterogeneous species (those that partition into both phases). Next,
the chemical species present can be classiﬁed in terms of solvent, reactive (reactant and
product) and inert species. The dissociation of chemical species into ions are considered
only for the aqueous phase. Physicochemical properties, such as vapour pressure, density,
viscosity, Gibbs free energy of formation, heat of formation, standard melting and boiling
temperature, etc., can be retrieved from a database, estimated by an appropriate group
contribution method such as the Constantinou and Gani method [15], or calculated using
a combination of quantum chemical and continuum solvation methods.
In the model construction step, constitutive equations are collected by selecting the ap-
propriate property models for computing species partitioning and equilibrium extents of
reaction. Next, reactions are classiﬁed into those that are kinetic-controlled, those that
are equilibrium-controlled, and those that are mixed. If the transfers of the heterogeneous
chemical species between the phases are not spontaneous, mass transfer eﬀects are also
considered. The balance equations are generated based on the reaction system informa-
tion and the reactor type (CSTR, batch or fed-batch). The constitutive and conditional
equations are combined into modules for diﬀerent systems and modelling objectives. After
35
==PAGE:41==
3.1. PTC MODELING FRAMEWORK
36
Figure 3.1: Framework for modelling of biphasic reaction systems [4]
==PAGE:42==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
37
a model consisting of equations from the three modules has been generated, it is validated
for compatibility with the available data before further use in design and analysis of the
biphasic reaction system. If the model fails the validation test, the collected data is used
to ﬁne-tune the model parameters. The ﬁnal result is a problem-speciﬁc model generated
through diﬀerent combinations of the equation from the three modules shown in Figure
3.1. A more thorough description of the various decision-making steps in each module
can be found in Anantpinijwatna et al. (2016) [4].
3.2
Model Selection and Modiﬁed Framework
In the present work, a systematic PTC modeling framework that is applicable to most
PTC systems is presented. Although it is based on the one described in the previous
section, the proposed framework does not rely on any experimental data and is, therefore,
truly predictive. In addition, experimental data can be used to improve the predictive
capabilities and accuracy of the modeling framework.
Figure 3.2: Length and time scales covered in a generic multiscale approach [14]
The methods used to calculate the molecular and mixture properties largely determine
the accuracy and performance of the PTC modeling framework. In Figure 3.1, module 1
deals with these methods to describe the physical and chemical equilibrium of the system.
The solution algorithm presented here employs sequential multiscale modeling by using
diﬀerent tools for diﬀerent scales of time and space (shown in Figure 3.2) to model and
predict the behavior of the PTC system. Although modules 2 and 3 remain largely the
same as deﬁned in Anantpinijwatna et al. (2016) [4], this algorithm changes the methods
used in module 1 to make the framework much more generic in terms of its application.
The algorithm is illustrated in Figure 3.3. With Python as the high-level interface, three
diﬀerent tools are employed at three diﬀerent levels of space and time as follows:
• Molecular/electronic level: Turbomole [1]
• Transport and reaction thermodynamics level: COSMOtherm [23]
==PAGE:43==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
38
Figure 3.3: Integrated and Multiscale Modeling Scheme
• Reactor level: Pyomo
3.2.1
Turbomole
Electronic structure calculations are performed in Turbomole with density functional
theory to obtain quantum mechanical gas phase energies or ground-state energies in a
conductor and generate charge density surfaces of the molecules in the system. In the
present work, the quantum chemical calculations are performed using density functional
theory with BP-TZVP parameterization, i.e., Becke-Perdew (BP) functional with triple-
zeta valence plus polarization (TZVP) function basis set; this is to ensure a seamless
integration with COSMOtherm at the next level.
The ground state energy of a molecule in a conductor is obtained by performing a geometry
optimization calculation.
To perform this calculation, Turbomole requires the atomic
coordinates of a molecule as input. This can be achieved either by providing the canonical
SMILES for the molecular species or by generating a set of Cartesian coordinates for
the desired molecule using special molecular design software (e.g., Avogadro [33]) and
converting this set into Turbomole format.
The geometry optimization calculation is
then performed using DFT with BP86-TZVP basis set. The optimization employs an
iterative procedure based on gradients of the current and, if available, previous iterations.
In its normal mode of operation, the shell script jobex controls and executes automatic
optimization of molecular geometry parameters. It will cycle through the direct SCF,
gradient and force relaxation programs and stop if either the maximum number of cycles
is reached or the convergence criteria (change in the total energy, maximum norm of the
gradient) are fulﬁlled. For COSMO calculations, an output ﬁle in .COSMO format is
generated.
==PAGE:44==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
39
The underlying quantum chemical model, COSMO [48], is an eﬃcient variant of dielectric
continuum solvation methods. In COSMO calculations, the solute molecules are calcu-
lated in a virtual conductor environment. In such an environment, the solute molecule
induces a polarization charge density σ on the interface between the molecule and the
conductor, i.e., on the molecular surface. These charges act back on the solute and gen-
erate a more polarized electron density than in vacuum. During the quantum chemical
self-consistency algorithm, the solute molecule is thus converged to its energetically opti-
mal state in a conductor with respect to electron density. The molecular geometry can
be optimized using the same methods for calculations in vacuum. The time consuming
QC calculation has to be performed only once for each molecule of interest.
Figure 3.4: Examples of screening charge density surfaces calculated in COSMO
[48]
3.2.2
COSMOtherm
This information is supplied to COSMOtherm which uses COSMO-RS continuum sol-
vation model to describe the molecular interactions and calculate chemical potentials of
molecules in liquid. The chemical potential diﬀerences of these molecules subsequently en-
able the eﬃcient calculation of nearly all liquid-phase equilibrium properties. The course
of a COSMO-RS calculation is illustrated in Figure 3.5.
COSMO-RS is an implicit solvent model which uses quantum chemical atomic charges to
create a molecular surface consisting of segments with a screening charge. The surface
contact interactions included in COSMO-RS calculations are electrostatic interactions,
dispersion and hydrogen bonding. The numerical solution involves a partition sum of all
interactions between solute and solvent segments, leading to the calculation of chemical
potentials of all components as a function of temperature and concentrations. Conse-
quently, this provides access to almost the entire liquid-phase equilibrium thermodynam-
ics, i.e., activity coeﬃcients, partition coeﬃcients, solubilities, free energies and many
more. In fact, COSMO-RS is ideally suited for PTC systems that heavily rely on the
accuracy of partition coeﬃcients, free energies of molecules at liquid-liquid interface and
free energies of solvation; it has currently been proven to be the most accurate model for
the calculation of solvation energies [46].
3.2.2.1
Theory
The theory behind COSMO-RS is brieﬂy described here [45, 49, 46]. The polarization
charge density of the COSMO calculation (also called screening charge density), which
==PAGE:45==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
40
Figure 3.5: Flow chart of a COSMOtherm calculation [46]
==PAGE:46==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
41
is a good local descriptor of the molecular surface polarity, is used to extend the model
towards ’real solvents’ [49, 47]. The (3D) polarization density distribution on the surface
of each molecule i is converted into a distribution-function, the so called σ-proﬁle pi(σ),
which gives the relative amount of surface with polarity σ on the surface of the molecule.
The σ-proﬁle for the entire solvent of interest S, which might be a mixture of several
compounds, pS(σ) can be built by adding the pi(σ) of the components weighted by their
mole fraction xi in the mixture [45].
pS(σ) =
X
i∈S
xipi(σ)
(3.1)
Electrostatics (Emisfit) and hydrogen bonding (EHB) are described as functions of the
polarization charges of two interacting surface segments σ and σ
′ or σacceptor and σdonor,
if the segments are located on a hydrogen bond donor or acceptor atom. Electrostatic
energy arises from the misﬁt of screening charge densities σ and σ
′, as illustrated below.
The less speciﬁc van der Waals (EvdW ) interactions are taken into account in a slightly
more approximate way [45].
Emisfit(σ, σ
′) = aeff
α
′
2 (σ + σ
′)2
(3.2)
EHB = aeffcHB min(0; min(0; σdonor + σHB) max(0; σacceptor −σHB))
(3.3)
EvdW = aeff(τvdW + τ
′
vdW )
(3.4)
These energy equations contain ﬁve adjustable parameters, an interaction parameter α
′,
the eﬀective contact area aeff, the hydrogen bond strength cHB, the threshold for hydrogen
bonding σHB, and the element-speciﬁc vdW interaction parameter τvdW and τ
′
vdW . In
order to take the temperature dependency of EHB and EvdW into account, temperature
dependent factors are applied, each with one adjustable parameter.
The link between the microscopic surface interaction energies and the macroscopic ther-
modynamic properties of a liquid is provided by statistical thermodynamics. Since in the
COSMO-RS view, all molecular interactions consist of local pair wise interactions of sur-
face segments, the statistical averaging can be done in the ensemble of interacting surface
pieces (illustrated in Figure 3.6) [23]. The molecular interactions in the solvent are fully
described by the normalized distribution function pS(σ) and the chemical potential of the
surface segments is given by [45]:
µS(σ) = −RT
aeff
ln [
Z
pS(σ) exp (aeff
RT (µS(σ
′) −Emisfit(σ, σ
′) −EHB(σ, σ
′)))dσ
′]
(3.5)
The σ-potential µS(σ) is a measure for the aﬃnity of the system S to a surface of polarity
σ.
This is an implicit equation and, therefore, must be solved iteratively.
The vdW
energy, which does not appear in the equation, is added to the reference energy in solution
(energy of the COSMO calculation). The chemical potential (partial Gibbs free energy) of
compound i in the system S (the solvent) can now be calculated by integration of µS(σ)
over the surface of the compound [45]:
==PAGE:47==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
42
Figure 3.6: Illustration of statistical thermodynamic procedure to calculate chem-
ical potential of a surface segment [23]
µi
S = µi
C,S +
Z
pi(σ)µS(σ)dσ
(3.6)
To take into account size and shape diﬀerences of the molecules in the system an additional
combinatorial term, µi
C,S, which depends on the area and volume of all compounds in
the mixture and three adjustable parameters is added. A more thorough description of
COSMO-RS theory can be found in Klamt (1995) [45], Klamt et al. (1998) [49], Eckert
and Klamt (2002) [23], and Klamt (2018) [46].
3.2.2.2
Phase Equilibrium
The LIQ EX option allows for the automatic computation of a multi-component multi-
phase liquid-liquid extraction equilibrium. This option computes the mole or mass based
equilibrium partition of an arbitrary number of compounds between two (or more) liquid
phases. Phases I and II are assumed to be immiscible. Using a given starting concentra-
tion in the two phases, COSMOtherm computes the aﬃnity of each compound i (neutral
as well as ions) to each of the two phases by means of the thermodynamic equilibrium
partition constant P ∗
i [49]:
P ∗
i = exp [(µI
i −µII
i )
RT
]
(3.7)
where R is the universal gas constant, T is the temperature, and µI
i and µII
i
are the
chemical potentials of compound i in phase I and phase II, respectively. Two constraint
equations are applied: mass conservation and charge neutrality.
Based on these con-
straints. the equations for partition coeﬃcient of all the species in the system are solved
in an iterative self-consistent manner until the concentrations of the two phases do not
change any more. At this point, the system converges to a thermodynamic and mass
equilibrium of two neutral phases.
The activity coeﬃcients and mole fractions of each species in the two phases are related
to its partition coeﬃcient by:
==PAGE:48==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
43
P ∗
i = xI
i
xII
i
= γII
i
γI
i
(3.8)
where x refers to the mole fraction and γ refers to the activity coeﬃcient.
Activity
coeﬃcients can also be computed separately using the option gamma for all the species
in a given phase.
3.2.2.3
Reaction Equilibrium
Using the keyword reaction, chemical equilibrium for a given system can be computed.
This option computes the reaction equilibrium constants and Gibbs free energies. The
mole-fraction-based, apparent equilibrium constant Kx of the reaction can be computed
from the Gibbs free energy of reaction as follows:
Kx = exp (−∆G
RT )
(3.9)
where ∆G is the Gibbs free energy of the reaction given by:
∆G =
X
i
νiGi
(3.10)
Here, νi is the stoichiometric coeﬃcients of species i (positive for products and negative
for reactants) and Gi is the total Gibbs free energy of the compound in the given solution.
Gi is comprised of two contributions: a QM contribution calculated using a QM methods
in Turbomole and a COSMOtherm contribution also called solvation energy [23, 45].
Turbomole and COSMOtherm together constitute module 1 in Figure 3.1.
3.2.3
Pyomo
At the reactor/process level, the properties calculated in COSMOtherm are then used to
numerically model the system dynamics over a period. This is achieved using the generic
equations concerning physical and chemical equilibrium, transfer and reaction kinetics,
and balance equations. Pyomo consolidates all the collected data, formulates the model
equations, constructs the model and, consequently, solves it.
3.2.3.1
Model Equations
Part 1: Physical and Chemical Equilibrium
Once the calculations in Turbomole and COSMOtherm are completed, the collected pa-
rameters are transferred to Pyomo. For neutral species, physical equilibrium is deﬁned
by Equation 3.8 in Section 3.2.2.2. It can be rewritten as:
Pi = xorg
i
xaq
i
= γaq
i
γorg
i
(3.11)
==PAGE:49==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
44
where Pi is the partition coeﬃcient of a species, org refers to the organic phase, aq refers
to the aqueous phase and i refers to relevant molecular species. In contrast, for ionic
species, the equation for phase equilibrium is deﬁned as:
xorg
i
= 0
(3.12)
For chemical equilibrium reactions, the model equations are deﬁned based on the equi-
librium constant calculated in COSMOtherm. The equation for a mole fraction based
constant is given by:
Kx,j =
Q(xp
i )νi,j
Q(xr
i )νi,j
(3.13)
where Kx,j is the mole fraction based equilibrium constant for a reaction j, xp
i is the mole
fraction of the relevant product (p) species i, xr
i is the mole fraction of the reactant (r)
species i, and νi,j refers to the stoichiometric coeﬃcient of the species i in the reaction
j.
Similarly, in the case of an activity-based chemical equilibrium constant Ka,j, the
equation becomes:
Ka,j =
Q(xp
i γp
i )νi
Q(xr
i γr
i )νi
(3.14)
Part 2: Kinetics of Phase Transfer and Chemical Reaction
Not all mass transfer and chemical reaction mechanisms are equilibrium-controlled. For
those controlled or limited by kinetics (transfer or reaction), relevant rate constants must
be obtained from experiments or estimated using appropriate methods. Mass transfer
coeﬃcients can be estimated using the correlations between Sherwood, Schmidt, and
Reynolds numbers (e.g., those reported by Kumar and Hartland (1999) [54]). Reaction
rate constants can be estimated using quantum chemical and solvation models; if an exact
or approximate transition state is known (i.e., if the mechanism is fairly understood), the
rate constant can be obtained by computing the energy barrier to the transition state.
However, in the absence of experimental data, rate equations can only be described by
elementary laws.
Once the mass transfer coeﬃcient is known, the generic equation for transfer kinetics can
be established as:
ri = kL,iS(xaq
i −xorg
i
Pi
)
(3.15)
where ri is the rate of transfer of species i from the aqueous phase into the organic phase,
kL,i is the mass transfer coeﬃcient for the species, and S is the eﬀective interface area
per volume.
In the case of reaction kinetics, the generic equation can be formulated based on non-
elementary reaction rate law as follows:
rj = kj
Y
(Cr
i γr
i )εi,j
(3.16)
==PAGE:50==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
45
where rj is the rate of reaction j, Cr
i is the concentration of the reactant (r) species
i and εi,j is the order of reaction j w.r.t species i. If the reaction follows elementary
kinetics, εi,j would equal νi,j. Other forms of rate equations can also be considered based
on experimental data.
Part 3: Balance Equations
There are two types of balance equations in a PTC system: material balance and charge
balance. These equations depend on the type of reactor being modeled [25]. Two most
common types of reactors are batch and continuous ﬂow. While the equations for a batch
process are written in terms of amounts (moles, mass, volume, etc.), those for a continuous
process are written in terms of ﬂow rates of the amounts.
Let us consider the generic equations for a batch reactor. Since ionic species are a deﬁnite
occurrence in PTC systems, a generic equation for charge neutrality must be established:
X
i
niei = 0
(3.17)
where ni and ei refer the moles and charge of ionic species i in the solution.
Material balances for each species i depend on the extent ξj of each reaction j in which
the species in involved. For kinetic reactions, the equation for ξj is deﬁned as:
˙ξj = dξj
dt = rjV
(3.18)
where V is the volume of the phase in which the reaction takes place. The generic material
balance each species i can then be formulated as:
norg
i
+ naq
i
= n0
i +
X
j
νi,jξj
(3.19)
where n0
i is the total number of initial moles of species i in both the phases combined.
Needless to say, equations deﬁning the relationships between mole fractions, moles and
concentrations must also be added to the model. As mentioned already, the same generic
equations can be formulated for a continuous stirred tank reactor by replacing the amounts
with ﬂow rates in all the equations above.
3.2.4
Solution Algorithm
The model is solved in Pyomo which is a Python-based optimization modeling language.
A dynamic programming approach is employed and the resulting nonlinear model is
solved using a large-scale nonlinear programming solver called IPOPT [105] along with
HSL MA97 linear subroutine [99].
Figure 3.7 shows the generic computational algorithm presented here for solving the dif-
ferential algebraic equations of a PTC system.
• Step 1: Specify known variables and parameters (initial amounts, temperature, etc.)
==PAGE:51==
3.2. MODEL SELECTION AND MODIFIED FRAMEWORK
46
• Step 2: Calculate the other required parameters (partition coeﬃcients, activity
coeﬃcients, reaction equilibrium constants, etc.) using COSMO and COSMO-RS
• Step 3: Initialize time and extents of reactions
• Step 4: Specify time period for the model
– Step 4.1: Solve equilibrium and balance equations implicitly to convergence
while updating the necessary parameters using COSMO-RS between iterations
– Step 4.2: Solve diﬀerent equations for the current time step
– Step 4.3: Adjust the relevant extents of reactions and time for the next time
step
• Step 5: Check if the time is lower than the speciﬁed period
– If yes, redo steps 4.1-4.3
– If no, terminate the calculation
Figure 3.7: Solution Algorithm for the Modiﬁed PTC Modeling Framework
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4
Case-Speciﬁc Implementation
This chapter presents the implementation of the modiﬁed modeling framework developed
in the previous chapter towards a case study as mentioned in Section 1.3.
4.1
Overall Process Summary
The overarching process ﬂowsheet is divided into three general sections as shown in Figure
4.1:
1. H2S capture in an absorption column
2. H2S conversion in a biphasic reactor
3. Downstream separation-puriﬁcation sequence
Figure 4.1: Schematic Representation of the Overall Process
In the absorption column, H2S-containing sour gas stream is put into contact with a coun-
tercurrent stream of aqueous methyldiethanolamine (MDEA); H2S is chemically absorbed
into the liquid stream while sweetened natural gas leaves at the top of the column. The
aqueous stream containing H2S, along with an organic solvent containing benzyl chloride
(i.e. the required material to react with sulﬁde ions in H2S-rich aqueous solution), is
then sent into a biphasic reactor to produce benzyl mercaptan and dibenzyl sulﬁde via
47
==PAGE:53==
4.2. PTC SYSTEM
48
a phase transfer catalyst. In the ﬁnal ﬂowsheet section, the aqueous phase is separated
and recycled to the absorption column, while the products are separated from the organic
phase which is recycled into the reactor.
The present work only focuses on one part of the ﬂowsheet in Figure 4.1: biphasic reactor,
where phase transfer catalysis takes place.
4.2
PTC System
As noted already, the rich amine stream exiting at the bottom of the absorber is directed
into a reactor for simultaneous extraction and conversion of H2S to benzyl mercaptan
(BM) and dibenzyl sulﬁde (DBS) via PTC in a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR,
Figure 4.2). While the rich amine makes up the aqueous phase, an equal volume of toluene
containing set amounts of benzyl chloride (BC) and a tetrabutylammonium (Q+) salt
(here QBr) comprises the organic phase. The equilibrium and kinetic reactions presumed
to occur in this biphasic system are given below.
Figure 4.2: A Simpliﬁed Illustration of the PTC Reactor
Organic Phase:
QSH + BC −−⇀
↽−−QCl + BM
(4.1)
QSQ + 2 BC −−→2 QCl + DBS
(4.2)
BM + BC −−→DBS + HCl
(4.3)
==PAGE:54==
4.3. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
49
Aqueous Phase:
2 H2O −−⇀
↽−−H3O+ + OH−
(4.4)
MDEAH+ + H2O −−⇀
↽−−MDEA + H3O+
(4.5)
H2S + H2O −−⇀
↽−−HS−+ H3O+
(4.6)
HS−+ H2O −−⇀
↽−−S2−+ H3O+
(4.7)
QBr + HS−−−⇀
↽−−QSH + Br−
(4.8)
QCl + HS−−−⇀
↽−−QSH + Cl−
(4.9)
2 QBr + S2−−−⇀
↽−−QSQ + 2 Br−
(4.10)
2 QCl + S2−−−⇀
↽−−QSQ + 2 Cl−
(4.11)
HBr + H2O −−⇀
↽−−H3O+ + Br−
(4.12)
HCl + H2O −−⇀
↽−−H3O+ + Cl−
(4.13)
QBr −−⇀
↽−−Q+ + Br−
(4.14)
QCl −−⇀
↽−−Q+ + Cl−
(4.15)
The PT catalysts, QBr & QCl, react with the inorganic sulﬁde anions in the aqueous
phase to produce the active catalyst species, QSH and QSQ. These active catalysts species
partition into the organic phase transporting the inorganic anion (HS–) to participate in
the nucleophilic substitution reactions with BC. The design speciﬁcations, shown in Table
4.1, for the reactor are taken from the available experimental data [93]. However, the data
reported is not comprehensive. Hence, the incomplete kinetic rate model for the organic
phase formation of DBS (reactions 4.2 & 4.3) and the reactions for the aqueous phase
formation of QSQ (reactions 4.10 & 4.11) are neglected to assess the feasibility of this
concept.
Table 4.1: Reactor Design Speciﬁcations
Parameter
Description
Speciﬁcation
BC/sulﬁde
Ratio of initial molarities of BC and sul-
ﬁde
1.73
QCl/sulﬁde
Ratio of initial molarities of QCl and sul-
ﬁde
0.1
Vaq/Vorg
Ratio of initial volumes of aqueous and or-
ganic phases
1
T
Temperature
333 K
4.3
Model Construction
The ﬁrst step of the framework is gathering system information. The reactor type and the
involved species are presented in the previous section. The classiﬁcations of the involved
species are shown in Table 4.2. Since there are no kinetic reactions considered, the model
equations for reactions are all based on chemical equilibrium. Since Singh et al. (2016)
[93] found that there are no mass transfer limitations beyond a certain stirring rate,
perfect mixing between phases is assumed. For each species in the system, geometric
optimization calculations are performed in Turbomole to obtain their screening charge
==PAGE:55==
4.3. MODEL CONSTRUCTION
50
density proﬁles. These proﬁles are then transferred to COSMOtherm to obtain partition
coeﬃcients, activity coeﬃcients and chem equilibrium constants, which are all parameters
for the PTC model.
Table 4.2: Classiﬁcation of the Involved Species
Chemical Species
Reactive
Solvent
Dissociation (in H2O)
H2O
Yes
Yes
Yes
Toluene
No
Yes
No
BM
Yes
No
No
BC
Yes
No
No
QSH
Yes
No
Yes
QBr
Yes
No
Yes
QCl
Yes
No
Yes
MDEA
Yes
No
No
H2S
Yes
No
Yes
HBr
Yes
No
Yes
HCl
Yes
No
Yes
HS–
Yes
No
Yes
S2–
Yes
No
No
MDEAH+
Yes
No
Yes
Br–
Yes
No
No
Cl–
Yes
No
No
H3O+
Yes
No
No
OH–
Yes
No
No
Q+
Yes
No
No
In part 1, physical and chemical equilibrium equations are deﬁned according to Eqs. 3.11,
3.12, 3.13 and 3.14. There are 19 chemical species and 11 reactions (4.1–4.15 excluding 4.2,
4.3, 4.10 and 4.11); therefore, there will be 19 equations describing phase equilibrium, one
for each species, and 11 equations describing reaction equilibrium, one for each reaction.
Part 2 of the modiﬁed framework is skipped since no kinetics are considered. In part 3,
balance equations are established. Since the reactor type is CSTR, these equations must
be in terms of ﬂow rates.
• The charge neutrality equation is deﬁned as:
X
i
˙niei = 0
(4.16)
where ˙ni is the molar ﬂow rate and ei is the molecular charge for the six ionic species
i in the aqueous phase.
• The mass balance equations are deﬁned as:
˙norg
i
+ ˙naq
i
= ˙n0
i +
X
j
νi,j ˙ξj
(4.17)
where ˙n refer to molar ﬂow rates of the species and ˙ξ refer to extents of reactions
in units of moles/time.
==PAGE:56==
4.4. SOLUTION STRATEGY
51
4.4
Solution Strategy
The process model for this particular case is solved according to the following strategy:
1. Calculate the gas-phase and COSMO energies of every component in Turbomole.
2. Specify the initial amount of the involved chemical species and set the extents of
reactions to zero.
3. Using Python as the interface, at time t = 0 and temperature T = 333 K:
(a) Input the COSMO ﬁles to COSMOtherm via Python:
i. Solve for phase equilibrium – to get moles, mole fractions and partition
coeﬃcients of the equilibrated phases.
ii. Calculate activity coeﬃcients using the mole fractions obtained in step i
above.
iii. Calculate reaction equilibrium constants using the mole fractions obtained
in step i above.
(b) Transfer all the data (parameters and initial values of variables) to Pyomo:
i. Solve the partition and reaction equilibrium and mole balances together
with P, γ and K as parameters and n, x and ξ as variables.
ii. If (xnew–xold) ≤tolerance, the model is solved. If not, adjust the values of
the species composition in both the phases to the newly calculated values
and restart at step 3(a). This procedure solves all the model equations
implicitly until the system is converged to true equilibrium.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Analysis & Discussion
In the previous chapter, the model for the PTC system under discussion has been for-
mulated.
The constructed model has to be evaluated in terms of the eﬀectiveness of
the solution strategy. This chapter presents and analyzes the results obtained from the
application of the modeling framework to the case study.
5.1
Phase Partitioning
From the phase equilibrium calculations in COSMOtherm, aﬃnities of each species in the
system to each of the two phases can be understood. To this end, the partition coeﬃcient
values calculated in the ﬁrst iteration of the implicit solution method are listed in Table
5.1.
Table 5.1: Partition Behavior Characterization of the System Species
Chemical Species
Partition Coeﬃcient
Preferred Phase
H2O
0.06
aqueous
Toluene
1104.57
organic
BM
1040.48
organic
BC
912.15
organic
QSH
100.86
organic
QBr
26.82
organic
QCl
24.31
organic
MDEA
0.44
aqueous
H2S
10.34
organic
HBr
6.45
organic
HCl
1.42
organic
HS–
0
aqueous
S2–
0
aqueous
MDEAH+
0.21
aqueous
Br–
0
aqueous
Cl–
0
aqueous
H3O+
0
aqueous
OH–
0
aqueous
Q+
1.09 × 109
organic
A partition coeﬃcient greater than 1 implies a relatively higher aﬃnity towards the organic
phase, while a value less than 1 implies a relatively higher aﬃnity towards the aqueous
phase.
In this context, most values in Table 5.1 are not surprising.
Neutral species
52
==PAGE:58==
5.2. REACTION ENERGY BARRIERS
53
generally prefer the organic phase, while ionic species heavily prefer the aqueous phase.
The main reactant and product in the organic phase reaction, benzyl chloride and benzyl
mercaptan, are heavily partitioned into the organic phase. This provides for a cleaner
product separation in the downstream puriﬁcation processes. The three catalyst species
(QSH, QBr and QCl) mildy prefer the organic phase. Among the three, the active catalyst
form of QSH exhibits about four times higher aﬃnity to the organic phase than the two
inactive catalyst species. This enables the preferential partition of the necessary active
form into the organic phase to undergo the reaction to form the required product BM.
The partition coeﬃcients of MDEA and MDEAH+ show that they would be present closer
to the interface between the two phases while still staying on the aqueous side of it. The
single outlier in the tabulated data concerns the partitioning of the Q+ ion—Q here refers
to tetrabutylammonium. Even thought the high value of its partition coeﬃcient seems
counter-intuitive at ﬁrst glance (since it is an ion), it must be noted that the charge density
of this ion at any position is generally low due the fairly long hydrocarbon chains. Nearly
95% of its molecular mass is hydrophobic, which explains its high partition coeﬃcient. It
is fair to assume that the Q+ ion is highly surface active.
5.2
Reaction Energy Barriers
There are two vital reaction processes for the successful application of PTC to this system:
• Formation of benzyl mercaptan in the organic phase
• Formation of active catalyst species QSH in the aqueous phase
Formation of Benzyl Mercaptan
This process is described by the following reaction:
QSH + BC −−⇀
↽−−QCl + BM
(5.1)
The Gibbs free energy of this reaction is calculated for the organic phase composition at
physical equilibrium in the ﬁrst iteration. Using COSMOtherm, this energy value in the
organic phase is found to be −92.7 kJ mol−1. This implies that the main reaction in the
system is thermodynamically favorable and spontaneous.
Formation of Active Catalyst Species
This process is described by two reactions, one from QBr to QSH and the other from QCl
to QSH:
QBr + HS−−−⇀
↽−−QSH + Br−
(5.2)
QCl + HS−−−⇀
↽−−QSH + Cl−
(5.3)
It must be noted that there is no QCl present at the start of the reaction. It is formed
during the production of BM in the organic phase. Therefore, the reaction with QCl
becomes relevant only as the iterations go up in the implicit solution method. Gibbs free
==PAGE:59==
5.3. MODEL PERFORMANCE
54
energies of these reactions are also calculated for the aqueous phase composition at phys-
ical equilirium in the ﬁrst iteration. The values are found to be 33.9 and 16.9 kJ mol−1,
respectively. This implies that there are energy barriers involved in the formation of the
necessary, active catalyst species. However, it must be noted that these energy values are
calculated in isolation. In a PTC system, these reactions occur simultaneously with the
organic phase reaction and phase transfer phenomena. As noted in the previous section,
QSH has four times higher aﬃnity to the organic phase. This would shift the equilibrium
towards the side of the products in reactions 5.2 and 5.3 above. In addition, the energy
released in reaction 5.1 in the organic phase is nearly twice as much as the required en-
ergy input for the two aqueous phase reactions. This could also potentially play a role in
promoting the reactions toward the formation of QSH.
5.3
Model Performance
During the implicit solution procedure, the model fails to converge to an acceptable or
optimal solution. The diﬀerence in acceptable variable tolerances between COSMO-RS
and IPOPT (in Pyomo) seem to be the cause of this failure. The model successfully com-
pletes the ﬁrst iteration, but the equilibrium convergence tolerance is not met. Therefore,
the obtained ﬁnal variable values are sent into the second iteration for updated variable
initialization to implicitly re-solve the model. However, if the ﬁnal variable values of the
ﬁrst iteration aren’t obtained at a high tolerance criterion of 10−16 in Pyomo, the second
iteration fails in COSMOtherm, i.e, COSMO-RS calculations for physical equilibrium do
not converge. On the other hand, if the high tolerance criterion is applied in Pyomo, all
required COSMOtherm calculations converge, but Pyomo fails to ﬁnd an optimal solution
for the resulting model equations.
The ﬁrst iteration found a 23% conversion of benzyl chloride to benzyl mercaptan. The
ﬁnal conversion is expected to be quite high if the convergence issue is solved.
The
current hypothesis for the failure of the PTC framework to the system under study is the
extremely low values for mole fractions and moles for certain species in the system; some of
these values are near or lower than the high tolerance criterion of 10−16 mentioned above.
This skews the results of each iteration and, subsequently, fails to meet the numerical
convergence criteria of either COSMOtherm or Pyomo/IPOPT in the later iterations.
Due to time constraints related to the duration of a Master’s thesis, the issue could not
be explored further.
==PAGE:60==
Conclusion
A rigorous multiscale modeling framework to describe the behavior of a phase transfer
catalysis system has been developed. The framework incorporates a series of computa-
tional tools covering diﬀerent scales of time and space in a sequential/dynamic modeling
approach. The current implementation oﬀers great advantages over the previously devel-
oped modeling framework reported in Anantpinijwatna et al. (2016) [4] and Piccolo et
al. (2012) [79]. Due to the incorporation of quantum chemical and continuum solvation
methods, the limitation due to the unavailability of accurate thermodynamic model pa-
rameters has been overcome in the present work. The model equations in the framework
can be modiﬁed according the reactor conﬁguration, reaction mechanism, kinetic limita-
tions, etc. These advantages allow for the consideration of a wide range of species and
systems, enabling the wide and diverse applicability of the developed framework and pro-
viding a reliable tool for the prediction of system dynamics in a phase transfer catalysis
system. The framework also allows for the input of experimental data to ﬁne-tune the
model parameters and equations to increase the model accuracy.
However, the modeling framework proved to have limitations too. As it stands, its appli-
cation on the case study considered in this work failed to provide an acceptable solution.
This might be due to the low numerical values (in the order of ≤−11) of moles and mole
fractions considered for the species in the system. In the absence of additional time, it
has been diﬃcult to compare the performance of the multiscale model over a collection
of diﬀerent PTC systems. On the other hand, several important factors in the successful
application of phase transfer catalysis towards simultaneous extraction and conversion of
H2S into value-added products, such as benzyl mercaptan, have been validated in the
present work.
Future Work
Although a generic PTC modeling framework has been developed in this work, there is
still a considerable amount of work to be done:
• The framework must be applied on several other systems to validate its performance
and accurately identify the hotspots.
• It must be extended to include solvent optimization and, possibly, catalyst de-
sign. This requires adding an extra layer of product design to convert it into an
optimization-based integrated product-process design framework.
• Consideration of ionic liquids as a replacement for organic solvents could be incor-
porated into the framework in line with principles of green chemistry.
• It could also potentially be expanded to cover surfactant-induced micellar systems
that are more advanced cases of multiphase (transfer) catalysis.
55
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1] TURBOMOLE V7.0 2015,
a development of University of Karlsruhe and
Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe GmbH, 1989-2007, TURBOMOLE GmbH, since
2007; available from
http://www.turbomole.com.
[2] O. Acevedo and W. L. Jorgensen. Advances in quantum and molecular mechanical
(qm/mm) simulations for organic and enzymatic reactions. Accounts of Chemical
Research, 43(1):142–151, 2010. doi: 10.1021/ar900171c. URL https://doi.org/
10.1021/ar900171c. PMID: 19728702.
[3] D. Albanese. Liquid-Liquid Phase Transfer Catalysis: Basic Principles and Syn-
thetic Applications. Catal. Rev. - Sci. Eng., 45(3-4):369–395, 2003.
[4] A. Anantpinijwatna, M. Sales-Cruz, S. H. Kim, J. P. O’Connell, and R. Gani. A
systematic modelling framework for phase transfer catalyst systems. Chem. Eng.
Res. Des., 115:407–422, 2016. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cherd.2016.
07.011.
[5] D. K. Babi, M. S. Cruz, and R. Gani. Fundamentals of Process Intensiﬁcation: A
Process Systems Engineering View. In Process Intensif. Chem. Eng., pages 7–33.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-28392-0 2.
URL http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-28392-0{_}2.
[6] A. D. Becke.
Density-functional exchange-energy approximation with correct
asymptotic behavior.
Phys. Rev. A, 38:3098–3100, Sep 1988.
ISSN 1050-2947.
doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.38.3098.
URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
PhysRevA.38.3098.
[7] L. S. Belv`eze, J. F. Brennecke, and M. A. Stadtherr. Modeling of activity coeﬃ-
cients of aqueous solutions of quaternary ammonium salts with the electrolyte-nrtl
equation. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 43(3):815–825, 2004. doi:
10.1021/ie0340701.
[8] M. Born.
Volumen und hydratationsw¨arme der ionen. Zeitschrift f¨ur Physik, 1
(1):45–48, Feb 1920. ISSN 0044-3328. doi: 10.1007/BF01881023. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF01881023.
[9] E. Buncel, R. Stairs, R. Stairs, and H. Wilson. The Role of the Solvent in Chem-
ical Reactions. Oxford chemistry masters. Oxford University Press, 2003. ISBN
9780198511007. URL https://books.google.dk/books?id=ifZzQgAACAAJ.
[10] I. Cameron and R. Gani. Product and Process Modelling: A Case Study Approach.
Elsevier Science, 2011. ISBN 9780444531612. URL https://books.google.dk/
books?id=CfCz4pesBe8C.
56
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[11] R. Car and M. Parrinello. Uniﬁed approach for molecular dynamics and density-
functional theory.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 55:2471–2474, Nov 1985.
doi:
10.1103/
PhysRevLett.55.2471. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
55.2471.
[12] C. Cassani, L. Bernardi, F. Fini, and A. Ricci.
Catalytic asymmetric mannich
reactions of sulfonylacetates. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 48(31):
5694–5697. doi: 10.1002/anie.200900701. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/anie.200900701.
[13] K. Chandler, C. W. Culp, D. R. Lamb, C. L. Liotta, and C. A. Eckert. Phase-
transfer catalysis in supercritical carbon dioxide: kinetic and mechanistic inves-
tigations of cyanide displacement on benzyl chloride.
Industrial & Engineering
Chemistry Research, 37(8):3252–3259, 1998. doi: 10.1021/ie970741h.
[14] J.-C. Charpentier.
The triplet “molecular processes–product–process” engi-
neering:
the future of chemical engineering?
Chemical Engineering Sci-
ence, 57(22):4667 – 4690, 2002.
ISSN 0009-2509.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0009-2509(02)00287-7.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0009250902002877.
[15] L. Constantinou and R. Gani. New group-contribution method for estimating prop-
erties of pure compounds. AIChE Journal, 40(10):1697–1710, 1994. ISSN 15475905,
00011541. doi: 10.1002/aic.690401011.
[16] L. Constantinou, R. Gani, and J. P. O’Connell. Estimation of the acentric factor
and the liquid molar volume at 298 k using a new group contribution method.
Fluid Phase Equilibria, 103(1):11 – 22, 1995. ISSN 0378-3812. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/0378-3812(94)02593-P. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/037838129402593P.
[17] N. R. Council. Beyond the Molecular Frontier: Challenges for Chemistry and Chem-
ical Engineering. National Academies Press, 2003. ISBN 0309505127, 0309084776,
1280183497, 9786610183494.
[18] C. J. Cramer. Essentials of Computational Chemistry: Theories and Models. John
Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, Uk, 2004. ISBN 9780470091821.
[19] C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar.
A universal approach to solvation modeling.
Accounts of Chemical Research, 41(6):760–768, 2008. doi: 10.1021/ar800019z. URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/ar800019z. PMID: 18512970.
[20] Q. Cui, M. Elstner, and M. Karplus. A theoretical analysis of the proton and hydride
transfer in liver alcohol dehydrogenase (ladh). The Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, 106(10):2721–2740, 2002. doi: 10.1021/jp013012v. URL https://doi.org/10.
1021/jp013012v.
[21] D. De Zani and M. Colombo. Phase-transfer catalysis under continuous ﬂow condi-
tions: An alternative approach to the biphasic liquid/liquid o-alkylation of phenols.
Journal of Flow Chemistry, 2(1):5–7, Jan 2012. ISSN 2063-0212. doi: 10.1556/
jfchem.2012.00020. URL https://doi.org/10.1556/jfchem.2012.00020.
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
58
[22] A. K. Dillow, S. L. J. Yun, D. Suleiman, D. L. Boatright, C. L. Liotta, and C. A.
Eckert. Kinetics of a phase-transfer catalysis reaction in supercritical ﬂuid carbon
dioxide. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 35(6):1801–1806, 1996. doi:
10.1021/ie9600405.
[23] F. Eckert and A. Klamt. Fast solvent screening via quantum chemistry: Cosmo-
rs approach. AIChE Journal, 48(2):369–385. doi: 10.1002/aic.690480220. URL
https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/aic.690480220.
[24] F. F. Fleming, L. Yao, P. C. Ravikumar, L. Funk, and B. C. Shook.
Nitrile-
containing pharmaceuticals: Eﬃcacious roles of the nitrile pharmacophore. Journal
of Medicinal Chemistry, 53(22):7902–7917, 2010.
[25] S. H. Fogler.
Elements of Chemical Reaction Engineering.
Prentice Hall, 2016.
ISBN 1488667152, 0133888096, 0133887510, 9780133887518.
[26] M. Foli´c, C. S. Adjiman, and E. N. Pistikopoulos. A computer-aided methodol-
ogy with robust design criteria for selection of solvents for reactions. In W. Mar-
quardt and C. Pantelides, editors, 16th European Symposium on Computer Aided
Process Engineering and 9th International Symposium on Process Systems Engi-
neering, volume 21 of Computer Aided Chemical Engineering, pages 787 – 792.
Elsevier, 2006. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1570-7946(06)80141-0. URL http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1570794606801410.
[27] A. Fredenslund, R. Jones, and J. Prausnitz.
Group-contribution estimation
of activity-coeﬃcients in nonideal liquid-mixtures.
AIChE Journal, 21(6):1086–
1099, 1975. ISSN 15475905, 00011541. doi: 10.1002/aic.690210607,10.1002/(issn)
1547-5905.
[28] H. Freund and K. Sundmacher. Towards a methodology for the systematic analysis
and design of eﬃcient chemical processes. part 1. from unit operations to elementary
process functions. Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Intensiﬁcation, 47
(12):2051–2060, 2008. ISSN 18733204, 02552701. doi: 10.1016/j.cep.2008.07.011.
[29] R. A. Friesner. Ab initio quantum chemistry: Methodology and applications. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102
(19):6648–6653, 2005. ISSN 10916490, 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0408036102.
[30] I. E. Grossmann and A. W. Westerberg. Research challenges in process systems
engineering. AIChE Journal, 46(9):1700–1703, 2000. ISSN 15475905, 00011541.
doi: 10.1002/aic.690460902.
[31] K. E. Gubbins and J. D. Moore.
Molecular modeling of matter:
Impact and
prospects in engineering. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 49(7):3026–
3046, 2010. doi: 10.1021/ie901909c. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ie901909c.
[32] J. P. Guthrie and I. Povar. A test of various computational solvation models on a set
of “diﬃcult” organic compounds. Canadian Journal of Chemistry, 87(8):1154–1162,
2009. doi: 10.1139/V09-071. URL https://doi.org/10.1139/V09-071.
[33] M. D. Hanwell, D. E. Curtis, D. C. Lonie, T. Vandermeersch, E. Zurek, and G. R.
Hutchison. Avogadro: an advanced semantic chemical editor, visualization, and
analysis platform. Journal of Cheminformatics, 4(1):17, Aug 2012. ISSN 1758-2946.
doi: 10.1186/1758-2946-4-17. URL https://doi.org/10.1186/1758-2946-4-17.
==PAGE:64==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[34] G. Harmsen. Reactive distillation: The front-runner of industrial process intensi-
ﬁcation - a full review of commercial applications, research, scale-up, design and
operation.
Chemical Engineering and Processing, 46(9):774–780, 9 2007.
ISSN
0255-2701. doi: 10.1016/j.cep.2007.06.005.
[35] G. Harmsen. Process intensiﬁcation in the petrochemicals industry: Drivers and
hurdles for commercial implementation.
Chemical Engineering and Processing:
Process Intensiﬁcation, 49(1):70 – 73, 2010.
ISSN 0255-2701.
doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cep.2009.11.009.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0255270109002438.
[36] T. Hashimoto and K. Maruoka. The Basic Principle of Phase-Transfer Catalysis
and Some Mechanistic Aspects. In K. Maruoka, editor, Asymmetric Phase Transf.
Catal., chapter 1. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2008. ISBN 9783527318421.
doi: 10.1109/TWC.2015.2477998.
[37] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Phys. Rev., 136:B864–
B871, Nov 1964. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864. URL https://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864.
[38] A. Jalan, R. W. Ashcraft, R. H. West, and W. H. Green.
Predicting solvation
energies for kinetic modeling.
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem.,
106:211–258, 2010. doi: 10.1039/B811056P. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
B811056P.
[39] F. Jensen. Introduction to Computational Chemistry. John Wiley & Sons Ltd.,
Chichester, UK, 3rd ed. edition, 2017. ISBN 9781118825990.
[40] W. L. Jorgensen. Quantum and statistical mechanical studies of liquids. 10. trans-
ferable intermolecular potential functions for water, alcohols, and ethers. application
to liquid water. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 103(2):335–340, 1981.
doi: 10.1021/ja00392a016. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00392a016.
[41] W. L. Jorgensen. Quantum and statistical mechanical studies of liquids. 11. trans-
ferable intermolecular potential functions. application to liquid methanol including
internal rotation. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 103(2):341–345, 1981.
doi: 10.1021/ja00392a017. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00392a017.
[42] S. C. L. Kamerlin, M. Haranczyk, and A. Warshel. Progress in ab initio qm/mm
free-energy simulations of electrostatic energies in proteins: Accelerated qm/mm
studies of pka, redox reactions and solvation free energies. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B, 113(5):1253–1272, 2009. doi: 10.1021/jp8071712. URL https://doi.
org/10.1021/jp8071712. PMID: 19055405.
[43] I. Kaur, V. Kumari, and P. K. Dhiman.
Synthesis, characterization and use of
polymer-supported phase transfer catalyst in organic reactions. Journal of Applied
Polymer Science, 121(6):3185–3191, 2011. doi: 10.1002/app.33907.
[44] S. H. Kim, A. Anantpinijwatna, J. W. Kang, M. Sales-Cruz, and R. Gani.
Application of new electrolyte model to phase transfer catalyst (ptc) systems.
In K. V. Gernaey, J. K. Huusom, and R. Gani, editors, 12th International
Symposium on Process Systems Engineering and 25th European Symposium on
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
60
Computer Aided Process Engineering, volume 37 of Computer Aided Chemi-
cal Engineering, pages 701–706. Elsevier, 2015.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-444-63578-5.50112-2.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780444635785501122.
[45] A. Klamt.
Conductor-like screening model for real solvents:
A new approach
to the quantitative calculation of solvation phenomena.
The Journal of Physi-
cal Chemistry, 99(7):2224–2235, 1995.
doi: 10.1021/j100007a062.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1021/j100007a062.
[46] A. Klamt. The COSMO and COSMO-RS solvation models. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.
Comput. Mol. Sci., 8(1):e1338, Jan 2018. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/
wcms.1338.
[47] A. Klamt and F. Eckert. Cosmo-rs: a novel and eﬃcient method for the a priori
prediction of thermophysical data of liquids. Fluid Phase Equilibria, 172(1):43 – 72,
2000. ISSN 0378-3812. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812(00)00357-5. URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378381200003575.
[48] A. Klamt and G. Sch¨u¨urmann.
Cosmo: a new approach to dielectric screening
in solvents with explicit expressions for the screening energy and its gradient. J.
Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, pages 799–805, 1993. doi: 10.1039/P29930000799.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/P29930000799.
[49] A. Klamt, V. Jonas, T. B¨urger, and J. C. W. Lohrenz. Reﬁnement and parametriza-
tion of cosmo-rs. The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 102(26):5074–5085, 1998.
doi: 10.1021/jp980017s. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/jp980017s.
[50] A. Klamt, B. Mennucci, J. Tomasi, V. Barone, C. Curutchet, M. Orozco, and
F. J. Luque.
On the performance of continuum solvation methods. a comment
on “universal approaches to solvation modeling”. Accounts of Chemical Research,
42(4):489–492, 2009. doi: 10.1021/ar800187p. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/
ar800187p. PMID: 19222200.
[51] Z. Kolsk´a, M. Z´abransk´y, and A. Randov´a. Group contribution methods for esti-
mation of selected physico-chemical properties of organic compounds. In Thermo-
dynamics - Fundamentals and Its Application in Science. IntechOpen.
[52] Z. n. Kolsk´a. Estimation of the enthalpy of vaporization and the entropy of vapor-
ization for pure organic compounds at 298.15 k and at normal boiling temperature
by a group contribution method. Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research, 44,
09 2005.
[53] E. Kolvari, A. Ghorbani-Choghamarani, P. Salehi, F. Shirini, and M. A. Zolﬁgol.
Application of n-halo reagents in organic synthesis. Journal of the Iranian Chemical
Society, 4(2):126–174, Jun 2007.
[54] A. Kumar and S. Hartland. Correlations for prediction of mass transfer coeﬃcients
in single drop systems and liquid–liquid extraction columns. Chemical Engineering
Research and Design, 77(5):372 – 384, 1999. ISSN 0263-8762. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1205/026387699526359. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0263876299718022.
==PAGE:66==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[55] D. Landini, A. Maia, and F. Montanari. Mechanism of phase-transfer catalysis. J.
Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., pages 112–113, 1977.
[56] D. Landini, A. Maia, and F. Montanari. Phase-transfer catalysis. nucleophilicity of
anions in aqueous organic two-phase reactions catalyzed by onium salts. a compari-
son with homogeneous organic systems. Journal of the American Chemical Society,
100(9):2796–2801, 1978. doi: 10.1021/ja00477a036.
[57] A. R. Leach.
Molecular Modelling: Principles and Applications.
Prentice Hall,
Harlow, UK, 2001. ISBN 9780582382107.
[58] C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. G. Parr. Development of the colle-salvetti correlation-
energy formula into a functional of the electron density. Phys. Rev. B, 37:785–789,
Jan 1988. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.37.785. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRevB.37.785.
[59] H. Lin and D. G. Truhlar. Qm/mm: what have we learned, where are we, and
where do we go from here? Theoretical Chemistry Accounts, 117(2):185, Jul 2006.
ISSN 1432-2234.
doi: 10.1007/s00214-006-0143-z.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00214-006-0143-z.
[60] K. Lipkowitz and D. Boyd.
Reviews in computational chemistry. Vol. 2.
VCH
Publishers, Inc.,, 1991. ISBN 1560815159, 3527283382.
[61] P. Lutze, R. Gani, and J. M. Woodley.
Process intensiﬁcation: A perspective
on process synthesis.
Chemical Engineering and Processing:
Process Intensiﬁ-
cation, 49(6):547 – 558, 2010.
ISSN 0255-2701.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cep.2010.05.002.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0255270110001182.
[62] B. Lygo and B. I. Andrews. Asymmetric phase-transfer catalysis utilizing chiral
quaternary ammonium salts: Asymmetric alkylation of glycine imines. Accounts of
Chemical Research, 37(8):518–525, 2004. doi: 10.1021/ar030058t.
[63] E. J. Maginn and J. R. Elliott.
Historical perspective and current outlook
for molecular dynamics as a chemical engineering tool.
Industrial & Engineer-
ing Chemistry Research, 49(7):3059–3078, 2010.
doi: 10.1021/ie901898k.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/ie901898k.
[64] M. Makosza and M. Fedorynski. Phase Transfer Catalysis. Catalysis Reviews-science
and Engineering, 45:321–367, 2003.
[65] A. V. Marenich, G. D. Hawkins, D. A. Liotard, C. J. Cramer, and D. G. Truhlar.
Gesol – version 2008.
[66] A. V. Marenich, C. J. Cramer, and D. G. Truhlar. Universal solvation model based
on solute electron density and on a continuum model of the solvent deﬁned by
the bulk dielectric constant and atomic surface tensions. The Journal of Physical
Chemistry B, 113(18):6378–6396, 2009. doi: 10.1021/jp810292n. URL https://
doi.org/10.1021/jp810292n. PMID: 19366259.
[67] A. V. Marenich, C. J. Cramer, and D. G. Truhlar. Universal solvation model based
on the generalized born approximation with asymmetric descreening. Journal of
Chemical Theory and Computation, 5(9):2447–2464, 2009. doi: 10.1021/ct900312z.
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ct900312z.
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
62
[68] W. Marquardt, L. von Wedel, and B. Bayer. Perspectives on lifecycle process mod-
eling. AIChE Symposium Series, 96(323):192–214, 2000. ISSN 00658812.
[69] J. Marrero and R. Gani.
Group-contribution based estimation of pure compo-
nent properties.
Fluid Phase Equilibria, 183-184:183–208, 2001.
ISSN 0378-
3812.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3812(01)00431-9.
URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378381201004319. Proceedings of
the fourteenth symposium on thermophysical properties.
[70] N. Metropolis, A. W. Rosenbluth, M. N. Rosenbluth, A. H. Teller, and E. Teller.
Equation of state calculations by fast computing machines. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 21(6):1087–1092, 1953. doi: 10.1063/1.1699114. URL https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.1699114.
[71] S. Miertuˇs, E. Scrocco, and J. Tomasi. Electrostatic interaction of a solute with a
continuum. a direct utilizaion of ab initio molecular potentials for the prevision of
solvent eﬀects. Chemical Physics, 55(1):117–129, 1981. ISSN 0301-0104. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0301-0104(81)85090-2. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0301010481850902.
[72] H. Modarresi, E. Conte, J. Abildskov, R. Gani, and P. Crafts. Model-based calcula-
tion of solid solubility for solvent selection – a review. Industrial Engineering Chem-
istry Research, 47(15):5234–5242, 2008. ISSN 0888-5885. doi: 10.1021/ie0716363.
[73] J. A. Moulijn, A. Stankiewicz, J. Grievink, and A. G´orak. Process intensiﬁcation
and process systems engineering: A friendly symbiosis. Comput. Chem. Eng., 2008.
ISSN 00981354. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2007.05.014.
[74] S. D. Naik and L. K. Doraiswamy. Phase transfer catalysis: Chemistry and engi-
neering. AIChE J., 44(3):612–646, mar 1998. URL http://doi.wiley.com/10.
1002/aic.690440312.
[75] A. Nicholls, D. L. Mobley, J. P. Guthrie, J. D. Chodera, C. I. Bayly, M. D. Cooper,
and V. S. Pande. Predicting small-molecule solvation free energies: an informal
blind test for computational chemistry.
Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 51(4):
769–779, 2008. doi: https://doi.org/10.1021/jm070549+.
[76] M. Orozco and F. J. Luque. Theoretical methods for the description of the solvent
eﬀect in biomolecular systems. Chemical Reviews, 100(11):4187–4226, 2000. doi:
10.1021/cr990052a.
[77] N. Papaiconomou, J.-P. Simonin, and O. Bernard. Solutions of alkylammonium and
bulky anions: Description of osmotic coeﬃcients within the binding mean spherical
approximation. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 51(28):9661–9668,
2012. doi: 10.1021/ie202954y.
[78] C. J. Pedersen and H. K. Frensdorﬀ. Macrocyclic Polyethers and Their Complexes.
Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. English, 11(1):16–25, 1972.
[79] C. Piccolo, A. Shaw, G. Hodges, P. M. Piccione, J. P. O’Connell, and R. Gani. A
framework for the design of reacting systems with phase transfer catalysis. Comput.
Aided Chem. Eng., 30:757–761, 2012.
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[80] Z. Qian, Q. Chen, and I. E. Grossmann.
Optimal synthesis of rotating packed
bed and packed bed: a case illustrating the integration of pi and pse. In M. R.
Eden, M. G. Ierapetritou, and G. P. Towler, editors, 13th International Sym-
posium on Process Systems Engineering (PSE 2018), volume 44 of Computer
Aided Chemical Engineering, pages 2377 – 2382. Elsevier, 2018. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64241-7.50391-8. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780444642417503918.
[81] C. Ramshaw. The incentive for process intensiﬁcation. 1st International Conference
on Process Intensiﬁcation for the Chemical Industry, (18):1–2, 1995.
[82] D. Reay, C. Ramshaw, and A. Harvey. Process Intensiﬁcation: Engineering for
Eﬃciency, Sustainability and Flexibility. Isotopes in Organic Chemistry. Elsevier
Science, 2013. ISBN 9780080983059. URL https://books.google.dk/books?id=
QV_U0Kbhh1UC.
[83] R. F. Ribeiro, A. V. Marenich, C. J. Cramer, and D. G. Truhlar. Prediction of
sampl2 aqueous solvation free energies and tautomeric ratios using the sm8, sm8ad,
and smd solvation models. Journal of Computer-Aided Molecular Design, 24(4):
317–333, Apr 2010. ISSN 1573-4951. doi: 10.1007/s10822-010-9333-9. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10822-010-9333-9.
[84] J. Royer and H. P. Husson.
Asymmetric synthesis. 2. practical method for the
asymmetric synthesis of indolizidine alkaloids: total synthesis of (-)-monomorine i.
The Journal of Organic Chemistry, 50(5):670–673, 1985. doi: 10.1021/jo00205a023.
[85] W. H. C. Rueggeberg, A. Ginsbu’rg, and R. K. Frantz. Benzyl benzoate from benzyl
chloride and sodium benzoate. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry, 38(2):207–211,
1946. doi: 10.1021/ie50434a025.
[86] K. D. Samant, D. J. Singh, and K. M. Ng. Design of liquid-liquid phase trans-
fer catalytic processes. AIChE Journal, 47(8):1832–1848, 2001. doi: 10.1002/aic.
690470814.
[87] K. D. Samant, D. J. Singh, and K. M. Ng. Design of liquid-liquid phase trans-
fer catalytic processes. AIChE Journal, 47(8):1832–1848, 2001. doi: 10.1002/aic.
690470814.
[88] E.
E.
Santiso
and
K.
E.
Gubbins.
Multi-scale
molecular
modeling
of
chemical
reactivity.
Molecular
Simulation,
30(11-12):699–748,
2004.
doi:
10.1080/08927020412331294878.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1080/
08927020412331294878.
[89] J. A. Satrio and L. Doraiswamy. Phase-transfer catalysis: a new rigorous mecha-
nistic model for liquid–liquid systems. Chem. Eng. Sci., 57(8):1355–1377, apr 2002.
URL http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0009250902000611.
[90] P. R. Schreiner, O. Lauenstein, E. D. Butova, P. A. Gunchenko, I. V. Kolomitsin,
A. Wittkopp, G. Feder, and A. A. Fokin. Selective radical reactions in multiphase
systems: Phase-transfer halogenations of alkanes. Chemistry – A European Journal,
7(23):4996–5003, 2001.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
64
[91] H. M. Senn and W. Thiel. Qm/mm methods for biomolecular systems. Angewandte
Chemie International Edition, 48(7):1198–1229. doi: 10.1002/anie.200802019. URL
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/anie.200802019.
[92] S. Shirakawa and K. Maruoka. Recent developments in asymmetric phase-transfer
reactions. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed., 52(16):4312–4348, 2013.
[93] G. Singh, P. G. Nakade, D. Chetia, P. Jha, U. Mondal, S. Kumari, and S. Sen.
Kinetics and mechanism of phase transfer catalyzed synthesis of aromatic thioethers
by H2S-rich methyldiethanolamine. J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 37:190–197, 2016. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2016.03.022.
[94] Stankiewicz, Andrzej I. and Moulijn, Jacob A. Process Intensiﬁcation: Transforming
chemical engineering. Chemical Engineering Progress, 96:22–23, 2000.
[95] C. M. Starks. Phase-transfer catalysis. i. heterogeneous reactions involving anion
transfer by quaternary ammonium and phosphonium salts. Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 93(1):195–199, 1971. doi: 10.1021/ja00730a033.
[96] C. M. Starks and R. M. Owens. Phase-transfer catalysis. ii. kinetic details of cyanide
displacement on 1-halooctanes. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 95(11):
3613–3617, 1973. doi: 10.1021/ja00792a025.
[97] C. M. Starks, C. L. Liotta, and M. E. Halpern. Phase-transfer catalysis. Funda-
mentals, Applications, and Industrial Perspectives. 1994.
[98] E. Stefanis, L. Constantinou, and C. Panayiotou. A group-contribution method
for predicting pure component properties of biochemical and safety interest. In-
dustrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 43(19):6253–6261, 2004. doi: 10.1021/
ie0497184. URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ie0497184.
[99] The Computational Mathematics Group at the STFC Rutherford Appleton Labo-
ratory and other experts. Hsl. a collection of fortran codes for large scale scientiﬁc
computation.
[100] D. N. Theodorou. Progress and outlook in monte carlo simulations. Industrial &
Engineering Chemistry Research, 49(7):3047–3058, 2010. doi: 10.1021/ie9019006.
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ie9019006.
[101] T. Van Gerven and A. Stankiewicz. Structure, energy, synergy, time—the funda-
mentals of process intensiﬁcation. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 48
(5):2465–2474, 2009. doi: 10.1021/ie801501y.
[102] J. J. Vanden Eynde and I. Mailleux. Quaternary ammonium salt-assisted organic
reactions in water: Alkylation of phenols. Synthetic Communications, 31(1):1–7,
2001. doi: 10.1081/SCC-100000172.
[103] M. C. Vander Zwan and F. W. Hartner.
Solid-liquid phase-transfer catalysis
by a quaternary ammonium salt. a comparison with crown ethers and polyalky-
lamines. The Journal of Organic Chemistry, 43(13):2655–2657, 1978. doi: 10.1021/
jo00407a020.
==PAGE:70==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[104] S. H. Vosko, L. Wilk, and M. Nusair.
Accurate spin-dependent electron liquid
correlation energies for local spin density calculations: a critical analysis. Canadian
Journal of Physics, 58(8):1200–1211, 1980. doi: 10.1139/p80-159. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1139/p80-159.
[105] A. W¨achter and L. T. Biegler. On the implementation of a primal-dual interior point
ﬁlter line search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Mathematical
Programming, 106(1):25–57, 2006.
[106] M.-L. Wang, P. Vivekanand, and M.-C. Yu. Hydrolysis of 4-methoxyphenylacetic
acid butyl ester under liquid–liquid biphasic phase transfer condition and their
kinetics.
Journal of the Taiwan Institute of Chemical Engineers, 43(2):207–214,
2012. ISSN 1876-1070. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtice.2011.10.005.
[107] G. D. Yadav and A. A. Kadam. Atom-eﬃcient benzoin condensation in liquid–liquid
system using quaternary ammonium salts: Pseudo-phase transfer catalysis. Organic
Process Research & Development, 16(5):755–763, 2012. doi: 10.1021/op300027j.
[108] S. S. Yuﬁt and S. S. Zinovyev. A comparative kinetic study of nucleophilic sub-
stitution under ptc conditions in liquid-liquid and solid-liquid systems.
Tetra-
hedron, 55(20):6319 – 6328, 1999.
ISSN 0040-4020.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0040-4020(99)00208-2.
URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0040402099002082.
==PAGE:71==
Appendices
Appendix A - Python Implementation
1
import os
2
import time
3
import numpy as np
4
from itertools import islice
5
import linecache as lc
6
from pyomo.environ import *
7
from pyomo.opt import SolverFactory, SolverStatus, TerminationCondition
8
9
# define all the components in the system
10
_comp_dict = {1:"toluene", 2:"h2o", 3:"cl_anion", 4:"benzylmercaptan", 5:"dibenzylsulfide
11
7:"benzylchloride", 8:"QBr", 9:"H3O+", 10:"HS-", 11:"MDEA",
12
12:"MDEA_+H", 13: "OH_anion", 14:"S_2-", 15: "H2S", 16: "Br-",
13
17:"HBr", 18:"Q+", 19:"QSH", 20:"QCl"}
14
15
# indexing the components to the respective cosmo filenames
16
_cosmo_dict = dict.fromkeys(_comp_dict.keys(), 0)
17
for i in _comp_dict:
18
_cosmo_dict[i] = _comp_dict[i] + ".cosmo"
19
if _comp_dict[i] in ["toluene", "h2o", "cl_anion"]:
20
_cosmo_dict[i] = _comp_dict[i] + "_c0.cosmo"
21
elif _comp_dict[i] is "H2S":
22
_cosmo_dict[i] = _comp_dict[i] + ".ccf"
23
24
fdir = []
25
fdir.append('''\"/home/abhiman/COSMOlogic/COSMOthermX19/COSMOtherm/DATABASE-COSMO/BP-TZVP
26
fdir.append('''\"/home/abhiman/Documents/COSMO files\"''')
27
28
with open('def_list.txt','w+') as writer:
29
for i in np.arange(1,4):
30
writer.write(_cosmo_dict[i] + " fdir=" + fdir[0] + "\r\n")
31
32
with open('custom_list.txt','w+') as writer:
66
==PAGE:72==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
67
33
for i in np.arange(4, len(_cosmo_dict)+1):
34
writer.write(_cosmo_dict[i] + " fdir=" + fdir[1] + "\r\n")
35
36
def _cosmotherm(file):
37
os.system('cosmotherm ' + file)
38
39
def _inp_base_template(file):
40
# directories for the COSMO files
41
#fdir = []
42
#fdir.append('''\"/home/abhiman/COSMOlogic/COSMOthermX19/COSMOtherm/DATABASE-COSMO/BP
43
#fdir.append('''\"/home/abhiman/Documents/COSMO files\"''')
44
45
with open(file,"w+") as in_file: # creating a basic input file w/o job
46
in_file.write("ctd = BP_TZVP_19.ctd cdir = ")
47
in_file.write("\"/home/abhiman/COSMOlogic/COSMOthermX19/COSMOtherm/CTDATA-FILES\"
48
in_file.write(" ldir = \"/home/abhiman/COSMOlogic/COSMOthermX19/licensefiles\"\r\
49
in_file.write("notempty unit=si nocompw nomix wtln ehfile\r\n")
50
in_file.write("!! Generated by COSMOtherm !!\r\n")
51
in_file.write("f=$DATABASE=def_list.txt fdir=" + fdir[0] + " VPfile\r\n")
52
in_file.write("f=$DATABASE=custom_list.txt fdir=" + fdir[1] + " VPfile\r\n")
53
return file
54
55
def _phase_equilibrium(file, T, org_n, aq_n, org, aq):
56
# T is the temperature; org and aq are lists of component mole fractions
57
file = _inp_base_template(file) # use the base template
58
# edit the base template to fit the calculation
59
with open(file,"a+") as in_file:
60
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " liq_ex=2 N1={")
61
for c in org_n:
62
in_file.write(str(c))
63
in_file.write(" ")
64
in_file.write("} N2={")
65
for c in aq_n:
66
in_file.write(str(c))
67
in_file.write(" ")
68
in_file.write("} XTHRESH = 1.0E-5 pr_k pr_xk pr_mu IGNORE_CHARGE # Automatic")
69
in_file.write(" Liquid Extraction Calculation")
70
_cosmotherm(file) # COSMOtherm run
71
72
# parsing the output to store the required data
73
output = file[:-3] + "tab" # name of the .tab file from COSMOtherm run
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
68
74
with open(output,"r") as out_file:
75
try:
76
# capture the required lines as string literals
77
lines_cache = islice(out_file, 6, len(_comp_dict)+6)
78
79
b = 0 # index counter
80
part_coeff = np.empty(len(_comp_dict)) # list to store equilirbium partition
81
# Store the mole numbers, fraction and partition coefficients for every compo
82
for current_line in lines_cache:
83
org_n[b] = float(current_line.split()[2])
84
org[b] = float(current_line.split()[4])
85
aq_n[b] = float(current_line.split()[5])
86
aq[b] = float(current_line.split()[7])
87
part_coeff[b] = float(current_line.split()[10])
88
b += 1
89
except:
90
print("COSOMOtherm Error with Phase Equilibrium")
91
return org_n, aq_n, org, aq, part_coeff
92
93
#def _partition_coeff(file, T, org, aq):
94
#
file = _inp_base_template(file) # use the base template
95
#
# edit the base template to fit the job
96
#
with open(file,"a") as in_file:
97
#
in_file.write("LogP xl1={ ")
98
#
for c in org:
99
#
in_file.write(str(c))
100
#
in_file.write(" ")
101
#
in_file.write("} xl2={")
102
#
for c in aq:
103
#
in_file.write(str(c))
104
#
in_file.write(" ")
105
#
in_file.write("} tk=" + str(T) + " # Automatic Partition ")
106
#
in_file.write("Coefficient Calculation")
107
#
108
#
# volume quotient vq is not given
109
#
# it will be estimated by COSMOtherm using QSPR/COSMO volumes
110
#
_cosmotherm(file) # COSMOtherm run
111
#
112
#
# parsing the output to store the required data
113
#
output = file[:-3] + "tab" # name of the .tab file from COSMOtherm run
114
#
with open(output,"r") as out_file:
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
115
#
# capture the required lines as string literals
116
#
lines_cache = islice(out_file, 7, len(_comp_dict)+7)
117
#
118
#
coeff_list = []
119
#
# Store the phase mole fractions for every component
120
#
for current_line in lines_cache:
121
#
coeff_list.append(10**(float(current_line.split()[2])))
122
#
return coeff_list
123
124
def _activity_coeff(file, T, org, aq):
125
file = _inp_base_template(file) #use base template
126
# edit the base template to fit the job
127
with open(file,"a") as in_file:
128
in_file.write("gamma xg={")
129
for c in org:
130
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
131
in_file.write("} tk=" + str(T) + " IGNORE_CHARGE # Automatic ")
132
in_file.write("Activity Coefficient Calculation")
133
in_file.write("\r\n")
134
in_file.write("gamma xg={")
135
for c in aq:
136
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
137
in_file.write("} tk=" + str(T) + " IGNORE_CHARGE # Automatic ")
138
in_file.write("Activity Coefficient Calculation")
139
_cosmotherm(file) # COSMOtherm run
140
141
# parsing the output to store the required data
142
output = file[:-3] + "tab" # name of the .tab file from COSMOtherm run
143
with open(output,"r") as out_file:
144
# capture the required lines as string literals
145
lines_cache = islice(out_file, 6, len(_comp_dict)+6)
146
147
org_coeff_list = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
148
b = 0
149
# Store the component activity coefficients in org phase
150
for current_line in lines_cache:
151
org_coeff_list[b] = np.exp(float(current_line.split()[2]))
152
b += 1
153
154
# capture the required lines as string literals
155
lines_cache = islice(out_file, 6, len(_comp_dict)+6)
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
70
156
157
aq_coeff_list = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
158
b = 0
159
# Store the component activity coefficients in aq phase
160
for current_line in lines_cache:
161
aq_coeff_list[b] = np.exp(float(current_line.split()[2]))
162
b += 1
163
164
return org_coeff_list, aq_coeff_list
165
166
def _reaction_equilibrium(file, T, org, aq):
167
file = _inp_base_template(file) #use base template
168
# edit the base template to fit the job
169
with open(file,"a") as in_file:
170
in_file.write("f=H3OBr.cosmo fdir=" + fdir[1] + " VPfile\r\n")
171
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
172
for c in org:
173
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
174
in_file.write("0.0} react={7 19} react_n={1 1} prod={4 20} prod_n={1 1} ")
175
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # BM formation in or
176
in_file.write("\r\n")
177
# All aqueous phase reactions below
178
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
179
for c in aq:
180
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
181
in_file.write("0.0} react={8 10} react_n={1 1} prod={16 19} prod_n={1 1} ")
182
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # QSH formation in a
183
in_file.write("\r\n")
184
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
185
for c in aq:
186
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
187
in_file.write("0.0} react={20 10} react_n={1 1} prod={3 19} prod_n={1 1} ")
188
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # QSH from QCl
189
in_file.write("\r\n")
190
#
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
191
#
for c in aq:
192
#
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
193
#
in_file.write("} react={9 11} react_n={1 1} prod={2 12} prod_n={1 1} ")
194
#
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # MDEA in aq phase
195
#
in_file.write("\r\n")
196
#
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
==PAGE:76==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
71
197
#
for c in aq:
198
#
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
199
#
in_file.write("} react={2 15} react_n={1 1} prod={9 10} prod_n={1 1} ")
200
#
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # HS- in aq phase
201
#
in_file.write("\r\n")
202
#
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
203
#
for c in aq:
204
#
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
205
#
in_file.write("} react={2 10} react_n={1 1} prod={9 14} prod_n={1 1} ")
206
#
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # S_2- formation in
207
#
in_file.write("\r\n")
208
#
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
209
#
for c in aq:
210
#
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
211
#
in_file.write("} react={2 6} react_n={1 1} prod={3 9} prod_n={1 1} ")
212
#
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # HCl deionization
213
#
in_file.write("\r\n")
214
#
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
215
#
for c in aq:
216
#
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
217
#
in_file.write("} react={2 17} react_n={1 1} prod={9 16} prod_n={1 1} ")
218
#
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # HBr deionization
219
#
in_file.write("\r\n")
220
#
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
221
#
for c in aq:
222
#
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
223
#
in_file.write("} react={2} react_n={2} prod={9 13} prod_n={1 1} ")
224
#
in_file.write("K_activity # Automatic Reaction Calculation") # H2O deionization
225
#
in_file.write("\r\n")
226
in_file.write("tk=" + str(T) + " reaction xr={")
227
for c in aq:
228
in_file.write(str(c) + " ")
229
in_file.write("0.0} react={8 9} react_n={1 1} prod={18 21} prod_n={1 1} ")
230
#QBr deionization
231
_cosmotherm(file) # COSMOtherm run
232
233
# parsing the output to store the required data
234
output = file[:-3] + "tab" # name of the .tab file from COSMOtherm run
235
eq_const_list = np.empty(4)
236
b = 0 # index
237
# store the apparent equilibrium constants (K_x) for all reactions
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
72
238
for i in range(0,4):
239
line_number = 7 + (i*(len(_comp_dict)++1+2+7)) # line 7 of every job
240
current_line = lc.getline(output, line_number)
241
eq_const_list[b] = float(current_line.split()[2])
242
b += 1
243
244
return eq_const_list
245
246
def _equilibrium_solver(file, T, org_n, aq_n, org, aq, tol="1e-8",ctol="1e-8"):
247
org_n, aq_n, org, aq, par = _phase_equilibrium(file, T, org_n, aq_n, org, aq)
248
org_g, aq_g = _activity_coeff(file, T, org, aq)
249
K_eq = _reaction_equilibrium(file, T, org, aq)
250
251
aq_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
252
org_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
253
aq_n_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
254
org_n_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
255
256
# Pyomo Model
257
model = ConcreteModel()
258
model.nc = RangeSet(1, len(_comp_dict)) # no. of system components
259
model.org_n = Var(model.nc, within=NonNegativeReals)
260
model.aq_n = Var(model.nc, within=NonNegativeReals)
261
model.org = Var(model.nc, within=PercentFraction)
262
model.aq = Var(model.nc, within=PercentFraction)
263
#
model.org_g = Param(model.nc, mutable=True)
264
model.aq_g = Param(model.nc, mutable=True)
265
model.par = Param(model.nc, mutable=True)
266
model.nr = RangeSet(1,10) # no. of equilibirum reactions
267
model.K_eq = Param(model.nr, mutable=True)
268
model.psi = Var(model.nr, domain=Reals)
269
model.ntot_org = Var(initialize=np.sum(org_n))
270
model.ntot_aq = Var(initialize=np.sum(aq_n))
271
model.org_n_p = Param(model.nc, within=NonNegativeReals, mutable=True)
272
model.aq_n_p = Param(model.nc, within=NonNegativeReals, mutable=True)
273
274
# transfer values to Pyomo
275
for i in model.nc:
276
model.org_n[i] = org_n[i-1]
277
model.aq_n[i] = aq_n[i-1]
278
model.org_n_p[i] = org_n[i-1]
==PAGE:78==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
279
model.aq_n_p[i] = aq_n[i-1]
280
model.org[i] = org[i-1]
281
model.aq[i] = aq[i-1]
282
#
model.org_g[i] = org_g[i-1]
283
model.aq_g[i] = aq_g[i-1]
284
model.par[i] = par[i-1]
285
for i in model.nr:
286
#
model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1]
287
if i==1:
288
model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1]
289
if i==2:
290
model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1]
291
if i==3:
292
model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1]
293
if i==4:
294
model.K_eq[i] = 2.768*10**(9)
295
if i==5:
296
model.K_eq[i] = 4.194*10**(-9)
297
if i==6:
298
model.K_eq[i] = 3.733*10**(-16)
299
if i==7:
300
#model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1]
301
model.K_eq[i] = 10**(6.3)
302
if i==8:
303
#model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1]
304
model.K_eq[i] = 10**(7.94804347)
305
if i==9:
306
model.K_eq[i] = 10**(-15.98798454)
307
if i==10:
308
model.K_eq[i] = K_eq[i-1-6]
309
310
# partition equilibirum constraints
311
def partition(m,i):
312
if i in [3,9,10,12,13,14,16,18]:
313
return m.org[i] == 0
314
return m.par[i]*m.aq[i]-m.org[i] == 0
315
model.par_constraints = Constraint(model.nc, rule=partition)
316
317
# reaction equilibrium constraints
318
def reac_eq(m,i):
319
if i == 1:
==PAGE:79==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
74
320
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.org[7]*m.org[19])\
321
-(m.org[4]*m.org[20]) == 0
322
elif i == 2:
323
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[8]*m.aq[10])\
324
-(m.aq[16]*m.aq[19]) == 0
325
elif i == 3:
326
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[20]*m.aq[10])\
327
-(m.aq[3]*m.aq[19]) == 0
328
elif i == 4:
329
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[9]*m.aq[11])\
330
-(m.aq[2]*m.aq[12]) == 0
331
elif i == 5:
332
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[2]*m.aq[15])\
333
-(m.aq[9]*m.aq[10]) == 0
334
elif i == 6:
335
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[2]*m.aq[10])\
336
-(m.aq[9]*m.aq[14]) == 0
337
elif i == 7:
338
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[2]*m.aq_g[2]*m.aq[6]*m.aq_g[6])\
339
-(m.aq[3]*m.aq_g[3]*m.aq[9]*m.aq_g[9]) == 0
340
elif i == 8:
341
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[2]*m.aq_g[2]*m.aq[17]*m.aq_g[17])\
342
-(m.aq[16]*m.aq_g[16]*m.aq[9]*m.aq_g[9]) == 0
343
elif i == 9:
344
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[2]*m.aq[2]*(m.aq_g[2]**2))\
345
-(m.aq[9]*m.aq_g[9]*m.aq[13]*m.aq_g[13]) == 0
346
else:
347
return m.K_eq[i]*(m.aq[8])\
348
-(m.aq[16]*m.aq[18]) == 0
349
model.eq_constraints = Constraint(model.nr, rule=reac_eq)
350
351
# mole balances for each component
352
model.c1_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[1]+model.aq_n[1] \
353
== model.org_n_p[1]+model.aq_n_p[1])
354
model.c2_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[2]+model.aq_n[2]+\
355
quicksum(model.psi[i] for i in range(5,10))\
356
+model.psi[9]-model.psi[4] == model.org_n_p[2]\
357
+model.aq_n_p[2])
358
model.c3_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[3]+model.aq_n[3]-\
359
model.psi[7]-model.psi[3] == model.org_n_p[3]\
360
+model.aq_n_p[3])
==PAGE:80==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
361
model.c4_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[4]+model.aq_n[4]-\
362
model.psi[1] == model.org_n_p[4]+model.aq_n_p[4])
363
model.c5_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[5]+model.aq_n[5] \
364
== model.org_n_p[5]+model.aq_n_p[5])
365
model.c6_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[6]+model.aq_n[6]+\
366
model.psi[7] == model.org_n_p[6]+model.aq_n_p[6])
367
model.c7_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[7]+model.aq_n[7]+\
368
model.psi[1] == model.org_n_p[7]+model.aq_n_p[7])
369
model.c8_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[8]+model.aq_n[8]+\
370
model.psi[2]+model.psi[10] == model.org_n_p[8]\
371
+model.aq_n_p[8])
372
model.c9_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[9]+model.aq_n[9]-\
373
quicksum(model.psi[i] for i in range(5,10))\
374
+model.psi[4] == model.org_n_p[9]+model.aq_n_p[9])
375
model.c10_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[10]+model.aq_n[10]\
376
+model.psi[2]+model.psi[6]-model.psi[5]\
377
+model.psi[3] == model.org_n_p[10]+model.aq_n_p[10])
378
model.c11_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[11]+model.aq_n[11]\
379
+model.psi[4] == model.org_n_p[11]+model.aq_n_p[11])
380
model.c12_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[12]+model.aq_n[12]\
381
-model.psi[4] == model.org_n_p[12]+model.aq_n_p[12])
382
model.c13_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[13]+model.aq_n[13]\
383
-model.psi[9] == model.org_n_p[13]+model.aq_n_p[13])
384
model.c14_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[14]+model.aq_n[14]\
385
-model.psi[6] == model.org_n_p[14]+model.aq_n_p[14])
386
model.c15_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[15]+model.aq_n[15]\
387
+model.psi[5] == model.org_n_p[15]+model.aq_n_p[15])
388
model.c16_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[16]+model.aq_n[16]\
389
-model.psi[2]-model.psi[8]-model.psi[10] == \
390
model.org_n_p[16]+model.aq_n_p[16])
391
model.c17_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[17]+model.aq_n[17]\
392
+model.psi[8] == model.org_n_p[17]+model.aq_n_p[17])
393
model.c18_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[18]+model.aq_n[18]\
394
-model.psi[10] == model.org_n_p[18]+model.aq_n_p[18])
395
model.c19_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[19]+model.aq_n[19]\
396
+model.psi[1]-model.psi[2]-model.psi[3] == \
397
model.org_n_p[19]+model.aq_n_p[19])
398
model.c20_mol = Constraint(expr = model.org_n[20]+model.aq_n[20]\
399
+model.psi[3]-model.psi[1] == model.org_n_p[20]\
400
+model.aq_n_p[20])
401
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
76
402
# sum of mole fractions in each phase = 1
403
model.xsum_org = Constraint(expr = summation(model.org)==1)
404
model.xsum_aq = Constraint(expr = summation(model.aq)==1)
405
406
model.nsum_org = Constraint(expr = model.ntot_org ==\
407
summation(model.org_n))
408
model.nsum_aq = Constraint(expr = model.ntot_aq ==\
409
summation(model.aq_n))
410
# mole fractions <--> moles
411
def x2n_org(m,i):
412
if i in [3,9,10,12,13,14,16,18]:
413
return m.org_n[i] == 0
414
return m.org[i]-(m.org_n[i]/m.ntot_org) == 0
415
model.xton_org = Constraint(model.nc, rule=x2n_org)
416
def x2n_aq(m,i):
417
#return sum_product(m.aq_n) == m.aq_n[i]/m.aq[i]
418
return m.aq[i]-(m.aq_n[i]/m.ntot_aq) == 0
419
model.xton_aq = Constraint(model.nc, rule=x2n_aq)
420
421
model.charge_aq = Constraint(expr = model.aq_n[3]+model.aq_n[10]\
422
+model.aq_n[13]+model.aq_n[14]\
423
+model.aq_n[16] == model.aq_n[9]\
424
+model.aq_n[12]+model.aq_n[18])
425
426
#
model.obj = Objective(expr = org[4], sense=maximize)
427
428
TransformationFactory('contrib.aggregate_vars').apply_to(model)
429
TransformationFactory('contrib.induced_linearity').apply_to(model)
430
TransformationFactory('contrib.remove_zero_terms').apply_to(model)
431
TransformationFactory('contrib.propagate_zero_sum').apply_to(model)
432
433
opt = SolverFactory('ipopt')
434
opt.options["linear_solver"] = "ma97"
435
opt.options["halt_on_ampl_error"] = "yes"
436
opt.options["tol"] = tol
437
opt.options["constr_viol_tol"] = ctol
438
opt.options["derivative_test"] = "first-order"
439
opt.options["check_derivatives_for_naninf"] = "yes"
440
opt.options["hessian_approximation"] = "limited-memory"
441
results = opt.solve(model, tee=True, symbolic_solver_labels=True)
442
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
443
if (results.solver.status == SolverStatus.ok) and (results.solver.termination_conditi
444
for i in range(1,21):
445
#
aq_new[i-1] = model.aq[i].value
446
#
org_new[i-1] = model.org[i].value
447
#
aq_n_new[i-1] = model.aq_n[i].value
448
#
org_n_new[i-1] = model.org_n[i].value
449
aq_new[i-1] = round(model.aq[i].value,11)
450
org_new[i-1] = round(model.org[i].value,11)
451
aq_n_new[i-1] = round(model.aq_n[i].value,11)
452
org_n_new[i-1] = round(model.org_n[i].value,11)
453
print("Component", i, ":", aq_new[i-1], org_new[i-1],\
454
aq_n_new[i-1], org_n_new[i-1])
455
print("Difference", ":", aq_new[i-1]-aq[i-1], org_new[i-1]-org[i-1],\
456
aq_n_new[i-1]-aq_n[i-1], org_n_new[i-1]-org_n[i-1])
457
s1 = aq_n_new[2]+aq_n_new[9]+aq_n_new[12]+aq_n_new[13]+aq_n_new[15]
458
s2 = aq_n_new[8]+aq_n_new[11]+aq_n_new[17]
459
print("Charge neutrality:", s1, s2)
460
s3 = org_n_new[2]+org_n_new[9]+org_n_new[12]+org_n_new[13]+org_n_new[15]
461
s4 = org_n_new[8]+org_n_new[11]+org_n_new[17]
462
print("Charge neutrality:", s3, s4)
463
print("Aqueous phase mole fraction sum:", np.sum(aq_new))
464
print("Organic phase mole fraction sum:", np.sum(org_new))
465
print(np.allclose(aq,aq_new,atol=1e-09))
466
print(np.allclose(org,org_new,atol=1e-09))
467
print(np.allclose(aq_n,aq_n_new,atol=1e-09))
468
print(np.allclose(org_n,org_n_new,atol=1e-09))
469
print(np.allclose(aq,aq_new,atol=1e-09) and \
470
np.allclose(org,org_new,atol=1e-09) and \
471
np.allclose(aq_n,aq_n_new,atol=1e-09) and \
472
np.allclose(org_n,org_n_new,atol=1e-09))
473
elif results.solver.termination_condition == TerminationCondition.infeasible:
474
print ("Problem is infeasible")
475
else:
476
# something else is wrong
477
print (str(results.solver))
478
479
return org_n, aq_n, org, aq, org_n_new, aq_n_new, org_new, aq_new
480
481
def main():
482
# name of the input file for COSMOtherm
483
inputfile = "trial.inp"
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
78
484
485
# simulation time space
486
t_init = 0 # start time
487
t_tot = 0.001 # total reaction time in sec
488
dt = 0.001 # step size in sec
489
490
# reactor temperature in Kelvin
491
T = 333
492
493
# initial component mole fractions in each phase
494
org = np.array([0.705882352941176, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.27807486631016,
495
0.016042780748663, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0,
496
0.0, 0.0])
497
aq = np.array([0.0, 0.903418303039486, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0,
498
7.93971995123597E-11, 0.036234425473004, 0.022978765608965,
499
0.036238282514516, 5.31213797188492E-07, 1.7239763342953E-06,
500
0.000753001949183, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0])
501
502
# intial component molar flowrates (kmol/sec) in each phase
503
org_n = np.array([0.0590745969264, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.0232718109104, 0.0013426044756,
504
0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0])
505
aq_n = np.array([0, 0.327916, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2.88E-11, 0.0131521, 0.00834066,
506
0.0131535, 1.93E-07, 6.26E-07, 0.000273319, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0])
507
508
iter = 0
509
org_n_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
510
aq_n_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
511
org_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
512
aq_new = np.empty(len(_comp_dict))
513
514
while True:
515
iter += 1
516
if iter == 1:
517
org_n[:], aq_n[:], org[:], aq[:], org_n_new[:], aq_n_new[:], org_new[:], aq_n
518
= _equilibrium_solver(inputfile, T, org_n, aq_n, org, aq, "1e-16", "1
519
else:
520
org_n[:], aq_n[:], org[:], aq[:], org_n_new[:], aq_n_new[:], org_new[:], aq_n
521
= _equilibrium_solver(inputfile, T, org_n, aq_n, org, aq)
522
print(np.allclose(aq,aq_new,atol=1e-09))
523
print(np.allclose(org,org_new,atol=1e-09))
524
print(np.allclose(aq_n,aq_n_new,atol=1e-09))
==PAGE:84==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
525
print(np.allclose(org_n,org_n_new,atol=1e-09))
526
print(iter)
527
if np.allclose(aq,aq_new,atol=1e-09) \
528
and np.allclose(org,org_new,atol=1e-09) \
529
and np.allclose(aq_n,aq_n_new,atol=1e-09) \
530
and np.allclose(org_n,org_n_new,atol=1e-09):
531
break
532
np.copyto(aq, aq_new)
533
np.copyto(org, org_new)
534
np.copyto(aq_n, aq_n_new)
535
np.copyto(org_n, org_n_new)
536
print(iter)
537
538
539
if __name__ == '__main__':
540
main()
