==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spatial change of herring distribution according 
to hydrographic fronts in Skagerrak 2017-18 
 
 
 
 
Laura Diernæs 
 
Master thesis in collaboration with National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical 
University of Denmark and Section for Monitoring, Data and Technique, National 
Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
  
1 
 
Danish title:  
Variabilitet i silds rumlige fordeling i forhold til hydrografiske fronter i  
Skagerak 2017-18 
 
Project Period:  
28-02-2019 to 28-07-2019  
 
Student:  
 
Laura Diernæs (s170463) 
 
Supervisor:  
J. Rasmus Nielsen and Karl-Johan Stæhr  
 
Collaboration:  
National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark, 
Kemitorvet, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark and Section for Monitoring, Data 
and Technique, National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University 
of Denmark, Willemoesvej 2, 9850, Hirtshals, Denmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
Abstract  
2 
Abstract  
During the international North Sea Herring Acoustic Survey (HERAS) in June/July, herring (Clupea 
harengus) spatial distribution patterns in Skagerrak (ICES division IIIa) between 2017 and 2018 
changes and the reason is unclear. An analysis was conducted to give an insight on herring distribution 
patterns according to hydrographic factors in terms of temperature and salinity and other influencing 
parameters such as primary- and secondary production and intraspecific biomass/distribution 
patterns. The importance of the study is to provide a better understanding of herring migration and 
fisheries biology in order to enhance the planning of acoustic surveys and improve population 
dynamic input parameters to asses herring stocks. The analysis method used was several Generalized 
Additive Models (GAMs) to analyse variability in herring biomass (dependent variables) according 
to descriptive (explanatory) variables and co-variates in form of hydrographical and biological 
parameters. The results of herring distribution during the day showed a clear preference to high 
zooplankton abundance (p = 6.51·10-11, n=2972). During the night, herring distribution showed that 
when zooplankton is not significant, complex significant effect of physical factors of temperature (p 
= 4.58·10-09, n=3327) and salinity (p = 7.57·10-08, n=3327) appears. Furthermore, interaction effects 
become present with highly significant effect (p<0.001) when temperature is included in an 
interaction. It appears that different mechanisms are determining herring biomass and distribution 
during day and night hours. It was, consequently, possible to observe the preference for herring to 
distribute according to food during the day. Herring is visual particle feeders (Stevenson and Scott, 
2005) predating on zooplankton. This could explain the statistically significant result of zooplankton 
during the day, and similarly the lack of significance of zooplankton during the night hours. The 
results during night hours are more complex and difficult to interpret in an unambiguous way from a 
biological point of view. During the night herring distribute more significantly according to physical 
factors However, the results did not show an unambiguous pattern nor a clear picture in the 
correlations to herring distribution during night hours.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
3 
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents 
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................................ 2 
Table of Contents .............................................................................................................................................. 3 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 4 
2. 
Materials and Methods ........................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1. 
Surveys design and area coverage .................................................................................................. 8 
2.2. 
Survey data collection ................................................................................................................... 10 
2.2.1. 
Acoustic data monitoring, sampling and processing .......................................................... 10 
2.2.2. 
Biological data sampling and processing ............................................................................. 14 
2.2.3. 
Hydrographic data monitoring, sampling and processing ................................................. 16 
2.2.4. 
Primary production ............................................................................................................... 17 
2.2.5. 
Secondary production ........................................................................................................... 18 
2.3. 
Data analysis .................................................................................................................................. 18 
2.3.1. 
Exploratory analysis .............................................................................................................. 18 
2.3.2. 
In depth statistical multi-variate analyses ........................................................................... 20 
3. 
Results ..................................................................................................................................................... 23 
3.1. 
Exploratory analysis ...................................................................................................................... 23 
3.2. 
In depth statistical multi-variate analyses ................................................................................... 24 
4. 
Discussion ............................................................................................................................................... 34 
5. 
Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................. 38 
Acknowledgement .......................................................................................................................................... 39 
References ...................................................................................................................................................... 40 
Appendix I ...................................................................................................................................................... 43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
Introduction  
4 
1. Introduction  
Interest in understanding factors controlling the distribution of fish species continues to grow among 
fisheries scientists. Herring (Clupea harengus) is a migrating species and it has long been of interest 
to understand their distribution patterns. Environmental and biological factors was early suggested as 
controlling factors for adult herring distribution. In the northern North Sea, the correlation between 
fish biomass/distribution and environmental factors has already been demonstrated. Maravelias & 
Reid (1995) studied density of pre-autumn spawning herring in the Northern North Sea, ICES division 
IVa (Figure 1), around the Shetland- and Orkney Islands from July 13th to 31st in 1992. The study 
showed a positive correlation between high density of pre-autumn spawning herring and sea surface 
temperature and -salinity. North Sea herring was found to have preferable salinity and temperature 
ranges, where high herring densities were concentrated in a salinity range between 35.4 and 35.85 
ppt and temperature ranges between 12°C to 14.5°C. The study demonstrated a statistically significant 
relationship, where most herring occurred in sea water with a salinity greater than 35.45 ppt., 
corresponding to the high ranges of salinity in the area. The study also showed that five of the six 
highest densities of herring occurred in temperatures between 12°C and 13°C, representing the cooler 
waters of the surveyed area (Maravelias and Reid, 1995).  
A second study by Nielsen et. al (2001) found more evidence of adult herring distribution in relation 
to hydrographic features. The study focused on the distribution, biomass and duration of the over-
wintering period of the Rügen spring spawning herring in ICES subdivision 23 (Figure 1), in the 
Sound, which is a transition zone between the Baltic Sea and Skagerrak/Kattegat for migrating fish 
stocks. The study showed that during autumn and spring, herring density increases with higher 
salinity ranges and around the location of the pycnoclines in the vertical water layers. The study 
showed that peak densities of herring occurred where the water was stratified and typically just below 
or directly in the halocline. However, the thermocline did not seem to have an influence on herring 
density (Nielsen et al., 2001).  
Even though evidence of hydrographic features and herring distribution have been tested and 
evidence of correlation have been proven, it has also been suggested that temperature and salinity 
could likely have an indirect effect. Many examples have shown that fish distribution and 
hydrographic feature correlate, but this correlation typically only persists for a few years and then 
breaks down (Mann, 1993). In an example by Raid (1989) it was proven that herring appear to be 
densest in areas between stratified and mixed water masses, and therefore have oceanographic 
preferences (Raid, 1989). Secondly, Maravelias and Reid (1995) showed that fish respond to the 
oceanographic structure rather than a fixed geographical point, where fish preferred areas of well-
mixed water or areas close to hydrofronts (Maravelias and Reid, 1995). Even though a hydrographic 
preference exist, these areas between mixed and stratified waters are typically characterized by having 
high productivity of zooplankton which could also be the reason for the high herring abundance (Raid, 
1989). To study oceanography and hydrographic factors as an indirect effect is therefore worthwhile. 
Studies to distinguish between the factors of food availability or temperature expected to influence 
herring distribution was reviewed by Mann (1993). The review focused on showing biological 
production processes as a link between the physical phenomena and fish stocks (Mann, 1993). Back 
then, the understanding of physical-biological interactions was in focus but relating the interactions 
to full fish stocks with respect to stock abundance and density was not fully studied. However, it was 
believed to be important to consider such interactions when managing fish stocks and fisheries (Mann, 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
Introduction  
5 
1993). To reduce the uncertainty of what the controlling factor was for fish distribution and biomass, 
the search for linking physical processes to biological consequences and afterwards to the effect on 
fish stocks was a topic of interest and has since been tested. It was tested by Maravelias et al. (1997) 
by using a Generalized Additive Model (GAM) to show if herring distribution was related to the 
presence of boundary zones and zooplankton distribution. The data was derived from the 1995 North 
Sea ICES Coordinated acoustic survey in ICES division IVa, around the Shetland- and Orkney Islands 
(Figure 1). The study proved that the highest herring abundances were associated with the highest 
zooplankton abundances and associated with well-mixed waters and transitions zones. It was found 
that the difference between surface and bottom temperature influenced herring abundance in the area, 
with a decrease in herring abundance with an increasing difference between surface and bottom 
temperature values and again stratified waters did not support high fish biomass (Maravelias and 
Reid, 1997). However, high sea-surface salinity was again found as a preferable environment for 
herring, where herring were most abundant in areas with surface salinity of more than 34.5 ppt. 
(Maravelias and Reid, 1997). Still, it was not certain which factor was controlling for herring 
distribution.    
 
 
 
Figure 1: Baltic Sea including Kattegat/Skagerrak. Map illustrating the ICES Areas: Map of ICES statistical 
subareas (roman numerals) and division. corresponding to the ICES fishing areas for statistical purposes 
(ICES CM, 2015). 
 
Herring (Clupea harengus) is a northern species where a study by Corten (2001) conducted in the 
northern North Sea, close to their southern limit, found a shift in distribution towards the north in 
1988-1990 in June-July. It was believed that this shift towards the north was a response to either the 
increasing temperature or as a reaction to the change in food supply (Corten, 2001). The period of 
June-July is typically the end of the feeding period for populations of the North Sea herring stocks 
before migrating to their spawning ground and/or wintering area. The study tried to test weather food 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Introduction  
6 
or temperature was the influencing factor controlling the northward shift. The result showed that deep 
water temperature in Skagerrak had risen over the last 50 years and it was also an indication that the 
winter temperature increased in the North Sea and on the North Sea plateau in the same period 
(Corten, 2001). Furthermore, Calanus finmarchicus, which is a common prey item for herring, 
showed a decline in abundance from 1962-1992, where a significant negative correlation between C. 
finmarchicus and the northern distribution of herring was found (Corten, 2001). From the results, 
both factors coincided with the shift to a more northern distribution of herring between 1988-1990 
and on this basis, it was again not possible to conclude if herring distribution was controlled by 
temperature or food availability. The reason why it is difficult to separate temperature and secondary 
production is that they are typically correlated with each other. C. finmarchicus is inversely correlated 
to winter temperature because it is a cold-water species with a southern distribution limit in the North 
Sea. With increasing winter temperature, survival of C. finmarchicus decrease and food would 
become scarce for herring, which could explain the northern shift to more favorable feeding 
conditions (Corten, 2001). However, herring has also shown preferable salinity and temperature 
ranges in several studies, which is important to control their physiological processes, for instance the 
development of gonads. If the temperature is too high, gonad development can accelerate and result 
in pre-maturation (Lam, 1983). None of these studies fully explained what factors controls herring 
distribution. The results from the above referred studies indicate that there is more than one factor 
influencing and controlling herring distribution, and it likely shifts between the controlling factors, 
or even other factors not included within the studies. It is clear, that more knowledge and thereby 
more studies are needed to be able to better comprehend herring distribution and migration, as 
important population dynamic parameters influencing herring fisheries biology among other. 
Furthermore, it is important to understand population dynamic parameters influencing herring stocks 
according to better planning of acoustic research surveys and thereby improve herring stock 
assessment and scientific management advice.  
The present study is focusing on analyses of herring distribution patterns in the Skagerrak area (ICES 
division IIIa) with data gathered during the international North Sea Herring Acoustic Survey 
(HERAS). Herring in the Skagerrak area during the survey period from late June to start July show a 
mixture of North Sea Autumn spawning herring (NSAS) and Western Baltic spring spawning herring 
(WBSS) (Stæhr, 2017, 2018). The stocks of WBSS herring distribute between ICES subdivision 22-
25, division IIIa and IVa, where NSAS herring distribute in subarea IV, division IIIa and VIId (Figure 
1). The Western Baltic spring spawning herring consist of many different stock components, but the 
stock of Rügen herring are believed to account for most of the Western Baltic herring and is described 
to migrate from the spawning site during April to June into their feeding areas (e.g. Nielsen et al., 
2001). The Western Baltic spring spawners also has an organized stage-dependent migration pattern. 
Most herring of > 2-wr (winter ring) fish show migration pattern into the western part of Skagerrak 
and further into the eastern North Sea to forage during the summer (Payne et al., 2009). The younger 
individuals (< 2-wr fish) only migrate into Kattegat and to eastern Skagerrak. Towards the end of the 
summer herring start aggregating in the eastern Skagerrak and Kattegat before migrating down to the 
southern area of Kattegat, into the Sound and then to the Western Baltic to their wintering areas 
(Figure 2A) (Nielsen et al., 2001; ICES CM, 2019). The North Sea Autumn spawning herring also 
consist of complex spawning components with separate spawning grounds, but stocks mix when 
foraging during the summer. At least two spawning stocks, one that spawn around the 
Orkney/Shetland Islands and one that spawn around Buchan coast, are observed at times in the areas 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
Introduction  
7 
of Skagerrak. They are found along the east coast of Scotland, and migrate across the North Sea and 
into Skagerrak and Kattegat before returning to their wintering grounds (Figure 2B) (ICES CM, 
2018b). Even though migration of herring stocks can be described, the distribution of herring in 
Skagerrak do not show a consistent pattern. It was observed from the North Sea Herring Acoustic 
Survey (HERAS) in June/July, that herring showed a high biomass and distribution in the western 
and central area of Skagerrak in 2017. In 2018 the highest biomass was observed in the eastern areas 
of Skagerrak and the reason for the change is not clear.  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Figure 2A (left map) shows the generalized migration pattern of Western Baltic spring spawning 
herring. The number show the stage-dependent migration and yellow circles indicate spawning populations 
(ICES CM, 2019). Figure 2B (right map) shows the generalized migration pattern of North Sea herring 
showing nursery, feeding and spawning areas (ICES CM, 2018b).  
In the literature it is evident that the study of herring larvae distribution according to hydrography 
and food availability has been thoroughly investigated. Studies have found that the distribution of 
herring larvae is mainly determined by feeding conditions, where larvae move to depths where light 
is sufficient for feeding and where prey is abundant (Munk, Kiørboe and Christensen, 1989). 
According to hydrographic features, studies have found that larvae is highly present in transition 
zones between thermally mixed waters and stratified water masses (Richardson et al., 1986). Even 
though the studies of eggs and larvae of herring are well-represented within the literature, it is of 
interest in this report to study the active migration/distribution of herring towards more favorable 
conditions. Eggs and larvae distribute mostly by passive drift and do not have the ability to actively 
travel and therefore the literature that concern the studies of adult herring is only relevant and of 
interest for this report. 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
8 
On this basis, the aim of this study is to conduct an in-depth analysis of herring spatial distribution in 
Skagerrak (ICES division IIIa) from June to July in 2017 and 2018. The aim is to provide deeper 
understanding of why the horizontal and vertical distribution of herring changes in June/July between 
years according to physical factors and hydrographic fronts or other influencing parameters such as 
primary and secondary biological production and intraspecific biomass/distribution patterns. The 
importance and impact of the study is to provide a better understanding on herring migration and 
fisheries biology, to improve planning of acoustic surveys and population dynamic input parameters 
for assessment of the stock. Thus, the study aims to test the null hypothesis: 
H1: that there is no association between herring distribution and hydrographic fronts in respect  
       of temperature and salinity. 
The hypothesis is analysed at high spatial distribution to explain the causality between change in 
herring distribution and variables of temperature, salinity, primary- and secondary production to 
explain the observed spatial distribution differences of herring in Skagerrak (ICES division IIIa) in 
2017 and 2018. On this basis, further detailed hypotheses are tested including the hypothesis:  
H2: that there is no relation between herring distribution and chlorophyll A concentration and  
       thus no evidence of an interaction with primary production,  
H3: that there is no relation between herring distribution and zooplankton concentration in  
       Skagerrak,  
H4: that there is no interaction between any of the above-mentioned factors.  
 
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Surveys design and area coverage  
The North Sea Herring acoustic survey (HERAS) is a Coordinated ICES acoustic survey of the North 
Sea and adjacent waters. The survey is used to determine the distribution and biomass of herring and 
sprat in the North Sea region as a tuning index in the stock assessment, where Denmark is responsible 
for the coverage of the areas of ICES division IIIa (Skagerrak-Kattegat) (ICES CM, 2015). The ICES 
coordinated acoustic survey started in 1979 around Orkney and Shetland and expanded with the first 
major coverage in the North Sea in 1984 (ICES CM, 2015). The survey has been used as a fishery 
independent index in the assessment of the North Sea autumn spawning herring (Clupea harengus) 
with data-time series extending back to 1989. The survey was further extended into division IIIa in 
1989 to include the stocks of the western Baltic spring-spawning herring (Clupea harengus) which 
overlap in distribution with the North Sea autumn-spawning herring in ICES division IIIa and the 
southern North Sea area (ICES, 2015; Nielsen et al. 2001). The acoustic estimates of herring are used 
as a tuning index by ICES to determine (assess) the size of the populations and the results are 
submitted to the ICES Herring Assessment Working Group (HAWG) each year (ICES CM, 2015).  
The HERAS is carried out annually in June/July, where the Danish part, i.e. the North Sea Herring 
Acoustic Surveys, were carried out during the period June 21st to July 5th in 2017 and June 25th to 
July 10th in 2018 (Stæhr, 2017, 2018). The annual Danish survey covers a part of the North Sea 
(subarea IVa-b) and the area of Skagerrak and Kattegat (division IIIa) (Figure 1). The survey is 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
9 
divided into 6 geographical strata (Figure 3A) (Stæhr, 2017, 2018) and follows a systematic strata-
based survey design (Figure 3A-B) conducted as stratified, parallel acoustic transects with random 
starting points. The Danish area is covered with parallel transects with mutual distance of 10-15 
nautical miles (NM) (ICES CM, 2015), and the transects are positioned perpendicular to the coast 
line (Figure 3B) (Stæhr, 2018). The geographical area coverage from the Danish HERAS 2017 and 
2018 is shown in Figure 4 including associated trawl stations with respectively demersal and pelagic 
hauls (Stæhr, 2017; 2018).  
 
Figure 3: Acoustic survey area covered by Denmark with the research vessel R/V Dana in June-July 2017-18. 
Figure 3A (left map) shows the strata used in the HERAS survey covered by Denmark in 2017 and 2018. 
Figure 3B (right map) show parallel transects within each stratum used in 2017 and 2018 (Stæhr, 2017, 2018).  
 
 
Figure 4: Ship route and transects during the Danish acoustic survey with R/V Dana in June-July including 
associated trawl fishery stations. Figure 4A (left map) shows the route and transects in 2017 (Stæhr, 2017). 
Figure 4B (right map) shows the sailing route and transects in 2018 (Stæhr, 2018). On the maps the red triangles 
represent pelagic hauls, and the blue triangles represent demersal hauls, and the lines show the acoustic 
transects.  
 
6
8
10
12
56
58
60
at tude
21
31
41
42
151
152
6
8
10
12
56
58
60
at tude
21
31
41
42
151
152
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
10
2.2. Survey data collection  
2.2.1. Acoustic data monitoring, sampling and processing   
Hydroacoustic data was collected with a Simrad EK60 38 kHz echosounder mounted with the 
transducer type ES 38 possessing a 7x7 degrees main lobe and placed in a towed body (ICES CM, 
2015). The Simrad EK60 is a split-beam Windows(TM) operated echosounder with built-in 
calibration and can have several frequencies (Simrad EK60, 2019). The current study is based on the 
38 kHz transducer monitoring. A split-beam transducer is electrically divided into four quadrants 
which transmit parallel pulses that propagate through the water, and after having detected a target, 
the reflected, received signal from each quadrant is amplified separately in a four-channel matched 
receiver. It enables estimation of the position and angle of the target in the beam field by comparing 
the time difference of the acoustic wave front arriving at the four quadrants (Kongsberg Maritime 
AS, 2012). The reflected target causes the phase angle of the electrical output signal from the 
quadrants to differ and by comparing the two angles, the angle from the along-ship axis (θt) and the 
angle from the athwart-ship axis (φt), the targets position is calculated in the beam field. The fore-
and-aft angle (θt) is determined from the electrical phase difference between the fore and the aft 
transducer halves (a+c, b+d). The athwart-ship angle (φt) is determined from the phase difference 
between the starboard and port transducer halves (a+b, c+d) (Figure 5) (Simmonds and MacLennan, 
2005; Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012).  
 
 
Figure 5: A split-beam echosounder and the principle behind it, where the target direction is determined by the 
angle from the along ship axis (θt) and the athwart ship axis (φt). Signals received from the four quadrants are 
combined to determine the phase differences (ηθ and ηφ) which determine the angles (Simmonds and 
MacLennan, 2005). 
 
To determine the precise position and angle of the target, the speed of sound in water needs to be 
calculated with high accuracy. The speed of sound in seawater is not a constant value but a function 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
11
of temperature (T), salinity (S) and pressure (P) (MacZenzie, 1981), and it is necessary to know those 
parameters to calculate the exact time difference between emitted- and received pulses used to 
estimate the target depth (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). The sound speed in the local water 
column in Skagerrak was calculated to be 1494.5 m·s-1 in 2017 and 1501 m·s-1 in 2018, and acoustic 
equipment was calibrated according to this (Table 2). 
The echosounder is operated with a 1 ms (millisecond) pulse duration and a receiver bandwidth of 
2425 kHz. The vessel acoustic transect monitoring speed was between 9-11 knots and the towing 
depth of the towed body, where the transducer is placed, was continuously between 4-5 meters below 
the sea surface during monitoring to avoid disturbance from air bubbles and wind / wave turbulence 
(Stæhr, 2017, 2018). To reach the efficient depth ranges for coverage and monitoring of herring it is 
recommended by ICES in the ICES SISP 9: Manual for International Pelagic Surveys (2015) to 
sample and use data from about 2-3 m below the transducer surface to avoid transducer near-field 
effects when estimating fish close to the sea surface (ICES CM, 2015). This was acknowledged and 
followed in the current monitoring, and the water layer down to 3 m below the transducer was not 
included in the estimation of fish biomass (Stæhr, 2017, 2018).  
In addition, the EK60 echosounder with frequencies of 18 kHz, 38 kHz and 120 kHz that run on a 
hull-mounted transducer were used continuously throughout the survey to collect data as back-up. 
This transducer is placed on the survey vessel hull 6 m below sea surface. During trawl hauls, the 
Simrad EK60 mounted on the towed body was taken aboard and only the hull-mounted transducer 
was used.  For the analysis to generate the fish biomass estimates, only data gathered at a frequency 
of 38 kHz from the towed body mounted transducer was used and data obtained during trawl hauls 
was excluded from echo integration (ICES CM, 2018a). In the Danish acoustic herring survey, these 
additional hull mounted transducers with several frequencies are mostly used to distinguish echoes 
produced by fish from echoes produced by plankton, oceanographic discontinuities and submerged 
objects (ICES CM, 2018a). Shorter pulses can be transmitted with the higher frequency transducers, 
which increase the absorption and limit the maximum depth range but also increases the resolution 
(Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). The 120 kHz frequency is therefore a great tool to distinguish 
between the echoes showed on the 38 kHz echograms in the acoustic data judging process. Low 
frequency transducers have a lower resolution, however, can reach greater depth than soundwaves 
with high frequency. Thus, the 18 kHz frequency is used to distinguish echoes at larger ranges, where 
higher frequencies cannot reach (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). 
Calibrate the Simrad EK60 is required to maintain the accuracy for hydroacoustic sampling. The 
echosounder was calibrated according to the procedure established for an EK60 with three 
frequencies (18, 38 and 120 kHz) (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012; Demer et al., 2015). Calibration 
was performed on board the research survey vessel used in the surveys (R/V Dana) in the Bornö in 
the Gullmar Fjords at the west coast of Sweden during June 21st-23rd in 2017 and June 25th-28th in 
2018 (Stæhr, 2017, 2018). These fjords are characterized by calm and sheltered water with reasonable 
depth which is desirable when performing calibration. Here the ship is anchored up with the anchor 
in the front and a heavy weight on the trawl wire in the back to assure a very fixed position and 
minimal movement of the vessel during the calibration procedure.  
Calibration is done by lowering a reference target, with a very precise known target strength, into the 
transducer sound beam. The measured target strength is compared with the known target strength of 
the copper sphere (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012; Demer et al., 2015). For the Danish survey and 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
12
calibration process, three different copper spheres are used as reference targets. The sphere diameter 
is different for all three spheres and all three frequencies in order to obtain a range of target strengths 
to calibrate over (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012; Demer et al., 2015). The calibration of the towed 
body split-beam transducer at 38 kHz was carried out against a 60 mm copper sphere. The hull-
mounted 18 kHz, 38 kHz and 120 kHz frequency transducers were carried out against a 63mm, 60mm, 
23 mm copper sphere, respectively (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012). The corresponding target 
strength in dB for each copper sphere is given in Table 1.  
 
 Table 1: The diameter and target strength (TS) for the copper sphere used in calibration of an EK60 
echosounder with three different frequencies (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012).  
 
 
During calibration, environmental parameters of salinity and temperature is measured for every 0.5 
m between the transducer to the depth of the sphere and an average is calculated to give the exact 
speed of sound velocity. The environmental parameters are used to estimate range, propagation loss, 
and spreading loss (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012; Demer et al., 2015). In addition, the temperature 
is also used to calculate the absorption coefficients which give more accurate echogram information. 
Calculation of absorption and the speed of sound based on the specified temperature and salinity are 
done by the echo sounders (Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2012; Demer et al., 2015).  
Calibration was performed with one copper sphere at the time. First, the sphere was immersed into a 
solution of dishwash and freshwater to help eliminate air bubbles on the sphere surface (Kongsberg 
Maritime AS, 2012). The sphere was then attached to lines from three winches anchored to the sides 
of the ship, and then lifted overboard and held by the fastened lines to the desired depths below the 
transducer covering the transducer beam width area by depth. The reference target was moved slowly 
around and evenly distributed within the beam field to collect enough data points (>100) (Demer et 
al., 2015; Simrad EK60, 2019). Technical data, setting and calibration parameters for the acoustic 
system of the EK60 38kHz were measured and displayed in Table 2. 
For acoustic sampling, the reflected energy was stored in 0.3 m intervals from the transducer to the 
seafloor or to a maximum depth of 500 meters for each ping in a Simrad EK60 raw data format. After 
acoustic sampling the raw data was assessed in a judgement procedure. This procedure remove data 
from layers or intervals with disturbance from air bubbles, wind induced upwelling of surface layers, 
propeller noise from ships, bottom echoes, heavy abundance of zooplankton, jellyfish, submerged 
objects, surface turbulence, entrained air bubbles, oceanographic discontinuities, and other features 
or objects not believed to be echoes from fish. This process was conducted for every transect nautical 
mile from a depth of 3 meters below the transducer surface (to consider the near-field zone of the 
transducer as described above) to 1 meter above seafloor or to a maximum depth of 500 meters. It 
means that no integration data is available from a depth between 0 and 7-8 meters from sea surface 
due to the towing depth of the mounted transducer at 4-5 meters below the sea surface. This represents 
a bias in the monitoring but is standard during acoustic surveys in general.  
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
13
Table 2: Simrad EK60 and calibration settings used during the North Sea Acoustic Survey with R/V Dana in 
2017 and 2018  
 
 
The judgement process was conducted using a DTU-Aqua developed software, EV2Akubio (ICES 
CM, 2018a).  Here the judgement process was carried out by fisheries acoustics experts. In this 
software, data from each acoustic ping were pre-integrated in 1-meter depth layers and the energy 
was separated in 3 dB classis over one nautical mile. The software is built to investigate the current 
data to check for disturbance and make it possible to delete energy from a depth layer assumed not 
originating from biological reflectors. Furthermore, echo of low energy assumed to originate from 
jellyfish or plankton is removed by introducing a low target strength threshold for one or several 1-
meter depth channels. A minimum threshold of -70 dB is set as default from the beginning, where 
lower target strength thresholds are introduced in 3 dB steps if needed, to exclude echo of low energy.  
Accordingly, targets with lower target strength than this threshold are removed. The result of this 
process was acoustic echo energy, SA per 1 nautical mile in 1-meter depth layers, originating from 
fish between 3 meters below the transducer and 500 m or 1 m above the seafloor. 
The fish SA values per NM are divided into SA per species per NM by using the SplitNASC function 
in the acoustic calculation software StoX (Johnsen et al., 2015). The purpose of the SplitNASC 
function is to split mixed acoustic category SA data containing several biotic species into several 
single species SA data. The SplitNASC function is bases on the fish SA per 1 nautical mile in 1-m 
depth layers from the judgement process in the EV2Akubio software, the species and length 
composition in all trawl hauls in a radius of 50 nautical miles around the given 1 nautical mile acoustic 
sample and the TS-length relationship for each of the biotic species. The following equations are used 
to calculate the SA proportion for one biotic species of the total SA of the mixed category (Johnsen 
et al., 2015): 
𝑇𝑆𝑠,𝑙= 𝑚𝑠∙log10 𝐿𝑙+ 𝑎𝑠 
where TS is the target strength, s is the fish species, l is the fish length group, L is the mean fish length 
in cm within the length group, and m and a are a constant for the species (s) in the TS-length equation 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
14
(Johnsen et al., 2015). The TS is an averaged function that depend mostly on the species swimbladder 
size and form, tilt angle, species fat content and behavior. Consequently, this is species and size 
specific. The TS contribution from each species present in the overlapping survey trawl hauls, as well 
as the species length group distribution, were weighted in proportion to their occurrence in the catches 
from the trawl hauls analysed by biological sampling during the surveys (Nielsen, 1996; Nielsen et 
al. 2001).  The empirical estimate TS algorithms given in the ICES SIPS 9: Manual for International 
Pelagic Surveys (ICES 2015) were used for the constants m and a: 
𝐻𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑇𝑆= 20 𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝐿−71.2 𝑑𝐵 
𝑆𝑝𝑟𝑎𝑡 𝑇𝑆= 20 𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝐿−71.2 𝑑𝐵 
𝐺𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑖𝑑𝑠 𝑇𝑆= 20 𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝐿−67.5 𝑑𝐵 
𝑀𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑙 𝑇𝑆= 20 𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝐿−84.9 𝑑𝐵 
where L is the length in cm. The backscattering cross section (σ) for species per length group was 
then calculated in the software by the equation:  
σs,l = 4π ∙10(TSs,l/10) 
Afterwards the calculation of the backscattering cross section from N individuals with the same 
acoustic properties were made, (ω):  
𝜔𝑠,𝑙= σs,l ∙Ns,l 
where N is the number of individuals. The NASC (nautical area scattering coefficient) for species per 
length group was calculated from the following equation: 
𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑠,𝑙= (
𝜔𝑠,𝑙
∑
∑
𝜔𝑠,𝑙
𝑓
𝑠=1
𝑛
𝑙=1
) ∙𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 
where n is the number of length groups, f the number of species and total is the value representative 
for all length groups for all species (Johnsen et al., 2015). The nautical area scattering coefficient 
(NASC) per species was calculated by the software following the equation: 
𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑠= ∑𝑁𝐴𝑆𝐶𝑠,𝑙
𝑛
𝑙=1
 
This process produces an output of the herring SA per 1-m depth layer and 1 nautical mile which then 
becomes a measure for the abundancy of herring per 1-m depth layer per 1 nautical mile (Johnsen et 
al., 2015). 
 
2.2.2. Biological data sampling and processing 
Species allocation of the hydroacoustic records are impossible without biological information. The 
principle is to obtain biological information from samples of the schools shown on the echosounder 
(ICES CM, 2015).  
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
15
Biological data sampling was performed perpendicular to the hydroacoustic data sampling during the 
survey with large trawls having fine meshed cod-ends. Biological data was collected four times in a 
24-hour period, with two hauls carried out during the hours of darkness and two hauls during hours 
with sunlight (Figure 4). One-hour towing time was used as a standard for the Danish surveys. The 
vessel speed during trawling was consistently between 3-4 kn. The hauls during day hours with 
sunlight were carried demersal near the bottom. Hauls during the night hours of darkness were carried 
out at the surface. The reason for this division of trawling depth is to catch herring where they are 
observed. During day hours with sunlight, herring is mostly observed demersal but during the night 
hours of darkness and around dusk and dawn, herring is mostly observed in the upper layers close to 
the sea surface. For demersal trawling an EXPO trawl was used and for pelagic trawling a FOTÖ 
trawl was used, both with a 16 mm cod-end (Table 3) (Stæhr, 2017, 2018). The cod-end mesh sizes 
of the trawl (Table 3) are of adequate small size to assure appropriate selection of all relevant herring 
size groups (and other fish size groups and -species with acoustic targets that overlap in distribution 
/ occurrence with herring).   
During trawling, trawl setting data from Scanmar sensors are collected with measurement of the net 
circumference, vertical opening (TrawlEye, 2019), trawl door spread (SS4 DoorSensor, 2019) and 
trawl wirelength (Height/depth Sensor, 2019). The data is used to asses if the trawl has covered the 
intended water volume. The trawl information of the FÖTO- and EXPO trawl are displayed in Table 
3. The FOTÖ trawl had an average circumference of 397 meters, and an average vertical opening in 
2017 and 2018 of 15 m and 20-25 m, respectively. The EXPO trawl had a circumference of 192 m in 
average, and an average vertical opening in 2017 and 2018 of 5-7 m and 6-8 m, respectively. The 
trawl door type used during trawling for both the FÖTO- and EXPO trawl were of same dimensions 
and is shown in Table 3. The door spreading during trawling measured for the FÖTO trawl was in 
2017 between 70-80 m and in 2018 between 70-90 m. The door spreading measured for the EXPO 
trawl was in 2017 between 60-100 m and in 2018 between 60-110 m. The wirelength for the FÖTO 
trawl measured in 2017 was between 300-380 m and in 2018 between 300-350 m. For the EXPO 
trawl the wirelength was between 160-600 m and 200-720 m in 2017 and 2018, respectively (Table 
3).  
Table 3: Midwater trawl metrics used during HERAS 2017-18 (Stæhr, 2017, 2018).  
 
 
All trawl stations were selected and placed at localities with high SA-values expected to contain the 
targeted fish stocks within that survey area. To increase the probability of catching the herring stocks 
representatively, the trawl stations are also based on the distribution of herring from previous surveys 
and historic commercial catch data.   
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
16
The procedure to handle the trawl catch includes the measure of total weight of the entire catch with 
all species together. This was followed by sorting the catch into species, where the catch in number 
and weight was determined for each fish species caught per trawl station (Nielsen et al., 2001). For 
the target species (including herring, sprat and mackerel), length measurements of all fish caught by 
species were obtained. Sprat and herring are specifically measured per half centimeter (semi-cm = 
scm) and all other species to the whole centimeter. The length measurements used in the HERAS 
survey is the total length of the fish (TL) which is the measure from the tip of the snout to the tip of 
the longer lobe of the caudal fin, rounding down to the nearest centimeter or nearest semi-cm 
depending on species. For the target species, the length-weight relation is produced by taking the 
average individual weight of a number of fish by length class in the fully observed length distribution.  
(ICES CM, 2015).    
 
2.2.3. Hydrographic data monitoring, sampling and processing 
To determine salinity, temperature and chlorophyll A concentrations in the water column associated 
to the trawling locations, a vertical Conductivity Temperature Depth (CTD) profile of the water 
column structure was taken (Figure 4). The hydrographic data was collected with a SeaBird SBE11 
Conductivity Temperature Depth (CTD) Sensor (Sea-Bird Scientific, 2017). To process SBE data a 
Sea-Bird’s Windows data processing software is used, which calculate and plot temperature, 
conductivity, pressure data from auxiliary sensors and derived variables of salinity and sound velocity 
(Sea-Bird Scientific, 2017). 
Hydrographic data was collected four times during each 24-hour period of the survey. Here, two CTD 
casts were carried out just before trawling at trawling start stations (one during the night hours of 
darkness and one during day hours with sunlight) and two CTD casts were carried out just after the 
end of trawling at trawling end stations (one during the hours of darkness and one during hours with 
sunlight) (Figure 6).  
The CTD data was collected from approximately 1.5 meters below the sea surface to 0.5 meters above 
the bottom or to a maximum depth of 150 meters. Sampling produced vertical profiles of pressure 
(dB), temperature (°C), salinity (PSU), chlorophyll A (μg/l) and conductivity (μs/cm), where 
conductivity is a measure of how well a liquid solution conducts electricity and is related to the 
salinity. Salinity data combined with temperature data is used to determine seawater density. Seawater 
density is important in hydroacoustic surveys to determine the speed of acoustic sound (m.s-1) in the 
water which is important to calculate the bottom depth and the precise depth of the backscattered 
energy from the acoustic targets, i.e. measures necessary in acoustic surveys as explained more 
detailed above (Simmonds and MacLennan, 2005). The fluorescence sensor is used to estimate 
chlorophyll A concentration which is a proxy for the concentration of phytoplankton in the water 
column. However, the exact value of chlorophyll A is not available for the 2017 survey due to missing 
calibration in that year. Chlorophyll fluorescence can therefore only be used as an indicator of the 
order of magnitude of the vertical change in chlorophyll A for each station and as an indication of 
primary productivity distributed in Skagerrak.  
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
17
 
Figure 6: Ship route and transects during the Danish acoustic survey with R/V Dana in June-July with CTD 
and WP2 (secondary producer) stations. The left map show the survey route in 2017 (Stæhr, 2017), and the 
right map show the survey route in 2018 (Stæhr, 2018). On the maps the squares represent a combination of 
CTD and WP2 stations (see below), where X represent only CTD stations.  
 
2.2.4. Primary production 
Primary production was estimated by measuring chlorophyll A in the water column in 2018 by 
collecting water with a Rosette SBE 32 Carousel Water sampler (Sea-Bird Scientific, 2017). The 
fluorescence sensor on the CTD is used as an estimate of chlorophyll A, but do not produce exact 
values of chlorophyll A due to missing calibration. In 2018, calibration of the fluorescence sensor 
was performed. Firstly, water was collected at 6-7 depths per CTD station decided from the vertical 
Conductivity Temperature Depth (CTD) profile produced by the SeaBird SBE11 CTD sensor (Sea-
Bird Scientific, 2017). No fixed depths were used for water sampling due to differentiation in 
chlorophyll A peaks between CTD stations. If one or more chlorophyll A peak(s) were present at a 
CTD station these depths were of interest to collect and the remaining water samples were collected 
around the depth of the peak. It resulted in a variation of which depth water was collected from 
because the depth where chlorophyll A peak occur in Skagerrak differ between CTD stations. 
However, because chlorophyll A is calculated manually for every station, a fixed depth is not 
necessary. 
Two liters of water were collected by firing the Rosette closing device. One bottle was fired at a time 
at position after 1 min rest at a desirable depth (Sea-Bird Scientific, 2017). The two liters of water 
from each depth were filtered through a Glass-fiber filter (GF/C Ø47 mm) using a multiple vacuum 
filtration system (vacuum below 0.2 bar) and the filters were stored in a -40°C freezer for later 
analyse. The filters were extracted in ethanol, stored in dark for ~20 hours and centrifuged for 15 min 
at 10000 m·s-2 (or 500 g). The supernatant of each sample was then used to measure the chlorophyll 
A concentration by conducting a spectrophotometric analysis. Here a spectrophotometer is used to 
measure light beam intensity as a function of wavelength. The chlorophyll A concentration (μg·l-1) at 
each depth were calculated from the intensity at the wavelength of 665 nanometer (nm), the specific 
absorptions coefficient for ethanol (83.4l g-1·cm-1), the path length of the cuvette in cm, the volume 
ethanol used in liters and the volume of water filtered in liters and multiplied by 106: 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
18
𝑐ℎ𝑙. 𝐴 (𝜇𝑔 𝑙−1) = (𝑊𝑎𝑣𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ (665 𝑛𝑚)/83.4 (𝑔−1 ∙𝑐𝑚−1)
𝑐𝑢𝑣𝑒𝑡𝑡𝑒 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ (𝑐𝑚)
) ∙( 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑙(𝑙)
𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 𝑓𝑖𝑙𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑑 (𝑙)) ∙106 
Calibration of the chlorophyll sensor on the CTD was conducted through four steps. First, by 
calculating the ratio between the observed chlorophyll fluorescence obtained from the seabird 911 
CTD and the calculated chlorophyll A value (fluor/chl ratio). Second, this ratio was used to calculate 
a delta ratio by dividing the change in the fluor/chl ratio between two depths (Δfluor/chl) with the 
change in depth (Δdepth). Third, to estimate the ratio for each depth (every 0.5 meter) an interpolated 
ratio was calculated. The interpolated ratio was calculated by adding the two ratios from step one and 
two (fluor/chl ratio and delta-ratio) and multiplying it with the change in depth (Δdepth). Fourth, the 
calibrated value of chlorophyll A for every 0.5 meter per station was then calculated simply by 
dividing the observed fluorescence obtained from the seabird 911 with the interpolated ratio. 
 
2.2.5. Secondary production 
Zooplankton data was collected twice a day during the surveys, once during day hours at noon with 
sunlight and once during night hour with darkness around midnight next to the CTD stations (Figure 
6). Data was collected with a 180 µm netting  (“Working Party 2 – WP2 net”), which is developed as 
a standard sampler for smaller meso-zooplankton (UNESCO, 1968). The WP2 net used during the 
North Sea Herring Acoustic Survey (HERAS) in 2017 and 2018 has a cylindrical-conical shape with 
a circular aperture of 57 cm, which is maintained by a galvanized-iron ring made of metal rod 
(UNESCO, 1968). The WP2 nets are typically small nets hauled vertically and can therefore not 
provide information on the vertical distribution of zooplankton, as only a total zooplankton biomass 
was collected in that particular station for the full water column at that exact moment in time (ICES 
CM, 2015). The WP2 net was brought to 150 meters depth or to 5 meters above the sea bottom at a 
vertical sinking speed of 1 m·s-1 and raised to the sea surface with a speed of 0.5 m·s-1 while collecting 
zooplankton as the net was being vertically hauled (UNESCO, 1968). The net was then rinsed with 
sea water before returning the WP2 net back on deck to collect the entire sample in the plankton 
collector in the end of the net.  Sea water was also used to clean the plankton collector in order to 
recovering the sample which was then ready to be further processed.  
The samples from each WP2 station were fractionized in size groups by filters of 2000 µm, 1000 µm 
and 180 µm. Each fractionized sample was placed carefully on a pre-weighted tin foil tray which was 
handled with tweezers and put in a drying oven set to 60°C for 24 hours. This procedure is known to 
remove water without affecting the organic content. After the 24 hours, the dry weight was then 
measured for each fractionized sample by subtracting the weight of the tin foil tray giving the total 
dry weight of each zooplankton fraction size. The zooplankton biomass was expressed as mg·m-2. 
The data was processed with the software Ocean Data View version 5.1.7 (Schlitzer, 2019) producing 
plots indicating the distribution of zooplankton in Skagerrak form 2017-18.     
 
2.3. Data analysis  
2.3.1. Exploratory analysis  
Within this study the aim was to test the null-hypothesis analyzed at high spatial resolution and to 
explain the causality between change in herring distribution and the below mentioned variables, to 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
19
explain the observed spatial distribution differences of herring in Skagerrak in 2017 and 2018. The 
variables tested against herring distribution was temperature [°C], salinity [PSU], chlorophyll A [μg/l] 
and zooplankton [mg·m-2]. First, an exploratory analysis was performed to investigate if any 
obviously association between herring distribution and hydrographic fronts in respect of temperature 
and salinity, chlorophyll A concentration, and thus evidence of interaction with primary production 
and zooplankton concentrations, was present. The initial exploratory analyses of the different types 
of sampled and processed data was used to detect temperature and salinity fronts (frontal zones) and 
production zones in Skagerrak from 2017 and 2018 by using the software Ocean Data View (ODV) 
version 5.1.7 (Schlitzer, 2019). Furthermore, the exploratory analysis was used to compile 
distribution and biomass patterns of herring according to influencing parameters of hydrographical 
fronts, production biomass and primary producer densities in the software Ocean Data View (ODV) 
(Schlitzer, 2019).  
 
The hydrographic data, the biological primary- and secondary production data and the herring 
biomass data in form of SA values among other was processed and plotted using kriging for 
interpolation between data points in ODV (Schlitzer, 2019). Ocean Data View (ODV) is a program 
for exploration of oceanographic features, produce graphic display of oceanographic- and geo-
referenced profiles and evaluate trajectory and time-series data. ODV is based on an object-oriented 
C++ software code. The code provides a maximum execution power required for gridding, shading 
and contouring of large datasets (Schlitzer, 2019). ODV can produce numerous types of graphic 
output, however, to detect hydrographic fronts and production zones only section (transect) plots 
along cruise tracks were used. Section plots display the obtained data from stations within a given 
section (Schlitzer, 2019). The Marine Data section windows created for this study was set to have a 
fixed X-axis of longitude, from the western Skagerrak to eastern Skagerrak between 6.9°E longitude 
to 11.2°E longitude and a fixed Y-axis of depth between 8m to 150 m below the sea surface. The 
advantages of the section windows are that it also supports Z variables in addition to the X and Y 
variables. The Z variable was set to each parameter tested within this study, including herring [SA] 
biomass, temperature [°C], salinity [PSU], chlorophyll A as a primary production estimate [μg/l] and 
zooplankton concentration [mg·m-2]. The dataset was split in data collected during day hours with 
sunlight and night hours of darkness and split between years. Individual section plots were then 
created with each Z parameter for day data in 2017, day data in 2018, night data in 2017 and night 
data in 2018 (Figure 7-10). The display style used in each section plot, was a gridded property fields 
produced using DIVA gridding, instead of colored dots at each sampled position. DIVA gridding was 
used to improve visualization for the entire surveyed area of Skagerrak. For the exploratory analysis 
an automatic averaging length-scale was used for the X- and Y-axis to achieve smoothness. It can be 
done manually, however, the auto adjustment created the most smooth plots. DIVA gridding was 
used instead of the other gridding options available in ODV because DIVA has the advantages that it 
accounts for coastlines and bathymetry features. The DIVA function is included in the ODV 
installation pack and available by default which makes it easy to use. Furthermore, DIVA create a 
better result than the other gridding options of weighted-average or quick gridding, that typically 
wrongly transmit information across barriers (Schlitzer, 2019). In result, twenty graphic displays 
created in Ocean Data View (ODV) were used to explore distribution and biomass patterns of herring 
according to influencing parameters of hydrographical fronts, secondary production biomass and 
primary producer densities in Skagerrak in the preliminary data analysis in the results.   
  
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
20
2.3.2. In depth statistical multi-variate analyses 
The data collected and included in these analyses were concentrated in the area of Skagerrak. The 
assumption is accordingly, that herring not included in the analyses, distribute similar according to 
the hydrographic fronts and biological plankton assemblages as the herring inside the investigation 
area covered by the survey. For these analyses, herring data was collected continuously and 
aggregated for every one nautical mile following the full survey route and transects showed in Figure 
4. The CTD data was collected as point source data shown in Figure 6 and only as a standard sampling 
in connection with the trawl hauls. The estimated abundancy of herring from SA per nautical mile 
was therefore assigned to the CTD stations in the area of Skagerrak by using data for 10 NM for each 
CTD sample to test the hypotheses. This was done instead of using kriging of hydrographic data of 
the entire area of Skagerrak and allocate hydrographic data to the continuous acoustic values. The 
used method in this study was evaluated to be the best possible solution due to the minimal CTD 
stations available.  It would not be appropriate to use a kriging of hydrography with so few numbers 
of CTD stations because it would produce averages with only a low resolution and contrast in the 
hydrographic data and it would therefore not be possible to observe herring spatial distribution 
according to the full range of the observed values for the hydrographic parameters. It may have been 
preferable to collect CTD data more frequent to enable kriging and continuous hydrographic data 
with higher resolution and contrast. However, this would have demanded a more comprehensive 
hydrographic survey, and it would then be necessary to use an entire new survey-design different 
from the standard ICES acoustic survey design conducted at present. The few numbers of CTD 
stations is a standard method for the standard and internationally coordinated ICES acoustic survey 
of the North Sea and adjacent waters. Accordingly, it is only possible to use data for nearby standard 
acoustic surveys with secondary CTD stations for data collection in the area of Skagerrak.  
Assigned herring data (SA) to CTD stations was therefore understood to be the best solution for the 
in-depth statistical analysis. It was evaluated appropriate that ten SA log stations (10 NM) were 
assigned to one CTD station. Herring migrate and vertically distribute differently between the hours 
of sunlight and darkness. It was therefore important to obtain the instant moment and close-by 
occurrence of herring close to the CTD station. The knowledge of herring migration pattern was a 
reason for assigning ten SA log stations to each CTD station. Ten SA log stations per CTD station 
was evaluated to include most of the obtained SA log stations from the area of Skagerrak and would 
be close to the coordinates of the CTD station. If more SA log stations were used, data would exceed 
the appropriate range from the CTD station, and the analyses would accordingly not explain if 
hydrographic parameters are influencing herring spatial distribution. The time of the day was also 
included in this evaluation process. It was important that when a CTD station was obtained in the 
hours of darkness, that the SA log stations were also obtained in the hours of darkness and vice versa. 
This method also assured that the ten SA log stations were also picked according to trawl stations 
with the same reasoning as why they were assigned to CTD stations. Consequently, it is with this 
approach possible to observe the exact moment in time with the highest resolution and precision as 
possible for herring occurrence according to the observed point source CTD stations and trawl 
stations. 
Variability in herring biomass (dependent variables) was analysed with statistical multi-variate 
analysis of variance according to descriptive (explanatory) variables and co-variates in form of the 
described hydrographical and biological parameters. The analysis method used was several 
Generalized Additive Models (GAM) (Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990) run in the software RStudio 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
21
version 3.5 by using the gam {mgcv} packages in R (Wood, 2019c). In addition, a Generalized linear 
model (GLM TMB) (Magnusson et al., 2017) was used to analyse zero inflation and the residuals to 
check error distribution and variances and to see if the models described the herring biomass data 
well.   
A GAM is a non-parametric regression method that has a less strict assumption of normal distribution 
and linearity than linear regression methods (Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990). The concept of standard 
linearity assumption is extended in a GAM to including any underlying distributions from exponential 
families here including Poisson, gamma, normal and binominal distributions (Maravelias and Reid, 
1997). Each of these response distributions allows a large diversity of link functions to connect the 
mean with the additive predictor. Thereby, allowing GAMs a non-linear smooth relation between the 
explanatory variables on the response (Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990). The model run on a backfitting 
algorithm created by Hastie and Tibshirani (1990) described by Maravelias, Reid and Swartzman 
(2000) as “A backfitting algorithm (Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990) that cycle through the covariates, 
improving the overall smoothness at each iteration until the deviance (the measure used for fitting of 
the model to the data) no longer decreases” (Maravelias, Reid and Swartzman, 2000). Also, the GAM 
allows 0-observations in the statistical distributions (see below).  
A Generalized Additive Model (GAM) and not a Generalized Additive Mixed Model (GAMM) was 
used in this study. GAMMs are an extension of generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) that 
include a smooth function that allows smooth terms to be treated as random effects (Wood, 2019b). 
GAM was used within this study because it would not make sense to assume more random 
coefficients. If a large number of random effects were needed to be implemented in the model, a 
GAMM would have been the better alternative (Shadish, Zuur and Sullivan, 2014).  
In this study the dependent variable (herring biomass) was modelled as the additive sum of 
unspecified non-parametric smooth functions of hypothesized covariates and their interactions. The 
covariates or explanatory variables consist of temperature, salinity, secondary production and 
chlorophyll A in terms of primary production. All available variables and their first order interactions 
were initially included in the model. However, according to Akaike information criterion (AIC) the 
relative quality of the statistical model showed that the best fit would be dividing the dataset into day 
obtained data and night obtained data, resulting in two main models (having lower AIC values). The 
final GAM models (Table 4 below) for data collected during day hours with light (Table 4; model 
01a) and night hours of darkness (Table 4; model 05a) was:  
Herring biomass = temperature + salinity + chlorophyll A + zooplankton + year + s(Longitude, 
Latitude).  
Secondly, the GAMs including interactions of covariates during day hours with light (Table 4; model 
02a) and night hours of darkness (Table 4; model 06a) was:  
Herring biomass = temperature · salinity · chlorophyll A · zooplankton + year + s(Longitude, 
Latitude).  
The GAMs are very flexible but can create problems if the data is overfit. A method to ensure a good 
fit is using splines, which is used as an application to interpolate or smooth data (Wahba, 1990). In 
the present study a cubic spline for random effect was used on the geographical term (longitude and 
latitude). By using a cubic spline the spatial variability in data is taken into account. This was done 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
Materials and Methods  
22
to include the observation-specific spatial effect, so the spatial effect would not interact with the other 
estimated effects, which is then analysed by the models. The number of basis functions (k) in a 
smoother has a great impact on the shapes of the model. The degrees of smoothing performed by the 
smoother (k) was determined by the degrees of freedom (df) associated with the smooth term. In 
general, the function is less flexible with fewer df (Maravelias, Reid and Swartzman, 2000). For 
GAMs during the day hours the number of basis functions (k) in the smoother was set to 40, evaluated 
to be the best fit. Examination of every output and residuals for GAMs with different k values (from 
k=5 to k=70) was analysed by increasing k and refitting the original model (not shown). The analyse 
showed that  k=40 was the best choice for the model. The analysis was checked by comparing the 
degrees of freedom to the estimated degrees of freedom and the result showed that k=40 showed the 
highest possible estimated degrees of freedom, the best fitted residuals, most explained deviance, and 
lowest AIC. For GAM during the night hours the number of basis functions (k) in a smoother was set 
to 15. Again, different k values were examined (not shown) and from the output and residuals of the 
model, k=15 showed the highest estimated degrees of freedom compared to the chosen k value, the 
best fitted residuals, most explained deviance, and lowest AIC. The degrees of smoothing performed 
within this study was therefore decided from the dataset observed with the highest possible df and 
resulted in the used k values illustrated in Table 4 in the results.  
In this study, estimate of herring biomass included a high number of true zeroes, that represent the 
actual response output, i.e. that no herring was estimated at that depth in the sampled station, and not 
caused by missing values. Statistical data analysis of such zero-inflated data does almost never show 
ordinary distribution as a gamma distribution. Gamma distribution would with a zero-inflated dataset 
fit the model poorly (Min and Agresti, 2002). However, it was tested with an Generalized Linear 
Models using Template Model Builder in the R packages glmmTMB in RStudio (not shown). TMB 
is normally used to quickly implement complex random effects, however, only one random effect 
was used in this study. The model was not able to run the log-transformation with a gamma 
distribution due to the vast majority of zero values in the data (Min and Agresti, 2002). One possibility 
to run the model with a gamma distribution was to transform the data by removing all zero-values. 
However, in this study, the true zero-values contained important information about herring 
distribution as well as when herring is present. The solution was therefore to run a GAM with tweedie 
distribution.  
Tweedie was firstly used because the dataset consisted of real numbers and not integers. If the data 
would have consisted of nonnegative integers, a negative binominal distribution would also have been 
tested. Furthermore, by using the tweedie family the distribution support positive reals with a point 
mass at zero but is otherwise continuous (Wood, 2019a), which also was expected for the distribution 
of the data within this study. To confirm that the tweedie family was appropriate to use in the present 
study and to analyse the residuals of the models, Generalized Linear Models (GLM TMBs) were run 
with same dataset as used in the GAMs (Appendix I; Table I). For the residual analysis the test for 
both the night- (Appendix I; Table III) and day model (Appendix I; Table II) showed a very small 
mismatch between model and data, with a higher mismatch during the day than during the night 
(Appendix I; Figure IIa & IIIa). However, the residuals performed quite well, and the diagnostics 
showed that the models are appropriate to use, i.e. the test showed that the data were valid and that 
the GAMs describe the herring biomass data well. For the analysis of using a tweedie distribution 
with glmmTMB confirmed that a tweedie was appropriate. The test was conducted by checking if the 
model could account for any zero inflation. The test was done by simulating data (n=10000) from 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
Results  
23
GLM 03b and GLM 07b (Appendix I; Table I) of day data and night data, respectively, to check if 
real observed zero-fraction matched the simulated and expected number of 0-observations (Appendix 
I; Figure IIb & IIIb). The test show that the model account for the positive mass at zero and a tweedie 
distribution was therefore showed as the appropriate family to use in the GAMs (Appendix I; Figure 
IIb & IIIb). Accordingly, the overall tests proved that the GAMs sufficiently explain the data and 
provide enough reasoning for using Generalized Additive Models with the tweedie family and 
without zero-inflation in this study as the final models, used for explaining herring distribution and 
biomass.  
The output from the models provide the fitted gam object produced by the gam() packages in RStudio 
(Wood, 2019c). The algorithm models the degrees of freedom, standard-error bands, tests of 
significance between terms and separates the parametric and nonparametric contributions within 
terms, which is then represented in an ANOVA table and are shown in the results.   
 
3. Results  
3.1. Exploratory analysis  
Section plots created in the software Ocean Data View (ODV) shows a considerable higher herring 
biomass during the hours of light in 2018 in the eastern Skagerrak compared to 2017 and compared 
to night hours of darkness. The herring biomass in 2018 during the day hours with sunlight was 
estimated to be around 2365 SA in the eastern Skagerrak at 10.819°E / 58.521°N (Figure 8). In 
comparison, during the hours of darkness herring estimate shows a considerably lower biomass with 
the highest recorded herring biomass of around 314 SA, distributed in the western part of Skagerrak 
at 7.053°E / 57.803°N (Figure 10). In 2017 during day hours with light, highest herring biomass (~337 
SA) is observed at 9.785°E / 57.952°N (Figure 7), but increases during hours of darkness with a 
biomass at 436 SA distributed in the mid transect (East to West) of Skagerrak close to the Norwegian 
coast at 9.057°E / 58.381°N (Figure 9).  
From the temperature and salinity section plots, it is observed that the water in 2017 was characterized 
by having a deeper spring layer and more mixed water columns compared to 2018. Furthermore, the 
recorded temperatures in 2018 is slightly higher in the upper water column and lower in the deep-
water compared to 2017.  
In terms of primary production, based on chlorophyll A, the highest recorded abundance is observed 
in 2017 during the hours of darkness. Primary production is abundant in patches almost in the entire 
surveyed area, with the highest abundance in the eastern Skagerrak (Figure 9). During hours of 
sunlight, primary production abundance decreases, however, the highest abundance is still observed 
in the eastern Skagerrak (Figure 7). In 2018, primary production is not as abundant compared to 2017, 
but the highest abundance observed that year is close to the west coast of Northern Jutland in Denmark 
during the hours with sunlight (Figure 8). Furthermore, it is observed that the lowest recorded primary 
production abundance in 2018 was during night hours of darkness, compared to 2017 and compared 
between night and day hours (Figure 10).  
 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
Results  
24
Zooplankton abundance from the section plots did not show a preference to either eastern- or western 
Skagerrak, where high zooplankton abundance is observed in both areas. In 2018, high secondary 
production is primarily observed in the eastern Skagerrak during hours of sunlight (Figure 8), but 
more abundant in the western Skagerrak in hours of darkness (Figure 10). In 2017, high zooplankton 
abundance is observed in both the Eastern and Western Skagerrak and lower abundance in mid-
section of Skagerrak during day hours with light (Figure 7). However, the highest recorded 
zooplankton abundance of 2017 and 2018 is observed in the western Skagerrak in 2017 during day 
hours with light. Furthermore, secondary production also shows high abundance in the western area 
of Skagerrak during night hours of darkness in 2017 (Figure 9).  
In this exploratory analysis from section plots in ODV of herring biomass, temperature, salinity, 
chlorophyll A and zooplankton, no clear pattern is observed. It is therefore necessary to include 
statistical tests to evaluate the hypothesis, to answer if there is any association between herring 
distribution and hydrographic fronts in respect of temperature and salinity or any association between 
herring distribution and primary- and secondary production.  
 
3.2. In depth statistical multi-variate analyses 
Total herring biomass as dependent variable from acoustic records was regressed for data collected 
during the day hours with sunlight against the explanatory variables of temperature, salinity, 
zooplankton and primary production in terms of chlorophyll A (Table 4; model 01a) and their 
interactions (Table 4; model 02a). Secondly, herring biomass was regressed as dependent variable for 
data collected during night hours with darkness against the same explanatory variables (Table 4; 
model 05a) and their interactions (Table 4; model 06a). In Table 5-8 the significant values (p-level) 
of the GAM covariates for night and day are given. The results are represented in the following order. 
First the GAMs without interaction of day (Table 4) and night (Table 5). Secondly, the GAMs with 
interaction terms for day (Table 6) and night (Table 7).  
Different models were performed before evaluating the best fit and choosing the best fitting smooths 
and k-values for the model as explained in the method section 2.3.2. 
The GAMs with and without interactions (Table 4) performed well, where the GAM for day without 
interactions (Table 4: model 01a) explained the deviance by 52.5% with an Akaike information 
criterion (AIC) of 11588.98. However, by including interaction terms of day data (Table 4: model 
02a) the deviance explained, increased to 54.8% and showed a lower AIC of 11447.22. The GAMs 
during the night with and without interactions also performed well. The GAM without interactions 
(Table 4: model 05a) explained deviance by 54.6% with an AIC of 8277.813. However, in the GAM 
during night hours with interactions, the deviance explained increased to 63.1% and showed a lower 
Akaike information criterion (AIC) of 7903.637.  The model during the day and during the night with 
interaction were therefore the best models explaining herring biomass.  
 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
Results  
25
 
Figure 7: ODV section plots of measured herring [SA] biomass, temperature [°C], salinity [PSU], chlorophyll 
A as a primary production estimate [μg/l] and zooplankton [mg/dry weight] from data collected during day 
hours with light in 2017. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
Results  
26
 
Figure 8: ODV section plots of measured herring [SA] biomass, temperature [°C], salinity [PSU], chlorophyll 
A as a primary production estimate [μg/l] and zooplankton [mg/dry weight] from data collected during day 
hours with light in 2018 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
Results  
27
 
Figure 9: ODV section plots of measured herring [SA] biomass, temperature [°C], salinity [PSU], chlorophyll 
A as a primary production estimate [μg/l] and zooplankton [mg/dry weight] from data collected during night 
hours of darkness in 2017. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
Results  
28
 
Figure 10: ODV section plots of measured herring [SA] biomass, temperature [°C], salinity [PSU], chlorophyll 
A as a primary production estimate [μg/l] and zooplankton [mg/dry weight] from data collected during night 
hours of darkness in 2018 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
Results  
29
Before checking if the model is coherent with the data, and if the explanatory variables and their 
interactions are significant, the residuals of the model are examined (Figure 11-12).  Autocorrelation 
plots of the residuals are shown in Figure 11-12, to see whether the smooth terms sufficiently 
accounted for autocorrelation in the data. From the normal theoretical quantiles (Q-Q plot), a small 
divergence from normal distribution assumption of the residuals at the tails is found, otherwise it 
follows the straight line for both day and night (Figure 11 and 12). Furthermore, the residuals versus 
linear predictor (fitted values) during the day (Figure 11) shows that the assumption of constant 
variance is untenable with a tail in the negative direction. However, during the night model (Figure 
12) the variance is more constant as the mean increases where some residuals overspread. This trend 
is confirmed by the histogram of residuals, that show a high proportion of negative values and a vast 
majority of zero values in the dataset (Figure 11 and 12), with a high proportion of zero values in the 
data during the night (Figure 12). The response variable against fitted values, shows that constant 
variance assumptions has not been reached and could be caused by high variables in the fitted data 
(Figure 11-12). Otherwise, it suggests that other explanatory variables are missing to increase the 
model sufficiency. However, for the sake of balance all data are kept, and it is assumed that the model 
assumptions hold. The residuals for the GAM, was checked by using GLM TMB package in R 
(Appendix I). The results showed a very small mismatch between model and data, with a higher 
mismatch for the day model than the night model (Appendix I; Figure IIa & IIIa). However, the 
residuals performed quite well, and the diagnostics showed that it is appropriate to use this model, 
i.e. the test showed that the data was valid and that the GAMs describe the herring biomass data well. 
According to the tweedie distribution used in the models, the GLM TMB packages was also used to 
validate this choice of family. The test showed that it was justified to use tweedie with the actual 
number of 0-observations, and not a gamma or negative binominal distribution. 
GAM without interaction terms 
The GAMs without interaction of the explanatory variables show, for both day hours with sunlight 
and night hours of darkness, that the physical parameters of temperature and salinity and the 
biological parameters of primary- and secondary production, have a highly statistically significant 
effect on herring biomass (Table 5 and 6). The model during the day shows that herring biomass is 
affected significantly by temperature (p < 2·10-16, n = 2972), salinity (p = 9.24·10-13, n = 2972), 
primary production (p = 1.08·10-04, n = 2972), zooplankton (p < 2·10-16, n = 2972) and between years 
(p < 2·10-16, n = 2972) (Table 4). Herring biomass during the night is also affected significantly by 
temperature (p < 2·10-16, n = 3327), salinity (p < 2·10-16, n = 3327), primary production (p < 2·10-16, 
n = 3327) and zooplankton (p = 9.64·10-05, n = 3327) (Table 5).  
The response of all explanatory variables shows the same negative or positive trend in both models 
of the day and night relationships, where the explanatory variables of temperature, salinity, 
chlorophyll A shows a positive correlation, i.e. the higher temperature, salinity and chlorophyll A the 
higher herring biomass, and year showed a negative correlation, i.e. higher biomass in 2017 than 
2018. The variable of zooplankton changes trend in the correlation between day and night models by 
having a positive effect during day hours (Table 5) and a negative effect during night hours (Table 
6). Temperature, salinity and chlorophyll A shows a positive correlation to herring biomass, which 
indicate that the higher the temperature and salinity and the higher the abundance of primary 
production is, the higher the biomass of herring is (Table 5 and 6). The main effect model results also 
indicate that herring biomass increases as food availability (zooplankton) increases (Table 5), 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
Results  
30
however, there is a negative significant relation during the night (Table 6), which could be explained 
by herring being visual predators on zooplankton, where zooplankton aggregations dissolve during 
the night and herring accordingly will not aggregate around zooplankton during darkness.  
GAM with interaction terms 
By including interaction terms in the GAM models, the correlations become more nuanced, and 
changes the perception of the results, i.e. the patterns appear to be more complex. The results of GAM 
05a (Table 4) with data from day hours with light, show that only zooplankton is the significantly 
influencing main effect on herring distribution and biomass (p = 6.51·10-11, n=2972). The results 
show a positive correlation, i.e. the higher zooplankton abundance the higher herring biomass (Table 
7). In addition, herring biomass is affected significantly different between years (p = 1.51·10-10, 
n=2972) with a negative relation. Furthermore, the result only shows a weak significant interaction 
effect at a 0.05 level, with herring biomass affected significantly in temperature and zooplankton 
interactions (p = 0.0168, n=2972) and when temperature, salinity and zooplankton are in interaction 
(p= 0.0162, n=2972). The results show that zooplankton is the main effect, affecting herring 
distribute. 
The results from GAM  06a (Table 4) for data during night hours of darkness, shows a more complex 
picture compared to GAM 05a during the day (Table 4). The strong biological effect of correlation 
between herring and zooplankton abundance disappears (p = 0.013742, n=3327), and the physical 
parameters are now highly significant (Table 8), with herring biomass highly affected by temperature 
(p = 4.58·10-09, n=3327) and salinity (p = 7.57·10-08, n=3327). Furthermore, primary production 
shows a lower significant effect on herring biomass (p= 2.51·10-03, n=3327). Statistically significant 
interaction effects are now present in almost every scenario (Table 8) with highly significant effect 
(p<0.001) when temperature is included in an interaction. Highly significant effect on herring biomass 
(p<0.001) is shown in interaction with temperature and salinity (p= 4.26·10-10, n=3327), temperature 
and primary production (p= 1.87·10-04, n=3327), temperature and zooplankton (p= 5.08·10-04, 
n=3327), temperature, salinity and primary production (p= 1.03·10-04, n=3327), temperature, salinity 
and zooplankton (p= 2.21·10-04, n=3327), temperature, primary production and zooplankton (p= 
4.81·10-04, n=3327) and with all explanatory variables of temperature, salinity, primary- and 
secondary production (p= 2.71·10-04, n=3327).  
The result shows that when zooplankton is not significant anymore, then complex significant effect 
of physical factors appears during night hours. Those patterns are not apparent during day hours 
because the zooplankton abundance correlation is so dominant during day hours. The results from the 
four main models of day and night with and without interactions, indicates that interaction effects are 
important to include in the models. This is to obtain more in depth understanding of the main factors 
influencing herring biomass and that there appears to be very different mechanisms determining 
herring biomass during day and night hours likely because of diurnal feeding behavior. To include 
interaction effects is necessary to obtain a realistic perception of herring distribution and biomass 
correlated to physical and biological parameters. 
To investigate the main effect models further and possibly provide a more detailed understanding of 
the dynamics, other scenarios were modeled with the main effect GAMs. First, the year variable was 
removed from the model (without interactions) during night hours (Table 4; model 05a) because the 
variable did not show a significant effect in the main model. However, by removing this explanatory 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
Results  
31
variable no strong change in results appeared, but only a lesser proportion of variability in the data 
and deviance was explained and a slightly higher Akaike information criterion (AIC) appeared (not 
shown). This was the reason for including year in the final main effect GAM for the night hours. In 
the main model (with interaction terms) during day hours (Table 4; model 02a), zooplankton was 
removed from the model (not shown). It resulted in significant effect for all explanatory parameters, 
and a radical decrease in the proportion of deviance explained by the model and a significant increase 
of the Akaike information criterion (AIC), and was therefore not used as a result. A further 
investigation of the GAM (with interaction terms) during night hours (Table 4; model 06a), that did 
not show a clear picture in the main model, was conducted. Firstly, chlorophyll A was removed from 
the model and afterwards zooplankton (not shown). Unfortunately, it did not provide a better picture 
of the relation to herring biomass and distribution, where the degree of the variability in the data 
explained by the models decreased and the Akaike information criterion (AIC) increased.    
 
 
 
Figure 11: Residuals analysis of; Left: model 01a (model of data collected during day hours) without 
interactions from the statistically analysis including all effects and; Right: model 02a (model of data collected 
during day hours) from the statistically analysis including all effects and their interactions. 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Residuals analysis of; Left: model 05a (model of data collected during night hours) without 
interactions from the statistically analysis including all effects and; Right: of model 06a (model of data 
collected during night hours) from the statistically analysis including all effects and their interactions. 
 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
Results  
32
Table 4: Generalized additive models (GAMs) for statistically analysis, showing model name, description of 
model (if the model run on data collected during the day hours with light or during the night hours of darkness), 
the equation used in the GAM, the deviance the model can explain in % and the Akaike information criterion 
(AIC) for the model. 
 
 
 
Table 5: Results, parametric coefficients and the estimates of the statistically analyses of the dependent variable 
(herring biomass) with model 01a (model of data collected during day hours) without interaction terms. All 
effects are shown with all effects statistically significant. Dependent variable  
 
 
 
Table 6: Results, parametric coefficients and the estimates of the statistically analyses of the dependent variable 
(herring biomass) with model 05a (model of data collected during night hours) without interaction terms. All 
effects are shown with all effects statistically significant except for year.  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
Results  
33
 
Table 7: Results, parametric coefficients and the estimates of the statistically analyses of the dependent variable 
(herring biomass) with model 02a (model of data collected during day hours) with interaction terms. All effects 
are shown with interaction effects included.  
 
 
 
Table 8: Results, parametric coefficients and the estimates of the statistically analyses of the dependent variable 
(herring biomass) with model 06a (model of data collected during night hours) with interaction terms. All 
effects are shown with interaction effects included. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
Discussion  
34
4. Discussion  
Herring spatial distribution around temperature and salinity fronts and their association with primary- 
and secondary production in Skagerrak was explored in the Ocean Data View (ODV) section plots in 
the exploratory analysis. In 2017, the initial analyses showed a warmer water column compared to 
2018. However, sea surface temperature was higher in 2018. Furthermore, the exploratory analyses 
showed that the pycnocline was more distinct in 2018 with the temperature decreasing-, and salinity 
increasing within a few meters’ depth. In 2017, the weather was characterized by having more 
extreme wind and waves compared to 2018. The weather in 2018 was rather calm and can explain 
the more compact pycnocline (i.e. the narrower vertical layer of changing temperature and salinity), 
where the sea surface temperature increased steadily as the water column did not have a strong wind 
induced mixing. Herring between the two years showed an overall higher biomass in 2018 compared 
to 2017 with more clusters throughout Skagerrak (Figures 7 and 8). At first observation, a clear pattern 
between herring distribution and physical- and biological factors was not apparent. Herring was 
distributed from the first upper layer around the halo- and thermocline, however, they were also 
distributed around 80 meters below the sea surface, with completely different salinity and temperature 
ranges. Primary production in terms of chlorophyll A and secondary production in terms of 
zooplankton showed an increased abundance in the eastern Skagerrak during daytime in 2018 (Figure 
8), and eastern Skagerrak was also the area of the highest herring biomass overall (Figure 8). It 
indicates that herring move according to biological factors. However, the relation between herring 
biomass and biological factors was not clear nor obvious in 2017 (Figure 7) or clear during the night 
in 2018. From the explanatory analyses it was consequently not possible to conclude on the 
relationships between herring distribution / biomass and biological- or hydrographic factors between 
day and night. Accordingly, it was necessary to conduct in depth statistically analysis to assess 
significance of potential relationships.  
In the main model analysed in the in-depth statistical analyses (Table 4; model 01a and 05a) without 
interaction effects, the result showed that every main parameter was highly significant. Temperature, 
salinity and chlorophyll A showed a positive relation both during the night and day, indicating higher 
herring biomass in waters with higher temperature, salinity and primary production. Furthermore, 
complex interactions seemed to occur as zooplankton changed its trend in relationship between day 
and night, with a positive relation during day to a negative relation during night. It accordingly needs 
to be further explored and it was from this result decided that interaction effects between the 
explanatory variables were necessary to include in the Generalized Additive Model analyses. The 
inclusion of interaction effect was supported by the higher proportion of deviance explained and the 
lower Akaike information criterion (AIC) in GAMs with interaction terms.   
The results during the day hours with light (Table 4; model 02a) showed a clear preference of herring 
distributing with higher biomass according to zooplankton. With reference to the explanatory analysis 
(Figures 7 and 8) a positive correlation between herring biomass and zooplankton could be observed 
during the day hours. Especially in 2018, that had the absolute highest herring biomass found in the 
same area where also the highest zooplankton abundance was found (Figure 8). In 2017 the result 
was not as clear. The highest herring biomass was found in an area without peak zooplankton 
abundance. However, the second highest herring biomass was found distributed in the area with the 
highest zooplankton abundance (Figure 7). During the day hours with light the H1 hypothesis was 
confirmed by the results, where no association between herring distribution and hydrographic fronts 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
Discussion  
35
in respect of temperature and salinity was found. Secondly, the hypothesis H2 was also confirmed 
with no relation between herring distribution and chlorophyll A concentration and thus no evidence 
of an interaction with primary production was found. The hypothesis H3 however was rejected 
because a strong and significant correlation between herring biomass and zooplankton concentration 
in Skagerrak during the day among others was found. The hypothesis H4 was rejected during the day, 
where interactions between any of the above-mentioned physical- and biological factors was found 
slightly significant (P<0.05). The two interactions found significant at a 0.05 level, included an 
interaction between temperature and zooplankton (p=0.0168, n=2972), and an interaction between 
temperature, salinity and zooplankton (p=0.016, n=2972). 
The results during night hours are more complex and difficult to interpret in an unambiguous way 
from a biological point of view. The GAM model 06a (Table 4) with interaction for the observations 
during night hours, did not show the same clear result as the results during the day. Here, the results 
show a more complex picture. The strong biological correlations and effects showed during the day, 
disappeared during the night, and it became clear that zooplankton was no longer the determining 
factor controlling herring distribution (Table 8). By looking at the observed ODV section plots in the 
exploratory analysis, zooplankton did not show a strong association with herring biomass during the 
night either. In 2018, where the correlation was strongest during the day, herring was not as abundant 
during the night (Figure 10). In addition, herring showed distribution and higher biomass in areas 
where zooplankton was almost not present during the night (Figure 10). In 2017, herring biomass was 
high in more zooplankton abundant areas, but from the ODV section plots, zooplankton showed an 
overall high abundance in most areas of Skagerrak that year (Figure 9). The hypothesis of H3 can 
accordingly not be confirmed for both day and night observations. The difference between the night 
and day biological correlations can likely be associated to feeding behavior of herring as discussed 
below.   
That herring distribute significantly according to zooplankton concentrations is very much supported 
in the literature. Herring is visual particle feeders (Stevenson and Scott, 2005) predating on 
zooplankton, and this could explain the statistically significant result during the day, and similarly 
the lack of significance during the night hours. During complete darkness herring would not be able 
to make visual predation and distribute according to food organisms. This explains the missing 
significant correlation to zooplankton during night, where herring probably to a higher degree 
distribute according to other factors. 
Herring is a diurnal vertical migrating fish that is found in the entire water column. It typically feeds 
primarily at dusk and dawn in the upper water column, where they rise to the surface at dusk and 
migrate down after dawn as a response to changes in light intensity (Stevenson and Scott, 2005). In 
this study, herring distribution and the exploratory variables were divided into hours with sunlight 
and hours of complete darkness. The observations during dusk and dawn was not included in the 
analysis but could have provided better results due to the importance for herring feeding during these 
hours. However, the data included within the present study cover as much of herring SA values as 
possible with data just prior to dusk and just after dawn included. The method within this study has 
its limitations. CTD casts were conducted as point source data four times in a 24-hour period (one 
cycle), but herring SA values were obtained continuously and aggregated for every one nautical mile. 
Some SA data would obviously not be included in this test, because SA log stations were assigned to 
the CTD stations and not the other way around. If it had been possible to collect CTD data more 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
Discussion  
36
frequently to enable kriging analyses on more frequent or continuously sampled hydrographic data 
with higher resolution and contrast in time and space, all herring biomass data of SA sampled on 
continuous basis could have been included in the analyses. However, in this case, it would be 
necessary to use an entire new survey-design different from the standard ICES acoustic survey design 
conducted, which is not possible to obtain at present. For now, only data for nearby standard acoustic 
surveys with secondary CTD stations (and trawl stations) for data collection in the area of Skagerrak, 
is possible. The method used in this study was therefore the best possible solution to obtain the highest 
resolution and contrast in the hydrographic data as possible given the survey design. The method also 
produces the best analyses and tests of herring spatial distribution according to the full range of the 
observed hydrographic parameters from the present data sampling. 
During the day, the physical factors did not show significant impact (correlation) on herring 
distribution, but from the results of the GAM model 06a (Table 4) for data during night hours, 
physical factors showed a statistically significant correlation. The results showed that the physical 
factors become highly significant and biological factors become less significant, however, very 
significant in interaction with other explanatory variables (Table 8). Even though the covariates of 
salinity and temperature both came out highly significant, it is only temperature that are always 
included in the highly significant interactions (Table 8). Thus, during the night hours of darkness the 
hypothesis H1 was rejected with a strong significant correlation between herring distribution / 
biomass and hydrographic factors of temperature and salinity in Skagerrak during the night. The 
hypothesis H2 was confirmed showing no relation between herring distribution / biomass and 
chlorophyll A concentration and thus no evidence of an interaction with primary production. 
Furthermore, hypothesis H3 was also confirmed because no significant correlation between herring 
distribution and zooplankton concentration in Skagerrak during the day was found. The hypothesis 
H4 was however rejected during the night where interactions between any of the above-mentioned 
physical and biological factors was found significant. The physical factor of temperature was always 
included in the highly significant interactions and salinity in less significant interactions.  
Temperature has in the literature been suggested as a determining factor for herring distribution 
(Maravelias and Reid, 1995) as well as zooplankton (Maravelias and Reid, 1997). In the present study, 
temperature showed a negative relation, where a higher temperature resulted in a low herring biomass. 
Studies have found herring to distribute in specific temperature ranges typically in cold waters. 
Maravelias and Reid (1995) found that high herring biomass distributed in temperature ranges 
between 12°C and 13°C, representing the more cold water masses at the studied area off the Orkney- 
and Shetland Islands (Maravelias and Reid, 1995), but found in a later study the preferred temperature 
range to be between 9°C and 10.5°C in the same area (Maravelias and Reid, 1997). Comparing the 
ranges observed off the Orkney- and Shetland Islands, a minimum temperature even lower than 9°C 
was observed in this study. However, a study from the Georges Bank area suggested that Atlantic 
herring had a preferred temperature range of 5°C to 9°C (Zinkevich, 1967), closer to the minimum 
temperature range in this study. Overall, it seems that herring distribute in the coldest waters possible 
in their distributed area and not a definite temperature range same for all herring stocks. The more 
northern stocks seem to be adapted to colder water temperatures in general. Brunel and Dickey-Collas 
(2010) observed the same trend, where herring stocks in the North Atlantic live in very different 
temperatures, with a negative relation between population density and mean temperature (Brunel and 
Dickey-Collas, 2010). The study found that water temperature was the determining factor for herring 
growth, where cold waters resulted in lower growth coefficient, but longer lifespan compared to the 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
Discussion  
37
ones living in warmer waters (Brunel and Dickey-Collas, 2010). This indicates that physiological 
adaptations and effects are connected to the preferred temperatures for herring occurrence. 
Temperature has proven to be important for physiological processes. For instance, the development 
of  herring gonads is effected by temperature where, if the temperature is too high, it can accelerate 
gonad development and result in pre-maturation (Lam, 1983).    
As observed from the exploratory analyses, the correlation between herring distribution / biomass 
and temperature and salinity during the night is not obvious. Herring showed distribution from the 
first upper water layer around the halo- and thermocline, however they also distributed with high 
densities around 80 meters depth below the sea surface (Figure 9 and 10). That herring is observed at 
different depths is likely because it is a diurnal vertical migrating species, and is therefore found in 
the entire water column during an diurnal cycle (Stevenson and Scott, 2005). Salinity and temperature 
were both highly statistically significant covaries during the night. In the exploratory analysis it was 
observed that herring had a preference to occurrence in hydrographic fronts where herring showed a 
distribution in or just above or below the halo- and thermocline, when they were not observed at 
deeper depths. A study conducted by Nielsen et. al (2001) showed that peak densities of the Rügen 
herring occurred where the water was stratified and typically just below or directly in the halocline, 
but no significant effect of the thermocline was shown. Other studies have found that North Sea 
herring density peaks are typically found in areas between stratified and mixed water masses or close 
to hydrographical fronts both in the North Sea associated and Baltic Sea waters (Raid, 1989; 
Maravelias and Reid, 1995). If this also was the case in Skagerrak, a relatively higher biomass of 
herring in 2017 would be expected, where the water was characterized by having both mixed and 
stratified water columns. However, it showed a lower biomass compared to 2018. One explanation 
for the difference in herring biomass between 2017 and 2018 is most likely that herring is a 
geographical migrating species, with only a high biomass in Skagerrak when foraging in the spring 
and early summer. These feeding migrations can vary from year to year (e.g. Nielsen et al., 2001). 
This study has not included the areas outside Skagerrak or split the herring according to the proportion 
of North Sea herring compared to the Western Baltic herring in the area. It is therefore not possible 
to conclude whether the stocks have been feeding in the area and returned to spawning and wintering 
grounds already, or migrated further out in the North Sea, or if they have not arrived in Skagerrak 
yet. Further and more elaborate studies are therefore needed to explain the full dynamics of the herring 
distribution patterns in the Skagerrak area during the survey period of the ICES international acoustic 
herring survey.   
There have been some difficulties in identifying and separating temperature and zooplankton as the 
main determining factors influencing herring distribution in the North Sea and Baltic Sea area. One 
major reason is that the copepod Calanus finmarchicus which is common prey for herring, is a cold-
water species with a southern distribution limit in the North Sea (Corten, 2001). C. finmarchicus 
would therefore also be expected to distribute in the colder water masses. However, within this study, 
day and night data were split and run in two separate models. It was, consequently, possible to observe 
the preference for herring to distribute according to food during the day, where herring is not restricted 
by light according to predation. During the night, herring probably distribute more significantly 
according to water temperature, but the model did not show an unambiguous pattern and clear picture 
in the correlations to herring distribution and was difficult to interpret in a unidirectional way. Other 
potential influencing factors on herring distribution not included in this study, e.g. occurrence of 
predators, could also influence herring distribution. Herring is an important prey for many piscivorous 
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
Conclusion  
38
fish, marine mammals and sharks, and might distribute as a response to predation and should ideally 
be included in further studies.  
 
5. Conclusion  
The thesis analysed herring distribution according physical- and biological factors by using 
Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) of main effects (including temperature, salinity, primary 
production in terms of chlorophyll A and secondary production in terms of zooplankton) without 
interactions. In conclusion the study found all explanatory variables highly significant both during 
the day and during the night, with temperature, salinity and primary production having a positive 
relation to herring biomass. However, zooplankton changed from a positive relation during the day 
to a negative relation during the night. It was believed these models did not show the real relation and 
interaction effects were found necessary to obtain a realistic perception of herring distribution 
correlated to physical and biological parameters. GAMs of main effects with interaction showed a 
more nuanced picture, and changed the perception of the results, i.e. the pattern appeared to be more 
complex and gave a different perspective of the results. During the day, zooplankton was the main 
factor influencing herring distribution with a positive relation, i.e. the higher zooplankton abundance 
the higher herring biomass. Only two very weak significant (p<0.05) interactions with temperature 
and zooplankton (p=0.0168, n=2972) and with temperature, salinity and zooplankton (p=0.0162, 
n=2972) were found. It showed a clear picture that zooplankton was the determining factor for herring 
distribution during the day. During the night, the results were more complex and difficult to interpret 
in an unambiguous way from a biological point of view. The strong biological effect of correlation 
between herring and zooplankton abundance disappeared, and the physical parameters of temperature 
and salinity were highly significant during the night. Furthermore, statistically significant interaction 
effects were present in every scenario during the night. However, only highly statistically significant 
effects (P<0.001) were observed when temperature was included in an interaction. This suggests, that 
temperature had an influence on herring distribution during the night in interaction with other 
parameters.   
Previously, there have been some difficulties in identifying and separating temperature and 
zooplankton as the main determining factors influencing herring distribution. One major  reason is 
that the common prey for herring, the copepod Calanus finmarchicus, is a cold-water species (Corten, 
2001). However, day and night were split and run in two separate models, and in conclusion it appears 
that very different mechanisms were determining herring biomass and distribution during day and 
night hours. It was, consequently, possible to observe the preference for herring to distribute 
according to food during the day, where herring is not restricted by light. The model during the night 
showed that herring distribute more significantly according to physical factors. However, the present 
investigations did not show an unambiguous pattern and clear picture in correlation to herring 
distribution and was difficult to interpret in a unidirectional way. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
Acknowledgement  
39
Acknowledgement  
This thesis would not have been possible if it was not for my supervisors J. Rasmus Nielsen and Karl-
Johan Stæhr (DTU Aqua) and their guidance. I would like to thank them for the insightful and very 
useful advice and comments on the thesis and thanks for always being ready to skype, reply on emails 
and meeting with me during the last 6 months. I would like to tank Anders Nielsen (DTU Aqua) for 
the advice and help during the process of the statistical multi-variate analyses, Colin Stedmon (DTU 
Aqua) for the opportunity to use his laboratory and equipment to extract chlorophyll A and Adam 
Hambly for the help during the extraction process and calculation of chlorophyll A. Finally, this thesis 
is built on data obtained during the Coordinated ICES North Sea Herring acoustic survey (HERAS) 
and I am very appreciative to have been given the chance by Karl-Johan Stæhr to participate and 
collect data for this thesis during the June/July surveys in 2017 and 2018 with R/V Dana. Finally, I 
would like to thank my parents and sisters for their unconditional support and help to get me where I 
am today.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
References  
40
References  
Brunel, T. and Dickey-Collas, M. (2010) ‘Effects of temperature and population density on von 
Bertalanffy growth parameters in Atlantic herring: a macro-ecological analysis’, Marine Ecology 
Progress Series, 405, pp. 15–28. 
Corten, A. (2001) ‘Northern distribution of North Sea herring as a response to high water 
temperatures and/or low food abundance.’, Fisheries Research, 50, pp. 189–204. 
Demer, D. A. et al. (2015) ICES Cooperative Research Report: Calibration of acoustic instruments. 
Hastie, T. and Tibshirani, R. (1990) Generalized Additive Models, Chapman and Hall, London. 
Height/depth Sensor (2019) SCANMAR AS. Available at: 
http://www.scanmar.no/en/hoydedybdesensor/. 
ICES CM (2015) ‘Manual for International Pelagic Surveys ( IPS ). Series of ICES Survey Protocols 
SISP 9 -IPS’, International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, p. 92. 
ICES CM (2018a) Report of the Working Group on International Pelagic Surveys (WGIPS). 
ICES CM (2018b) Stock Annex: Herring (Clupea harengus) in Subarea 4 and divisions 3.a and 7.d, 
autumn spawners (North Sea, Skagerrak and Kattegat, eastern English Channel), ICES 
Headquarters, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
ICES CM (2019) Stock Annex: Herring (Clupea harengus) in subdivisions 20–24, spring spawners 
(Skagerrak, Kattegat, and western Baltic), ICES Headquarters, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Johnsen, E. et al. (2015) ‘StoX Reference Guide’, Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway. 
Kongsberg Maritime AS (2012) ‘Simrad EK60 Scientific echo sounder reference manual’, 
Kongsberg Maritime AS, 2.4. 
Lam, T. J. (1983) ‘Environmental Influences on Gonadal Activity in Fish.’, Fish physiology, 9, pp. 
65–116. 
MacZenzie, K. . (1981) ‘Nine-term equation for speed of sound in the oceans’, J. Acoust. Soc. Am, 
(70). 
Magnusson, A. et al. (2017) ‘glmmTMB balances speed and flexibility among packages for zero-
inflated generalized linear mixed modeling’, The R Journal. 
Mann, K. H. (1993) ‘Physical oceanography, food chains, and fish stocks: a review’, ICES Journal 
of Marine Science, 50(2), pp. 105–119. 
Maravelias, C. D. and Reid, D. G. (1995) ‘Relationship between herring (Clupea harengus) 
distribution and sea surface salinity and temperature in the northern North Sea’, Scientia Marina, 
59(3–4), pp. 427–438. 
Maravelias, C. D. and Reid, D. G. (1997) ‘Identifying the effects of oceanographic features and 
zooplankton on prespawning herring abundance using generalized additive models.’, Marine Ecology 
Progress Series, 147(1–3), pp. 1–9. 
Maravelias, C. D., Reid, D. G. and Swartzman, G. (2000) ‘Modelling spatio-temporal effects of 
environment on Atlantic herring, Clupea harengus.’, Environmental Biology of Fishes, 58(2), pp. 
157–172. 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
References  
41
Min, Y. and Agresti, A. (2002) ‘Modeling nonnegative data with clumping at zero: a survey’, Journal 
of the Iranian Statistical Society. 
Munk, P., Kiørboe, T. and Christensen, V. (1989) ‘Vertical migrations of herring, Clupea harengus, 
larvae in relation to light and prey distribution’, Environmental Biology of Fishes, 26(2), pp. 87–96. 
Nielsen, J. R. (1996) Acoustic monitoring of herring related to the establishment of a fixed link across 
the Sound between Copenhagen and Malmö, Danish Institute for Fisheries Research. 
Nielsen, J. R. et al. (2001) ‘Distribution, density and abundance of the western Baltic herring (Clupea 
harengus) in the Sound (ICES Subdivision 23) in relation to hydrographical features’, Fisheries 
Research, 50(235–258). 
Payne, M. R., Clausen, L. W. and Mosegaard, H. (2009) ‘Finding the signal in the noise: objective 
data-selection criteria improve the assessment of western Baltic spring-spawning herring’, ICES 
Journal of Marine Science, 66, pp. 1673–1680. 
Raid, T. (1989) ‘The influence of hydrodynamic conditions on the spatial distribution of young fish 
and their prey organisms’, Rapp. Pv Réun. Cons. Int. Explor. Mer, 190, pp. 166–172. 
Richardson, K., Heath, M. R. and Pihl, N. J. (1986) ‘Studies of a larval herring:(Clupea harengus L.) 
patch in the Buchan area. I. The distribution of larvae in relation to hydrographic features.’, Dana, 6, 
pp. 1–10. 
Schlitzer, R. (2019) ‘Ocean Data View User’s Guide’, Alfred-Wegener-Institute for Polar and Marine 
Research (AWI), Version 5., pp. 1–178. 
Sea-Bird Scientific (2017) SBE 11plus V2 Deck Unit For use with SBE 9plus CTD Product Manual, 
Sea-Bird Scientific. 
Shadish, W. R., Zuur, A. F. and Sullivan, K. J. (2014) ‘Using generalized additive (mixed) models to 
analyze single case designs.’, Journal of School Psychology. Society for the Study of School 
Psychology, 52(2), pp. 149–178. 
Simmonds, J. and MacLennan, D. (2005) Fisheries Acoustics: Theory and Practice. 2nd ed. 
Blackwell Science. 
Simrad EK60 (2019) Kongsberg Maritime AS. Available at: https://www.simrad.com/ek60. 
SS4 DoorSensor (2019) SCANMAR AS. Available at: http://www.scanmar.no/en/ss4-dorsensor/. 
Stæhr, K.-J. (2017) Acoustic Herring Survey Report for RV “Dana”, 21th June - 5th July 2017, 
internal report. 
Stæhr, K.-J. (2018) Acoustic Herring Survey Report for RV “Dana”, 25th June - 10th July 2018, 
internal report. 
Stevenson, D. K. and Scott, M. L. (2005) Essential fish habitat source document. Atlantic herring, 
Clupea harengus, life history and habitat characteristics. 
TrawlEye (2019) SCANMAR AS. Available at: http://www.scanmar.no/en/traloye/. 
UNESCO (1968) Zooplankton sampling. 
Wahba, G. (1990) Spline Models of Observational Data. 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
References  
42
Wood, S. N. (2019a) GAM Tweedie families, r-project.org. Available at: https://stat.ethz.ch/R-
manual/R-patched/library/mgcv/html/Tweedie.html. 
Wood, S. N. (2019b) Generalized Additive Mixed Models, The R Journal. Available at: 
https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/mgcv/html/gamm.html. 
Wood, S. N. (2019c) Generalized additive models with integrated smoothness estimation, r-
project.org. Available at: https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-
devel/RHOME/library/mgcv/html/gam.html. 
Zinkevich, V. N. (1967) ‘Observations on the distribution of herring, Clupea harengus L., on Georges 
Bank and in adjacent waters in 1962-65’, ICNAF Res. Bull, 4, pp. 101–115. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
Appendix I  
43
Appendix I 
 
Table I: Generalized linear models (GLM TMBs) for statistically analysis of residuals of GAM model, showing 
model name, description of model (if the model run on data collected during the day hours with light or during 
the night hours of darkness), the equation used in the GLM, and the Akaike information criterion (AIC) for 
the model.  
 
 
Table II: Result of coefficients of the Conditional model including p-values and estimates of the statistically 
analyses of the dependent variable (herring abundance) according to the physical and biological explanatory 
variables with model 03b (GLM TMB of data collected during day hours). Secondly, description of variability 
of Random effects. All statistically significant effects are shown.  
 
 
Figure IIa: Figure showing the plot of created scaled residuals, simulated from the fitted model 03b (GLM 
TMB of data collected during day hours). 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
Appendix I  
44
 
Figure IIb: Histogram of observed zero-fraction simulated from the GLM 03b through 10000 simulations. The 
red line indicates the real observed zero fraction in the model, showing no more zero inflation is necessary.  
 
Table III: Result of coefficients of the Conditional model including p-values and estimates of the statistically 
analyses of the dependent variable (herring abundance) according to the physical and biological explanatory 
variables with model 07b (GLM TMB of data collected during night hours). Secondly, description of 
variability of Random effects. All statistically significant effects are shown.  
 
 
Figure IIIa: Figure showing the plot of created scaled residuals, simulated from the fitted model 07b (GLM 
TMB of data collected during night hours). 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
Appendix I  
45
 
Figure IIIb: Histogram of observed zero-fraction simulated from the GLM 07b through 10000 simulations. The 
red line indicates the real observed zero fraction in the model, showing no more zero inflation is necessary.  
 
 
