==PAGE:1==
Shear Behaviour of Arch-Shaped
Concrete Members
by
Mats Fjærestrand and Ola Hovland Kjær
Master’s Thesis, July 2019
Supervisors:
Per Goltermann
Jens-Christian Kragh-Poulsen
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2019
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title: Shear Behaviour of Arch-Shaped Concrete Members
This report was prepared by:
Mats Fjærestrand, s172411
Ola Hovland Kjær, s172409
Supervisors:
Per Goltermann, Professor
Jens-Christian Kragh-Poulsen, PhD Student
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
February 2019- July 2019
ECTS:
70 (35 each)
Education:
MSc
Field:
Structural Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the require-
ments for graduation in the above education at the Technical
University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The project is credited 35 ECTS for each author. The topic of the project was out-
lined by the supervisors, as part of an industrial PhD. The project has been further
developed and adjusted during the process in collaboration with the supervisors.
We wish to give our appreciation and thank both of our supervisors Per Golter-
mann and Jens-Christian Kragh-Poulsen for the dedication and support during the
project. We also want to thank the DTU Structural lab, especially Henrik Børglum
and Christian Peter Rasmussen. We would very much like to thank all others in-
volved in the project and the people who spent time proofreading the report.
Lastly, we want to show our gratitude to COWI for the resources provided.
Kgs. Lyngby, 28.07.2019
Mats Fjærestrand (s172411)
Ola Hovland Kjær (s172409)
i
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Arch-shaped concrete members without shear reinforcement are commonly found
in structures like bridges, foundation and tunnels. As of today, little research on
the topic is available and no codes are found to have design regulations which takes
curvature into account. This may lead to uneconomic or unsafe design solutions.
The objective of this project is to develop an understanding of the shear behaviour
of such members. Throughout the project, 12 arch-shaped concrete beams without
shear reinforcement and 3 straight reference beams are tested in a three-point bend-
ing test. The radius of the arch-shaped members are varied both in direction and
magnitude. In addition, maximum aggregate size and compressive strength are the
main varying material properties. The experimental results are analysed with fo-
cus on curvature inﬂuence on shear capacity and crack development. Digital Image
Correlation is utilised to analyse crack development with high accuracy, a method
not yet seen in literature for arch-shaped structures investigated for shear. Further,
experimental results are compared with an empirically based code used in industry
and with a shear capacity model modiﬁed to ﬁt arches, namely the Critical Shear
Crack Theory (CSCT). The curvature of the beam aﬀects the shear capacity in great
extend. The crack development analysis indicate that concave beams show similar
behaviour to straight beams, where convex deviates from those two. Further, the
comparison of test results with the empirical code does not account for curvature. It
is proven with reference to the experimental results how curvature can be accounted
for by implementing a new factor. Lastly, the CSCT provides good ﬁt with straight
and concave beams, however, the formulation of convex beams should be modiﬁed.
iii
==PAGE:8==
Table of Contents
List of Symbols
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Signiﬁcance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Failure Modes of Reinforced Concrete Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Shear-Transfer Actions in Reinforced Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Shear Capacity According to DNV Standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Critical Shear Crack Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Experimental Plan
17
3.1
Beam Specimens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Cylinder Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Developing the Concrete Mix Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Preparation of Casting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Beam casting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Experiments
29
4.1
Beam Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Cylinder Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Results
39
5.1
Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Compression and Tensile Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Summary of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Analysis and Discussion of Results
49
6.1
Inﬂuence of Beam Curvature on Shear Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
iv
==PAGE:9==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
v
6.2
Evaluation of Failure Surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3
Development of Cracks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.4
Relative Displacement Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.5
Strain-Softening Behaviour with Varying Maximum Aggregate Size
.
64
7
Comparison to Theory
69
7.1
DNV Standard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Extended CSCT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8
Conclusion
79
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Bibliography
83
Appendices
87
Appendix A - Reinforcement Drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
Appendix B - Experimental Reports
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
Appendix C - Test procedure: Beam
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170
Appendix D - Test setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Appendix E - Test procedure: Cylinder Compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . 176
Appendix F - Test procedure: Cylinder Tension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
Appendix G - Test result for Longitudinal Reinforcement . . . . . . . . . . 181
Appendix H - Matlab Calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 184
Appendix I - Surface of Critical Shear Crack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202
Appendix J - Initial Cracks and Critical Shear Cracks
. . . . . . . . . . . 208
Appendix L - Fitting Curves for Compression Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 212
Appendix M - Division of Workload
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
List of Symbols
Abbreviations
AVG Average
CD
Curing days
CSCT Critical Shear Crack Theory
DIC
Digital Image Correlation
LVDT Linear variable diﬀerential transformer
RC
Reinforced concrete
RDV Relative displacement vector
RSD
Relative standard deviation
Symbols - Greek
∆V
Additional shear force transferred through critical shear crack, CSCT
ϵ
Longitudinal strain
ϵ0
Strain corresponding to max stress
γ
Unit weight of concrete
γc
Material factor concrete
λ
Coeﬃcient deﬁning location of point where slope of tension force in ﬂexural
reinforcement is calculated
φ
Diameter of reinforcement
ρ
Flexural reinforcement ratio
σfitted Fitting curve for compression plot
vii
==PAGE:12==
viii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Symbols - Latin
a
Horisontal distance from edge of load plate to edge of support edge, also
known as shear span
b
Width of cross-section
c
Compression zone
d
Distance from centroid of tensile reinforcement to compression edge
d1
Emperical factor equal to 1000mm
dg
Maximum aggregate size
dg0
Reference aggregate size
Ec
Young’s modulus of concrete
Es
Young’s modulus of longitudinal reinforcement
fc
Compressive strength of concrete
fcck
Cylinder compressive stress from experiments
ftd
Design tensile strength of the concrete
ftk
Charateristic tensile strenght
ftn
Normalized in-situ tensile strength of concrete
h
Height of the cross section
kA
Emperical factor equal to 100MPa
kv
For slabs and beams without shear reinforcement the factor kv is set equal to
1.5 - d/d1, but not greater than 1.4 nor less than 1.0
M
Bending moment at control section
Pcr
Load corresponding to initial crack observed with DIC
Rs
Radius of reinforcement
Rmid
Radius from the center of the beam
u
Moister content
V
Shear force at control section
==PAGE:13==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ix
V
Shear force
Vadj
Adjusted volume
Vcal
Calculated value of shear capacity
Vcd
Shear capacity according to DNV formula
Vcr.CSC The shear force when the critical shear crack develops
Vcr
Shear force corresponding to initial crack observed with DIC
VCSC Total shear force carried by critical shear crack, CSCT
Vmax
Max shear capacity
VR,c
Shear capacity according to CSCT
Vtest
Shear force obtained by test
w
Critical shear crack width
wa
Material absorption
x
Depth of the compression zone
X1
Width of the support
z
Flexural lever arm
z1
Distance for calculation of deviation force ∆V
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
1
Introduction
1.1
Research Signiﬁcance
Arch-shaped concrete members are commonly used in structures such as founda-
tions, bridges and tunnels. These structures are often constructed without trans-
verse reinforcement (shear reinforcement). Little research is available on this topic,
therefore this project aims to expand the knowledge with experimental data and
analysis on shear behaviour of such members. Shear failure is a brittle failure mode
and is undesirable in design of concrete members. Therefore it is important to be
able to verify the shear capacity on this basis. Extensive research has been commit-
ted into understanding the shear behaviour of straight concrete members since the
1950’s [1]. There is made a distinction between members with and members with-
out shear reinforcement in the design and research of shear behaviour. Safe design
solutions for members with shear reinforcement can be obtained with a number of
established theories based on equilibrium considerations [2]. In structures without
shear reinforcement, no such generally accepted solutions to determine the shear ca-
pacity is available. This can be highlighted by the fact that most codes used in the
industry are based and validated solely on empirical formulas. There is also a clear
diﬀerence regarding what material and geometric parameters each code takes into
account in the formulations [3]. Shear behaviour of arch-shaped concrete members
and straight members are diﬀerent [4]. The curvature of the arch-shaped members
will inﬂuence the shear behaviour, however, further knowledge is very limited. The
scarce research on the topic has not made its way into design codes, so shear design
of arch-shaped members may lead to unsafe design solutions or cause uneconomic
structures.
Previous research on arch-shaped concrete members include a series of six arch-
shaped beams without shear reinforcement tested by Campana, Fern´andez Ruiz,
and Muttoni [5] in a four-point bending test, only to obtain spalling failure. The
same authors also did nine three-point bending tests of curved beams and obtained
1
==PAGE:16==
2
1. INTRODUCTION
shear failures [4]. This seems to be the only research published on the topic of shear
behaviour of arch-shaped concrete members without shear reinforcement. Leonhardt
and M¨onnig [6] also did experiments on arch-shaped beams, however, they were
reinforced for shear and aimed to investigate pull-out of longitudinal reinforcement.
Therefore more research is needed to understand the shear behaviour of arch-shaped
concrete members. This project aims to do so.
1.2
Problem Statement
This project will conduct full scale experiments on 12 arch-shaped and 3 straight
concrete beams without shear reinforcement. Concrete cylinder testing will also be
executed in parallel to beam tests. The overall goal is to expand the experimental
data on arch-shaped concrete members without shear reinforcement.
Advanced
measuring tools like Digital Image Correlation (DIC) will be used to enhance the
understating of shear behaviour. Further, the research objectives are limited to:
• Investigate the inﬂuence of magnitude and direction of curvature on shear
capacity.
• Evaluate the cracks evolving during testing by using DIC and understand how
the crack development in curved beam diﬀers from straight.
• Provide relative displacement vectors of the critical shear crack to obtain a
deeper physical understanding of the failures.
• Compare the experimental test results to two shear capacity models: DNV-
GL-C502 which is used in the industry and the Critical Shear Crack Theory
which is newly expanded to account for curvature.
• Investigate how diﬀerent aggregate size aﬀect the shear behaviour of the beam
and concrete properties.
1.3
Structure of the Report
A brief description of the structure of each chapter is presented below.
Theory: Background information on shear behaviour and shear models is discussed
brieﬂy. This includes failure models, shear-transfer actions and relevant models used
further in the comparison to theory chapter.
==PAGE:17==
1.3. STRUCTURE OF THE REPORT
3
Experiments and Experimental Plan: Speciﬁcations on test specimens, and
the planning and preparation phase of the experiments is described. Experimental
methods are described along with an presentation of the construction of the test-
setup and chosen measuring equipment.
Results: A short and concise presentation of the obtained experimental data in a
raw format.
Analysis and Discussion: The diﬀerent analysis are described one by one, with
a corresponding discussion within each analysis. Extra focus in dedicated to under-
standing of crack development.
Comparison to Theory: Two shear models are compared to experimental results.
Interesting ﬁndings are further analysed and discussed.
Conclusion: The research objectives presented here will be answered directly in
the conclusion. Brief thoughts and discussions on possible future work extending
this project will be presented lastly.
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
2
Theory
This chapter will introduce important aspects of the shear theory for members with-
out shear reinforcement. As mentioned, there are trustworthy models available for
members with shear reinforcement. Theory of plasticity can for instance be used
in the form of a perfect plastic solution [7]. This model is found in design basis of
Eurocode 2 and is among the generally accepted design approaches for beams with
shear reinforcement [8]. There are several models available for elements without
shear reinforcement, however, without general acceptance. The theory of plasticity
is applied in the Crack Sliding Model [9]. Further on Zhao et. al proposed an ex-
tension to the Crack Sliding Model to predict shear capacity from observed crack
patterns based on an upper bound solution. Other models for shear capacity of
non-shear reinforced members like the one in the Eurocode 2 is solely an empirical
model [2]. Despite the lack of agreement in the capacity formulation, some aspects
in understanding shear behavior are commonly accepted within the research com-
munity. Diﬀerent types of failure modes localized from a literature study will be
presented in this chapter in addition to a description of generalized crack types.
Possible shear-transfer actions in reinforced concrete are also presented. Since a
comparison with the DNVGL-ST-C502 (DNV Standard) will be conducted in this
project, its main formulas of interest and an investigation of its background is pre-
sented. Finally, the Critical Shear Crack Theory (CSCT) and its extension to ﬁt
arch-shaped members will be described in detail. It should be noted that the CSCT
has received some critique regarding questionable applicability outside the available
size eﬀect test data [10]. It is still used here as it is found applicable to how the
this experiment is conducted, also with regards to comparison of a model found in
codes which is not entirly empirical. Since the theory, models and codes of prac-
tice available today are based on straight members, this chapter will mainly evolve
around straight members.
5
==PAGE:20==
6
2. THEORY
2.1
Failure Modes of Reinforced Concrete
Beams
The diﬀerent types of failure modes for beams without transverse shear reinforce-
ment can be put into three main categories: ﬂexural failure, diagonal failure and
deep beam failure. These failure categories all belongs within a certain range of
a/d-ratio, with a being the clear distance from load to support and d is the depth to
longitudinal reinforcement [11]. To describe diagonal failure, the term shear failure
is also often used. Deep beam failure is not relevant for this project as it is observed
for beams with very low a/d-ratios [12]. There are also other failure modes which
are not necessarily related to a/d-ratio: anchorage failure and bearing failure. An-
chorage failure is associated with anchorage and bond of longitudinal reinforcement
and can be avoided in experiments by anchorage plates or enough anchorage length.
Bearing failure may happen when the bearing plate is small and it is more often an
issue for deep beams than slender beams [13]. When these two failure modes are not
desirable, they can be avoided in experiments by taking relevant measures. In the
following subsections, a brief description of the ﬂexural failure mode and diagonal
failure mode is presented with reference to the literature study by Ziara [11]. These
are regarded most relevant for the experimental program in this project with slender
beams.
2.1.1
Flexural Failure
Beams with a large a/d ratio will typically fail in ﬂexure due to vertical cracks
in the region of maximum moment developing through the section. The ﬂexural
reinforcement ratio ρ also plays an important role here as a low ρ can lead to
ﬂexural failure, even for relatively short members [14] This leads to a failure as the
concrete compression at the top will crush. A ﬂexural failure can either be caused
by excessive yielding of the ﬂexural reinforcement or no yielding and thus a sudden
and brittle crushing of the compression concrete.
2.1.2
Diagonal Failure
Diagonal failure develops in regions where both shear and bending moment is
present. Crack propagation is important for these types of failure and terminol-
ogy is therefore described further. Cracks close to the point of maximum bending
moment will typically propagate vertically and are termed “ﬂexural cracks”. Some
diagonal cracks will develop and extend from the tip of ﬂexural cracks and are
==PAGE:21==
2.1. FAILURE MODES OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
7
Figure 2.1: Failure modes of RC concrete beams. a) Diagonal-Tension Failure, b)
Shear-Tension Failure, c) Shear-Compression Failure, d) Flexural Failure. [11]
therefore referred to as “Flexural-Shear Crack”. In this case, the ﬂexural crack is
more precisely referred to as “Initiating crack”. There are several other types of
cracks that can develop, here named “Secondary Cracks”. Secondary cracks can for
instance evolve from dowel action in the ﬂexural reinforcement. Failure modes from
development of ﬂexural-shear cracks is here further divided into three types:
Diagonal-Tension Failure - Cracks developing in the region of combined bending
moment and shear force propagates diagonally towards the point of loading. At
some point the crack reaches a point where the beam is becoming unstable and fails
due to crushing of compression concrete at the crack tip.
Shear-Tension Failure - Very much like the previous diagonal-tension failure, di-
agonal cracks may also initiate secondary cracks along the ﬂexural reinforcement
towards the support. This shear-tension failure results in bond loss between rein-
forcement and the surrounding concrete. The compression concrete will then crush,
and the beam fail.
Shear-Compression Failure - In the case of splitting of concrete compression at the
crack end, but where no anchorage failure is present, a third failure type named
shear-compression failure will occur. All three diagonal failure types are illustrated
in the ﬁgures below.
==PAGE:22==
8
2. THEORY
2.2
Shear-Transfer Actions in Reinforced
Concrete
In uncracked concrete beams without shear reinforcements the shear force is carried
by the concrete in the elastic range. In the case were the concrete starts to crack,
diﬀerent mechanisms contribute to the total shear resistance. There is to a cer-
tain extent agreement in the literature on shear capacity of beams and slabs which
states that there are ﬁve possible shear transfer mechanisms in cracked concrete:
cantilever action, aggregate interlock, dowelling action, residual tensile strength of
concrete and strut action [15]. However, there is no general agreement regarding
what mechanisms that are most important and to which extent they contributes to
the total shear capacity throughout the diﬀerent phases of loading. The implemen-
tation of the shear transfer mechanisms deviates greatly depending on the approach
used to predict shear capacity [15]. Some models will emphasize the eﬀect of one or
two mechanisms but neglect other mechanisms. For instance, aggregate interlock is
the governing shear transfer action in the Compression Field Theory [16] [17]. Oth-
ers base the prediction of shear capacity in members without shear reinforcement
on concrete tensile strength after cracking as the most important parameter [18].
The Critical Shear Crack Theory takes supposedly all shear transfer mechanisms
into account but gives the strut action less signiﬁcance than other theories [2]. In
addition to this, codes used in the industry often present empirical formulas where
the governing parameters are can be very diﬀerent and even more unrelated to a
physical behaviour [19] [20].
2.2.1
Aggregate Interlock
The mechanism of aggregate interlock arises from cracked concrete with some form
of sliding or movement. Aggregate interlock is therefore directly related to the way
a crack is formed in the concrete, crack width and relative slip. Normal strength
concrete has, a hardened cement paste which is lower than strength of the aggregates,
therefore cracks will split on one side of the individual aggregates from cement paste.
The aggregates still connected to the cement paste on one side interlocks with the
cavity on the other side of the crack and resists shear displacement [21], see Figure
2.2a).
The magnitude of the aggregate interlock as a shear-transfer mechanism
is limited by the surface roughness. The surface roughness is directly related to
the aggregate distribution of the concrete and often represented as the maximum
aggregate size. Large aggregate size allows aggregate interlock with larger crack
==PAGE:23==
2.2. SHEAR-TRANSFER ACTIONS IN REINFORCED CONCRETE
9
Figure 2.2: Aggregate interlock a) at particle level showing contact area and b) the
variation of shear- and normal stress with increasing slip δ and crack width w. [15]
width and larger contact area, thus better shear transfer ability. The relationship
between crack width, displacement and interlock stresses are illustrated in Figure
2.2b).
In the case of high-strength concrete, cracks will typically run through both the
cement paste and the aggregate particles. This limits the roughness of the cracks
and thus the shear-carrying capacity of the crack in the form of aggregate interlock.
However, it has been found through experiments that the relationship between frac-
tured particles and high-strength concrete may not be limited to the traditional
deﬁnition of high-strength concrete (60MPa). The number of fractured particles is
also dependent on the strength of the aggregates [21].
2.2.2
Residual Tensile Strength
Cracked concrete can still transfer some tensile stress. A way to illustrate how this
can contribute to the shear carrying capacity is to visualise tension ties developing
through the cracks as shown in ﬁgure 2.1e) by Ruiz, Muttoni, and Sagaseta. The
eﬀect is limited by the crack width and diminishes to zero as the cracks becomes
large enough, thus a crack will have some residual tensile strength close to the crack
tip, but little or no residual strength elsewhere along the crack [15].
2.2.3
Cantilever Action
Cantilever action can be visualised as a strut and tie action which occurs between
two cracks, a “crack tooth” [15]. It connects the compression concrete with the
longitudinal reinforcement in the same way a strut-and-tie models works. The eﬀect
is illustrated visually by Ruiz, Muttoni, and Sagaseta, see Figure 2.3b).
==PAGE:24==
10
2. THEORY
Figure 2.3: Shear carrying mechanisms in a straight concrete beam before devel-
opment of critical shear crack. a) Area of consideration, b) cantilever action, c)
aggregate interlock, d) strut action, e) dowel action f) and residual tensile strength.
[22]
2.2.4
Dowel Action
Dowel action arises from the force transferred by longitudinal reinforcement per-
pendicular to its axis due to a crack [23]. A vertical crack with signiﬁcant opening
cannot transfer shear force by itself, but the longitudinal reinforcements act as a
dowel, connecting the two sides of the crack with a shear-carrying action. The con-
crete cover to the reinforcement inﬂuences the shear transfer and the dowel eﬀect
is therefore limited by the tensile capacity of the concrete [24]. The dowel eﬀect
is shown to be more prominent in the area were concrete cannot develop spalling
cracks. This is also more applicable for short span beams were the critical crack
develops near the bearing plate which is preventing spalling cracks to appear. In the
cases were the critical shear crack develops through the compression reinforcement,
spalling cracks cannot appear and the dowel eﬀect becomes more prominent [15].
2.2.5
Strut Action
Strut action is a mechanism that is related to the shear span and beam height
[13]. The arch shear-carrying mechanism that is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.3d) were the
compression strut deviates from the critical crack to maintain the capacity. In the
situation were the critical crack is crossing the strut formed in the concrete beam
the compressive strength is reduced [2].
==PAGE:25==
2.3. SHEAR CAPACITY ACCORDING TO DNV STANDARD
11
2.3
Shear Capacity According to DNV Standard
The basis for shear capacity calculations in DNVGL-ST-C502 [20] includes beams
with a/h ratio greater than 3.0. Two modes of failure must be checked according to
the code: tensile failure (Vcd+Vsd) and compressive failure (Vccd). The second part of
the tensile failure, Vsd, is contribution from transverse reinforcement and thus set to
zero here, since beams without shear reinforcement is considered. Three solutions for
the calculation of shear capacity is proposed, however, only the “Simpliﬁed solution”
is dedicated to members without shear reinforcement. To calculate the design shear
capacity of the concrete itself, the following expression is used:
Vcd = 0.3
 
ftd + kA · As
γc · bw · d
!
bwdkV
≤
0.6ftd · bw · d · kv
(2.1)
where:
Vcd
Shear capacity
ftd
Design tensile strength of concrete
b
Width of the cross-section
d
Distance from centroid of tensile reinforcement to compression edge [mm]
d1
1 000 mm
kA
100 MPa
kv
For slabs and beams without shear reinforcement the factor kv is set equal
to 1.5 - d/d1, but not greater than 1.4 nor less than 1.0
ftd is the design tensile strength of the concrete, deﬁned as ftd = ftn/γc. Here, ftn is
the normalized in-situ tensile strength expressed in Equation 2.2, taken from section
4.3.3.4 in the DNV Standard. The same material factor, γc, is found in the second
part of the expression. Since the application of these expressions is comparisons
with experiments, the material factor is set to 1.
ftn = ftk ·

1 −
 ftk
25
!0.6

(2.2)
Here, the charateristic tensile strenght is deﬁned as ftk = 0.48·f 0.5
cck and fcck is taken
as cylinder compressive stress from experiments.
2.3.1
Background Information on DNV Standard formula
The DNV Standard does not provide any further explanation to the origin or basis
of the shear capacity formulas for members without shear reinforcement.
In an
attempt to better understand where the formula is coming from, contact with the
DNV Standard oﬃce was established by the authors. The information provided
==PAGE:26==
12
2. THEORY
from this contact was a reference to the old Norwegian Standard NS-3473 [25].
With reference to the e-mail correspondence with DNV, the DNVGL-ST-C502 was
developed parallel to development of NS-3473. NS-3473 was later withdrawn as the
standard for structural design in 2010 and replaced by Eurocode 2 [26]. An attempt
acquire the background information on what the Norwegain Standard is based on
was made by contacting the distributer of the Eurocode in Norway: Standard Norge.
Contact established with a senior at Standard Norge, who was involved in making
the NS-3473, conﬁrmed that the formulas of interest are empirically based. Best-ﬁt
method was used to create the expression based on experimental data from straight
beams at the time. Both normal strength and high-strength concrete was used in the
experiments. Further reference or information on the development of the formulas
was not obtainable.
2.4
Critical Shear Crack Theory
One of the more recent theories for predicting shear capacity of slender beams is
the Critical Shear Crack Theory (CSCT). As the name suggests, it is based on de-
velopment of the critical shear crack and considers the contribution of all potential
shear-carrying actions (residual tensile strength of concrete, dowelling action, ag-
gregate interlock, combined and arching action). The main principles of this theory
were introduced by Muttoni and Schwartz in 1991 [27] with further improvements
in 2003 [28]. The theory has been implemented in the Swiss code for structural con-
crete [29]. It has later been proposed an extension to this theory for shear design
of arch-shaped members [4]. The basis for the original mechanical model based the
CSCT and its extension is presented in the two following subsections.
2.4.1
Formulation for Straight Members
According to Muttoni [2], shear strength of members is strongly dependent on the
critical shear crack width and on its roughness. These dependencies are reﬂected in
the CSCT as:
VR,c
b · d =
q
fcf(w, dg)
(2.3)
where:
w
critical shear crack width
dg
Maximum aggregate size
f(w, dg)
function which accounts for the width of the critical shear crack and surface
roughness expressed with dg
==PAGE:27==
2.4. CRITICAL SHEAR CRACK THEORY
13
The width of the critical shear crack can be represented at a control section at a
distance d/2 from loading for a simply supported beam with point load [2]. The
placement of the control section is illustrated with Figure 2.4. It is also known
from previous research on both punching shear and shear in beams that there is
a proportional relationship between the crack width of the critical shear crack and
the product of longitudinal strain at the control section and eﬀective depth [2]. The
placement of the control depth is illustrated in Figure 2.4. The longitudinal strain
is evaluated in the control region with the assumption of no tensile strength in the
concrete. The compression concrete is assumed to show a linear elastic behaviour
and plane sections remain plane. An expression for the longitudinal strain can be
expressed as:
ϵ =
M
b · d · ρ · Es · z
0.6 · d −x
d −x
= V · (a −d/2)
b · d · ρ · Es · z
0.6 · d −x
d −x
(2.4)
where:
M
Bending moment at control section
V
Shear force
ρ
Reinforcement ratio
Es
Young’s modulus of longitudinal reinforcement
z
Flexural lever arm
x
Depth of the compression zone
The depth of the compression zone can be formulated as [2]:
c = dρ · Es
Ec
·
 s
(1 + 2Ec
ρEs
) −1
!
(2.5)
where:
Ec
Young’s modulus of concrete
A simple analytical expression which takes aggregate size, width of the critical shear
crack and concrete strength into account can be formulated as in Equation 2.6 [28].
The shear capacity can further be found by setting V = VR,c in Eq. 2.4, inserting to
Equation 2.6 and solve for VR,c. It should be noted that the eﬀect of crack roughness
(expressed as dg) is negligible for high-strength concrete where the cement matrix
is stronger than the aggregates and thus the crack develops through the aggregates
[2].
VR,c =
b · d · √fc
1 + 120 ·
ϵ·d
dg0+dg
(2.6)
==PAGE:28==
14
2. THEORY
Figure 2.4: Control section and control depth for a straight beam. [15]
where:
fc
Compressive strength of the concrete
dg0
Reference aggregate size, set equal to 16 mm
ϵ
Longitudinal strain
2.4.2
Formulation for Arch-Shaped Members
As mentioned, there has been developed an extension to the CSCT to account for
arch-shaped structures [4]. The extended CSCT is based on the introduction of
a deviation force which comes from the curvature of the reinforcement. In Figure
2.5c) and d), proposal of two free body diagrams from the section of arched beams
are drawn. The resultant force from the tension reinforcement is drawn as a tangent
to a point λ · d from mid-span. The sole purpose of the coeﬃcient λ is to determine
the point of tangency. The total shear force carried by the critical shear crack is
expressed in Equation 2.7 [4]. It is also assumed that a shear failure will happen
when the shear force is equal to the shear capacity deﬁned in Equation 2.6.
VCSC = V + ∆V = VR,c
(2.7)
where:
VCSC
Total shear force carried by critical shear crack
∆V
Additional shear force transferred through critical shear crack
The free body diagram presented in Figure 2.5 is the basis for the expression of the
deviation force:
∆V = V · a
z1
· λ · d
Rs
=
2 · λ · d · a
2 · z · Rs −(λ · d)2 · V
(2.8)
where:
λ
Coeﬃcient determine the tangency point
RS
Radius of reinforcement
z1
Distance for calculation of deviation force ∆V
==PAGE:29==
2.4. CRITICAL SHEAR CRACK THEORY
15
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the eﬀect of deviation force on arches - and free body
diagram for c) positive radius d) and negative arch. [4]
The distance z1 is deﬁned as:
z1 = z −(λ · d)2
2 · Rs
(2.9)
By evaluating the expression for ∆V that a positive radius will result in a larger
force which must be taken by the critical shear crack. On the other hand, a negative
reinforcement radius will result in a negative ∆V and thus a lowering the force
needed to be taken up by the critical shear crack. Further, by inserting Equation
2.8 and2.4 into Equation 2.7 it is possible to determine the shear capacity by solving
for the shear force, V .
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
3
Experimental Plan
The experimental plan of this project includes tests on concrete beams and cylinders,
where beams are the main interest and cylinders serves the purpose of determine
characteristics of the used concrete. Speciﬁcations on the beam and cylinder spec-
imens are explained along with material speciﬁcations, the process of developing
concrete mix designs and the general process of preparing specimens. This includes
formwork, reinforcement binding, casting and storage.
3.1
Beam Specimens
Five diﬀerent beam types have been developed and investigated. All beams share
the same cross section and reinforcement placement, however the beam curvature,
reinforcement degree, concrete compressive strength and aggregates sizes are vary-
ing factors. An overview of the shape of the ﬁve beam types is shown in Table 3.1.
The beam indexing is created so the letter describes shape, followed by a number
to indicate the individual specimen. Beam type A and B are convex beams, D and
E are concave and C is a straight beam for reference.
Table 3.1: Overview of beam types.
Beam
index
Illustration
Number of
specimens
Curve
orientation
Average
radius [mm]
A1, A2, A3
3
Convex
3200
B1, B2, B3
3
Convex
5200
C1, C2, C3
3
No curvature
∞
D1, D2, D3
3
Concave
-5200
E1, E2, E3
3
Concave
-3200
17
==PAGE:32==
18
3. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN
Table 3.2: Mutual varying factors for each complete beam series.
Test
Series No.
Compressive
Strength [MPa]
Max Aggregate
Size [mm]
1
40*
25
2
40
8
3
40
16
* The actually strength ended up between 60-80 MPa.
Three full series of the ﬁve beam types was completed for this project, each series
consisting of beams A to E. Maximum aggregate was purposely varied for each beam
series, see Figure 3.2. In other words, three diﬀerent mix designs have been used.
The compressive strength was initially sought to be around 40MPa for all test se-
ries, however, due to some troubles with the ﬁrst series it ended up as high-strength
concrete. The actual compressive strength was found with cylinder testing. The
reinforcement degree was aimed to be 1.09% for all beams, except beam C1 where
it was lowered to 0.60%.
Since no standard design is available for the beam specimens to obtain the desired
failure, the ﬁrst series of specimens was considered a pilot series. New beam speci-
mens were not cast before the ﬁrst series was tested to ensure that the desired failure
could be obtained. Adjustments to the reinforcement and beam geometry could be
made before casting the second and third beam series, however, only one change
was made regarding C1 which better could be compared to the curved members
with equal reinforcement degree.
Since these is experiments of shear capacity in member without shear reinforcement,
no shear reinforcement is needed for the test area. However, to control which side
the shear failure occurs on, stirrups are place on one side of the beams as illustrated
in Figure 3.1. The side with no stirrups is later referred to as the test side. This
is convenient when doing a DIC analysis, because the camera can focus on the
side without shear reinforcement only, as the failure will occur there.
Flexural
reinforcement is placed on the underside of all beams. The ﬂexural reinforcement
degree is chosen with the aim to enforce a shear failure, rather than a bending
failure. The shear reinforcement and overall geometry of beam type A is shown in
Figure 3.1 as an example. Reinforcement drawings for the other beams are presented
in Appendix A. Figure 3.1 does not show anchorage plates, however, it should be
noted that anchorage plates was added to both top and bottom reinforcement, for
all specimens.
==PAGE:33==
3.2. CYLINDER SPECIMENS
19
Figure 3.1: Illustration of beam specimens where test region is on the right side.
Beam type A is used as an example here.
Figure 3.2: Drawing of cylinder specimen used for tension testing
3.2
Cylinder Specimens
Cylinders were tested to be able to determine the compression and tensile strength
of each beam. This was necessary to be able to compare beam results with models
as they typically depend on either compressive or tensile strength. Some models
include E-modulus of the concrete as well. The material parameters was determined
from regular axial compression tests of cylinders with diameter 150mm and height
300mm. The tensile strength was determined from tests carried out on notched
cylinders with diameter and height 150mm, see Figure3.2. Three compression tests
and at least one tensile test was cast and prepared for each beam. Compression
tests were done on the same day as beam tests, or one day in advance. Tensile
tests were conducted within a reasonable period depending on the availability of
equipment and eﬃciency in performing the experiment. A thorough explanation of
the test procedure and further specimen detail is presented in Section 4.2.
3.3
Developing the Concrete Mix Designs
As described in section 3.1, and summarized in Table 3.2, three diﬀerent concrete
recipes with varying compressive strength and aggregate size was used. The only
diﬀerence in material usage between the recipes was the amount of each aggregate
==PAGE:34==
20
3. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN
type and size of the largest aggregates used. The recipes are diﬀerenciated throught
the report by indicating the larges aggregate size used: 8mm, 16mm and 25mm. The
process of developing the mix designs was begun before the start of this project, so
only the 8mm and 16mm recipes needed to be developed. The process of developing
the concrete mix designs involved test casting, as described in Section 3.3.2, before
ending up with ﬁnal mix designs, Section 3.3.3.
3.3.1
Materials
A description of the materials used in each recipe is presented in the bullet points
below.
• Cement – Aalborg Portland Rapid Cement A widely used cement type,
especially for concrete element production due to its fast strength developing char-
acteristics. It is considered a low alkali cement, calciﬁed as CEM I 52.5 N. [30].
• Water – Tap water
• Additive: Plasticizer – MasterPozzolith 20N The plasticizer gives better
homogeneity and lowers the necessary water, so a lower water-cement ratio is needed
[31]
• Additive: Super-Plasticizer – MasterGlenium SKY Ensures an eﬀective
dispersion by delaying absorption on the cement particles. The eﬀect is a faster
strength development and better workability without inﬂuencing the water-cement
ratio [32]
• Aggregates Coarse and ﬁne aggregates types were used for the concrete mix
designs: sand and three diﬀerent stone sizes. The sand and stone is classiﬁed in
environment class E, which is considered to handle extra aggressively environment in
regards to chlorides and alkali’s which makes it more suitable for marine construction
e.g [33]. Table 3.3 summarises which aggregate size is used for each recipe .
Table 3.3: Description of aggregate types in each concrete mix design.
Material
Name
Description
R08
R16
R25
Sand
Masnedø E-sand
Sand, 0-4mm



Stone 1
Glensanda
Granite, 4-8mm



Stone 2
Glensanda
Granite, 8-16mm

Stone 3
Glensanda
Granite, 16-25mm

==PAGE:35==
3.3. DEVELOPING THE CONCRETE MIX DESIGNS
21
3.3.2
Test casting
To ensure that the desired compressive strength was obtained for the mix design,
casting and of compression testing of cylinders (D=150mm H=300mm) was made.
Aggregates were dried in an oven overnight at 105◦C and cooled down to room
temperature before mixing of the concrete started. Moisture content measurements
was also done to verify everything was completely dry before casting. All work with
the test casting was done at the DTU Concrete Lab. A concrete mixer with 50L
capacity was used for mixing and a vibrator table was used when pouring, see Figure
3.3.
Figure 3.3: Test cast: 1. Vibrator table, 2. Air measuring equipment, 3. Concrete
mixer and 4. Cylinder after pouring and vibrating
Both slump and air content measurements were done on the fresh concrete for every
batch. The concrete cylinders were demoulded after 24 hours and put in a 20◦C
water bath for the remaining curing period. Compressive tests were done after 7 -,
14 -, 21- and 28-days curing using a 3MN Toni Technik Load Frame with a loading
speed of 0.140 MPa/s. After evaluating workability during casting and development
of compressive strength, adjustments to the mix design was done and new test
castings was made. An example of the progression of the measured compressive
strength for the 8mm recipe is shown in Figure 3.4. It can be seen how each round
of test casting gets closer to the desired 40 MPa strength at 28 days. The 16mm
recipe was found acceptable after just one test casting.
==PAGE:36==
22
3. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN
Figure 3.4: Progression of test casting results for mix design R8.
3.3.3
Final Mix Design
Due to challenges with moisture content of the aggregate, each mix design was
adjusted accordingly for each batch of beam casting. There were also some inaccu-
racies in the scale of concrete mixer used, so each batch had some variations. The
15 individual ﬁnal mix designs of each beam is presented in Appendix B. These
recipes are extracted a report [34] created from a thin section analysis on the cast
cylinders. The ’original’ recipes of which the beam casting were based on, before
adjustments, are presented in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Original mix designs
Material
Description
8mm
16mm
25mm
[kg/m3]
[kg/m3]
[kg/m3]
Cement
Aalborg Portland Rapid Cement
314.0
280.0
298.0
Water
Tap water
186.1
189.2
160.1
Additive - S
MasterPozzolith 20N
0.94
0.56
1.49
Additive - SP
MasterGlenium SKY
2.20
1.12
2.98
Sand
Sand, 0-4mm
813.9
733.1
754.9
Stone 1
Granite, 4-8mm
994.8
183.3
188.7
Stone 2
Granite, 8-16mm
0
916.4
0
Stone 3
Granite, 16-25mm
0
0
943.6
As mentioned, adjustments to the recipes were done for each batch of concrete ac-
cording to moisture content measurements of the aggregates. The moisture content,
u was found by putting a representative amount of aggregate in a bowl, weigh before
and after drying it in a microwave oven. The moisture content is then calculated
as:
==PAGE:37==
3.4. PREPARATION OF CASTING
23
u = m1 −m2
m2 −m0
[−]
(3.1)
Where m0 is the weight of the bowl of which the aggregates are dried in, m1 is
mass of the bowl and wet aggregates, m2 is the mass of the bowl and dry material.
Further, the amount of the respective aggregates M (in kg/m3) is added to the
adjusted volume Vadj, calculated as:
Vadj = M ·
u −wa
1 −(u −wa)
[kg/m3]
(3.2)
Here, wa is the material absorption. The amount of water is then reduced by the
sum of Vadj for all aggregates.
Values from sieve analysis of each aggregate size is shown in ﬁgur 3.5. By combining
the values for each recipe, grain size distribution curves were plotted. This gives a
visual representation to the major diﬀerence between the three recipes in terms of
aggregate distribution. Approximately 50 % of the each aggregate size is either 8,16
or 25 mm and the other 50 % is evenly distributed from smaller aggregate sizes.
Figure 3.5: Grain size distribution of aggregates for each recipe.
3.4
Preparation of Casting
3.4.1
Storage of Aggregates
Since the concrete mix designs are based on surface dry aggregate volumes, it was
desired to dry out the aggregate in the big bags before casting. Also, since the
==PAGE:38==
24
3. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN
individual big bags in principle could have varying moisture content, drying would
also limit the diﬀerences and the uncertainty. As mentioned in Section 3.3.3, there
are simple ways to adjust mix design for moisture content, however, it has been
aimed to not change the original mix design too much. All the aggregates used for
this experiment was delivered in a wet condition and was intended to be dried out
inside the experimental hall of DTU. Unfortunately this did not go as planned, so
the aggregates was therefore stored in an isolated shipping container with a heater
and dehumidiﬁer.
The ﬁrst dehumidiﬁer was not satisfying enough to give the
desired control of moisture content. This led to upgrading of the equipment during
the project period. The solution of storing and drying all aggregates in a container
proved to be a time-consuming solution, so a considerable amount of time has gone
to organise and monitor the process to ensure suﬃciently dry aggregates. Due to
time limitation and unsatisfactory dehumidiﬁer, the aggregates of the ﬁrst test series
did not reach the desired level of dryness, and large adjustments was done to the
25 mm recipe.
3.4.2
Formwork
The formwork used in this experiment was partially delivered in parts by DTU, later
put together and ﬁnished. They were put together so that they could be reused and
moved several times without taking damage. It is common to construct beam forms
in a ‘standing’ orientation, however, the forms were constructed so the beams were
cast laying on the side because of the curvature. In total, three diﬀerent forms were
used, one straight form and two forms with centre radius of 5200mm and 3200mm,
see Figure 3.6.
3.4.3
Reinforcement Work
Reinforcement drawings for all beams are provided in Appendix A. The reinforce-
ment for the ﬁrst ﬁve beams was ordered pre-tied with the aim of minimising the
workload of preparing the reinforcement in the forms. However, the quality of the
tying job was not acceptable, so adjustments and rearrangement of the rebars was
necessary before casting. This experience led to the conclusion of ordering the next
batch of rebars and stirrups separately and doing the tying ourselves.
It was a
slightly more time-consuming solution in terms of tying, but less adjustments after
placing in forms was necessary and the overall result was better. Figure 3.7 shows
the completed reinforcement cage for beam B2 and beam A2 reinforcement before
completion. As seen in the ﬁgure, shear reinforcement is very practical when tying
==PAGE:39==
3.5. BEAM CASTING
25
(a) Rmid = 5200mm (left) and 3200mm (right).
(b) Rmid = ∞
Figure 3.6: Formwork
Figure 3.7: Reinforcement for beam D (ﬁnished) and E (not ﬁnished).
reinforcement because it helps create a solid cage and to create correct spacing of
the longitudinal reinforcement. Naturally, no shear reinforcement was placed in the
test region of the beams. When the tied reinforcement was placed in the forms, the
longitudinal reinforcement showed a tendency to sag here, so they had to be lifted
vertically by wires connected to a cross-beam above the form during casting.
3.5
Beam casting
Between two and three beams were cast on each day of casting. Ideally it would
be done inside the DTU Concrete Lab, but because of limited space, the castings
where done inside containers. Since there is no mixer larger than 200L at the DTU
==PAGE:40==
26
3. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN
Figure 3.8: Mobile concrete mixer with its main parts marked.
concrete lab, and one beam is approximately 400L, it was not suitable. A mobile
concrete mixer with 600L capacity was therefore brought to the site. This let us
cast one beam and the corresponding cylinders in one batch of fresh concrete. The
mobile concrete mixer consisted of compartments to store aggregates, water, ce-
ment and additives, see Figure 3.8. The mix design, adjusted for moisture content
in aggregates, was input to the computer which was connected to a digital scale
under the mixer itself.
For each batch, a standard slump measurement and air
content was done. In the cases where the slump measurement deviated a lot from
the test castings, measures were taken until the concrete reached satisfactory slump
measurements. The concrete was poured into the forms by using wheelbarrows and
buckets and vibrated by using regular hand held concrete vibrators. Levelling of
the concrete was done shortly after pouring to remove excess concrete and create a
smooth surface.
After casting, the surface was kept moist by spraying water and covering with plas-
tic. The beams were stored overnight in the containers with heaters. On days where
outside temperatures were particularly low, insulating mats where used to cover the
concrete surface. Cylinders were stored at the same location as the beams. After
approximately 24 hours, wet fabric was placed on the free surface of the concrete
and covered with plastic. The cylinders were demolded at this point and kept moist
with the same technique. The beams were stored for further 72 hours before de-
molding. An ‘insulation tent’ was built around the beams on a few occasions when
low outside temperatures was expected, see Figure 3.9 and placing insulation mats
on top didn’t seem to be enough to ensure suﬃcient curing.
After a total of 96 hours of storage in the forms, the beams were demoulded, all
==PAGE:41==
3.5. BEAM CASTING
27
Figure 3.9: Heat tent built around forms, after casting.
sides covered with wet fabric and wrapped in plastic. They were further lifted by
a forklift into an insulated container which was temperature controlled at 20 ◦C.
Before they got moved inside, two sets of wheels where strapped on the beam so it
could be pushed into the container and lifted oﬀto a permanent storage location.
Full casting and testing list is given in table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Order of casting and testing dates of beams.
Cast day
nr.
Date of
casting
Beam
index
Day of
testing
Curing
days
1
14.02.19
E1
02.04.19
47
D1
05.04.19
50
2
21.02.19
A1
11.04.19
49
B1
12.04.19
50
C1
09.04.19
47
3
26.04.19
A2
21.05.19
25
B2
20.05.19
25
C2
28.05.19
33
4
02.05.19
A3
27.05.19
25
B3
27.05.19
25
C3
28.05.19
26
5
09.05.19
E2
12.06.19
34
D2
06.06.19
28
6
15.05.19
E3
06.06.19
22
D3
12.06.19
28
==PAGE:42==
==PAGE:43==
4
Experiments
In this chapter an explanation of how the diﬀerent tests are carried out regarding
the machines, measuring equipment and recording devices is given.
4.1
Beam Experiments
The beams were tested in a classic three-point bending test. The reason for not
using a four-point bending test, which often is used for investigating shear, is that
previous published research show that spalling failure will be dominant when testing
arches in a four-point conﬁguration [5]. Roller supports was used for both supports.
It should be noted that it was not desirable to investigate traditional arching action
of the curved members, so allowing horizontal movement was key. Detailed test
procedure is provided in Appendix C. The three-point bending machine used to test
the beams, was built and designed from scratch by hand during this project and is
therefore explained in the following section.
4.1.1
Test Setup
The starting point for design the test setup is shown in the Figure 4.1a. The frame
consisted of two U400 steel beam proﬁles which are attached to two steel pipes,
which was further ﬁxed to the ground with pre-stressed bolts. This forms the frame
of which the hydraulic compression machine is mounted to.
Five diﬀerent geometries are tested which causes a varying height to the upper side
of the beams at mid-span. The largest height diﬀerence between two beam types
(A and E) was approximately 1m. Since the steel columns already were extended,
the two-steel beam U 400 could not be moved freely up and down to account for the
height diﬀerence of each specimen type. The free piston length was limited to 180
mm. In other words, the height diﬀerence had to be taken care of by the support
or by an extension to the piston head. Both solutions where implemented in the
29
==PAGE:44==
30
4. EXPERIMENTS
(a) Initial test setup.
(b) The ﬁnal test setup as build
Figure 4.1: The three-point test setup
design. The height diﬀerence between the two beams of equal orientation was han-
dled by the extended part of the piston. When testing beams of another orientation
(convex vs. concave), the support setup was designed so it could be lifted up or
down. It became of a great importance how to make the transition of the diﬀerent
support heights most eﬃcient and at the same time keep the rigidity of the system
intact. To be able to mount and move the test setup and inserting the beams to the
test machine, an overhead crane available in the experimental hall was used. Figure
4.2a shows the developed design of the test setup.
Figure 4.2b shows a top view of the support system in the 3D model. Four x’s
are marked to indicate where lifting straps were to be connected in order to ensure
working space and safety during removal of bolts before changing support height.
From here the support platform could be moved up and down by the overhead crane
==PAGE:45==
4.1. BEAM EXPERIMENTS
31
(a) Planned test setup with movable support sys-
tem.
(b) Plan view of one support with
lifting marks
Figure 4.2: 3D model from planning phase. Note: bolt holes are not drawn in the
model.
Table 4.1: Result of test setup control calculations
Structural
Load
Deﬂection
member
[kN]
[mm]
Beam U200
75
0.275
Beam U280
105
0.146
Beam U400
150
0.073
Colmun HE-B 120
52.5
0.035
Column Pipe168
150
0.303
and reattach to the desired height.
To ensure that the stiﬀness of the system was suﬃcient to give reliable results,
calculations related to deﬂection of the test setup is carried out, see Appendix D.
The results from the calculations are listed in Table 4.1. All calculations are made
by the conservatively assumption of an applied load at 300kN, divided evenly to
both sides. Only the major structural members are checked. There proved to be no
concerns with the deﬂection or elongation of the steel members which make up the
frame systems.
Finally, the support system was built and the result is seen in Figure 4.1b. Through
==PAGE:46==
32
4. EXPERIMENTS
the building processes it was noticed that the sideways stiﬀens for the frame holding
the hydraulic compression machine was not accounted for in the design process, so
two struts was added to complete the test setup. The two struts was ﬁxed to the
concrete strong wall, seen in Figure 4.1b.
4.1.2
Test Program and Measuring Equipment
In this section, the type and placement of measuring equipment is described. The
tests were conducted as a deformation control test with a loading speed of approxi-
mately 0.5 mm/min.
Measurements From the Load Cell
The load and position from the piston was recorded on the computer system that
also controls the test speed. One of the challenges with the position measuring of
the load cell is that the displacement can appear other places than directly in the
beam. For instance, the displacement of the cushioned plate under the load cell or
under the support will be recorded as change in the position of the load cell, without
applying deformation to the beam. The same eﬀect can appear from deformation in
the diﬀerent structural members. This have been calculated and checked in section
4.1.1 to have a minor inﬂuence, but nevertheless all small inaccuracies adds up to
inaccurate results. The load measurements from the load cell, however, have been
used as it is considered an accurate way of recording load. Deformation measure-
ments was recorded, but only used as control of LVDT (Linear variable diﬀerential
transformer) and DIC measurements.
LVDT Measurements
Linear displacement was recorded at seven locations on the beams with LVDT’s.
These electrical transformers can be used to track changes in voltage, and so each
LVDT was calibrated to convert electrical potential diﬀerence into displacement of
relevant units. A list of the placement and naming of each LVDT is presented in
Figure 4.3.
• A1, B1 and C1 measure the stability of the beam during testing. Monitoring
horizontally movement on the top region of the beam see if there is any lateral
movement during testing.
• A2 and C2 measure the horizontal movement of the roller supports.
==PAGE:47==
4.1. BEAM EXPERIMENTS
33
• B2 and B3 measure the deﬂection of the beam at mid-span and are placed
underneath the beam.
So, LVDT A1, A2, B1, C1 and C2 are mainly there to measure irregularities to verify
the results and help troubleshooting if strange results are obtained. The average of
LVDT B2 and B3 are further used in the analysis as the deﬂection measurements
at mid-span.
Figure 4.3: Plan view of LVDT’s placement.
LVDT is a commonly used measuring equipment and reliable, as it moves in a hollow
form and therefore the friction loss is very low and makes the LVDT precise. On the
other hand it gets damage by heat or vibration [35], but for this experiment which
takes place indoors and also not a vibration test, it was found to give a reliable
results.
DIC
The reason for using DIC is to monitor deformation and relative movement of a
surface area with very high precision. In this case, that area of interest is the side
of the beam without shear reinforcement. A high resolution SLR camera is used to
take pictures, in this case a Nikon D300S camera. To be able to evaluate surface
movements, a random speckle pattern of black dots on white background is made
with chalk spray paint.
A software like GOM Correlate can further be used to
analyse the images taken with the camera. The ﬁrst picture provides a base for the
software to recognise and calculate how the pattern moves compared to the other
images. The speckle pattern is thus tracked through the test which gives the possi-
bility investigate movement everywhere on the concrete surface. DIC measurements
are well suited to provide detailed information of the development of cracks and
surface strain, which is hard or impossible to see with the naked eye. In Figure 4.4
==PAGE:48==
34
4. EXPERIMENTS
Figure 4.4: Plan view of test setup showing DIC equipment.
the setup of the DIC equipment is shown.
Before each beam test, several pictures were taken to control the quality of the
applied speckle pattern. This is done with a built-in function in GOM Correlate,
where it gives feedback on which area that has to be improved, if necessary at all.
To ensure that camera is aimed fully perpendicular to the beam, two rulers were
taped on the beam, one on each side of the test area. By calibrating the length in
the program to the known distance of one of the rulers, it could be cross checked
by virtually measuring the other ruler in the software. If the lengths are the same
then the camera is aimed perpendicular to the beam. It is also practical to have
a digital display which show the current load of the load cell in the frame of the
camera. This makes it easier to connect individual images to load stages. Once all
the quality controls are made the camera is set to take picture every other second
throughout the test.
The major advantage of using DIC is the possibility to measure continuously on a
surface. Other common types of measuring equipment is limited to point measure-
ments, like the LVDT’s. In addition to this, a major advantage is the precision.
Disadvantages are that it can only measure one surface and it is somewhat time
consuming.
Data logger
All LVDT’s and load cell measurements was connected to the data logger through
the connectivity panel see ﬁgure 4.5. The data from the data logger is in units of
volt. By using conversion factors of the LVDT’s and load cell, outputs are converted
to relevant units. The data logger records data points faster than every half second.
==PAGE:49==
4.2. CYLINDER EXPERIMENTS
35
Figure 4.5: Data logger with connectivity panel (right).
Figure 4.6: Instron 8508 used for both cylinder tests.
This is a higher frequency than the images taken with the camera for DIC, so the
internal clock of the data logger and camera was synced before every test.
4.2
Cylinder Experiments
Both compression and tension test of the cylinders are done in the same uni-axial test
machine, an Instron 8508 with a capacity of 5MN see ﬁgure 4.6. The test procedures
can be found in Appendix E for compression and Appendix F for tension.
==PAGE:50==
36
4. EXPERIMENTS
(a) Plan view of the compression test setup.
(b) Concrete cylinder ready for compression
test.
Figure 4.7
4.2.1
Compression Tests
The cylinder compression tests was deformation controlled by the position of the
piston. The speed was set to 0.15 mm/min until at least 1.0% strain was achieved,
where the test was stopped. The setup had three LVDT’s and one extensometer to
measure the vertical displacement. The LVDT’s was added to obtain more precise
measurements of displacement than the load cell could provide. The analysis of this
report include evaluation of strain-softening curves of the compression tests, so the
precision of vertical displacement after failure was important.
Extensometers are typically even more precise than LVDT’s and will measure dis-
placement directly on the specimen. Results from the extensometer was later used
to determine the E-modulus of the concrete. The extensometer was removed before
the test specimen reached failure, typically around 70% of the max load, due to
the risk of damaging the equipment. The test was put on temporary break where
it maintained a constant force which made it possible to remove the extensometer
before continuing the loading. The placement of the extensometer is shown in Fig-
ure 4.7b. Both the extensometer and LVDT was calibrated so that output from the
data logger could be converted.
==PAGE:51==
4.2. CYLINDER EXPERIMENTS
37
(a) Plan view tensile test
(b) Test setup tensile test
4.2.2
Tension Tests
Initially, it was aimed to complete the tensions tests so that strain-softening curves
could be created. To be able to do this, high accuracy strain measurements over the
notch of the cylinder (illustrated in Figure 3.2 in the previous chapter) was ensured.
Two steel rings was tightly attached to the specimen with a known distance in be-
tween. Three extensometers was then attached to the steel ring with even spacing.
The test was then carried out with deformation control on an average reading of
these extensometers. The capacity of the machine was 5MN, in other words, the
capacity is far more than necessary for the tension tests, which was roughly 0.4-
0.8% of the machine capacity is used. Therefore, controlling the deformation on the
extensometers was very important.
To be able to apply tensile stress to the cylidner, epoxy glue was used. Notches
was sawn into the cylinders with a concrete cutter and further sandblasting of the
top and bottom was conducted. The sandblasting was necessary to obtain a rough
surface to glue a steel plate onto. The steel plate was glued using an two-component
epoxy glue. The attached steel plate could then be bolted to the machine, where
the second steel plate was ready. Glue was applied to the free surface of the second
plate and the cylinder was lowered. The process is illustrated in Figure 4.9.
The tension testing was a tedious and diﬃcult method to execute. A lot of trouble
with equipment and the procedure in general was experienced. The gluing failed for
all of the last four specimens and so few results was obtained. This led to a shift of
focus away from analysis of tensile tests, although a lot of time was spent testing.
The outcome was nevertheless tensile capacity of most of the concrete recipes.
==PAGE:52==
38
4. EXPERIMENTS
Figure 4.9: Procedure of inserting tension cylinder into machine.
==PAGE:53==
5
Results
A selection of data obtained by the conducted experiments is presented here. The
calculations regarding processing of the results and the further analysis and compar-
ison to theory is presented in Appendix H. Only the most essential data of the beam
and cylinder tests is given in ﬁgures and tables, the rest is to be found in Appendix B.
Geometry and other useful parameters of the individual beams is listed in Table 5.1.
The measurement which are the same for all specimen is not listed up in the table.
Such as X0 which is set to be X0 = 100mm, c is placed 200 mm from the center and
the longitudinal reinforcement in the compression zone is 2φ12. It is worth noticing
that the ﬂexural reinforcement ratio for beam C1 deviates from the rest.
Table 5.1: Geometry and Data, see Figure 3.1 for reference.
h
b
d
a
Rs
Rmid
ρ
φ
X1
CD
γ
Figure
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[mm2]
[mm]
[days]
[kN/m3]
A1
401
254
336
1200
3065
3200
1.11
3 x 20
118
50
23.2
A2
399
256
342
1200
3057
3200
1.08
3 x 20
118
25
23.2
A3
405
254
350
1200
3055
3200
1.06
3 x 20
118
25
23.7
B1
400
251
335
1200
5065
5200
1.12
3 x 20
118
49
24.3
B2
403
252
338
1200
5065
5200
1.11
3 x 20
118
25
23.3
B3
404
253
334
1200
5070
5200
1.12
3 x 20
118
25
23.9
C1
405
253
343
1200
∞
∞
0.46
2 x 16
145
47
23.9
1 x 12
C2
399
252
339
1200
∞
∞
1.10
3 x 20
145
33
23.8
C3
403
253
345
1200
∞
∞
1.08
3 x 20
145
26
23.8
D1
402
252
337
1200
-5337
-5200
1,11
3 x 20
118
50
24.0
D2
403
254
343
1200
-5343
-5200
1,08
3 x 20
118
28
23.8
D3
402
252
342
1200
-5342
-5200
1.10
3 x 20
118
28
24.1
E1
403
253
338
1200
-3338
-3200
1.10
3 x 20
118
47
24.2
E2
403
253
333
1200
-3333
-3200
1,12
3 x 20
118
34*
23.9
E3
400
252
335
1200
-3335
-3200
1.11
3 x 20
118
22*
23.9
* Where the curring days of the beam deviates more then one day from the cylinder test.
Self-weight beam
Beam A and E have a theoretical volume of 0.381 m3, beam B and D have 0.359
m3 and beam C 0.340 m3.
With a unit weight of approximately 24 kN/m2, a
self-weight corresponding to 8.16-9.15 kN is calculated. Half of the self weight is
39
==PAGE:54==
40
5. RESULTS
typically applied as additional shear force. It has been found of little importance to
include the self weight here based on the idea of comparing the beams to each other.
It should be emphasised that this will have an eﬀect in comparison to theoretical
models.
5.1
Beams
In the following section all the beams are listed up and presented in a repetitive
way from beam A to E, where a force-displacement plot is made with a small table
listing up the maximum shear force and displacement at maximum shear force. The
critical shear crack is shown by drawings based on a major strain DIC image after
failure. In those ﬁgures, the thick black line illustrate the critical shear crack and
the smaller grey ones are other cracks. Some of the ﬁgures are mirrored to makes
the beams easier to compare with each other.
5.1.1
Beam Type A
Force-deﬂection curve
Figure 5.1: Shear force deﬂection curve
Table 5.2: Results
A1
A2
A3
V [kN]
68.9
63.1
58.5
δ [mm]
6.97
6.48
5.79
==PAGE:55==
5.1. BEAMS
41
Critical crack failure
(a) A1
(b) A2
(c) A3
Figure 5.2: Critical cracks for beam A
==PAGE:56==
42
5. RESULTS
5.1.2
Beam Type B
Force-deﬂection curve
Figure 5.3: Shear force deﬂection curve
Table 5.3: Results
B1
B2
B3
V [kN]
93.6
68.9
71.8
δ [mm]
10.57
7.39
7.27
Critical crack failure
(a) B1
(b) B2
(c) B3
==PAGE:57==
5.1. BEAMS
43
5.1.3
Beam Type C
Force-deﬂection curve
Figure 5.5: Shear force deﬂection curve
Table 5.4: Results
C1
C2
C3
V [kN]
85.8
91.0
78.7
δ [mm]
25.72
8.73
7.43
Critical crack failure
(a) C1
(b) C2
(c) C3
==PAGE:58==
44
5. RESULTS
5.1.4
Beam Type D
Force-deﬂection curve
Figure 5.7: Shear force deﬂection curve
Table 5.5: Results
D1
D2
D3
V [kN]
108.1
97.8
107.1
δ [mm]
10.56
10.6
11,33
Critical crack failure
(a) D1
(b) D2
(c) D3
==PAGE:59==
5.1. BEAMS
45
5.1.5
Beam Type E
Force-deﬂection curve
Figure 5.9: Shear force deﬂection curve
Table 5.6: Results
E1
E2
E3
V [kN]
136.3
86.2
80.6
δ [mm]
19.08
12.52
11.24
Critical crack failure
(a) E1
(b) E2
(c) E3
==PAGE:60==
46
5. RESULTS
5.2
Compression and Tensile Results
The cylinders have follow the their respective beams from the casting day until
the testing to ensure the same environment for both test cylinders and beam, thus
maintaining the same curing conditions. This makes the compression strength of
the cylinders transferable to the compression strength in the beam. Curing time for
the beam and cylinders in Table 3.5 and 5.7, respectively. For beam E2 and E3 the
curing days between the cylinder and beam deviates with more than one day. The
tensile test have been carried out more simultaneous because it requires to modify
and rebuild the compression machine as explained in Section 4.2.2 this leads to a
bigger deviation of curing days between beam test and tension test.
Table 5.7: Compression and tensile strength with associated curing time
fc and ft [MPa]
A
B
C
D
E
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
fc
61.8
49
38.3
78.1
43.6
41.9
72.1
46.7
37.6
74
42.5
41.4
81.8
37.8
11.4
CD
49
26
25
49
26
25
47
33
26
50
27
27
47
28
28
ft
3.3
-
-
3.7
-
-
2.9
-
-
3.1
2.4
2.2
2,7
1,8
0,95
CD
54
-
-
54
-
-
48
-
-
55
35
29
49
35
42
Ec.
30.1
28.5
27.7
34.3
28.3
29.0
34.7
26.2
30.2
33.2
23.4
25.4
35.2
25.2
20.2
Longitudinal reinforcement
The reinforcement delivered by Celsa steel (C) is used for test series 1 and steel from
Lemvigh-M¨uller (LM) is used for test series 1 and 2. All testing of reinforcement
has been done by an external. From the raw data, stress-strain curves have been
created and E-modulus has been extracted. All the plots are presented in Appendix
G. The E-modulus for the longitudinal reinforcement is given in table 5.8. In the
same table it shows that Ø16 from LM is not used since reinforcement ratio were
changed during the experiment to match the ratio used in the curved beams and
therefore only to be found in C1. This is also based on the observation done after
testing beam C1 which deﬂected a lot and it became apparent that it was yielding,
to such extent in the ﬂexural reinforcement, which could lead to a ﬂexural failure
and not the desired shear failure.
Table 5.8: E-modulus of longitudinal reinforcement
E-modulus [GPa]
Ø12
Ø16
Ø20
LM
194.9
-
206.8
C
200.8
194.1
190.5
==PAGE:61==
5.3. SUMMARY OF RESULTS
47
5.3
Summary of Results
Collection of all the essential results are provided in Table 5.9. It is worth noticing
that Es values is only valid for the the ﬂexural reinforcement and thus the Es for
C1 is an average of the φ16 and φ12.
Table 5.9: Experimental results
fc
ft
V
δ
Ec
Es
Rs
Figure
[MPa]
[MPa]
[kN]
[mm]
[GPa]
[GPa]
[mm]
A1
61.8
3.3
68.9
6.97
30.1
190.5
3065
A2
49.0
-
63.1
6.48
28.5
206.8
3257
A3
38.3
-
58.5
5.79
27.7
206.8
3055
B1
78.1
3.7
93.6
10.57
34.3
190.5
5065
B2
43.6
-
68.9
7.39
28.3
206.8
5065
B3
41.9
-
71.8
7.27
29.0
206.8
5070
C1
72.1
2.9.
85.8
25.72
34.7
195.6
∞
C2
46.7
-
81.0
8.72
26.2
206.8
∞
C3
37.6
-
78.7
7.43
30.2
206.8
∞
D1
74.0
3.1
109.1
10.56
33.2
190.5
5337
D2
42.5
2.4
97.8
10.60
23.4
206.8
5343
D3
41.4
2.2
107.1
11.33
25.4
206.8
5342
E1
81.8
2.7
136.3
19.08
35.2
190.5
3338
E2
37.8
1.8
86.2
12.52
25.2
206.8
3333
E3
11.4
0.95
80.6
11.24
20.2
206.8
3335
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
6
Analysis and Discussion of Re-
sults
6.1
Inﬂuence of Beam Curvature on Shear
Capacity
Shear capacity is investigated from the results of three-point bending test series in
this section. To do this, a relationship between the shear span, a, and reinforcement
radius Rs is used. Here, positive Rs is deﬁned as convex beams (A and B) and neg-
ative values are concave beams (D and E). The straight beams are thus assumed to
have an Rs = ∞. To be able to compare the curvatures inﬂuence on shear capacity,
the ratio a/Rs is used. Further, the shear capacity from experiments, Vtest, is nor-
malised with b, d and √fc. The reason for using the square root of the compressive
strength is because a clear relationship has been found with shear capacity [36]. The
inﬂuence of curvature on shear capacity is then seen when plotting the a/Rs-ratio
and normalisation, see Figure 6.1a.
It can be seen how there is a clear trend of less shear capacity with negative cur-
vature, and more shear capacity for positive curvature. The trend also seems to
increase with larger absolute values of radius. These observations is in agreement
with previous research in this particular investigation [4]. It can also be seen from
the plot that beam E3 deviates in magnitude from E1 and E2 and thus from the
trend, which can be related to how the normalisation of Vtest is weighted. This might
explain the large deviation for E3, however, E3 has an abnormally low compressive
strength and should not be considered too a large extent. By evaluating the plot in
Figure 6.1a it can be seen that beam A and B have a very small deviation within
the beam type. On the other hand, D and E shows a signiﬁcant bigger spread in
shear capacity. After normalising with √fc, b and d, the only major varying factor
not included is the maximum aggregate size.
49
==PAGE:64==
50
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
(a) Visualisation of curvature inﬂuence on normalized shear capacity.
Test series 1
(black), 2 (grey) and 3 (white).
6.2
Evaluation of Failure Surface
Surface evaluation is based on a visual observation. In ﬁgure 6.2, images of the fail-
ure surface for beam A with aggregate size 25, 8 and 16 mm is shown in respectively
ﬁgure a, b and c. More pictures of the failure surface of each beam is presented in
Appendix I.
From evaluations of the failure surface, it was found that the maximum aggregates
size plays an important role. It could clearly be seen that all beams from the ﬁrst
test series (with high-strength concrete) had a large portions of aggregates that was
’cut’, rather than just pulled out. The normal-strength concrete beams had failure
surfaces with larger surface roughness and cavities of pulled-out aggregates was
spotted. It can be seen in Figure 6.2b how the surface is rough, but with very small
sized cavities due to the small aggregate size. Figure 6.2c, a rough surface can also
be seen, but with larger cavities due to pull-out of larger aggregates. Although these
clear tendencies could be spotted for all beams, it was never a matter of surfaces
with aggregate pull-outs only, or surfaces with aggregate cutting only. All surfaces
had a combination of the two, it was rather a matter of which surface type was
dominant.
==PAGE:65==
6.3. DEVELOPMENT OF CRACKS
51
(a) A1
(b) A2
(c) A3
Figure 6.2: Images of the failure surface of type A beams.
6.3
Development of Cracks
6.3.1
Initial crack
In this section an analysis of the load corresponding to the ﬁrst observation of the
initial crack is carried out for all 15 beams. This is done to investigate possible pat-
terns within each beam group when it comes to Pcr and its relation to the maximum
shear force. From Chapter 5 it was located a repeating ’knee behaviour’ of the beam
shear force-deﬂection plots. So, it is also of interest here to see the observed initial
crack in relation to the inclination change (knee). The cracking load observed from
experiments, Pcr, is extracted by using DIC images to monitor the major strain on
the concrete surface. Shear force at cracking load Vcr is then calculated.
Figure 6.3a shows how the strain is more or less evenly distributed over the all con-
crete surface before a distinct crack appears on the next Figure 6.3b. The major
strain on the surface is now concentrated and the beginning of a crack at mid-span.
This process have been done for all the beams to determine where and when the ﬁrst
crack appears and also extract the associated load. DIC images and corresponding
==PAGE:66==
52
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
(a) Before cracking
(b) Initial crack has developed
(c) Major Strain scale of DIC measure-
ments.
Figure 6.3: Major strain on concrete surface from DIC measurements. Beam A2.
Table 6.1: Comparison of shear force at inital crack and shear force at failure.
A
B
C
D
E
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Vcr
25.3
24.9
21.0
27.8
30.2
19.0
17.5
18.7
24.6
26.1
17.5
18.9
23.9
15.6
9.4
Vmax
68.9
63.1
58.5
96.3
68.9
71.8
85.8
91.0
78.7
108.1
97.8
107.1
136.3
86.2
80.6
Vcr
Vmax
0.37
0.39
0.36
0.30
0.44
0.26
0.20
0.21
0.31
0.24
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.12
shear force-displacement plot is found in Appendix J.
In Figure 6.3b a shear force-deﬂection plot for beam A2 is made where Vcr is high-
lighted. It can be observed how the circle representing Vcr hits the ’knee’ of the
curve. This is also the case for all other beams with a small degree of variation,
see Appendix J. This clear trend indicates that the change of inclination in the
mentioned plots come from the development of the initial crack. The initial crack
is always seen at mid-span, or very close to mid-span. The shear force at which
the initial crack is observed is summarised in Table 6.1 for all beams. The values
tend to be in the same range and very little diﬀerence is seen for the diﬀerent beam
types. However, when comparing to max shear force a clear trend is spotted. The
convex beams gets the initial crack at an average of 0.35 · Vmax. and for concave
beams has the average value of 0.18·Vmax. So, from this it is shown how the convex
beams develops cracks at a much later load stage than convex beams.
==PAGE:67==
6.3. DEVELOPMENT OF CRACKS
53
(a) Beam A2
(b) Beam E2
Figure 6.4: Shear force - deﬂection plot with Pcr (◦) and Pcr.CSC (◦) marked.
6.3.2
First appearance of critical shear crack
A closer evaluation of the ﬁrst appearance of what develops into the critical shear
crack is done in this section. Much like the analysis in Section 6.3.1, DIC mea-
surements is used to extract the shear force when the critical shear crack, Vcr.CSC,
develops. Shear force-deformation plots with marking of critical shear crack for all
beams is shown in Appendix J. Table 6.2 summarizes the Vcr.CSC-values and com-
pares with Vmax.
Table 6.2: Comparison of shear force at ﬁrst appearance of the critical shear crack
and shear force at failure.
A
B
C
D
E
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Vcr.CSC
34.2
39.5
30.4
27.8
44.7
25.9
78.6
71.8
57.3
105.2
91.3
81.2
111.5
66.2
43.6
Vmax
68.9
63.1
58.5
96.3
68.9
71.8
85.8
91.0
78.7
108.1
97.8
107.1
136.3
86.2
80.6
Vcr.CSC
Vmax
0.50
0.63
0.52
0.30
0.65
0.36
0.92
0.79
0.73
0.97
0.93
0.76
0.82
0.77
0.54
The comparison between Vcr.CSC and Vmax show a clear trend, opposite to the trend
observed for initial crack analysis. Convex beams develops crack which evolves into
the critical shear crack at a much earlier load stage than the concave beams, when
comparing to maximum shear force. Convex beams develop the critical shear crack
on average at a shear force of 0.50·Vmax while on average 0.80·Vmax for the concave
beams.
A notable observation can be seen in relation to the initial crack development. The
convex beams develop cracks at a later load stage, but the crack which becomes the
critical shear crack appears shortly after. The concave beams on the other hand
develop cracks earlier, but the critical shear crack appears very close to the ultimate
load. Figure 6.4a and Figure 6.4b expresses this eﬀect visually for beam A2 and
==PAGE:68==
54
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
E2 receptively. This means that concave beams gives a longer warning before the
failure occur then convex beams. In concrete design a ductile failure is desirable.
6.3.3
Analysis of Crack Propagation
Beam A2, C2 and E2 is given a closer assessment in terms of crack propagation
throughout the test course with the use of major strain plots form DIC. The basis
for this particular election is based on beams with normal strength concrete and
the same aggregate size, to easier compare each. This analyse is carried out to
give a grater understanding of how the cracks develops within the three extremes
of geometry used in this experiment. In the following, a force-deﬂection plot with
indication of load steps is given. The load steps are found in the DIC images later
and are used to follow the crack propagation from initial crack to after failure. The
scale for the DIC image is the same as presented in the previous section in Figure
6.3c.
Beam A2
The critical crack appears as the start of the third and last signiﬁcant crack observed
on beam A2 before failure. The cracks develops from a ﬂexural crack into a Flexural-
shear crack with a Shear-Tension failure as explained in chapter 2. In between circle
4 and 5, the crack that develops into the critical one starts obliquely into the load
cell.
Where the crack also follows the ﬂexural reinforcement.
When the crack
appears around the ﬂexural reinforcement, the reinforcement could be visible for
the blue eye.
Figure 6.5: Diﬀerent stages A2
==PAGE:69==
6.3. DEVELOPMENT OF CRACKS
55
(a) A2 - 1
(b) A2 - 2
(c) A2 - 3
(d) A2 - 4
(e) A2 - 5
(f) A2 - 6
(g) A2 - 7
(h) A2 - 8
==PAGE:70==
56
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Beam C2
The reference beam gives seven signiﬁcant cracks before the beam reaches failure.
The last crack that gets formed is also the one that develops into the critical crack.
The critical crack develops relatively close to the support, and the crack follow the
compression reinforcement mostly. The crack observed can be mostly be categorised
as Flexural-Shear crack ending in Shear-Tension Failure.
Figure 6.7: Diﬀerent stages C2
(a) C - 1
(b) C - 2
(c) C2 - 3
(d) C2 - 5
(e) C2 - 6
(f) C2 - 8
==PAGE:71==
6.3. DEVELOPMENT OF CRACKS
57
(g) C2 - 9
(h) C2 - 10
Beam E2
E2 have four signiﬁcant cracks, before the critical crack appears as the ﬁfth and
closest one to the support.
The crack ﬁrst appear as a ﬂexural crack before it
develops into a ﬂexural-shear crack. This goes relatively fast and it fails as a shear-
tension. The critical crack opens up around ﬁgure 6.10f but, has still not reached
the maximum capacity it only has a minor drop before the load building up to the
ﬁnal failure. After failure in point 9 the beam continues to have a relative high
strength, before the crack width is too large and the capacity drops to one quarter
of the maximum.
Figure 6.9: Diﬀerent stages
(a) E2 circle 1
(b) E2 circle 2
==PAGE:72==
58
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
(c) E2 circle 4
(d) E2 circle 5
(e) E2 circle 6
(f) E2 circle 8
(g) E2 circle 9
(h) E2 circle 10
(i) E2 circle 11
(j) E2 circle 12
Summary of the Crack Propagation
It can be seen from following the crack propagation that the convex beam develops
only a few cracks in total. This is opposite for the straight and concave beams which
develop more cracks. A similarity for all beams is the tendency of the critical shear
crack to be the last crack to develop before failure. It is also evident that all beams
==PAGE:73==
6.3. DEVELOPMENT OF CRACKS
59
has a combination of purely ﬂexural cracks at mid-span and one or more ﬂexural-
shear cracks some distance from mid-span. A few secondary cracks are spotted for
the beams, but there is no obvious pattern to their development.
6.3.4
Critical Shear Cracks Combined
In the following ﬁve ﬁgures the critical crack for each beam geometry is isolated and
drawn upon each other. This is done to make it easier to see how the shape of the
critical shear crack vary for each beam type. Only the test side of the beams are
shown in Figure 6.11.
(a) A beams
(b) B beams
(c) C beams
(d) D beams
==PAGE:74==
60
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
(e) E beams
Figure 6.11: Caption
From the combined critical shear crack ﬁgures it can be seen how the straight beam
failed in a typical manner. The critical shear crack develops all the way up to the
load plate and ’breaks oﬀ’ after approximately a/2. The Critical shear crack then
follows the longitudinal reinforcement towards the bearing plate. The critical shear
cracks of the concave beams do show a similar shape, however the break-oﬀis much
closer to the bearing plate. Another notable diﬀerence is seen when the curvature
becomes large (E beams), where the critical shear crack hits the top edge of the
beam before reaching the load plate. The cracks of the convex beam has the break-
oﬀpoint much closer to the load plate, unlike the straight and concave beams. The
inclination of the crack at the break-oﬀis also less steep, in addition to clear ten-
dency to follow the longitudinal reinforcement for a longer distance.
As described above, a clear diﬀerence in the developed shape and placement of
the critical shear crack is spotted between the beam types. It is hard to pinpoint
the inﬂuence this has on the over shear carrying behaviour, but a nearby thought
regarding the concave beams is additional inﬂuence of the dowelling eﬀect. The
critical shear crack ends up close to the support and thus the dowelling eﬀect can
be signiﬁcant here. It also seen how the critical shear crack develops across the top
reinforcement for the E beams. On the other hand, the critical shear crack splits
along a large distance of the longitudinal reinforcement for the convex beams, which
might limit the dowelling eﬀect.
6.4
Relative Displacement Vectors
In this section, an analysis on the relative displacement vectors (RDV) of the critical
shear crack is conducted. It is presented in [37] how observed RDV of experiments
on straight beams can be translated to the Crack Sliding Model using the theory
of plasticity. The ﬁndings by Muttoni [38] are idealised and forms the basis for
==PAGE:75==
6.4. RELATIVE DISPLACEMENT VECTORS
61
the model, as illustrated in Figure 6.12. The ﬁndings by Muttoni are considered
instrumental in the explanation of the Critical Shear Crack theory and the crack
behaviour itself. Because of the importance of RDV’s for straight members, a similar
analysis is here conducted for the arch-shaped members. No such analysis on arch-
shaped members is found in earlier research.
Figure 6.12: (a) Relative displacement vectors from experiments on straight beams
and [38] (b) an idealised representation [37]
An evaluation of the Crack Sliding Model and how it could relate to curved mem-
bers is not conducted here, but rather an evaluation of whether the same physical
behaviour is found for arch-shaped members. The analysis will also provide a better
understanding of the critical shear crack development of arch-shaped members. The
analysis is made from a selection of three convex, three concave and one straight
beam, all with normal strength concrete. The RVD of the straight beam is used as
a control of what is already known in the literature, and is not further described
here, but rather presented in Appendix B (Beam C2).
DIC measurements and the GOM Correlate software was utilized in the creation
of relative displacement vectors. To create a RDV, two virtual points on each side
of the beam was identiﬁed and tracked through the test. The x- and y-component
of their relative displacement was extracted from GOM Correlate and later used to
construct relative displacement vectors. Multiple point pairs, and thus RDVs, was
created along the critical shear crack to be able to observe relative movement along
the critical shear crack. The number of RDVs for each beam was varied based on the
length of the critical shear crack. Changes to the relative displacement of two points
==PAGE:76==
62
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
is only obtained when one load step is compared to another. Load steps was chosen
with care to ensure an accurate representation of the actual relative displacement
and was individually chosen for each beam. When carrying out the analysis, small
displacements of the virtual points due to strain in uncracked concrete was neglected.
Finally, a visual representation of the RDV was created, presented below, with the
illustration of cracks after failure as the background (from chapter 5 Result). Each
point of measurement has a series of RDVs connected to it, propagating away from
the critical shear crack.
The load step of which the individual RDV ends at is
illustrated in the legend of each ﬁgure.
(a) A2
(b) A3
(c) B3
Figure 6.13: Relative displacement vectors of convex arch-shaped beams from the
experimental program.
Crack development after failure used as background for
illustrative purposes.
==PAGE:77==
6.4. RELATIVE DISPLACEMENT VECTORS
63
(a) D2
(b) D3
(c) E2
Figure 6.14: Relative displacement vectors of concave arch-shaped beams from the
experimental program.
The ﬁrst thing to notice from the visualisation of the RVDs (Figure 6.13 and 6.14)
is that the RDV initially develops perpendicular to the critical shear crack. This
is observed for all investigated beams. It should be noted that the RDV are not
exactly perpendicular to the critical shear crack, but very close to, and in all cases
it is considered a good assumption for these results. It is also a common observation
for all beams that the relative movement of the cracks are larger at the bottom of
the cracks, that than towards the crack tip. This is to be expected as the cracks
develops from the bottom of the beam.
Further it can be seen that the concave beams (D2, D3 and E2) all end up with
vertical RDVs when approaching failure. These two observations which are true for
==PAGE:78==
64
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
the concave beams correspond well with the previous reasearch on straight beams.
The convex beams (A2, A3 and B3) however, does not show the same trend close
to failure. The RVDs of these beams stays straight in relation to their starting
direction. This makes the inclination of the RDV at failure vary along the critical
shear crack. RDV close to the top part of the critical shear crack are vertical, while
the RDV at the lower part of the critical shear crack is inclined.The red-shaded
load steps in Figures 6.13 and 6.14 indicates displacement which happened after
maximum shear force was recorded. It can be seen that a signiﬁcant portion of the
relative displacement is from these load steps.
RDVs perpendicular to the crack means that the crack is simply opening, without
any transverse movement along the crack. On the other hand, RVD with an incli-
nation to the crack is a combination of slip and crack opening. With this in mind,
it can be seen how the cracks of the concave beams initially opens without any slip,
then further develops with a combination of slip and crack opening. The concave
beams, with RVDs almost perpendicular to the crack at all load stages, will develop
a crack opening with no, or very little, presence of slip. As described in Chapter 2, it
is suggested in the literature that slip should be present to fully develop aggregate
interlock as a signiﬁcant shear-transfer mechanism. Therefore, it may be argued
that aggregate interlock is limited for convex beams. Since convex beams are found
to have less shear capacity, this might be one of the inﬂuencing factors. However,
more research is needed on the topic to be able to conclude.
6.5
Strain-Softening Behaviour with Varying
Maximum Aggregate Size
Small introduction to this section is made to illustrate the the behaviour of the
concrete with a diﬀerent concrete strength.
Where the strength of the concrete
eﬀects both the ascending and descending part of the stress-strain curve which is
shown in ﬁgure 6.15 and closer explained by Nielsen [39]. In this section the softening
curve will be of most interest and therefore the part which is going to be evaluated.
==PAGE:79==
6.5. STRAIN-SOFTENING BEHAVIOUR WITH VARYING MAXIMUM
AGGREGATE SIZE
65
Figure 6.15: Typical behaviour of diﬀerent concrete strength [39]
In total 45-compression plot will be divided in to three diﬀerent categories based
on the aggregate size. To make it more transparent to analyse a average of three
compression tests carried out which gives a total of 15 compression plot each repre-
senting beam A1 -E3. Calculation in this section is based on the paper present of
Su and Bei ,2008. The presented ﬁtting curve follows equation 6.1.
σfitted =
A · X + B · X2
1 + C · X + D · X2
(6.1)
Were A, B, C and D are constants which is derived in Appendix L and X is
ϵ
ϵ0
which is the normalised strain. All the curves present is a result of the σfitted.
In this analysis, stress-strain plots of the compression tests are analysed through
the ﬁtting curve, calculated from Equation 6.1. The raw data of this analysis is
presented in beam Appendix B. This analysis is focusing on the softening (descend-
ing) part of the stress-strain curve, plots presented is therefore limited to this part
only. Fitting curves representing compression test for each beam are combined in
plots depending on maximum aggregate size in Figures 6.16, 6.17 and 6.18. The red
line is the curve which is the most representative for each aggregate size. These are
further combined in Figure 6.19 to create a comparison between the diﬀerent sizes.
In ﬁgure 6.16 it is important to emphasize that the compression strength of the
concrete is between 61.8 and 81.8 fc and categorize as a high strength concrete.
The tendency between the individual curves shows that higher compressive strength
gives a steeper descending curve, which is in good agreement with Figure 6.15. A1
with fc = 61.8MPa has the most gentle curve and E1 with fc = 81.8MPa is the
steepest.
==PAGE:80==
66
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Figure 6.16: Normalized descending curve of for dg25
In ﬁgure 6.17, beam E3 (fc = 11.4MPa) deviates from the rest and is therefore
disregarded, with respect to the the choice of ﬁnding a representing curve. The
same tendency is observed here, as for the dg = 25mm plots: Higher concrete
strength gives a steeper curve.
Figure 6.17: Normalized descending curve for dg16
The same tendency observed for dg = 25mm and dg = 16mm is to bee seen for
dg = 8mm were higher compression strength results in a steeper descending curve.
==PAGE:81==
6.5. STRAIN-SOFTENING BEHAVIOUR WITH VARYING MAXIMUM
AGGREGATE SIZE
67
Figure 6.18: Normalized descending curve for dg8
A plot with one representative ﬁtting curve for each aggregate type is furhter pre-
sented in Figure 6.19. From this plot it is possible to observe what eﬀect maximum
aggregate size has on the softening behaviour of the compression tests.
Again it should be noted that the curve representing dg = 25mm is from high-
strength concrete and is steeper from this reason.
The shape of this curve can
therefore not directly be compared to the curves representing dg = 16mm and
dg = 8mm. During compression testing of the concrete with dg = 25mm a sudden
and brittle failure with a loud noice was typically observed. A softer and less brittle
failure was observed for dg = 16 and dg = 8mm concrete. This indicates that a
steep softening curve is equivalent with a brittle failure and vise versa. Further to
note from ﬁgure 6.19 is the tendency that a higher dg gives a more ductile failure,
when fc is kept constant. This is a trend seen from the 16mm and 8mm-curves,
which do in fact have more or less equal fc (respectively 41.9 and 43.6 MPa). It is
known that the integration of a curve in a stress-strain plot results in the fracture
energy. Based on the 16mm- and 8mm-curves in Figure 6.19 it is believed that the
fracture energy (and thus ductility) is larger for increasing maximum aggregate size,
with constant fc.
==PAGE:82==
68
6. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Figure 6.19: Combined softening curve for compressive test grouped according to
maximum aggregate size.
==PAGE:83==
7
Comparison to Theory
As mention before, there is no available information in the literature on the consis-
tency between design codes predictions of shear capacity and experimental results
of arch-shaped concrete members. This section aims to enlighten this topic based
on the experimental results obtained in this project. The experimental data will be
compared to the DNVGL-ST-C502, as it is described in Section 2.3. In addition to
this, a comparison of the new extension to the CSCT to account for arch-shaped
members will be conducted. The basis of the extended CSCT is described in detail
in Section 2.4.
7.1
DNV Standard
Initially it is desirable to simply compare how the ﬁt between calculated shear ca-
pacity from the DNV calculations Vcalc and the actual test results Vtest. It is done
here by dividing the two as: Vtest/Vcalc, later referred to as shear comparison. The
nature of this comparison lets us conclude that results equal to 1 are a perfect
ﬁt, results greater than 1 means conservative calculations. Results less than 1 are
un-conservative in the sense of over-estimating the shear capacity of the members
when comparing to actual test results. Figure 7.1a shows a bar plot of the above
described comparison where each beam type is grouped together. A similar com-
parison is made in Figure 7.1b with a scatter plot and the perfect ﬁt line.
Figure 7.1b shows that the beams are over-estimated with the DNV Standard to a
varying degree, except for D3, E1 and E3. The ﬁgure also shows that most beams are
calculated to have a shear capacity in a limited range of 95-115kN. This is not very
surprising since all beams share the same variables (in the DNV formulation), except
concrete strength. The bar plot in Figure 7.1a makes it clear how the curvature
of the beams is not considered in the DNV Standard. A clear trend of more un-
conservative results for positive curvature and more conservative results for negative
curvature is observed when comparing to the straight reference beams. The most
69
==PAGE:84==
70
7. COMPARISON TO THEORY
(a) Bar plot, grouped by beam type.
(b) Scatter plot with a perfect ﬁt line.
Figure 7.1: Comparison of shear capacity from experimental data and DNV calcu-
lations (Vtest/Vcalc).
critical beams are the A-beams which on average is tested to just 61% percent
of the calculated capacity (RSD = 6%). The E-beams are on average calculated
conservatively, failing at 6% higher load than the calculated capacity (RSD = 14%).
It is also observed that the straight reference beams are over-estimated estimated
by the DNV formulation. The reason for this is not clear, rather unexpected. A
Vtest/Vcalc value of 1 or closer to 1 was expected. As described in Section 5, the
self-weight is not included in the deﬁnition of Vtest and is a partial explanation.
However, self-weight would only account for 4% of the shear capacity, whereas the
overestimation is on average 15% for the straight beams. The shear capacity for-
mulas in the DNV Standard is based on an empirical solution, and includes a size
factor kv. The size factor might stem from experiments with other a/d-ratios or
reinforcement degree. However, this would be speculations and no conclusions on
the reason can be made here. Results from the comparison discussed above are
listed in Table 7.1.
Aggregates size is not considered in the DNV formulation (ref. Section 2.3). It can
therefore be argued that some of the variation within each beam type (A-E) comes
from diﬀering aggregates. The variation within each beam type is not consistent
and thus no clear relationship between aggregate size and capacity can be seen from
Figure 7.1a.
==PAGE:85==
7.1. DNV STANDARD
71
Table 7.1: Comparison of shear capacity from experimental data and calculations
with DNV Standard (Vtest/Vcalc).
A
B
C
D
E
1
0.63
0.84
0.86
0.95
1.16
2
0.61
0.69
0.90
0.98
0.90
3
0.60
0.73
0.81
1.08
1.13
P
AVG
0.61
0.75
0.86
1.00
1.06
0.86
RSD
0.03
0.10
0.05
0.07
0.14
0.08
7.1.1
Proposal of new factor to the DNV formulation
It has been shown in the previous section how the DNV Standard does not take cur-
vature into account in its formulation of the shear capacity. Since the formulation
is an empirical expression based on experiments on straight members, this was not
surprising. The DNV calculation also over-estimated the capacity for the straight
beams from these experiments. In this section, an extension to Equation 2.1 to
take curvature into account is proposed. It should be noted that there is made no
attempt to modify the formula to account for the over-estimation issue observed.
The focus will therefore be on ensuring consistent calculations by the DNV formula,
even for arch-shaped members. The extension to the DNV expression is proposed
is created with a regression analysis on the experimental data. The ﬁnal proposal
is presented here along with an explanation of the process of deriving it.
To include curvature, it has been found appropriate to use the radius of the longitu-
dinal reinforcement, Rs, as a basis. It is also desirable to create an expression which
naturally eliminates arch-shaped eﬀects when evaluating a straight member (with
Rs = ∞). Taking these two considerations into account, a plot of the shear compar-
ison (Vtest/Vcalc) and the ratio a/Rs was created, see Figure 7.2. An advantage of
using a here is the elimination of units. A- and B-beams are found on the positive
part of the x-axis because their longitudinal reinforcement is deﬁned as positive. A
linear relationship is observed from this ﬁgure, thus a linear regression analysis was
conducted to create a ﬁtted line. The process of creating the ﬁtting line is described
in Appendix H.
The slope of the line can further be used directly in combination to the a/Rs-ratio
to get an expression which eliminates the eﬀect of arching a member. From this, a
new factor, ks is created. The factor can be implemented in the original expression
(Equation 2.1) to calculate shear capacity in the DNV formula, as:
==PAGE:86==
72
7. COMPARISON TO THEORY
Figure 7.2: Shear comparison with varying reinforcement ratio. Linear regression
line is plotted.
Vcd = 0.3
 
ftd + kA · As
γc · bw · d
!
bw · d · kv · ks
≤
0.6ftd · bw · d · kv · ks
(7.1)
The factor ks is deﬁned as:
ks = 1 −0.6 a
Rs
(7.2)
It can be seen how the slope of the ﬁtted line (0.59x) is simpliﬁed for practical use
to 0.6. There are three things to notice with this factor:
1. The value of ks will become 1.0 if evaluating a straight beam. This is because
Rs = ∞and the second part of the factor expression becomes zero. A value
of 1.0 means no change to the original DNV formulation.
2. Convex beams with a positive value for the reinforcement radius gets a reduc-
tion in shear capacity since ks < 1.0
3. Concave beams with a negative reinforcement radius will on the contrary get
an increase in shear capacity from the ks-factor.
To show the eﬀect of the new proposed factor, a shear comparison bar plot and
scatter plot is again made, Figure 7.3. It can be seen how the bars are levelled and
very little variation is present due to curvature now.
==PAGE:87==
7.2. EXTENDED CSCT
73
(a) Bar plot, grouped by beam type.
(b) Scatter plot with perfect ﬁt line.
Figure 7.3: Comparison of shear capacity from experimental data and DNV calcu-
lations (Vtest/Vcalc), including the new proposed ks-factor..
7.2
Extended CSCT
A similar comparison as the one done in the previous section with Vtest/Vcalc is now
done with calculations based on the extended CSCT. Vcalc is now referring to shear
capacity from extended CSCT calculations. Figure 7.4a shows a bar plot with beams
grouped together and Figure 7.4b shows a scatter plot with a perfect ﬁt line.
(a) Bar plot, grouped by beam type.
(b) Scatter plot with perfect ﬁt line.
Figure 7.4: Comparison of shear capacity from experimental data and extended
CSCT calculations (Vtest/Vcalc).
==PAGE:88==
74
7. COMPARISON TO THEORY
Table 7.2: Comparison of shear capacity from experimental data and calculations
with Extended CSCT.
A
B
C
D
E
1
0.94
1.18
1.29
1.14
1.33
2
0.76
0.83
0.98
0.97
0.86
3
0.69
0.81
0.83
0.99
1.08
P
AVG
0.79
0.94
1.03
1.03
1.09
0.98
RSD
0.16
0.22
0.23
0.09
0.21
0.18
The ﬁrst thing to notice from Figure 7.4a is the much larger capacity of beams from
the ﬁrst test series than test series 2 and 3. The beams of test series 1 were cast
with high-strength concrete. It is stated in the CSCT basis that dg should be set
to zero when calculating high-strength concrete, and so this is done for all beams of
test series 1. A discussion of the inﬂuence of setting dg = 0 is presented in Section
7.2.1. Further, Figure 7.4b shows that the data points of test series 2 and 3 tends
follow the perfect ﬁt line linearly, however with an oﬀset to the unconservative side
for some of the beams. A closer look reveals that beam type A and B are dominant
on the unconservative side. It is known from the CSCT basis that shear capacity
calculations are directly related to the λ-value. This factor is found empirically from
a small data set [4], and so its inﬂuence on the experimental data in this project is
further investigated in Section 7.2.2.
The straight reference beams have an average capacity of 98% of that calculated
with the original CSCT, however, with a large RSD of 23%. Unlike the arched
members, the straight beam deviates a signiﬁcant amount in both directions. No
clear trend when it comes to aggregate size is observed from the Figure 7.4b and
7.4a.
7.2.1
Eﬀect of High-Strength Concrete
As previously described in Section 2.4, dg is used as an expression of the roughness
(and thus eﬀect of aggregate interlock) of the critical shear crack in the CSCT. The
eﬀect of aggregate interlock is found to be insigniﬁcant for small surface roughness,
which is typical for high-strength concrete. Muttoni and Fern´andez Ruiz [2] pro-
poses that a solution to account for this is to set dg to zero. The ﬁrst beam series in
the experimental program of this project was made with high-strength concrete, so
as proposed, dg was set to zero in the calculations. Since the CSCT has a clear way
of treating high-strength concrete in its model, it is found interesting to evaluate its
==PAGE:89==
7.2. EXTENDED CSCT
75
Figure 7.5: Comparison of experimental data and extended CSCT calculations high-
lighting the eﬀect of high-strength concrete.
inﬂuence on the shear comparison. Therefore, a new round of calculations with the
CSCT is conducted, but now leaving dg as it is (25mm) for test series 1. The latter
test series will have no change in calculations and show the same results as before.
A bar plot is created in the same manner as before, but now the highlighted area
represents the eﬀect of setting dg = 0.
Figure 7.5 shows a clear inﬂuence of how the surface roughness is treated in the
CSCT. It is evident that Vcalc now has a much higher value, and the shear com-
parison becomes less conservative. Also, the consistency within each beam type is
better when dg is kept with its original value, regardless of the compressive strength.
From the analysis of the beams failure surface, in Section 6.2, it is found that
the amount of aggregate cutting is much higher for high-strength concrete. The
high-strength concrete also proved to give slightly smoother surface overall which
strengthens the argument of treating high-strength concrete diﬀerently than normal
strength concrete in shear models.
However, the speciﬁc way of treating high-
strength concrete in the CSCT is found to be extremely conservative.
A more
reﬁned way of treating surface roughness should be investigated further.
7.2.2
Variation of λ-Coeﬃcient
The coeﬃcient λ is an important factor in the formulation of extended CSCT. It
deﬁnes the location of the point where slope of the tension force in the longitudinal
reinforcement is calculated and directly inﬂuences the magnitude of the deviation
==PAGE:90==
76
7. COMPARISON TO THEORY
Figure 7.6: Experimental data compared to calculations with varying λ
force. λ is typically set to be equal to 0.5 as described in Section 2.4.2. Campana,
Ruiz, and Muttoni [4] who ﬁrst proposed the extension of the CSCT claims “re-
search is still needed to conﬁrm the adequacy of this value”. A brief analysis on the
eﬀect of varying λ is therefore presented here. It should be noted that the straight
beam (type C) is not included in this analysis because it is not aﬀected by λ. This
is due to the nature of the deviation force expression, Equation 2.8 which becomes
zero for straight members (with Rs −→∞).
Figure 7.6 presents how experiments ﬁt with calculations for each beam type, with
varying λ. An average Vtest/Vcalc of each beam type is calculated for λ values of 0.5,
1.0, 1.5 and 2.0. Further, a trend line for each beam type is plotted based on the
four obtained data points.
It can be seen from the ﬁgure that each beam type ﬁts to an exponential trend
line well (minimum coeﬃcient of determination, R2 = 0,977). Further, it can be
observed that a single λ-value will not provide a good ﬁt for both positive and neg-
ative curvature. Extended CSCT calculations for the two beam types with positive
curvature (beam types A and B), would have a better ﬁt with experimental data if
λ was higher. From this it is therefor in the Authors opinion that the deﬁnition of
λ should take curvature orientation into account. This analysis is based on a small
data set, however, a proposal of new λ values are still presented in Table 7.3. It has
been deemed adequate to keep the original λ = 0.5 for concave beams, while the
convex beams was necessary to change. These values are solely chosen to ﬁt the 12
beams tested here and should therefore later be calibrated when more experimental
data becomes available.
==PAGE:91==
7.2. EXTENDED CSCT
77
Table 7.3: New λ-values that proved best ﬁt with experimental data
Beams
Curvatre
New λ-value
A and B
Convex
1.4
D and E
Concave
0.5
(a) Bar plot, grouped by beam type.
(b) Scatter plot with perfect ﬁt line.
Figure 7.7: Comparison of experimental data and calculations with new λ-values.
Table 7.4: Comparison of shear capacity from experimental data and calculations
with Extended CSCT based on new λ .
A
B
C
D
E
1
1.15
1.35
1.29
1.14
1.33
2
0.95
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.86
3
0.87
0.94
0.83
0.99
1.08
P
AVG
0.99
1.08
1.03
1.03
1.09
1.05
RSD
0.15
0.21
0.23
0.09
0.21
0.18
Updated results with the λ-values from Table 7.3 are presented in Table 7.4 and
visually in Figure 7.7. It can be seen that there is a much better ﬁt overall for
test series 2 and 3, while the same tendency as before is seen for test series 1 (high
strength concrete). An average value of 1.04 is obtained for the shear comparison
now.
It should be noted that adding the self-weight would inﬂuence the result,
however, this is regarded negligible.
==PAGE:92==
==PAGE:93==
8
Conclusion
The conclusion aims to answer each research objective listed in Section 1.2:
• It can be concluded from the experiments that concave beams have a higher
shear strength capacity and convex beams have lower shear capacity, com-
pared to straight reference beams. The overall tendency of the test series in
this project is unambiguous when normalised for compressive strength. It is
also found that a smaller absolute value of the radius increases the observed
tendency. These ﬁndings are in good agreement with previous research on
arch-shaped members without shear reinforcement.
• Development of the initial crack occurs at the same load range and thus is
independent of beam geometry. However, with comparison to maximum load,
the initial crack appears earlier for the concave beams and later for convex
beams. Both concave and straight beams develop more ﬂexural-shear cracks
before failure compared to convex beam which develop relatively few ﬂexural-
shear cracks before reaching failure. The critical shear crack for convex beams
behave very diﬀerent compared to concave beams. The critical shear crack
of the concave is similar to the straight beams. The ‘break-oﬀ’ point of the
convex beams is close to the load plate and follows the longitudinal ﬂexural
reinforcement for a longer distance. The break-oﬀpoint for concave beams,
on the other hand, is located close to support and follows top reinforcement
towards the load plate.
• Relative displacement vectors of the critical shear crack of the straight and
concave beams show a very similar behaviour. The vectors are initially perpen-
dicular to the crack and develops vertically as load is increased. The vectors
of the convex beams however, does not change inclination once they have de-
veloped. This leads to less slip for convex beams compared to the straight and
concave beams. The relative displacement vectors also show how the critical
shear crack continue to develop after maximum load is reached, in what can
79
==PAGE:94==
80
8. CONCLUSION
be viewed as a softening section of the shear force-deﬂection curve before the
ﬁnal failure is reached.
• The comparison with the DNV Standard for shear capacity of non-shear rein-
forced members is observed to be a non-conservative calculation based on the
straight beams. It is also clear that the calculation does not take curvature of
beams into account. In relation to straight beams it is found that the capacity
for convex beam is over-estimated and concave is under-estimated. This bias
can be accounted for by including a new proposed factor, ks = 1 −0.6 · a/Rs
in the DNV formulation.
• Comparison of the Extended CSCT with experimental data showed a good
estimation of shear capacity for concave beams. The capacity of the convex
beams was over-estimated. It was also found that the λ-coeﬃcient should be
diﬀerent depending on orientation of curvature. By using a new value of 1.4
for convex beam, better ﬁt was found. The shear capacity of beams with high-
strength concrete is very conservative for beams with high-strength concrete.
• The eﬀect of compression strength on the compressive tests softening curve is
evident, even for smaller variations. Tests on higher strength concrete speci-
mens resulted in a steeper softening curve. In addition to compressive strength,
maximum aggregate size also inﬂuences the softening curve of the concrete.
Larger aggregate size lead to a more ductile failure.
8.1
Future work
Some of the results obtained have not been analysed and can be further investigated.
Some of the possibilities to investigate further are listed below.
• The analysis of softening curves from the compression test proved how max-
imum aggregate size and compressive strength inﬂuences the behaviour. An
analysis to see how this translates to the descending part of the beam test,
which could perhaps help understand the inﬂuence of aggregate size one the
shear failure of arch-shaped members.
Strain-softening curves from tensile
test could also assist in this analysis. Deﬂection measurements have not been
evaluated in this report and could be analysed further in relation to shear
capacity.
• More tests of arch-shaped concrete members is encouraged to further inves-
tigate inﬂuence of, for instance, varying reinforcement ratio. This could lead
==PAGE:95==
8.1. FUTURE WORK
81
to a better basis to determine the λ-coeﬃcient in the CSCT and the ks-factor
proposed to the DNV formulation. It would also open the possibility for more
conclusions if new beams with normal strength concrete and 25mm maximum
aggregate size was cast.
• It would be beneﬁcial to compare test results to other commonly used codes
of practice or shear capacity models, to see if curvature can be accounted for
in the formulations. With that in mind, the Crack Sliding Model can be seen
as an interesting choice.
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
ASCE-ACI Committee 445 on Shear and Torsion. “Recent approaches to shear
design of structural concrete”. In: Journal of structural engineering 124.12
(1998), pp. 1375–1417.
[2]
Aurelio Muttoni and Miguel Fern´andez Ruiz. “Shear strength of members
without transverse reinforcement as function of critical shear crack width”.
In: ACI Structural Journal 2.ARTICLE (2008), pp. 163–172.
[3]
Karl-Heinz Reineck et al. “ACI-DAfStb Databases for Shear Tests on Slender
Reinforced Concrete Beams with Stirrups.” In: ACI Structural Journal 111.5
(2014).
[4]
Stefano Campana, Miguel Fern´andez Ruiz, and Aurelio Muttoni. “Shear strength
of arch-shaped members without transverse reinforcement”. In: ACI Structural
Journal 111.3 (2014), p. 573.
[5]
Stefano Campana, Miguel Fern´andez Ruiz, and Aurelio Muttoni. “Strength of
arch-shaped members in bending and shear”. In: 4th ﬁb Congress, Mumbai.
CONF. 4th ﬁb Congress, Mumbai. 2014, p. 9.
[6]
Fritz Leonhardt and E M¨onnig. Vorlesungen uber Massivbau: Grundlagen zum
Bewehren im Stahlbetonbau. Dritter Teil. Springer, 1977.
[7]
Lars German Hagsten, Mogens Peter Nielsen, and Linh Cao Hoang. “Beam
shear design according to Eurocode 2: a review of the theoretical background”.
In: Proceedings of the Eleventh East Asia-Paciﬁc Conference on Structural
Engineering & Construction. National Taiwan University. 2008.
[8]
Antoni Cladera and Antonio R Mari. “Shear strength in the new Eurocode 2.
A step forward?” In: Structural Concrete 8.2 (2007), pp. 57–66.
[9]
J-P Zhang. “Diagonal cracking and shear strength of reinforced concrete beams”.
In: Magazine of Concrete Research 49.178 (1997), pp. 55–65.
83
==PAGE:98==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10]
Abdullah D¨onmez and Zdenˇek P Baˇzant. “Critique of critical shear crack
theory for ﬁb Model Code articles on shear strength and size eﬀect of reinforced
concrete beams”. In: Structural Concrete (2019).
[11]
Mohamed Mohamed Ziara. “The inﬂuence of conﬁning the compression zone in
the design of structural concrete beams”. PhD thesis. Heriot-Watt University,
1993.
[12]
F Leonhardt and R Walther. “Contributions to The Treatment of The Prob-
lems of Shear in Reinforced Concrete Construction: Stuttgart Shear Tests”. In:
Beton-und Stahlbetonbau, Translation by CV Amerongen (1964) 111 (1962),
p. 134.
[13]
Mogens Peter Nielsen and Linh Cao Hoang. Limit analysis and concrete plas-
ticity, Third Edition. CRC press, 2011.
[14]
GNJ Kani. “Basic facts concerning shear failure”. In: Journal Proceedings.
Vol. 63. 6. 1966, pp. 675–692.
[15]
M Fern´andez Ruiz, Aurelio Muttoni, and Juan Sagaseta. “Shear strength of
concrete members without transverse reinforcement: A mechanical approach
to consistently account for size and strain eﬀects”. In: Engineering Structures
99 (2015), pp. 360–372.
[16]
Frank J Vecchio and Michael P Collins. “The modiﬁed compression-ﬁeld the-
ory for reinforced concrete elements subjected to shear.” In: ACI J. 83.2 (1986),
pp. 219–231.
[17]
Evan C Bentz, Frank J Vecchio, and Michael P Collins. “Simpliﬁed modiﬁed
compression ﬁeld theory for calculating shear strength of reinforced concrete
elements”. In: ACI Materials Journal 103.4 (2006), pp. 614–624.
[18]
Pascal Casanova and Pierre Rossi. “Analysis and design of steel ﬁber reinforced
concrete beams”. In: Structural Journal 94.5 (1997), pp. 595–602.
[19]
EN 1992-1-1 Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures - Part 1-1: General
ruels and rules for buildings. EN. Brussels: CEN, 2005.
[20]
DNVGL AS. “Standard - DNVGL-ST-C502: Oﬀshore concrete structures, Edi-
tion August 2017”. In: ().
[21]
Joost Cornelis Walraven. “Aggregate interlock: a theoretical and experimental
analysis”. In: (1980).
[22]
Joan Maria Rius Gibert et al. “Active shear strengthening of reinforced con-
crete beams using Ni-Ti-Nb shape memory alloys”. PhD thesis. Universitat
de les Illes Balears, 2019.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[23]
I Jeli´c, MN Pavlovi´c, and MD Kotsovost. “A study of dowel action in reinforced
concrete”. In: Magazine of Concrete Research 51.2 (1999), pp. 131–141.
[24]
Helen Dulacska. “Dowel action of reinforcement crossing cracks in concrete”.
In: Journal Proceedings. Vol. 69. 12. 1972, pp. 754–757.
[25]
Standard Norge. “NS 3473: Prosjektering av betongkonstruksjoner, Beregnings-
og konstruksjonsregler”. In: Standard Norge (2003).
[26]
Standard Norge. Produktpresentasjon - NS-EN 1992-1-1:2004+NA:2008. 2019.
url: https://www.standard.no.
[27]
Aurelio Muttoni and Joseph Schwartz. “Behavior of beams and punching in
slabs without shear reinforcement”. In: IABSE colloquium. Vol. 62. CONF.
IABSE Colloquium. 1991, pp. 703–708.
[28]
A Muttoni. “Shear and punching strength of slabs without shear reinforce-
ment.” In: Beton- und Stahlbetonbau 98.2 (2003), pp. 74–84.
[29]
SIA Code. “262 for concrete structures”. In: Swiss Society of Engineers and
Architects, Z¨urich, Switzerland (2003), p. 94.
[30]
Aalborg Portland. Rapid. 2019. url: https://www.aalborgportland.dk
(visited on 07/08/2019).
[31]
BASF. MasterPozzolith 20N. 2019. url: https://assets.master-builders-
solutions.basf.com (visited on 07/08/2019).
[32]
BASF. MasterGlenium SKY 830. 2019. url: https://www.master-builders-
solutions.basf.no (visited on 07/08/2019).
[33]
FC Beton AS. Beton miljøklasser. 2019. url: https://www.fc-beton.dk
(visited on 07/09/2019).
[34]
COWI. “Determination of paste, air and aggregate content by point coint, and
an estimate of concrete compressive stregth”. In: Test report (2019), pp. 1–47.
[35]
An Overview of Linear Variable Diﬀerential Transformer. 2019. url: https:
//www.elprocus.com/lvdt (visited on 07/10/2019).
[36]
KG Moody et al. “Shear strength of reinforced concrete beams Part 1-Tests
of simple beams”. In: Journal Proceedings. Vol. 51. 12. 1954, pp. 317–332.
[37]
Linh C Hoang. “The Crack Sliding Model–Uniﬁed Approach to Shear and
Punching Shear”. In: IABSE Congress Report. Vol. 17. 18. International As-
sociation for Bridge and Structural Engineering. 2008, pp. 212–213.
==PAGE:100==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[38]
A Muttoni. “Die Anwendbarkeit der Plastizit¨atstheorie in der Bemessung von
Stahlbeton (The Applicability of the Theory of Plasticity in the Design of
Reinforced Concrete)”. In: Rep 176 (1990).
[39]
Mogens Peter Nielsen. Beton 2, Del 2, Plasticitetsteori for beton. Danmarks
Tekniske Universitet, DTU Byg, 2001.
[40]
Ray K L Su and Cheng Bei. “The Eﬀect of Coarse Aggregate Size on the Stress-
strain Curves of Concrete under Uniaxial Compression”. In: HKIE Transac-
tions 15.3 (2008), pp. 33–39.
==PAGE:101==
Appendices
87
==PAGE:102==
Mrk.
Type
Kval.
Dim.
Stk.
A-mål
B-mål
C-mål
Z-mål
1
34
Y
10
15
175
325
2
67
Y
20
3
4217
3350
3
67
Y
12
2
3873
3065
Note:
Note:
gevind
gevind
Stålplade
Lenton bolt coupler S13
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Krumme bjælker
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
BJÆLKE-1
2
kunde skitse
Dato:
06-03-2019
Valset armering, Klip & bukke
A
A
A
88
APPENDICES
Appendix A - Reinforcement Drawings
==PAGE:103==
Stålplade
Lenton bolt coupler S13
Mrk.
Type
Kval.
Dim.
Stk.
A-mål
B-mål
C-mål
Z-mål
1
34
Y
10
15
175
325
2
67
Y
20
3
3892
5350
3
67
Y
12
2
3695
5065
Note:
Note:
gevind
gevind
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Krumme bjælker
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
BJÆLKE-2
2
kunde skitse
Dato:
24-03-2019
Valset armering, Klip & bukke
A
A
A
APPENDIX A - REINFORCEMENT DRAWINGS
89
==PAGE:104==
Stålplade
Lenton bolt coupler S13
Mrk.
Type
Kval.
Dim.
Stk.
A-mål
B-mål
C-mål
Z-mål
1
34
Y
10
15
175
325
2
67
Y
20
3
3885
3075
3
67
Y
12
2
4217
3350
Note:
Note:
gevind
gevind
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Krumme bjælker
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
BJÆLKE-3
2
kunde skitse
Dato:
24-03-2019
Valset armering, Klip & bukke
A
A
A
90
APPENDICES
==PAGE:105==
Stålplade
Lenton bolt coupler S13
Mrk.
Type
Kval.
Dim.
Stk.
A-mål
B-mål
C-mål
Z-mål
1
34
Y
10
15
175
325
2
67
Y
20
3
3701
5075
3
67
Y
12
2
3892
5350
Note:
Note:
gevind
gevind
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Krumme bjælker
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
BJÆLKE-4
2
kunde skitse
Dato:
24-03-2019
Valset armering, Klip & bukke
A
A
A
APPENDIX A - REINFORCEMENT DRAWINGS
91
==PAGE:106==
Stålplade
Lenton bolt coupler S13
Mrk.
Type
Kval.
Dim.
Stk.
A-mål
B-mål
C-mål
Z-mål
1
34
Y
10
15
175
325
2
00
Y
12
3
3580
3
00
Y
16
2
3580
Note:
Note:
gevind
gevind
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Bjælke
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
BJÆLKE-5
2
kunde skitse
Dato:
24-03-2019
Valset armering, Klip & bukke
A
A
A
92
APPENDICES
==PAGE:107==
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Stålplade
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
ST1
2
30x250x400
costumer description
Dato:
01-04-2019
B
B
C
C
B
B
APPENDIX A - REINFORCEMENT DRAWINGS
93
==PAGE:108==
Kunde:
Projekt:
Type:
Reference tegning:
Dimension:
Udøfrt af:
Godkendt af:
DTU
Stålplade
SISU
Rev.:
Liste
nr.:
Antal:
Konto:
ST2
2
30x250x400
costumer description
Dato:
01-04-2019
B
B
B
B
94
APPENDICES
==PAGE:109==
 
 
 
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
A1 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
401 mm 
b 
254 mm 
d 
336 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,11 % 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
95
Appendix B - Experimental Reports
Beam A1
==PAGE:110==
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 25mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
355 
Water 
Tap water 
160 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
1,49 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2,98 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
781 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
170 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
850 
Total 
  
2320 
 
 
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
21.02.19 
z-measurement: 
200 mm 
Air content: 
0,6 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day was a cloudy day around 10 °C with 1 mm rain per hour. The casting of the 
beam was inside a uninsulated container.   
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. After 
casting the beam was wetted and covered with plastic.  
• 
24-96 hours: a hot tent with heater was built inside the container to ensure sufficient 
temperature see figure 1 and 2. Free surface of beams was covered with wet towels and 
paper. 
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet paper and plastic. 
• 
The rebars have been exposed for outdoor climate for approximately 8 months. 
• 
After putting on the insulation mats the surface of the concrete was more uneven. 
 
 
96
APPENDICES
==PAGE:111==
            
                      
 
            Figure 1: Heat tent under construction                                                       Figure 2: Heat tent finished 
                 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
12.04.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
50 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
34 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
68,9 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
6,97 mm 
 
 
 
 
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
97
==PAGE:112==
1 
Before failure 
(65 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(58 kN) 
         
 
3 
At 10 mm 
deflection 
(28 kN) 
    
       
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
11.04.19 
Age: 
49 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,21 mm 
150,95 mm 
150,10 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
64,4 MPa 
61,9 MPa 
58,7 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
20,4 GPa 
20,8 GPa 
15,4 GPa 
 
98
APPENDICES
==PAGE:113==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
99
==PAGE:114==
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
 
 
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
16.04.19 
Age: 
54 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
3,3 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
148,69 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
15,14 mm 
100
APPENDICES
==PAGE:115==
 
Note: Plot from displacement measurements of machine, extensometer average data not available. 
Lack of sensitivity in test the machine’s displacement measurements causes the negative displacement 
after failure. 
 
Photos of specimen(s) after failure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
101
==PAGE:116==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
A2 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
399 mm 
b 
256 mm 
d 
342 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,08 % 
 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 8mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
451 
Water 
Tap water 
217 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0.94 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2,2 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
1119 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
529 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2319 
102
APPENDICES
Beam A2
==PAGE:117==
 
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
26.04.19 
z-measurement: 
170 mm 
Air content: 
1,8 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. Concrete 
surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
21.05.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
25 days 
Test speed 
0,8-05 
mm/min 
Test duration 
19 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
63,1 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
6,48 mm 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
103
==PAGE:118==
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(62,4 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(57,7 kN) 
 
 
3 
At 10,5 mm 
deflection 
(15,5 kN) 
 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
21.05.19 
Age: 
26 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,66 mm 
148,66 mm 
149,65 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
44,3 MPa 
49,5 MPa 
52,7 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
15,0 GPa 
17,6 GPa 
18,1 GPa 
104
APPENDICES
==PAGE:119==
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
105
==PAGE:120==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
106
APPENDICES
==PAGE:121==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
A3 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
405 mm 
b 
254 mm 
d 
350 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,06 % 
 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 16mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
332 
Water 
Tap water 
166 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0,62 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
1,12 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
925 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
158 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
789 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2372 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
107
Beam A3
==PAGE:122==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
02.05.19 
z-measurement: 
170 mm 
Air content: 
1,15 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container, the weather was cloudy around 11 ℃ 
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. Concrete 
surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
27.05.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
25 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
19 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
58,5 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
5,79 mm 
 
 
 
 
108
APPENDICES
==PAGE:123==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(56,5 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(17,2 kN) 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
27.05.19 
Age: 
25 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
150,27 mm 
149,14 mm 
149,38 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
37,9 MPa 
38,0 MPa 
38,6 
E-modulus, E 
15,8 GPa 
15,7 GPa 
16,6 GPa 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
109
==PAGE:124==
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
110
APPENDICES
==PAGE:125==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
B1 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
400 mm 
b 
251 mm 
d 
335 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
5200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,12 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 25mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
345 
Water 
Tap water 
143 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
1.49 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2.98 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
701 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
206 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
1030 
Total 
  
2429 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
111
Beam B1
==PAGE:126==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
21.02.19 
z-measurement: 
180 mm 
Air content: 
0,9 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day was a cloudy day around 10 °C with 1 mm rain per hour. The casting of the 
beam was inside a uninsulated container.   
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. After 
casting the beam was wetted and covered with plastic.  
• 
24-96 hours: a hot tent with heater was built inside the container to ensure sufficient 
temperature see figure 1 and 2. Free surface of beams was covered with wet towels and 
paper. 
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet paper and plastic. 
• 
The rebars have been exposed for outdoor climate for approximately 8 months. 
• 
After putting on the insulation mats the surface of the concrete was more uneven.  
 
           
 
Figure 1: Heat tent under construction                                     Figure 2: Heat tent finished 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
11.04.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
49 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
41 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
96,3 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
10,57 mm 
 
 
112
APPENDICES
==PAGE:127==
 
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
11.04.19 
Age: 
49 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
113
==PAGE:128==
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,59 mm 
149,55 mm 
149,72 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
80,1 MPa 
76,2 MPa 
78,1 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
23,1 GPa 
23,4 GPa 
23,3 GPa 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
114
APPENDICES
==PAGE:129==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
Date of testing: 
16.04.19 
Age: 
54 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
3,7 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
148,72 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
14,95 mm 
 
Note: Plot from displacement measurements of machine, extensometer average data not available. 
Lack of sensitivity in test the machine’s displacement measurements causes the negative displacement 
after failure. 
 
Photos of specimen after failure 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
115
==PAGE:130==
 
116
APPENDICES
==PAGE:131==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
B2 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
403 mm 
b 
252 mm 
d 
338 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
5200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,11 % 
 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 8mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
437 
Water 
Tap water 
188 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0.94 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2,2 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
895 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
803 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2326 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
117
Beam B2
==PAGE:132==
 
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
25.04.19 
z-measurement: 
195 mm 
Air content: 
1,4 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. Concrete 
surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
• 
This batch of concrete had in total four z-measurement were the first one started at 55 mm 
and the last one on 195 mm 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
20.05.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
25 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
23 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
68,9 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
7,39 mm 
 
 
 
 
118
APPENDICES
==PAGE:133==
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(68,8kN kN) 
 
 
2 
At failure 
(26,5 kN) 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
21.05.19 
Age: 
26 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
148,93 mm 
149,21 mm 
149,46 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
44,4 MPa 
44,3 MPa 
41,8 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
17,6 GPa 
16,9 GPa 
15,7 GPa 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
119
==PAGE:134==
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
120
APPENDICES
==PAGE:135==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
121
==PAGE:136==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
B3 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
404 mm 
b 
253 mm 
d 
334 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
5200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,12 % 
 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 16mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
362 
Water 
Tap water 
170 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0.62 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
1.12 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
795 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
177 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
883 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2389 
122
APPENDICES
Beam B3
==PAGE:137==
 
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
02.05.19 
z-measurement: 
175 mm 
Air content: 
0,5 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container, the weather was cloudy around 11 ℃ 
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. Concrete 
surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
27.05.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
25 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
25 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
71,8 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
7,27 mm 
Initial Critical crack load, cc  25.9 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
123
==PAGE:138==
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(69,1 kN) 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(33,4 kN) 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
27.05.19 
Age: 
25 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,51 mm 
148,48 mm 
148,90 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
42,4 MPa 
40,0 MPa 
42,9 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
17,3 MPa 
16,2 MPa 
17,7 MPa 
124
APPENDICES
==PAGE:139==
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen is presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
125
==PAGE:140==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
126
APPENDICES
==PAGE:141==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
C1 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
405 mm 
b 
253 mm 
d 
343 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
-- mm 
Ølower 
2x16 
1x12 
mm 
mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
145 mm 
ρ 
0,46 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 25mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
365 
Water 
Tap water 
156 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
1,49 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2,98 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
773 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
183 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
913 
Total 
  
2394 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
127
Beam C1
==PAGE:142==
 
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
21.02.19 
z-measurement: 
200 mm 
Air content: 
0,9 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: Casted inside a insulate container, approximately 10 ℃  and 1 mm rain per 
hour.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled heaters. 
Concrete surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: Under the plastic a layer of wet paper/fabric was placed on the free surface of 
beams. 
• 
96 h-test day: the beam where taken out and demolded and wrapped in wet paper/fabric and 
plastic before lifted inside the same container.  
• 
The rebars have been exposed for outdoor climate for approximately 8 months. 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
09.04.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
47 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
56 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
85,8 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
25,72 mm 
 
 
 
 
128
APPENDICES
==PAGE:143==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(85 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(8 kN) 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
09.04.19 
Age: 
47 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min   
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
150,04 mm 
150,80 mm 
148,92 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
66,6 MPa 
75,3 MPa 
74,4 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
22,0 GPa 
23,1 GPa 
22,1 GPa 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
129
==PAGE:144==
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
130
APPENDICES
==PAGE:145==
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
10.04.19 
Age: 
48 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
2,9 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,6 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
14,6 mm 
Height of notch, n2 
3,0 mm 
 
 
Note: Above plot is from extensometer average, however test was deformation controlled by 
deformation measurements of machine. Lack of sensitivity in test machine explains the large jump in 
deformation after max stress.  
Photos of specimen after failure 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
131
==PAGE:146==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
C2 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
 
h 
399 mm 
b 
252 mm 
d 
339 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
-- mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
145 mm 
ρ 
1,10 % 
 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 8mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
408 
Water 
Tap water 
201 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0.94 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2.2 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
1059 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
667 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2338 
132
APPENDICES
Beam C2
==PAGE:147==
 
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
25.04.19 
z-measurement: 
165 mm 
Air content: 
1,5 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: Casted inside a insulate container.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled heaters. 
Concrete surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: Under the plastic a layer of wet paper/fabric was placed on the free surface of 
beams. 
• 
96 h-test day: the beam where taken out and demolded and wrapped in wet paper/fabric and 
plastic before lifted inside the same container.  
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
28.05.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
33 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
21 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
91,0 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
8,73 mm 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
133
==PAGE:148==
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(90,9 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(90,5 kN) 
 
 
 
Relative Displacement Vectors 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
28.05.19 
Age: 
33 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,55 mm 
149,60 mm 
150,48 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
46,9 MPa 
46,5 MPa 
46,3 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
17,0 GPa 
17,1 GPa 
16,2 GPa 
 
134
APPENDICES
==PAGE:149==
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
135
==PAGE:150==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
136
APPENDICES
==PAGE:151==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
C3 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
 
h 
403 mm 
b 
253 mm 
d 
345 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
-- mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
145 mm 
ρ 
1,08 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 16mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
361 
Water 
Tap water 
178 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0.62 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
1.12 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
602 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
205 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
1027 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2375 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
137
Beam B3
==PAGE:152==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
02.05.19 
z-measurement: 
180 mm 
Air content: 
1,2 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: Casted inside a insulate container, approximately 11 ℃  and cloudy outside.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled heaters. 
Concrete surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: Under the plastic a layer of wet paper/fabric was placed on the free surface of 
beams. 
• 
96 h-test day: the beam where taken out and demolded and wrapped in wet paper/fabric and 
plastic before lifted inside the same container.  
• 
The concrete look to have minor bleeding separation in the formwork see figure below. The 
red line shows were the surface changes. In the upper right corner, the author of the report 
did touched the concrete surface to verify that it was mainly water and this goes for the 
whole surface.    
 
 
 
Figure 1: Bleeding separation 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
28.05.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
26 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
30 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
78,7 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
7,43 mm 
 
 
138
APPENDICES
==PAGE:153==
 
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(78,2 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(33,6 kN) 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
28.05.19 
Age: 
26 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,62 mm 
150,05 mm 
150,59 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
37,3 MPa 
37,9 MPa 
37,2 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
15,6 GPa 
15,3 GPa 
15,4 GPa 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
139
==PAGE:154==
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
140
APPENDICES
==PAGE:155==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests.   
Beam index: 
D1 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder)  
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
402 mm 
b 
252 mm 
d 
337 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,11 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 25mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
389 
Water 
Tap water 
154 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
2.9 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
12.8 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
752 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
181 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
906 
Total 
  
2398 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
141
Beam D1
==PAGE:156==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
14.02.19 
z-measurement: 
170 mm 
Air content: 
1,8 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: Took place inside the experimental hall. The weather was around 13 ℃ and 
cloudy.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside the experimental hall. Concrete surface was covered with 
plastic and wetted. 
• 
24-96 hours: The sides of the formwork were removed and beam hade three sides free which 
was with wet fabrics/paper before the plastic was put back on. 
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet fabrics and plastic. 
• 
The rebars have been exposed for outdoor climate for approximately 8 months. 
 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
05.04.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
50 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
52 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
108,1 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
10,56 mm 
 
 
 
 
 
142
APPENDICES
==PAGE:157==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(102 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(52,5 kN) 
 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
05.04.19 
Age: 
50 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
150,0 mm 
149,9 mm 
150,0 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
72,5 MPa 
75,2 MPa 
74,4 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
20,6 GPa 
22,8GPa 
21,8 GPa 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
143
==PAGE:158==
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
 
144
APPENDICES
==PAGE:159==
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
10.04.19 
Age: 
55 days 
No. of specimens 
3 (1 failed) 
Tensile strength, ft 
3,1 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,71 
148,73 
mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 
150 
mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
15,5 
15,7 
mm 
Height of notch, n2 
3 
3 
mm 
 
Note: Above plots are from extensometer average, however test was deformation controlled by 
deformation measurements of machine. Lack of sensitivity in test machine explains the large jump in 
deformation after max stress.  
 
Photos of specimen after failure 
 
#1 
 
 
#2 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
145
==PAGE:160==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
D2 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
403 mm 
b 
254 mm 
d 
343 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
5200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,08 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 8mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
341 
Water 
Tap water 
168 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
1.12 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
1.34 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
868 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
997 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2376 
 
146
APPENDICES
Beam D2
==PAGE:161==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
09.05.19 
z-measurement: 
145 mm 
Air content: 
- % * 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container. the weather was cloudy around 13 
℃ and 2 mm rain per hour.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. Concrete 
surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
• 
The air meter test was not functioning on this casting day and therefore not possible to 
measure the air content.  
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
06.06.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
28 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
27 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
97,8 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
10,6 mm 
 
 
 
*The LVDT under the beam did fall off, right after the failure of the beam and therefore is 
data regarding the deflection on this beam limited.  
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
147
==PAGE:162==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(97,55 kN) 
 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(44,0 kN) 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
06.06.19 
Age: 
27 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
150,0 mm 
149,8 mm 
149,5 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
43,7MPa 
42,8 MPa 
41MPa 
E-modulus, E 
15,7 GPa 
15,5GPa 
15,7 GPa 
 
 
148
APPENDICES
==PAGE:163==
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
149
==PAGE:164==
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
13.06.19 
Age: 
35 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
2,44 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
148,46 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
16,38 mm 
 
 
Photos of specimen after failure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150
APPENDICES
==PAGE:165==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
D3 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
402 mm 
b 
252 mm 
d 
342 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
5200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,10 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 16mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
308 
Water 
Tap water 
148 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0.56 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
1.12 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
591 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
227 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
1137 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2413 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
151
Beam D3
==PAGE:166==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
15.05.19 
z-measurement: 
185 mm 
Air content: 
1,0 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container. the weather was clear sun and around 
15 ℃ . 
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters this time at a 
low temperature due to the warm weather. Concrete surface was wetted and covered with 
plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
12.06.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
28 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
32 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
107,1 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
11,33 mm 
 
 
 
 
 
152
APPENDICES
==PAGE:167==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 
(106,4 kN) 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 
(103,8 kN) 
 
 
3 
Before crack 2 
(37,45 kN) 
 
 
 
4 
After crack 2 
(4,85 kN) 
 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
12.06.19 
Age: 
27 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
153
==PAGE:168==
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,51 mm 
149,85 mm 
149,45 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
41,7MPa 
42,0 MPa 
40,4 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
17 GPa 
16 GPa 
15,2 GPa 
 
 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
154
APPENDICES
==PAGE:169==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
 
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
13.06.19 
Age: 
29 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
2,16 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,21 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
16,39 mm 
 
 
Note: Glue at the top of the specimen failed after approx. 0,011mm deformation. No data is therefore 
available after this point. However, it can be seen that the maximum tensile strength of the concrete 
specimen was reached. 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
155
==PAGE:170==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
E1 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
403 mm 
b 
253 mm 
d 
338 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,10 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 25mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
345 
Water 
Tap water 
127 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
2.9 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
10.4 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
627 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
218 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
1092 
Total 
  
2422 
 
156
APPENDICES
Beam E1
==PAGE:171==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
14.02.19 
z-measurement: 
50 mm 
Air content: 
1,8 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: Took place inside the experimental hall. The weather was around 13 ℃ and 
cloudy.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside the experimental hall. Concrete surface was covered with 
plastic and wetted. 
• 
24-96 hours: The sides of the formwork were removed and beam hade three sides free which 
was with wet fabrics/paper before the plastic was put back on. 
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet fabrics and plastic. 
• 
The rebars have been exposed for outdoor climate for approximately 8 months. 
• 
This was the first cast for the day and the concrete mixer was not wetted before mixing the 
concrete, which lead to a concrete mix with to a low water content. The concrete was very 
dry and hard to work with.  
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
02.04.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
47 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
71 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
136,3 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
19,1 mm 
 
 
 
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
157
==PAGE:172==
1 
Before failure 
 
 
 
 
2 
After first failure 
 
 
 
3 
After second 
failure 
 
 
 
 
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
2.04.19 
Age: 
47 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,9mm 
149,9 mm 
149,6 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
- MPa 
80,6 MPa 
84,4 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
- GPa 
24,9 GPa 
26,3 GPa 
 
158
APPENDICES
==PAGE:173==
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
04.04.19 
Age: 
49 days 
No. of specimens 
3 (1 failed) 
Tensile strength, ft 
2,7 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,8 
150,9 
mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 
150 
mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
16,9 
15,9 
mm 
Height of notch, n2 
3 
3 
mm 
 
 
 
 
Photos of specimen after failure 
 
#1 
 
 
#2 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
159
==PAGE:174==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
E2 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
403 mm 
b 
253 mm 
d 
333 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,12 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 8mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
271 
Water 
Tap water 
132 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
1.12 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
2.64 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
672 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
1310 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
0 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2389 
 
160
APPENDICES
Beam E2
==PAGE:175==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
09.05.19 
z-measurement: 
185 mm 
Air content: 
- % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container. the weather was cloudy around 13 
℃ and 2 mm rain per hour.  
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters. Concrete 
surface was wetted and covered with plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
• 
The air meter test was not functioning on this casting day and therefore not possible to 
measure the air content. 
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
12.06.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
34 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
33 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
86,2 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
12,52 mm 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
161
==PAGE:176==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Before failure 1 
(82,8 kN) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
After failure 1 
(69,1 kN) 
 
 
3 
Before failure 2 
(85,65 kN) 
 
4 
After failure 2 
(72,15 kN) 
 
 
5 
Before crack 2 
(61,7 kN) 
 
 
6 
After crack 2 
(59,1 kN) 
 
 
162
APPENDICES
==PAGE:177==
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
06.06.19 
Age: 
27 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,7 mm 
150 mm 
149,9 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
37,0 MPa 
36,1 MPa 
40,3 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
13,1 GPa 
13,9 GPa 
14,4 GPa 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” failed 
specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
163
==PAGE:178==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
13.06.19 
Age: 
35 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
1,81 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
149,53 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
17,92 mm 
 
Photos of specimen after failure 
 
 
 
 
 
164
APPENDICES
==PAGE:179==
 
Report of experimental data from beam tests and corresponding cylinder tests. 
Beam index: 
E3 
 
Contents 
1 Geometry and reinforcement 
2 Concrete recipe 
3 Casting 
4 Results – Beam test 
5 Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
6 Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
1  Geometry and reinforcement 
 
L 
3400 mm 
   
 
h 
400 mm 
b 
252 mm 
d 
335 mm 
a 
1200 mm 
Rmid 
3200 mm 
Ølower 
3x20 mm 
Øupper 
2x12 mm 
c 
200 mm 
x0 
100 mm 
x1 
118 mm 
ρ 
1,11 % 
 
2  Concrete recipe 
 
• 
Maximum aggregate size: 16mm 
Ingredient 
Type/class 
kg/m³ 
Cement 
Rapid-Cement 
256 
Water 
Tap water 
147 
P - TSS 
UM.Pozzolith 20N 
0,56 
SP - TSS 
UM.Glenium Sky 631 
1.12 
Sand 0-4 mm 
E0004 RN Avedøre Metro 
1003 
Stone 4-8 mm 
E0408 Glensanda 
164 
Stone 8-16 mm 
E0816 Glensanda 
819 
Stone 16-25 mm 
E1625 Glensanda 
0 
Total 
  
2391 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
165
Beam E3
==PAGE:180==
3  Casting 
 
Date of casting: 
15.05.19 
z-measurement: 
150 mm 
Air content: 
1,3 % 
 
Notes from day of casting and storage conditions: 
• 
Casting day: The casting took place inside a container. the weather was clear sun and around 
15 ℃ . 
• 
First 24 hours: Beams cured inside a container with insulation mats and heaters this time at a 
low temperature due to the warm weather. Concrete surface was wetted and covered with 
plastic. 
• 
24-96 hours: The free surface of the beam was covered with paper and wetted and then 
plastic put on top.  
• 
96-test day: the beam where stored inside a insulate container with temperature-controlled 
heater at 20 degrees. Beam was wrapped in wet towels and plastic. 
• 
During the mix of this batch three z-measurement were made, where it started out with 195 
mm for the first one and 205 for the second one and 150 for the third one. This was the first 
mix of concrete for the day.  
 
 
4  Results – Beam test 
 
Date of testing: 
06.06.19 
 
Critical crack and other minor cracks at failure in test region 
Age: 
22 days 
Test speed 
0,8 mm/min 
Test duration 
48 min 
Max. shear force, Vmax 
80,6 kN 
Deflection at failure, δfail 
11,24 mm 
 
 
 
166
APPENDICES
==PAGE:181==
Major strain plot from DIC analysis 
 
1 
Before failure 1  
(79,05 kN) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
After failure 1 
(78,8 kN) 
 
3 
After crack 2 
(39,5 kN) 
 
 
 
4 
After crack 3   
(17,3 kN) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
167
==PAGE:182==
5  Results – Compression test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
12.06.19 
Age: 
27 days 
Test speed: 
0,4 mm/min  
No. of specimens 
3 
 
Cylinder no. 
1 
2 
3 
 
Cylinder diameter, D 
148,83 mm 
149,78 mm 
149,19 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
300 mm 
300 mm 
300 mm 
Compressive strength, fc 
11,1 MPa 
11,3 MPa 
11,8 MPa 
E-modulus, E 
5,7 GPa 
6,1 GPa 
6,5 GPa 
 
Photos of specimens after failure 
Two photos of each failed specimen are presented below. The first showing an “untouched” 
failed specimen and the second photo where all loose parts are taken apart. 
#1 
#2 
#3 
 
 
 
168
APPENDICES
==PAGE:183==
#1 
 
#2 
 
#3 
 
 
6  Results – Tensile test (cylinder) 
 
Date of testing: 
13.06.19 
Age: 
42 days 
No. of specimens 
1  
Tensile strength, ft 
0,95 MPa  
Cylinder diameter, D 
150,06 mm 
Height of cylinder, h 
150 mm 
Depth of notch, n1 
13,72 mm 
 
Note: Glue failed at 0,015mm deflection so no data was obtained past this point. It can be seen from 
the plot, however, that maximum tensile capacity was obtained before the test ended. 
Photo of specimen after failure 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX B - EXPERIMENTAL REPORTS
169
==PAGE:184==
Beam test procedure 
 
Dato:  
 
 
Where:  
 
 DTU, building 119 
Performed by:  
 
 
 
 
Test program and step 
Beam  
 
 
Specimen preparation 
1) Spray the specimen with a speckle pattern. White chalk spray as a base and dots from 
black spray paint.  
2) Measure up and mark the middle of the beam and where the support is going to be 
placed. 
3) Mount the support with the right angle depending the test specimen curvature. Then 
measure up the distance to be with a 1200 mm clearance between the support and 
load plate.  
 
Test setup 
4) Lift the specimen into the test set up, place it on the rollers. Control that the beam 
lays stable in the test machine.  
5) Make sure that the centre of the beam is placed right below the loadcell. Then lock 
the roller, so it is possible to work with the beam without moving it. 
6) Mount the vertical safety beam which prevents the beam from fall out of the machine 
in case of skew loading.  
7) Put on the loading plate with the cushion underneath. If necessary put on a extender 
to the piston.  
8) Mount and connect all the measuring equipment to the datalogger and control 
computer, see figure 1 for a sketch. Where the red cross and arrows shows where the 
LVDT is placed.  
• Connect all the measure equipment to the beam. 
• Digital display of the load in the view of the DIC. 
• Load and position from the load cell 
170
APPENDICES
Appendix C - Test procedure: Beam
==PAGE:185==
 
Figure 1:Plan view of the measuring equipment 
9) Tape two rulers on the beam on both side of the test area.  
10) Mark the beam with the beam type, concrete recipe, casting day and testing day.  
11) Measure the cross section of the beam at supports and mid-span. 
12) Set up the camera parallel to the beam so, the picture is taken perpendicular to the 
side of the beam.  
13) Make sure that the clock on the camera and datalogger is in sync. 
14) Set up necessary light sources to give an even light on the test specimen during the 
test.   
15) Take the necessary amount of picture to verify the quality and also to verify that 
measurement on both sides is the same. This is done by using the two rulers, this test 
ensure that the camera is point straight on the beam.  
16) Connect all the measurement equipment to the datalogger and control that it works 
before starting the test. 
17) Take picture to document the set up and placement of the measuring equipment   
18) Turn on the cooling system and then turn on the machine.   
 
Testing 
19) The test is deformation controlled.   
20) Start the DIC camera with 1 picture every 2 second approximately simultaneous with 
the recording of the Datalogger.  
21) Then start the machine.    
22) Stop the test when the specimen has gone to fracture, and the beam only gives 
resistance from the reinforcement.  
23) Extract all the data.  
 
 
APPENDIX C - TEST PROCEDURE: BEAM
171
==PAGE:186==
Test setup
≔
E
210000 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
E-modul steel
-
≔
B1
60 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
Iy1
⋅
9.25 106 mm
mm
mm
mm4
≔
H1
160 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
S1
7.5 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
F1
10.5 mm
mm
mm
mm
-
≔
B2
75 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
Iy2
⋅
19.1 106 mm
mm
mm
mm4
≔
H2
200 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
S2
8.5 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
F2
11.5 mm
mm
mm
mm
Beam U-280
≔
B3
95 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
Iy3
⋅
62.8 106 mm
mm
mm
mm4
≔
H3
280 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
S3
10 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
F3
15 mm
mm
mm
mm
Beam U-400
≔
B3
110 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
Iy3
⋅
204 106 mm
mm
mm
mm4
≔
H3
400 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
S3
14 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
F3
18 mm
mm
mm
mm
Column U -120 1-4
≔
B3
120 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
Ac1
⋅
3.4 103 mm
mm
mm
mm2
≔
H3
120 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
S3
6.5 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
F3
11 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
Ø
168 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
t
7 mm
mm
mm
mm
172
APPENDICES
Appendix D - Test setup
==PAGE:187==
Calculation
≔
P
300 kN
kN
kN
kN
Load from the pistion
≔
P1
=
―
P
2
150 kN
kN
kN
kN
Load to rigth suppoert
≔
P2
=
―
P
2
150 kN
kN
kN
kN
Load to left suppoert
≔
L1
1000 mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance between column C1 and C2 also C1 
and C4
≔
L2
200 mm
mm
mm
mm
Distance from the center of the support to
the middel of the beam U -200
Load that goes into the 
beam U-280  in the back end 
≔
P3
=
―――――
⋅
P1
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
―
L1
2
L2
⎞
⎟
⎠
L1
45 kN
kN
kN
kN
Load that goes into the 
beam U-280  in the front 
(nearest the test machine)
≔
P4
=
+
-P3
P1
105 kN
kN
kN
kN
≔
C1
=
―
P3
2
22.5 kN
kN
kN
kN
Column 1
≔
C2
=
C1
22.5 kN
kN
kN
kN
Column 2
≔
C4
=
―
P4
2
52.5 kN
kN
kN
kN
Column 4
≔
C3
=
C4
52.5 kN
kN
kN
kN
Column 3
-
≔
Mmax
=
⋅
P2
⎛
⎜
⎝
+
―
L1
2
L2
⎞
⎟
⎠
105
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
APPENDIX D - TEST SETUP
173
==PAGE:188==
≔
a
=
-
―
L1
2
L2
300 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
b
=
+
―
L1
2
L2
700 mm
mm
mm
mm
≔
x
a
Two beams carry the load, 
therefor 
. This is the 
―
P1
2
deflection for beam U 200.  
≔
∆1
=
⋅
⋅
―
1
6 ―――――
⎛
⎜
⎝
⋅
⋅
⋅
―
P1
2
L1 b x
⎞
⎟
⎠
⋅
E Iy2
⎛
⎜
⎝
-
-
1
⎛
⎜
⎝
―
b
L1
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
⎛
⎜
⎝
―
x
L1
⎞
⎟
⎠
2 ⎞
⎟
⎠
0.275 mm
mm
mm
mm
Beam U-280
=
P4
105 kN
kN
kN
kN
Load that goes into the 
beam U-280  in the front 
(nearest the test machine)
≔
Mmax.U280
=
―――
⋅
P4 L1
4
26.25
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
≔
Umax.U280
=
⋅
―
1
48 ―――
⋅
P L1
3
⋅
E Iy3
0.146 mm
mm
mm
mm
Column HE-B 120.  
≔
Ccapacity
=
⋅
Ac1 E
714000 kN
kN
kN
kN
=
<
C1
Ccapacity
1
=
<
C2
Ccapacity
1
=
<
C3
Ccapacity
1
=
<
C4
Ccapacity
1
≔
σcolumn1
=
――
C1
Ac1
6.618 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
≔
σcolumn3
=
――
C3
Ac1
15.441 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
≔
σcolumn2
=
――
C2
Ac1
6.618 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
≔
σcolumn4
=
――
C4
Ac1
15.441 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
174
APPENDICES
==PAGE:189==
≔
ε
=
―――
σcolumn1
E
⋅
3.151 10-5
≔
Lc
1.1 m
The length of column 1-4 from where the load is working
≔
∆Lc
=
⋅
Lc ε
0.035 mm
mm
mm
mm
Deformation in mm due to  compression 
Column steel pipe 168 
≔
Dout
168 mm
mm
mm
mm
Outer diamter of the steel pipe
≔
Dinner
=
-
Dout
⋅
2 7 mm
mm
mm
mm
154 mm
mm
mm
mm
Inner diamter of the steel pipe
≔
Aout
=
⋅
π
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
Dout
2
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
⎛⎝
⋅
2.217 104 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
≔
Ainner
=
⋅
π
⎛
⎜
⎝
――
Dinner
2
⎞
⎟
⎠
2
⎛⎝
⋅
1.863 104 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
≔
APipe168
=
-
Aout
Ainner
⎛⎝
⋅
3.541 103 ⎞⎠mm
mm
mm
mm2
≔
σpipe168
=
―――
―
P
2
APipe168
42.366 MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
Dividing the force to both steel pipe 168 
column
≔
εpipe168
=
―――
σpipe168
E
⋅
2.017 10-4
≔
Lpipe168
0.7 m
The height where the LVDT is attached to 
the steel pipe.
≔
∆Lc
=
⋅
Lpipe168 εpipe168
0.141 mm
mm
mm
mm
Elongation of the steel pipe
Beam U 400
=
Iy3
⎛⎝
⋅
2.04 10-4⎞⎠m4
≔
L3
1000 mm
mm
mm
mm
The distance between the steel pipe 168
≔
MU400
=
――
⋅
―
P
2
L3
4
37.5
⋅
kN
kN
kN
kN m
≔
∆U400
=
⋅
―
1
48 ―――
⋅
―
P
2
L3
3
⋅
E Iy3
0.073 mm
mm
mm
mm
Max deflection in the beam 
holding the pistion. 
APPENDIX D - TEST SETUP
175
==PAGE:190==
Compression test procedure 
 
Dato:  
 
 
Where:  
 
 DTU, building 119 
Performed by:  
 
 
 
 
Test program and step 
Fracture testing 
 
 
Specimen preparation 
1) Clean the surface of the concrete which is in contact with the machine 
2) Number the specimen with a marker 
3) Measure the concrete specimen with a caliper, in both top and bottom with 3 
different point and the middle value is used. 
4) Make sure that the surface is even, with a precision of 0,5 mm 
 
Test setup 
5) Mount three LVDT around the bottom load plate, evenly spaced out. Make sure that 
the LVDT is standing perpendicular on the moving load cell at the top. In figure 1 a 
sketch of the setup is made.   
6) Measure distance between the two-measuring part of the extensometer 
7) Mount the extensometer approximately in the middle of the test specimen, by coarse 
measuring it with a folding ruler.  
8) Center the specimen in the machine and make sure that the specimen is levelled off 
with the machine on both sides. Use a A4 paper to account for the unevenness of the 
concrete surface. 
9) Place a protecting shield 
 
 
Figure 1:Plan view of test setup 
 
Testing 
10) Make sure that all the measuring equipment is connected to the datalogger and test it 
before running the actually test.  
176
APPENDICES
Appendix E - Test procedure: Cylinder
Compression
==PAGE:191==
11) Control the computer signals by changes the offset which will give a changes in the 
voltage given into datalogger.  
12) The test is deformation controlled. 
13) The test is stopped temporarily to remove the extensometer before it goes fracture 
14) Stop the test when the specimen has gone to fracture and approximately 1% strain is 
achieved 
After 
15) Take one picture of the specimen in the test machine 
16) Take the specimen out, place it on a table. Take picture of the specimen from 
different angels.  
17) All the lose part is taken away before new picture of the specimen is taken from the 
same angels as in step 14.  
18) Wrap it all up in a plastic sheet together with a description note of testing day, casting 
day and specific concrete mix which makes it possible to go back and control check 
the specimen. 
 
 
APPENDIX E - TEST PROCEDURE: CYLINDER COMPRESSION
177
==PAGE:192==
 
Tensile test procedure 
 
Dato:  
 
 
Where:  
 
 DTU, building 119 
Performed by:  
 
 
 
Test program and step 
tensile testing 
 
 
1) The cylinder used for testing have the following dimension 150 x 150 mm. The 
notched in the middle of the specimen is made with a depth of 15 mm +/- 1 mm. The 
notched goes around the whole specimen the width is 2-5 mm 
 
Figure 1: 
2) The specimen is cut in both ends to ensure a smooth and clean surface, to give the 
epoxy sufficient contact. To make the notched and the end cut a diamond saw is 
used. 
3) The test specimen is measured both in top and bottom before testing.   
4) To steel plate is used, by gluing it on the specimen before screw into the test 
machine.   
5) The steel plate is cleaned and sandblasted before glued on to the concrete specimen.  
6) The concrete specimen is also sandblasted.  
7) The glue is mixed in-situ where the first plate is attached concrete specimen and then 
screwed into the top plate which is further lifted into the machine. See figure 2 for 
how the plate is lifted in. This is  the explanation for step 1 and 2  in figure 3 
178
APPENDICES
Appendix F - Test procedure: Cylinder Tension
==PAGE:193==
 
Figure 2:Top plate that is connects the test machine and test specimen 
8) Now the specimen is in the machine, the bottom plate is already in place with the 
steel plate attached to. The glue is applied on the steel surface before the specimen 
is lowered.  This is step 3 and 4 of figure 3.   
 
 
Figure 3: Step by step procedure of mounting the test specimen into the test machine. 
 
 
9) Mount two metal rings to the specimen, one on each side of the notched. These two 
rings are fasted independent of each other to also have control of a rotation in the 
specimen.  
10) Between the metal rings the three extensometer is mounted evenly distributed 
around the test specimen see figure for a plan view of the test setup and also how 
the extensometer is attached to the steel rings.  
 
 
 
APPENDIX F - TEST PROCEDURE: CYLINDER TENSION
179
==PAGE:194==
 
 
 
Figure 4: Plan view of the setup and extensometer mounted between the steel ring 
11) The test is displacement controlled.  
12) Connect all the extensometer to control computer so the load speed relates to the 
displacement measured on the specimen.  
13) Further connect all the measuring equipment and loading to datalogger. Check that it 
records correctly by testing the equipment before starting the test.    
14) Start the test, and stop it when approximately 1 % strain is reached if possible.  
 
  
This procedure is based on Uni-axial tension test for steel fibre reinforced concrete. 
Published by Materials and Structures. Vol 34, January-February 2001.  
 
 
180
APPENDICES
==PAGE:195==
 
 
 
 
 
TThe steel is provied from to companys which is Celsa steel and Lemvigh-Müller. The test of the 
reinforcement is carried out by FORCE Technology.  
 
Figure 1: Ø12 Celsa steel test 1 
 
Figure 2: Ø12 Celsa steel test 2 
 
Figure 3: Ø12 Celsa steel test 3 
 
Figure 4: Ø16 Celsa steel test 1 
 
Figure 5: Ø16 Celsa steel test 2 
 
Figure 6: Ø16 Celsa steel test 3 
 
Figure 7: Ø20 Celsa steel test 1 
 
Figure 8: Ø20 Celsa steel test 2 
APPENDIX G - TEST RESULT FOR LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT181
Appendix G - Test result for Longitudinal
Reinforcement
==PAGE:196==
 
Figure 9: Ø12 Lemvigh-Müller test 1 
 
Figure 10: Ø12 Lemvigh-Müller test 2 
 
Figure 11: Ø20 Lemvigh-Müller test 1 
 
Figure 12: Ø20 Lemvigh-Müller test 2 
 
Figure 13: Ø20 Lemvigh-Müller test 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182
APPENDICES
==PAGE:197==
 
All the E-modulus from the tensile test is calculated by equation 1 and listed up in table 1 
below. The numbers are given in GPa.  
 
 
 
𝐸= ∆𝜎
∆𝜀 
(1) 
 
Table 1: E-modulus reinforcement [GPa] 
 
Test 
Ø12 
Ø16 
Ø20 
Celsa 
Lemvigh-
Müller 
Celsa 
Lemvigh-
Müller 
Celsa 
Lemvigh-
Müller 
1 
373,4* 
193,6 
193,3 
- 
188,9 
201,7 
2 
192,2 
190,8 
200,0 
- 
194,6 
197,7 
3 
209,3 
- 
188,9 
- 
186,4 
220,9 
Average 
200,8 
194,9 
194,1 
- 
190,5 
206,8 
 
*Is not considered when calculating the average.  
 
APPENDIX G - TEST RESULT FOR LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT183
==PAGE:198==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% Read and plot data from BEAM test
% Script made by Mats Fjærestrand and Ola Hovland Kjær as part of the
% Master Thesis: "Shear Behaviour of Arch-shaped Concrete Members"
% Spring 2019
 
 
clc
clear all
close all
 
%%%%%%%%%%%----BEAM----%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
beamname = 'a2';
 
 
% IMPORTANT
% - remeber to change beamname to corresponding beam (AND file)
% - remeber to change the plotting range
 
 
 
% Sign convension:
%
%               Load
%                ||
%                \/
%     -------------------------
%    /\                       /\
%
% SupportA        B          Support C
%
%        -  <---    --->  +
%
%
 
%% Importing compressive strength data from file
 
[compVal, compIndex] = xlsread('0CompressiveStrength1.xls');
ind = find(ismember(compIndex,beamname));
 
 
 
%% Parameters
 
b = 250; %[mm] Cross-section width
d = 350; %[mm] Distance from top to center reinforcement
fc = compVal(ind); %[MPa] Compressive strength 
 
 
 
%% Factors for the BEAM MACHINE and LVDT:
%Do not change.
loadFac = 50;  %kN/V
posFac = 8;     %mm/V
a1Fac = -20.011; %mm/V
a2Fac = 10.036; %mm/V
b2Fac = -20.048; %mm/V
b3Fac = -20.017; %mm/V
b4Fac = -10.313; %mm/V
c1Fac = -20.004; %mm/V
c2Fac = -10.080; %mm/V
184
APPENDICES
Appendix H - Matlab Calculations
Beam calculation 1
==PAGE:199==
 
 
%% Read data as matrix
% 1. Make sure the datafile doesn't contain any extra rows above the header row
% 2. Make sure all commas in the excel file is ',' not '.'
 
filename = beamname + ".xls";
data = xlsread(filename);
 
 
%% Creating vectors of raw data / separating data matrix
 
% Load [V] - from load cell
loadData = data(:,10);     
 
% Displacement from LVDT's
a1Data = data(:,3); % Horizontal - support A
a2Data = data(:,4); % Roller - support A
b2Data = data(:,5); % Vertical - under beam at mid-span
b3Data = data(:,6); % Vertical - under beam at mid-span
b4Data = data(:,7); % Horizontal - at mid-span
c1Data = data(:,8); % Horizontal - support C
c2Data = data(:,9); % Roller - support C
 
 
% Time (IN PROGRESS)
timeData = data(:,2);  
 
 
%% Processing of raw data
 
%Factors to get from Volt to appropriate unit 
% position = posData.*posFac;
load = -1*loadData.*loadFac;    % [kN] also changes the load from neg to pos
a1 = a1Data*a1Fac; %[mm]
a2 = a2Data*a2Fac; %[mm]
b2 = b2Data*b2Fac; %[mm]
b3 = b3Data*b3Fac; %[mm]
b4 = b4Data*b4Fac; %[mm]
c1 = c1Data*c1Fac; %[mm]
c2 = c2Data*c2Fac; %[mm]
 
 
%% 'Zeroing' out LVDT's
% Doing this because we assume zero displacement before loading starts
 
a1 = a1(:)-a1(1);
a2 = a2(:)-a2(1);
b2 = b2(:)-b2(1);
b3 = b3(:)-b3(1);
b4 = b4(:)-b4(1);
c1 = c1(:)-c1(1);
c2 = c2(:)-c2(1);
 
 
%% Calculation
shearForce = load/2;
beamDef = mean([b2,b3],2); %Beam deflection: average of LVDT b2 and b3
 
normShearForce = shearForce/(b*d*sqrt(fc)/1000) ; % [sqrt(MPa)]Normalized shear force
 
maxShear = max(shearForce); %[kN] maximum recoreded shear force in data set
maxShearIndex = find(shearForce==maxShear); %[-]
defMaxShear = beamDef(maxShearIndex); %[mm] 
 
horizontal_help=[shearForce,a2,c2];
for n=1:length(horizontal_help)
    if horizontal help(n,1)==maxShear
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
185
==PAGE:200==
        a2_horizontal=horizontal_help(n,2);
        c2_horizontal=horizontal_help(n,3);
        lengde_maxV=n;
    end
end
 
 
 
 
%% CSCT basis
if beamname=='a1'|beamname=='b1'|beamname=='c1'|beamname=='d1'|beamname=='e1'
    dg=25;
elseif beamname=='a2'|beamname=='b2'|beamname=='c2'|beamname=='d2'|beamname=='e2'
    dg=8;
     elseif beamname=='a3'|beamname=='b3'|beamname=='c3'|beamname=='d3'|beamname=='e3'
    dg=16;
end
 
dg0=16;                        % [mm] Aggregate size
dg;                            %[mm] Max Aggregate size
rho=(As_bottom+As_top)/(bw*h); %[-] rebar ratio
a=1200;                        %[mm] distance between load and support
Es=200000;                     %[MPa] E-modulus steel 
Ec=10000*nthroot(fc,3);        %[MPa] E-modulus concrete 
 
 
 
x=d*rho*(sqrt(1+(2*Ec)/(rho*Es)-1));   % Compression Heigth
 
z=d-x/3;                               % Flexrual lever arm at midspan 
 
V=maxShear;                            % Max shear capacity
 
epsilon=(V*(a-(d/2))*0.6*d-x)/(bw*d*rho*Es*z*d-x);  % Longitudinal strain
 
Vrc=(bw*d*sqrt(fc)/6)*(2/(1+120*((epsilon*d)/(dg0+dg))));   % Shear resistance 
depening og the strength of the strut carrying shear
Vrc=Vrc/1000;
 
 
%% CSCT Extension of arch- shaped memebers
 
lambda=0.5;                      % Given by Campana S, Ruiz M and Muttoni A (See paper 
shear strength of Arch- Shaped members without Transvers Reinforcement)
 
 
Rs_pos_3000=3065;
Rs_pos_5000=5065;
Rs_neg_3000=3075;
Rs_neg_5000=5075;
 
 
if beamname=='a1'|beamname=='a2'|beamname=='a3'
    Rs=-Rs_pos_3000;
elseif beamname=='b1' |beamname=='b2'|beamname=='b3'
     Rs=-Rs_pos_5000;
     elseif beamname=='d1' |beamname=='d2'|beamname=='d3'
        Rs=Rs_neg_5000; 
        elseif beamname=='e1' |beamname=='e2'|beamname=='e3'
             Rs=Rs_neg_3000; 
             elseif beamname=='c1' |beamname=='c2'|beamname=='c3'
                 Rs=0;
end
 
z1=z-(lambda*d^2)/(2*Rs);         % Is the heigth between flexrual reinforcment and 
compression strut
 
DeltaV=(Vrc*a*lambda*d)/(z1*Rs);  % The extende part of CSCT 
186
APPENDICES
==PAGE:201==
Vcsc=Vrc+DeltaV;
V;
Check=V/Vcsc;
%% Range of plotting
%range of actual test to be plotted
 
start = 1;
final = 1912; 
 
 
% The table below indicates the range end of each beam:
%
%    Test end   | Right after failure
% a1:  3000     |   1372
% a2:  1912     |   1370
% a3:  1909     |   1314
% b1:  4200     |   3317
% b2:  2330     |   1637
% b3:  2520     |   1675
% c1:  5600     |   5356
% c2:  1989     |   1402
% c3:  3040     |   1415
% d1:  3660     |   2715
% d2   2743     |   2193   % LVDT KrÃ¦sjet ved 2195 
% d3   3366     |   2599
% e1:  7230     |   6635
% e2   3456     |   2720
% e3   5021     |   3000
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
 
 
%% Write datafile
 
outputName = beamname + "OUT";
datafile = [load(start:final), beamDef(start:final), normShearForce(start:final)];
xlswrite(outputName, datafile);
 
 
%% Crack utvilking
 
A2_crack=[24.9 ,30.35,39.55,52.2,61.45,62.2,18.57,14.1];  % 8 pkt
C2_crack=[18.7, 27.85,36.55,60.95,74.05,89.4,90.5,90.8,46.38,51.79];  % 10 
E2_crack=[ 15.6,27.6, 33.3,51.7,66.2,75.93,82.53,82.92,85.65,71.77,67.8,24.1]; % 12 
pkt
LengdeA2=length(shearForce);
LengdeE2=length(shearForce);
LengdeC2=length(shearForce);
Crack_mat=[shearForce(:,1),beamDef(:,1)];
A2_crack=round(A2_crack,1);
E2_crack=round(E2_crack,1);
C2_crack=round(C2_crack,1);
 
for j=1:8
  
for i=1:2087
    if E2_crack(j)==round(Crack_mat(i,1),1)
         deformation(j)=Crack_mat(i,2); 
        
    end
     end
end
 
    for j=9:12
        for i=2080:LengdeE2
           if E2_crack(j)==round(Crack_mat(i,1),1)
            deformation(j)=Crack_mat(i,2); 
   
           end
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
187
==PAGE:202==
        end
    end
 
 
 
 %% Inital critical crack 
 
 
inital_cr=[34.2 , 39.5, 30.4, 33.3 , 44.7 , 25.9, 78.6  , 71.8 , 57.3 ,105.2 , 91.3 , 
81.2, 111.5 , 66.2, 43.6 ];
 
 
  
for i=1:5021 
    if inital_cr(13)==round(Crack_mat(i,1),1)
         deformation(1)=Crack_mat(i,2);     
    end
end
 
 
188
APPENDICES
==PAGE:203==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% Read and plot data from BEAM tests
% Script made by Mats Fjærestrand and Ola Hovland Kjær as part of the
% Master Thesis: "Shear Behaviour of Arch-shaped Concrete Members"
% Fall 2019
 
clc
clear all
close all
 
%%%%%%%%%%%----BEAM----%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
beamname = {'a1', 'a2', 'a3', ...
            'b1', 'b2', 'b3', ...
            'c1', 'c2', 'c3', ...
            'd1', 'd2', 'd3', ...
            'e1', 'e2', 'e3'};
 
% Sign convension:
%
%               Load
%                ||
%                \/
%     =========================
%    /\                       /\
% SupportA        B          Support C
%        -  <---    --->  +
%
%
 
%% PLOT AND EXPORT CONTROLL
% true plots are created // false: plots are not created
fig1 = false;        %To determine test range
p1 = false;         %Evaluation of LVDT's
fig2 = false;        %Single plots: Shear force:deflection - whole test
fig_norm = false;   %Comb plots: Normalized shear:deflection until failure
fig_normNy = false; %Comb plots: Normalized shear:deflection with ny-factor until 
failure
fig_V = false; 
fig_V_Pcr = false;
initialCrackPlot = true;
 
 
% Potting ranges
rangeFail = [1372, 1370, 1314, ...
             2286, 1637, 1675, ...
             5356, 1403, 1415, ...
             2715, 2195, 2599, ...
             6635, 2720, 3000];
         
rangeAll =  [3000, 1912, 1909, ...
             3317, 2330, 2520, ...
             5772, 1989, 3040, ...
             3663, 2195, 3366, ...
             7230, 3456, 5019];
 
%% Importing compressive strength and other beam properties
[compVal, compIndex] = xlsread('0CompressiveStrength1.xls');
ind = find(ismember(compIndex,beamname));
 
% Parameters
[values, diamIndex] = xlsread('0beam info.xls');
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
189
Beam calculation 2
==PAGE:204==
ind = [];
fc = [];
rho = [];
h = [];
b = [];
d = [];
dg = [];
Ec = [];
ft = [];
 
for i = 1:length(beamname)
    % Finding the index in diamVal of each testname
    ind = [ind, find(ismember(diamIndex,beamname{i}))];
    %Putting diameter and height values in vectors at same index as in
    %testname
    fc = [fc, values(ind(i),1)];
    rho = [rho, values(ind(i), 4)];
    h = [h, values(ind(i), 5)];
    b = [b, values(ind(i), 6)];
    d = [d, values(ind(i), 7)];
    dg = [dg, values(ind(i), 8)];
    Ec = [Ec, values(ind(i), 9)];
    ft = [ft, values(ind(i), 14)];
end
 
%% Factors for the LVDT's and test machone:
loadFac = 50;  %kN/V
posFac = 8;     %mm/V
a1Fac = -20.011; %mm/V
a2Fac = -10.036; %mm/V
b2Fac = -20.048; %mm/V
b3Fac = -20.017; %mm/V
b4Fac = -10.313; %mm/V
c1Fac = -20.004; %mm/V
c2Fac = -20.080; %mm/V
 
%% Read data and data processing
% Initializing empty vectors and matricies to store data
 
filename = beamname + ".xls";
 
Load = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
a1 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
a2 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
b2 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
b3 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
b4 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
c1 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
c2 = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
beamDef = zeros(length(beamname),1000);
 
%Looping through all tests and collecting data
for i = 1:length(beamname)
    data{i} = xlsread(filename(i));
    %LOAD
    loadData = [data{i}(:,10)]';
    Load(i, 1:length(loadData)) = -1*loadData*loadFac;
    
    %LVDT's
    a1Data = [data{i}(:,3)]'; % Horizontal, perpendicular to beam - support A
    a1(i, 1:length(a1Data)) = -1*a1Data*a1Fac;
    a1(i,:) = a1(i,:)-a1(i,1);
    a2Data = [data{i}(:,4)]'; % Horizontal, at roller - support A
    a2(i, 1:length(a2Data)) = a2Data*a2Fac;
    a2(i,:) = a2(i,:)-a2(i,1);
    b2Data = [data{i}(:,5)]'; % Vertical - under beam at mid-span
    b2(i, 1:length(b2Data)) = b2Data*b2Fac;
    b2(i,:) = b2(i,:)-b2(i,1);
190
APPENDICES
==PAGE:205==
    b3Data = [data{i}(:,6)]'; % Vertical - under beam at mid-span
    b3(i, 1:length(b3Data)) = b3Data*b3Fac;
    b3(i,:) = b3(i,:)-b3(i,1);
    b4Data = [data{i}(:,7)]'; % Horizontal, perpendicular to beam - at mid-span
    b4(i, 1:length(b4Data)) = b4Data*b4Fac;
    b4(i,:) = b4(i,:)-b4(i,1);
    c1Data = [data{i}(:,8)]'; % Horizontal, perpendicular to beam - support C
    c1(i, 1:length(c1Data)) = c1Data*c1Fac;
    c1(i,:) = c1(i,:)-c1(i,1);
    c2Data = [data{i}(:,9)]'; % Horizontal, at roller - support C
    c2(i, 1:length(c2Data)) = c2Data*c2Fac;
    c2(i,:) = c2(i,:)-c2(i,1);
    
    %CALCULATIONS
    beamDef(i,1:length(b2(i,:))) = (b3(i,:)+b2(i,:))/2; %Beam deflection: average of 
LVDT b2 and b3
    shearForce(i,1:length(Load(i,:))) = Load(i,:)/2;
    norm(i,1:length(Load(i,:)))  = shearForce(i,:)*1000/(b(i)*h(i)*fc(i)) ; % 
Normalized shear force
    ny(i) = (5/fc(i)^(2/3))*(1+((0.35*h(i))/(16+dg(i))))^(-0.62)*(1+32.2*rho(i)); %ny-
factor (from Kragh-Poulsen, unpubl.)
    normNy(i,1:length(Load(i,:)))  = shearForce(i,:)*1000/(b(i)*h(i)*ny(i)*fc(i)) ; % 
Normalized shear force, including ny-factor
 
    maxShear(i) = [, max(shearForce(i,:))];
    maxShearIndex(i) = [, max(find(shearForce(i,:) == maxShear(i)))];
    defMaxShear(i) = [ , beamDef(i, maxShearIndex(i))]; %[mm] 
    
    
    W(i) = (h(i)^2*b(i)/6);   
    M(i) = ft(i)*W(i);
    Pcr(i)=(((M(i)*4)/(2*1250)))/2000;
    
end
 
Load(Load == 0) = NaN;
beamDef(beamDef == 0) = NaN;
%%
% Shear force at initial crack
V_cr=[25.3,24.9,20.95,27.8,30.2,18.95,17.45,18.7,24.6,26.1,17.45,18.9,23.9,15.6,9.4];
 
% Shear force at first appearance of the critical shear crack
V_cr_CSC = [34.2 39.5 30.4 27.8 44.7 25.9 78.6 71.8 57.3 105.2 91.3 81.2 111.5 66.2 
43.6];
 
% LOOP to get corresponding deflections
for i = 1:15
    for j = 1:length(shearForce)
        if round(V_cr(i),1) == round(shearForce(i,j),1)
            def_cr(i) = round(beamDef(i,j),1);
            break
        end
    end
    for j = 1:length(shearForce)
        if round(V_cr_CSC(i),1) == round(shearForce(i,j),1)
            def_cr_CSC(i) = round(beamDef(i,j),1);
            break
        end
    end
end
 
 
 
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
191
==PAGE:206==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% Read and plot data from COMPRESSION tests
% Script made by Mats Fjærestrand and Ola Hovland Kjær as part of the
% Master Thesis: "Shear Behaviour of Arch-shaped Concrete Members"
% Fall 2019
clc
clear all
close all
format short
 
%%%%%%%%%%%----CHOOSE BEAM----%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
test = "a2";
testname = {test + '_c1',test + '_c2', test + '_c3'};
 
 
 
 
%% Parameters
 
H = 300; %[mm] Height of cylidner
 
[diamVal, diamIndex] = xlsread('0DiameterMeasurements.xls');
ind_c1 = find(ismember(diamIndex,testname{1}));
ind_c2 = find(ismember(diamIndex,testname{2}));
ind_c3 = find(ismember(diamIndex,testname{3}));
 
% Diamters of cylinders
D = [diamVal(ind_c1,1), diamVal(ind_c2,1), diamVal(ind_c3,1)]; %[mm]
 
%load strenghts
%load diameters
 
 
%% Factors for Instron 8508 (Compression/Tension machine):
%Do not change.
%ORDER: C1 - C2 - A1
loadFac = 100;      %kN/V
posFac = 5;         %mm/V
C1Fac = -20.004;    %mm/V
C2Fac = -20.080;    %mm/V 
A1Fac = -20.011;    %mm/V
ExtFac = -166.54;    %mm/V
 
% B4Fac = -10.313  |  A2Fac = -10.036  |  C2Fac = -20.080;
% A1Fac = -20.011  |  C1Fac = -20.004  |
 
 
 
for i = 1:length(testname)
    filename = testname(i) + ".xls";
    m = testname{i};
    
    raw.(m) = xlsread(filename);   %Creates struct with raw data matricies
    
    %Separating the matrix and multiplying with the apporpriate factors for
    %unit conversion
    loadData.(m) = raw.(m)(:,7)*-loadFac;    %[kN]
    posData.(m) = raw.(m)(:,8)*-posFac;      %[mm]
    C1.(m) = raw.(m)(:,3)*C1Fac;            %[mm]
    C2.(m) = raw.(m)(:,4)*C2Fac;            %[mm]
    A1.(m) = raw.(m)(:,5)*A1Fac;            %[mm]
192
APPENDICES
Cylinder test calculation
==PAGE:207==
    Ext.(m) = raw.(m)(:,6)*ExtFac;          %[mm]
    
    
    % 'zeroing' out the position
    posData.(m) = posData.(m)(:)-posData.(m)(1);
    C1.(m) = C1.(m)(:) - C1.(m)(1);
    C2.(m) = C2.(m)(:) - C2.(m)(1);
    A1.(m) = A1.(m)(:) - A1.(m)(1);
    Ext.(m) = Ext.(m)(:) - Ext.(m)(1);
 
end
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% CHOOSE TEST NUMBER 
 
testNo = 3;      % c1 = 1        c2 = 2      c3 = 3
 
 
 
%% Smoothening of position data
for i = 3:(length(posData.(testname{testNo})(:))-2)
    posData.(testname{testNo})(i) = (posData.(testname{testNo})(i-2) + 2*posData.
(testname{testNo})(i-1) + 3*posData.(testname{testNo})(i) + 2*posData.(testname
{testNo})(i+1) + posData.(testname{testNo})(i+2))/9;
 
end
 
 
 
 
 
%% Chose which LVDT's to include when averaging
% Here you can choose to scrap one or more of the LVDT's if they are faulty
useC1 = true;       % true or false
useA1 = true;       % true or false
useC2 = true;       % true or false
check = [useC1, useA1, useC2];
 
% Making the invalid LVDT's zero-measurements
C1.(testname{testNo}) = C1.(testname{testNo})*useC1;
A1.(testname{testNo}) = A1.(testname{testNo})*useA1;
C2.(testname{testNo}) = C2.(testname{testNo})*useC2;
 
%% Averaging of LVDT's 
%Calclating the average of the chosen LVDT's
sumLVDT.(testname{testNo}) = C1.(testname{testNo}) + A1.(testname{testNo}) + C2.
(testname{testNo});
LVDT.(testname{testNo}) = sumLVDT.(testname{testNo}) / sum(check);
 
Ext.(testname{testNo}) = Ext.(testname{testNo});
%% Calculating stress and strain
 
A = D(testNo)^2*pi/4; % [mm^2]
stress.(testname{testNo}) = loadData.(testname{testNo}) / A * 1000; %[MPa]
 
maxStress = max(stress.(testname{testNo}));
xStress = [0]; %Fictive x-coordinates to plot maxStress line
 
strain.(testname{testNo}) = LVDT.(testname{testNo}) / H;    %[-] strain
 
strain_ext.(testname{testNo})=Ext.(testname{testNo})/80;
 
NorStress.(testname{testNo})= stress.(testname{testNo})/maxStress;
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
193
==PAGE:208==
 
 
%% Calculation of E-modulus based on LVDT
index1 = 300;
index2 = 700;
 
stress1 = stress.(testname{testNo})(index1);
stress2 = stress.(testname{testNo})(index2);
strain1 = strain.(testname{testNo})(index1);
strain2 = strain.(testname{testNo})(index2);
 
deltaStress = stress2 - stress1;
deltaStrain = strain2 - strain1;
 
E2 = deltaStress/deltaStrain/1000; % [GPa] E-modulus
 
%% Calculation of E-modulus based on Extensometer
index1 = 50;
index2 = 450;
 
stress1e = stress.(testname{testNo})(index1);
stress2e = stress.(testname{testNo})(index2);
strain1e = strain_ext.(testname{testNo})(index1);
strain2e = strain_ext.(testname{testNo})(index2);
 
deltaStress_e = stress2e - stress1e;
deltaStrain_e = strain2e - strain1e;
 
E = deltaStress_e/deltaStrain_e/1000; % [GPa] E-modulus
 
 
 
%% Write datafile
col1 = strain.(testname{testNo});
col2 = stress.(testname{testNo});
col3 = LVDT.(testname{testNo});
col4 = NorStress.(testname{testNo});
col5 = posData.(testname{testNo});
col6= zeros(length(col5),1);
col6(1,1)=max(col2);
col7= zeros(length(col5),1);
col7(1,1)=E;
helpy=[col2,col1];
 
for i=1:length(col1)
  
    if col2(i,1)==max(col2)
      strain_max=helpy(i,2);
      disp('nå')
    end
   
end
 
 
col8= zeros(length(col5),1);
col8(1,1)=strain_max;
 
datafile = [col1, col2, col3,col4,col5,col6,col7,col8];
 
 
outputName = testname(testNo) + "OUT";
csvwrite(outputName,datafile)
 
 
194
APPENDICES
==PAGE:209==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% SCRIPT USED TO PROCESS AND PLOT TENSION TESTS
% Takes xls/csv data files as input, outputs figures
% Smoothening functions is applied to data before plotting
% Created by Ola Hovland Kjær and Mats Fjærestrand
 
clc
clear all
close all
% Name of all test files to be read:
testname = {'a1_t1comp', ...
            'b1_t1comp', ...
            'c1_t1', ...
            'd1_t2', 'd1_t3', ...
            'e1_t1', 'e1_t2comp', 'e1_t3comp'};
name = testname;
 
%% PLOT AND EXPORT CONTROLL
% true plots are created // false: plots are not created
p1 = false;     %Used to determine test range(remove excess data before and after 
test)
p2 = false;     %Stress-Strain
p3 = true;      %Stress-Deformation
writeData = false;
 
%% Parameters
 
[values, diamIndex] = xlsread('0Measurements(notchDiameter and height).csv');
ind = [];
D = [];
H = [];
A = [];
L0 = 60; %[mm] Distance ext is measured over
for i = 1:length(testname)
    % Finding the index in diamVal of each testname
    ind = [ind, find(ismember(diamIndex,testname{i}(1:5)))];
    %Putting diameter and height values in vectors at same index as in
    %testname
    D = [D, values(ind(i),1)];
    H = [H, values(ind(i),2)];
    A = [A, D(i)^2*pi/4];
end
 
%% Factors for Instron 8508 (Compression/Tension machine):
%Do not change.
loadFac = 100;  %kN/V
posFac = 5;     %mm/V
ex123Fac = 0.4;  %mm/v ?????????????????????????????
 
%% Read data and data processing
% Initializing empty vectors and matricies to store data
loadData = [];
Load = zeros(length(testname),100000);
posData = [];
Pos = zeros(length(testname),100000);
ex123Data = [];
Ext = zeros(length(testname),100000);
Stress = zeros(length(testname),6);
 
filename(:) = testname(:) + ".xls";
% Looping through all tests and collecting data
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
195
Cylinder tensile calculation
==PAGE:210==
% Calibration factors and 'zeroing' of displacement data is included here
for i = 1:length(testname)
    testname{i} = xlsread(filename(i));
    %computerData = 
    try name{i}(6:9);
        %LOAD
        loadData = [testname{i}(:,6)]';
        Load(i, 1:length(loadData)) = loadData;
        % POSITION
        posData = [testname{i}(:,5)]';
        Pos(i, 1:length(posData)) = posData - posData(1);
        for j = 4:length(posData)-3
            Load(i,j) = (Load(i,j-3) + 2*Load(i,j-2) + 3*Load(i,j-1) + 4*Load(i,j) + 
3*Load(i,j+1) + 2*Load(i,j+2)+ Load(i,j+3))/16;
            Pos(i,j) = (Pos(i,j-3) + 2*Pos(i,j-2) + 3*Pos(i,j-1) + 4*Pos(i,j) + 3*Pos
(i,j+1) + 2*Pos(i,j+2)+ Pos(i,j+3))/16;
        end
        % Calculation of stress and strain
        Stress = Load*1000/A(i);
        disp('try')
    catch
        % LOAD
        loadData = [testname{i}(:,3) * loadFac]';
        Load(i, 1:length(loadData)) = loadData;
        % POSITION
        posData = [testname{i}(:,4) * posFac]';
        Pos(i, 1:length(posData)) = posData - posData(1);
        % EXTENSOMETER average
        ex123Data = [testname{i}(:,5) * ex123Fac]';
        Ext(i, 1:length(ex123Data)) = ex123Data - ex123Data(1);
        for j = 3:length(ex123Data)-2
            Ext(i,j) = (Ext(i,j-2) + 2*Ext(i,j-1) + 3*Ext(i,j) + 2*Ext(i,j+1) + Ext(i,
j+2))/9;
        end
        % Calculation of stress and strain
        Stress = Load*1000/A(i);    % [MPa]
        disp('catch')
    end
end
 
%Strain = Ext(:,length(posData));
%Strain = Ext/L0*100;      % [%] 
PlotPos = Pos;
PlotPos(PlotPos == 0) = NaN;
PlotExt = Ext;
PlotExt(PlotExt == 0) = NaN;
 
%% Calculation and exporting tensile strenght
 
ft = [];
nameOUT = [];
for i = 1:length(name)
    ft = [ft, round(max(Stress(i,:)),2)];
end
ft = num2cell(ft);
ft_OUT = [name; ft];
filename = 'ft.xls';
 
if writeData == true
    recycle on % Send to recycle bin instead of permanently deleting.
    delete(filename); % Delete (send to recycle bin).
    xlswrite(filename, ft_OUT)
end
 
 
 
 
 
196
APPENDICES
==PAGE:211==
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
197
==PAGE:212==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% DNV Calculations and comparison with experimental data
% Created by Mats Fjærestrand and Ola Hovland Kjær
% Last edited: 16.06.19
%
% Created as part of the master thesis "Shear Behaviour of Arch-Shaped 
% Concrete Members"
clc
clear all
close all
 
%% Parameters
[values, names] = xlsread('0beam_info.xls');
names = names(2:19,1);
 
V_test = values(1:15,11);
b   = values(:,6);          %[mm] Width of cross section
d   = values(:,7);          %[mm] Distance from centre of rebar to compression edge
fc  = values(:,1);          %[mm] Concrete compressice strength
As  = values(:,12);         %[mm] Flexural reinforcement area
d1 = 1000;                  %[mm] Constant
kA = 100;                   %[MPa] Constant
kv = 1.5-d/d1;              %[-] Constant
kv(kv>1.4) = 1.4;           
kv(kv<1.0) = 1.0;
 
Rs = values(:,2);           %[mm] Reinforcement radius
a = 1200;                   %[mm] Shear span
ks = 1 - 0.6*a./Rs;         %[-] New proposed factor by Authors
 
%% Calculation of concrete tensile strength according to DNV Standard
fcck = fc;                          % Section 4.3.3.2 in DNV Standard
ftk = 0.48*(fcck).^0.5;
ftn = ftk.*(1-(ftk/25).^0.6);       % Section 4.3.3.4 in DNV Standard
ft = ftn;
 
%% Calculations according to 6.6.2 in DNVGL-ST-C502
for i = 1:length(names)
V_cd(i) = 0.3*(ft(i)+(kA*As(i))/(b(i)*d(i)))*b(i)*d(i)*kv(i)/1000; %[kN]
V_lim(i)= 0.6*ft(i)*b(i)*d(i)*kv(i)/1000;                          %[kN]  
    if V_cd(i) <= V_lim(i)
        V_DNV(i) = V_cd(i);
    elseif V_cd(i) > V_lim(i)
        V_DNV(i) = V_lim(i);
        disp('lim')
    end
end
 
%% Printing results to excel-file
for i = 1:15
%Comparison
    comp(i) = V_test(i) / V_DNV(i);
198
APPENDICES
DNV calculation
==PAGE:213==
end
header = {'A', 'B', 'C', 'D', 'E'};
Mat = reshape(comp,[3,5]);
meanMat = mean(Mat);
sdMat = std(Mat);
summary = [header; string(Mat); string(meanMat); string(sdMat)];
summary = strrep(summary,'.',',');
filename = 'out_DNV.xls';
delete(filename)
xlswrite(filename, summary);
 
 
%% CALCULATION OF TREND LINE BASED ON a/Rs
% Linear regression // Y = X*B
x = a./Rs(1:15);
one = ones(length(x),1);
X = [one, a./Rs(1:15)];
Y = comp(1:15)';
B = X\Y;
Line = B(1)+ x*B(2);
Fac = -0.6*x;
 
V_DNVny = [];
for i = 1:15
    V_DNVny(i) = V_DNV(i) + V_DNV(i)*Fac(i);
    compNy(i) = V_test(i) / V_DNVny(i);
end
Xny = [-0.5 0.5];
Ycal = B(1) + B(2)*Xny;
 
 
 
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
199
==PAGE:214==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
%% Calculation of shear capacity according to extension of CSCT to arch-shaped 
members
% Created by Mats Fjærestrand and Ola Hovland Kjær
% Last edited: 10.06.19
%
% Created as part of the master thesis "Shear Behaviour of Arch-Shaped 
% Concrete Members"
clc
clear all
close all
syms V
 
%% Parameters
[values, names] = xlsread('0beam_infoCSCT.xls');
beamNames = names(2:19,1);
 
b   = values(:,6);          %[mm] Width of cross section
h   = values(:,5);          %[mm] Height of cross section
d   = values(:,7);          %[mm] 
fc  = values(:,1);          %[mm] Concrete compressice strength
Rs  = values(:,2);          %[mm] Reinforocement radius
rho = values(:,4);          %[-]  Flexural reinforcement ratio
dg  = values(:,8);          %[mm] Max Aggregate size
for i = 1:length(beamNames)
    if fc(i) > 60
        dg(i) = 0;
    end
end
dg0 = 16;                   %[mm] Reference aggregate size
a   = 1200;                 %[mm] distance between load and support
Es  = values(:,16);         %[MPa] E-modulus steel 
Ec  = values(:,15);         %[MPa] E-modulus concrete 
V_test = values(:,11);
 
 
%% Initializing variables
x   = [];
z   = [];
eps = [];
Vrc = [];
z1  = [];
deltaV = [];
V_calc = [];
 
%% LAMBDA
% System to allow variable lambda values. Lambda = 0.5 used for origianl
% calculations.
lamA = 0.5;
lamD = 0.5;
lamA = [lamA lamA lamA];
lamB = lamA;
200
APPENDICES
CSCT calculation
==PAGE:215==
lamC = [0 0 0];
lamD = [lamD lamD lamD];
lamE = lamD;
lambda = [lamA, lamB, lamC, lamD, lamE, 0.5 0.5 0.5];
 
%% Shear resistance according to CSCT:
for i = 1:length(h)
    x = [x, d(i)*rho(i)*(Es(i)/Ec(i))*(sqrt(1+((2*Ec(i))/...
        (rho(i)*Es(i))))-1)];      % Depth of comp. zone
    z = [z, d(i)-x(i)/3];       % Flexrual lever arm at midspan
    eps = [eps, ((V*(a-(d(i)/2)))/(b(i)*d(i)*rho(i)*Es(i)*z(i))) * ...
          ((0.6*d(i)-x(i))/(d(i)-x(i)))]; % Longitudinal strain
 
 
    Vrc = [Vrc, (b(i)*d(i)*sqrt(fc(i))/6)*(2/(1+((120*eps(i)*d(i))/ ...
          (dg0+dg(i)))))]; %[N] Shear resistance (without arch effect)
 
    %% Extension to CSCT:
    
    z1 = [z1, z(i)-(((lambda(i)*d(i))^2)/(2*Rs(i)))];     % Distance between 
flexrual reinforcment and compression strut
    deltaV = [deltaV, (V*a)/(z1(i))*(lambda(i)*d(i))/(Rs(i))] ;% Additional force 
due to arch-shape 
 
    % Critcal Shear Crack force according to extended CSCT:
    eqn = Vrc(i)-deltaV(i)-V == 0;
 
    % Calculation of Shear resistance
    V_solve = solve(eqn,V);% [N]
    V_solve = double(V_solve);  
    V_solve = V_solve(V_solve>0)/1000;   % [kN]
    V_calc = [V_calc, V_solve];  
end
 
APPENDIX H - MATLAB CALCULATIONS
201
==PAGE:216==
 
 
 
After testing all the beams, they were cut over, so the surface of the critical crack was visible and 
possible to be examined closer. Where the light grey spot indicates that the aggregates is torn out of 
the concrete. 
Beam 
no. 
Picture of surface along critical shear crack 
Closeup of crack surface 
A1 
 
 
 
 
 
A2 
 
 
 
 
 
A3 
 
 
202
APPENDICES
Appendix I - Surface of Critical Shear Crack
==PAGE:217==
 
 
B1 
 
 
 
 
 
B2 
 
 
 
 
 
B3 
 
 
APPENDIX I - SURFACE OF CRITICAL SHEAR CRACK
203
==PAGE:218==
 
 
 
 
 
 
C1 
 
 
 
 
 
C2 
 
 
 
 
 
C3 
 
 
204
APPENDICES
==PAGE:219==
 
 
 
 
 
 
D1 
 
 
 
 
 
D2 
 
 
 
 
 
D3 
 
 
APPENDIX I - SURFACE OF CRITICAL SHEAR CRACK
205
==PAGE:220==
 
 
 
 
 
 
E1 
 
 
 
 
 
E2 
 
 
 
 
 
E3 
 
 
206
APPENDICES
==PAGE:221==
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX I - SURFACE OF CRITICAL SHEAR CRACK
207
==PAGE:222==
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Image Correlation images are from GOM Correlate. Major strain is shown and the color scale of the DIC images is 
presented below. The blue circle (○) in the shear force-deflection plot indicates initial crack and the red circle (○) indicates 
first appearance of critical shear crack.  
 
 
 
 
Shear force-deflection plot 
DIC 
(initial crack) 
DIC  
(first appearance of critical shear crack) 
A1 
 
 
Pcr = 25.3 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 34.2 kN 
A2 
 
 
Pcr = 24.9 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 39.5 kN 
A3 
 
 
Pcr = 21.0 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 30.4 kN 
208
APPENDICES
Appendix J - Initial Cracks and Critical Shear
Cracks
==PAGE:223==
B1 
 
 
Pcr = 27.8 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 27.8 kN 
*The initial crack develops into critical shear 
crack, so Pcr = Pcr.CSC 
B2 
 
 
Pcr = 30.2 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 44.7 kN 
B3 
 
 
Pcr = 19.0 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 25.9 kN 
C1 
 
 
Pcr = 17.5 kN 
 
 
Pcr.CSC = 78.6 kN 
C2 
 
 
Pcr = 18.7 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 71.8 kN 
APPENDIX J - INITIAL CRACKS AND CRITICAL SHEAR CRACKS
209
==PAGE:224==
C3 
 
 
Pcr = 22.1 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 57.3 kN 
D1 
 
 
Pcr = 26.1 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 105.2 kN 
D2 
 
 
Pcr = 17.5 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 91.3 kN 
D3 
 
 
Pcr = 18.9 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 81.2 kN 
E1 
 
 
Pcr = 23.9 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 111.5 kN 
210
APPENDICES
==PAGE:225==
E2 
 
 
Pcr = 15.6 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 66.2 kN 
E3 
 
 
 
Pcr = 9.4 kN 
 
Pcr.CSC = 43.6 kN 
 
APPENDIX J - INITIAL CRACKS AND CRITICAL SHEAR CRACKS
211
==PAGE:226==
 
 
 
 
 
This analyse is a collection of all the compression plot made in this experiment and made in 
to a more transparent to analyse by using a fitting curve is based on the following equation 
1. All the raw data regarding the compression test can be found in beam appendix.  
 
𝜎=
𝐴𝑋+ 𝐵𝑋'
1 + 𝐶𝑋+ 𝐷𝑋' 
Equation 1: Fitting curve 
 
(1) 
 
Were X being the normalized strain 
+
+,, 𝜀. is the strain at 𝑓1 maximum stress. Constant A, B, C 
and D is given by the following calculation and is only valid for the descending part of the 
curve which means 1<
2
34  and also1>
+
+,.  
𝐴=
354(+547+,)9
+,+54(347+54) , B=0, C=A-2 and D=1. Were 𝑓:1 and 𝜀:1 is the stress and strain inflection 
point which can be found by equation. 
 
 
𝜀:1
𝜀.
= 6.2 −1.12ln (𝑓1) 
Equation 2: inflection point 
 
(2) 
 
𝑓:1
𝑓1
= 1.25 −0.26ln (𝑓1) 
Equation 3: inflection point 
 
(3) 
 
The inflection point is based on a regression analysis which is further explained in detail by 
Ray K L Su & Cheng Bei in “The Effect of Coarse Aggregate Size on the Stress-strain Curves of 
Concrete under Uniaxial Compression” and how different aggregate size effects equation 2 
and 3. The number used in those equation is therefore adapted to fit the aggregate size used 
in this experiment and the numbers seen in the equation is not necessarily the one used for 
calculation.  
 
In figure 1-3 a collection of all the fitted curves with respect to the aggregate size is 
presented as a result of the equation used above. All the compression test has recoded data 
for approximately 1% strain. 
 
212
APPENDICES
Appendix L - Fitting Curves for Compression
Test
==PAGE:227==
 
Figure 1: Fitted curve dg=25mm 
  
 
 
Figure 2: Fitted curve for Dg=16 mm 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Fitted curve dg=8mm 
APPENDIX L - FITTING CURVES FOR COMPRESSION TEST
213
==PAGE:228==
 
 
 
 
Mats 
% 
Ola 
% 
Lab work 
 
 
 
 
Construction of test 
machine 
Main responsible 
65 
- 
35 
Preparation of casting and 
casting 
- 
50 
- 
50 
Test casting 
- 
20 
Main responsible 
80 
Beam tests 
- 
50 
- 
 
Cylinder compression tests 
- 
40 
Main responsible 
60 
Cylinder tensile tests 
- 
40 
Main responsible 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
Report writing 
 
 
 
 
0 Abstract 
- 
50 
- 
50 
1 Introduction 
Discussed the content of the 
chapter, wrote half of it.  Then 
controlled the other half 
50 
Discussed the content of the 
chapter, wrote half of it. 
Then controlled the other 
half 
50 
2 Theory 
Research and control 
30 
Research and writing 
70 
3 Experimental Plan 
Wrote half of the chapter, 
controlled the other half. 
50 
Wrote half of the chapter, 
controlled the other half. 
50 
4 Experiments  
Wrote it and discussed the 
content.  
70 
controlled and discussed the 
content of the chapter.  
30 
5 Result  
Wrote the chapter.  
70 
controlled and discussed the 
content of the chapter. 
30 
6 Analysis and Discussion 
of Results 
Wrote half of the sections, 
discussed the content for all and 
controlled the other half 
50 
Wrote half of the sections, 
discussed the content for all 
and controlled the other half 
50 
7 Comparison 
Controlled and discussed the 
content 
30 
Wrote and discussed the 
content.  
70 
8 Conclusion 
Discussed the content of the 
chapter, wrote half of it. Then 
controlled the other half 
50 
Discussed the content of the 
chapter, wrote half of it. 
Then controlled the other 
half 
50 
9 Future work 
- 
50 
- 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis and calculations 
 
 
 
 
DIC analysis 
Approximately half of the 
beams. 
50 
Approximately half of the 
beams. 
50 
DNV Calculations 
Controlled the number 
30 
Preformed the calculation 
70 
CSCT Calculations 
Started the matlabs script and 
calculation. Controlled the 
numbers in the end.  
40 
Assist in the preparation, 
took over the script and 
further developed it. 
60 
DNV and CSCT 
comparison 
Assist in the preparation. 
Controlled the numbers. 
Discussed the result 
20 
Made the analysis.  
80 
Softening curve 
Did the analysis and the 
calculation.  
80 
Assist in the preparation 
and controlled the numbers.  
20 
Beam calculation 
Analyzed approximately half of 
the beams. Controlled the 
calculation 
50 
Analyzed approximately 
half of the beams. Made the 
calculation.  
50 
Compression calculation 
Assist in the preparation, took 
over the work and further 
developed the script.  
50 
Started the calculation and 
matlab script, did also the 
first compression 
calculation.  
50 
214
APPENDICES
Appendix M - Division of Workload
==PAGE:229==
Tensile calculation 
Assist in the preparation 
30 
Preformed the analysis.   
70 
First crack  
Started the analysis.  
60 
Assist in the preparation 
and did the last part.  
40 
Critical crack 
Started the analysis. 
70 
Discussed the progress and 
controlled it 
30 
Crack propagation  
Preformed the analysis.   
80 
Assist in the preparation 
20 
Relative displacement 
vector 
Discussed the progress and how 
to use the data combined with 
some research.  
30 
Discussed the progress, and 
research. Performed the 
calculation and made all the 
drawings.   
70 
Drawing of critical crack 
Approximately half of the 
beams. 
50 
Approximately half of the 
beams. 
50 
Calculation of test setup 
Performed most of the 
calculation 
80 
Controlled  
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX M - DIVISION OF WORKLOAD
215
