==PAGE:1==
Phonological Loop for Musical
Sequences: The effect of
Timbre
Master Thesis
LOÏC FORMA
Supervised by Jeremy Marozeau
Co-supervised by Aleksandra Koprowska
Department of Electrical Engineering
DTU Acoustic Technology
Denmark Technical university
July, 2019
A Master Thesis submitted in partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the
degree of M.Sc. of Acoustics.
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
DTU Acoustic Technology
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
ACT
Ørsteds Plads
Building 352
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3949
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
Title
Phonological Loop for Musical Sequences: The effect of Timbre
This report was written by
Loïc Forma (s172818)
Supervisors
Jeremy Marozeau, Aleksandra Koprowska.
Hearing Systems Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Project Period
4 february - 28 july 2019
ECTS
35
Institute
DTU Acoustic Technology
Degree
M.Sc. of Acoustics
Class
Public
Edition
1. edition
Remarks
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
Candidate (Id.)
Loïc Forma (s172818)
Signature of Student
Date
July 28, 2019
==PAGE:5==
v
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Jeremy Marozeau, who of-
fered me the opportunity to work with him. I am grateful for the support he offered
me along the way, for the motivation he gave me when I needed it and for all the
wise advises he provided me with.
I express my profound gratitude to my other supervisor Aleksandra Koprowska,
for her dedication, her patience, and all the valuable inputs she gave me. Moreover,
I am deeply indebted to her for the extended help and feedback she gave me during
the redaction of this report. This thesis would not be what it is without her contri-
bution, thank you.
My sincere thanks also goes to all the DTU employees who always helped me when
I asked for assistance. To all the technical team, and speciﬁcally to Andrew King
who spent a lot of time to set up the recording devices, thank you. Special appreci-
ation is due to Rikke Skovhøj Sørensen who helped me to recruit participants.
I would like to thank my family who have supported me throughout my whole stu-
dent life, especially my parents who sacriﬁced so much for my education.
I thank my fellow ofﬁce-mates slightly for the relaxing moments we shared during
these long working days, a little bit more for the tips they gave me, even more for
the good moments we spent out of the ofﬁce, but mainly for the Gammel Dansk.
Finally, my last acknowledgements are going to my child/teenage-hood friends,
who encouraged me during my master despite the distance, and where always here
when I needed a phone call to change my mind. To them, who beard all my com-
plains when I was writing this report, and who answered me by sending pictures
of their holidays, thank you !!
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
vii
Abstract
Auditory working memory for musical stimuli has been the focus of an increas-
ing number of studies last years. It has been shown that performance in auditory
working memory task depends on different features of the auditory signal, as the
pitch and the timbre. However, little is known about how it would be affected if hu-
man voice is used as a stimulus. In human, it has be found that con-speciﬁc audio
signals are subject to particular processing. Vocal stimuli elicit a higher cognitive
activity and vocal production is more accurate when the stimuli to match is played
by a human voice. This study examined the effect of human vocals on the mem-
ory for tone sequences. It was hypothesized that the auditory working memory
has an enhanced processing for vocal melodies. Two related hypothesis were also
investigated. The ﬁrst one was related to the vocal stimuli: when someone hears
his own voice, pitch processing should be even more enhanced. The second one
investigated the effect of the pitch range: when melodies match participant’s pitch
range, it should enhanced memorization.
22 participants with different musical backgrounds performed a serial order
memory task for a sequence of tones. They heard a melody, and they had to mem-
orize and recreate it with the help of an interface.The melodies were presented in
ﬁve different conditions, namely participant’s own voice, a male and female human
voices, a piano played in participant’s pitch range, and a piano played out of this
range.
On average, musicians performed better, but results didn’t show any signiﬁcant
effect of voice, neither of range. However, performance for the task were character-
ized by primacy/recency effect and a strong effect of the tone height. Grouping
participants based on their musical level or their ability to sing accurately gave the
same results.
The absence of signiﬁcant effect for human stimuli can be explained by the fact
that the phonological loop doesn’t beneﬁt from the effect of a vocal timbre, and that
sub-vocalization is not affected by the timbre. However, this absence of signiﬁcant
effect might be due to some parameters of the experimental design. Finally, impli-
cations for models of serial order short term memory are discussed, with arguments
in favor of a strong domain-speciﬁc processing.
==PAGE:8==
Contents
1
Problem statement
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Baddeley’s model of working memory: it’s components and their role in
storing and processing of tonal stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Phonological loop
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Visuospatial Sketchpad
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Episodic Buffer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.4
Central Executive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduction of vocal stimuli . . . .
10
2.3
Motivation for the present study and hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Methods
21
3.1
Participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Melodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Timbres
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Study Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results
29
4.1
Musical experience and vocal accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Response accuracy for Timbre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Response accuracy for Position and Tone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Transposition Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6
Complementary results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.1
The effect of recording quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.2
The effect of gender and voice in/out of range . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Discussion
39
5.1
The effect of timbre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
viii
==PAGE:9==
Contents
ix
5.1.1
Difference between production/perception of single tones . . . . .
39
5.1.2
Extension to musical sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3
Vocal rehearsal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
The effect of Position and Tone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
Response accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.2
Transposition Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3
Design limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.1
Voice recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3.2
Training and artifacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.3
The effect of singer’s gender
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3.4
The effect of tempo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
59
Appendix A Graphical model check
61
A.1 Response accuracy for Position and Tone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Transposition Gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
References
65
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
Baddeley Model of the working memory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Scoops and Vibrato representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
The pitch internal representation of two tones, played with two different tim-
bres. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Graphical representation of the task performed by the participants. . . . . . .
20
3.1
Application Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.1
Boxplot for the response accuracy for the different timbres. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Boxplot for the response accuracy for the different Tones . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Boxplot for the response accuracy for the different Position . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Transposition gradient for the mean participant Position,Tone and Chance
level.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.5
SNR in dB in function of the improvement in percentage. . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1
Application interface: mixing up Tone and Position
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.1 Diagnostic plot for the model with response accuracy as dependent variable
and Tone, Position and Musician Level as parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Diagnostic plot for the model with Transposition length as dependent vari-
able and Condition, Distance and their interaction as parameters. . . . . . . .
62
x
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
2.1
Conditions and Effects for the Timbres . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1
Melodies patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1
Description of data and data type used for the statistical analysis. . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Coefﬁcients for the Tone-Position-Musician Level Model
. . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1
Occurrence for every Tone-Position pair. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Voice conditions and octave shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
xi
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER1
Problem statement
In music academy, a common way to train and assess musical perception skills is to
perform musical dictation. This task requires to be able to remember a melody, then to
extract the rhythm and the pitch. Usually, the melody is played on a piano. However,
their is a common belief that this practice is quite unfair for some reasons. First, for
students with an absolute pitch perception, this task is too easy. The opposite way, there
are students who exhibit a very bad pitch perception, making this task very challenging.
Finally, it is believed that students practicing piano have an advantage, because the
instrument used for this task is the same as the one they are practicing every day. For
this last reason, more and more teachers are in favor of playing the melody for every
participant with its own instrument. It might be of interest to investigate if timbre can
inﬂuence the pitch perception of musical melodies.
These past years, an increasing number of researches tried to ﬁnd why some peo-
ple have troubles to sing in tune (Bella et al. 2011; Hutchins et al. 2014; Pfordresher
and Larrouy-Maestri 2015; Hanser 2016; Weaver et al. 2017). To assess singing skills
of the participants, the task mainly used is called a pitch-matching task. In this pro-
cedure, people hear a tone, and they have to sing it back. The criterion used is how
close in frequency they are able to be. Some papers summarize possible explanations
for poor pitch-matching capacities (Pfordresher and Steven 2007; Hutchins and Peretz
2012). They have an approach where they divide the process of pitch-matching into ca-
pacities components. In this vision pitch-matching requires to be able to perceive the
pitch, to plan an action, to realize it, and to coordinate all these components thanks to
the memory. Therefore, poor pitch matching can come from a perceptual deﬁcit, as a
bad pitch discrimination capacity (Peretz et al. 2002), a defective control of the vocal
folds and vocal cavities (Joyner 1969), a mismapping between perception and action,
also called sensorimotor problem (Pfordresher and Steven 2007; Pfordresher and Man-
tell 2009), a memory deﬁcit, as a tendency to produce classic intervals instead of the
one heard (Schön et al. 2004) or even a motivation explanation as peer pressure (Hanser
2016). In the case of the auditory working memory and memory for melody, the sen-
sorimotor and the motor problems can’t be an explanation, so they will not be further
investigated. Instead of dividing the components by their physiological properties, a
slightly different approach is going to be used. First, the Baddeley model is going to be
1
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Problem statement
introduced with a short overview of its components and their main features. Then, all
the components are going to be further investigated with the light of the ﬁndings about
auditory working memory.
Structure of the thesis
The chapter 2 provides an overview of the researches performed on the auditory
working memory for musical stimuli. First, the most common model of working mem-
ory is described. Then, each of its sub-components are more speciﬁcally discussed, with
their possible implications in musical tasks. The next part of this chapter has a particular
focus on the vocal stimuli and how they differ from other stimuli in perceptual and pro-
duction tasks. These speciﬁc results are summarized to point out some non-investigated
areas that motivated the study, the hypothesis and the choice of the task. The chapter 3
introduces the experiment that has been performed: how the task has been designed
and set up, who took part in it, what the participants had to do... The chapter 4 presents
the data extracted from the experiment. It explains how the results have been computed,
and describes the statistical analysis performed. It points out that the effects assumed by
the hypothesis are not statistically relevant. Other effects related to short term memory
for musical stimuli are investigated, as well as some possible bias. The chapter 5 focuses
on the implications of the results gotten in the previous chapter. It discusses possible
explanations for the absence of signiﬁcant effect of timbre. The processing of musical
sequences by the auditory working memory receives a particular concern. It also points
out some limitations and possible design modiﬁcations. The chapter 6 summarizes the
study, with a particular concern on the ﬁndings, their implications and what could be
done in future work.
2
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER2
Background
2.1 | Baddeley’s model of working memory: it’s compo-
nents and their role in storing and processing of
tonal stimuli
Before introducing the model proposed by Baddeley, it is important to properly deﬁne
two terms: working memory, and short term memory. The term working memory refers
to the temporary storage in the memory of any kind of information (visual, verbals...).
It can be seen as a desk which can only store a few information, but gives a direct ac-
cess to this one. Originally, the expression short term memory was used to describe this
temporary storage. Because it might be misleading about how this memory works, and
to take account of new parameters, the modern term working memory has been more
and more used with years. However, both terms are still used by the scientiﬁc com-
munity, without necessary making any difference between the two deﬁnitions. To be in
agreement with the terms used in previous publication, both term will be used here. It
is important to precise that it will always refer to the same thing.
Even thought there is a few models that attempted to explain how the working memory
is running (Pascual-Leone 1970; Cowan 1998; Cowan 1999), the most commonly used
and admitted is the model proposed by Baddeley. In one of his ﬁrst publication about
his model (Baddeley and Broadbent 1983), Baddeley proposed to divide the working
memory in three sub-components: the central executive, the phonological loop and the
visuospatial sketchpad. Later, he added a fourth component called the episodic buffer
(Baddeley and Hitch 2000). These four components and their interactions can be seen in
the Figure 2.1.
The central executive is a sort of general-purpose component, responsible for selection,
for decision and for coordinating the other sub-systems. Norman and Shallice proposed
that the central executive can be controlled at two levels (Norman and Shallice 1986).
For routines that don’t require to be particularly focused, the central executive is work-
ing on a "automatic" mode. However, for situations that require to take initiatives and
decisions, as a situation never experimented before a mechanism called the Supervisory
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Baddeley’s model of working memory
CENTRAL 
EXECUTIVE
EPISODIC BUFFER
PHONOLOGICAL 
LOOP
VISUOSPATIAL 
SKETCHPAD
Figure 2.1: Schematic representation of the working memory as deﬁned by Baddeley.
The plain lines represent the main interactions. The dotted lines represent weaker in-
teractions. The different representation of the central executive is motivated by the fact
that it is the coordinating system. Contrary to the other subsystems, it can’t be used as a
memory store, and it only deals with other working memory components (reproduced
from Baddeley 2007).
Attentional System is used.
The phonological loop deals with every acoustic stimuli, and is responsible for its stor-
age. This system can be divided itself into two sub-systems, a phonological input store
and an articulatory rehearsal process. The store ﬁrst purpose is speech perception as it
is assumed to be able to keep in memory just a few information, which will fade away
with time and interaction of new incoming information. But it can be transformed into
an active memory store, thanks to the rehearsal process. To keep the information a
longer time, rehearsal can be used to reactivate the trace. The visuospatial sketchpad
can be seen as a phonological loop, dealing with visual and spatial information instead
of the acoustical stimuli.
The episodic buffer is assumed to be a binding system between the other sub-systems of
the working memory and the long term memory, capable of holding multidimensional
traces, for example auditory and visual information. The term buffer refers to the fact
that it provides a storage system able to bind information from different coding system,
mixing information from perception and long term memory into a coherent element.
2.1.1 | Phonological loop
The ﬁrst experiments which assessed the phonological loop memory capacity were all
based on the same paradigm. A standard tone was played to the subject, and he has
to remember it. Then, a comparison tone was played after a certain delay, and the task
was to judge if the comparison tone was the same as the standard tone. During the
4
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Baddeley’s model of working memory
delay, the participant can be forced to hear distractors as tones (interpolated tones) or
to have a non musical related cognitive activity, as counting backward. With this proce-
dure, Bachem showed that discrimination score was decreasing with time, pointing out
that the phonological loop was subject to decay, which means that it loses information
with time (Bachem 1954). Only people with absolute pitch were able to keep the tone in
memory for a long duration, probably by using the transcription from pitch to chroma,
in other worlds from frequency perception (musical domain) to phonetic transcription
(verbal domain).
More than decay, it has been proved that the phonological loop is particularly impaired
by interference. Deutsch found that listeners with perfect pitch discrimination for short
delay (around 6s) between standard and comparison tones, started to make mistakes
when tones were interpolated between them (Deutsch 1970). Even if the subjects were
asked to ignore them, the pitch discrimination score was decreasing when the number of
interpolated tones was increasing, pointing out that the phonological loop was strongly
impaired by interference. The same results were found by asking people to pitch-match
a stimuli tone (to sing back a tone they just heard). Pitch-matching accuracy in people
able to sing in tune when asked to directly repeat a tone was poorer when they were
asked to sing it back after tone or noise interference (Estis et al. 2011). It was assumed
that this impairment was due to a memory loss in the phonological loop.
The interference strength is a function of many parameters. Rakowski obtained forget-
ting curves when the delay was ﬁlled with silence, cognitive activity (counting back-
ward in threes) or with tonal stimuli (Rakowski 1993). The forgetting curve for the
cognitive activity was decreasing faster than the one with silence, but the forgetting
curve decay was the fastest for the tonal interference. Therefore, remembering a tone
requires a cognitive activity, and it can be impaired by non musical related cognitive
activity, or non active listening of musical stimuli. The curves differences for these two
conditions point out that the phonological loop is the most impaired when the stimuli
are of the same nature. A cognitive activity using verbal stimuli have less effect on the
memory trace for tones than a passive listening of musical stimuli. This result supports
parallel processing of verbal and musical stimuli in the phonological loop. In other
experiments, Deutsch shew that pitch discrimination was boosted when one of the in-
terpolated tone was the same as the standard tone, and it was inhibited when one of
the interpolated tone was the same as the comparison tone (Deutsch 1972a). The results
are also slightly better when the interpolated tones and the target tones are played to
different ears, pointing out the fact that spatialization can be used as a cue to avoid in-
terference (Deutsch 1978). The frequency difference between the target tones and the
interpolated tones has also an impact on the pitch discrimination. If the interpolated
tones are all from the octave below or above the target tones, the pitch discrimination
5
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Baddeley’s model of working memory
score increases (Deutsch 1974). However, this effect is less strong if the interpolated
tones are taken randomly above and below, showing that there is an expectancy effect.
Other experiments (Semal and Demany 1991; Williamson et al. 2006) pointed out that
the memory for pitch was improved when the tones were far apart in frequency from
each other.
In a similar manner, the phonological loop is also able to remember timbre. The same
experiment with standard, comparison and interpolated tones has been replicated by
Starr and Pitt but with timbre discrimination instead of pitch discrimination (Starr and
Pitt 1997). The amount of memory impairment for timbre increases with the similar-
ity in timbre between the tones. However, the pitch similarity doesn’t affect the timbre
discrimination (Starr and Pitt 1997), as the timbre similarity doesn’t affect the pitch dis-
crimination (Semal and Demany 1991). These results suggest that timbre and pitch are
processed independently in the phonological loop. Semal provided further evidence
for an autonomous process of pitch (Semal and Demany 1993). In related experiments,
she found that the intensity and the amplitude envelope of the interpolated tones could
vary without affecting the discrimination score. In the same study, Semal found that
timbre can impaired the phonological loop for pitch in the case where the interpolated
tones have a dense spectrum in the vicinity of the target tones. This last result is in rela-
tion with the fact that pitch is more impaired when the tones are close from each other
(Semal and Demany 1991).
Some experiments performed with musical sequences instead of single tone (Williamson
et al. 2006; Gorin et al. 2018) proved that the phonological loop is also capable to hold
musical sequences, and not only individual tones. Finally, the processing of musical
stimuli by the phonological loop seems to be a domain speciﬁc processing. People suf-
fering from congenital amusia show a short-term memory deﬁcit for non-verbal but not
verbal sounds (Tillmann et al. 2009). They are unable to remember pitch or timbre se-
quence, but have normal result for verbal sequence, which show that verbal and musical
stimuli are proceed by different mechanism of the phonological loop.
2.1.2 | Visuospatial Sketchpad
Because all musical stimuli are processed by the phonological loop, the visuospatial
sketchpad, which is in charge of the spatial and visual stimuli is not a system directly
used in melody memory. However, it can be used in some strategies. The main one is in
relation with the contours. As the melody is playing, the tone height can decrease or in-
crease, and so it is possible to draw a line following the ascending or descending melody
structure: the contours. It is clear that they are a transcription of a musical information
(the frequency change) into a visual information (a line increasing and decreasing). In
6
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Baddeley’s model of working memory
his experiment, Vicario shew that using only the contour can be sufﬁcient in order to rec-
ognize a melody (Vicario 1983). He transformed all the musical interval of a melody by
applying a compression or extension ratio. For example, a ratio of 2 would mean that
every second (an interval of 200 cents, where cent refers to the logarithm measure of
music intervals, with 100 cents corresponding to one semi-tone) would become a major
third (an interval of 400 cents), every fourth (an interval of 500 cents) would become an
augmented sixth (an interval of 1 000 cents). The other way, the ratio can be lower than
one, which means that every interval is reduced. The participant task was to recognize
a well-known melody transformed with a ﬁxed ratio. Of course, the highest recognition
rate was for ratio equal to one (no modiﬁcation). For ratio higher than 1, the higher the
ratio, the poorer the recognition was. The opposite effect was observed for ratio lower
than 1. To get a melody recognition rate around 50%, an extension ratio of 2 has to be
applied, or the octave has to be reduced to a tone (ratio of 1:6). The information pro-
vided by the contour can be even more reduced (White 1958). In his experiment, White
set all the intervals to 1 semi-tones, keeping only the contour shape, and discarding the
relative frequency changes. Even with such a high distortion, subjects were still able to
recognize melody to some extent.
On the other hand, Deutsch found that people were not able to recognize a well-known
melody when all the tones were randomly picked between three different octaves, with
the chroma staying the same (e.g. B4 F4 G4 A4 becomes B5 F4 G3 A5) (Deutsch 1972b).
With this change, the contour was completely distorted, and the melody recognition
was based primarily on the rhythm. However, the contour distortion is not the only ex-
planation to give. In a musical context, tones separated by an integer multiple of octave
are labeled the same (same chroma), because their perception is similar. One evidence
of this octave equivalence effect is provided by people with absolute pitch, who can rec-
ognize the chroma but fail to recognize the height (Lockhead and Byrd 1981). In a latter
study, Deutsch argued that the disappearance of octave equivalence effects in melody
is probably the main reason of the results she got in her experiment of 1972 (Deutsch
1983). Therefore, even though the visuospatial sketchpad can be of an help in melody
memory and recognition, its importance should not be overestimated compare to the
one of the other working memory components.
2.1.3 | Episodic Buffer
The episodic buffer is assumed to be a binding system between the long term memory
and the working memory. During any musical task, it will bind the information stored
in the working memory with extra information and tools related to musical knowledge
stored in the long term memory. This extra data can be used to improve musical pro-
7
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Baddeley’s model of working memory
cessing of the stimuli, but can also change the perception of some musical features, as
the pitch or the timbre.
As Demany and Semal resumed in their review, perception is usually a consequence
of memory in the case of the auditory system (Semal and Demany 2008). This point
is highly correlated with Gestalt Theory, which explains why in the case of perception
"the whole is more than the sum of the parts". In their book, Retzel, Lerdahl and Jack-
endoff developed a model for the rules which are used for the perceptual organizing
music (Retzel et al. 1985). In a melody, the tones are mainly grouped by proximity
(i.e. frequency proximity), similarity (i.e. same timbre) and continuity (i.e. descending
melody). The tonal context has also a big inﬂuence, by creating expectancy. Krumhansl
and Kessler used a probe tone experiment, where they asked subject to rate tone con-
sonance in a musical key (Krumhansl and Kessler 1982). Then, they have been able to
draw a key proﬁle, where each tone has a strength, depending on how consonant it
sounds in the key. Because some tones are more attractive than others, melodies are
expected to be concluded by one of this strong tone.
In the long term memory, it has also been shown that in the case of melody, pitch are
more stored in a relative way than in an absolute one (Trainor and Unrau 2012; Schellen-
berg and Habashi 2015), even for 6-months young infants (Plantinga and Trainor 2005).
Even people with absolute ear for pitch who are able to store the chroma in their long
term memory have troubles to keep in memory the tone height (Bachem 1954).
Another aspect related to the episodic buffer and the long term memory is the musi-
cal practice. It is not surprising to observe that musicians show better auditory system
capacity when presented with musical stimuli. Brattico and Naatanen found that the au-
ditory system of musicians reacts faster that the one of non-musicians when presented
with an unexpected tone (Brattico et al. 2001). Fujioka et al. presented to subjects a stan-
dard melody, and 20% of the time this melody contained a deviant tone. They shew that
musicians have a faster automatic answer to change in the pitch structure of melodies
(Fujioka et al. 2004). Kalakoski focused on the visual representation of musical notes.
She found that musicians recall better the musical pattern, even thought the presenta-
tion was only visual, and so processed by the visuospatial sketchpad. This suggested
that musicians were able to use a better strategy, probably merging visual representa-
tion with a musical representation they were creating (Kalakoski 2007). Finally Pallesen
demonstrated that the better scores obtained by musicians in musical tasks rely on their
capacity to exert sustained cognitive control (Pallesen et al. 2010). All these behavioral
and neurological ﬁndings can be used to explain why musicians perform better at musi-
cal tasks, as pitch discrimination, pitch memory, and pitch masking (Weaver et al. 2017)
8
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Background
2.1. Baddeley’s model of working memory
2.1.4 | Central Executive
In the Baddeley’s model of working memory, the central executive is responsible for
coordinating the other subsystems, but also for decision. This decision judgement is a
main concern in a musical context. It is going to be used to judge if the tones are dif-
ferent, if the pitch is increasing or decreasing, if the timbre changes... (Deutsch 1970;
Rakowski 1993; Starr and Pitt 1997). Therefore, in every pitch discrimination task, the
central executive has a main role because it is responsible for the ﬁnal answer (same
or different). Wickelgren introduced two alternatives for pitch decision judgement: a
same-different one, and a higher-lower one (Wickelgren 1969). The ﬁrst one is called
similarity dimension and is unsigned, while the second one is signed and called the
pitch-difference dimension. He performed experiment with comparison of a standard
tone and a comparison tone played after interpolated tones, in a Same-Different task
(classic pitch discrimination task) or a Higher-Same-Lower task. He found that the fa-
miliarity dimension was primarily used, and this process is described by the criterion
decision rule. The pitch-difference dimension is only used in the Higher-Same-Lower
task, once the Comparison and Standard tones have been judged as being different.
However, this model doesn’t say anything about the context, as the musical key.
To take account of this parameter, Krumhans introduced the notion of contextual princi-
ples of tonal relation (Krumhansl 1990). This notion is an extension applied in a musical
context of the similarity dimension deﬁned by Wickelgren. On one of his experiment he
compared the recognition rate of tones induced in a musical context. The subject task
was to judge on a scale from 1 to 6, with 1 corresponding to completely sure the same
and 6 corresponding to completely sure different, the perceptual difference between a
standard and comparison tone. These tones were always the same within a melody, but
this information wasn’t given to the subject. The 8 interpolated tones were picked so
they suggest the C major key. The major ﬁnding was that the tones with the highest
tonal hierarchy were judged as being more similar (Krumhansl and Kessler 1982). This
higher result might be explained by a stronger trace in the phonological loop, but also a
better pitch representation of these tones, which leads to less uncertainty. Therefore, it
is not surprising that melody context improves pitch discrimination. In his experiment,
Warrier asked people to judge the sameness on a scale from 0 (same) to 3 (different) of
two consecutive tones played after a musical sequence ﬁnishing by the standard tone
(Warrier and Zatorre 2002). The comparison tone was played right away, with a cent
deviation in the range 0-52 and the same or a different timbre. When the two tones had
the same timbre, introducing a melody context decreased the just noticeable difference
from 52 cents to 35 cents. When the timbre was different, introducing a melody context
improved to notice the frequency deviation. In overall, the melodic context improved
9
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2. Background 2.2. The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduction of vocal stimuli
the pitch discrimination capacities.
The other principal parameter in a pitch-discrimination task is the stimuli timbre. In the
same experiment, Warrier found that changing the timbre between the standard and
the comparison tone produces a higher perception difference, no matter the cent de-
viation (Warrier and Zatorre 2002). Even when the frequency of the two target tones
was the same, a change in the timbre was enough to induce the perception of a change
in the pitch. Three levels of timbre differences were possible during the experiment:
same timbre, small difference, and large difference. The uncertainty of the answer was
the highest when the the timbre difference was the highest. In a previous experiment,
Pitt found that it was mainly non-musicians who were disturbed by a change in the
timbre (Pitt 1994). He pointed out that for this group, a change of timbre was also inter-
preted as a change of pitch. More surprising, the reciprocal effect exists. Which means
that a change of pitch can induce the sensation of a change of timbre, even though this
effect is shallow. In an experiment performed recently, Caruso had a particular focus
to control for parametrical variations (Caruso and Balaban 2014). Subjects were asked
to judge pitch and timbre similarity of stimuli manipulated along this two dimensions.
The main ﬁnding is that these dimensions are not perceptually orthogonal to each other.
This result has been conﬁrmed by Allen and Oxenham, who found signiﬁcant percep-
tual interference between pitch and timbre, measured by its spectral centroid (Allen and
J Oxenham 2014). Moreover, even if musicians had better results, they were showing
similar interference effects. These ﬁndings show that human hearing system (including
auditory working memory) is not able to perfectly segregate the two orthogonal com-
ponents that are pitch and timbre. Finally, timbre can also affect the perception of a tone
as being in tune or out of tune. For the same tuning deviation, vocal tones are perceived
as more accurate than synthesized tones (Hutchins and Peretz 2012).
2.2 | The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduc-
tion of vocal stimuli
In many species, an enhanced attention has been found when it comes to hear con-
speciﬁc voices. The particular attention given to voices coming from same species has
been found in animals as marmots (Blumstein et al. 2004). The animals show a stronger
response when they hear voices from reliable alarm callers, which mean they are able to
identify the caller just by its voice. In a study about sciurid rodents, it has been found
that the group size explained over 88% of the individuality variation in vocal specie fea-
tures. This higher variation in vocal individuality shows the importance of being able
to discriminate a character just by its voice (Pollard and Blumstein 2011). In a review,
10
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Background 2.2. The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduction of vocal stimuli
Perrodin et al. pointed out that temporal voice areas have been found in primates, in
dogs and ﬁnally in healthy humans (Perrodin et al. 2015). Preferences for vocal stim-
uli have been study in human newborns by Ecklund-Flores and Turkewitz 1996. It has
been shown that female speech sounds produce a higher response than other sound
stimuli. This preference is even stronger when newborns hear the voice from their own
mother (Decasper and Fifer 1980). This higher answer can be explained by the fact that
some areas in human auditory cortex are speciﬁc to voice stimuli (Belin et al. 2000), and
an enhanced cognitive activity is noticed when hearing vocal stimuli (Levy et al. 2003).
This higher cognitive control can be used to proceed speech, but also extract informa-
tion about the speaker, as its identity (Van Dommelen 1990). The same way there is
evidences for an early process of musical stimuli in musicians, there is evidences for a
rapid brain discrimination of human voice in everyone (Charest et al. 2009; Stavropou-
los and Carver 2016). This sensory capacity is even noticed in people suffering from
attentional deﬁcit to voices, as the one suffering from autism spectrum disorders (Lin
et al. 2016), which suggested that it is a strong biological process.
But when it comes to music, human vocal sounds have strong advantages. The ﬁrst
study to assess the effect of hearing a human voice on a musical task is probably Moore.
In his experiment, he performed both a pitch discrimination and a pitch matching task
(Moore et al. 2008). The tones were created using three possible timbre: the partici-
pant’s own voice, a neutral female voice, and a non-vocal complex tone. Even though
the pitch discrimination didn’t show any difference between all the stimuli, the pitch
matching results were statistically signiﬁcant, with the participants’ own voice being
the easiest timbre. No statistically difference was found for the difference of the female
voice and the nonvocal tones. In a complementary study, Leveque succeed to ﬁnd a
difference between vocal and non vocal tones in a pitch matching task (Lévêque et al.
2012). She pointed out that only poor singers were helped by the human model, the
more participants had trouble to sing in tune, the more they improved with the vocal
stimuli. Hutchins and Peretz reproduced the previous experiment with participants’
own voice instead of a random vocal sound (Hutchins and Peretz 2012). Once again,
non-musicians were better to pitch match their own voice. For her pitch matching task,
Granot asked her participants to sing intervals instead of single tone (Granot et al. 2013),
supported by the encoding in the long term memory of interval and not absolute pitch
(Trainor and Unrau 2012; Schellenberg and Habashi 2015). She used a piano and a
professional singer, played both in live or with a recording. If the activation of the mir-
ror system was an explication to the better performance with vocal sound, a live voice
should increase the stimulation of this system even more, producing a better response.
However, even though the pitch matching accuracy was better for voice compare to pi-
ano, the advantage of live voice over recorded voice was only partially supported. Once
11
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 2. Background 2.2. The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduction of vocal stimuli
again, participants with the poorest results had the highest beneﬁt of the vocal stimuli.
In a completely different experiment, Weiss assess the memory for melody played with
different timbres (Weiss et al. 2012). Subjects had to listen to a ﬁrst set of unfamiliar folk
melodies played with familiar timbres (piano and voice) or unfamiliar timbres (bandjo
and marimba). Then they had to listen to a second set, composed of half new melodies
and half previous melodies, still played with the same timbre. Their task was to rec-
ognize if the melody was played in both sets. Only melody presented vocally were
remembered better.
Most of the previous results can be explained by a physiological point of view. Dur-
ing voice production, the early pitch-shift response, an automatic feedback control loop
of the vocal system, is activated. Burnett and Larson found that modifying the auditory
feedback during production changes the early pitch-shift response (Burnett and Larson
2002). Then, this system might help to correctly pitch match the target tone when its
timber is participant’s own voice. The higher cognitive activity induced by con-speciﬁc
signals is supported by other researches on the auditory system. For example, when
voice has stronger emotional expression, it has been shown that participants have an
enhanced cognitive activity (Schirmer et al. 2005). In a relatively similar way, opposite-
sex voices are processed with a speciﬁc mechanism, which may reﬂect emotion (Li et al.
2014). This enhanced arousal state is also induced by vocal music (Weiss et al. 2016).
Finally, Agus et al. investigated the reaction time to recognize the timbre of a stimuli.
They found that the timbre with the fastest reaction time and the highest accuracy re-
sponse was the voice (Agus et al. 2012).
The advantage might also be explained by purely acoustic properties. If the stimuli
spectrum is closed to the subject’s voice spectrum, it will be easier for him to reproduce
the pitch. In the case of self pitch matching, the timbre of the target is the same as the
participant’s one. Therefore, the only dimension the participant will be tempted to vary
will be the pitch, as any timbre variation will give the feeling to have a poorest pitch-
match (if one can assumed that the participant used a natural voice for the recording and
for the pitch matching). This own-voice advantage can be extended with a softer effect
to any other voice, because two voices will be more likely to have a close spectrum than
a voice with any other instrument. Yarbrough et al. found that children were better at
matching a female voice than male voice, because their tessitura (their confortable vocal
range) is closer from this gender, and so have more similarities (Yarbrough et al. 1991).
In a similar way, Watts and Hall found that female participants have the best results in
a pitch matching task when they are matching a female voice (Watts and Hall 2008).
Willson argued for an isomorphism between action and perception which would en-
hance processing (Wilson 2001). From this point of view, the closer the stimuli and par-
12
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Background 2.2. The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduction of vocal stimuli
ticipant spectrum, the better the reproduction. In a latter work, she described the top
down effect induced by vocal stimuli (Wilson and Knoblich 2013). As motor activation
can feedback into perceptual processing, a sound with a timbre close to participant’s
should improve musical capacities. This last point is also related to the mirror system,
which is another possible explanation for the better results with vocal stimuli. Even
though the existence of mirror neurons in human have not been yet formally demon-
strated by neuroscientists, there is stronger and stronger evidence in favour (Ferrari
and Coudé 2017). These neurons have been ﬁnd in all apes, and behavioural studies are
supporting their presence in humans. These specialized neurons have two functions:
comprehension and imitation of action proceed by other humans. One possible appli-
cation of these neurons can be ﬁnd in an experiment conducted by Pardo. She found
that talkers engaged in a conversation have a tendency to match their prosody (Pardo
2006). Leveque gave as a potential explanation of her result the effect of theses neurons.
In a pitch matching task, hearing a human stimuli should activate the mirror network,
and so it will be easier to reproduce the tone heard (Lévêque et al. 2012). Finally, Weiss
advanced a deeper memory processing to explain the better memorization of the vocal
melodies. He based his argument on the levels of processing deﬁned by Craik (Craik
and Lockhart 1972). From this point of view, human stimuli are deeply engraved in the
memory because of their biological relevance.
One main effect about vocal stimuli and its perception remains to be discussed: the vo-
cal generosity effect. Hutchins and Peretz found that subjects tend to be more ﬂexible
for voice out of tune compare to other stimuli (Hutchins and Peretz 2012). The partic-
ipants were asked to judge if a comparison tone was different from a standard tone,
both played with the same timbre. Vocal recordings and synthesized tones were used
for the timbre. The deviation between the two tones could range from 0 to 100 cents. A
signiﬁcant difference has been observed for the curves of voice and synthesized tone.
The proportion of tones judged as being out of tune is increasing way faster for the syn-
thesized tone. Even though musicians performed better at the task, the same effect was
observed for this group, which means that the lax criterion used for the voice doesn’t
disappear with practice. This result was in agreement with a previous experiment which
found that pitch discrimination was poorer for vocal stimuli compared to instrumental
or synthesized tones (Lévêque et al. 2012). To further investigate this effect, Hutchins
and Peretz asked participants to judge a tone induced in a musical context as being in
tune or out of tune. Even though an in/out-of tune task is slightly different by nature
of a pitch discrimination task, both tasks can be seen as equivalent (Warrier and Zatorre
2002). When the tone was played by a violin, participants were better at out-of tune
recognition compared to when the tone was sung. More important, even if musicians
performed better on average, both musicians and non-musicians shew evidence for the
13
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 2. Background 2.2. The speciﬁc aspects of perception and reproduction of vocal stimuli
vocal generosity effect (Hutchins et al. 2014). Up to this effect, one can also mention
two artefacts strongly linked with vocal production: the vibrato and the scoops (see
below for an explanation of these artefacts). Usually, vibrato are more present in vocal
stimuli than other instruments (Figure 2.2b). Even if the pitch of the tone with vibrato
is perceived as the same of the tone without vibrato (Shonle and Horan 1980), Van Be-
souw et al. proved that vibrato can increased up to 10 cents the range within the one
tones are judged as being in tune (Van Besouw et al. 2008). The scoops, deﬁned as the
rapid change of tune during the on-set and off-set (Figure 2.2c) have also an effect on
pitch perception (Larrouy-Maestri and Pfordresher 2018). The perceived pitch will be
the average across time of the instantaneous pitch, and therefore scoops can alter pitch-
judgement. For all these reasons, pitch discrimination for vocal tones is a more complex
task than pitch discrimination for tones played with other timbres.
Vocal artefacts
The Figure 2.2 shows a representation of the two main artefacts related to vocal pro-
duction: the scoops and the vibrato. The same melody is represented with any artifact
(a), with vibrato (b), with scoops (c) or with both scoops and vibrato (d). The melody
Time
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
MIDI TONE
(a)
Time
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
MIDI TONE
(b)
Time
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
MIDI TONE
(c)
Time
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
MIDI TONE
(d)
Figure 2.2: Visual representation of the same melody played with any artifact (a), with vibrato (b), with scoops
(c) or with both scoops and vibrato (d). The y-axis represents the midi tone (i.e. pitch height).
14
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Background
2.3. Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
without the artifacts have stable pitch for every tone, and the transition between them
is instantaneous. This is more likely to represent the melody played by an instrument
as piano, with discrete pitch representation (the keys) and no possibility for the instru-
mentalist to change the pitch during production. The melody b still has an instanta-
neous pitch change, but the tones are played with vibrato. The pitch has a sinusoidal
change around the midi note. One can noticed that the vibrato has two main parame-
ters: an amplitude and a period. There is no correlation between these parameters and
the tone height. The scoops are represented in the bottom-left corner of the ﬁgure. They
correspond of the transient pitch during the tone onset and offset. As the vibrato, they
have two main parameters: the amplitude and the length. Finally, the last Sub-ﬁgure
d shows the effect of vibrato and scoop both together. This plot is the most likely to
represent a vocal melody, as human voice can’t change instantaneously, what creates
scoops. The attenuation/suppression of these scoops during pitch correction computed
by audio processor software is one of the main reason of the "autotune" effect, and the
robotic voice it creates. For many reasons (change of tension in the vocal folds, auditory
feedback...) vibrato can’t be completely absent in vocal production.
2.3 | Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
To summarize the speciﬁc features of vocal stimuli, one can say that they are offering
a larger frequency range within the one they would be judged as in tune (larger crite-
rion used by the central executive), they are easier to reproduce for inaccurate singers
(better sensorimotor control), and they are offering a deeper engraving of melody into
the memory. However, none of the previous experiment really assessed the effect of the
voice on the phonological loop. It is obvious that the phonological loop is used during
pitch discrimination and pitch matching tasks. However, other aspects as pitch discrim-
ination or motor control capacities are also assessed during these tasks. Moreover, there
is no possibility to dissociate the impact of these effects on the result from the impact of
the vocal stimuli on the phonological loop. The same problem remains in the task used
by Weiss. First, the phonological loop is just a transitional step before the trace of the
melody enters the long term memory. So the effect of vocal stimuli on the phonologi-
cal loop can’t be directly assess. An other argument is supported by the fact that being
able to recognize a melody when heard for the second time doesn’t require to be able to
perfectly remember the structure of the melody (i.e the intervals, the rhythmical struc-
ture...). Other characteristics as the style, the voice speciﬁc features, artifacts on some
tones... are more likely to be used for melody recognition.
Baddeley and Williamson have been the ﬁrst to really assess the capacity of the phono-
15
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Background
2.3. Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
logical loop with musical sequences (Williamson et al. 2006). They played melodies of
different length, created with three possible tones. The participant’s task was to indicate
if the ﬁrst tone was the lowest, the highest or the tone of the middle. Then repeat it for
every tone. Even if they got a lot of promising results which supported the existence
of a phonological loop for tone sequences sharing some properties with the phonolog-
ical loop for words sequences (primacy/recency effect, similarity impairment effect),
one criticism can be expressed. By using only three tones, there is a high chance that
participants are going to store information in the visuospatial sketchpad with a visual
representation, or even in the verbal domain with the labels "low", "middle", "high".
This is enhanced by the fact that subjects were provided with an answer sheet where
they had to choose one of these labels for every tone. Therefore, it might be that some of
the effects they observed were due to a memorization based on these three subsystems.
Hypothesis
Even though there is no evidence in favor of an enhanced phonological loop processing
for vocal stimuli, these lasts have been proved to trigger many speciﬁc features, and
some of them would be very useful in a rehearsal process. One can think that the sub-
vocal activity would be enhanced with a vocal melody, as it is easier to pitch-match it,
and so to reproduce it. An other argument could be the isomorphism between action
and perception described by Willson, and the mirror neurons system.
The present study tested the effect of the voice on the phonological loop. The research
main hypothesis was that musical sequences played with a vocal timbre would be better
remembered than the musical sequences played with a classic instrument. Two related-
hypothesis were also investigated. The ﬁrst was that the beneﬁt of a vocal stimuli would
be even higher when the timbre is our own voice. The second was that musical se-
quences are better remembered when they are played at a frequency range that match
participant’s tessitura. One additional argument for this last hypothesis comes from
the research of Murry and Zwirner who found that people are the most accurate and
have the fastest onset in a pitch-matching task when the tone is at the middle of their
tessitura, and they have more and more troubles to be in tune when the frequency gets
distant from this point (Murry and Zwirner 1991).
To test these hypothesis, the serial order short term memory task for musical stimuli has
been performed. Usually, this task is performed with verbal or spatial stimuli (Hurl-
stone et al. 2014). This task has been used with musical stimuli for the ﬁrst time by
Gorin et al., who found that the task is feasible even for non-musicians (Gorin et al.
2018). While Gorin et al. tried to ﬁnd similarities and differences for verbal and musical
16
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Background
2.3. Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
stimuli, here the focus was on the timbre of the musical stimuli. As the main hypothesis
is about the effect of vocal stimuli on the phonological loop, two timbres were needed:
a voice and an instrument (here a piano). They were both played at a frequency corre-
sponding to the participant’s tessitura. The choice of tones played by real instrument
instead of synthesized tones is supported by the fact that these last are low in biological
signiﬁcance. In their study, Lockhead and Byrd found that subjects with absolute pitch
were 99% accurate in recognizing the pitch of a piano tone, while this accuracy dropped
to 58% with pure sine tones (Lockhead and Byrd 1981). To test the hypothesis about
the effect of hearing our own voice, every participant’s voice was recorded to add this
timbre in the procedure. To investigate the last hypothesis, a voice from the opposite
gender was added, which means that female had a lower voice for this condition, while
male had a higher voice. Finally, a last timbre was added. Another piano, but played at
the same frequency range of the voice of the other gender.
Table 2.1: This table summarized the effects included in every condition. The abbrevia-
tions for the conditions are OV for Own Voice, PI for Piano In the paticipant’s tessitura,
PO for Piano Out of the paticipant’s tessitura, VI for Voice In the paticipant’s tessitura
and VO for Voice Out of the paticipant’s tessitura. The labels for the effects are IN for
a timbre IN the paticipant’s tessitura, VOICE when the timbre is vocal and OWN when
the timbre has been recorded from the participant. VOICE can include a sub-effect called
Spectrum, which means that the spectrum of the stimuli is close from participant’s voice
spectrum.
Condition
OV
PI
PO
VI
VO
Effects
IN



VOICE



(Spectum)
()
()
OWN

The different conditions with the corresponding effects they include are summarized
in the Table 2.1 The accuracy score for the conditions PI (piano in the participant’s tes-
situra) and VI (voice in the paticipant’s tessitura) can be compared to assess the effect
of the voice and test the ﬁrst hypothesis. The same can be done with the scores of the
conditions PO (piano out of the participant’s tessitura) and VO (voice out of the patici-
pant’s tessitura). It might be possible that the differences for these two pairs (PI/VI and
PO/VO) are different because nothing guarantee that the effects are additive. It might
be that there is some interactions (e.g. a different range induces a change of response
only when the stimuli is the voice), but the sign of the difference should be the same.
The results for the condition OV (own voice) and the condition VI can be compared to
see if there is any effect of the own voice. To test the last hypothesis about the tessi-
17
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Background
2.3. Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
tura, VI can be compared with VO, and PI with PO. Once again, these differences might
not be equal. For example, it might be that the voice beneﬁts more than the piano to
be in the participant’s tessitura, because it also has a close spectrum with participant’s
voice. Indeed, the effect of the voice can be divided into two sub-effect: the effect of the
voice per se, related to con-speciﬁc signals, and the effect of the "Spectrum" related to
acoustics properties that should facilitates the reproduction. All voices should beneﬁts
from the con-speciﬁc advantage, while only voice in the participant’s tessitura should
beneﬁts from the acoustics properties. If the difference between VI and PI is higher than
the difference between VO and PO, an explanation could be the extra effect of a close
spectrum.
Serial order task and the phonological loop
As explained previously, most of the tasks used by former studies were not appropriate
to assess the effect of the timbre on the phonological loop. The task used here is the
short term memory task for serial order, which has been used by Baddeley and Hurl-
stone to assess phonological loop capacities. Participants are given short sequences of
verbal or visual items, and they have to recall them in order (Hurlstone et al. 2014). This
protocol has been used for the ﬁrst time with musical stimuli by Gorin et al. They found
that auditory working memory for musical stimuli has a lot of similarities with the one
for verbal stimuli, but suggest some domain-speciﬁc effect (Gorin et al. 2018). The same
task has been used here to assess phonological loop with different timbres.
The main beneﬁt of this procedure comes from the fact that it overcomes the problem
linked with pitch perception of the voice. The perceptual distance as theorized by Wick-
elgren (Wickelgren 1969) between a tone A and its second presentation A’ will probably
be smaller in the case of a vocal stimuli than in the case of an instrumental stimuli. This
effect is represented on the Figure 2.3. One can see that the timbre can affect the pitch
internal representation. For some timbres, the internal representation is broader, and so
the pitch discrimination can be harder due to the overlapping between the curves. So if
one is investigating the strength of the trace in the phonological loop with interference
in a pitch discrimination task, the effect of interference will be mixed and indivisible
from the effect of the timbre on the pitch perception. However, in the task proposed by
Gorin et al., the effect of perceptual distance differences for timbre disappear (as long as
the intervals between the tones are large enough, e.g. at least one semi-tone). Let’s take
the simple case of a melody composed out of two tones A and B, separated by at least
one semi tone. No matter the timbre, the perceptual distance between A and its sec-
ond presentation A’ will always be smaller than the perceptual distance between A and
the second presentation of B (B’). Therefore, to minimize the sum of the perceptual dis-
18
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Background
2.3. Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
Pitch Perception
Pitch Strength
Timbre A
Timbre B
Figure 2.3: The pitch internal representation of two tones, played with two different
timbres. The x-axis represents the pitch perception of the tone, and the y-axis the relative
strength associated with this perception. One can see that the Timbre A has a broader
internal representation, so the overlapping between the two curves is higher than the
overlapping for the Timbre B. Then, in a pitch discrimination task, Timbre A will suffer
from poorer results. In the experiment, Timbre A would more likely represents the vocal
conditions, and Timbre B the piano conditions.
tances, the participant will have to associate A with A’, and B with B’. This minimization
task is represented in the Figure 2.4. For the timbre with the broad internal representa-
tion, there is a huge overlapping between the internal representation of different tones
(e.g. Tone A and B) that does not exist for the other timbre. In a pitch discrimination
task, these two timbres would give different results. In the serial order task, partici-
pants have to match deteriorated presentations of the tones with recent presentations.
No matter the internal pitch representation width, the Deteriorated/Recent pairs asso-
ciation that minimize the sum of perceptual distances remains the same. Finally, the
minimization task depends only on the capacity to remember the pitch perception of
every tone, and no more on the capacity to segregate two tones.
Besides the effect of the timbre, the serial order task offers the opportunity to investigate
some properties of the phonological loop for musical components. It is well established
that for verbal stimuli, the response accuracy in function of the position has a U-shape
(Cowan et al. 2002). The ﬁrst stimuli are better remember because participants have time
to rehearse them a lot of time before the phonological loop started to be overﬂowed. This
is the primacy effect. The last stimuli beneﬁt from the recency effect. Because they have
been the last, they are not suffering from a lot of interference created by new stimuli.
19
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 2. Background
2.3. Motivation for the present study and hypothesis
Pitch Perception
Pitch Strength
Deteriorated presentation
Recent presentation
A
B
C
Position 1
Position 3
Position 2
(a)
Pitch Perception
Pitch Strength
Deteriorated presentation
Recent presentation
B
A
C
Position 1
Position 3
Position 2
(b)
Figure 2.4: Graphical representation of the task performed by the participants, with three tones.
The x-axis represents the pitch perception of the tone, and the y-axis the relative strength associated
with this perception. During the ﬁrst presentation, a pitch trace is going to be printed in the audi-
tory working memory. Because of many kind of disturbances (interferances, internal noise, decay...),
this internal representation will vary and the maximum can be shifted on the frequency dimension.
This deteriorated presentation is plotted in dot lines. To recreate the melody, participants rely on
this trace, and minimize the perceptual distances (maximize the overlapping) with the new presen-
tations. All other things being equal, one can see that no matter if the internal representation is
broad (2.4a) or narrow (2.4b), the association that maximizes the overlapping remains the same.
Regarding errors, one relevant function is the transposition gradient. It is deﬁned as
the distance between the (wrong) answer and the correct position. It has been shown
(Lewandowsky and Farrell 2008) that people tend to have high transposition value for
small distance, which means that when they are wrong their answer is close to its real
position. In their study, Gorin et al. found evidences for similar performances with mu-
sical stimuli (Gorin et al. 2018). To the best of our knowledge, no one tried to reproduce
their experiment, so it might be of an interest to see if the same effects are observed
here. Finally, the experimental design provides insights about the processing of musical
sequences. Gorin et al. mainly found arguments to support the use of domain-general
process, but the results also point out some additional domain-speciﬁc effects. The repli-
cation of the experiment with new parameters can provide new information about these
effects.
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER3
Methods
3.1 | Participants
Twenty three participants with different levels of musical expertise took part in the ex-
periment. Some of them were recruited from the participants Data Base of the hearing
department of DTU. The others were DTU students answering an advertisement. For
their participation, they were offered the possibility to receive a compensation. They
were normal hearing, not suffering from congenital amusia, and none of them reported
to have an absolute pitch ear. This last requirement was of a huge importance, because
people with absolute pitch would have been able to convert pitch into verbal domain
(e.g. 440Hz becomes A4), and another memory domain would have been assessed.
All participants provided informed consent and all experiments were approved by the
Science-Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference H-16036391).
One of the participant decided to quit the experiment during the session and will not be
included in further analysis.
The Participant mean age was 25.6 years (std=3.1; range:20-31). A not too extended
range is important because age has been proved to have an effect on pitch discrimina-
tion (He et al. 1998). The one used here is similar to the one chosen by Moore in his
work about pitch memory (Moore et al. 2007). The gender distribution was 5 females
and 17 males. Depending on their musical experience, the participants were divided
in two groups: experienced musicians or non-musicians. The ﬁrst assignment has been
performed based on a self-rating of musical level. The participants were asked to choose
one these categories: 1 = non-musician; 2 = music loving non-musician; 3 = amateur mu-
sician; 4 semiprofessional musician; 5 = professional musician. These categories are the
same as the one used by Law and Zentner 2016, and later by Gorin et al. 2018. This sub-
jective assignment has been proved to be a good criterion to segregate non-musicians
from musicians. Subjects choosing the ﬁrst or second category were assigned to the
group of non-musicians, and the subjects choosing the third, forth or ﬁfth category are
assigned to the group of musicians. Based on this criterion, the non-musicians group
was composed out of 14 participants, while the musicians group was composed out of 8
participants. In the musicians group, the mean years of practice was 11.1 years (std=3.4,
range=5-15). In the non-musicians group, the mean years of practice was 0.43 (std=0.94,
21
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2. Stimuli
range=0-3) with 11 participants who never practiced music (school excluded).
3.2 | Stimuli
3.2.1 | Melodies
The stimuli consisted in musical melodies composed out of 6 tones. The tones char-
acteristics were the same as the one used in the experiment performed by Gorin et al.
2018. They all lasted 300 ms, with a linear rise and fall of 10 ms. These 6 tones corre-
spond to the ﬁve tones of a major pentatonic key, plus the fundamental repeated at the
upper octave (Tones 1-3-5-8-10-13 in a musical writing). The choice of the pentatonic
key has been motivated by the results of Krumhansl and Kessler 1982, on the tone hier-
archy proﬁle. The pentatonic tones are the one with the highest "strength" in the major
key. Therefore, none of them will sound dissonant or absolutely "weaker" in the melody.
Another aspect is the musical distance between the tones of the melody. The closer the
frequency tone, the more interference they suffer from, as shown by Semal and Demany
1991 in a pitch discrimination task. Regarding musical sequences, it has been proved
by Williamson et al. (Williamson et al. 2006 Williamson et al. 2010) that the memory is
impaired when the different stimuli are very close in frequency. With a pentatonic key,
the possible intervals are equal to one tone (200 cents), or one tone and a semi tone (300
cents). These distances are large enough to avoid too large impairment, and do not vary
too much across tones. Even more important, these distances are way larger than the
distances induced by the vocal generosity effect. So it ensures that this effect does not
interfere in the task.
The melody was randomly picked between one of the 12 different patterns resumed in
the Table 3.1. As shown by Deutsch, repetition of tones interferes with their perception
(Deutsch 1972a). Therefore, each of these melodies are composed of the six different
tones, all played once. There is a pause of 30 ms between every tone, so it means that
the presentation was one tone every 330ms. This presentation rate is similar to the one
used in previous experiments as Gorin et al. 2018, and shown by Dowling as having a
slightly better recognition score (ref. Dowling et al. 2008). This can be explained by the
Gestal theory developped by Retzel et al. 1985. At this presentation rate, the tempo is
fast enough to create the grouping effect, but still slow enough to have time to hear the
different tones. The melody has been chosen 6 tones long to have a task realisable for
non-musicians, but still challenging enough for musicians to not perfectly performed,
as shown by the results from Williamson et al. 2006, Williamson et al. 2010, and Gorin
et al. 2018.
22
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2. Stimuli
The melodies have been created to all have the same musical contour, with three changes
of direction. Here, contour refers to the change of height in the melody. It can be seen as
a function increasing when the height of the next tone is higher, and decreasing when
the next tone is lower (in term of frequency). With three changes of direction, it means
that the melody is going down-up-down (↘↗↘for a more visual representation) or
the other way around, so up-down-up (↗↘↗). Three changes of direction has been
estimated by a pilot session to be a good trade off between a too simple task (e.g. zero
change, equivalent to an always increasing/decreasing melody) and a too demanding
task. This pre-selection ensures that the melody contour is a controlled factor.
Table 3.1: The 12 possible patterns. The number represents the tone height in the key
(1=lowest; 6=highest). The ﬁrst Tone column represents the tone played in ﬁrst position,
the second Tone column represents the tone played in second position and so on.
Pattern n
Tone
1
2
1
3
6
5
4
2
4
6
1
2
3
5
3
3
1
2
4
6
5
4
5
6
2
1
3
4
5
3
4
6
5
1
2
6
4
3
1
2
6
5
7
4
6
2
1
3
5
8
3
5
6
2
1
4
9
6
4
1
2
5
3
10
4
3
2
6
5
1
11
6
3
2
5
4
1
12
1
4
2
3
5
6
3.2.2 | Timbres
To play the melodies, four different timbres were used: a piano sound, a voice of a pro-
fessional female/male singer, and the voice of the participant himself. The piano sound
has been downloaded from the musical sample instruments provided by the University
of Iowa Electronic Music Studios (http://theremin.music.uiowa.edu/MISpiano.html).
They performed the recordings with single Neumann KM 84 cardioid condenser mi-
crophone with a sampling frequency of 44.1 kHz and a 16 bits resolution. The one
used in the experiment are the one played "mezzo forte". The piano tones are the only
one which the temporal envelope has not been ﬂattened, to keep the original piano
sound. The professional singers recording have been downloaded from the Singing
Voice Database provided by the Center for Research in Entertainment and Learning
(http://crel.calit2.net/projects/databases/svdb). The recordings were in WAVE
23
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.2. Stimuli
PCM format with the following characteristics: 44100 Hz; 16 bit; 1 channel (mono). No
information was provided about the microphone used. The vocal expression used was
the one called "Flat" and described as "Affectless. Consonants and vowels with same weight.
Minimizing melodic contour". However, the recording provided in this database are only
composed of the tones of the C major key. To create the other missing semi-tones, a
phase vocoder algorithm has been implemented on Matlab. This algorithm has been
inspired by the work of Dolson 1986 and Laroche and Dolson 1999.
For the last timbre, voice recording of the participants themselves have been performed
with a microphone shure SM58. The sampling frequency was 44.1kHz and the resolu-
tion was 16 bits. They were asked to sing at a distance from the microphone of around
one ﬁst, while standing up. The recording took place in the sound isolated booth used
during the full experiment. First, they were asked to sing a few tones, to ﬁnd a full
octave where they were comfortable. This full octave corresponds to a reduced range
of their tessitura. It means that they did not have to force on their voice to reach the
tone, which would have produced a non-natural sound. Because some of them were
uncomfortable with the idea of singing, it was told them that this recording was just
a preliminary task. In other words, it was necessary to record their voice for the "real"
experiment, but they were going to be evaluated only on the memory task. For the voice
recording procedure, the stimuli the participants had to sing back were the piano tones
mentioned above. They were played to them with an headphone, then they had to sing
them back. They started with the lowest tone, and the tones were increasing semitone
by semitone until they reached the octave. The participants were asked to sing back on
the syllabus "la" for more or less 1 second, to keep the same volume during the proce-
dure, and to avoid vibrato as much as possible. It was also told them that it is possible
to perform this task as many time as needed to have a recording good enough, and the
number of times they have to perform it will not affect the rest of the experiment. To
remove the effect of on-set and off-set change of pitch (i.e. scoops), the tones were re-
duced to 300ms, with a cut in the middle of the signal. The frequency was calculated by
computing a FFT on these 300ms weighted with a Hanning window. When they were
out of tune, the tone they sang was pitched back to the correct musical frequency of the
equal temperament tuning system. The signal processing used was the phase vocoder
algorithm mentioned above. If they missed one semi-tone, it was also possible to create
it with this algorithm. Finally, the same procedure was repeated, but with their own
voice as a stimuli, instead of the piano sound. At the end, every participants got their
voice recorded in two conditions: the piano matching, and the own-voice matching.
24
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3. Study Design
3.3 | Study Design
To fully automatized the procedure, an application has been created using the Matlab
app developer. The Figure 3.1 shows a screenshot of the application interface.
Figure 3.1: Screenshot of the Application Interface
On the upper part, there is 6 buttons named Tone 1 to Tone 6, corresponding to the 6
tones of the melody. They are sorted by frequency from the lowest to the highest and it
is possible to hear them by clicking on the button. This is repeatable how many times
the subject wants to. Just under the tone button, there is a spinner corresponding to the
tone position in the melody. It can only be ﬁtted with integers from 0 to 6. Initially, they
are all set to zero. It is the subject’s task to set a number here to recreate the melody. For
example, if he thinks that the tone 1 was played in the forth position, he has to enter a
4 in this slot. The button Reset is just here if the subject needs to reset all the Position
spinners to zero (and to ﬁx a Matlab bug, when the spinner gets out of control). At the
bottom, there is three bigger buttons. By cliking on Play, the subject has the chance to
hear the melody he created by ﬁlling up the Position spinners. The subject can use it
as many times he wants to. The Validate button is used when the subject wants to save
his answer. It can’t be clicked if two tones have the same position, or if at least one
tone has still 0 as position. Therefore, the subject is forced to give a unique answer for
every tones, even if he is not sure of the answer. Once it has been pressed, the answer
is saved and can’t be changed anymore, because the button is not activated anymore.
Pressing this button also reset all Position spinners to zero. The last button is used to
play the next melody to remember. When the subject feels ready, he can click on Next
and the new melody starts one second after. The Next button is no longer activated,
25
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.3. Study Design
while the Validate button becomes available. Therefore, the subject can only hear the
melody once. Then he has to give an answer, to click on Validate and the Next button
becomes available again.
The melody memory task was composed of the 12 melodies introduced earlier (see
the pattern Table 3.1), played with ﬁve different timbres: participant’s own voice, the
two professional singers, and a piano used twice: once it was matching participant’s
pitch range, the other it was played out of participant’s pitch range. Here, the partici-
pant’s pitch range represents the full octave the participant chose to sing. The same in
range/out of range was used for the professional singers. For the professional singer of
the participant’s gender the pitch range was matching participant’s range. For the pro-
fessional singer of the other gender and the piano out of range, the tones were shifted
one octave below when the participant was a female, and one octave higher when the
participant was a male. This octave shift was made to play tones the subject would not
be able to sing back, because they are out of his tessitura. This octave shift has been
chosen to ensure that the same musical key will be used for every presentations. By in-
troducing a constant musical key, it was believed that the task would be slightly easier.
Also, changing the key from presentation to presentation can be very misleading. For
example, if the melody starts with the third of the new key, which happens to be the
fundamental of the previous key, people might not noticed the change of key straight
away and then feel trapped. This key confusion can even mislead Music Information
Retrieval algorithms (Chai and Vercoe 2005), which fail to notice key changes when the
modulation is to the dominant (a ﬁfth higher) or sub-dominant key (a fourth lower).
To take account of the training effect, the 60 presentations were pseudo-randomized
across timbres and patterns. It has been ensured that the same melody can not be played
twice in a row, and the same timbre can not be used twice in a row. First, the timbre or-
der was randomized between the 5 conditions, and kept constant along the procedure.
In other words, if the ﬁrst timbre was participant’s voice, then presentations 1; 6; 11;
16... were played with the timbre corresponding to the participant’s voice. Then the
melodies were randomized, with the condition that the same melody can’t be played
twice in a row (and that all melodies are played once and only once with all timbres).
It might be that some unintentional artifact (a click, a tone more noisy...) has been
recorded during the preliminary task. To prevent the participant using it as a clue,
the tones recorded in the two conditions of the preliminary task were used. The ﬁrst
set was used to play the melody to remember (button Next). The other set was used
for the melody reconstruction (buttons Tone and button Play). Then, if an artifact is
present during the melody presentation, this artifact can not be used for the melody
reconstruction part.
26
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3. Methods
3.4. Procedure
3.4 | Procedure
The experiment took place in a sound isolated booth, and the stimuli were presented
binaurally with a Sennheiser HD 650 headphone. All tones were normalized to have the
same root mean square value. They were presented at 65 dB(A) SPL and were sampled
at 44.1 kHz.
The procedure has been inspired by Gorin et al. 2018, who found an innovative way
to adapt to musical stimuli the serial order short term memory task for verbal stimuli
performed by Majerus et al. 2008. The participant’s task was to recreate the melody he
heard with the help of an interface designed to be the simplest and intuitive possible.
Before the experiment really starts, the participant was introduced to the application
with a trial session, performed with the help of the experimenter. The ﬁrst melody was
just an increasing melody played at the piano, to be sure that the participant understood
the task. Then 5 melodies with increasing difﬁculties were played. The experimenter
was still in the booth to ensure that the subject understood how to use the application.
The trial session was also a chance for the participant to hear the different timbres used
during the experiment.
Two hints were also given during the trial session. First, after a click on Validate, the
timbre of the Tone buttons is uploaded and becomes the one which will be used for the
next melody. So if the participant wants, he can click on them to know the new timbre
and the tones that are going to compose the next melody. Second, participants were
informed that the important result was not if they were able to fully recreate the melody,
but how many correct tones they were able to ﬁnd back. This was necessary because
many of them thought they were not good enough for this task and were discouraged.
Of course, they were not told that the chance level was "only" one correct out of 6. At
the end of the trial session, the experimenter launched the real experiment. The subjects
were alone to perform the task. Before they started, they were told that it was important
they take the time they want to perform the task. Before the 21st and 41st melodies,
a message was displayed offering participants to take a break. They were free to take
it or not, to stay in the booth or not, with no time limitation. At the end of the task,
participants were offered the possibility to know their score during a debrieﬁng session.
The questions it was not possible to answer prior the experiment were explained, and
they were offered the opportunity to ask any complementary questions.
27
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER4
Results
4.1 | Musical experience and vocal accuracy
The purpose of the preliminary task was to record the participant’s voice. In the male
group, 14 participants chose to sing the midi tones 46 to 58 (A#2 to A#3), 2 chose the
midi tones 47 to 59 (B2 to B3) and 1 chose to sing between 48 to 60 (C3 to C4). In the
female group, 3 participants chose to sing the midi tones 57 to 69 (A3 to A4) and 2 chose
the midi tones 58 to 70 (A#3 to A#4). These results match previous studies, where par-
ticipants were asked to sing in the range 65-70 (F4 to A#4) for females and 53-58 (F3 to
A#3) for males (Rakowski 1993), or in the range 59-67 (B3 to G4) for females and 47-55
(B2 to G3) for males (Hutchins and Peretz 2012).
Even though the auto-evaluation of musical expertise has shown accurate results (Law
and Zentner 2016 and Gorin et al. 2018), a study conducted by Pfordresher and Steven
2007, showed that participants tend to underestimate their capacity to sing in tune. To
estimate the capacity to sing in tune, they used as criterion the capacity to reproduce a
tone with less than 100 cents deviation (1 cent corresponds to 1/100 of a semi-tone step,
on a logarithm scale). As an example, if the target tone was the midi tone 60, the subject
had to sing any frequency between the midi tone 59 and the midi tone 61 to be consid-
ered as "in-tune". This can be considered as a pretty lax criterion, which can explained
why some people considering themselves as bad singer have been included in the good
singers group.
In this experiment, on the top of the self-evaluation of musician level, an analysis on
the recordings has been performed to have a more objective way to attribute subjects
to groups. If they were able to sing all semi-tones of the chroma key with less than 50
cents difference, they were considered as good singers, no matter their musical practice.
This decision is supported by Estis et al. 2011, who showed that musically untrained
participants with accurate pitch matching have a better pitch memory than the other
untrained participants. In her experiment, all musicians were accurate singers because
they were professional singers. But some musicians without vocal practice can be in-
accurate singers. With this new criterion, 3 non-musicians were considered as accurate
singers, while 3 musicians were not accurate enough to be included in this group.
The experiment duration was not measured precisely, but some participants were way
29
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 4. Results
4.2. Data Analysis
longer than others. If the fastest have been able to perform the full experiment in less
than 1 hour, the average duration was around 2 hours, with a maximum of more than 3
hours for one participant.
4.2 | Data Analysis
The statistical analysis has been performed with the statistical software RStudio version
3.5.2 (2018-12-20). The libraries MASS, BAS and car have been imported to perform the
analysis. The different independent variables were: Timbre, Musician Level, Tone, and
Position. The dependent variables were the response accuracy and the transposition
gradient. They were calculated for one or several dependent factors. The variables are
summarized in the Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Description of data and data type used for the statistical analysis. In some
analysis, Musician Level is replaced by Accurate singer. This variable is also a binary,
equals to 1 when the subject is an accurate singer, 0 otherwise. Binary data is treated as
factors in R.
Variable name
Description
Data type
Timbre:
The timbre used to play the melody
Factor
Musician Level:
Non-musician (0) or Musician (1)
Binary
Tone:
The tone height in the musical key
Factor
Position:
The tone position in the musical sequence
Factor
Response accuracy:
Correct answer mean on melodies played with these factors
Numerical
(for factors)
Transposition gradient:
Relative distance errors on the factor dimension
Numerical
(for factor)
Response accuracy for a factor was calculated by averaging the number of correct an-
swers on presentations with this factor, where correct answers represent the number
of tones correctly answered per melody. For example, the response accuracy for tim-
bre was calculated by averaging the number of correct answers on every melody with
the same timbre. To calculate the transposition gradient for Position, the distance be-
tween the given answer and the correct answer was calculated for every wrong answer.
Then, the proportion of transposition for every distance was computed. To calculate the
transposition gradient for Tone, the same process was applied, but with the tone height
(ranging from 1 to 6) instead of the sequence position. To give an example, let’s take the
case when the melody is Tone 3-5-1-4-2-6 and the participant answer for the tone in ﬁrst
position is Tone 2. Then there is a transposition distance for Position equal to 4, because
the Tone 2 was supposed to be in 5th position (5-1=4), and there is a transposition for
30
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4. Results
4.3. Response accuracy for Timbre
Tone of 1, because the tone in ﬁrst position is Tone 3 (3-2=1).
Before performing further analysis, it has been checked that every participant was able
to perform the task, and that none of the result was only due to chance level. For every
response accuracy for Timbre, chance level (16,66%) has been removed. Then, for ev-
ery participant, the distribution of the score across the timbre has been compared to the
theoretical distribution centered on zero via a one-sample t-test. The range of p-value is
from 6e-4 to 6e-5, which means that none of the participant answered completely ran-
domly.
4.3 | Response accuracy for Timbre
The ﬁrst analysis assessed the effect of Timbre on the response accuracy.
A 2 × 5
mixed-effects repeated-measures analysis of variance type 2 (ANOVA II), with a two-
level between-participant factor (musicians vs.
non-musicians), a ﬁve-level within-
participant timbre factor (own voice, piano in the tessitura, piano out of the tessitura,
voice of the same gender, and voice of an other gender) and response accuracy for tim-
bre as dependent variable has been performed. As expected by the visualisation of the
boxplots Figure 4.1, the anova analysis does not show any signiﬁcant effect for timbre
(p-value=0.37) and its interaction (p-value=0.40). However, the musician expertise has
a signiﬁcant effect on the results (p-value=2.2e-3). The Mauchly Tests for Sphericity con-
ﬁrms that the assumption of sphericity has not been violated (p=0.68). The normality
assumption of the residuals was veriﬁed by the Shapiro-Wilk test (p-value=0.61). The
mean for the non-musicians group plotted Figure 4.1a shows a particularly constant
value across timbre. For the musician group, the mean score is higher for every timbre,
pointing out the better performance. Regarding the timbre variation, there is a slightly
better results for piano conditions (55% against 50% for the voice conditions). The scores
for both piano conditions have been merged, and the same has been done for all voice
conditions. A two sample student’s t-test gave a p-value of 0.23, so it is not possible to
conclude that the effect of piano is signiﬁcant.
Finally, when the musician level grouping was replaced by the accurate singer grouping,
the anova shown similar results (with accurate singers having better results than inac-
curate singers). This was clearly expected by comparing the curves of accurate/non ac-
curate singers Figure 4.1b, and the curves of musician/non-musicians Figure 4.1a which
look almost the same. In this model, the accurate singer effect was a little bit more sig-
niﬁcant (p-value=6.1e-4) than the musician effect in the previous model, even though
the average mean was a little bit lower for the ﬁrst group (51% correct for accurate
31
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Results
4.3. Response accuracy for Timbre
OV
PI
PO
VI
VO
Timbre
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
% correct
Musician
Non Musician
(a)
OV
PI
PO
VI
VO
Timbre
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
% correct
Accurate
Non Accurate
(b)
Figure 4.1: Boxplot for the response accuracy for the different timbres. Timbre labels
are: 1.’OV’ for Own Voice; 2.’PI’ for Piano In; 3.’PO’ for Piano Out; 4.’VI’ for Voice
In and 5.’VO’ for Voice Out. In the Figure 4.1a, the squares and diamonds represent
respectively the mean scores for the musicians group and the non-musicians group.
In the Figure 4.1b the dots and crosses represent respectively the mean scores for the
accurate singers group and the non-accurate singers group.
32
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Response accuracy for Position and Tone
singers, 52% correct for musicians). Finally, a t-test comparison of the non-musician but
accurate singers group (3 participants) and musician but non accurate singers group (3
participants) did not show any statistical difference on the response accuracy for timbre
(p-value=0.46). Which mean that participants who switched group had likely results.
4.4 | Response accuracy for Position and Tone
To assess the effect of Position and Tone, the score has been averaged across every tim-
bre and participant of the same level, keeping Tone and Position as parameters. The
boxplot for the result with Tone and Position as parameters can respectively be seen in
the Figures 4.2 and 4.3. For the Tone curve, one can see a U shape, with a high score for
Tone 1 and even higher for Tone 6. This shape is noticeable in the mean of every group,
even thought the ﬁrst group performed way better. For the Position curve, one can no-
ticed a slightly drop of performance for the tones of the middle (Tone 3 and 4), especially
for non-musicians. Because they have a similar median and variance, the Positions 1;
2; 5 and 6 have been merged together into the group called "Extremum" while the Posi-
tion 3 and 4 have been merged together into the group called "Middle". This grouping
is motivated by the primacy and recency effect for verbal stimuli (Glanzer and Cunitz
1965, Postman and Phillips 1965, Baddeley and Hitch 1977) and more recently for musi-
cal stimuli, as soon as the melody has at least 5 tones (Williamson et al. 2006, Gorin et al.
2018). However Gorin found a primacy effect only for the ﬁrst tone of the melody, and a
recency effect only for the last tone, while here it has been chosen to group the two ﬁrst
tones with the two last ones to reduce the complexity of the model.
A Three-way analyse of variance type 2 (ANOVA II) has been performed with response
accuracy for Position and Tone as dependent variable; musician Lvl, Tone height and
Position as between-subject factor. None of the factor interaction is statistically signiﬁ-
cant (p-value ∈[0.24;0.96]). This absence of interaction can be seen in the Figures 4.2 and
4.3, where the curves for musicians and non musicians have the same shape (Musican
Level/Tone interaction and Musician Level/Position interaction) . However, there is a
statistical evidence for the effect of the Position (p-value = 0.010), a stronger evidence for
the effect of the Musician experience (p-value=9.8e-7) and a extremely strong evidence
for the effect of the Tone (p-value<2.2e-16). The model coefﬁcients are shown in the Ta-
ble 4.2. The Estimated Std. column summarizes the effect of every factors level, and the
standard deviation associated with its can be seen in the Error column. It is possible to
see that the primacy and recency effects predict a score 8% (± 3 %) higher for tones in
position "Extremum". Finally, a Shapiro-Wilk test of normality conﬁrms that the resid-
33
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Results
4.4. Response accuracy for Position and Tone
1
2
3
4
5
6
Tone
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% correct
Musician
Non Musician
Figure 4.2: Boxplot for the response accuracy for the different Tones. The squares and
diamonds represent respectively the mean scores for the musician group and the non-
musician group.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
% correct
Musician
Non Musician
Figure 4.3: Boxplot for the response accuracy for the different Position. The squares
and diamonds represent respectively the mean scores for the musician group and the
non-musician group.
uals are normally distributed (p-value=0.24). A more detailed check of assumption can
be seen in the Appendix.
34
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Results
4.5. Transposition Gradient
Table 4.2: Summary of the coefﬁcient calculated by the Repeated Measure Anova type II
with response accuracy for Position and Tone as dependent variable; Tone, Position and
Level as between factor. Intercept corresponds at the Tone 1 played in an "Extremum"
Position (1; 2; 5 or 6) for a non-musician (Lvl1).
Estimate Std.
Error
t value
Pr(> |t|)
(Intercept)
0.45257
0.03502
12.925
< 2e-16
Tone 2
-0.10401
0.04454
-2.335
0.021010
Tone 3
-0.16173
0.04334
-3.731
0.000279
Tone 4
-0.12522
0.04387
-2.854
0.004991
Tone 5
-0.05459
0.04334
-1.259
0.210010
Tone 6
0.26449
0.04273
6.190
6.65e-09
PositionMiddle
-0.08146
0.03081
-2.644
0.009158
Lvl2
0.12941
0.02463
5.255
5.58e-07
4.5 | Transposition Gradient
For every participants, the transposition gradient has been calculated for the Tone dis-
tance and the Position distance. Then, the proportion of a transposition gradient only
due to random guessing has been simulated over 1e7 trials. A plot of the mean par-
ticipant results can be seen in the Figure 4.4. The Chance condition shows that with
random guessing, occurrence is a decreasing function of the distance. Therefore, it is
not surprising to notice the same tendency for every conditions. However, there is a
strong discrepancy for the transposition distance due to Position and Tone. While the
Position transposition gradient follows the one randomly simulated, the Tone transpo-
sition gradient shows a strong tendency toward small distances. The distribution of the
transposition distance does not ﬁt a normal distribution. To ﬁx this issue, a boxcox trans-
formation with a λ = 0.4 has been applied. An analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) has
been performed, with condition as categorical variable (Tone, Position, Random) and
transposition distance as a continuous variable (integer from 1 to 5). As expected, the
results of the ANCOVA pointed out that Distance is a signiﬁcant parameter (p-value <
2.2e-16). Condition is also signiﬁcant (p-value=1.765e-07), and its interaction with dis-
tance is highly signiﬁcant (p-value < 2.2e-16), pointing out that the slope of the transpo-
sition curve varies with the conditions. A Shapiro-Wilk test of normality conﬁrms that
the residuals are normally distributed (p-value=0.22). Once again, further explanation
can be found in the Appendix.
A post hoc analysis gave that the interaction between Distance and Position (the slope
of the curve) was not signiﬁcantly different from the interaction between Distance and
Chance (p-value = 0.69), contrary to the the interaction between Distance and Tone (p-
value=5e-5).
35
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Results
4.6. Complementary results
1
2
3
4
5
Transposition Distance
0
20
40
60
80
% Occurence
Tone
Pos
Chance
Figure 4.4: Transposition gradient for the mean participant Position,Tone and Chance
level.
4.6 | Complementary results
4.6.1 | The effect of recording quality
One of the issue related to the voice recording is the difference of sound quality across
the different participants. Depending on their capacity to have a clear and powerful
voice and their relative position with the microphone, the signal to noise ratio (SNR)
differs from participant to participant. Furthermore, the setting of the sound card has
been changed by other experimenters for their own experiment, so that some partici-
pants had a different setting before it has been set back to original setting. For all these
reasons, the noise level was different from participant to participant. This difference
was high enough to be clearly noticeable by a hearing comparison of the stimuli from
different participants. It might be possible that the difference of quality, as measured by
the SNR, had an impact on the results. For example, noise might have a masking effect
on the pitch (Malzan 1993), decreasing its perception. To assess the effect of SNR on the
results, it is of interest to investigate if they have any relation.
To compute the signal to noise ratio, the power of the signal was calculated during the
tones, corresponding to the sound power, and during the silence, corresponding to the
noise power. The ratio was calculated and log transformed to get a dB scale. The cal-
culated SNR ranges from 36dB to 56dB, so 20dB difference between the lowest and the
highest value, with a standard deviation of 5dB. Because this timbre was the only one to
have a different SNR for every participant, the SNR of the other timbres have not been
36
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Results
4.6. Complementary results
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Improvement in %
35
40
45
50
55
60
SNR (dB)
Figure 4.5: SNR in dB in function of the improvement in %. Every cross represents a
participant.
calculated.
To assess the effect of the SNR, the data from the response accuracy for timbre have been
used. The scores for every timbre, own voice excluded, have been averaged for every
participant. Then the "improvement score" has been calculated with this formula:
Imp = ScoreOwnVoice −ScoreOtherTimbres
ScoreOtherTimbres
× 100.
The improvement ranges from -31% to +37%, with a standard deviation of 17%. Which
means that some participants had quite poorer results with their own voice, while others
were way better with this timbre. The SNR (dB) has been plotted in function of the
Improvement in the Figure 4.5. It is not possible to distinguished any clear pattern as
the points look randomly scattered. This visual observation is checked by mathematical
analysis. The correlation between the two variables is quite low (r=0.21) and is not
statistically signiﬁcant (p-value=0.34).
4.6.2 | The effect of gender and voice in/out of range
Another possible issue to investigate is the non balanced gender representation, and its
possible consequences on the results of the "Voice In" and "Voice Out" conditions. The
"Voice In" singer was always of the participant’s gender, while the "Voice Out" singer
was of the opposite gender. In addition of the fact that the change of tessitura might
affect the result (the hypothesis investigated), the effect of the timbre per se should not
37
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Results
4.6. Complementary results
be omitted. In other words, it might be that no matter the participant gender and tessi-
tura, one of the two singer always gives better results. With a perfectly balanced gender
representation, this effect would be equally spread across the two conditions, and so
hidden in the results. However, only 22% of the participants were female. Then, a sta-
tistical analysis should be performed to see if this non balanced representation hides sig-
niﬁcant effects. For the model, the dependent variable will be the participant response
accuracy for timbre. A Shapiro-Wilk test of normality conﬁrms that the score for both
the man and the woman timbre are normally distributed, with a p-value respectively
equal to 0.56 and 0.54. A 2 × 2 mixed-effects repeated-measure analysis of variance
type 2 (ANOVA II) with a two levels between-participant factor (participant gender)
and a two levels within-participant factor (the two professional singers) has been per-
formed. None of the effect is statistically signiﬁcant (p-value ∈[0.19;0.85]). As there
is only two levels of the within subject factor, there is no need to check the sphericity
assumption. The normality assumption of the residuals was veriﬁed by a Shapiro-Wilk
test of normality (p-value=0.51).
38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER5
Discussion
The results of this study only found an effect of musicianship on the response accuracy.
On average, musicians performed better. This result was deﬁnitely expected, regard-
ing all previous studies showing better score for musicians in musical tasks (Murry and
Zwirner 1991, Dowling et al. 2008, Estis et al. 2011...). Furthermore, this conclusion can
be extended to every participant able to pitch match accurately, as there is no statisti-
cal difference between using this criterion or the musical level. However, there is no
effect of the timbre on the response accuracy for any group. For non-musicians, all tim-
bres were at the same level. Despite their better results on average, musicians did not
show any preference for a timbre. It is true they performed better with the piano stimuli
compared to the voice stimuli, but there is no statistical differences between these two
timbres. This absence of signiﬁcant results can come from experimental procedure limi-
tation or wrong hypothesis. However, promising results have been achieved concerning
serial recall for musical stimuli.
5.1 | The effect of timbre
In the experiment, pitch memory for different timbres has been assessed with a serial
order short term memory task. The main hypothesis was about hearing a con-speciﬁc
voice, and its potential beneﬁt on the phonological loop. The subsidiary hypothesis was
that this effect should even be stronger when the stimuli is created from the participant’s
voice. The last hypothesis questioned if the same beneﬁt still exist when it is not possible
to sing back the stimuli, because of a pitch change. As none of the timbre showed higher
result, one can conclude that none of the hypothesis is conﬁrmed.
5.1.1 | Difference between production/perception of single tones
Vocal stimuli have been proved to posses a lot of speciﬁc features, that trigger spe-
cial effects, as the vocal generosity effect and a higher accuracy in the pitch matching
task. The question was to investigate if similar features can be used by the phonological
loop to help melody memorization. If the higher pitch accuracy can be explained by
an enhanced processing of the phonological loop, human stimuli should have higher
response accuracy in the serial order task. However, all the vocal timbres results are
39
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.1. The effect of timbre
similar to the piano results. The absence of signiﬁcant effect of the timbre support that
the higher accuracy observed for pitch matching with vocal stimuli is probably not re-
lated to perceptual differences for this stimuli.
To ﬁnd the explanations of the improved accuracy with vocal stimuli, it is necessary
to understand the reasons of a bad pitch matching. As summarized by Hutchins and
Peretz 2012 two reasons are the most likely: a bad perception, or a poor motor control.
One of the ﬁrst method used to see the inﬂuence of pitch perception on pitch match-
ing was to look for correlation between pitch discrimination score and pitch matching
accuracy. A few studies found correlation (Moore et al. 2007, Estis et al. 2011) between
this two measures, while some of them rejected the correlation (Pfordresher and Steven
2007, Moore et al. 2008). A complete set of experiments performed by Hutchins and
Peretz 2012 and by Hutchins et al. 2014 pointed out that the main reason of the poor
pitch matching observed was a poor vocal control. In one of their experiment, they used
a specially designed instrument called "slider". This instrument allows participants to
control the pitch by sliding a button with their ﬁnger. They performed a pitch matching
task with the slider playing their own voice. The main ﬁnding is that people are more
accurate when they are using the slider compare to when they are ask to sing, arguing
in favor of a defective vocal control. Then, the higher pitch accuracy can be explained
by an enhanced motor control 1 when the timbre is human vocal. Finally, the results
of our study support this explanation, by excluding an enhanced processing for human
vocals.
Most of the advantages induced by vocal stimuli are motor control related, and so out
of the auditory working memory. But this better control for vocal stimuli could have
feedback the perceptual system and its phonological loop. One can think of the control
loop of the vocal loop (Burnett and Larson 2002) and the isomorphism between percep-
tion and production hypothesized by Wilson 2001. More than argument against these
systems, the results we found can be used to get hints about them. It might be that
the early pitch-response is not activated when there is not an active production, even
though the auditory feedback correspond to someone’s own voice. Regarding the iso-
morphism described by Willson, the production difference across timbre could not be
strong enough to elicit a stronger answer. It might also be that this system just doesn’t
operate for pitch perception.
But if the better pitch matching observed for vocal stimuli is mainly due to a better
sensorimotor control, how does it come that accurate singers have better results on the
1More than a pure motor control,this problem can be described as a sensorimotor issue (Pfordresher
and Steven 2007) . The deﬁcit can be seen as a feedfoward miss mapping, which occurs on the link from
the perceived model to the planned motor action. Finally, Hutchings and Peretz concluded that poor pitch
matching is due to a sensorimotor deﬁcit in timbre translation.
40
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.1. The effect of timbre
memory task? As explained previously, using groups based on their musical experience
or on their ability to sing accurately gives the same statistical effect. One explanation
can be provided by Moore et al. 2007, who pointed out the importance of pitch memory
in a pitch matching task. One of the reason why some participants are better at pitch
matching, is because they are able to keep in memory the trace of the tones. Then, a
division based on singing accuracy has similarities with a division based on memory
capacities for pitch. Another point to mention is the correlation between singing skills
and musical practice. By practicing their instrument, musician develop their pitch per-
ception, and so indirectly their capacity to sing. Some non-musicians are able to sing
accurately, which means they probably have natural beneﬁts to proceed musical stim-
uli. On the other hand, if after some years of practice a musician is still not able to sing
accurately, it means that he is suffering from a poor pitch processing. Also, the poor
musician singers were all describing themselves as amateur musician and the accurate
non-musician singers were all describing themselves as music-loving non-musician. So
these participants were on two consecutive groups of the "musician scale" used. There-
fore, a division based on singing capacities shares a lot of properties with a division
based on musical expertise.
The memory retention abilities for musical melody is inseparable from the phonological
loop features. It has been shown many times with different paradigm that the phonolog-
ical loop offers one system for pitch retention (Deutsch 1970, Rakowski 1993, Williamson
et al. 2006, Estis et al. 2011), another one for timbre (Semal and Demany 1991, Starr and
Pitt 1997), and these two parallels sub-systems do not interfere each other(Starr and Pitt
1997, Mercer and McKeown 2010). In other words, the phonological loop for pitch is
deaf to timbre: the same interpolated tones will always create the same interference,
no matter their timbre. However, the trace of the tone created in the phonological loop
might be stronger for some timbres. If a timbre elicit a higher pitch perception, it might
be better retained. All the studies mentioned above investigated the effect of the inter-
polated tones, and most of them with a pitch discrimination task. The relevant result
was the score difference between the conditions. But no one ever investigated if the
properties of the standard and comparison tones can affect the results. It might be that
with other standard and comparison tones (different in pitch and/or timbre), the abso-
lute score would have been lower or higher. In this case, a wore or better perceptual
representation of the tone could be an explanation. At the top of all, the different tim-
bres can bias the central executive judgement of similarity. In the experiment performed
here, ﬁve timbres have been used for the same serial order memory task. This offers the
opportunity to compare the retention of pitch for different timbres. Even if it is well
known that the pitch and timbre subsystems of the phonological loop are independent,
it might be that this two dimensions interfere before entering the loop. In this case, if
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.1. The effect of timbre
one of the timbre offers more cue to extract the pitch, this perception will be better en-
graved and retained. One can imagine a kind of pre-processing for the pitch, that could
be affected by the timbre. For example, Lockhead and Byrd 1981 found that people with
absolute pitch have troubles to recognize the pitch of pure sinusoidal, pointing out that
these stimuli have different properties compare to natural sounds. Here, the results are
supporting the fact that none of the timbre provides a better trace in the phonological
loop. This can be explained by an absence of pitch pre-processing affected by the timbre,
but also by timbres having close properties. It would be interesting to redo the experi-
ment with timbre even more remote from each other to investigate the hypothesis of a
pre-input process providing stronger trace.
5.1.2 | Extension to musical sequences
In the previous section, phonological loop properties related to pitch and timbre mem-
ory have been discussed. However, most of the tasks introduced asked the participant
to take a decision between the deteriorated trace of a tone and another recently played.
However, this conﬁguration is not highly signiﬁcant in the every day life, where tones
are usually included in a musical context. In a ﬁrst experiment, Weiss found that peo-
ple have a better memorization of the melody vocally played (Weiss et al. 2012). This
difference of memorization might be explained by two different hypothesis. The ﬁrst
one is that con-speciﬁc signals elicit higher cognitive activity, and therefore are deeper
engraved. This hypothesis implies that vocal stimuli enhance cognitive activity, but it
doesn’t imply that the tonal relation is better remembered because others cues can be
used. The second one is related to the acoustical difference between classic instruments
as piano and the voice. This last has a lot of speciﬁc features (e.g. vibrato, scoops...)
that might be used as a cue to extract pitch and to increase the memorization. Both
hypothesis are highly correlated with our main hypothesis, but the second one would
provide a stronger argument, because it is related with tonal relation. If the acoustic
vocal features can be used to extract more information about the pitch and increase the
memorization, it would be likely that vocal sequences are performed better than piano
sequences in the serial order task. In a latter experiment, Weiss and Peretz 2019 pointed
out that people suffering from congenital amusia are also performing better with vocal
melody. However, because of their pitch perception deﬁcit, this improvement ca not be
due to a better processing of the tonal sequences, providing a strong argument for the
ﬁrst hypothesis. This conclusion is supported by previous researches which found an
enhanced cognitive activity, often related with arousal, for vocal stimuli (Schirmer et al.
2005, Li et al. 2014, Weiss et al. 2016).
However, the results of Weiss do not allow to reject his second hypothesis, as it might
42
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.1. The effect of timbre
be that for normal hearing subjects both effects are present. If it is the case, the serial
order memory for vocal has to give better results. As there is no difference in the re-
sponse accuracy for timbres, a better processing of the tonal relationship for vocal stim-
uli can be excluded. Nonetheless, it is important to mention that Weiss hypothesized
that the acoustical speciﬁcity of the voice could be used as a cue to extract the pitch. He
based a main part of his argument on the effect of the scoops, while these lasts haven
been removed in our experiment. Probably that creating the melody out of single tones
recorded separately tended to smooth the transition and to lose some realistic aspects
inherent to vocal production. From this perspective, it could be interesting to repeat the
experiment with a new condition: a professional singer recording all the melodies. With
these recordings, all the scoops and speciﬁc features proper to vocal production would
be preserved in the melodies, and it will be possible to see if they have an effect on pitch
perception.
5.1.3 | Vocal rehearsal
One question that remains concern the use of vocal (or subvocal) rehearsal. In verbal
learning, both vocal and subvocal rehearsals have been proved to improve memoriza-
tion. In their experiment, Dahlen and Caldwell–Harris 2013 introduced to participants
new words in a foreign language by hearing the noun associated with an image. Four
conditions were tested. In the ﬁrst, they were asked to repeat it aloud. The second was
the same as the ﬁrst but the auditory feedback was suppressed with white noise. In the
third they had to sub vocal it. In the last, all kind of rehearsal was suppressed. After
a delay, they were ask to recall the name associated with the image. Condition 1 and
3 had the best results, pointing out the importance to use rehearsal to keep in mem-
ory information. For the vocal rehearsal, suppressing auditory feedback decreased the
memorisation. This experiment, and others as the one performed by S. Zamuner et al.
2015 or Grohe and Weber 2018 proved the importance of being able to rehearse when
learning words introduced vocally. Disturbing this rehearsal with the suppression of
the auditory feedback or with articulatory suppression highly decrease the results.
Even though all previous experiments were conducted with vocal stimuli for words,
one can assumed that similar effects occur with musical stimuli. Nees et al. 2017 found
that articulatory rehearsal was the main component involved in the maintenance of mu-
sical melody. By using vocal rehearsal, it should be easier to recall the melody and so
the score accuracy for serial order task should be higher. From this point of view, a
vocal rehearsal should beneﬁts from all the advantages related to vocal pitch match-
ing. Because it is easier to reproduce, it is better remembered and the recalling score
is higher. All the top-down effects and the auditory feedback will also help to pitch
43
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.2. The effect of Position and Tone
match the melody. With these effects being the strongest for a self-voice matching. The
effect of the tessitura would also occur at this moment. It is easier to pitch match tones
which are at a frequency close to the middle of our frequency range. With tones played
at an extremum of this range, the singing will be less accurate and the vocal rehearsal
will be less effective. However, none of these predictions is true. Either participants
did not used vocal rehearsal, either vocal rehearsal does not beneﬁt from the different
effects listed above. The ﬁrst option seems more likely, and is also supported by the
experimenter observations during the trial session, where no one tried to sing back the
melody aloud.
On the other hand, it seems very unlikely that participants did not try to sub-vocalize
the melody. If they did so, it would mean that the subvocalization is not affected by
the timbre. This can be explained by the fact that it is possible to reproduce the timbre
of anyone or any instrument when using subvocalization and mental representation of
sound (see Greenspon et al. 2017 for one recent experiment about auditory image). To
ensure people are using the vocal rehearsal and assess its properties, one option can
be to force them to sing back the melody after the listening session. But other effects
might appear: by singing, interference will be created, and the absolute results might
by lower than with sub-vocalization. Controlling for all undesirable effects that could
appear with a forced vocal rehearsal seems to be a very challenging task.
5.2 | The effect of Position and Tone
Despite the absence of signiﬁcant effect for the timbres, the paradigm used for the exper-
iment offers the opportunity to investigate the properties of musical stimuli retention in
the working memory. Recent studies found that short term memory for serial order
shares properties across domains, supporting the existence of domain-general mecha-
nism involved in the process. The ﬁrst experiments compared performances of verbal
and visuospatial domains (see Hurlstone et al. 2014 for a review). This domain compari-
son has been extended by Gorin et al. 2018 who performed a comparison between verbal
and musical serial order. Their ﬁndings supported the concept of a shared domain-
general serial order short term memory effects, but they also pointed out the existence
of some domain-speciﬁc effects. This discrepancy of mechanism for verbal and musical
stimuli has been further investigated in a latter experiment (Gorin and Majerus 2019).
The results supported the existence of speciﬁc process in the musical domain. The re-
tention of information in the working memory can be seen as the joint action of domain
speciﬁc and domain general processes.
One of the main common observation for the serial order short term memory task is the
44
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.2. The effect of Position and Tone
classic U-shape observed for the score accuracy curve in function of the item’s position.
This shape has been observed in the visuospatial domain (Guérard and Tremblay 2008),
in the verbal domain (Bhatarah et al. 2009) and more recently in the musical domain
(Hurlstone et al. 2014; Gorin et al. 2018). This classic curve reﬂects that these three do-
mains are sharing some domain-general properties. The transposition gradient, which
reﬂects the tendency of errors to be close to their real position, provides another argu-
ment for domain-general properties.
5.2.1 | Response accuracy
The response accuracy has been plotted with Position as a variable in the Figure 4.3 but
also with Tone in the Figure 4.2. While the ﬁrst one is drawn in every research using
the serial order paradigm, it is not a classic thing to plot the response accuracy for the
stimuli as factor. This might be explained by the fact that sometimes the stimuli are dif-
ferent for every condition (e.g. new words for every sequence), or they all get the same
response accuracy. However, as it can be seen on the plot, some tones have way higher
score than others. This is revealed in the statistical analysis performed, where Tone is the
most statistically signiﬁcant variable (p-value 2.2e-16). These different scores observed
between Tones might be explained by different effects. The ﬁrst one is the tone strength
induced by the key (Krumhansl and Kessler 1982). The key proﬁle shows that all tones
used do not have the same strength. Particularly, the fundamental is the strongest, and
it probably explains why Tone 1 and Tone 6 have the highest scores. However, the key
proﬁle can not explain all the score differences between tones. After the fundamental,
the tone with the highest strength is the ﬁfth (Tone 4). However, this tone has lower re-
sults than Tone 5. Also, Tone 1 and 6 are both fundamentals, so the key proﬁle does not
explain why Tone 6 has an extremely high score. The disappearance of octave equiva-
lence in melody (Deutsch 1983) can be the explanation of this result. Tone 6 is the only
one to be played at the upper octave, so it offers an extra cue to discriminate it. The
contour can be another cue to explain the results (Vicario 1983). Tone 1 and 6 were al-
ways at an extreme position of the contour, which might enhance their identiﬁcation.
Probably that using the same key but using another chroma as lowest and highest tone
would have decreased the results for the fundamental, and increased the results for the
chroma now used for Tone 1 and Tone 6.
The plot for Position scores does not show a strong trend, and the U-shape is barely ob-
servable. However, by clustering the Position in two groups with Position 1; 2; 5 and 6
in one called "Extremum" and Position 3 and 4 in another called "Middle", the statistical
model gives a signiﬁcant effect of Position (p-value=1,0e-3), with the highest score for
the position "Extremum" (see table 4.2). This result support the existence of a primacy
45
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.2. The effect of Position and Tone
and recency effect for musical stimuli. However, because these two effects have been
merged together, it is not possible to get the relative strength of every position, neither
to compare the recency effect strength with the primacy effect strength.
One of the main issue with the patterns that have been used here, is that the occurrence
of Tone at different Position is not equally distributed, as shown by the Table 5.1. For
example, Tone 2 has been mainly played in Position 3 and 4, while Tone 4 has only been
played once at these positions. If the primacy and recency effect are present, Tone 2
would have a lower score than Tone 4 due to a position effect, and not necessarily be-
cause it suffers from a poorer perception. Therefore, it would be a mistake to make a
model with only the Position or only the Tone as variable. Their interaction should ab-
solutely be included because of the non balanced Tone/Position occurrences. However,
it is necessary to reduce the complexity of the model to perform an accurate statistical
analysis. This too high complexity is the reason of the merging of the Position factors
into two groups. This non equally distributed Tone/Position combination comes from
the creation of the melody, which were chosen to have 3 changes in their contour. But it
should be possible to respect this condition and to ensure an equal distribution for the
Tone/Position combinations. Then it would be possible to perform an analysis for Tone
and for Position separately, and so to extract more information about the position.
Table 5.1: This table summarized the number of occurrence for every Tone-Position pair,
in the patterns used during the experiment and summarized table 3.1. For example, the
Tone 5 is played 2 times in Position 4.
Tone
1
2
3
4
5
6
Position
1
1
1
3
4
1
2
2
2
0
3
3
1
3
3
3
6
1
0
0
2
4
2
4
1
1
2
2
5
2
0
3
1
4
2
6
2
1
1
3
4
1
Even though the statistical analysis could be more powerful with a better design, it still
gives promising results in accordance with previous researches. From the Table 5.1, one
can see that both Position and Tone have a statistically signiﬁcant effect. The Position
effect represents the primacy and recency effects, which are also observed in visuospa-
tial and verbal serial order tasks, and reﬂect domain-general mechanism. But the main
effect is due to the Tone height, related to the frequency and so speciﬁc of musical se-
rial order task. Therefore, this last effect is due to some domain speciﬁc mechanism.
Probably that the design used here, with a strong musical key used along the experi-
ment over-estimated the importance of the domain-speciﬁc mechanisms compare to the
46
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.2. The effect of Position and Tone
domain-general ones. Finally, the results are supporting previous ﬁnding of Gorin et al.
2018 and Gorin and Majerus 2019 who pointed out that musical stimuli maintenance in
the working memory is the combination of domain-general and domain-speciﬁc pro-
cess.
5.2.2 | Transposition Gradient
In previous researches, the transposition gradient has always been calculated for a posi-
tion distance, as serial order are governed by locality constraint. However, the discrete
and ordered set of Tones used here gives a special occasion to see if a similar effect
can occurs in the pitch dimension. The transposition gradients for Position and Tone
are plotted in the Figure 4.4. The chance level, corresponding to the curve of someone
answering randomly an inﬁnite number of times, has also been plotted. A statistical
analysis has been performed to ﬁnd if there is any signiﬁcant effect. One of the main
ﬁnding is the fact that the transposition gradient for Position is not statistically differ-
ent from the chance level one. This result might seems in contradiction with the one of
Gorin et al. 2018. However they did not compare the transposition gradient with the
chance level in their analysis. They only concluded that there is an effect of distance.
But this effect of distance is also signiﬁcant in the chance level curve, so it would have
been interesting to investigate if this distance effect is only due to chance. The absence
of a signiﬁcant transposition gradient for Position points out that the domain-general
mechanism which tends to reduce the distance error does not operate for musical stim-
uli, or at least is overcame by a stronger mechanism.
It is very likely that the domain-speciﬁc process takes over for musical stimuli. In the
previous section, it has been argued that the response accuracy for Tone was mainly
driven by musical related effect, pointing out the importance of the musical domain-
speciﬁc process. Regarding transposition gradient, the one for Position does not differ
from the chance level curve, while the one for Tone clearly shows a tendency to have
higher values for small frequency distances and smaller values for large frequency dis-
tances. This difference between the two curves is statistically signiﬁcant (p-value=5e-5).
It means that when participants make a mistake, they tend to pick a tone which is close
in frequency to the real one (i.e close in Tone dimension), instead of picking a tone which
is close in the sequence (i.e. close in Position dimension). This ﬁnding provides not only
another argument for domain-speciﬁc process, but also that this domain-speciﬁc process
can overcome more general-speciﬁc ones.
Finally, this task has been chosen because it was believed that it will consist in a percep-
tual minimization task, getting rid of many undesirable effects, as the vocal generosity
effect. The transposition gradient observed for Tone gives a strong argument in favor of
47
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
this choice. When participants made mistakes, they tended to minimize the perceptual
distance in the frequency dimension. This proves that when they recreated the melody,
they were trying to match all tones they chose with the internal representation they had.
This matching was performed by minimizing the sum of perceptual distances for tones.
To perform this task, the trace of the tone in the auditory working memory is used.
Therefore, the procedure only assess the participant’s ability to maintain in memory
the pitch, and overcomes the issue related with higher perceptual difference for vocal
stimuli.
5.3 | Design limitations
5.3.1 | Voice recording
Own voice recognition
Some of the possible criticisms concern the "Own voice" stimuli. The ﬁrst limitation is
related to the two possible ways to hear a sound: air conduction and bone conduction.
Using air conduction is the classic and mostly used way to hear sound. A change of
pressure in the air induces a vibration of the ear drum. The ossicles transmit this vi-
bration to the cochlea, the basiliar membrane is stimulated and a signal is sent to the
brain. However, the sound can also be transmitted as a vibration in the skull bone. This
vibration is directly transmitted to the basiliar membrane. Therefore, this sounds is not
transformed by the outer and middle ear components (ear canal, ear drum, ossicles...).
In the every day life, people hear their own voice only when they are speaking. What
they really hear is a mixture of the signal transmitted via air conduction and the one
transmitted via bone conduction. While both air and bone conduction are used during
normal vocal production, only the air conduction is used when the voice is recorded and
played with an headphone. People not used to record their voice and hear it back via an
headphone might have troubles to recognize it. This recognition can be even more com-
plicated with the stimuli used here. During speech, even if the spectrum is transformed
because of the bone conduction, most of the prosody (the intonation, stress, rythm...)
is not changed. Then, participants could use this feature to help recognizing their own
voice. With simple tones, the only participant’s voice speciﬁcity remaining is the spec-
trum, only heard by air conduction.
To ensure that participants are able to recognize their own voice, one solution could be
to perform a voice recognition task. One can imagine a procedure where participants
hear different stimuli recorded from themselves and other participants, and they have
to judge if the recording comes from their voice or not. Based on the recognition rate, it
48
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
would be possible to exclude from the analysis participants not recognizing their own
voice. But this difference between a voice heard both by air and bone conduction, and
the same voice heard only by air conduction should not be over-estimated. Even though
the spectrum of the voice recorded is not exactly the same as the one naturally heard,
it will not be likely to ﬁnd another stimuli that matches more this last. So if the mem-
ory for musical stimuli is improved when the timbre shares close acoustical properties
with the participant’s voice, the condition with the highest beneﬁt for this effect would
remain participant’s own voice.
Voice processing
Another point is related to the processing applied to the voice. Two effects can explained
that some participants had troubles to recognize their own voice. The ﬁrst is related to
mathematical and computational constraints. The vocoder algorithm chosen to pitch
match the voice to the correct frequency can not ensure a perfect transformation and
might create artifacts. In other words, the timbre might be transformed, and the sig-
nal to noise ratio can be increased during the process. As resumed in the publication
of Laroche and Dolson 1999, the two main artifacts induced by the vocoder are "tran-
sient smearing" and "phasiness". The ﬁrst is deﬁned as a loss of percusiveness in the
signal, while the second refers to coloration in the signal, as the feeling that the speaker
to microphone distance changes. These artifacts are stronger for larger transformation.
As a consequence, the poorer the pitch matching, the higher the transformation, and so
the more artifacts induced by the phase vocoder algorithm. To limit this computational
artifact, it has been decided that every time a participant would sing a tone with an
accuracy superior of 200 cents, he will be asked to sing again the tone. This 200 cents
criterion has been decided by multiple listening of signal transformed by the vocoder
for different ratio. It has been judged that every transformation with a ratio higher than
2 semi tones distorted the signal to such an extend that the original voice wasn’t recog-
nizable anymore.
The second effect related to signal processing is linked with the dynamic changes of
the signal, mainly the scoops and the vibrato. The Figure 2.2 shows a representation of
these artifacts. The bottom right corner Sub-ﬁgure d shows the effects of vibrato and
scoop both together. This plot is the most likely to represent a melody sung, as vocal
production creates scoops and vibrato. Removing or transforming these features might
have an impact on the tone processing. In previous experiments, Watts and Hall 2008
and Moore et al. 2008 transformed their stimuli to remove the vibrato. However, Granot
et al. 2013 pointed out that this manipulation might reduce the biological signiﬁcance of
the stimuli. Here, nothing has been done to reduce the vibrato, but it might have been
49
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
of interest to investigate if some participants have a larger one, and if yes, if it has any
consequence on the results. Regarding the scoops, it has been found that this dynamic
aspect is an important perceptual cue for listeners (Larrouy-Maestri and Pfordresher
2018). For example, they facilitate the segmentation of the tones in a musical context,
and inﬂuence perception of intonation. Futhermore, removing the pitch transition be-
tween tones gives the feeling of a non natural voice. This effect is mainly observed in
pop music when the autotune processor is used with too high parameters, giving this
"robotic" voice effect. Here, the tones have been cut in their middle to get rid of the on-
set and off-set scoops. This choice was motivated to avoid to cut during a pitch sweep
because some participants were very long to stabilize their pitch. The "autotuned" effect,
due to an almost instantaneous change of pitch, has been avoided because ramps have
been added at the extremity of the tones, and there is 30 ms of silent between each tones.
However, the scoops as described by Pfordresher and Larrouy-Maestri are missing. One
solution might have been to add them back at the end of the signal processing. Finally,
it is necessary to precise that this issue related to the missing scoops is not only affected
the "own voice" timbre, but every voice stimuli. The absence of scoops might explained
why musicians performed slightly better with the piano stimuli, which naturally do not
have any scoops. Because the voice stimuli did not have these scoops, they might have
been not judged as very natural, and so suffer from a poorer pitch processing. Never-
theless there is no signiﬁcant difference between the piano and the voice stimuli, so this
hypothesis can not be investigated.
Sound Noise Ratio differences
As explained in the previous section, some people got poorer recording quality, for rea-
sons independent of themselves (wrong sound card setting), or because of their timidity,
low voice level... Because of these different recording aspects, there is a 20dB difference
between the highest Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) and the lowest one. This SNR differ-
ence between recordings might be of an inﬂuence on the results. Intuitively, one can
think that a higher noise makes the task harder, as it decrease the recording quality.
Some researches support this intuition. As stated before, there is a masking effect that
can affect pitch perception (Malzan 1993). But the SNR is still high enough to ensure
that masking could not be an explanation for a bad performance during this task. Some
more likely explanations are supported by Fastl and Stoll 1979 and by Fastl and Zwicker
2007. They shew that pitch strength vary with stimuli type. A pure tone has a higher
saliency than a complex tone, and this last has a higher saliency than broadband noise
stimuli. So the purer the signal’s spectrum, the higher the tonal strength. Regarding
vocal stimuli, Shrivastav concluded that pitch strength is in relation with voice quality
50
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
(Shrivastav et al. 2012). As a more noisy voice would be judge to be of a lower quality, it
should suffer from a lower pitch strength. More recently, Eddins successfully proposed
a model to predict breathiness values from pitch saliency, arguing for the correlation
between this two variables (Eddins et al. 2016). Here breathiness is used to represent
perception of dysphonic voice quality. A lower SNR decreases the voice quality, and
tends to make it sounds non natural. For these reasons, voice recorded with lower SNR
should suffer from a lower pitch strength. This ﬁnding supports the previous conclu-
sions of Shrivastav. With a lower saliency, the pitch might suffer from a lower processing
of the phonological loop, and so a lower score for serial order task.
However, the results from our experiment show there is no correlation between SNR
and score improvement for the own voice condition. The hypothesis that a poorer SNR
would increase the task difﬁculty might exist, but if it is the case, it did not have any ef-
fect on the result of the experiment. Here, the recordings have SNR in the range 35dB to
55dB. If the SNR has an effect on the pitch memory, one could expect that the response
accuracy would be an increasing function of the SNR, until it reaches a threshold. From
this threshold, the score would stay the same no matter the SNR. From the results, it
seems that this threshold is lower than 35dB. So if the experiment has to be performed
again, using this 35dB as a minimum SNR should be a criteria to respect.
For these different reasons, it is not likely that the results of the own voice stimuli
suffered from a bad recognition, a poor recording or strong distortion during the signal
processing. All points expressed before should be more regarded as possible improve-
ment rather than explanations for the absence of signiﬁcant effect.
5.3.2 | Training and artifacts
Another issue that might have affected the results is the effect of training. Training was
necessary to ensure that participants had a good control of the app. Some common im-
proper uses have been noticed. First, participants had a tendency to switch the signiﬁca-
tion of tone and position. In the app interface, the tones were ﬁxed, and the spinner was
used to give them a position. However, some participants tended to answer the tone’s
height in the spinner, instead of answering the position. As an example, if the Tone 3
was in Position 2, they were answering Tone 2 in Position 3. An example of this mistake
can be seen in the Figure 5.1. This can be justiﬁed by a miss comprehension of what rep-
resents tone and what represents position. This kind of switch was particularly present
in non-musicians. However, musicians were also suffering from difﬁculties to fully con-
trol the app. Indeed, in a formal music representation, the position is represented by a
displacement from left to right, while the tone is represented on the vertical dimension.
51
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
If one considers the spinner as a vertical axes, the two dimension were switched in the
design. This trouble was even stronger in musician without classic formation but prac-
ticing computer music with sequencers, because these last have an interface inspired by
classic music sheet. Finally, some participant thought they had to click on the spinners
with respect for the position order. To take back the example of the Figure 5.1a, someone
answering this way would start by clicking once on the spinner below Tone 3 (Position
1), then once on the spinner below Tone 1 (Position 2), then once on the spinner below
Tone 6 (Position 3) and so on. By doing so, they were just setting all spinners to "1". But
because of the delay before they realized their mistake, they were sometimes unable to
recreate the melody anymore after this mistake. All these observations tend to show
that the interface used by Gorin et al. 2018 was probably more suitable for the task, even
thought it was a little bit more fussy. However, participants were all conﬁdent about
how to use the interface after the trial session, where many feedback were provided by
the experimenter to ensure they correctly got the task.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.1: Example of the answer given by a participant remembering perfectly the
melody, but mixing up the meaning of Position and Tone. The good answer is given in
the upper Figure (a) and the (wrong) participant’s answer is given below (b).
On the other hand, training could have helped participants to develop strategies. As
the same musical key was used for every melody, participants could get to know which
tone is the Tone 1, which tone is the Tone 2 and so on. However, if they were able to do
so, they did it for every timbre, and it just allowed them to have better results on aver-
age. Plus, two timbres were transposed one octave higher or lower, so the tones were
52
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
not exactly the same, but only the chroma. However, because of the octave equivalence
effect (Bachem 1954), this cue could be enough to use such a strategy.
A bigger point of interest might be the presence of artifacts for some tones. If a tone
is the only one to have a special feature as a strong attack, a strong vibrato or swipe, par-
ticipants might use this feature as a cue to recognize it. The recognition rate of the tone
would be particularly high, even for a participant who would be unable to recognize
the pitch. The absence of such artifact has been checked prior to the experiment for the
piano recordings, as well as for the professional singers recordings. However, the par-
ticipant’s voice recording was done during the experiment, with no possibility to ensure
that no artifact was present in the signal. To avoid a recognition based on artifacts, two
sets have been recording from every participant. The ﬁrst one have been used to play
the melody to memorize, while the second one have been used to help the participants
to recreate the melody. However, the set used to play the melody was always the same.
So if one tone had a strong artifact, the attentive participant would have noticed it, and
would have used this cue to recognize it in next presentations.
However, there are at least three arguments to support that no one used this strategy.
First, the experimenter was listening to the tones after the recording session to ensure
there was no really strong artifact. When it was the case, the tone was recorded once
again. If one small artifact has not been noticed by the experimenter but the participant,
the way to use it as a cue was not that obvious. It requires the participant to be sure
of its answer (only based on pitch recognition the ﬁrst time), to memorize the relevant
information until the next melody played by this timbre, and to understand how the
application has been coded. In other words, to understand that the tones used to play
the melody were always the same, and different from the one used during the melody
reconstruction. Finally, if some participants succeed to use it as a cue for recognition, it
would have improved their score for their own voice timbre. Nonetheless, no particu-
larly high score for this timbre has been noticed. So the use of such artifact as a cue can
deﬁnitely be rejected.
A last kind of artifact still needs to be discussed: the one only due to the participant
singing capacities. It happened that some subjects were forced to change their singing
techniques while performing the recording. Because of the tones starting to be too high,
they were forced to pass from chest voice to high head voice (also named falsetto). This
change of vocal techniques induces a change of timbre. If they did so, they did it during
the two recordings, because the change from chest to head voice is quite stable. Then,
the change of timbre would occur at same tone for both sets, and this cue could be used
to create two sub-groups in the tones. However, the change of timbre induced by such
a technique is not the strongest artifact. It might be that some of the participants did
53
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
not notice it, and the results do not show any evidence in favor of a cue that improved
result for the own voice timbre
It might also be that the use of two sets had a negative effect on the results. Indeed, if
one of the tone has an artifact, and this artifact is not present in the other tone of the
same frequency, it might decrease their similarity perception. This would be a similar
effect as the one conducting people to judge tones with same pitch but different timbres
to have different pitch (Warrier and Zatorre 2002). However, as none of the tones of the
melody reconstruction part would have the same artifact, the tone the closest in term
of perception would remain the one with the same pitch. The artifact would probably
increase a little bit the difﬁculty, but would not be completely misleading. In the Figure
4.1, it is possible to see that all vocal timbres have the same median and the same mean
within group. However, only the own voice timbre used two sets for the tones. Regard-
ing the similarities of the results, it does not seem likely that the use of two sets had any
impact on the task performance.
To conclude, the training effect can be ruled out because the procedure was pseudo-
randomized, so if a participant improved during the procedure, this improvement would
be reﬂected equally in every timbre. Probably an easier interface to control could have
been designed, but there is no chance that it had a speciﬁc impact on the results. And
even if it might have decreased the average score, there is no argument to support that
it would have affect only one speciﬁc timbre. Regarding the artifacts, some participants
might have noticed that the same tones were used during the full procedure. But even
in the unlikely case they got a beneﬁt out of it, it was too insigniﬁcant to be reﬂected in
the results. Equally, the possibility of a deﬁciency induced by these artifacts is too weak
to be considered.
5.3.3 | The effect of singer’s gender
The participant gender distribution is 5 females for 17 males, which represents less than
22% of female for more than 78% of male. In these conditions, it is obvious that the
equal distribution for gender is not respected. However, there is no argument in favor
of a gender advantage in working memory task nor in musical task. Because of the
small number of participants, especially the few females it has been possible to recruit,
a gender difference might occur. But it will more likely represent the individual differ-
ences, which would disappear with larger groups. For the two piano stimuli and the one
created with the participant own voice, no gender difference should be found. For the
timbre labeled as "Voice In" and "Voice Out", this non balanced distribution could bias
the results. Indeed, females performed "Voice In" with the professional woman singer,
54
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
and performed "Voice Out" with the professional man singer. The opposite label-voice
association was used for males. With balanced gender distribution, both voices would
have been equally played for both labels. As it is not the case, if one of the two voices
was way easier to memorized, it would have increased the score for the label where it
was the most played. The effect assessed would not have been the one investigated (the
effect of a stimuli played out of the participant’s tessitura), but the effect of the voice per
se. The repeated measure Anova performed with the singer’s gender as within subject
and the participant’s gender as between subject discard the hypothesis of such a bias.
None of the voice has a statistically signiﬁcant better score. Moreover, this analysis con-
ﬁrms that none of the gender has an advantage for the task. This point argues for not
including the gender in the statistical model, even though the gender distribution is not
balanced.
One of the point that requires further investigation is the effect of tones played out of the
participant’s tessitura. The motivation behind this extra timbre was to see if the beneﬁt
produced by the voice was due to the fact that it comes from a human (the effect of con
speciﬁc signal), or because it was something easily reproducible (the effect of the tessi-
tura). Here, playing the tones at different frequencies has no impact, neither for piano
nor for voical stimuli. However, the frequency shift between the two intervals is quite
small: one octave. Which means that the highest tone of one interval was also the lowest
tone of the other interval. This shift one octave shift has been chosen for several reasons.
First, to make the task easier and to control for tonal change, the key has been chosen to
always be the same. So, it is necessary for the pitch shift to be a multiple integer of one
octave. In this situation, it is just unthinkable to consider an interval higher than two
octaves, because it would be impossible to ﬁnd men singing low enough and women
singing high enough.
But one issue remains: the vocal timbres have to be the same for every participant, no
matter the gender. Regarding the tessitura of the participants, all males were in the
range of a tenor (midi note 47-61 for the participants and 40-64 for a tenor), and all fe-
males were in the range of a mezzo soprano (midi note 57-69 for the participants and
50-74 for a mezzo soprano). One can conclude that with a two octaves shift, a bass singer
will be needed for the "Voice Out" of the female, and a tenor singer will be needed for
the "Voice In" of the male. For the opposite pairs, a soprano and a mezzo soprano will
be needed. In these conditions, four voices would be needed, and extracting the effect
of the change of timbre from the effect of the tessitura seems to be a challenging prob-
lem. This last could be considered as an extended problem of the one related to the non
balanced gender distribution. The one and the two octaves shift conﬁgurations have
been summarized in the Table 5.2. With a one octave shift (Table 5.2a), both genders
are processing the task with both timbre. In the case of an equal gender distribution,
55
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
the speciﬁc effects of the voice are equally spread across the two conditions ("Voice In"
and "Voice Out"). If it is not the case, a statistical analysis can be computed to extract
the relevant information, as seen previously. In the case of a two octave shift, none of
the voices used for the condition "Voice In" would be the same as the ones used for the
condition "Voice Out" (Table 5.2b). In these conditions, it will not be possible anymore
to dissociate the effect of the personal voice features from the effect of the change of
frequency.
Voice In
Voice Out
Male
M1
F1
Female
F1
M1
(a) One octave shift
Voice In
Voice Out
Male
M1
F2
Female
F1
M2
(b) Two octaves shift
Table 5.2: Possible conﬁgurations for the "Voice In" and "Voice Out" conditions when
the frequency shift is one octave (a) or two octaves (b). Every singer is associated with
a number and a letter, M standing for Male singer and F standing for Female Singer.
The last argument for the choice of a one octave shift comes from the ﬁndings of Deutsch
1978, who pointed out that people were not able anymore to recognize well-known
melodies when the tones chroma was conserved, but the height was randomly picked
between three different octaves. These results might be explained by the deterioration of
the contour, but is mainly due to the loss of the octave equivalence effect in a sequential
setting, as shown by Deutsch in a latter experiment (Deutsch 1983). With a one octave
shift, it was believed that participants would be able to sing some of the tones consid-
ered as being out of their tessitura, but not all of them. Then, if they want to sing back
the full melody, they have to transpose some of the tones, what creates the same effect
as the one described by Deutsch. Another argument comes from Murry and Zwirner
1991, who found that people are better at pitch matching tones with a frequency close to
the middle of their tessitura. Even if the tones in the "out of range" might be sing back,
participants should have more troubles to sing them back, what should decrease the
effectiveness of this strategy. To ensure that at least one tone was too extreme for their
tessitura, they were asked to sing back the higest (for males) or lowest (for females)
tone used in the "Out" condition. However, it seems that some participants discovered
strategies to overcome this difﬁculty. Some males started to use their falsetto voice,
some participants were transposing all the tones to their tessitura, some used as a cue
the fact that they were not able to sing back some of the tones... As a conclusion, it might
be that the absence of effect was due to a too small shift.
Finally, it appears that having a properly deﬁned change of frequency is a tough prob-
lem when the stimuli are vocals. The best way to ensure that participants are not able to
sing back the tones would be to have an extremely high shift. However, because of the
56
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
limited tessitura of singers, this condition would imply to use recordings of more than
one singer, leading to the issue explained previously. Possible solutions might be to per-
form this task with an instrument having an extremely high tessitura (i.e. a piano) or to
create all vocal tones with an analysis-synthesized method. But both solutions are suf-
fering from new limitations. With the ﬁrst one, the conspeciﬁc effect will be deﬁnitely
lost, while analysis-synthesized methods struggle to reproduce voices that sounds as
genuine as real human recordings.
5.3.4 | The effect of tempo
The last parameter to investigate is the effect of the tempo on the response. It seems ob-
vious that the tempo has a huge effect on the task difﬁculty. If it is too fast, it might not
be possible to extract the pitch or to segregate the tones anymore (Cowan 1984). If it is
too slow, the interference effect will be stronger, and decay will start to affect the mem-
ory (Deutsch 1974, Cowan 1998, Estis et al. 2011). In the experiment, the tempo used is
3 notes per second, so 180 beats per minutes (bpm). This tempo is in the range [86;200]
bpm, which has been shown to be the preferred tempo when asking people to tap ﬁnger
in free conditions (McAuley et al. 2006). One of the main research about tempo has been
performed by Dowling et al. 2008. They introduced people with melodies from familiar
and unfamiliar themes. Then, for some of the melodies, they changed one of the tone.
The task of the participants was to decide if the melody was the original or a deviant.
They tested 3 presentation rates: 360pbm, 180bpm and 36bpm. For both the familiar
and the unfamiliar themes, the presentation rate of 180bpm had the highest response
accuracy. This is mainly for this reason that Gorin et al. 2018 chose this bpm for their
task. Because they shew that the task was feasible for non-musicians at this rate, it has
been chosen to use the same bpm here.
But it might be possible that at this tempo, the tones duration is too shot to get a beneﬁt
of the timbre. In other words, because the task is to extract the pitch, participants only
focus on this task and can not use any other information as a cue. In a pitch matching
task, it has been found that the duration between the onset of the stimuli and the onset
of the voice is in the range [300;500]ms ( Murry and Zwirner 1991). With a bpm of 180,
there is no chance that participants try to sing back the tones during the presentation.
However, the rehearsal process is known to be the reason of the primacy effect observed
in serial order memory task. In their experimental design, Dowling et al. used 3 differ-
ent bpm, but two of them were out of the range of the musical tempo. Warren et al.
found that under around 40 bpm, the tempo is too slow, and the sensation of melody
is lost. The same effect appears at fast tempo, around 300 pbm (Warren et al. 1991).
Then, the fact that Dowling found the highest result at 180bpm is not surprising, but it
57
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5. Discussion
5.3. Design limitations
does not imply that this tempo is the only one suitable for the serial order task. It might
be that at slower bpm, participants would have more time to proceed the tones, so to
extract more information, and so to enhance the memory trace of the melody. Then,
if some timbre elicit higher cognitive activity, it will be more likely represented in the
results.
58
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER6
Conclusion
This study was conducted to investigate the effect of human timbre on the phonolog-
ical loop. It was hypothesized that con-speciﬁc signals would elicit a enhanced audi-
tory working memory processing and so increase the musical phonological loop perfor-
mance. Two sub-hypothesis were also investigated. The ﬁrst was related to the possible
superiority of own voice compare to other con-speciﬁc voices, and the second one was
about the effect of having a pitch range matching or not the participant’s tessitura.
A serial order short term memory task has been performed with musical stimuli. The
melodies were created in ﬁve conditions to test the different hypothesis. In three condi-
tions, the timbre was a human voice. For the two other conditions, a piano was played at
two different pitch ranges. The participant’s task was to recreate a melody he just heard.
This task requires the subject to be able to accurately perceived the melody, to memorize
it and ﬁnally to recreate it. The task was designed that the melody reconstruction part
of the task could not be affected by the timbre. So only the tones perception and memo-
rization, both performed by the phonological loop, were investigated. The results were
calculated with the response accuracy, which is the average number of tones correctly
ﬁnd back per melody.
Results did not show any signiﬁcant effect for timbre, with the ﬁve conditions all at
the same score. On average, musicians performed better. An other grouping based
on vocal accuracy gave similar results, arguing that this more objective criterion can
be used for this musical task. Despite the absence of timbre effect, an analysis for serial
order short term memory effects has been performed. The results show a signiﬁcant pri-
macy/recency effect, in accordance with previous experiments for musical sequences.
They also point out a strong effect of the tone height in the musical key.
Limitations can be expressed to explain the results of the response accuracy for timbre.
Some are related to technical issues, as the quality of the recordings and their post-
processing. Other are related to the design, as the tempo and the frequency shift be-
tween the timbres. However, it does not seem likely that these issues can justify the
absence of signiﬁcant effect for timbre, even if they should be considered as points that
require a particular control by future researches. The most likely reason to explain the
results is the fact that the phonological loop does not beneﬁt from the effect of vocal
timbre, as long as the rehearsal is performed by sub-vocalization.
59
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
Finally, the results for the serial order short term memory task provide arguments for
the use of some domain-general process in the auditory working memory, as pointed
out by the primacy and recency effects. However, the strongest effect was for the tone
height, as reﬂected both by the serial order accuracy and the transposition gradient for
tones. Therefore, in a musical context, the domain-speciﬁc process are likely to be the
strongest.
For future studies, it could be of interest to repeat the same task by asking the partici-
pants to sing back the melody before they have to recreate it. By using vocal rehearsal,
the beneﬁts of human stimuli on vocal production might help to increase memoriza-
tion. On the other hand, it might also impaired memorization, because the repetition
will produce interference. Regarding the domain processing, the study pointed out that
domain-speciﬁc process for musical stimuli has probably been underestimated, because
it was not studied in a real musical context. It could be of interest to investigate the
effect of the musical context on the relative strength of speciﬁc and general domain pro-
cessing.
60
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIXA
Graphical model check
To check the linear model asumptions, the statistical software R offers the opportunity
to create diagnostic plots, that shows the residuals in four different subplots: Residuals
vs Fitted, used to check the linear relationship; Normal Q-Q, used to examine the nor-
mality of residuals; Scale-Location, used to check the variance homogeneity; Residuals
vs Leverages, used to identify if some points have a too high inﬂuence on the model.
A.1 | Response accuracy for Position and Tone
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
93 134
120
−2
−1
0
1
2
−2
−1
0
1
2
Theoretical Quantiles
Standardized residuals
Normal Q−Q
93134 73
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Fitted values
Standardized residuals
Scale−Location
93 134 73
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
Leverage
Standardized residuals
Cook's distance
Residuals vs Leverage
73
93
134
Figure A.1: Diagnostic plot for the model with response accuracy as dependent variable
and Tone, Position and Musician Level as parameters.
61
==PAGE:74==
Appendix A. Graphical model check
A.2. Transposition Gradient
The diagnostic plot of the model with response accuracy as dependent variable and
Tone, Position and Lvl as independent variable can be seen in the Figure A.1. The Resid-
ual vs. Fitted doesn’t show any pattern and the line is quite horizontal, allowing to con-
clude that the linear relationship assumption has been respected. The qq-plot follows a
normal distribution, and so this assumption is also checked. The residual vs Leverage
plot doesn’t show any point that might have a big inﬂuence on the model. Even thought
the line of the Scale Location plot shows a lump, the points look randomly distributed
without showing any pattern, so the homogeneity of variance of the residuals is good
enough. The heteroscedasticity might be corrected with a transformation, but as the
other assumptions are perfectly matched, this option will not be considered here.
A.2 | Transposition Gradient
1
2
3
4
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Fitted values
Residuals
Residuals vs Fitted
79
213
155
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Theoretical Quantiles
Standardized residuals
Normal Q−Q
79
213
155
1
2
3
4
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Fitted values
Standardized residuals
Scale−Location
79
213
155
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Leverage
Standardized residuals
Cook's distance
1
0.5
0.5
1
Residuals vs Leverage
51
79
Figure A.2: Diagnostic plot for the model with Transposition length as dependent vari-
able and Condition, Distance and their interaction as parameters.
The diagnostic plot can be seen in the Figure A.2. The Residual vs Fitted and Scale-
62
==PAGE:75==
Appendix A. Graphical model check
A.2. Transposition Gradient
Location plots do not have any clear pattern (except for the lines due to the discrete
values) and the lines are horizontal enough to conclude that the linear relationship as-
sumption and the homogeneity of variance of the residuals are respected. The normal
QQ plot conﬁrms that the residual are normally distributed. Finally, even though some
points of the Residuals vs Leverage are out of the cluster, they are still at a low Cook’s
distance, so they don’t need further examination.
63
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
References
Agus, T. R., Suied, C., Thorpe, S. J., and Pressnitzer, D. (2012). Fast recognition of musical sounds based on
timbre. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 131(5):4124–4133.
Allen, E. and J Oxenham, A. (2014). Symmetric interactions and interference between pitch and timbre. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 135:1371.
Bachem, A. (1954). Time factors in relative and absolute pitch determination. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 26(5):751–753.
Baddeley, A. D. (2007). Working Memory, Thought and Action. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Baddeley, A. D. and Broadbent, D. E. (1983). Working memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
of London. B, Biological Sciences, 302:311–324.
Baddeley, A. D. and Hitch (1977). Recency re-examined., pages 647–667. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Baddeley, A. D. and Hitch, G. J. (2000). Development of working memory: Should the pascual-leone and
the baddeley and hitch models be merged? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 77(2):128–137.
Belin, P., Zatorre, R. J., Lafallie, P., Ahad, P., and Pike, B. (2000). Voice-selective areas in human auditory
cortex. Nature, 403(6767):309–312.
Bella, S. D., Berkowska, M., and Sowi´nski, J. (2011). Disorders of pitch production in tone deafness. Frontiers
in Psychology, 2:Article 164.
Bhatarah, P., Ward, G., Smith, J., and Hayes, L. (2009). Examining the relationship between free recall and
immediate serial recall: Similar patterns of rehearsal and similar effects of word length, presentation
rate, and articulatory suppression. Mem Cognit, 37(5):689–713.
Blumstein, D. T., Verneyre, L., and Daniel, J. C. (2004). Reliability and the adaptive utility of discrimination
among alarm callers. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(1550):1851–1857.
Brattico, E., Naatanen, R., and Tervaniemi, M. (2001). Context effects on pitch perception in musicians and
nonmusicians: Evidence from event-related-potential recordings. Music Perception - MUSIC PERCEPT,
19:199–222.
Burnett, T. A. and Larson, C. R. (2002). Early pitch-shift response is active in both steady and dynamic
voice pitch control. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 112(3 I):1058–1063.
Caruso, V. and Balaban, E. (2014). Pitch and timbre interfere when both are parametrically varied. PloS one,
9:e87065.
Chai, W. and Vercoe, B. (2005). Detection of key change in classical piano music. ISMIR 2005, 6th Interna-
tional Conference on Music Information Retrieval, London, UK, 11-15 September 2005, pages 468–473.
Charest, I., Pernet, C., A Rousselet, G., González, I., Latinus, M., Fillion-Bilodeau, S., Chartrand, J.-P., and
Belin, P. (2009). Electrophysiological evidence for an early processing of human voices. BMC neuroscience,
10:127.
Cowan, N. (1984). On short and long auditory stores. Psychological Bulletin, 96(2):341–370.
Cowan, N. (1998). Visual and auditory working memory capacity. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(3):77–78.
Cowan, N. (1999). An Embedded-Processes Model of Working Memory, page 62–101. Cambridge University
65
==PAGE:78==
References
References
Press.
Cowan, N., Saults, J. S., Elliott, E. M., and Moreno, M. V. (2002). Deconfounding serial recall. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46(1):153–177.
Craik, F. I. and Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6):671–684.
Dahlen, K. and Caldwell–Harris, C. (2013). Rehearsal and aptitude in foreign vocabulary learning. The
Modern Language Journal, 97(4):902–916.
Decasper, A. and Fifer, W. (1980). Of human bonding: newborns prefer their mothers’ voice. science 208,
1174-1176. Science (New York, N.Y.), 208:1174–6.
Deutsch, D. (1970). Dislocation of tones in a musical sequence, a memory illusion. Nature, 226(5242):286–.
Deutsch, D. (1972a). Effect of repetition of standard and comparison tones on recognition memory for
pitch. J Exp Psychol 1972a.
Deutsch, D. (1972b). Octave generalization and tune recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 11(6):411–412.
Deutsch, D. (1974). Generality of interference by tonal stimuli in recognition memory for pitch. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 26(2):229–234.
Deutsch, D. (1978). Interferencet in pitch memory as a function of ear or input. Quarterly Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 30(May):283–287.
Deutsch, D. (1983). Octave equivalence in the processing of tonal sequences. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 74(S1):S10–S10.
Dolson, M. (1986). The phase vocoder, a tutoriel. Computer Music Journal, 10(4):14–27.
Dowling, W. J., Bartlett, J. C., Halpern, A. R., and Andrews, M. W. (2008). Melody recognition at fast and
slow tempos: Effects of age, experience, and familiarity. Perception and Psychophysics, 70(3):496–502.
Ecklund-Flores, L. and Turkewitz, G. (1996). Asymmetric headturning to speech and nonspeech in human
newborns. Developmental psychobiology, 29:205–17.
Eddins, D. A., Anand, S., Camacho, A., and Shrivastav, R. (2016). Modeling of breathy voice quality using
pitch-strength estimates. Journal of Voice, 30(6):774–774.e7.
Estis, J. M., Dean-Claytor, A., Moore, R. E., and Rowell, T. L. (2011). Pitch-matching accuracy in trained
singers and untrained individuals: The impact of musical interference and noise.
Journal of Voice,
25(2):173–180.
Fastl, H. and Stoll, G. (1979). Scaling of pitch strength. Hearing Research, 1(4):293–301.
Fastl, H. and Zwicker, E. (2007). Pitch and Pitch Strength, pages 111–148. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg.
Ferrari, P. and Coudé, G. (2017). Mirror neurons.
Fujioka, T., Trainor, L., Ross, B., Kakigi, R., and Pantev, C. (2004). Musical training enhances automatic
encoding of melodic contour and interval structure. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 16:1010–21.
Glanzer, M. and Cunitz, A. R. (1965). Two storage mechanisms in free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 5(4):351–360.
Gorin, S. and Majerus, S. (2019). Verbal and musical short-term memory: Evidence for shared serial order
processes? Psychologica Belgica.
Gorin, S., Mengal, P., and Majerus, S. (2018). A comparison of serial order short-term memory effects across
verbal and musical domains. Memory and Cognition, 46(3):464–481.
Granot, R. Y., Israel-Kolatt, R., Gilboa, A., and Kolatt, T. (2013). Accuracy of pitch matching signiﬁcantly
improved by live voice model. Journal of Voice, 27(3):390.
66
==PAGE:79==
References
References
Greenspon, E. B., Pfordresher, P. Q., and Halpern, A. R. (2017). Pitch imitation ability in mental transfor-
mations of melodies. Music Perception, 34(5):585–604.
Grohe, A.-K. and Weber, A. (2018). Memory advantage for produced words and familiar native accents.
Journal of Cognitive Psychology, pages 1–18.
Guérard, K. and Tremblay, S. (2008). Revisiting evidence for modularity and functional equivalence across
verbal and spatial domains in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition,
34(3):556–569.
Hanser, S. B. (2016). Disapproval on improvement of pitch matching and group behavior.
He, N. J., Dubno, J. R., and Mills, J. H. (1998). Frequency and intensity discrimination measured in a
maximum-likelihood procedure from young and aged normal-hearing subjects. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 103(1):553–565.
Hurlstone, M. J., Hitch, G. J., and Baddeley, A. D. (2014). Memory for serial order across domains: An
overview of the literature and directions for future research. Psychological Bulletin, 140(2):339–373.
Hutchins, S., Larrouy-Maestri, P., and Peretz, I. (2014). Singing ability is rooted in vocal-motor control of
pitch. Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics, 76(8):2522–2530.
Hutchins, S. M. and Peretz, I. (2012). A frog in your throat or in your ear? searching for the causes of poor
singing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(1):76–97.
Joyner, D. R. (1969). The monotone problem. Journal of Research in Music Education, 17(1):115.
Kalakoski, V. (2007). Effect of skill level on recall of visually presented patterns of musical notes. Scandina-
vian journal of psychology, 48:87–96.
Krumhansl, C. L. (1990). Cognitive foundations of musical pitch. Cognitive Foundations of Musical Pitch,
pages 1–307.
Krumhansl, C. L. and Kessler, E. J. (1982). Tracing the dynamic changes in perceived tonal organization in
a spatial representation of musical keys. Psychological Review, 89(4):334–368.
Laroche, J. and Dolson, M. (1999). Improved phase vocoder time-scale modiﬁcation of audio. Ieee Transac-
tions on Speech and Audio Processing, 7(3):323–332.
Larrouy-Maestri, P. and Pfordresher, P. (2018). Pitch perception in music: Do scoops matter?
Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 44.
Law, L. N. C. and Zentner, M. (2016). Assessing musical abilities objectively: construction and validation
of the proﬁle of music perception skills.
Levy, D., Granot, R., and Bentin, S. (2003). Neural sensitivity to human voices: Erp evidence of task and
attentional inﬂuences. Psychophysiology, 40:291–305.
Lewandowsky, S. and Farrell, S. (2008). Short-term memory: New data and a model. Psychology of Learning
and Motivation, 49:1–48.
Li, Y., Gu, F., Xiliang, Z., Yang, L.-Z., Chen, L., Wei, Z., Zha, R., Wang, Y., Li, X., Zhou, Y., and Zhang, X.
(2014). Cerebral activity to opposite-sex voices reﬂected by event-related potentials. PloS one, 9:e94976.
Lin, I.-F., Agus, T., Suied, C., Pressnitzer, D., Yamada, r., Komine, Y., Kato, N., and Kashino, M. (2016). Fast
response to human voices in autism. Scientiﬁc Reports, 6:26336.
Lockhead, G. and Byrd, R. (1981). Practically perfect pitch. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
70(2):387–389.
Lévêque, Y., Giovanni, A., and Schön, D. (2012). Pitch-matching in poor singers: Human model advantage.
Journal of Voice, 26(3):293 – 298.
Majerus, S., Poncelet, M., Van der Linden, M., and Weekes, B. S. (2008). Lexical learning in bilingual adults:
67
==PAGE:80==
References
References
The relative importance of short-term memory for serial order and phonological knowledge. Cognition,
107(2):395–419.
Malzan, J. (1993). Pitch, masking, and ohm’s law for hearing.
McAuley, J. D., Jones, M. R., Holub, S., Johnston, H. M., and Miller, N. S. (2006). The time of our lives: Life
span development of timing and event tracking. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135(3):348–
367.
Mercer, T. and McKeown, D. (2010). Updating and feature overwriting in short-term memory for timbre.
Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics, 72(8):2289–2303.
Moore, R. E., Estis, J., Gordon-Hickey, S., and Watts, C. (2008). Pitch discrimination and pitch matching
abilities with vocal and nonvocal stimuli. Journal of Voice, 22(4):399 – 407.
Moore, R. E., Keaton, C., and Watts, C. (2007). The role of pitch memory in pitch discrimination and pitch
matching. Journal of Voice, 21(5):560 – 567.
Murry, T. and Zwirner, P. (1991). Pitch matching ability of experienced and inexperienced singers. Journal
of Voice, 5(3):197–202.
Nees, M. A., Corrini, E., Leong, P., and Harris, J. (2017). Maintenance of memory for melodies: Articulation
or attentional refreshing? Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 24(6):1964–1970.
Norman, D. and Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action: Willed and automatic control of behavior. Cognitive
Neuroscience: A reader.
Pallesen, K. J., Brattico, E., Bailey, C. J., Korvenoja, A., Koivisto, J., Gjedde, A., and Carlson, S. (2010).
Cognitive control in auditory working memory is enhanced in musicians. PLOS ONE, 5(6):1–12.
Pardo, J. S. (2006). On phonetic convergence during conversational interaction. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 119(4):2382–2393.
Pascual-Leone, J. (1970). A mathematical model for the transition rule in piaget’s developmental stages.
Acta Psychologica, 32:301 – 345.
Peretz, I., Ayotte, J., Zatorre, R., Mehler, J., Ahad, P., Penhune, V., and Jutras, B. (2002). Congenital amusia:
A disorder of ﬁne-grained pitch discrimination. Neuron, 33(2):185–191.
Perrodin, C., Kayser, C., Abel, T. J., Logothetis, N. K., and Petkov, C. I. (2015). Who is that? brain networks
and mechanisms for identifying individuals. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(12):783–796.
Pfordresher, P. and Mantell, J. (2009). Singing as a form of vocal imitation: Mechanisms and deﬁcits.
Pfordresher, P. Q. and Larrouy-Maestri, P. (2015). On drawing a line through the spectrogram: how do we
understand deﬁcits of vocal pitch imitation? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9:271.
Pfordresher, P. Q. and Steven, B. (2007). Poor-pitch singing in the absence of "tone deafness". Music Percep-
tion, 25(2):95–115.
Pitt, M. (1994). Perception of pitch and timbre by musically trained and untrained listeners. Journal of
Experimental Psychology-human Perception and Performance, 20(5):976–986.
Plantinga, J. and Trainor, L. (2005). Memory for melody: Infants use a relative pitch code. Cognition, 98:1–11.
Pollard, K. A. and Blumstein, D. T. (2011). Social group size predicts the evolution of individuality. Current
Biology, 21(5):413–417.
Postman, L. and Phillips, L. W. (1965). Short-term temporal changes in free recall. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 17(2):132–138.
Rakowski, A. (1993). Short-term memory for pitch investigated with vocal matchings. Archives of Acoustics,
18(2):351–7, 351–357.
Retzel, F., Lerdahl, F., and Jackendoff, R. (1985). A generative theory of tonal music. Notes, 41(3):502.
68
==PAGE:81==
References
References
S. Zamuner, T., Morin-Lessard, E., Strahm, S., and P.A. Page, M. (2015). Spoken word recognition of novel
words, either produced or only heard during learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 89.
Schellenberg, E. and Habashi, P. (2015). Remembering the melody and timbre, forgetting the key and
tempo. Memory cognition, 43.
Schirmer, A., Striano, T., and D Friederici, A. (2005). Sex differences in the preattentive processing of vocal
emotional expressions. Neuroreport, 16:635–9.
Schön, D., Lorber, B., Spacal, M., and Semenza, C. (2004). A selective deﬁcit in the production of exact
musical intervals following right-hemisphere damage. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 21(7):773–784.
Semal, C. and Demany, L. (1991). Dissociation of pitch from timbre in auditory short-term-memory. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 89(5):2404–2410.
Semal, C. and Demany, L. (1993). Further evidence for an autonomous processing of pitch in auditory
short-term memory. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 94(3 PART 1):1315–1322, 1315–1322.
Semal, C. and Demany, L. (2008). The Role of Memory in Auditory Perception, pages 77–113. Springer US,
Boston, MA.
Shonle, J. I. and Horan, K. E. (1980). The pitch of vibrato tones. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
67(1):246–52, 246–252.
Shrivastav, R., Eddins, D. A., and Anand, S. (2012). Pitch strength of normal and dysphonic voices. The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 131(3):2261–2269.
Starr, G. E. and Pitt, M. A. (1997). Interference effects in short-term memory for timbre. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 102(1):486–494.
Stavropoulos, K. and Carver, L. (2016). Neural correlates of attention to human-made sounds: An erp
study. PLOS ONE, 11:e0165745.
Tillmann, B., Schulze, K., and Foxton, J. M. (2009). Congenital amusia: A short-term memory deﬁcit for
non-verbal, but not verbal sounds. Brain and Cognition, 71(3):259 – 264.
Trainor, L. J. and Unrau, A. (2012). Development of Pitch and Music Perception, pages 223–254. Springer New
York, New York, NY.
Van Besouw, R. M., Brereton, J. S., and Howard, D. M. (2008). Range of tuning for tones with and without
vibrato.
Van Dommelen, W. A. (1990). Acoustic parameters in human speaker recognition. Language and Speech,
33(3):259–272.
Vicario, G. B. (1983). Micro- and macromelodies. Fourth Workshop on Physicaland Neuropsychological Foun-
dations of Music.
Warren, R. M., Gardner, D. A., Brubaker, B. S., and Bashford, J. A. (1991).
Melodic and nonmelodic
sequences of tones: Effects of duration on perception.
Music Perception: an Interdisciplinary Journal,
8(3):277–289.
Warrier, C. and Zatorre, R. (2002). Inﬂuence of tonal context and timbral variation on perception of pitch.
Perception and Psychophysics, 64(2):198–207.
Watts, C. R. and Hall, M. D. (2008).
Timbral inﬂuences on vocal pitch-matching accuracy.
Logopedics
Phoniatrics Vocology, 33(2):74–82.
Weaver, A. J., DiGiovanni, J. J., and Ries, D. (2017). Relationships among musical training and pitch match-
ing in children and adults. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 142(4):2613–2613.
Weiss, M., Trehub, S., and Schellenberg, E. (2012). Something in the way she sings: Enhanced memory for
vocal melodies. Psychological science, 23:1074–8.
69
==PAGE:82==
References
References
Weiss, M. W. and Peretz, I. (2019). Ability to process musical pitch is unrelated to the memory advantage
for vocal music. Brain and Cognition, 129:35–39.
Weiss, M. W., Trehub, S. E., Schellenberg, E. G., and Habashi, P. (2016). Pupils dilate for vocal or familiar
music. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 42(8):1061–1065.
White, B. (1958). Recognition of distorted melodies. American Psychologist, 13(7):384–384.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1969). Associative strength theory of recognition memory for pitch. Journal of Mathe-
matical Psychology, 6(1):13 – 61.
Williamson, V., Baddeley, A. D., and Hitch, G. (2006). Music in working memory? examining the effect of
pitch proximity on the recall performance of nonmusicians.
Williamson, V. J., Baddeley, A. D., and Hitch, G. J. (2010). Musicians’ and nonmusicians’ short-term memory
for verbal and musical sequences: Comparing phonological similarity and pitch proximity. Memory &
Cognition, 38(2):163–175.
Wilson, M. (2001). Perceiving imitatible stimuli: consequences of isomorphism between input and output.
Psychological Bulletin, 127(4):543–553.
Wilson, M. and Knoblich, G. (2013). The case for motor involvement in perceiving conspeciﬁcs.
Yarbrough, C., Green, G., Benson, W., and Bowers, J. (1991). Inaccurate singers: An exploratory study of
variables affecting pitch-matching. Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education, (107):23–34.
70
