==PAGE:1==
Understanding sense-making
behaviour of software developers
using process mining in a
behaviour-driven development
context
Erik David Allin
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In order to optimise development processes, it is essential to understand
how developers engage with software artefacts with diﬀerent levels of read-
ability. This thesis aims to investigate how developers work with software
elements in a behaviour-driven development (BDD) environment. The
investigation is performed through experimentation with system under-
standing tasks of a domain and code-speciﬁc character when the quality
of the source code behind varies due to code obfuscation. This thesis re-
views the necessary theory and considerations underlying an experiment
using eye-tracking and the think-aloud protocol. The experiment is per-
formed with 24 subjects that are experienced in software development.
Furthermore, the necessary data processing that is used to extract the
data to a database and then to a ﬁle format ﬁtted for analysis.
The
data is organised per software artefact, and per ﬁle in the experiment’s
projects for process mining. Inﬂuence because of obfuscation is analysed
through comparison of raw data extracted from the experiments, process
mining, reading of questionnaires given to the test persons and statis-
tical analysis. Based on the analysis, it is concluded that obfuscation
increases developers dependence on BDD elements with domain-speciﬁc
tasks. Additionally, the developer solves the task faster and more cor-
rectly. For code-speciﬁc tasks, the use of BDD elements varies, but the
diﬃculty of tasks increases and the test subjects’ accuracy and speed
reduces. Overall, this thesis shows that obfuscation increases the use of
BDD elements, and presents several diﬃculties in understanding systems.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
For at kunne optimere udviklingsprocesser er det nødvendigt at forstå
hvordan udviklere arbejder med software artefakter med forskellig læs-
barhed. Målet for dette speciale er at undersøge hvordan udviklere ar-
bejder med software artefakter i et behaviour-driven (BDD) udviklings-
miljø. Dette gøres ved hjælp af et eksperiment med forståelsesopgaver af
domæne- og kodespeciﬁk karakter, når kvaliteten på kildekoden bag va-
rierer pga. kode obfuskering. Specialets eksperiment foretages med brug
af en eye-tracker og ved brug af en tænke højt-protokol samt brugen af
spørgeskemaer. Eksperimentet foretages på 24 testpersoner med erfaring
indenfor softwareudvikling. Dernæst beskrives den nødvendige databe-
handling, der trækker dataen til en database ud og dernæst til et format,
der kan organiseres per software artefakt og ﬁl i experimentets projek-
ter. Ved sammenligning af rådata fra eksperimenterne, process mining,
aﬂæsning af spørgeskemaer givet til testpersonerne og statistisk analyse,
analyseres brugen af hvilken indﬂydelse obfuskering har på testpersoner-
nes engagement med projektet indhold. På baggrund af analysen kon-
kluderes det, at obfuskering domæne-speciﬁkke opgaver øger udvikleres
afhængighed af BDD elementer, men til gengæld gør at udvikleren hur-
tigere og mere korrekt gennemfører opgaven. For kode-speciﬁkke varierer
brugen af BDD elementer, men derudover øges niveauet på spørgsmålene
og testpersonernes korrekthed og hastighed mindskes. Samlet set konklu-
deres det, at obfuskering øger brugen af BDD elementer, og giver ﬂere
vanskeligheder ved at forstå systemer.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering under
the supervision of Barbara Weber, Per Bækgaard and assistant supervi-
sors Indira Nurdiani Jabangwe and Constantina Ioannou.
The thesis is about eye-tracking visualisations and analysis using process
mining and statistical analysis on data extracted from the eye tracker
Tobii Eye Tracker 4C using the Eclipse plugin iTrace.
Lyngby, 28-July-2019
Erik David Allin
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank Barbara Weber and Per Bækgaard, my supervisors for
supporting with materials and ideas throughout the entirety of the study.
Furthermore, I would thank Indira Nurdiani Jabangwe for providing re-
latable study material and for helping with ideas for the experiment struc-
ture. Finally, I thank Constantina Ioannou for giving technical support
for equipment and ideas used in the experiments of this study as well as
suggestions and guidance for the data analysis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aims and hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Developers understanding of code . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Code obfuscation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Behaviour-driven Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Eye-tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
iTrace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Process mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5.1
Disco
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methodology
19
3.1
The process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Experiment setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Context selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Hypothesis formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.2.3
Variables selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.4
Selection of test subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.5
Code obfuscation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.6
Experiment design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Exporting the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.4
Analysing the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.1
Process mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4.2
Verbal protocol analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4.3
The analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.5
Validity threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5.1
Conclusion validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.5.2
Internal validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5.3
Construct validity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.5.4
External validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Data analysis
53
4.1
Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation
for domain understanding tasks (Q1) . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.1
Comparison of raw data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.1.2
Process maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.1.3
Questionnaires & verbal protocol analysis . . . . .
67
4.1.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2
Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation
for code understanding tasks (Q2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.2.1
Comparison of raw data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
4.2.2
Process maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
4.2.3
Questionnaires & verbal protocol analysis . . . . .
86
4.2.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
4.3
Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
. . . . . . .
93
4.3.1
Statistical overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
5
Discussion
105
5.1
Experiment results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
5.1.1
Domain-speciﬁc tasks results
. . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.1.2
Code-speciﬁc tasks results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
5.1.3
Overall results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
5.2
Validity threats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
5.2.1
Statistical power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
5.2.2
Reliability of measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
5.2.3
Random heterogeneity of subjects . . . . . . . . . . 111
5.2.4
Maturation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
5.2.5
Ambiguity about the direction of causal inﬂuence
& Interactions with selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . 112
5.3
Further studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
6
Conclusion
115
A Pre-experiment questionnaire
117
B Post-experiment questionnaires
129
C iTrace gaze database creation
147
D Experiment individual test subject data
149
D.1 Group 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
D.2 Group 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
D.3 Group 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
D.4 Group 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
E Experiment grouped test subject data
159
F Histograms & Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) scripts 163
G One-way Analysis of variance (ANOVA) test script
167
H Additional analysis of variance (ANOVA) results
169
I
Bar chart with error bars script
175
Bibliography
179
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Nowadays, the development of systems is a task performed in many work-
ing environments. The outcome may have big impacts on those who use
the system. Additionally, it has an impact on those who are to maintain
and develop it further on.
Optimising the development process can decrease cost and time required,
as well as the quality of the resulted product.
While many tools and
practices exist to improve the process, one of the newer techniques is
behaviour-driven development (BDD). Being a technique that is still rel-
atively new but builds upon older well-known techniques such as test-
driven development (TDD), it oﬀers some interesting features. BDD of-
fers a way for IT and business to communicate, and rather than only
testing the functionality of the system, it also tests the business require-
ments. While it oﬀers improvements to communication between people of
diﬀerent origin, another thing is if it improves the development process.
Since the goal of BDD also is to drive the development process, this might
very well be the case [19].
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
1.1
Related works
Before the study is performed, it is essential to investigate existing studies
within this area. Studies shows that an understandable source code with
descriptive function and class names improve the developer’s comprehen-
sion of a system [9] [31] [24]. With this in mind, well-written source code
might often be enough for a developer to get to understand a system. The
easier understanding is also consistent with another study ﬁnding a po-
tential connection between the readability of source code and the amount
of usage of BDD elements. If the code is easily readable, the developer
might ﬁnd information from the BDD less important [25].
A relevant study to perform is to investigate the connection of how de-
velopers engage with software artefacts of diﬀerent readability. The con-
nection is investigated through the use of eye-tracking, that are proven
to be able to document a developers sense-making behaviour when they
read software artefacts in diﬀerent aspects [25] [14].
The quality of the source code changes through obfuscation through a
tool, ProGuard, used in the industry to optimise and obfuscate Java
code.
While code obfuscation is mostly used due to security reasons,
studies have shown that it decreases an attackers eﬃciency in under-
standing and modifying code that has been obfuscated [17]. Additionally,
code obfuscation is still relevant since modern systems more often have
to run security-sensitive code on unsecured endpoints [18]. These unse-
cured endpoints exist in the form of small and often insecure internet of
things (IoT) devices. These types of devices and other smart devices are
increasingly used both in the industry and in private. With the amount
of sensitive data often being stored on such devices, avoiding access by
malicious software or people have become increasingly important.
Through experiments with a between-group in conjunction with within-
group experimental design, and the use of eye-tracking and retrospective
think-aloud testing the necessary data for a study is made. The data
analysis is split into four parts consisting of raw data comparison, pro-
cess mining, verbal protocol analysis and statistical analysis. This allows
ﬁnding patterns of ways developers try to understand the code and how
BDD might be a tool for improving this.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Aims and hypotheses
3
1.2
Aims and hypotheses
Currently, there is a scarcity of information regarding how the readability
of source code aﬀects the use of BDD. This thesis aims to obtain an
understanding of how developers are engaged with software artefacts in
certain ways when they try to understand them.
The purpose is to conduct an eye-tracking experiment with retrospective
think-aloud in the context of BDD to understand how developers engage
diﬀerently with snippets of software during sense-making tasks when the
readability of the code varies. Data analysis is considered through raw
data comparison, process mining, verbal protocol analysis and statistical
analysis. Through the analysis, it can be seen whether obfuscation aﬀects
the engagement on software artefacts.
Due to the limited scope of this thesis, diﬀerent techniques of changing
the readability of code are not included but is limited to a standard way
of code obfuscation. The speciﬁc structure of the BDD ﬁles is also not in
focus.
The subordinate aims of this thesis are to:
• Investigate how developers interact diﬀerently with software arte-
facts when source code is obfuscated during sense-making tasks that
require domain understanding.
• Investigate how developers interact diﬀerently with software arte-
facts when source code is obfuscated during sense-making tasks that
require code understanding.
• Discover what challenges developers have when working with obfus-
cated code.
The reason to distinguish between domain- and code understanding is
that the expected engagement with such tasks is diﬀerent.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory
This chapter aims to introduce the essential theory and concepts, are used
in the following sections. The aim is also to complement the content of
section 1.1, as it investigates related studies in the area. Furthermore, it
introduces its corresponding theory.
First, an overview related to how developers understand code is given in
section 2.1. To further understand this, it is relevant to look at how code
obfuscation works and aﬀects this understanding in section 2.2. Continu-
ing, principals behind the experiments’ use of behaviour-driven develop-
ment (BDD) in section 2.3 are explained. This serves as relevant back-
ground knowledge for the experiment methodology described in section 3.
Additionally, the theory behind eye-tracking used in the experiment is de-
scribed in section 2.4. The theory lays the foundations for the background
of the methodology in chapter 3 and as foundations for the data gathered
for section 4. Finally, the theory behind process mining is described in
section 2.5, intended as relevant information for the analysis performed
with the data in chapter 4. This is intended as relevant knowledge for the
discussion of this data analysis in chapter 5 and ﬁnally, the conclusion in
chapter 6.
==PAGE:20==
6
Theory
2.1
Developers understanding of code
As this thesis investigates developers sense-making of systems, it is es-
sential to discover what is already known about code understanding from
existing studies.
As described in chapter 1, code understanding when
developing a system is critical. If this lacks, the system may no longer be
possible to be understood, maintained, developed or be useful, because
no one understands the system.
Numerous studies are done in the relation of understanding a developer’s
code comprehension with the source code of diﬀerent readability. This is
both in regards to the naming of descriptive functions and variables, the
use of BDD [25] and when code obfuscation is used. The studies found
that full, descriptive names improved comprehension, accuracy and speed.
In case of abbreviations and specially non-descriptive abbreviations and
letters, the results were worse [9] [31] [24]. Some of the studies also make
their test subjects think-aloud during experiments too; for example, when
their cognitive load are studied [33].
Only a few studies have focused on the comprehension of more than just
source code. Leonard Peter Binamungu et al. have found that many BDD
practitioners ﬁnd that one of BDDs beneﬁts is its ability to improve code
comprehension [8].
The connection between a developer’s engagement
with source code and BDD elements depending on whether the source
code is obfuscated or not or has diﬀerent levels of readability has yet
to be studied. No study that has investigated this connection could be
found.
2.2
Code obfuscation
Code obfuscation is the attempt to protect software systems from being
attacked or reverse engineered. If successfully reverse engineered, systems
vulnerabilities can be exploited. In the wrong hands, this could be used
to get access to systems and in the worst-case tamper and break down
these systems. Another serious threat is that with a reverse-engineered
system, an attack can eﬀectively replicate the system. In this way, a com-
pany can potentially go bankrupt since its solution loses its uniqueness.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Code obfuscation
7
With this threat and the increased use of IoT and smart devices, code
obfuscation is still an area to take serious [18].
Code obfuscation in the simplest form can be described as a way to change
the source code, so its implementation details are hidden from an at-
tacker. The program is, thus, transformed into a semantically equivalent,
but which is more diﬃcult to understand. There exist many ways of code
obfuscation. Some techniques are name obfuscation of code content such
as function and variable names, code ﬂow obfuscation changing the ﬂow
of the program without changing its functionality.
Changing the ﬂow
can, for example, be obtained by the use of opaque predicates. These can
add extra control transfers in the system that only the developer knows
is never used. Furthermore, this can be used as a watermark if someone
copies a project. If a system were copied, but still had a opaque predicate
in the system that does nothing, it could be a good argument for the orig-
inal creator to accuse the system of being a copy. If the attacker kept it
in, since it was not understood that it did nothing, the original developer
might have a good cause to claim the originality of his system. None of
the techniques are perfect, as in many scenarios, an attacker could still be
able to comprehend parts of the system, including its opaque predicates
[34] [15].
The amounts of studies researching the capabilities of the techniques are
limited, in regard to how much they reduce the attackers’ capabilities to
understand a system. A study by Mariano Ceccato et al. with master
and PhD students show that identiﬁer renaming, also known as name
obfuscation, at least doubles the time needed for a successful attack to
happen. The study also found that this obfuscation technique reduces
the gap between novice and skilled attackers. Additionally, it makes sys-
tems that are easy to attack without obfuscation more similar to systems
that are normally more diﬃcult to break [17]. Comparing obfuscation
techniques, Mariano Ceccato et al. documented that identiﬁer renaming
is more eﬀective compared to more advanced techniques such as opaque
predicates [16]. With identiﬁer renaming there are many options in re-
gard to what policies can be used as the renaming method. Often the
options are between full alternative words, abbreviations or single letters.
A study has shown that full words give the best comprehension but not
much diﬀerent from abbreviations. Single letters, however, are more dif-
ﬁcult to understand [31]. If both the abbreviations and single letters are
named meaningless, the diﬀerence is not as measurable. In another study,
==PAGE:22==
8
Theory
full word identiﬁers gave a 19% increase in the speed of ﬁnding defects in
a system, requiring a good understanding of the system [24]. If a person
were to use an eﬀective code obfuscation technique, these options would,
therefore, be a good choice.
2.3
Behaviour-driven Development
Behaviour-Driven Development (BDD) is an agile method of developing
software that builds upon the foundations of Test-Driven Development
(TDD). TDD focuses on the details and outcome of the implementation
of a system. Functions and classes at the code level are tested for the
expected outcome. Thereby, it is tested if the system has the expected
feature as speciﬁed. The amount that can be tested is, in theory, very
high, as every single function’s result can be tested. Since the testing is
primarily based on the code, setting up the tests requires a good under-
standing of the system and code structure. This makes the way of testing
quite complex. The ﬁrst reason is that testers often need the skills of
a developer. The amount of testing also has to be aligned in a project,
which requires some prior experience with TDD [35] [19].
Dan North and many others started to create BDD, because of the ex-
plained complications and misunderstandings among how developers used
TDD [6]. BDD still uses elements from TDD, but rather than focusing on
near-code testing, and it tests the behaviour of a system. The behaviour
of a system is a set of scenarios. These are derived from the business
requirements or goals of the system. BDD is also diﬀerent in the way
that the test scenarios are more general and descriptive. That allows sev-
eral more roles in a business to participate in them. In this way, BDD
consists of two phases being Deliberate Discovery and the TDD part. De-
liberate Discovery is what makes BDD diﬀerent, as, before any testing,
many company roles in addition to developers, agree on the goals and
behaviour of the system. Since many roles are not used to code, this
extra step ensures that all roles agree on what the system shall do [19]
[35]. This should limit the number of misunderstandings that otherwise
could happen to the systems development. It requires the involvement of
several more people.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Behaviour-driven Development
9
The process of BDD varies a bit between businesses and programming
languages but generally consists of ﬁve steps. The ﬁrst step is the meet-
ing across roles, where the systems Business goals are deﬁned. To fulﬁl
these business goals, the second step is performed by describing several
features that the system needs to require to act as expected. A feature is
given as scenarios in the system being used. In a scenario, there is given
a background as a pre-condition to the scenario. After the pre-condition,
an action is performed to the system. When this action is performed,
the feature describes what happens past the action as a post-condition.
A suﬃcient amount of features to reach the business goals are described
in the third step. Often, both positive and negative scenarios describe
what happens if a system is used correctly or incorrectly. The structure
is often described by a "Given...
When...
Then..., where given indi-
cates the pre-condition, when the action that is performed and then the
post-condition. For the fourth step, an executable speciﬁcation of the
scenarios is made by writing step deﬁnitions. Step deﬁnitions are meant
as the layer between the scenarios and the actual source code. This means
that it also has a description of the scenarios. What makes it diﬀerent is
that it calls the speciﬁc part of the system in the code. It checks that the
post-condition is what is expected. Finally, the ﬁfth step is the low-level
speciﬁcation, meaning the code of the system. [41] The process can also
be seen in ﬁgure 2.1
Business
goals
Features
Examples
Executable
 
speciﬁcation
Application
code
Low-level
 
speciﬁcation
Figure 2.1: The process of BDD [41]
The process of BDD is usually maintained and run by a tool. The tools
depends on the programming language of the developed system. As this
thesis focuses on developers’ understanding of Java, the most often used
tools are Cucumber or JBehave. Because of its simplicity Cucumber is the
selected tool in this thesis [5]. In addition to the tool that runs the BDD
tests, a special syntax called Gherkin is chosen to describe the feature
and step deﬁnitions previously described. Table 2.1 shows an example
==PAGE:24==
10
Theory
of a scenario/feature, its corresponding step deﬁnition and the low-level
speciﬁcation that is called from the step deﬁnition. The scenario and code
are from a project used in this study. The scenario is about successfully
depositing money to an employee card. The scenario is simpliﬁed for this
example to give a simple overview [19].
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Behaviour-driven Development
11
Scenario
Step deﬁnition
Source code
Background :
Given
an
←-
e m p l o y e e
c a r d
w i t h
a
b a l a n c e
of
100
E m p l o y e e C a r d
c a r d = new ←-
E m p l o y e e C a r d ( ) ;
D e p o s i t T o E m p l o y e e C a r d
←-
d e p o s i t S e l f S e r v i c e ;
@ G i v e n ( "^an
employee
card
with←-
a
balance
o f
(\\ d+)$" )
p u b l i c
void
a n _ e m p l o y e e _ c a r d ←-
. . . ( i n t
b a l a n c e )
{
c a r d . s e t B a l a n c e ( b a l a n c e ) ;
}
p u b l i c
void
s e t B a l a n c e ( i n t
←-
b a l a n c e )
{
t h i s . b a l a n c e
=
b a l a n c e ;
}
S c e n a r i o :
←-
S u c c e s s f u l ←-
d e p o s i t
Given
an
←-
e m p l o y e e
c a r d
w i t h
in
←-
u s e
s t a t u s
is
←-
f a l s e
@ G i v e n ( "^an
employee
card
with←-
in
use
s t a t u s
i s
( true | ←-
f a l s e ) $" )
p u b l i c
void
a n _ e m p l o y e e _ c a r d ←-
. . . ( boolean
i n U s e S t a t u s )
←-
{
c a r d . s e t I n U s e S t a t u s (←-
i n U s e S t a t u s ) ;
}
p u b l i c
void
s e t I n U s e S t a t u s (←-
boolean
i s I n U s e S t a t u s )
{
t h i s . i n U s e S t a t u s
= ←-
i s I n U s e S t a t u s ;
}
When
an
←-
e m p l o y e e
c a r d
is
s e t
to←-
in
u s e
and
is
d e p o s i t e d
w i t h ←-
a
b a l a n c e
of
100
@ W h e n ( "^an
employee
card
i s
←-
s e t
to
in
use
and
i s
←-
d e p o s i t e d
with
a
balance
←-
o f
(\\ d+)$" )
p u b l i c
void
a n _ e m p l o y e e _ c a r d ←-
. . . ( i n t
a m o u n t )
{
r e s p o n s e D e p o s i t M o n e y S e l f S e r v i c e ←-
=
d e p o s i t S e l f S e r v i c e ←-
. d e p o s i t ( card ,
a m o u n t ←-
) ;
}
p u b l i c
R e s p o n s e O b j e c t
d e p o s i t (←-
E m p l o y e e C a r d
a c c o u n t ,
i n t ←-
a m o u n t )
{
i f
( ! a c c o u n t . i s I n U s e S t a t u s ( ) )
←-
{
a c c o u n t . s e t I n U s e S t a t u s (←-
true ) ;
a c c o u n t . d e p o s i t B a l a n c e (←-
a m o u n t ) ;
a c c o u n t . s e t I n U s e S t a t u s (←-
f a l s e ) ;
r e t u r n
D E P O S I T _ S U C C E S S ) ;
}
e l s e
{
a c c o u n t . s e t I n U s e S t a t u s (←-
f a l s e ) ;
r e t u r n
D E P O S I T _ F A I L U R E ;
}
}
Then
t h e
←-
e m p l o y e e
c a r d
a f t e r
a
d e p o s i t
h a s
a
←-
n e w
b a l a n c e
200
@ T h e n ( "^the
employee
card
←-
a f t e r
a
d e p o s i t
has
a
new←-
balance
(\\ d+)$" )
p u b l i c
void
t h e _ e m p l o y e e _ c a r d ←-
. . . ( i n t
n e w B a l a n c e )
{
a s s e r t E q u a l s ( c a r d . ←-
g e t B a l a n c e ( ) ,
←-
n e w B a l a n c e ) ;
}
p u b l i c
R e s p o n s e O b j e c t
d e p o s i t (←-
E m p l o y e e C a r d
a c c o u n t ,
i n t ←-
a m o u n t )
{
p u b l i c
i n t
g e t B a l a n c e ( )
{
r e t u r n
b a l a n c e ;
}
Table 2.1: Example of a feature ﬁle and its corresponding step deﬁnition
ﬁle and source code. Based on the EmployeeCard project.
==PAGE:26==
12
Theory
The beneﬁts of BDD is that newcomers to a project can look at the above
ﬁles to get a quick understanding of it. From table 2.1, it can be derived,
that feature ﬁles can be used to describe more high-level features, which
therefore gives domain-related knowledge. A high-level feature, in this
case, is that the card is deposited. A lower-level feature is what internal
message is sent to the system in case of a (un)successful scenario. In case,
the newcomer has to understand a system feature at a lower level, the
feature ﬁles in combination with the step deﬁnitions can point towards
the right source code. In theory, this should be a faster way than for the
newcomer to search through the source code.
BDD is still a relatively new development method but is used in the in-
dustry. From the monitoring of systems liveliness [22], malware analysis
[7] and for the development of real-time embedded systems [36].
The
beneﬁts of BDD are ﬁrst and foremost that it applies well into projects
already running with an agile approach. When in use, it oﬀers improved
communication between stakeholders on a project. This is partly due to
the creation and maintainability of the scenarios being possible by more
roles not necessarily used to programming, including customers. This is
because of the simple text description of features as seen in table 2.1.
Additionally, BDD allows for better code comprehension due to its sim-
plicity. With the ability to improve code comprehension [25], BDD’s role
in this study is well enforced. The purpose of it is to improve code com-
prehension of a system. In this case with an obfuscated system. As with
many testing techniques, the drawback of BDD is when a system grows
in size, so does the amount of testing necessary. When BDD oﬀers to
involve many roles, it also increases the number of resources and people
that have to be used.
It can also be diﬃcult to establish a connection with enough people. Es-
pecially if these are not within the same business. Another ﬂaw with
BDD is that if it is not used correctly, it can easily become very techni-
cal. With people used to TDD, it can describe features just as technical
as in the case of TDD. Finally, duplication also shows to be an issue, if
diﬀerent teams are working on a project [8].
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Eye-tracking
13
2.4
Eye-tracking
Eye-tracking is a method of tracking where a person looks at an ob-
ject. In software engineering, this object is often a computer screen. The
eyes’ movements can be followed, and paths from this can be generated.
Eye-tracking devices exist in many variants and can be used for many
purposes [37]. Additionally, a study by Lai, Meng Lung et al. reviewed
eye-tracking in studies from 2000 to 2012, and found it to be reliable for
future studies [30]. The eye-tracker used in this study is the Tobii Eye
Tracker 4C1.
Eye-trackers use diﬀerent techniques to track the eyes of the user, but in
general, most trackers use pupil centre corneal reﬂection (PCCR). The
concept of this is to use a light source to illuminate the eye of the user.
This results in reﬂections from the eye which are captured by a camera
as an image.
Through the image, the reﬂection of the light source is
identiﬁed on the eye. Through the positions of the cornea and the pupil,
the gaze direction is possible to calculate. The Tobii Eye Tracker 4C uses
near-infrared illumination. With the help of image-processing algorithms
and a physiological 3D model of the day, it is possible to detect the eyes’
position and point of gaze [2].
Eye-trackers operate with a high sampling rate, for example, the Tobii
Eye Tracker 4C samples at 90 Hz. This means that a signiﬁcant amount
of gaze data is generated fast. This data consists of gaze points, which
in short has an X and Y coordinate as well as a timestamp. In studies,
rather than using raw gaze data, it is more normal to use data based
on ﬁxations. This is partly due to that humans do not register objects
faster than after 50-150 ms, depending on what the gaze focuses on [3].
Fixations are points or areas that the user’s eyes stop at for an extended
time. These are composed of several gaze points. The beneﬁts are that
the amount of ﬁxations is lowered and that areas of interest can be deter-
mined. Additionally, areas that are focused on for a too short period to be
registered are ignored if they are done correctly. Since a ﬁxation consists
of several gaze points, a ﬁxation has both a start and end timestamp.
Fixations are composed of algorithms that determine if two gaze points
are within a pre-deﬁned distance of each other. Furthermore, it can be
1https://gaming.tobii.com/product/tobii-eye-tracker-4c/
==PAGE:28==
14
Theory
determined by the speed the gaze had between the two points. If the two
gaze points are within the pre-deﬁned distances and speed limits, they
are put into the same ﬁxation. Gaze points between ﬁxations are called
saccades and are therefore the movement between ﬁxations. The selec-
tion of the right algorithm can be important as ﬁxations composed the
wrong way can have a critical impact on a study [4]. If an algorithm uses
a distance between gaze points that are too wide, many details might not
be caught since they will be put into the same ﬁxation.
Figure 2.2: Gaze points converted to ﬁxations [4]
However, having selected a well-tested algorithm makes it possible to
use eye-tracking for studies. Within software engineering, eye-trackers
started to be used in the 90s and have since increased in popularity when
conducting studies.
While eye-trackers, previously, were more limited
in their features, they have become more reliant over the years. This
has allowed studies to have been performed relating to model- and code
comprehension and debugging [40]. These previous studies about code
comprehension validate the use of eye-tracking in this thesis.
Zohreh Sharaf et al. reviewed studies and found several connections in
studies relating to code comprehension. The studies showed that a person
reading source code varied from reading a regular text. The changes were
primarily increased in ﬁxations time; meaning source code takes longer to
comprehend. Additionally, newcomers to programming spend more time
on comments compared to more experienced programmers that go more
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Eye-tracking
15
directly at the code. It can, therefore, be assumed that eye-tracking is a
useful tool to study peoples code comprehension. [39]
2.4.1
iTrace
With the use of regular eye-tracking, from ﬁxations, X-, Y-coordinates
and timestamps can be extracted. However, when researching code com-
prehension, additional details are needed to be able to discover what a
developer gazes at. With only coordinates, heat maps can be made, but
this would limit the actions that can be tracked from a test subject in
an experiment. Furthermore, the solution would be limited to be a still
image of the code that a developer would have to comprehend. While
this would be either a very short experiment or an unrealistic setting, it
would be diﬃcult to avoid. A possibility is to record the experiments.
The timestamps from the video could be compared to the positions and
timestamps of the eye-tracker. This would be a process that would re-
quire much time.
Katja Kevic et al. conducted the ﬁrst study with eye-tracking that in-
volved a large source codebase. This was possible with the open-source
tool, iTrace2. iTrace solves the problem as mentioned earlier by the link-
ing gazes to corresponding source code entities (SCE). The tool can be
used as a plug-in for the well known integrated development environment
(IDE), Eclipse. Source code entities in Eclipse would be diﬀerent types
of elements in the code shown, for example, declarations, methods and
comments [29]. Timothy R. Shaﬀer et al. concluded that the use of iTrace
from within Eclipse enables the use of eye-tracking on software artefacts
of large size. For experiments containing projects with several classes,
iTrace is, therefore, a suﬃcient tool
iTrace is coupling ﬁxations data with source code entity data by generat-
ing an abstract syntax tree containing line numbers and positions of each
SCE. In combination with a gaze handler that translates coordinates into
line numbers, it is possible to determine the SCE gazed at by a user [38].
This combined data is possible to be exported to JSON and XML. In
addition to the oﬃcial version of iTrace, support for exporting data to
a SQL database is made possible. Additionally, the use of BDD ﬁles as
2http://www.i-trace.org/
==PAGE:30==
16
Theory
SCEs are also supported. The version of iTrace used in this study can be
found here.
2.5
Process mining
Process mining is a research area that originates from partly machine
learning, data mining and process modelling. One of the ideas behind
is to take an event log of executed actions and to perform analysis on
it. With process mining, it is possible to get an insight into the process
generated from the previously described eye-tracker in section 2.4. This
data can be exported to a .csv ﬁle. While this can represent the data, the
data can be made easier to present or comprehend. A .csv ﬁle is simply
a ﬁle of comma-separated values. By having an eye-tracker recording at
90 Hz, such a ﬁle ends up with thousands of lines of observations.
However, process mining data can be sorted into an event log and be
compared to what is the expected process. The creation and compari-
son of such event logs have been done in several studies; both within the
software and other topics [32] [11]. The procedure is usually within busi-
nesses that a Business Process Model (BPM) exist. When process mining
is used, it is possible to investigate how the process is actually performed
and then review the BPM. If no BPM exists, process mining can allow
the creation of one.
This process is often made with three activities: Control-ﬂow discov-
ery, conformance checking of an extension or enhancement. Discovery
describes the gathering of data and the construction of a model of the
process. The process can then be investigated to get an overview of how
the process is.
Conformance checking is the process of comparing the generated model to
an existing BPM. Thereby, it possible to determine if the BPM matches
the process. In this way, the BPM can be improved with missing elements
or the process can be optimised to align with the BMP.
Extension or enhancement is the enhancement or extension of the BPM
model to align with the process analysed [12].
However, in this thesis, only the ﬁrst two activities are relevant. First,
the gaze data is changed into a model; then the process map is to be
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Process mining
17
compared between processes with or without obfuscation. There is no
existing BPM, but assumptions about how the diﬀerence might be.
2.5.1
Disco
For the construction and visualisation of process maps from the event log
available from iTrace, there exist diﬀerent tools. One of these is Disco3.
Firstly, the tools can visualise the event log in a process map in all its
detail. Additionally, it allows ﬁlters on all variables/columns from the
data to be applied. This allows sorting the data into groups or individual
data. Statistical data is also presented in addition to just the process
map. Not many studies are found directly mentioning the use of Disco.
One study was found, though, where Phanchaporn Jaisook et al. analysed
medical treatment processes by the use of Disco. [26]
3https://ﬂuxicon.com/disco/
==PAGE:32==
18
Theory
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Methodology
This chapter aims to describe the process of the experiment to under-
stand developers sense-making behaviour when they handle source code
of diﬀerent readability due to code obfuscation. The thoughts are de-
scribed through the considerations and methods. Furthermore, the tools
and methods used for the understanding of the data generated from the
experiment are described. Finally, the planning of the setup of the ex-
periment will be described in a validity evaluation.
3.1
The process
Before the experiment is started, several decisions related to what ele-
ments are used is to be made. These decisions are described in section
3.2 and its subsections. The section gives the deﬁnition, design and set-
tings of the experiment, following ideas by Wohlin et al. [45].
When the gaze data are exported from the eye-tracker, a database is used
to store the data. This export is described in section 3.3 and its subsec-
==PAGE:34==
20
Methodology
tions.
To analyse the outputted data from the database as well the audio record-
ings, tools and changes for identifying the patterns found are selected. In
section, 3.4.1 the preparation of the database data and process mining
of the gaze data are described. In section 3.4.2, verbal protocol analysis
is described. Finally, in section 3.4.3, the description of how the data
analysis is done with the use of the previously prepared data is given.
These sections in the process can be done and considered separately, but
needs the previous steps to be performed as ﬁndings from these are re-
quired as content for the next step.
Finally, according to Campbell et al., there are four types of threats to
the validity of experiment results. These threats can be discovered by
investigating the conclusion, internal, construct & conclusion validities.
The investigation of the threats is made through a validity evaluation
of these threats. Section 3.5.1 will describe the elements relating to the
conclusion validity, followed by internal validity in section 3.5.2. Section
3.5.3 focuses on elements of construct validity and ﬁnally in section 3.5.4,
elements relating to an external validity is described [45].
3.2
Experiment setup
The experiments started on the 26th of March and ended on the 8th of
May 2019. A total of 24 test subjects participated in the experiments.
Additionally, a pilot experiment with a supervisor to verify the setup and
results of the experiment was performed. Data generated from the pilot
experiment is not included in the thesis due because of the supervisor’s
knowledge about the experiment.
3.2.1
Context selection
It would be optimal to experiment with a real software project and with
the developers working with these. The problem is that it quickly ends up
requiring a high cost or network of people that work with such projects.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Experiment setup
21
Instead, projects based on the ideas of well-known, Danish systems, Re-
jsekort and an employee card-based system with built-in payment and
access control functionality are used. This makes it possible to limit the
system in size, letting the experiment be faster and cheaper to make.
Rejsekort is a Danish travel card system, used for public transportation.
Firstly, the card is used as payment for transportation. Secondly, it is
used when the user checks in when they start their journey and checks out
when the journey ends. Checking in and out is done by hovering the card
over a scanner. The scanner is placed at a station or inside a transport
vehicle, e.g. a bus. The cost of the journey is automatically calculated
when the passenger checks out.
The employee card system bears some resemblances, as it can be used for
payments; in this case in canteens. This means that both cards have a bal-
ance that can be increased by deposits and decreased by purchases. The
employee card is also used for access control to enter rooms or buildings.
3.2.2
Hypothesis formulation
The null hypothesis that the experiments aim to reject is the following:
When the readability of source code changes, developers are still able to
solve sense-making tasks with the same strategy, speed and accuracy.
That means that obfuscating code would have no impact. That also
means that BDD is not used any diﬀerently when the readability varies
because of code obfuscation.
To reject this hypothesis, this thesis’ alternative hypothesis is the follow-
ing:
When the test subjects are presented with obfuscated code, the subjects
have more diﬃculties completing sense-making tasks. This can be in the
form of an increase in the time spent or more incorrect answers given to
tasks. It can also mean that BDD elements are used diﬀerently.
Furthermore, obfuscation it might mean that test subjects use diﬀerent
strategies. A strategy describes how or if diﬀerent software artefacts are
==PAGE:36==
22
Methodology
used. The increase in time spent can happen because the test subject has
to use more time understanding the obfuscated source code. If the source
code is too diﬃcult to understand, another source of understanding the
system can be necessary. This gives the second alternative hypothesis,
which is that the obfuscation leads the subjects to rely more on BDD.
This hypothesis is based on previous experiments that showed that devel-
opers tend to use BDD when they try to get a domain and code under-
standing of the system [25]. Decreasing the readability of the source code
might increase the need to look elsewhere than the code to acquire this
understanding. Since the BDD code is not aﬀected by the obfuscation, it
might be an alternative to the source code.
As the primary and subordinate aims of this thesis, as speciﬁed in section
1.2, are very similar to these hypotheses, testing this can be used to reject
the null hypothesis.
The primary aim of the experiment is to investigate how developers en-
gage when dealing with code where the readability varies. This will in the
data analysis be investigated by researching if the secondary goals from
section 1.2, holds or not. Therefore, the questions that try to reject the
null hypothesis are:
• Q1.
How do developers interact with software artefacts
diﬀerently when source code is obfuscated during sense-
making tasks that require domain understanding?
• Q2. How do developers interact diﬀerently with software
artefacts when source code is obfuscated during sense-making
tasks that require code understanding?
• Q3. What challenges do developers have when dealing with
obfuscated code?
As speciﬁed in section 2.3, a question requiring domain understanding
would be possible to solve with just the feature ﬁle. A code understanding
questions might need all software artefacts or at least the source code to
be answered.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Experiment setup
23
3.2.3
Variables selection
An important aim of this thesis is to investigate whether changing the
readability of code, changes a developers sense-making ability in regards
to understanding a system. Since the variation of the readability is con-
trolled by applying code obfuscation, the use of obfuscation is this thesis’
independent variable.
The independent variable is the variable(s) that can be controlled and
changed in an experiment. At the same time, it is a variable that opti-
mally should aﬀect the dependent variable. The dependent variable is the
variable(s) that can not be controlled or changed [45]. The dependent
variable of this thesis is the developer’s way of engaging with the project
aﬀected by the independent variable. Engagement is not directly mea-
surable and therefore has to be divided into measures that describe how
the test subject goes through the experiment. As mentioned in section
3.2.2, when a test subject has trouble with an experiment task, it can be
assumed that this could be seen in the form of an increase of time spent
on the task. It could also result in a decrease in their accuracy in regards
to the number of correct answers or diﬀerent use of BDD elements.
3.2.4
Selection of test subjects
To ﬁnd enough test subjects for the experiment, convenience sampling
was primarily used. A total of 24 test subjects participated in the experi-
ments. Convenience sampling was used because of the number of needed
test subjects for the experiment.
When recruiting subjects, a requirement was that subjects had the right
qualiﬁcations to understand the elements in the experiment. The most
critical requirement is that the test subjects had a good understanding
of Java to be able to navigate in the source code of the project. Because
of this, all test subjects had to previously have attended at least one
software development course with Java. Secondly, it was an advantage
if they previously had experience with BDD. This was a requirement,
though since BDD is not that widespread and is only taught directly in
a few courses at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
All test subjects had or were currently studying at a bachelor or mas-
==PAGE:38==
24
Methodology
ter’s degree at DTU or the University of Copenhagen (KU) in Computer
science, Digital media or similar study lines.
3.2.5
Code obfuscation
As described in section 2.2, diﬀerent kinds of obfuscation techniques exist,
and each has its beneﬁts. When used for this experiment, it was criti-
cal that the obfuscation technique previously had shown that it made an
impact when it comes to program comprehension. Identiﬁer renaming
showed to be one of the more eﬀective obfuscation techniques. Addition-
ally, meaningless abbreviations or letters was the most eﬀective renaming
techniques [16]. Since both abbreviations and letters are equally eﬀective,
single letters were chosen due to its simple policy of naming, starting from
A and going forward in the alphabet. To avoid complications with vari-
able naming, parameters given in functions instead have the naming based
on the parameter type and number of the variable. Therefore, the ﬁrst
integer parameter in a function was named paramInt1.
With identiﬁer renaming chosen, a tool for performing the obfuscation
had to be found. Since manual obfuscation on even a small system would
take time with a rigorous policy, it was preferred to use a tool. With an
obfuscation tool, an important factor was to choose one that is already
used by others. A list of Java code obfuscator tools existed [28]. At the
list, one of the larger and still maintained code obfuscators was ProGuard
1. ProGuard also oﬀered several other functionalities, but only the ob-
fuscation feature was used. A rigorous policy with letters was used on
function names and their content [23]. At the time of the obfuscation,
ProGuard version 6.0.3 was used. Names of classes and packages in the
projects were not obfuscated.
This choice was made to use the same
structure as the study that found meaningless letters and abbreviations
to decrease readability [24].
Normally, code obfuscated aims to prevent attacks or exploits on systems.
This means that it normally only works on already compiled source code
or .class ﬁles in the case of Java source code. Because of this, the compiled
and obfuscated code needs to be decompiled. Several Java decompilers
exist, and one of the most used ones is from the JD Project [43] [27]. The
1https://www.guardsquare.com/en/products/proguard
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Experiment setup
25
regular JD-GUI tool was used in this thesis. The code was decompiled
with JD-GUI version 1.4.0.
The ﬁnal results of the obfuscation in a ﬁle can be seen in table 3.1.
Not obfuscated
Obfuscated
public
c l a s s
AccessControl {
private
i n t
accessLevelRequired ;
private
i n t
accessControlID ;
private
i n t
countAccessesGranted ←-
= 0;
private
i n t
countAccessesDenied =←-
0;
private
ResponseObject
response ;
public
AccessControl ( i n t ←-
accessLevelRequired ,
i n t ←-
accessControlID )
{
t h i s . accessLevelRequired = ←-
accessLevelRequired ;
t h i s . accessControlID = ←-
accessControlID ;
}
public
c l a s s
AccessControl {
private
i n t
H ;
private
i n t
I ;
private
i n t
J = 0 ;
private
i n t
K = 0 ;
private
ResponseObject k ;
public
AccessControl ( i n t ←-
paramInt1 ,
i n t ←-
paramInt2 )
{
t h i s . H = paramInt1 ;
t h i s . I = paramInt2 ;
}
Table 3.1: Example of the class, AccessControl.java from the Employ-
eeCard project, before and after obfuscation
3.2.6
Experiment design
The structure of an experiment is necessary to know to describe its design.
It is also relevant to know what the test subjects solve and how the
experiment is performed.
These things are described in the following
subsections.
3.2.6.1
Experimental structure
Before this thesis was started, only the Rejsekort based source code
project existed and only in a non-obfuscated version. The simplest way
the hypothesis could have been tested would, therefore, be to obfuscate
==PAGE:40==
26
Methodology
the entire project. Then the test subjects could run through sense-making
tasks in the same project, but with half of it obfuscated. The test sub-
jects would be divided into two groups, that speciﬁed in what order the
treatments would be presented to them.
There is a problem with the within-subject structure to note. If test sub-
jects are working with especially tasks with no obfuscation, they might
be able to get a robust understanding of the system. Continuing with the
obfuscated system, they might be able to recognise many elements of the
system. The same applies to the other order, although starting with an
obfuscated system would provide less help.
Because of this, another structure, where only half of the Rejsekort project
would be obfuscated, was considered. In this way, test subjects could not
get familiar with the entire system when the treatment changed.
Due to the structure of the Rejsekort project, though, it was not possible
to break the project in two halves without changing important parts of
the system. Therefore, it was necessary to code another system, similar
in level and overall ideas. As previously described, this was the employee
card system. Keeping the project at a similar level and with similar ideas
was to ensure that projects would be equally diﬃcult to understand. This
would minimise the risk of the projects being the reason that developers
engage diﬀerently with the system. If this was the case, it could give
errors later in the results. At the same time, the projects must be diﬀer-
ent, so the test subject does not learn too much from the ﬁrst part of the
experiment.
The participants are to solve sense-making tasks in these two systems and
are split into four groups. Participants are all selected in a randomised
order and are therefore assigned a random group. Each group ﬁrst works
with one project (Rejsekort or EmployeeCard) with a treatment (non-
obfuscated or obfuscated) and then continues with the other project with
the other treatment. The structure is speciﬁed in table 3.2 which is often
known as a Latin square experimental design.
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Project 1
Rejsekort (N)
Rejsekort (O)
EmployeeCard (N)
EmployeeCard (O)
Project 2
EmployeeCard (O)
EmployeeCard (N)
Rejsekort (O)
Rejsekort (N)
Table 3.2: Latin square experiment design
N = Non-obfuscated, O = Obfuscated
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Experiment setup
27
This design is based on a Latin square, meaning that the two projects
and two treatments or variants of these projects are tested in all possible
orders. In this way, it can be analysed whether the order of the projects or
treatments is changing the test subjects sense-making ability. It can also
be analysed if the projects make a diﬀerence when it comes to readability.
Even though they are coded to be at the same level, small diﬀerences can
turn out to be a source of error. Therefore, being able to measure if there
are diﬀerences is important. This structure can also be observed as a
within-subject design in conjunction with a between-groups design. The
conjunction of the designs is that the groups pairwise test the same or-
der of projects as the within-groups factor, but with diﬀerent obfuscation
orders as the between-groups factor, e.g. group 1 and 2. Additionally,
each group is compared to a group from the other pair, e.g. group 1 and
3, where the obfuscation order is the same, but the order of the projects
vary. The beneﬁts of a within-group design are that fewer participants
are needed when compared to a between-group design. As more groups
are needed, one of the common drawbacks can be detected. The draw-
back is the threat of the test subject learning from the ﬁrst part of the
experiment, thus aﬀecting the second part. By using the Latin square
experiment design, if such a drawback happens, it is at least possible to
detect it. With two diﬀerent projects in use, the chance of this is lowered
though. A threat with diﬀerent levels of projects is also possible but is
again also measurable [10].
Since 24 participated in the experiments, this means that six people were
in each group. All participants were given an ID based on this, describing
in which group and number a person was. The IDs names go from G1P1
to G4P6.
3.2.6.2
Task description
In all the groups, test subjects are for each project to solve four questions
that are put into two tasks. Additionally, the test subjects are prepared
for the experiments projects with two questions that are put into one
task in a warm-up project that is based on a straightforward calculator.
The questions are put into tasks since they aim to address two types of
questions - questions that deals with domain and code understanding.
The structure of a task is that a test subject ﬁrstly opens a Markdown ﬁle
==PAGE:42==
28
Methodology
containing a domain understanding question. Once they have found the
answer, they are instructed to go to the corresponding answer ﬁle. The
test subject then continues to the next question in the task, which deals
with code understanding. Once the answer is found to that question, they
go through the same procedure for the next question, and that concludes
one task. The process a test subject runs through in a task can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.1.
Task_structure
Task 1.1.0.md 
- Question 1, 
domain 
understanding
Task 1.1.1.md 
- Answer questi
on 1
Task 1.2.0.md 
- Question 2, c
ode 
understanding
Task 1.2.1.md 
- Answer questi
on 2
Start new task
Continue to next 
task or end of 
experiment
Figure 3.1: The process of running through a task including the naming
of Markdown ﬁles, Link for full version
The experiment is constructed of ﬁve of these processes that the test
subject works with, including one warm-up task. The structure the test
participant goes through in the experiment can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Projects
Tasks
Question
types
Project 1
Project 2
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
1. Domain
Understanding
1. Domain
Understanding
1. Domain
Understanding
1. Domain
Understanding
2. Code
Understanding
2. Code
Understanding
2. Code
Understanding
2. Code
Understanding
Warm-up
Warm-up
1. Domain
Understanding
2. Code
Understanding
Figure 3.2: Structure of the process of an experiment, Link for full ver-
sion [25]
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Experiment setup
29
Source code preparation
Develop 
projects 
(Rejsekort/Emp
loyeeCard)
Compile 
projects in 
Eclipse
Obfuscate 
projects 
through 
ProGuard
Decompile 
projects 
through JD-GUI
Figure 3.3: The process of writing and obfuscating the projects of the
thesis, Link for full version
Domain understanding questions deal with high-level details that should
be possible to understand through reading the BDD ﬁles and speciﬁcally
the feature ﬁles. Code understanding deals with low-level details that
require details only speciﬁed in the source code. Understanding these de-
tails requires test subjects to observe the source code. Test subjects could
either try to ﬁnd the answer in the source code or use the feature ﬁles to
ﬁnd a suiting step deﬁnition. Then they could use the step deﬁnition to
ﬁnd the part of the source code that has the answer. When formulating
the questions for the projects, the aim was to ask about functionality that
people were familiar with. Therefore, it would contain functionality often
used by people with the two systems. Although the employee card system
is not directly built on an actual system, it contains functions that stu-
dents should be familiar with. This could either be from a student card
or an ID card at their job. At the same time, test participants should not
be able to answer the questions, without a look at the projects artefacts.
To ensure this did not happen, it was prohibited for the test subjects to
guess at a question without looking into the project’s ﬁles.
The actual development of the systems was based on BDD principles.
This means that ﬁrstly feature ﬁles are made, and from these step deﬁni-
tion ﬁles are generated. Finally, the source code containing these features
are made. All projects developed, as well as the tools used, can be found
at https://github.com/erikallin/cucitrace. The correctness of the
artefacts was inspected by supervisors both before and during the pilot
experiment. The pilot was performed before the actual experimentation
started. All task questions can also be found at the link.
The entire process of preparing the source code projects for the experi-
ment can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
==PAGE:44==
30
Methodology
3.2.6.3
Experiment execution
Location and instrumentation:
All experiments except the pilot were performed at DTU in building 322,
room 029. The room had tables with controllable heights and windows
with controllable blinds. In all experiments, the blinds were completely
down. Furthermore, the table was adjusted to a height of 85 cm to ensure
the same conditions. The room was, at the time, only used for experi-
ments. During all experiments, no concurrent experiments were running,
and no other people were present in the room to minimise interruptions.
Additionally, the room was placed in a quiet area, so a minimum of sound
could be heard from outside the room. The experiment was run on a HP
EliteBook 840 G4 which is a 14-inch laptop, running with a resolution of
1920x1080 pixels. Connected to the computer was a Tobii Eye Tracker
4C to collect the eye-tracking data [42]. The eye-tracker records obser-
vations at a rate of 90 Hz and does not require any further equipment.
The experiment was run in Eclipse Neon 3, version 4.6.3, with the plugin
iTrace, based on version 0.0.1 Alpha. iTrace had received modiﬁcation
additionally to the version.
The used iTrace version can be found at
https://github.com/CIoann/cucitraceSetup. This GitHub page also
contains an installation guide for the setup of iTrace. In Eclipse the font
size was set to 14 to improve the eye-tracking measurements. This was
to ensure better eye-tracking data since each line then was broader and
therefore easier to be seen by the tracker. Since the eye-tracker is not
100% exact, the broader lines improve accuracy. To store the data gen-
erated, data was exported to a SQL database and was then exported in
MySQL Workbench 8.0.12 to .csv ﬁles.
All questionnaires and training slides were presented and performed on
a separate laptop to have a more clean setup for the test subject. Addi-
tionally, if experiments were running for a long time, the software would
begin to use a lot of the test machines resources. Because of this, it was
beneﬁcial to limit the number of open programs on the machine. Finally,
all audio recordings during the experiments were made on a Oneplus 5
smartphone.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Experiment setup
31
Figure 3.4: Experiment laptop setup (self-taken picture), Link for full
version
Figure 3.5: Experiment room (self-taken picture), Link for full version
Experiment structure:
The experiment was put into four diﬀerent phases. This included a pre-
==PAGE:46==
32
Methodology
experiment questionnaire, two introduction powerpoints, the actual ex-
periment and ﬁnally a post-experiment questionnaire.
A consent was
signed by the subjects before they started the experiment. The consent
detailed the experiment and what data was stored during the experiment.
It also informed the participant that all data would be anonymised since
they would only be known by their ID as speciﬁed in section 3.2.6.1. Fi-
nally, all instructions and elements in the experiments were performed
using an interview protocol to make sure everyone got the same informa-
tion.
Pre-experiment questionnaire:
When the participant entered the room, they were after the consent asked
to ﬁll in a questionnaire. The purpose of the questionnaire was to get an
understanding of the test participants background. The background was
important to the thesis since the test subjects needed to have knowledge
and experience with software development. Firstly, they were asked about
their education level and line. Secondly, more in-depth questions were
given to get to know how much the test participant knew about object-
oriented programming including, BDD/Cucumber, Eclipse and code ob-
fuscation. Furthermore, they were asked about in what settings they had
been using programming. All factors that could make this test subject
more potent to the following tasks.
Finally, they were asked if they, due to their sight, were using glasses.
This was asked because eye-trackers can have a more diﬃcult time cal-
ibrating correctly if the test subject wears glasses. All questions (and
answers) of the questionnaire can be found in Appendix A.
Introduction / training:
Once the questionnaire had been ﬁlled, the experiment was introduced.
The goal of the introduction was to inform the test subject about the
projects in the experiment. Furthermore, it instructed how to operate
with the eye-tracker and the IDE. Additionally, the purpose was to intro-
duce the structure of the tasks in the experiment. Question ﬁles contained
the questions the test subject had to answer. The answer ﬁles contained
the instructions on how verbally to answer the question, once the answer
had been found. Due to the alpha version state of the Eclipse plugin,
iTrace, the user was informed that they were only allowed to navigate the
code with a mouse. Therefore, they could not use shortcuts when right-
clicking. Going to, for example, a function’s deﬁnition through a shortcut
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Experiment setup
33
could give an unexpected behaviour in the generated data. These limita-
tions were because that iTrace builds its abstract syntax tree only upon
launch. As such, it requires that the source code is not altered during
sessions.
The test subjects were also instructed to keep the same seat position
during the experiment. This was to avoid worsening the eye-trackers cal-
ibration.
The test subjects were then given a quick introduction to BDD and Cu-
cumber, with the description of feature ﬁles and step deﬁnition ﬁles and
their relation to the source code. The introduction aimed to make test
subjects equally prepared for the tasks since only a few of the partic-
ipants had previously been using BDD. After the introduction, a test
subject should be able to handle BDD ﬁles about as well as other test
subjects that already had some knowledge of this.
The introduction slides can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/16kwTSfusAC__A9yNXdQDcKbYuNj2uVuq?
usp=sharing
The experiment:
After the introduction, the participants had the option to ask questions
about the introduced theory. If they did not have any, the subject would
move to the test machine to start the experiment. The subject was posi-
tioned in front of the screen in a comfortable position. This was to ensure
that they could keep the same position throughout the experiment. Be-
fore the experiment could start, the participant’s ID was entered in iTrace
by clicking "Session info". The participant was asked to run a calibration
of the eye-tracker. The calibration was a built-in feature in iTrace and
showed a result screen once done. An acceptable calibration requirement
was based on the result screen, where nine circles were shown. In ﬁve
circles, a green and a red line would indicate the result of the calibration
of that part of the screen. The diﬀerent coloured lines indicated the result
for each eye. If none or only one of these circles had a line being slightly
outside the circle, the calibration would be assumed acceptable. If more
lines went outside, re-calibrations would be rerun until an acceptable re-
sult was present. An acceptable result can be seen at ﬁgure 3.6, where
none of the lines went outside the circles.
==PAGE:48==
34
Methodology
Figure 3.6: iTrace Eclipse plugin calibration acceptable result screen,
Link for full version
If the result screen showed an acceptable result, the participant used the
"show crosshair" feature. If the ’show crosshair’ feature showed an overall
precise position according to where the participant looked, the eye-tracker
would be considered correctly calibrated. The diﬀerent features described
within iTrace was used directly from the interface of iTrace as shown in
ﬁgure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: iTrace Eclipse plugin interface, Link for full version
The participant could then start the tracking. At the same time, voice
recording was started, and the participant began with the warm-up tasks.
Next, they went for one of the main project’s four tasks. Finally, they
ended with the other project that would be oppositely obfuscated com-
pared to the prior. The test subject was at the end of each task asked
to verbally go through the steps they went to solve the task. They were
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Experiment setup
35
asked to specify how diﬃcult on a scale from 1 to 5, the task was, where 5
was the most diﬃcult. The reason to explain their answer verbally after
was to reduce the time spent on ﬁnding the answer. This is also called
the retrospective think-aloud method. It was selected in favour of concur-
rent think-aloud since it allowed the test participant to focus on the task
at hand. Studies have shown that concurrent think-aloud can increase
cognitive load [13]. When handling obfuscated systems, the participant
is already assumed to be somewhat stressed, so adding further cognitive
load could aﬀect the results. Additionally, from the eye-tracking data
recorded, it is more important to see data in regards to the test subject
ﬁnding the answer. How much time the test subjects spend on describing
how they found the answer are not in focus. Furthermore, having the
answer given once the answer ﬁle is opened allows data to be separated
into question- and answer parts.
During the experiment, timestamps of the duration of tasks were noted.
Additionally, the diﬃculty of the task, as provided by the participant, was
noted. Whether the participant asked a question right or not was also
noted. The participant was allowed to ask non-task related questions, if
something in the introduction, for example, had been misinterpreted. Be-
cause of the number and length of experiments, participants were given
a threshold of ﬁve minutes for each task. If going beyond the thresh-
old, they were asked to describe what they did to try to solve the task.
This could be that they did not ﬁnd an answer or that they had to guess
the answer. When the participant had been through all tasks, they were
asked to stop the eye-tracking, and the experiment would end.
Post-experiment questionnaire:
Once the test subject had been through the tasks, they would get a post-
experiment questionnaire. The questions focused on getting an under-
standing of the subject’s experience with the tasks with and without
obfuscation. This was done by asking them how well they thought, the
diﬀerent types of artefacts helped them. The same questions were asked
once for each project, that had opposite obfuscation. Doing this gave
an impression of the diﬀerences when the test subject was dealing with
obfuscated and non-obfuscated projects. The rating the subject deﬁned
was based on how much they used the type of artefact and how much it
helped them. This meant that if one type of artefact were useful well in
one project, but not in the other, it could get detected. Artefacts were
sorted into three categories being: source code, feature ﬁles and step def-
==PAGE:50==
36
Methodology
initions.
All questions and answers of the questionnaires can be found in Appendix
B
3.3
Exporting the data
In every experiment, data were collected by the use of an eye-tracker,
voice-recorder as well as written notes. While the data from the voice-
recording could be used right away, decisions had to be made for how the
eye-tracking data was to be outputted.
As previously described, some additions had been made to the version
of iTrace. The original iTrace module only supported the option of ex-
porting its data to an XML ﬁle. In theory, this is ﬁne, but the use of a
database has its beneﬁts. A database can be accessed easily from any-
where if needed and by several sessions at once. As this experiment runs
locally with an on-machine database, this was not critical.
In addition to the SQL export support, the data outputted was extended
with details about source code entities (SCEs). An SCE describes a part
of source code that can be categorised. Therefore, it is possible to know
at what part of a ﬁle the test subject was looking. Furthermore, it is also
possible to get information about the speciﬁc entity that is observed in
the source code. This includes, for example, variables and methods.
The support of SCEs was party important due to the use of BDD el-
ements. It was also important since it gave more details about where
a test subject was gazing.
The support gave the possibility to see at
what element in a ﬁle the test subject was gazing. An example is the
given/when/then parts of a scenario in a feature ﬁle or a function in a
source code ﬁle. All the SCE data is stored in a separate table not to be
combined with the gaze information.
Finally, a table in the database is made for the session info of the tracking,
containing the ID, purpose and other relevant information to the session.
All these insertions into the database can be seen in listing 3.1.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Exporting the data
37
// Data
being
i n s e r t e d
into
gaze
. csv
f i l e s
String
statementGazes = "INSERT INTO gazes
( gaze_name ,
gaze_type , ←-
gaze_session_id ,
x ,
y , "
+ " l e f t _ v a l i d a t i o n ,
right_validation ,
left_pupil_diameter , "
+ " right_pupil_diameter ,
timestamp ,
session_time ,
←-
tracker_time , "
+ "system_time ,
nano_time" ;
// Continued
statementGazes += " ,
path ,
line_height ,
font_height ,
l in e , "
+ " col ,
line_base_x ,
line_base_y" ;
// Data
being
i n s e r t e d
into
s c e s
. csv
f i l e s
String
statementSCE = "INSERT INTO s c e s
( sce_gaze_id ,
"
+ "sce_name ,
sce_type ,
how ,
total_length , "
+ " start_line ,
end_line ,
start_col ,
end_col ,
depth ) "
// Data
being
i n s e r t e d
into
session_info
. csv
f i l e s
String
statementSessionInfo = "INSERT INTO session_info "
+ " ( session_ID , session_purpose , session_descrip , ←-
developer_username ,
"
+ "developer_name , screen_width , screen_height )
Listing 3.1: SQL Insert statements in the extended iTrace
In the code, three tables can be seen. Firstly, there is the session informa-
tion that contains all the gaze points. Then for each gaze, there are one
or several SCEs that describe wherein the code, the gaze was pointing.
The reason why there can be more than one SCE is that the ﬁrst SCE
is where the gaze is exactly. The rest is the surrounding SCEs in sorted
order from nearest to furthest. The surrounding SCEs are all the SCEs
that in some way, relate to the initial SCE. This means a variable inside
a loop, inside a function, there would be an SCE detailing all individual
layers. To keep track of this the variable, depth, is added to the SCE
table. The depth variable can be looked at to get the order of the SCEs
in a gaze. The structure of the database schema with the three tables
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.8.
==PAGE:52==
38
Methodology
Session info
session_ID
session_purpose
session_descrip
developer_username
developer_name
screen_width
screen_height
Gazes
gaze_id
gaze_session_id
gaze_name
gaze_type
x
y
left_validation
right_validation
left_pupil_diameter
right_pupil_diameter
timestamp
session_time
tracker_time
system_time
nano_time
path
line_height
font_height
line
col
line_base_x
line_base_y
Sces
sce_gaze_id
sce_name
sce_type
how
total_length
start_line
end_line
start_col
end_col
depth
Figure 3.8: The database scheme of the extended iTrace, Link for full
version
The session ID that iTrace deﬁnes, in the beginning, is made to ensure
that the session is unique. This is used by the gazes that all have a session
ID as a foreign key to the session. Finally, to combine all the SCEs to
gazes, the ID of the gazes is used as a primary key so all SCEs can be
coupled to a gaze.
Once an experiment was performed, all three tables contain their infor-
mation about the session. The database tables were then exported to
.csv ﬁles, and the data analysis part could start. Once the tables were
exported, the database was cleared, and a new was created for the next
experiment. The SQL commands that are responsible for building the
database can be seen in appendix C.
All raw gaze data can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/13KrYGnlyUZlm0oYFKxEfj8OqWuUdK8nq?
usp=sharing.
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Analysing the data
39
3.4
Analysing the data
Once the experiments were performed, and the data exported, the data
analysis started. The data had to be simpliﬁed, so it only included rele-
vant information in the analysis. This section describes the process that
was performed on the data generated to be able to perform the process
mining and verbal protocol analysis.
Process mining was chosen as a data analysis tool because of its eﬀective
way of visualising the data collected from the eye-tracking. Its visuali-
sation presents the user’s behaviour through the steps of the experiment
and can be ﬁltered in many ways to show relevant points. An example
could be to see how much BDD ﬁles were used in a speciﬁc task by a
speciﬁc test subject.
Verbal protocol analysis was used because it was easily added to the
experiments without much complexity added to the test subjects. Fur-
thermore, it required no additional training. It was also easily performed,
as it only required a smartphone to record audio. At the same time, it
adds a way to conﬁrm the ﬁndings from the process mining.
Additionally, with the post-questionnaire, the option of several points of
view for results was possible. One of them might show reactions from
the test subject that they forgot to mention in the other source. At the
same time, by analysing the voice of the test subject, there might also be
a chance to catch how stressed the test subject was at a speciﬁc point.
3.4.1
Process mining
With the data extracted from the database in section 3.3 to apply pro-
cess mining, it is necessary to create a timeline or log of events from the
gaze data. When the data was extracted from the database, each gaze
had timestamps. This indicated when the eye-tracker caught it. A dis-
advantage was that by that time, there were 90 observations per second,
resulting in a session having many thousand observations.
If sticking
with this number of observations, it might potentially give issues when
presented. In order to reduce the number of observations, the data had
to be aggregated by software artefact and ﬁle.
==PAGE:54==
40
Methodology
Before the data was aggregated, only data relevant to perform the pro-
cess mining on the data was to be left. For process mining, there must be
one row for each activity performed in the process. In each row, a case
ID, an activity name, and a start and end timestamp must be included
[21]. The start and end timestamp are required to make a timeline. In
that scenario, the aggregation of activities is needed. The aggregation in
the experiment is done at an artefact- and ﬁle-level and is described in
section 3.4.1.1 and 3.4.1.2.
Each activity is a part of a process. In this experiment, a process starts
when the test subject gazed at a question ﬁle and ended when they gazed
at the corresponding answer ﬁle. As stated in section 3.2.6.2, this is the
structure of all processes or questions in the experiment. The process
holds for both domain- and code understanding questions. When a pro-
cess is deﬁned, it is critical to deﬁne what activities are in the process.
The activities can be grouped up to simplify the many gazes caught. The
ways the data was grouped in this thesis is described in the following
subsections.
3.4.1.1
Organise by ﬁle
To be able to reduce a large number of repeating observations, one way is
to aggregate observations by the observed ﬁles. This means that when test
subjects gaze at a ﬁle, and the gazes are in continuation, the observations
are grouped. By grouping the observations, a timespan is made. The
timestamp of the latest observation is used as the end timestamp. Doing
this creates a timespan for that activity instead of just a timestamp. This
can be done without loss of important information since the methods and
variables in the ﬁles are not important to this experiment.
An example of a process where observations are aggregated by ﬁle can be
seen in ﬁgure 3.9.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Analysing the data
41
Figure 3.9: The timeline of a task when observations are organised by
ﬁles, link to full version [25]
The variables used for the rows in the ﬁle with data aggregated by ﬁle
is:variant (test subject ID), gazeID, ﬁlename, artifact, task, tsStart (start
timestamp), tsEnd (end timestamp) and task+variant.
All raw gaze data as well as organised by ﬁle can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/13KrYGnlyUZlm0oYFKxEfj8OqWuUdK8nq?
usp=sharing.
The organisation of the gaze data is based on the following project:
https://github.com/CIoann/cuciTraceAnalyzers
3.4.1.2
Organise by artefact
This thesis especially focuses on the use of BDD when code readability
changes. Therefore, aggregating the gaze data by the observed types of
software artefacts is relevant. This also has the beneﬁt of further limiting
the number of observation compared to when organised by ﬁle. When
organising by artefact, all ﬁles of similar types are grouped. There are
three types of artefacts, being source code, feature ﬁles and step code ﬁles.
This means that if a test subject, for example, gazes at Constants.java
and StationList.java in continuation, these would be grouped as they
are both artefacts of the type source code.
The process of the gazes over time in a question when observations are
aggregated by ﬁle can be seen in ﬁgure 3.10.
==PAGE:56==
42
Methodology
Figure 3.10: The timeline of a task when observations are organised by
software artefacts. A test subject either looks at zero or
one of a speciﬁc type of software artefact, since all ﬁles of
that type are aggregated together, link to full version [25]
The variables used for the rows in the ﬁle with data aggregated by arte-
fact is: variant (test subject ID), artifact (type of artifact), gaze (what
the gaze is focused at), task, tsStart (start timestamp), tsEnd (end times-
tamp) and task+variant.
All raw gaze data as well as organised by artefact can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/13KrYGnlyUZlm0oYFKxEfj8OqWuUdK8nq?
usp=sharing.
The organisation of the gaze data is based on the following project:
https://github.com/CIoann/cuciTraceAnalyzers
3.4.2
Verbal protocol analysis
Compared to the data generated by iTrace, not much has to be done to the
audio recordings. Once the smartphone had made the audio recordings,
the ﬁles were ready to be analysed. Normally with the verbal protocol
analysis, recordings could also be transcribed. Because of the length and
amount of experiments, this was considered not to be relevant as 923
minutes of recording were done in total.
While the recordings are not used directly to ﬁnd results, they are used
as additional material to prove results found from the process mining.
It is also used to prove the results found in the data generated by the
eye-tracker. This can especially be relevant to prove a point or to be used
in a scenario where a result might not be completely given by the pro-
cess mining or statistical data alone. Additionally, the recordings allowed
missing data from the experiments to be gathered after the experiment
had happened.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Analysing the data
43
All recordings can be found at the following link:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/18_LqvHeyHHVoXktguNgkNPN7vE1019gs?
usp=sharing
All recordings except for G3P3 are left in their full versions. The ex-
periment of G3P3 was interrupted in the early parts of the experiment.
The interruption happened because of memory savings on the phone that
closed the recording app without warning. The parts of the recording
that got captured are at the link.
3.4.3
The analysis
The ﬁrst important thing for the analysis is to note that the warm-up
tasks are not a part of the analysis since those tasks are not obfuscated.
The reason to have the warm-up tasks is mostly to make the test subjects
familiar with the structure of the tasks and software artefacts.
The analysis starts with the introduction of the diﬀerent strategies used
by the test subjects. In the following sections, the analysis is made based
on domain- and code understanding tasks separately, as these are as-
sumed to get quite diﬀerent results. Finally, the last section focuses on
these two understandings combined.
Based on the data extracted from the written notes during experiments,
and the raw data extracted from the recorded eye-tracking data, a com-
parison is made. The extracted raw data is grouped by the projects. The
comparison of the non-obfuscated and obfuscated data for the projects
are then made.
After the analysis of the raw data, process maps organised in the ways
described in section 3.4.1.1 and 3.4.1.2 are made based on the strategies
ﬁrstly given in this analysis.
The analysis then uses the data from the questionnaires that were an-
swered by test subjects as well as from the audio recordings to strengthen
further the results found by the previous analysis.
The results of raw data comparison, process maps and questionnaires and
recordings are then combined, and the overall results are discussed.
Finally, with the use of kernel density estimation (KDE), bar charts and
ANOVA tests, additional ﬁndings are found, and the null hypothesis is
==PAGE:58==
44
Methodology
rejected or not.
In the analysis, accuracy, diﬃculty as given by test subject, per cent-wise
BDD-usage and total time used are the analysed variables. This means
that these variables will describe the developers’ diﬀerent sense-making
ability because of obfuscation.
3.5
Validity threats
3.5.1
Conclusion validity
This type of validity investigates the relationship between the treatment
and the outcome of the speciﬁc study. It is critical for the thesis that
the right conclusion is given based on this relationship. There must be a
statistical relationship; otherwise, issues that aﬀect the ability to conclude
can happen.
3.5.1.1
Statistical power
When the statistical power is considered, it is relevant to consider the
possibility of Type I or Type II errors. A type I error happens when a
statistical test indicates a null hypothesis even though there is no signiﬁ-
cant eﬀect of obfuscation. Type II errors indicate that a null hypothesis
is not rejected even though there is a signiﬁcant eﬀect of obfuscation.
With the use of ANOVA tests in the data analysis, P-values way above
or below the value of 0.05 are considered safer values, which indicates
that there is a pattern. Values close to 0.05, is considered less safe. A
minor diﬀerence in the experiment or test subjects could tip the bal-
ance. Another factor to consider is the eﬀect size, η2. In an experiment
with subjects with diﬀerent backgrounds, the η2 because of obfuscation is
expected to be at a low value. This is because that test subject’s individ-
uality often describes much of the eﬀect, η2, as they vary from each other.
Finally, the power of parametric statistical tests such as the ANOVA test
is also considered high [45].
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Validity threats
45
The statistical power is also aﬀected by the number of observations or
test subjects. As the groups consist of six test subjects each, a threat
is that just one test subject can aﬀect the results.
The diﬀerences of
test subject and possible threats because of that are further discussed in
section 3.5.1.4.
3.5.1.2
Reliability of measures
Reliability of measure relates to identifying instrumentation or experi-
ment elements such as questions. For the reliability to be high, it must
be possible to measure the same outcome if a part of the experiment is
measured twice.
The primary functionality of iTrace was tested before each experiment
via the calibration and "show crosshair" feature as described in section
3.2.6.3.
Here the accuracy of the crosshair was high after calibration,
and the font size was increased; this allowed for a line-by-line accuracy.
While it is known that eye-trackers are not necessarily perfect in regards
to accuracy, this experiment only relied on knowing at which ﬁle was
gazed. Because of this, the precision should be more than enough. If
the accuracy was important, the font size or distance between elements
might have needed additional increases. Besides accuracy, the speed of
an eye-tracker is also to be considered. With the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C
recording at 90 Hz, this is not considered a problem of interest though.
As described in section 2.4, humans do not register objects faster than
after 50-150 ms [3].
Having a higher sampling frequency could have improved the accuracy of
ﬁxations [1]. However, current eye-tracking technology is reliable for use
in studies [30], and the 90 Hz of the Tobii Eye Tracker 4C is therefore
deemed enough. The export of data to the database was also tested be-
fore the experiments. These tests gave good results and ran for about 30
minutes. The reliability of iTrace and the eye-tracker was also tested in
the pilot experiment.
==PAGE:60==
46
Methodology
3.5.1.3
Fishing and the error rate
The threat of ’ﬁshing’ for speciﬁc results could easily be a threat to the
experiment. If there was not a broad focus on diﬀerent variables of the re-
sult in the data analysis, the results could perhaps be observed diﬀerently.
One example is if instead of the projects, the groups were compared in the
descriptive comparisons. In this case, a more diﬃcult project would not
necessarily be detected as easily. Comparing, group one and two would
only discover the diﬀerences because of obfuscation. It is however critical
not to miss the diﬀerences between the projects, as these can easily create
Type I and Type II errors. One such threat was found with BDD usage
that was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the EmployeeCard project, but not
for the Rejsekort project.
3.5.1.4
Random heterogeneity of subjects
The test subjects were heterogeneous in the way that they were at dif-
ferent stages in their education. Twelve were currently doing their mas-
ter’s degree, seven were on their bachelor degree, and one was doing his
PhD. Finally, 4 test subjects had ﬁnished their master’s degree and were
working as developers or similar. Additionally, the test subject studied
diﬀerent study lines and had diﬀerent levels of experience with software
development. Other factors that could aﬀect the results are that only
very few test subjects had any prior experience with BDD. As discovered
in the data analysis, some test subject used other means than feature ﬁles
for domain-speciﬁc tasks, possibly making the task more diﬃcult. This
probably happens because of their lacking experience with BDD. Also,
the amount that the test subjects had prior experience with code obfus-
cation varied. This meant some were more prepared once reaching the
obfuscated code.
As stated in section 3.2.4, convenience sampling was used to ﬁnd enough
test subjects. It was therefore known that the persons would be hetero-
geneous before the experiments. The same type of selection was done in
the previously compared studies, that also used a mix of students and
graduated test subjects [9] [31] [24] [17]. Because of the heterogeneity, an
introduction was given of the structure of the experiment and to BDD as
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Validity threats
47
speciﬁed in section 3.2.6.3.
A threat to the heterogeneity is that very weak or strong test subjects
may aﬀect the results. This will be investigated further in chapter 4.
3.5.2
Internal validity
Internal validity investigates if the observed outcome of the experiment,
because of the treatment applied is because of a causal relationship. The
biggest threat is that the outcome is not a result of a controllable factor
or one that is not measured. This means it is validating whether the
treatment causes the outcome.
3.5.2.1
Maturation
A threat is the possibility of maturation, that means that subjects work
diﬀerently in diﬀerent phases of the experiment. If a task is too long, the
test subjects might get bored or tired, which decreases their motivation.
This inﬂuences their answers. As introduced in section 3.2.6.3, the test
subjects were given a maximum of ﬁve minutes to solve a task. One of
the reasons behind to deﬁne a time limit is that diﬀerences in accuracy
and diﬃculty might be clearer when test subjects have less time.
The time limit also means that in many cases, the test subject would be
busy at ﬁnding an answer. This means they often not have the time to
get too bored. It could rather be the number of tasks that could bore
the test subject. This was partly solved by switching between domain-
and code-speciﬁc tasks as well as diﬀerent projects. At the same time,
the time limit should not be too short as that might also easily aﬀect the
outcome. If too short, many questions might not be possible to get to
answer at all.
==PAGE:62==
48
Methodology
3.5.2.2
Instrumentation
In the case of instrumentation, diﬀerent experiment artefacts might have
had an impact on the outcome. One thing was how the questions and
feature ﬁles are formulated. This may aﬀect the extent of comprehension
of the subjects. Therefore, it is important that the scenario is well for-
mulated.
The complexity of the code can also aﬀect the extent of the compre-
hension of the test subjects. The code should not be too easy nor too
complicated, and also take the time limit into consideration. A diﬀerence
in the level of complexity was important to distinguish the more diﬃcult
tasks better from easier ones. If all tasks were too equal in diﬃculty, the
test subject might become too familiar with the amount of eﬀort needed
to solve tasks.
Additionally, the layout of the IDE and the means for the test subjects
to answer questions should be appropriately designed. Because of this,
Eclipse was held very close to its standard layout. Only the iTrace plugin
in the bottom part of the IDE diﬀerentiated. The means for the test
subjects to answer questions was additionally kept the same throughout
the experiment.
3.5.3
Construct validity
Construct validity investigates the relationship between theory and ob-
servation.
If the relationship between cause and eﬀect is found to be
causal, there are more to consider. One example is that the treatment
in the experiment reﬂects the construct that is studied, meaning that it
measures what it claims to measure. This can, for example, raise the
question about whether the right measures have been selected.
3.5.3.1
Construct deﬁnition
It can be a threat to the results if there are measures for the developer’s
engagement with software artefacts that are not considered. In the exper-
==PAGE:63==
3.5 Validity threats
49
iment, accuracy, diﬃculty, per cent-wise BDD-usage and total time used
are measured.
A variable that could have been measured is the cognitive load of test
subjects. One way to measure this was to study the pupil data found in
the eye-tracking data. This was not performed because of the already sig-
niﬁcant amount of data provided by the eye-tracker. Additionally, data
in the form of recordings and notes from the experiments also provided
details about diﬃculty and accuracy. Another way could have been to
measure the pulse of the test subjects. It can be assumed that the rating
of diﬃculty would be connected to these values.
However, it is not a
guarantee and could give other results than currently found. Because of
this, there could be additional work to be performed. This is to analyse
developers engagement in regards to physical measures such as pupil data
or pulse. This thesis, however, lays some foundations of what results are
to be expected from these potential future studies.
3.5.3.2
Mono-method bias
Much of the data in the experiments rely on the eye-tracker. If it was
biased, it might end up aﬀecting the experiment, resulting in a wrong
conclusion. Because of the use of user rating and noted timestamps, this
can be used to cross-check some of the data. However, since the noted
timestamps are made manually, it is less precise. It can still be used as
validation if the eye-tracking data were completely oﬀ.
The use of mostly students also aﬀect the results. If the test subjects
were all graduated software developers, the eﬀects of obfuscation might
have turned out diﬀerently. This would probably have meant that they
would have performed better in the experiment, as they would have more
software development experience. The same is the case for the test sub-
jects’ lack of experience with BDD. As also stated in section 3.5.1.4, even
though all test subjects got an introduction, prior experience with BDD
would probably have changed the use of BDD in the experiments.
==PAGE:64==
50
Methodology
3.5.3.3
Evaluation apprehension
Test subjects might try to perform better than usual, known as the
Hawthorne eﬀect because they know they are evaluated. Results might,
therefore, be more diﬃcult to generalise outside studies that contain ex-
periments. A present spectator during the experiment might further in-
crease this eﬀect. It was necessary to have a spectator during the exper-
iment. Therefore, the test subjects are assumed to attempt to perform
better in the experiment, compared to if no spectator was present. This
was to be able to answer questions and check that test subjects gazed
correctly at the test machine. If no spectator were present, the results
would have been diﬀerent. For example, if the test subject gazed away
from the eye-tracker, its’ calibration might have worsened. It was possi-
ble to prevent the Hawthorne eﬀect by instructing test subjects that their
interactions were the most important and not their performance. Even
with this, compared to normal business, software developers might not
feel the same amount of pressure.
3.5.4
External validity
External validity is concerned with investigating whether the results of
the thesis can be generalised. If there is found to be a causal relationship
between the cause and the eﬀect, it can be possible to use the results
outside the thesis’ scope.
3.5.4.1
Interaction of selection and treatment
The disadvantages of the use of students are that they are not represen-
tatives of practitioners in the industry. Using a combination of people
from diﬀerent study lines may have both beneﬁts and ﬂaws. A beneﬁt is
that software developers outside the thesis will also often have a mixed
background. Some may even come from an education that is not typical
IT education. Flaws are that some test subjects might have had less soft-
ware development experience.
==PAGE:65==
3.5 Validity threats
51
All test subjects voluntarily participated in the experiments and as such,
should all be equally motivated to solve the tasks. Developers that are
engaging with software artefacts of diﬀerent readability in the industry
are also assumed to do it voluntarily. Therefore, the results of the thesis
could correspond well with eﬀects due to obfuscation outside the thesis.
3.5.4.2
Experimental setup
Another possible threat is that the experimental settings are not repre-
sentative of an industry setting. Many factors such as hardware, software,
programming language and, environment and setting may have an impact
on test subjects performance.
The experiment is based on the Java programming language.
While
Java is a well-used programming language, the question is if the ﬁnd-
ings can be generalised to other Object-oriented programming languages.
As BDD frameworks and tools exist for several other used languages such
as C#/.NET, Python and JavaScript, this may very well be the case.
Finally, there is the threat to the result in the form of the ﬁve-minute
time limit. In the industry, there is a limit to how much time a developer
can use on a task. It is assumed that ﬁve minutes is less than what would
be given in the industry.
Because of these thoughts, this thesis might be diﬃcult to compare di-
rectly with the industry. If it was to be compared, a similar time limit
had to be added.
==PAGE:66==
52
Methodology
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 4
Data analysis
This chapter aims to describe the data analysis of the data generated by
the experiment performed and described in chapter 3. The investigation
is performed by running through the subordinate aims of section 1.2 and
the questions from section 3.2.2 to possibly approve or reject the null
hypothesis. The possible rejection is made by validating or rejecting the
questions based on the analysis methods described in section 3.4. The
gaze data from the experiments are at this point, assumed to have been
through the process described in section 3.4.1.
Section 4.1 focuses on question 1 (Q1), analysing the data in regard to
domain understanding tasks. Section 4.2 explains the same for code un-
derstanding tasks as speciﬁed in Q2. Finally, section 4.3 describes the
overall results for what obfuscation meant for the outcome of the experi-
ments answering Q3.
It must be noted that gaze data for task 4 for the test participant G4P2
is not included in the data analysis, as the data was missing in the eye-
tracking data.
The reason behind might be the machine resource re-
quirements of the gathering and storing of data from iTrace. When the
experiment had been running for a long while, the test machine began to
run slower. The slowdown could happen if the machine were struggling
==PAGE:68==
54
Data analysis
to follow along with the storing of data being recorded. In a few other
experiments, a small amount of data was also missing, but this was all
past the beginning of task 4.2.1, which is the answer ﬁle of the last task.
Since only the developers sense-making ability is important and not how
the questions were verbally answered, these participants were still used
entirely in the data analysis. The reason why some experiments did not
experience the lack of data might be because they were shorter time-wise.
All experiments took between 27.5 and 58 minutes, with G4P2 being the
longest.
All results extracted from the gaze data, notes about task diﬃculty and
correctness during the experiment and audio recordings can be found in
appendix D for individual test subjects and appendix E for average data
of the groups. Scripts made for kernel density estimation (KDE) and the
ANOVA tests can be found in appendix F, appendix G and appendix H.
All raw gaze data used in this analysis can be found at https://drive.
google.com/drive/folders/13KrYGnlyUZlm0oYFKxEfj8OqWuUdK8nq?usp=
sharing. The following sections below focus on data relevant to the ques-
tions answering the hypothesis.
Before starting the data analysis, it is noted that test subjects used many
diﬀerent strategies for solving tasks. These strategies are important when
visualising process maps since it allows to ﬁlter the data based on these.
In table 4.1, an overview of which strategies test subjects used to solve
tasks is given. The word strategy in this case refers to which software
artefacts test subjects used or gazed at to ﬁnd the answer to a question
in a task. Test subjects appear more than once as they ran through a
total of four domain and code understanding questions.
==PAGE:69==
55
Not obfuscated
Task
Domain
Code
Feature ﬁle
G1P1 x 2, G1P2 x 2, G1P4, G1P5, G2P1 x2,
G2P2 x 2, G2P3, G2P4 x 2, G2P5 x 2, G2P6,
G3P2, G3P6, G4P1 x 2, G4P3 x 2, G4P4 x 2,
G4P5 x 2, G4P6 x 2
Total: 28
G2P1, G4P1
Total: 2
Step code
None
G2P2
Total: 1
Source code
G1P3 x 2
Total: 2
G1P1, G1P3 x 2, G1P4, G1P6, G2P3, G2P6,
G3P1 x 2, G3P2, G3P6 x 2, G4P1
Total: 13
Feature ﬁle &
step code
G3P1, G4P2
Total: 2
None
Feature ﬁle &
source code
G2P3, G3P1, G3P3, G3P4, G3P6
Total: 5
G1P6, G2P1, G2P3, G2P4 x 2, G2P6,
G3P3 x 2, G3P4, G4P4
Total: 10
Step code &
source code
G1P6, G3P4
Total: 2
G1P2, G1P5, G2P5, G3P4, G4P3
Total: 5
Feature ﬁle,
step code &
source code
G1P4, G1P5, G1P6, G2P6,
G3P2, G3P3, G3P5 x 2
Total: 8
G1P1, G1P2, G1P4, G1P5, G2P2, G2P5,
G3P2, G3P5 x 2, G4P2, G4P3, G4P4,
G4P5 x 2, G4P6 x 2
Total: 16
Obfuscated
Task
Domain
Code
Feature ﬁle
G1P1 x 2, G1P2, G1P3, G1P4, G1P5, G1P6
G2P1, G2P3 x 2, G2P4 x 2, G2P5 x 2, G2P6 x 2,
G3P1, G3P2 x 2, G3P3, G3P4, G3P5 x 2, G3P6 x 2,
G4P1, G4P3 x 2, G4P4, G4P5 x 2, G4P6
Total: 32
G3P6 x 2
Total: 2
Step code
None
None
Source code
None
G2P1, G2P2, G2P3, G2P6 x 2, G3P1,
G4P1 x 2, G4P4
Total: 9
Feature ﬁle &
step code
G1P4, G1P5, G1P6
Total: 3
None
Feature ﬁle &
source code
G1P3, G2P1, G3P1, G4P1
Total: 4
G2P1, G2P3, G2P4 x 2
Total: 4
Step code &
source code
G1P2, G2P2, G4P2
Total: 3
G1P1, G1P2, G1P6, G2P2, G4P3
Total: 5
Feature ﬁle,
step code &
source code
G2P2, G3P3, G3P4,
G4P2, G4P4, G4P6
Total: 6
G1P1, G1P2, G1P3 x 2, G1P4 x 2, G1P5 x 2,
G1P6, G2P5 x 2, G3P1, G3P2 x 2, G3P3 x 2,
G3P4 x 2, G3P5 x 2, G4P2 x 2, G4P3, G4P4,
G4P5 x 2, G4P6 x 2
Total: 28
Table 4.1: Test subject strategies for solving tasks requiring domain- or
code understanding for obfuscated and non-obfuscated sys-
tems. A strategy describes what software artefact(s) the test
subject looks at to solve a task.
==PAGE:70==
56
Data analysis
4.1
Software artefacts usage with and without
code obfuscation for domain understanding
tasks (Q1)
As mentioned in section 2.3, a question dealing with domain understand-
ing should be possible to solve just by reading the correct feature ﬁle.
The alternative is ﬁnding the source code containing the same informa-
tion. As observed in table 4.1, the simple way is the most used strategy
for domain understanding questions. In the following sections, it is seen
if this is also what the data show.
4.1.1
Comparison of raw data
With a comparison of the extracted data from the eye-tracker, it is pos-
sible to investigate how data changes when source code obfuscation is
introduced. Because of this, it is relevant to compare the projects with
itself in its obfuscated version. Therefore, the data is combined between
the groups; for example, group 1 starts with Rejsekort non-obfuscated
and group 4 ends with it. The same is performed for the other project.
In table 4.2 and 4.3 this data is presented.
It must be noted that the groups work with the projects in the order as
speciﬁed in table 3.2.
Rejsekort, Domain understanding
Group
Task
Obfuscated
Diﬃculty
average
Correct
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
%
use BDD
Total time
spent
average
Group 1
1.1.0
No
1.50
5/6
26.25
22.00
38.63%
124.90
Group 1
2.1.0
No
2.17
4/6
20.75
22.90
21.93%
199.07
Group 4
3.1.0
No
1.67
6/6
70.67
0.72
65.22%
109.45
Group 4
4.1.0
No
1.00
6/6
30.16
0.00
45.35%
66.50
Total
6.33
87.50%
147.83
45.62
38.70%
499.92
Group 2
1.1.0
Yes
1.83
6/6
34.85
0.73
40.56%
87.73
Group 2
2.1.0
Yes
2.00
6/6
73.02
13.30
53.31%
161.92
Group 3
3.1.0
Yes
2.83
4/6
75.88
20.63
53.24%
181.30
Group 3
4.1.0
Yes
1.50
6/6
25.28
0.00
35.67%
70.88
Total
8.17
91.67%
209.03
34.67
48.56%
501.83
Table 4.2: Experiment data for the Rejsekort project for domain under-
standing tasks.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
57
As it is seen from table 4.2, obfuscation does not seem to have much of an
eﬀect in regard to the average summed results. However, the diﬃculty and
accuracy are increasing. The other bigger diﬀerence when the total results
are observed is that feature ﬁles are used more. This is in consistence with
table 4.1. It is seen that 22 out of 24 test participants answer a domain-
speciﬁc task with just a feature ﬁle when the source code is obfuscated
for one of their tasks. When it comes to non-obfuscated projects, the
number is only 17 out of 24. Additionally, there is a small increase in the
total amount of test subjects that only use feature ﬁles from 28 to 32 out
of the total 48 strategies (47 for non-obfuscated because of G4P2).
Finally, there are some major diﬀerences between some tasks for some
groups, that is aﬀecting the overall results. For example, task 3.1.0 shows
a big increase in time spent as well as decreased accuracy. The reason
for this could easily be that these two incorrect test subjects did not
(only) try to ﬁnd the answer in the feature ﬁle. If the test subject looks
elsewhere with obfuscated code, the time needed might increase a lot.
EmployeeCard, Domain understanding
Group
Task
Obfuscated
Diﬃculty
average
Correct
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
%
use BDD
Total time
spent
average
Group 3
1.1.0
No
2.33
5/6
40.93
27.87
34.62%
198.75
Group 3
2.1.0
No
3.00
2/6
49.87
11.10
23.55%
258.88
Group 2
3.1.0
No
2.00
4/6
128.45
0.00
68.92%
186.37
Group 2
4.1.0
No
1.67
5/6
29.82
20.00
35.66%
139.70
Total
9.00
66.67%
249.07
58.97
39.31%
783.70
Group 4
1.1.0
Yes
2.17
5/6
41.95
32.00
44.82%
165.00
Group 4
2.1.0
Yes
2.50
3/6
65.57
14.85
54.10%
148.63
Group 1
3.1.0
Yes
2.00
5/6
102.35
12.60
53.86%
213.42
Group 1
4.1.0
Yes
1.83
5/6
23.72
19.35
43.59%
98.80
Total
8.50
75.00%
233.58
78.80
49.91%
625.85
Table 4.3: Experiment data for the EmployeeCard project for domain
understanding tasks
The results from table 4.3 shows some diﬀerences compared to the Re-
jsekort project. In general, it is observed that the EmployeeCard project
seems to be more diﬃcult. This is concluded because the diﬃculty and
the total time spent is increased. Furthermore, the accuracy is lower in
all cases with the total data. The eﬀects of obfuscation are also diﬀerent
compared to the Rejsekort project. The diﬃculty is decreased and the
time used on tasks is reduced, rather than unchanged. The use of feature
==PAGE:72==
58
Data analysis
ﬁles are high, but the use of the step code ﬁles is almost doubled. The
percentage-wise use of BDD elements is about the same.
4.1.2
Process maps
For all process maps, all activities and paths are shown, meaning both
were set to 100% in Disco. All process maps show the absolute frequency
an artefact or ﬁle were gazed at as primary attribute. The secondary
attribute is the total duration that the artefact or ﬁle was gazed at for a
test subject[20]. The process maps show the processes at an artefact level
in section 4.1.2.1 and at a ﬁle-level in section 4.1.2.2 for a more detailed
view. For all process maps, the process is initiated when the test sub-
ject gaze at the similar questions ﬁle and terminates when looking at the
corresponding answer ﬁle, as stated in section 3.1. Only the most used
strategies from table 4.1 are investigated. All process maps can be seen
in their full version at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ZEoupZ0tVx_cP8vXcSDlaJlY1jz6h_
ru?usp=sharing
4.1.2.1
Organised by artefact
In the case of domain-speciﬁc questions, the most important strategies are
feature ﬁle only because it is the most used strategy. The feature ﬁle +
source code strategy is next since the use of source code, in general, seems
to experience a decline when the code is obfuscated. At the same time, it
gives a simpler overview of the use of obfuscated source code compared
to the ﬁnal process map. The last type of process maps investigates all
software artefacts, (feature ﬁle, step code & source code). As discovered
in section 4.1.1, there is a general trend when test subjects do not only
look at feature ﬁles. The trend is that they have more problems ﬁnding
the answer. Because of this, the expected amount of gazed at artefacts is
assumed to be higher. Because of this, at the feature ﬁles + source code
strategy is investigated. With that strategy, the use of source code ﬁles is
easier visible, especially in regard to the process maps organised by ﬁle.
In regard to feature ﬁle only in ﬁgure 4.1, it is observed that some of the
==PAGE:73==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
59
results from the raw data can be seen here.
69
3.8 mins
61
66.5 secs
28
20
8
QUESTION
89
(18.7 mins)
FEATURE
69
(27.1 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
63
5 mins
58
69.7 secs
32
27
5
QUESTION
90
(17.6 mins)
FEATURE
63
(28.1 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.1: Process maps of artefact usage for domain understanding
tasks when only feature ﬁles were used
In ﬁgure 4.1, the time-wise usage of the elements is not that diﬀerent, but
in general, the test subjects ﬁnish the tasks slightly faster for obfuscated
tasks. The amount of times the elements are visited (frequency) is lower
for the obfuscated tasks, interpreting that obfuscation does not change
much when only feature ﬁles are visited. Overall, it is shown that obfus-
cating a project’s source code, does not seem to aﬀect a user much if they
only look at feature ﬁles. The diﬀerence between the non-obfuscated and
obfuscated process maps is assumed to be because of the variation of test
subjects reading speed or developing/BDD experience.
==PAGE:74==
60
Data analysis
13
53.6 secs
13
35.2 secs
12
10 secs
5
21.3 secs
14
16.2 secs
4
21.8 secs
5
5
QUESTION
31
(5.3 mins)
SOURCE CODE
17
(9 mins)
FEATURE
18
(5.4 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
8
16.9 secs
13
11.2 secs
5
5.3 secs
3
23.2 secs
14
17.6 secs
1
3.5 secs
4
2
1
1
QUESTION
23
(5.1 mins)
SOURCE CODE
9
(4.5 mins)
FEATURE
16
(6.4 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.2: Process maps of artefact usage for domain understanding
tasks when feature ﬁles & source code was used
==PAGE:75==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
61
In ﬁgure 4.2, it is observed that when the code is obfuscated, there is an
increase in the use of feature ﬁles. This is consistent with the general
trend. At the same time, the amount navigating between the source code
and the time used on the ﬁles is decreased. This could indicate that the
test subject relies mostly on the feature ﬁles. This theory can further be
tested when the process map is organised by ﬁles instead of artefacts in
section 4.1.2.2. Finally, the overall time usage is a bit lower because of
less use of source code. This is consistent with that the answer is found
faster in the feature ﬁle, or the test subject gives up when it comes to the
source code. In the end, as stated in section 4.1.1, the accuracy ends up
to be higher for all obfuscated tasks except task 3.1.0 and 4.1.0 for group
3 & 4. This correlates well with the fact that the test subjects more often
ﬁnd the answer in feature ﬁles, and does not mistake when they read the
more complicated source code.
Finally, test subjects that use all software artefacts is seen in ﬁgure 4.3,
a few ﬁndings are found here.
==PAGE:76==
62
Data analysis
7
18 secs
10
46.2 secs
7
48.9 secs
3
11 secs
9
37.1 secs
10
13.1 secs
9
35.5 secs
4
24 secs
3
6.5 secs
6
24 secs
10
66.3 secs
8
20.1 secs
8
7
1
QUESTION
29
(6.5 mins)
FEATURE
23
(4.5 mins)
STEP CODE
19
(7.7 mins)
SOURCE CODE
23
(12.1 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
5
31 secs
2
13 secs
10
25 secs
3
1.3 secs
13
39.9 secs
3
1.3 secs
7
22.2 secs
7
13.5 secs
2
67 millis
11
19.5 secs
6
15.4 secs
10
12.4 secs
6
2
2
1
1
QUESTION
21
(2.7 mins)
SOURCE CODE
18
(11.3 mins)
STEP CODE
20
(4.9 mins)
FEATURE
26
(4.8 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.3: Process maps of artefact usage for domain understanding
tasks when all software artefact was used
==PAGE:77==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
63
In ﬁgure 4.3, a clear path that test subjects take in the obfuscated case,
that also is the most expected. A developer would often have to look at
the feature ﬁle ﬁrst to spot a scenario relevant to the given question. The
developer then goes to the corresponding step code that points toward
the source code that hopefully contains the answer.
These directions (both backwards and forwards through the steps) is the
most used path in the process map. With the non-obfuscated case, there
is also a number of test subjects that go directly to the source code.
4.1.2.2
Organised by ﬁle
To simplify the process maps when organised by ﬁles all markdown ﬁles
with questions in them have been renamed to QUESTION. The renam-
ing is performed to reduce the number of elements in the process maps
because the number is already high.
Starting with the strategy, feature ﬁles only, the same pattern as to when
the data was organised by artefacts can be seen.
==PAGE:78==
64
Data analysis
12
27.5 secs
5
7.6 secs
18
39.3 secs
9
7.7 secs
17
90.2 secs
2
11.9 secs
11
14.1 secs
4
27.4 secs
11
27.1 secs
4
6.2 secs
16
21.4 secs
15
12 secs
2
3.5 secs
4
6.2 secs
28
20
1
1
2
2
2
QUESTION
89
(18.7 mins)
CheckIn.feature
12
(2.6 mins)
CreditCardVerification.feature
5
(47.1 secs)
AccessControl.feature
18
(12.8 mins)
CreateAdminReports.feature
17
(3.9 mins)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
2
(7.7 secs)
Deposit.feature
4
(85.5 secs)
Reload.feature
11
(5.4 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
1
2 secs
12
31.7 secs
18
62.5 secs
9
51.1 secs
8
7.5 secs
6
56.9 secs
6
43.2 secs
10
13.5 secs
4
15.4 secs
8
37.6 secs
17
18.5 secs
9
16.9 secs
4
3.3 secs
6
6.6 secs
4
3.5 secs
32
27
2
1
2
QUESTION
91
(17.5 mins)
AccessControl.feature
12
(4.2 mins)
CreateAdminReports.feature
18
(4.6 mins)
CreditCardVerification.feature
9
(6.8 mins)
CheckIn.feature
6
(2.8 mins)
Reload.feature
6
(2.6 mins)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
4
(3.6 mins)
Deposit.feature
8
(3.4 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.4: Process maps of ﬁle usage for domain understanding tasks
when only feature ﬁles were used
This means that the frequency and time-wise usage of the feature ﬁles are
lower or unchanged when code is obfuscated. In ﬁgure 4.4, the amount
of feature ﬁles visited in total is seven for both cases, so the test subjects
does not seem to experience more problems to ﬁnd the right feature ﬁle.
This is expected, as naming and content of feature ﬁles are unchanged.
With the strategy, feature ﬁles + source code, in ﬁgure 4.5, there are new
ﬁndings compared to the previous maps organised by artefact.
==PAGE:79==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
65
4
11.3 secs
1
13.2 secs
2
8.2 secs
2
3.7 secs
9
24 secs
3
13.1 secs
1
9.5 secs
2
1.6 secs
2
2.9 secs
2
5 secs
2
822 millis
2
3.4 secs
9
8.5 secs
1
2.4 secs
1
78 millis
3
20.7 secs
1
516 millis
2
568 millis
1
2.5 secs
1
1.2 secs
2
3.7 secs
3
3.9 secs
1
1.1 secs
3
1 secs
1
1.4 secs
3
17.6 secs
5
5
QUESTION
31
(5.3 mins)
EmployeeCardList.java
4
(35.6 secs)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
2
(54 secs)
CreateAdminReports.feature
3
(72.2 secs)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
12
(4 mins)
CreditCard.java
6
(83 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
1
(50 secs)
SelfServiceMachine.java
2
(3.2 mins)
Deposit.feature
3
(7.9 secs)
DepositToEmployeeCard.java
4
(111.3 secs)
Constants.java
1
(11.8 secs)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
5
2.2 secs
1
55 millis
6
5.7 secs
1
13 millis
1
12 millis
2
1.1 secs
8
9.9 secs
1
6.3 secs
1
14.6 secs
1
933 millis
1
3.5 secs
2
224 millis
1
1.8 secs
2
565 millis
3
3.5 secs
3
7.8 secs
1
20.4 secs
4
3.5 secs
1
4.9 secs
3
26.1 secs
2
4.3 secs
1
5.4 secs
1
15.9 secs
1
4.3 secs
1
878 millis
4
2
1
1
QUESTION
23
(5.1 mins)
AccessControl.java
8
(49 secs)
SelfServiceMachine.java
1
(15.9 secs)
EmployeeCard.java
4
(34.2 secs)
AccessControl.feature
2
(77.8 secs)
CheckInAutomaton.java
1
(36.9 secs)
CheckIn.feature
3
(42.2 secs)
Reload.feature
8
(3.6 mins)
TravelCard.java
1
(34.6 secs)
Kiosk.java
1
(5.5 secs)
CreditCard.java
1
(18 secs)
Canteen.java
1
(8.3 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
1
(3.6 secs)
Deposit.feature
3
(47.5 secs)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.5: Process maps of ﬁle usage for domain understanding tasks
when feature ﬁles & source code was used
In ﬁgure 4.5, it is observed that the source code time-wise is visited almost
half the amount when obfuscation is present. This is even though the
amount of source code ﬁles gazed at are increased at the same time.
The reason for this increase is mostly because the source code ﬁles are
diﬃcult to understand. Therefore the test subject often has to go through
more ﬁles before ﬁnding the answer of before advancing to the feature ﬁle
containing the answer.
Investigating the strategy, all software artefacts, the same pattern as to
when the data was organised by artefacts can be observed.
==PAGE:80==
66
Data analysis
3
21.5 secs
1
981 millis
1
410 millis
4
16.9 secs
1
378 millis
2
7.3 secs
3
9.8 secs
1
5.8 secs
1
577 millis
2
12.5 secs
1
1.2 secs
1
1.9 secs
1
1.5 secs
1
4.3 secs
2
13.2 secs
1
933 millis
1
9.4 secs
1
133 millis
4
9.5 secs
2
2.5 secs
1
1.8 secs
1
18.2 secs
1
1.8 secs
1
910 millis
1
7.8 secs
2
1.7 secs
4
12.7 secs
1
7.4 secs
2
7.8 secs
1
1.4 secs
1
15.3 secs
3
8.2 secs
3
9.2 secs
1
7.6 secs
1
7 secs
1
12.3 secs
1
1.7 secs
2
13.4 secs
4
35.6 secs
1
3.3 secs
2
10.5 secs
3
4.7 secs
1
766 millis
1
444 millis
2
2.8 secs
3
12.4 secs
1
2.3 secs
1
1.5 secs
3
5.8 secs
1
9.1 secs
2
2.4 secs
1
813 millis
1
5.5 secs
1
8.5 secs
1
1.9 secs
8
7
1
QUESTION
29
(6.5 mins)
CreditCardVerification.feature
7
(77.5 secs)
CreditCardVerificationSteps.java
9
(2.3 mins)
CreditCard.java
6
(53.8 secs)
Kiosk.java
8
(7 mins)
ASystemInitialization.feature
4
(18.7 secs)
AccessControl.feature
2
(7 secs)
CanteenList.java
1
(2 secs)
Canteen.java
1
(24.3 secs)
CreateAdminReportsSteps.java
2
(2 mins)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
3
(23.7 secs)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
2
(32.3 secs)
ValidateCreditCardSteps.java
1
(30.4 secs)
SelfServiceMachine.java
2
(76 secs)
ResponseObject.java
2
(14.5 secs)
DepositToEmployeeCard.java
5
(98.8 secs)
Deposit.feature
7
(103.4 secs)
DepositWithdrawSteps.java
5
(2.3 mins)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchases.feature
1
(29.4 secs)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchasesSteps.java
1
(29.4 secs)
AccessControlSteps.java
1
(4.4 secs)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
1
6.1 secs
1
12.9 secs
1
917 millis
1
122 millis
3
10.6 secs
2
1 secs
3
3 secs
3
1.3 secs
1
1.8 secs
2
5.5 secs
9
28.4 secs
1
6.2 secs
2
5.7 secs
1
9.6 secs
1
3.9 secs
1
356 millis
1
12 millis
1
11 millis
1
2.7 secs
5
5.3 secs
1
5.2 secs
1
344 millis
2
1.4 secs
1
1.1 secs
2
1.7 secs
2
3.4 secs
4
6.4 secs
1
21.9 secs
6
11.6 secs
1
6.5 secs
2
67 millis
1
1.3 secs
3
4.1 secs
1
1.3 secs
2
3.4 secs
1
10 secs
2
1.7 secs
3
7.6 secs
1
4 secs
4
2.6 secs
1
2.1 secs
7
7 secs
2
1.3 secs
5
3.3 secs
3
11.3 secs
2
4.6 secs
2
1.9 secs
6
2
2
1
1
QUESTION
21
(2.7 mins)
CreditCard.java
10
(2 mins)
CreditCardVerificationSteps.java
3
(79.8 secs)
CreditCardVerification.feature
2
(29.6 secs)
Kiosk.java
11
(2.6 mins)
Constants.java
5
(20.3 secs)
Reload.feature
10
(82.1 secs)
TravelCard.java
1
(8.8 secs)
ReloadSteps.java
11
(2.1 mins)
CreditCardCompany.java
3
(11.2 secs)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
14
(3 mins)
ValidateCreditCardSteps.java
6
(89.1 secs)
SelfServiceMachine.java
10
(5.2 mins)
ResponseObject.java
2
(9 secs)
SystemLogger.java
1
(4.7 secs)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.6: Process maps of ﬁle usage for domain understanding tasks
when all software artefact was used
The total amount of visited elements in ﬁgure 4.6 are decreased from 20
to 14 when obfuscation is present. Additionally, the ﬁles visited are in
more cases indicated by a darker blue colour, which indicates that their
frequency is higher compared to the elements not visited a lot. The same
goes for the edges, which are indicated by the thicker lines. The edges
indicate that most test subjects use the same ﬁles. For the non-obfuscated
scenario, test subjects go through diﬀerent paths.
A reason for this is just the same as in ﬁgure 4.5. In the ﬁgure, it was seen
that when the code is obfuscated, test subjects more often tend to go for
==PAGE:81==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
67
BDD software artefacts. This is especially the case for feature ﬁles in the
case of domain understanding tasks. Since the strategy in this process
map is based on all software artefacts, sometimes the answer is found in
the source code. This is because of step code ﬁles now can point in the
right direction, compared to if they were not used by the test subject.
4.1.3
Questionnaires & verbal protocol analysis
Finally, it is relevant to investigate what the test subjects themselves
felt went diﬀerently, when code obfuscation was used. This is done by
analysing their answers from the post-experiment questionnaire, which
can be seen in appendix B.
As the questionnaire does not focus on domain understanding tasks in
general, but rather just the diﬀerence when test subjects work with either
non-obfuscated or obfuscated projects, not all results can be used directly
for this section. An advantage is that test subjects were not instructed
when they were to solve both domain- and code-understanding tasks.
This indicates that the eﬀect of obfuscation had a good chance to change
behaviour for both types of tasks.
Since domain-understanding tasks can be solved by the use of only feature
ﬁles, this is probably the most important diﬀerence to focus on.
The
results show, that the average "score" of the usability of feature ﬁles are
changing for most groups. For the Rejsekort project, the score went from
4.17 to 4.33 when the code was obfuscated for task 1 and 2. For task 3 and
4 the score remained unchanged at 4.83. For the EmployeeCard project,
the score went from 4.00 to 4.50 for task 1 and 2. For task 3 and 4 the
score went from 4.33 to 4.83. Overall, the trend is that feature ﬁles always
seem to be useful to the test subjects, but when they encounter obfuscated
code, it becomes even more useful. Since domain-understanding tasks can
be solved solely by the use of feature ﬁles, this is deﬁnitely the case for
these tasks as well.
==PAGE:82==
68
Data analysis
Project
Task
Obfuscated
Usability score
Group 1
Rejsekort
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
No
4.17
Group 2
Rejsekort
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
Yes
4.33
Group 3
Rejsekort
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
Yes
4.83
Group 4
Rejsekort
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
No
4.83
Group 3
EmployeeCard
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
No
4.00
Group 4
EmployeeCard
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
Yes
4.50
Group 1
EmployeeCard
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
Yes
4.83
Group 2
EmployeeCard
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
No
4.33
Table 4.4: Usability of feature ﬁles for all groups
Table 4.4 shows, that in all cases except for the Rejsekort project tasks
3.1.0-4.2.0, the usability of feature ﬁles are increased when code is obfus-
cated. The usability remains unchanged for the case not following this
path. Overall, it must be noted that feature ﬁles have a very high score,
since all scores are at 4.00 or above out of 5.
This is consistent with the following quotes from the test subjects:
"I mostly had to rely on the feature and just hope the code did what it
was supposed to", G2P1
"I used the feature ﬁles to see where the related classes to perform a task
were located...", G3P1
"I had to rely on the speciﬁcation in the Feature ﬁles in a stronger
degree...", G3P3
"Looking at feature ﬁles was very fast on occasion", G4P1
"The obfuscated code made me try to look for the answers elsewhere,
then the source code", G4P3
Based on the previous ﬁndings, these quotes aligns well. Many test sub-
jects found their answers in the feature ﬁles.
If they tried to ﬁnd it
elsewhere, the feature ﬁles in some cases pointed towards the step or
source code that had the answers. Comparing this with what was said
by test subjects in the audio recordings, many of them could often read
the answers aloud from the features ﬁles. This indicates that they heavily
relied on them. An example of this is for G1P2 at the time 24:45, where
the test subject says that he more or less just read the content of the fea-
ture ﬁle. Instead of going elsewhere, they often just went directly there.
==PAGE:83==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
69
Even though most test subjects were newcomers to BDD, they hoped or
trusted the feature ﬁle to describe the code correctly.
4.1.4
Results
Since the structure of feature ﬁles are very simple and written in almost
plain English, the time needed to solve a task was reduced. In addition
to this, the accuracy and diﬃculty of these tasks were, in most cases,
unchanged on average.
With this, the code obfuscation increases the use of feature ﬁles and re-
duces both the use of source code as well as step code ﬁles. A ﬁnal note
is that no matter if a project is obfuscated or not, feature ﬁles are useful
among test subject as seen by table 4.4.
However, it is critical to prove whether there is a statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerence because of the obfuscation. Figure 4.7 and ﬁgure 4.8 shows how
each variable was aﬀected. For illustrating the diﬀerences, Kernel density
estimation (KDE) is used because it makes it possible to smoothen the
data compared to histograms. This results in illustrations that are easier
to compare. The bandwidth used is adapted for each ﬁgure to smoothen
the data. Since the KDE graphs are based on estimates, corresponding
histograms showing the exact data is made. The estimated values are also
the reason why the ﬁgure for accuracy shows that some data is above 1.0,
even though that is not possible. Because of the smoothening, the data
is curved meaning it takes some time before reaching 0.0 on the Y-axis.
This must be noted for all the KDE graphs. The scripts creating the
KDE graphs can be seen in appendix F. In addition to the KDE graph,
a bar chart with error bars (standard deviation) is shown in ﬁgure 4.9,
again visualising the eﬀects due to obfuscation. The script creating the
bar chart can be seen in appendix I. Additionally, the histograms, as well
as the scripts and data used to make the ﬁgures and full-size images, can
be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QeyD_OV3FWLmj__8VZu53pt6M89ov1Jw?
usp=sharing
==PAGE:84==
70
Data analysis
(a) Accuracy, full version
(b) Percentage-wise use of BDD, full version
Figure 4.7: Kernel density estimates comparing data of accuracy and
percentage-wise use of BDD with and without obfuscation
for domain speciﬁc tasks
==PAGE:85==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
71
(a) Diﬃculty, full version
(b) Total time used, full version
Figure 4.8: Kernel density estimates comparing data of diﬃculty and
total time used with and without obfuscation for domain
speciﬁc tasks
==PAGE:86==
72
Data analysis
Figure 4.9: Bar chart with error bars comparing data of accuracy,
percentage-wise use of BDD, diﬃculty and total time used
with and without obfuscation for domain-speciﬁc tasks, link
for full version
In ﬁgure 4.7, 4.8 and 4.9 it is observed that accuracy is a bit increased,
BDD usage is increased, diﬃculty is a bit increased and total time used
is decreased. This corresponds well with previous ﬁndings. It can also
be seen from the standard deviation, that the results of individual test
subjects vary a lot.
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test on each of these variables
with obfuscation grouping the values of the variables were performed.
The ANOVA test compares the variability of a variable due to treatment,
in this case obfuscation, and the variability due to random error [45]. The
reason to investigate all variables is that they all describe diﬀerences in
how a test subject has engaged with software artefacts. It can be seen
if the diﬀerences are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. If this is the case, the null
hypothesis can be rejected for domain-speciﬁc tasks. The script doing the
ANOVA test can be seen in appendix G. The results can be seen in table
==PAGE:87==
4.1 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
domain understanding tasks (Q1)
73
4.5.
Sum of squares
Degrees of freedom
F-value
P-value
η2
Accuracy
0.107801
1.0
0.664286
0.417133
0.71%
Residual
15.092199
93.0
99.29%
Total: 15.2
%-wise BDD usage
0.146325
1.0
3.679866
0.058141
3.81%
Residual
3.698019
93.0
96.19%
Total: 3.844344
Diﬃculty
0.514296
1.0
0.553102
0.458928
0.59%
Residual
86.475177
93.0
99.41%
Total: 86.989473
Total time used
10967.672604
1.0
1.206975
0.274768
1.28%
Residual
845082.772238
93.0
98.72%
Total: 856050.444842
Table 4.5: Results from the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test
for domain speciﬁc tasks
It is known that the P-value is the probability of getting a result simi-
lar to the one that was actually observed, given that the null hypothesis
is true. Additionally, the value of η2 or the eﬀect size is indicating the
amount of the variation that is because of the speciﬁc variable. This is
the proportion of the total sum of square that the variable represents
with its sum of square value.
Generally speaking, a P-value of 0.05 or smaller indicates that the null
hypothesis can be rejected. It is described as that the values vary signiﬁ-
cantly from each other, given two treatments. This is also known as the
signiﬁcance level. η2 values in regard to ANOVA tests can grouped into
three size: small, medium and large. A small η2 value is 0.01 or 1 %, 0.06
or 6 % are medium and 0.14 or 14 % is considered high proportions of
the total sum of square [44].
Because of the required P-value, it can be seen from table 4.5 that for do-
main speciﬁc tasks, none of the variables vary signiﬁcantly. The η2 values
are also all very small. Therefore, the null hypothesis can not be rejected.
The use of BDD is, however, very close to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. In
case more participants were included, it could easily make the diﬀerence
signiﬁcant.
Another factor of importance is that the data of the experiment is not
perfectly normally distributed. As the experiment vary on many vari-
ables and especially in regard to the test subjects’ backgrounds, this is
==PAGE:88==
74
Data analysis
not uncommon. This is seen in the sum of square values, as none of the
variables describe much of the variation.
To study whether the projects or test subject IDs had an impact on
the results, two-way ANOVA tests was performed in appendix H. Ob-
fuscation was still kept in the tests, since it is still the eﬀect of this and
possibly its intersection with Project or ID that is interesting. Here, it
is seen that the η2 values of the project are 3.52 %, 5.32 %, 0.70 %
and 6.80 % which are considered low and medium. This is for the for-
mula V ariable Obfuscated × Project, where variable is again accuracy,
diﬃculty, BDD usage and total time used.
When the ID of test sub-
jects are considered, the numbers are diﬀerent. The found η2 values in
this case are 40.71 %, 31.62 %, 36.32 % and 28.33 % for the formula
V ariable Obfuscated × ID. This means that diﬀerences between test
subjects has a very high eﬀect on the discovered diﬀerences.
It is also observed that several of the P-values indicates that projects
and individual test subjects make a signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the result.
However, none of the intersected values with project and ID are close to
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence, and will therefore not be further studied. These
results conﬁrms that designing two projects of equal diﬃculty was not
done perfectly. This was also discovered in the raw data in section 4.1.1.
The diﬀerences between test subjects were already known because they
were found by convenience sampling.
4.2
Software artefacts usage with and without
code obfuscation for code understanding tasks
(Q2)
4.2.1
Comparison of raw data
With the data from the experiment, ﬁrst, a comparison for the Rejsekort
project with code-speciﬁc tasks is made.
==PAGE:89==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
75
Rejsekort, Code understanding
Group
Task
Obfuscated
Diﬃculty
average
Correct
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
%
use BDD
Total time
spent
average
Group 1
1.2.0
No
2.50
6/6
15.47
39.75
36.75%
150.23
Group 1
2.2.0
No
2.83
2/6
1.30
14.05
8.02%
191.48
Group 4
3.2.0
No
3.00
5/6
39.32
53.05
37.40%
246.95
Group 4
4.2.0
No
2.83
6/6
26.32
40.20
32.58%
204.20
Total
11.17
79.17%
82.40
147.05
28.94%
792.87
Group 2
1.2.0
Yes
3.67
1/6
19.30
17.70
15.01%
246.53
Group 2
2.2.0
Yes
3.00
3/6
1.98
9.63
5.30%
219.30
Group 3
3.2.0
Yes
4.00
2/6
67.32
49.20
35.40%
329.13
Group 3
4.2.0
Yes
4.00
3/6
17.45
26.32
18.15%
241.10
Total
14.67
37.50%
106.05
102.85
20.16%
1036.07
Table 4.6: Experiment data for the Rejsekort project for code under-
standing tasks
Based on the data from table 4.6, it can be observed that obfuscation
makes a diﬀerence when it comes to code understanding questions. As
speciﬁed in section 2.3, with code understanding questions, it takes more
than the feature ﬁle to ﬁnd an answer because of its lack of low-level
details.
The diﬀerences, when obfuscated, are a rather large diﬃculty increase, an
accuracy that is about half as good and an increase of time used for all
tasks. Table 4.1 shows that the number of test subjects that require all
types of software artefact is increased from 16 to 28 strategies or 13 test
subject to 17. Additionally, the number of people ﬁguring out where the
right code is, just from the feature ﬁle is decreased from 10 to 4 strategies.
==PAGE:90==
76
Data analysis
EmployeeCard, Code understanding
Group
Task
Obfuscated
Diﬃculty
average
Correct
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
%
use BDD
Total time
spent
average
Group 3
1.2.0
No
2.67
5/6
17.53
15.80
16.09%
207.22
Group 3
2.2.0
No
2.67
5/6
7.32
9.40
9.05%
184.67
Group 2
3.2.0
No
3.00
2/6
69.27
19.73
30.23%
294.45
Group 2
4.2.0
No
3.50
4/6
20.48
15.12
17.85%
199.47
Total
11.83
66.67%
114.60
60.05
19.72%
885.80
Group 4
1.2.0
Yes
3.50
3/6
42.15
69.80
33.34%
335.82
Group 4
2.2.0
Yes
4.00
1/6
27.45
105.90
40.07%
332.77
Group 1
3.2.0
Yes
4.17
1/6
67.52
79.43
37.59%
390.95
Group 1
4.2.0
Yes
4.33
2/6
27.67
62.50
36.36%
248.02
Total
16.00
29.17%
164.78
317.63
36.89%
1307.55
Table 4.7: Experiment data for the EmployeeCard project for code un-
derstanding tasks
In table 4.7 many similar results as for the Rejsekort project is observed
except for the use of BDD. The use of BDD artefacts varies a lot as
it is almost doubled, where it almost fell 33 % for the Rejsekort project.
Just as in the case of domain understanding questions, the EmployeeCard
project seems to be the more diﬃcult project to work with. This is also
indicated by the use of BDD, as it is assumed that more diﬃcult tasks
will make developers rely more on BDD elements.
4.2.2
Process maps
Again the process maps for the diﬀerent strategies used by the test sub-
jects when dealing with code understanding tasks is set to show every-
thing. The observed strategies are source code ﬁles only, because of the
relatively high usage, but also because that would be the strategy that
is most directly changed because of obfuscation. Table 4.1 shows that
the usage is reduced from 13 to 9 strategies when obfuscated. This could
indicate that source code ﬁles alone are not an easy strategy when the
code is obfuscated.
The source code & feature ﬁles strategy shows a reduction from 10 to 4
strategies when obfuscated. The drop is assumed to be because of the
lack of step code usage.
==PAGE:91==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
77
Finally, the all software artefacts strategy are investigated. This strategy
goes from being used 34.04% of the time to 58.33% when obfuscated. As
section 2.3 states, code understanding questions requires a user to ﬁnd an
answer in the code. When the readability of the code is low, BDD works
as pointers towards the right feature and step in the code containing the
answer. Since the obfuscated code is more diﬃcult to read, this strategy
being well used makes sense.
All process maps can be seen in their full version at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ZEoupZ0tVx_cP8vXcSDlaJlY1jz6h_
ru?usp=sharing
4.2.2.1
Organised by artefact
31
109.6 secs
26
37.9 secs
13
8
5
QUESTION
39
(12.2 mins)
SOURCE CODE
31
(20.7 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full
version
26
74.5 secs
26
48.3 secs
9
9
QUESTION
35
(7.3 mins)
SOURCE CODE
26
(23 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.10: Process maps of artefact usage for code understanding
tasks when only source code ﬁles were used
==PAGE:92==
78
Data analysis
Figure 4.10 shows that the overall time usage increases from a total of
163.19 seconds to 215.64 when the code is obfuscated. Additionally, the
amount of times test subjects gaze between the software artefacts remains
relatively constant, except for the fact that the number of test subjects is
decreased from 13 to 9. This means that there is almost a 50 % increase.
While the question ﬁle is gazed at for a longer time in the case of no
obfuscation, the time-wise usage of the source code artefact is increased
by 60.5%. Even when subjects use more time, the accuracy is less than
half as good for obfuscated tasks. In addition to this, the average time
usage of 215.64 is not far from the time limit of ﬁve minutes that the test
subject had to solve a task.
The next strategies utilising more software artefact might further increase
the need for time. Figure shows that 4.11 with source code & feature ﬁles
a few other ﬁndings are observed.
==PAGE:93==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
79
18
33.2 secs
18
42.8 secs
21
29.1 secs
10
38.9 secs
10
17 secs
18
2.4 mins
10
5
5
QUESTION
41
(9.1 mins)
SOURCE CODE
36
(20.3 mins)
FEATURE
28
(7.1 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
1
93.9 secs
4
17.5 secs
6
9.5 secs
1
512 millis
7
54.9 secs
10
13.1 secs
4
4 secs
1
8.8 secs
4
4
QUESTION
15
(2.9 mins)
FEATURE
8
(101.2 secs)
SOURCE CODE
14
(9.7 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.11: Process maps of artefact usage for code understanding
tasks when feature ﬁles & source code was used
==PAGE:94==
80
Data analysis
After obfuscation, the total time used is relatively constant when obfus-
cated, changing from an average of 249.5 to 264.73. This goes again with
many of the individual software artefacts that is unchanged in their us-
age. Feature ﬁles are visited less, and the question and source code have
a slight increase. The edges in the case of no obfuscation are thicker,
which indicates that test subjects move a bit more around before ending
the question.
When all software artefacts are analysed, diﬀerences are observed.
==PAGE:95==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
81
9
8.4 secs
26
85 secs
13
26.5 secs
13
38.7 secs
8
5.9 secs
24
19.3 secs
17
68.3 secs
4
18 secs
5
16.1 secs
10
17.7 secs
29
2.3 mins
14
23.1 secs
16
12
4
QUESTION
59
(12 mins)
FEATURE
45
(7.3 mins)
STEP CODE
43
(14.3 mins)
SOURCE CODE
41
(15.1 mins)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
22
61.7 secs
29
51 secs
57
2.9 mins
29
52.9 secs
1
6.6 secs
63
2.7 mins
30
67.8 secs
37
32.7 secs
47
2.2 mins
1
4.6 secs
17
16.4 secs
35
30.1 secs
53
2.2 mins
14
35.6 secs
28
21
1
4
2
QUESTION
129
(27.7 mins)
STEP CODE
123
(34.3 mins)
SOURCE CODE
106
(49.2 mins)
FEATURE
103
(23 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full versions
Figure 4.12: Process maps of artefact usage for code understanding
tasks when all software artefact was used
==PAGE:96==
82
Data analysis
Figure 4.12 shows that the average time used is increased by 52 % from
211.69 seconds to 321.76. This indicates that the average test subject ran
out of time when the code was obfuscated since tasks had a time limit of
ﬁve minutes. Furthermore, it is observed that the diﬀerent elements are
visited more per person in the obfuscated process map indicated by the
darker edges. Especially, the use of source code increases since its time-
wise use per person increases by 87.23% from 56 seconds per test subject
to 105 seconds. Finally, feature ﬁles go from 27.38 to 49.29 seconds and
step code ﬁles from 53.63 to 73.5 seconds.
Overall, these increases are consistent with what was found in the raw
data. Especially when all artefacts are used, the time used in increased.
4.2.2.2
Organised by ﬁle
When data are organised by ﬁle, it investigates whether the previous
ﬁndings in increases spent time also increases the number of ﬁles used.
==PAGE:97==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
83
2
2.8 secs
5
4.3 secs
4
4.9 secs
1
875 millis
3
5.3 secs
1
1.7 secs
2
15.7 secs
1
6.9 secs
2
5.9 secs
1
2.3 secs
1
8.2 secs
1
1.7 secs
1
3.3 secs
5
31.6 secs
5
16.2 secs
1
7.3 secs
1
1.6 secs
3
1.9 secs
2
5.5 secs
1
1.4 secs
4
4.1 secs
1
8.8 secs
2
6 secs
1
4.3 secs
1
12 millis
1
4 secs
6
9.8 secs
1
8.7 secs
1
11 secs
1
1.2 secs
2
7.8 secs
2
114 millis
3
1.3 secs
1
1.1 secs
2
4.3 secs
1
1.8 secs
2
1.6 secs
3
10.3 secs
13
8
1
1
1
1
1
QUESTION
41
(12.1 mins)
CreditCardCompany.java
10
(5.9 mins)
CreditCard.java
1
(11 secs)
CheckOutAutomaton.java
5
(77.4 secs)
Kiosk.java
6
(103.4 secs)
ResponseObject.java
4
(89.5 secs)
EmployeeCard.java
3
(71.4 secs)
EmployeeCardList.java
2
(22 secs)
AccessControl.java
2
(46.7 secs)
Canteen.java
2
(65.3 secs)
CanteenList.java
1
(18.4 secs)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
6
(2.7 mins)
SelfServiceMachine.java
5
(68.7 secs)
SystemLogger.java
1
(16.6 secs)
Station.java
1
(16.1 secs)
StationList.java
1
(50.1 secs)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
2
6.4 secs
6
13.7 secs
1
621 millis
2
2.3 secs
2
16.6 secs
1
1.9 secs
2
3.7 secs
1
7.9 secs
1
13.8 secs
1
8.4 secs
1
5.3 secs
1
345 millis
3
3.1 secs
5
7.1 secs
2
1.4 secs
1
77 millis
1
732 millis
1
4.7 secs
3
3.8 secs
1
2 secs
2
4.5 secs
1
6.6 secs
1
5.1 secs
1
1.1 secs
1
2.2 secs
1
15 millis
2
6.7 secs
5
6.5 secs
2
4.1 secs
5
18 secs
1
2.9 secs
4
9.3 secs
4
35.4 secs
6
13.7 secs
1
6.8 secs
2
4.8 secs
1
2.8 secs
9
9
QUESTION
37
(7.2 mins)
Kiosk.java
12
(6 mins)
Constants.java
4
(22.2 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
9
(2 mins)
CreditCard.java
3
(2.1 mins)
CheckOutAutomaton.java
2
(2.3 mins)
RandomTravelCardUsers.java
1
(38.3 secs)
Station.java
2
(7.3 secs)
Canteen.java
1
(29.5 secs)
SelfServiceMachine.java
4
(2.6 mins)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
6
(2.1 mins)
AccessControl.java
3
(88 secs)
EmployeeCard.java
2
(20.5 secs)
ResponseObject.java
1
(40.1 secs)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.13: Process maps of artefact usage for code understanding
tasks when only source code ﬁles were used
Figure 4.13 shows that the number of ﬁles visited is slightly lower, de-
creasing from 15 to 13 ﬁles. It must be noted that ﬁles visited only once
are at 5 ﬁles for non-obfuscated projects and 2 ﬁles for obfuscated. This
indicates that approximately the same amount of ﬁles are visited more
regularly. Having 13 test subjects against 9 for obfuscated, increases the
chance that one test subject to aﬀect the amount drastically.
With the feature ﬁle and source code strategy, it is more diﬃcult to com-
pare the two process maps because only test subjects from group 2 used
this strategy. This indicates that ﬁles related to Rejsekort task 3 and 4
and EmployeeCard task 1 and 2 are not a part of the process maps.
==PAGE:98==
84
Data analysis
2
23 millis
3
11 secs
1
11 millis
2
6.8 secs
1
656 millis
1
3.4 secs
1
1.7 secs
1
266 millis
4
5.4 secs
4
1.1 secs
2
2.7 secs
1
2.2 secs
3
34 millis
1
4.7 secs
3
1.5 secs
2
2.5 secs
9
24.5 secs
1
10.9 secs
1
4.5 secs
2
11.4 secs
2
7.9 secs
2
3.8 secs
1
2.2 secs
1
681 millis
4
43 millis
2
13.3 secs
1
11 millis
1
57 millis
1
2.8 secs
2
1.5 secs
1
9.7 secs
1
22.1 secs
7
14.4 secs
1
10.9 secs
1
10.5 secs
2
1.7 secs
1
4.4 secs
1
19.8 secs
1
911 millis
1
288 millis
1
53 secs
1
5.4 secs
1
5.5 secs
1
1.2 secs
1
890 millis
3
3.3 secs
1
153 millis
2
19.9 secs
1
10.4 secs
1
2.3 secs
1
9.1 secs
1
1.9 secs
1
8.3 secs
1
43.7 secs
4
2.5 secs
1
1.5 secs
2
13.4 secs
1
4.2 secs
1
57 millis
1
1.3 secs
2
2.7 secs
1
2.6 secs
2
2.1 secs
1
5.3 secs
2
4.3 secs
1
2.7 secs
1
711 millis
1
6.1 secs
2
13.7 secs
1
921 millis
10
5
2
1
1
1
QUESTION
43
(9.1 mins)
Kiosk.java
4
(94.7 secs)
CreditCardVerification.feature
1
(7.8 secs)
CreditCard.java
5
(60.5 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
5
(2.6 mins)
CreateAdminReports.feature
8
(105.9 secs)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
9
(2.6 mins)
InitSystem.java
1
(9.8 secs)
AccessControl.java
1
(11 secs)
EmployeeCard.java
2
(14.6 secs)
AccessControlList.java
1
(48.8 secs)
CanteenList.java
6
(2.8 mins)
Withdraw.feature
4
(42.7 secs)
SystemLogger.java
3
(2.2 mins)
EmployeeCardList.java
6
(36.2 secs)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchases.feature
11
(3.8 mins)
Canteen.java
2
(13.2 secs)
DepositToEmployeeCard.java
3
(40.9 secs)
Constants.java
2
(13.8 secs)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
3
(10.8 secs)
TravelCard.java
6
(114.8 secs)
ResponseObject.java
1
(1.4 secs)
TravelCardUserList.java
1
(9.2 secs)
CreateTravelCard.feature
2
(26.9 secs)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
1
93.9 secs
3
13.3 secs
2
601 millis
2
7 secs
2
1.3 secs
1
1.5 secs
1
14.3 secs
1
4.2 secs
1
357 millis
6
40.7 secs
1
2.3 secs
5
6 secs
1
8.8 secs
3
1.7 secs
2
5.5 secs
2
2.1 secs
2
3.2 secs
2
15.4 secs
1
3.5 secs
1
389 millis
1
993 millis
1
2.6 secs
1
2 secs
1
512 millis
4
4
QUESTION
15
(2.9 mins)
CheckOut.feature
6
(93.9 secs)
CheckOutAutomaton.java
12
(4.9 mins)
SystemLogger.java
5
(62.8 secs)
Constants.java
2
(9.3 secs)
CheckInAutomaton.java
2
(37.3 secs)
CreditCardVerification.feature
2
(7.3 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
3
(2.5 mins)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.14: Process maps of artefact usage for code understanding
tasks when feature ﬁles & source code was used
In ﬁgure 4.14 it is observed that the non-obfuscated map visits 23 ﬁles
and the obfuscated only 7 ﬁles. Without obfuscation, ﬁve ﬁles are only
visited once in spite of 10 test subjects running this strategy. This reduces
the gap bit but still indicates that there actually could be a decrease in
ﬁles visited when obfuscation is in eﬀect. This can be observed since four
out of seven obfuscated ﬁles visited are indicated darker, whereas this is
only the case for two non-obfuscated ﬁles.
Finally, with the all software artefacts strategy in ﬁgure 4.15, bigger dif-
==PAGE:99==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
85
ferences are observed.
1
281 millis
5
18.7 secs
2
5.7 secs
2
1.6 secs
1
16 millis
4
13.9 secs
1
250 millis
1
203 millis
1
4.3 secs
4
24.1 secs
1
1 secs
5
16.7 secs
1
15 millis
1
12 millis
2
797 millis
1
422 millis
1
3.6 secs
5
6.8 secs
7
8.9 secs
1
1.7 secs
2
1.2 secs
5
24 secs
3
3 secs
1
1.3 secs
7
9.5 secs
2
594 millis
1
1.5 secs
2
12.9 secs
1
1.9 secs
4
10.7 secs
1
866 millis
1
6.3 secs
1
5.4 secs
1
5.8 secs
4
3.5 secs
1
1.6 secs
6
23 secs
2
814 millis
1
15 millis
3
1.4 secs
7
4.9 secs
1
16 millis
1
8.4 secs
3
7 secs
1
12 secs
2
2.2 secs
1
670 millis
1
2.4 secs
3
2 secs
1
264 millis
4
3.2 secs
1
1 secs
2
1.2 secs
6
72.5 secs
5
3.9 secs
2
1.7 secs
1
1.2 secs
3
14.1 secs
1
66 millis
1
11.8 secs
1
11 millis
5
15.4 secs
1
2.1 secs
1
109 millis
6
22.2 secs
4
4 secs
1
3.3 secs
3
11.3 secs
3
3.5 secs
3
3.6 secs
1
1.2 secs
1
13.3 secs
1
6.2 secs
1
539 millis
1
11.5 secs
2
3 secs
16
12
1
3
QUESTION
60
(12 mins)
CheckOut.feature
10
(92.8 secs)
CheckInOutSteps.java
10
(4.1 mins)
CheckOutAutomaton.java
8
(2.5 mins)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchases.feature
6
(85.4 secs)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchasesSteps.java
2
(2.1 mins)
SelfServiceMachine.java
1
(39.5 secs)
CreateAdminReportsSteps.java
14
(3.8 mins)
CanteenList.java
3
(104.7 secs)
Withdraw.feature
9
(73.8 secs)
DepositWithdrawSteps.java
4
(94.8 secs)
CreditCard.java
4
(25 secs)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
5
(114.6 secs)
AccessControl.feature
1
(1.2 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
1
(35.4 secs)
CreateTravelCard.feature
10
(63.5 secs)
CreateTravelCardSteps.java
14
(2.7 mins)
TravelCard.java
1
(47 millis)
Kiosk.java
8
(2.5 mins)
StationList.java
10
(4.4 mins)
CreateAdminReports.feature
8
(71.8 secs)
CheckIn.feature
2
(48.1 secs)
SystemLogger.java
2
(11.1 secs)
RandomStations.java
1
(6.1 secs)
(a) Not obfuscated, link for full version
4
6.7 secs
7
14.3 secs
7
12.6 secs
2
2 secs
4
3.1 secs
7
3.7 secs
1
1.2 secs
1
5.2 secs
15
28.5 secs
5
21.4 secs
7
4.8 secs
6
2.4 secs
1
5 secs
2
333 millis
2
631 millis
1
8.4 secs
6
10 secs
2
673 millis
1
4.6 secs
5
21.9 secs
1
233 millis
2
281 millis
2
122 millis
1
453 millis
4
13.4 secs
12
31 secs
2
3.4 secs
4
4.2 secs
2
13.4 secs
1
3.3 secs
6
9.5 secs
2
1.1 secs
13
25.1 secs
2
228 millis
3
3.8 secs
1
16 millis
1
2.2 secs
2
1.9 secs
1
967 millis
2
1.5 secs
10
46.1 secs
3
3.4 secs
1
12.2 secs
1
1.6 secs
2
4.4 secs
1
6.6 secs
1
3 secs
1
4.8 secs
1
72 millis
11
26.3 secs
3
1.9 secs
5
37.4 secs
12
26 secs
1
1.6 secs
1
2.8 secs
1
1.6 secs
2
6.7 secs
2
32 millis
1
1.2 secs
3
2.4 secs
1
8.8 secs
1
12 millis
2
4 secs
1
63 millis
2
1.3 secs
1
1.9 secs
1
6 secs
4
6.1 secs
1
3.4 secs
7
18.1 secs
2
621 millis
1
12 millis
1
969 millis
1
2.6 secs
1
300 millis
1
510 millis
1
10 millis
6
6.3 secs
3
2.1 secs
5
9.2 secs
1
644 millis
1
2.8 secs
2
6 secs
1
2.1 secs
1
15 millis
1
5.6 secs
2
1.5 secs
1
1.4 secs
3
2.2 secs
7
7.2 secs
1
29.8 secs
1
391 millis
2
2 secs
1
2.5 secs
2
3 secs
1
2.5 secs
1
278 millis
1
955 millis
2
4.1 secs
2
1.6 secs
1
15 secs
1
1.2 secs
3
1.7 secs
1
438 millis
4
10.5 secs
4
6.2 secs
5
11.2 secs
1
6.6 secs
2
187 millis
3
73 millis
3
1.6 secs
2
299 millis
1
10.9 secs
1
4.4 secs
1
62 millis
1
1.6 secs
4
3.1 secs
2
1.9 secs
1
343 millis
1
8.2 secs
1
4.7 secs
1
1.2 secs
10
3.6 secs
6
23.7 secs
1
156 millis
1
34.7 secs
1
20.2 secs
10
21.5 secs
3
2.7 secs
4
8.1 secs
12
12.8 secs
1
746 millis
1
9.1 secs
2
515 millis
1
6.4 secs
6
4.3 secs
7
16.4 secs
1
1.7 secs
2
3.8 secs
1
589 millis
1
410 millis
1
133 millis
2
3.3 secs
1
1.9 secs
10
14 secs
1
413 millis
6
19.5 secs
3
3.8 secs
1
437 millis
9
21.8 secs
2
4.1 secs
3
2.2 secs
5
4.5 secs
1
1.1 secs
11
38.7 secs
6
402 millis
2
2.6 secs
2
1.2 secs
3
3.1 secs
2
8.8 secs
1
1.4 secs
1
12.5 secs
4
4.9 secs
6
30.6 secs
28
21
1
1
1
1
1
2
QUESTION
133
(27.6 mins)
DepositWithdrawSteps.java
30
(8.6 mins)
DepositToEmployeeCard.java
5
(104.9 secs)
Deposit.feature
3
(29 secs)
EmployeeCard.java
9
(86.1 secs)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchases.feature
23
(6.5 mins)
ValidateCreditCardSteps.java
26
(8.8 mins)
SelfServiceMachine.java
24
(11.2 mins)
Constants.java
14
(2.1 mins)
CreditCard.java
8
(103.2 secs)
ActivateEmployeeCardForPurchasesSteps.java
12
(4.6 mins)
CreateAdminReportsSteps.java
31
(5.9 mins)
Canteen.java
1
(9.8 secs)
CanteenList.java
12
(4.4 mins)
CreateAdminReports.feature
23
(4.1 mins)
EmployeeCardList.java
4
(28.9 secs)
SystemLogger.java
4
(53.1 secs)
CheckOut.feature
2
(21.9 secs)
CheckInOutSteps.java
2
(34.1 secs)
CheckOutAutomaton.java
5
(52.5 secs)
CreditCardCompany.java
5
(107.9 secs)
CreditCardVerificationSteps.java
3
(57.8 secs)
CreditCardVerification.feature
1
(4.6 secs)
Kiosk.java
11
(5.9 mins)
StationList.java
15
(7.9 mins)
TravelCardUserList.java
2
(23.9 secs)
CreateTravelCard.feature
19
(4.4 mins)
CreateTravelCardSteps.java
19
(5 mins)
TravelCard.java
2
(33.3 secs)
ResponseObject.java
6
(57 secs)
CheckIn.feature
2
(21.4 secs)
CheckInAutomaton.java
4
(61.7 secs)
Filter.java
1
(1.9 secs)
RandomStations.java
2
(59.4 secs)
Withdraw.feature
24
(4.7 mins)
WithdrawFromEmployeeCard.java
16
(3.4 mins)
ValidateCreditCard.feature
9
(98.4 secs)
CucumberTest.java
1
(22 millis)
AccessControl.feature
1
(6.7 secs)
(b) Obfuscated, link for full version
Figure 4.15: Process maps of artefact usage for code understanding
tasks when all software artefact was used
In ﬁgure 4.15, the non-obfuscated process map has an unchanged amount
of ﬁles compared to when step code ﬁles were not included in ﬁgure 4.14.
With obfuscation, the number of ﬁles is increased. This indicates that
there was a time increase. This was observed in the process maps when
organised by artefact. Even though the number of test participants that
used this strategy is raised from 16 to 28 persons. Both strategies are used
by more than one subject in each group. This indicates that there should
not be the same problem as in the previous process map concerning the
number of used ﬁles.
Without obfuscation, 23 ﬁles are used, with ﬁve ﬁles that are only visited
once. The case for obfuscation ﬁles is that 38 ﬁles are used, again with
ﬁve ﬁles used only once. In this thesis’ experiments, there is an increase
of 65% (from 23 to 38) in the number of ﬁles that test subjects used to
answer the same code understanding questions. The diﬀerence happened
==PAGE:100==
86
Data analysis
because of the obfuscated source code.
4.2.3
Questionnaires & verbal protocol analysis
Finally to further strengthen the results found in the previous sections, the
test subjects own answers in the post-questionnaire will be investigated.
As already stated for domain understanding questions in section 4.1.3,
feature ﬁles often have a positive eﬀect, if code is obfuscated and diﬃcult
to read.
Code understanding is diﬀerent because the answer to such
questions can only be found in the code. This makes feature ﬁles more a
pointer towards the right code snippet rather than an answer.
Because of this, it is important to investigate the usability scores of step
code and source code ﬁles, since they are critical to code understanding
questions.
Project
Task
Obfuscated
Usability score
step code
Usability score
source code
Group 1
Rejsekort
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
No
4.16
4.16
Group 2
Rejsekort
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
Yes
3.00
1.50
Group 3
Rejsekort
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
Yes
4.33
2.33
Group 4
Rejsekort
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
No
3.83
4.00
Group 3
EmployeeCard
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
No
3.67
3.83
Group 4
EmployeeCard
1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0
Yes
3.83
1.83
Group 1
EmployeeCard
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
Yes
4.16
2.00
Group 2
EmployeeCard
3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0, 4.2.0
No
2.50
3.33
Table 4.8: Usability of step code and source code ﬁles for all groups
The results of table 4.8 are quite diﬀerent when compared to feature ﬁles
for domain understanding, which was expected.
For the Rejsekort project, usability of step code is decreased from a score
of 4.16 to 3.00 for task 1 and 2 and increased from a score of 3.83 to 4.33
for task 3 and 4. The usability of source code is decreased from a score
of 4.16 to 1.50 for task 1 and 2 decreased from a score of 4.00 to 2.33 in
task 3 and 4.
For the EmployeeCard project, the usability of step code is increased from
a score of 3.67 to 3.83 for task 1 and 2 and from a score of 2.50 to 4.16
for task 3 and 4. For source code, the usability is decreased from a score
of 3.83 to 1.83 for task 1 and 2 and from a score of 3.33 to 2.00 for task
==PAGE:101==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
87
3 and 4.
With a number of comments given by the test subject as to how obfusca-
tion changed the way they tried to solve tasks, something in close relation
to the scores is observed.
"I had to spend a lot more time trying to understand in-depth how each
of the functions worked, instead of just glancing over the important bits
so I could get a general feeling of how a function works.", G1P2
"I had to look a lot more at the Cucumber steps, as the source code was
not very helpful due to the variable and function naming being
obfuscated.", G1P3
"I tried to rely on the steps as they summarised the underlying code",
G1P4
"If the code is obfuscated the source code is almost unusable to ﬁgure
what it does. This made me rely much more on the step code and feature
ﬁles", G2P5
"I knew that the source code would not be beneﬁcial without some guide
and so I decided to use a high level strategy by ﬁrst letting feature ﬁles
guide me through the step ﬁles which in turn guided me through the
source code.", G3P2
As observed from the quotes, the readability of the source code worsened
quite a lot. However, where source code becomes close to unusable, the
BDD ﬁles helped many of the test subjects. The general assumptions are
that the BDD ﬁles help to pinpoint the class or function that contains the
answer to a question. This is heard from the audio recording. Addition-
ally, it is heard that some test subjects start with the feature ﬁles as they
think that answers for code understanding tasks are in there. They do not
necessarily go there to pinpoint their way towards the right step or source
code in the ﬁrst case. Furthermore, it is heard from several recordings
that many test subjects get surprised once they reach some obfuscated
code. Examples are G1P2 at 27:55 and forward and G2P1 at 07:18. In
these examples, the test subject gets surprised about the naming of the
content and quickly realises that it is not worth much. This is consistent
with the quotes above, describing the source code as almost unusable.
==PAGE:102==
88
Data analysis
4.2.4
Results
From results in the previous sections, it is found that code obfuscation
has a clear eﬀect on how test subjects try to solve a task as well as how
well they did. As the readability is lowered with obfuscation, source code
becomes more diﬃcult to understand. This increases the number of times
BDD ﬁles are required in a task. Even with the help from feature ﬁles and
step code, the time spent on tasks are higher, and the accuracy is mostly
half as good as in non-obfuscated situations. Therefore, it can easily be
said that test subjects engage diﬀerently with the code when obfuscated.
It is worth noting the time-wise increase in total time spent by test sub-
jects on tasks. During the analysis, it was observed that the average total
time of usage for especially obfuscated tasks went above the ﬁve-minute
time limit that the test subject had per task.
Finally, just as for domain-speciﬁc tasks, it is critical to prove whether
there is a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence because of the obfuscation.
Figure 4.16, 4.17 and 4.18 shows how each variable was aﬀected. Again,
Kernel density estimation (KDE) is used. Again it must be noted that
KDE is based on estimates, which is why, for example, accuracy shows
to be above 1.0 in some cases. The scripts that create these KDE graphs
can be seen in appendix F. The script creating the bar chart can be seen
in appendix I. Histograms corresponding to the KDE, and data used to
make the ﬁgures and full-size images can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QeyD_OV3FWLmj__8VZu53pt6M89ov1Jw?
usp=sharing
==PAGE:103==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
89
(a) Accuracy, full version
(b) Percentage-wise use of BDD, full version
Figure 4.16: Kernel density estimates comparing data of accuracy and
percentage-wise use of BDD with and without obfuscation
for code speciﬁc tasks
==PAGE:104==
90
Data analysis
(a) Diﬃculty, full version
(b) Total time used, full version
Figure 4.17: Kernel density estimates comparing data of diﬃculty and
total time used with and without obfuscation for code spe-
ciﬁc tasks
==PAGE:105==
4.2 Software artefacts usage with and without code obfuscation for
code understanding tasks (Q2)
91
Figure 4.18: Bar chart with error bars comparing data of accuracy,
percentage-wise use of BDD, diﬃculty and total time used
with and without obfuscation for code-speciﬁc tasks, full
version
Figure 4.16, 4.17 and 4.18 clearly shows that the data changes.
It is
observed that accuracy is decreased a lot and the BDD usage increases.
The rated diﬃculty an total times used increases. This is consistent with
previous ﬁndings. Again it is found, that the results of individual test
subjects vary a lot.
Just as for domain-speciﬁc tasks a one-way ANOVA test is performed on
the variables. Hereby, it can be investigated whether the null hypothesis
can be rejected or not. The scripts that perform the ANOVA test can be
seen in appendix G. The results can be seen in table 4.9.
==PAGE:106==
92
Data analysis
Sum of squares
Degrees of freedom
F-value
P-value
η2
Accuracy
3.613289
1.0
16.742421
0.000091
15.26%
Residual
20.070922
93.0
84.74%
Total: 23.684211
%-wise BDD usage
0.063767
1.0
1.453405
0.231041
1.54%
Residual
4.080285
93.0
98.46%
Total: 4.144052
Diﬃculty
20.970511
1.0
25.283773
0.000002
21.38%
Residual
77.134752
93.0
78.62%
Total: 98.105263
Total time used
163591.252661
1.0
15.642977
0.000149
14.4%
Residual
972576.176813
93.0
85.6%
Total: 1136167.429474
Table 4.9: Results from the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test
for code speciﬁc tasks
Table 4.9 shows that it is observed that for all values except the use of
BDD, the diﬀerence is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. Therefore, the null hypothe-
sis can be rejected in the case of accuracy, diﬃculty and total time used.
In the case of the use of BDD, the P-value is higher compared to the case
for domain speciﬁc tasks. This is consistent when comparing the results
that are presented in the KDE ﬁgures, ﬁgure 4.7 and 4.16. In the KDE
ﬁgure of code-speciﬁc tasks, the use of BDD is quite similar with and
without obfuscation.
With the η2 values, it is observed that, except for the BDD usage, the
values are higher compared to for domain-speciﬁc tasks. The values of η2
are also considered to be high in general. This means that the amount of
variation is higher.
Just as for domain-speciﬁc tasks, it was relevant to investigate whether
the diﬀerences in projects or IDs had a signiﬁcant impact as well. There-
fore, two-way ANOVA tests was performed. The test subject IDs had high
η2 values which, conﬁrms that there is a big diﬀerence of test subjects.
Additionally, a P-value of 0.003 was found for the interaction of obfusca-
tion and the project in the case of BDD usage. This indicates that there
can be a signiﬁcant eﬀect between obfuscation and one or more projects
on the percent-wise BDD usage. The two-way ANOVA tests can be seen
in appendix H.
The signiﬁcant diﬀerence shows that it is relevant to ﬁlter the data be-
tween the projects and performing a one-way ANOVA test on it.
==PAGE:107==
4.3 Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
93
Sum of squares
Degrees of freedom
F-value
P-value
η2
BDD usage, EmployeeCard
0.368941
1.0
9.078658
0.004195
16.48%
Residual
1.869362
45.0
85.52%
Total: 2.238303
BDD usage, Rejsekort
0.062337
1.0
1.626974
0.208668
3.49%
Residual
1.724167
45.0
96.51%
Total: 1.786504
Table 4.10: BDD usage results from the one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test for code-speciﬁc tasks ﬁltered by project
As observed in table 4.10, there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence of the BDD usage
in the case of the EmployeeCard project. Additionally, the η2 value is just
as high as for the other variables in the original one-way ANOVA test.
For the Rejsekort project, the results are not signiﬁcant with a P-value
of 0.20 and a low η2. This result corresponds with that the amount of
BDD used for the EmployeeCard project almost doubles. In the case of
the Rejsekort project, the diﬀerence is reduced.
4.3
Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
In addition to the previous results, it is relevant to investigate how much
of an eﬀect obfuscation has in total.
The focus is to investigate the overall results for the tasks in the experi-
ment. It reﬂects a realistic scenario of when a developer is to understand a
system. Understanding a system will very often require knowledge about
both domain- and code-speciﬁc things. With the use of BDD, these two
ways of understanding parts of a system can be obtained quite diﬀerently.
As test subjects are mostly new with BDD, it can in some cases happen
that subjects try to ﬁnd answers the "traditional" way, without the use
of BDD. Therefore the overall diﬀerence of how they interact with the
system when source code is obfuscated becomes relevant.
When investigating the overall results and thus not dividing data into
domain- and code-speciﬁc tasks, table 4.11 and table 4.12 shows the re-
sults of obfuscation on the experiment’s projects. The results because
of obfuscation increases diﬃculty, decreases accuracy, either decreases or
increases BDD usage based on the project and increases the overall time
==PAGE:108==
94
Data analysis
used. It also shows that the EmployeeCard project in all cases are more
diﬃcult. The Rejsekort project is only using more BDD in the case of no
obfuscation. This correlates well with what was found for code-speciﬁc
tasks. Here it was also observed that test subjects used more BDD for
the EmployeeCard project, because it is more diﬃcult.
Rejsekort
Group
Task
Obfuscated
Diﬃculty
average
Correct
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
%
use BDD
Total time
spent
average
Group 1
1.1.0
No
1.50
5/6
26.25
22.00
38.63%
124.90
Group 1
1.2.0
No
2.50
6/6
15.47
39.75
36.75%
150.23
Group 1
2.1.0
No
2.17
4/6
20.75
22.90
21.93%
199.07
Group 1
2.2.0
No
2.83
2/6
1.30
14.05
8.02%
191.48
Group 4
3.1.0
No
1.67
6/6
70.67
0.72
65.22%
109.45
Group 4
3.2.0
No
3.00
5/6
39.32
53.05
37.40%
246.95
Group 4
4.1.0
No
1.00
6/6
30.16
0.00
45.35%
66.50
Group 4
4.2.0
No
2.83
6/6
26.32
40.20
32.58%
204.20
Total
17.50
83.33%
230.23
192.67
32.71%
1292.78
Group 2
1.1.0
Yes
1.83
6/6
34.85
0.73
40.56%
87.73
Group 2
1.2.0
Yes
3.67
1/6
19.30
17.70
15.01%
246.53
Group 2
2.1.0
Yes
2.00
6/6
73.02
13.30
53.31%
161.92
Group 2
2.2.0
Yes
3.00
3/6
1.98
9.63
5.30%
219.30
Group 3
3.1.0
Yes
2.83
4/6
75.88
20.63
53.24%
181.30
Group 3
3.2.0
Yes
4.00
2/6
67.32
49.20
35.40%
329.13
Group 3
4.1.0
Yes
1.50
6/6
25.28
0.00
35.67%
70.88
Group 3
4.2.0
Yes
4.00
3/6
17.45
26.32
18.15%
241.10
Total
22.83
64.58%
315.08
137.52
29.43%
1537.90
Table 4.11: Experiment data of all tasks for the Rejsekort project
==PAGE:109==
4.3 Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
95
EmployeeCard
Group
Task
Obfuscated
Diﬃculty
average
Correct
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
%
use BDD
Total time
spent
average
Group 3
1.1.0
No
2.33
5/6
40.93
27.87
34.62%
198.75
Group 3
1.2.0
No
2.67
5/6
17.53
15.80
16.09%
207.22
Group 3
2.1.0
No
3.00
2/6
49.87
11.10
23.55%
258.88
Group 3
2.2.0
No
2.67
5/6
7.32
9.40
9.05%
184.67
Group 2
3.1.0
No
2.00
4/6
128.45
0.00
68.92%
186.37
Group 2
3.2.0
No
3.00
2/6
69.27
19.73
30.23%
294.45
Group 2
4.1.0
No
1.67
5/6
29.82
20.00
35.66%
139.70
Group 2
4.2.0
No
3.50
4/6
20.48
15.12
17.85%
199.47
Total
20.83
66.67%
363.67
119.02
28.91%
1669.50
Group 4
1.1.0
Yes
2.17
5/6
41.95
32.00
44.82%
165.00
Group 4
1.2.0
Yes
3.50
3/6
42.15
69.80
33.34%
335.82
Group 4
2.1.0
Yes
2.50
3/6
65.57
14.85
54.10%
148.63
Group 4
2.2.0
Yes
4.00
1/6
27.45
105.90
40.07%
332.77
Group 1
3.1.0
Yes
2.00
5/6
102.35
12.60
53.86%
213.42
Group 1
3.2.0
Yes
4.17
1/6
67.52
79.43
37.59%
390.95
Group 1
4.1.0
Yes
1.83
5/6
23.72
19.35
43.59%
98.80
Group 1
4.2.0
Yes
4.33
2/6
27.67
62.50
36.36%
248.02
Total
24.50
52.08%
398.37
396.43
41.11%
1933.40
Table 4.12: Experiment data of all tasks for the EmployeeCard project
In general, all code understanding tasks are assumed to be more diﬃcult
than domain understanding tasks. Of the code understanding tasks, task
3.2.0 & 4.2.0 are assumed to be the most diﬃcult because of how deep in
the code the answers lies. Task 3.2.0 is close to task 1.2.0 but contains a
second part requiring more code understanding. Tasks 2.2.0 was observed
to be confusing for some test subjects, and as such task 1.2.0 are assumed
to be the easiest code understanding task. The tasks of the projects are
made as close to each other as possible, so the diﬃculty is assumed to
be equal. Overall the EmployeeCard project turned out to be the most
diﬃcult project of the two as seen from table 4.11 and table 4.12. To show
this, it is worth visualising the results based on time used and accuracy.
==PAGE:110==
96
Data analysis
0,00%
10,00%
20,00%
30,00%
40,00%
50,00%
60,00%
70,00%
80,00%
90,00%
100,00%
0,00
50,00
100,00
150,00
200,00
250,00
300,00
350,00
400,00
RK
1.1.0
RK
1.2.0
RK
2.1.0
RK
2.2.0
RK
3.1.0
RK
3.2.0
RK
4.1.0
RK
4.2.0
EC
1.1.0
EC
1.2.0
EC
2.1.0
EC
2.2.0
EC
3.1.0
EC
3.2.0
EC
4.1.0
EC
4.2.0
Accuracy
Time used
Experiment task timings and accuracy
Non-obfuscated time
Obfuscated time
Non-obfuscated accuracy
Obfuscated accuracy
Figure 4.19: Average time usage (in seconds) and accuracy for all ex-
periment questions, full version
As observed in ﬁgure 4.19, the timing of tasks do not necessarily follow
along with what is assumed to be the most diﬃcult tasks. These tasks
are task 3.2.0 for both projects, followed by task 1.2.0 EC and 2.2.0 EC
and ﬁnally task 4.2.0 in both projects and task 1.2.0 RK. All tasks where
obfuscated.
The assumption for domain understanding tasks is constant time-wise as
5 of 8 tasks decrease when they are obfuscated. Their overall timings are
lower than code understanding tasks in all cases when obfuscated. The
only exception is EC 3.1.0 vs RK 2.2.0. The results are more of a mix
when not obfuscated.
Accuracy-wise the biggest diﬀerence is task 1.2.0 RK decreases from 100
% to 16.67 %, an 83.33 % decrease. When the lowest accuracy is consid-
ered, task 3.2.0 EC is again worth considering. Task 3.2.0 has an accuracy
below 50% both when obfuscated and not. For the Rejsekort project, the
accuracy of task 3.2.0 also decreases from 83.33 % to 33.33 %. The as-
sumed most diﬃcult task 4.2.0 decreases by 50 % and 33.33 %. Especially
when not obfuscated have high accuracy.
Some outliers are task 2.1.0 and 3.1.0 EC, although they are domain un-
==PAGE:111==
4.3 Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
97
derstanding tasks. Task 2.1.0 has both a relatively high time usage and
low accuracy and task 3.1.0 high time usage both when obfuscated and
not.
Finally, it is worth visualising the results when the division of domain-
and code-speciﬁc questions are not taken into account.
0,00%
10,00%
20,00%
30,00%
40,00%
50,00%
60,00%
70,00%
80,00%
90,00%
100,00%
0,00
100,00
200,00
300,00
400,00
500,00
600,00
700,00
RK 1
RK 2
RK 3
RK 4
EC 1
EC 2
EC 3
EC 4
Accuracy
Time used
Experiment task timings and accuracy
Non-obfuscated time
Obfuscated time
Non-obfuscated accuracy
Obfuscated accuracy
Figure 4.20: Average time usage (in seconds) and accuracy for experi-
ment grouped tasks, full version
Figure 4.20 shows that all except RK 2 has a lower accuracy for obfuscated
tasks. The same applies for the time used, where RK 2 is the only task
that experiences a decrease when obfuscated.
4.3.1
Statistical overview
In the previous sections, it is found that obfuscation changes the strategy
of test subjects in most cases for code-speciﬁc tasks. For domain-speciﬁc,
there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences for any variables. However, in the
case of percentage-wise use of BDD, it was close. In the case of code-
speciﬁc questions, test subjects often rely on both feature ﬁles and step
==PAGE:112==
98
Data analysis
code ﬁles to ﬁnd the answer in the source code.
With these results, it is known how obfuscation aﬀects domain- and code-
speciﬁc tasks separately. However, it is also worth to investigate the re-
sults of the two combined, since it is a more realistic scenario. As a result
of this, the results can apply to systems developed outside this thesis, for
example, in businesses.
Figure 4.21, 4.22 and 4.23 shows how each variable was aﬀected. The
scripts creating these KDE graphs can be seen in appendix F. The script
creating the bar chart can be seen in appendix I.
Histograms corresponding to the KDE, scripts and data used to make the
ﬁgures and full-size images can be found at:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QeyD_OV3FWLmj__8VZu53pt6M89ov1Jw?
usp=sharing
==PAGE:113==
4.3 Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
99
(a) Accuracy, full version
(b) Percentage-wise use of BDD, full version
Figure 4.21: Kernel density estimates comparing data of accuracy and
percentage-wise use of BDD with and without obfuscation
both domain- and code-speciﬁc tasks
==PAGE:114==
100
Data analysis
(a) Diﬃculty, full version
(b) Total time used, full version
Figure 4.22: Kernel density estimates comparing data of diﬃculty and
total time used with and without obfuscation both domain-
and code-speciﬁc tasks
==PAGE:115==
4.3 Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
101
Figure 4.23: Bar chart with error bars comparing data of accuracy,
percentage-wise use of BDD, diﬃculty and total time used
with and without obfuscation for both domain- and code-
speciﬁc tasks, full version
Figure 4.21, 4.22 and 4.23 shows that, the data in regard to obfuscation
changes. It is observed that accuracy is decreased. BDD usage is in-
creased, and the rated diﬃculty is increased. Finally, the total time used
is increased. Again it is found that the results of individual test subjects
vary a lot. The questions are whether the diﬀerences are enough so that
it is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
Because of the large diﬀerences found in ﬁgure 4.23, it is worth inves-
tigating whether there are some individual test subjects that aﬀect the
results of the experiment. For this, a bar chart investigating individual
accuracy of the test subjects are made. Similar charts could have been
made for the other variables but are expected to give similar results. As
such, only the comparison of accuracy is made.
==PAGE:116==
102
Data analysis
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
G1P1
G1P2
G1P3
G1P4
G1P5
G1P6
G1 Average
G2P1
G2P2
G2P3
G2P4
G2P5
G2P6
G2 Average
G3P1
G3P2
G3P3
G3P4
G3P5
G3P6
G3 Average
G4P1
G4P2
G4P3
G4P4
G4P5
G4P6
G4 Average
Accuracy
Test subject ID & group average
Accuracy domain+code
Figure 4.24: Accuracy of test subjects and group averages, link for full
version
Figure 4.24 shows that group 1, 2 and 3 have approximately the same
average accuracy, but group 4 has a higher value. The exact values are:
Group 1: 62.50%, Group 2: 64.58%, Group 3: 62.50% and Group 4:
72.92%.
Especially group 2 has two weak test subjects, being G2P3
and G2P6. Oppositely group 4 has G4P1 and G4P3 having very high
accuracy, with G4P3 having 100% accuracy. Additionally, group 2 also
have two strong test subject being G2P2 and G2P4, which is the reason
why group 2 does not have a lower accuracy than other groups. These
diﬀerences correlates well with the assumptions of section 3.5.1.1 and the
relatively low η2 values found in some scenarios.
Finally, concluding the data analysis, a one-way ANOVA test is performed
on each variable again. The scripts doing the ANOVA test can be seen
in appendix G.
==PAGE:117==
4.3 Overall challenges with obfuscated code (Q3)
103
Sum of squares
Degrees of freedom
F-value
P-value
η2
Accuracy
1.236432
1.0
5.641192
0.01855
2.91%
Residual
41.205674
188.0
97.09%
Total: 42.442106
Percentage-wise BDD usage
0.201641
1.0
3.877056
0.05042
2.02%
Residual
9.777660
188.0
97.98%
Total: 9.979301
Diﬃculty
14.026465
1.0
10.195052
0.001651
5.14%
Residual
258.652482
188.0
94.86%
Total: 272.678947
Total time used
44921.0
1.0
3.482384
0.063583
1.82%
Residual
2425121.0
188.0
98.18%
Total: 2470042.0
Table 4.13: Results from the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
test for both domain and code speciﬁc tasks
As seen in table 4.13, the results are a combination of the previous
ANOVA tests. There is still signiﬁcant diﬀerences for accuracy and dif-
ﬁculty. The η2 values describing them are however reduced and can be
described as low [44].
Just as for the domain- and code-speciﬁc tasks, attempts at two-way
ANOVA tests were made. A P-value of 0.02 was found for the interaction
of obfuscation and the experiments project. This indicates that there is
an interaction eﬀect between obfuscation and one or both of the selected
projects on the use of BDD. The results from this test can be seen in
appendix H. Filtering the data between the projects and performing a
one-way ANOVA test on the data gives the following results:
Sum of squares
Degrees of freedom
F-value
P-value
η2
BDD usage, EmployeeCard
0.490783
1.0
9.889242
0.002226
10.52%
Residual
4.665025
94.0
89.48%
Total: 5.155808
BDD usage, Rejsekort
0.004122
1.0
0.080833
0.77681
0.09%
Residual
4.691725
92.0
99.91%
Total: 4.695847
Table 4.14: BDD usage results from the one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test for both domain and code speciﬁc tasks ﬁl-
tered by project
In table 4.14, it is observed that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerent of the
BDD usage in the case of the EmployeeCard project. The eﬀect size,
==PAGE:118==
104
Data analysis
η2 is high compared to the ones from the original ANOVA test. Since
this was the case for code-speciﬁc tasks as well, it was excepted. In the
Rejsekort project, there is far from a signiﬁcant diﬀerence. Since this
signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found for code-speciﬁc and combined tasks, it
seemed necessary to check the results for domain-speciﬁc tasks as well.
The results are found in the end of appendix H, where P-values of 0.42 and
0.07 were found along with low η2 values. Because of that, no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was found because of obfuscation for domain-speciﬁc tasks for
any of the projects.
==PAGE:119==
Chapter 5
Discussion
This chapter discusses the results of the experiments. The results will be
compared with existing studies as introduced in chapter 1 and chapter 2
in section 5.1.
As previously stated in section 3.1, according to Campbell et al., there are
four types of threats to the validity of experiment results. These threats
can be discovered by discussing the conclusion, internal, construct & con-
clusion validities [45]. A number of these were described in section 3.5.
However, after the data analysis, some of the threats to the thesis can be
conﬁrmed or denied. The discussion of this is performed in section 5.2.
Finally, in section 5.3, suggestions for further studies, based on the dis-
cussion, are suggested.
5.1
Experiment results
The results of the thesis show that analysing eye-tracking data in diﬀerent
ways, including process mining, is possible. This includes the study and
==PAGE:120==
106
Discussion
visualisation of reading patterns and how they vary when code obfusca-
tion is used. It can be veriﬁed whether test subjects follows the expected
path through software artefacts. The process mining visualisations on a
ﬁle and artefact level were able to highlight diﬀerent aspects of the pro-
cess maps. While some details are lost when not showing all details, it
still allowed to see the number of elements and path that test subjects
went through to solve tasks.
When the results were compared to was found in the theory section, not
everything went as expected. When compared to previous studies, a com-
parison to the ﬁndings of section 2.2 is performed. Here a 19% increase in
speed was found when using full word identiﬁer method/function names
compared to meaningless abbreviations and letters [24]. As the obfusca-
tion uses single letters, this should be comparable.
5.1.1
Domain-speciﬁc tasks results
For domain-speciﬁc tasks, a 0.38 % time increase was found for the Re-
jsekort project and a 20.14 % decrease for the EmployeeCard project when
obfuscated. This is inconsistent with the previous study [24]. However,
among the studies comparing the readability of source code in chapter
2, none were using BDD. The decrease or constant values of speed was
found to be because of an increase in the use of BDD. The increase in
speed and BDD usage is observed in ﬁgure 4.7 and 4.8. As also stated
in section 2.3, BDD simpliﬁes the description of the functionality of a
system, which is consistent with these ﬁgures. As domain-speciﬁc tasks
are assumed to be described in feature ﬁles, an answer is easily found
because of its high readability.
As found in ﬁgure 4.2, it was indicated that the test subjects relied mostly
on the feature ﬁles. When visiting the source code, the test subject quickly
realises that the content is obfuscated. Therefore they often realise that
feature ﬁles are probably more useful.
==PAGE:121==
5.1 Experiment results
107
5.1.2
Code-speciﬁc tasks results
For code-speciﬁc tasks, a 30.67 % time increase was found for the Re-
jsekort project and a 47.61 % increase for the EmployeeCard. This is
consistent with the study compared to [24]. However, with an increased
diﬀerence. Since code-speciﬁc tasks need the use of source code to ﬁnd
an answer, the increase aligns well.
Based on the post-questionnaires, it was observed that when a project
is obfuscated, step code ﬁles becomes increasingly useful. This fact is
opposite when it comes to the obfuscated source code.
The usability
score given by test subjects is often close to half the amount of its non-
obfuscated versions.
This means that even though step code ﬁles are
more useful, the test subject still spends much time to understand the
obfuscated source code.
As found in section 4.2.4, the increase in time led to that test subjects
spend above the ﬁve-minute time limit on average, as observed in ﬁgure
4.17. This was often because the test subjects used some time on deciding
whether they found the answer or not before they went to the answer ﬁle.
As it was found in the process maps, and especially ﬁgure 4.15, obfuscat-
ing a project increases the chance that test subjects end up visiting ﬁles
that do not contain the answer. This might be because it is more diﬃcult
to determine where the answer is, as function names are not understand-
able.
Finally, it was found that the use of BDD was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the
case of the EmployeeCard project only. As that project was found to be
more diﬃcult than the Rejsekort project. This makes sense, as code with
worse readability tends to increase the use of BDD. It also corresponds
well with what was found in a previous study previously introduced [25].
5.1.3
Overall results
Overall, the combination of the two types of tasks gives an 18.96 % time
increase for the Rejsekort project and 15.81 % increase for the Employ-
eeCard project. This indicates a very close comparison with the study
in comparison [24]. Therefore, it can be assumed that the studies also
==PAGE:122==
108
Discussion
varied in the type of tasks. Since the studies lacked BDD elements, the
use of domain- and code-speciﬁc tasks were not mentioned [9] [31] [24]
[17]. With a small improvement compared to these studies, a reason could
be that the high usability of feature ﬁles for domain-speciﬁc tasks helped
with the improvement. However, as source code projects are diﬀerent in
diﬃculty, this can could be the reason. By investigating the diﬀerence
between the two projects in this thesis, a third project might have had
an even higher or lower diﬀerence in timings. With the design of the ex-
periments, this diﬀerence was measurable, and we, therefore, know that
it is a threat.
It can be assumed that obfuscation has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on developers
engagement with software artefacts, except in the case of domain-speciﬁc
tasks. With code-speciﬁc and the combination of the two, which variables
that are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent vary. In the case of BDD usage, only the
EmployeeCard project has a signiﬁcant diﬀerence with the combinations
of tasks. This implies that there is a diﬀerence between the two projects,
as the usage of BDD did not vary much in the Rejsekort project. This was
also seen in the raw data comparisons, where the EmployeeCard turned
out to be more diﬃcult. As speciﬁed in section 5.1.2, the increased use
of BDD on a more diﬃcult project is expected to happen due to a pre-
vious study [25]. Because of the diﬀerences in the projects, the selected
experimental design with several groups was well selected, as it made this
discovery possible.
Figure 4.19 showed that diﬃcult tasks by the time required, or by the ac-
curacy that test subjects ﬁnish them with, do not necessarily percentage-
wise become even more diﬃcult when a project is obfuscated compared
to easier tasks. This investigation was not found in any prior studies, and
can therefore not be compared to previous ﬁndings.
However, it can be assumed that in a more realistic scenario with a mix
of domain and code-speciﬁc sense-making tasks, a developer should have
a more diﬃcult time to answer tasks. This implies that they spend more
time to answer, and they increase the likelihood of the answer to be wrong.
Especially if the developer is limited on time. As the time limit might
not be exactly ﬁve minutes, results might change a bit. Imagining a sce-
nario with an inﬁnite amount of time is, at the same time, not realistic
in a real-life scenario. In none of the studies compared to, a time limit
was given on test subject, or it was not mentioned in the study [9] [31]
==PAGE:123==
5.2 Validity threats
109
[24] [17]. Therefore, even without a time limit, it can still be assumed
that obfuscation or a change in code readability will aﬀect a developer’s
sense-making behaviour.
This change in the sense-making behaviour goes well with the fact that
23 of the 24 test subjects in the post-questionnaire thought that code
obfuscation changed their behaviour.
The test subject that did not agree was conﬁdent enough in Java that
he did not think the obfuscated names made a big diﬀerence. This was
because he had the possibility of using BDD ﬁles, as they enabled him to
ﬁnd the right code, no matter if it was obfuscated or not. As such, it can
be concluded that if a system is straightforward, or the developer is very
skilled, obfuscation might not end up changing a developer’s sense-making
behaviour.
5.2
Validity threats
5.2.1
Statistical power
It was found that the use of BDD often had P-values close to 0.05. This
was for the combined tasks and for domain-speciﬁc tasks, that had P-
values of 0.05042 and 0.058141. From section 3.5.1.1, it is known that
such values are considered less safe. A minor diﬀerence in the experiment
or test subjects could have made the result signiﬁcant. A reason why this
is the case can be conﬁrmed with the results of ﬁgure 4.24, where it was
found that individual test subject results vary a lot. As such, one added
test subject could make the use of BDD signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
Another factor to consider is the eﬀect size, η2 that was, except for the
case of code-speciﬁc tasks, mostly low. This was excepted, as a test sub-
ject’s individuality often have a high eﬀect on diﬀerences in experiments
with many possible outcomes and measured variables. This is also ob-
served in regard to that the test subject IDs in the ANOVA tests often
had a η2 value close to 30 %. These results can be seen in appendix H.
==PAGE:124==
110
Discussion
5.2.2
Reliability of measures
Early in chapter 4, it is described that if an experiment were running for
a long time, the test machine would become very busy. This was because
the machine could not write the data from the memory to the database
fast enough, and therefore, the memory ended up full. This meant that
if an experiment was suﬃciently long, some eye-tracking data might not
be recorded into the database. This is because once the experiment was
stopped, the transferring of the data to the database was also stopped.
If some data had yet not been transferred from memory to the database,
it was lost. As such, two test subjects doing the same tasks, but with
diﬀerent timings, might result in diﬀerent measures. Luckily, this only
aﬀected one test subject in regard to the used data. As such, this does
not aﬀect the results, as the data from the single test subject could be ex-
cluded. This error can be because that iTrace is in a 0.0.1 alpha version.
As a general rule with software, alpha, as well as beta versions, cannot be
assumed to be completely free of bugs. At the Github of Eclipse plugin of
iTrace, there are nine issues, not including the one discovered in this the-
sis. However, it might not be an error with iTrace, but rather a limitation
of the hardware, more speciﬁcally the memory, in the test machine. As
iTrace does not describe any required speciﬁcations for memory, it should
be something that should be added. Additionally, the iTrace plugin has
been extended with the support of BDD elements and SQL exporting.
Documentation of testing these extensions could not be found.
This indicated that more work could go into the collection of gaze data
with especially studies with longer sessions. These experiments do, how-
ever, provide some insight into how a study can be performed. It also
provides knowledge about the tools for collecting and storing the data
work for shorter sessions.
Finally, the reliability of the process mining is considered. Because of the
length of each experiment and the number of software artefacts, process
mining was performed at a ﬁle and artefact level. In future studies, it
could be relevant to perform shorter experiments and analyse details at a
line-by-line level. Because of the size of the experiments, process mining
was only performed at ﬁle and artefact level. Analysing at a function
level would require to analyse a very complex process map or to analyse
short periods of the experiment.
==PAGE:125==
5.2 Validity threats
111
5.2.3
Random heterogeneity of subjects
As previously stated in section 3.5.1.4, there is a threat to the heterogene-
ity of test subjects, since very weak or strong test subjects may aﬀect the
results. One example could be the accuracy of the test subjects, as ob-
served in table 4.24. In the table, it is observed that a few very weak or
strong test subjects aﬀect the total accuracy of their group. Therefore,
it is indicated that this threat was present in the experiments. However,
as the accuracy of the groups in case of three of the four groups is very
similar, it is still possible to make a comparison of the groups. A possible
way to avoid the heterogeneity was to use another way of ﬁnding a test
subject than convenience sampling. Using students from the same study
line and semester or graduated software engineers with similar experience
might eliminate very weak or strong test subjects.
Another example is observed in ﬁgure 4.17, where outliers are observed
in the total time used KDE. Where most test subject use between 50
and 400 seconds on average, a few outliers are above 400 seconds. This
results in that the average time of the groups that the subjects are part
of increases. The same is found for the case in ﬁgure 4.8 for the total
time used.
5.2.4
Maturation
As stated in section 3.5.2.1, one reason behind the selection of a ﬁve-
minute time limit, was that the time limit should not be too short. If this
was the case, it might easily aﬀect the outcome. This was found to be an
obstacle according to table 4.6 and 4.7, as many obfuscated code-speciﬁc
tasks reached the limit with average group timings.
Especially in the
case of the EmployeeCard project, all except task 4.2.0 had an average
group value above the time limit. This indicates that the selection of ﬁve
minutes as the time limit might have aﬀected the outcome. If the time
limit had been increased, a larger number of test subject might have been
able to solve the more diﬃcult tasks, increasing accuracy.
At the same time, according to the results, there were no signs of the test
subjects getting bored, as results did not worsen later in the experiments.
==PAGE:126==
112
Discussion
5.2.5
Ambiguity about the direction of causal inﬂuence &
Interactions with selection
There is a threat to the experimental design by using more than one
group. As described in section 3.2.6.1, more groups were used because of
the structure of the Rejsekort project. One threat in this regard could be
that the projects have diﬀerent diﬃculties. As found in the data analysis,
the EmployeeCard project overall seemed to be a more challenging project
compared to the Rejsekort project. However, it appeared that the eﬀect
of obfuscation was almost the same. One exception was that the two
projects had diﬀerent outcomes for the use of BDD when obfuscated.
For code-speciﬁc and combined tasks, the use of BDD increased quite a
bit for the EmployeeCard project. In the case of the Rejsekort project,
BDD usage decreased. This corresponds well with what was found in a
previous study, that found that if code were easily readable, BDD becomes
less important [25]. Besides BDD usage, the threat was avoided as it was
possible to compare the projects with each other since obfuscation had
the same eﬀect.
5.3
Further studies
This thesis studied the engagement of developers with the code of diﬀerent
readability by the use of eye-tracking. It extended past studies ﬁndings
by including BDD software artefact and code obfuscation to change the
code readability. The thesis is limited in the amount and type of test
subjects, the complexity of included tasks and tools for measurements.
Future testing with additional people and with people that have an equal
amount of prior experience software developing could be performed. Ad-
ditional people with equivalent experience would allow for more precise
statistical results. This is because it would reduce the threat of outliers.
Additionally, experience with BDD in the industry should also be a pref-
erence to have more exact results. The software of the size and origin
comparable to industry standards may present diﬀerent tasks, resulting
in diﬀerent results.
Software that supports the alteration of software
elements during an experiment would be preferable. As previously de-
==PAGE:127==
5.3 Further studies
113
scribed, iTrace did not support changes and required the content to be
static during the experiment.
Besides test subjects, means of measuring physical aspects could also be
used to analyse the developer’s engagement. Through pupil size or pulse
measuring, test subjects, cognitive load or stress level could be measured.
==PAGE:128==
114
Discussion
==PAGE:129==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
Obfuscation of software artefacts is concluded to aﬀect developers en-
gagement during sense-making tasks. The use of eye-tracking and ret-
rospective think-aloud in an experimental setting were found to be able
to create the data necessary for an analysis of the obfuscation. The ef-
fects were diﬀerent when developers were engaged with diﬀerent types of
tasks. For domain understanding tasks, it can be concluded that obfusca-
tion increased the use of BDD elements and diﬃculty of tasks. However,
it also increased the test subject’s accuracy and speed, and therefore, also
making tasks somewhat easier. None of the diﬀerences was statistically
signiﬁcant. For code understanding tasks, the accuracy decreased while
BDD usage, diﬃculty and time spend increased, resulting in overall more
diﬃcult tasks. When the tasks were combined, the results were the same
as for code-speciﬁc tasks, however with smaller diﬀerences. The diﬀer-
ences were signiﬁcant except for BDD usage for code-speciﬁc tasks and
for BDD usage and time spent when tasks were combined. BDD usage
for the EmployeeCard project in the case of code-speciﬁc and combined
tasks was also found to be signiﬁcant. Finally, it was found that individ-
ual diﬀerences in an experimental setting are often signiﬁcant, and further
studies are suggested with a group of more similar test subjects.
==PAGE:130==
116
Conclusion
==PAGE:131==
Appendix A
Pre-experiment
questionnaire
This appendix contains the results from the pre-experiment questionnaire,
that was given to test subject before the experiment. Because some ques-
tions have too many answer options, not all details are possible to read
directly in this appendix. To solve this issue, all answers given can also
be seen in their entirety at this link:
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1I5FvOee7-cRqG4DTL4yDBmpqGwlgxyYs0i1tiJgQ0N
viewanalytics
==PAGE:132==
Pre-experiment questionnaire
24 svar
Participant ID (ask observer)
24 svar
g1p1
G3P1
G2P1
G4P1
G1P2
G2P2
G3P2
G4P2
G1P3
G2P3
G3P3
G4P3
G1P4
G2P4
G3P4
G4P4
G1P5
G2P5
G3P5
G4P5
G1P6
G2P6
G3P6
G4P6
Gender:
24 svar
==PAGE:133==
Age:
24 svar
Language pro¦ciency
Please state the other language
24 svar
Male
Female
12,5%
87,5%
20
22
24
25
26
27
28
34
0
2
4
6
8
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
2 (8,3 %)
2 (8,3 %)
2 (8,3 %)
7 (29,2 %)
7 (29,2 %)
7 (29,2 %)
6
(25 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %) 3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
English
Other language
0
10
20
No proficiency
No proficiency
No proficiency
Elementary proficiency
Elementary proficiency
Elementary proficiency
Limited working profi…
Limited working profi…
Limited working profi…
1/2
1/2
1/2
==PAGE:134==
Occupation (if you are a student please state which levels, e.g., Bachelor/Master/PHD)
24 svar
If you are a student, please indicate your study line/subject area
21 svar
Do you have any industrial experience in software development? If yes, brie§y describe
Danish
Danish, Faroeese, Nor…
Danish, Faroese
Dansk
German
Hungarian
Slovak
0
5
10
15
20
16 (66,7 %)
16 (66,7 %)
16 (66,7 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
Bachelor
Bachelor.
Delveloper
IT
IT Consultant
It Consultant
MSc student
Master
Master stu…
PhD
Profession…
bach…
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
4 (16,7 %)
4 (16,7 %)
4 (16,7 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
9 (37,5 %)
9 (37,5 %)
9 (37,5 %)
2 (8,3 %)
2 (8,3 %)
2 (8,3 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
CS & Engineering, E…
Computer Science a…
Computerscience an…
Digital Media Engine…
IT-security
Production
Software Technology
soft…
0
1
2
3
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
2 (9,5 %)
2 (9,5 %)
2 (9,5 %)
3 (14,3 %)
3 (14,3 %)
3 (14,3 %)
2 (9,5 %)
2 (9,5 %)
2 (9,5 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
3 (14,3 %)
3 (14,3 %)
3 (14,3 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %)
1 (4,8 %
1 (4,8 %
1 (4,8 %
==PAGE:135==
your role and the number of years you work in the industry.
23 svar
Familiarity
Are you familiar with the Rejsekort/travel card system?
24 svar
Are you familiar with employee/student card systems used for getting access to
buildings and payment/discounts in canteens etc.?
24 svar
1 year
1 year software…
1 year, consulta…
2 years as anal…
Frontend devel…
No
Part time in Ny…
Web-Programm…
Yes, I have wor…
no
0
1
2
3
4
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
2 (8,7 %)
2 (8,7 %)
2 (8,7 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
1 (4,3 %)
4 (17,4 %
4 (17,4 %
4 (17,4 %
Yes
No
100%
Yes
No
100%
==PAGE:136==
Familiarity with
Experience with Java programming (in months or years)
24 svar
Experience in other most frequently used programming languages and the approximate
experience. Example answers: C (3 years), Python (2 years)
24 svar
Ruby (3 years), C (3 years), Python (2 years), Shell scripting (8 years)
JavaScript (2 years), Python (1 year), Java (1 year), C# (1 year), C (1 year)
Python/C at uni. small scripts mostly.
C, C++ (3 years+)
C 2 years Python 2 years
Javascript (2 years), Python (6 months)
Object-oriented
programming
Java programming
Behavior driven
development (BDD)
Unit testing
Eclipse ID
0
5
10
15
Not at all familar
Not at all familar
Not at all familar
Slightly familiar
Slightly familiar
Slightly familiar
Somewhat familiar
Somewhat familiar
Somewhat familiar
Moderately familiar
Moderately familiar
Moderately familiar
Extremely Familiar
Extremely Familiar
Extremely Familiar
1 1/2 year
1 year
1 year work, occa…
1-2 years?
2 year
3 years
4 months
5 months
6…
0
1
2
3
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
3 (12,5 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
2 (8,3 %)
2 (8,3 %)
2 (8,3 %)
3 (12,5 %
3 (12,5 %
3 (12,5 %
==PAGE:137==
Python (4 years) 
Javascript/Typescript (5 years)
C (3 months), Python (1 months)
Python (3 years), Javascript (1 year), PHP (1 year)
c (3mth) F#(6mth)
JavaScript (2½ years)
C (4 years), Python (5 years), Mathematica (5 years), Matlab (3 years)
Python 1 year, C++ 4 months, C# 1 year, C 4 months
Python 2 years, Javascript 2 years
C# (3 years), python (5 years), javascript (6 years)
Python (1 year), VBA (1 year), Matlab (2 years)
C and C# 6 months, Python 1 year, JavaScript 2 years
C# (3 years), Javascript (5 years), Python (2 years), PHP (5 years)
Assembly - 6 month, C - 2 years, C++ - 2 yeras, C# - 5 years
C# 2 Years, Javascript 1½ years
C++ 1½ year, Flutter 3 months
C++ (2 years)
Android (4 months) Javascript (on-off 2 months) Prolog (4 months)
Python (2 years), C++ (2 years)
What is the setting of your programming experience in the past 5 years? (check all
relevant boxes)
24 svar
Screening
0
10
20
30
Classroom (as a student)
Classroom (as a lecturer /
TA)
Work in the industry
Contribution to open
source projects
Hobby
Personal Projects
24 (100 %)
24 (100 %)
24 (100 %)
6 (25 %)
6 (25 %)
6 (25 %)
7 (29,2 %)
7 (29,2 %)
7 (29,2 %)
17 (70,8 %)
17 (70,8 %)
17 (70,8 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
1 (4,2 %)
==PAGE:138==
Do you wear glasses?
24 svar
Do you wear contact lenses?
24 svar
If you wear glasses, do they reduce the light contrast?
24 svar
If you wear glasses, do the lenses re§ect light (re§ective/create glare)?
24 svar
Yes, monofocal lenses
Yes, bifocal (progressive)
lenses
No
12,5%
83,3%
Yes
No
95,8%
Yes
No
I don't wear glasses
20,8%
79,2%
==PAGE:139==
If you wear glasses or contact lenses, what are they used for?
24 svar
Can you read from a computer screen without di¨culty when you have your contact
lenses and/or glasses on?
24 svar
Do you use a screen reader, screen magni¦er or other assistive technology to use the
computer?
24 svar
Yes
No
I don't wear glasses
16,7%
79,2%
Reading only
Seeing distant object only
Both
I don't wear glasses nor
contact lenses
16,7%
79,2%
Yes
No
I don't wear glasses
20,8%
79,2%
==PAGE:140==
Have you ever been diagnosed with color-blindness?
24 svar
Have you ever been diagnosed with learning/reading disabilities, e.g., dyslexia or visual
aphasia?
24 svar
Please list other issues that you have with your sight/vision
8 svar
Dyslexia
It's a little bad but otherwise it's okay
Yes
No
100%
Yes
No
95,8%
Yes
No
95,8%
==PAGE:141==
none
None, nilch, nada
Bygningsfejl
Little farsighted, i don't require glasses yet.
Perfect vision
Eye-sight: -1,75 on both eyes
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google. Rapportér misbrug - Servicevilkår
 Analyse
==PAGE:142==
128
Pre-experiment questionnaire
==PAGE:143==
Appendix B
Post-experiment
questionnaires
This appendix contains the results from the post-experiment question-
naire, that was given to test subject just after running the experiment.
The post-experiment questionnaire was split into the four diﬀerent groups
that test subjects were put into. This was due to that before the study,
it was not known whether the order the test subjects would be running
the projects, and the obfuscation would end up changing how they would
feel aﬀected by the obfuscation.
All answers given can also be seen at these links:
Group 1: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScIhZ-sSIo8-AbwllmyufV_
te7Xqors0LVg1L9Vuy4K70ZjQA/viewanalytics
Group 2: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1iKcv6yGB4HB-thvAaxpViE3woFWCif-jK
viewanalytics
Group 3: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1A19ybgarEuqe8BzqMHsYFdJpSqLQ7cLNc
viewanalytics
Group 4: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1hgPrxvCXIxwcPBgE9YhgYlg4s4eqFATNm
viewanalytics
==PAGE:144==
Post-experiment questionnaire
6 svar
Participant ID (ask observer)
6 svar
G1P1
G1P2
G1P3
G1P4
G1P5
G1P6
Usefulness of project elements without obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and 2.2.0
for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
3 (50 %)
2 (33,3 %)
==PAGE:145==
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
Usefulness of project elements with obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and 4.2.0
for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
0
1
2
3
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
3 (50 %)
2 (33,3 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
5 (83,3 %)
1 (16,7 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
5 (83,3 %)
==PAGE:146==
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
The obfuscated code changed my behavior in regard to understanding the system
through other means/elements compared to what I am otherwise used to
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
3 (50 %)
2 (33,3 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
1 (16,7 %)
4 (66,7 %)
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
Yes
No
100%
==PAGE:147==
If yes, how did it change the way you tried to answer the question / understand the
system? What type of ¦les did you use and why?
6 svar
Spent more time in different source ¦les to gain knowledge about the structure
I had to spend a lot more time trying to understand in-depth how each of the functions worked, instead of just glancing over the
important bits so I could get a general feeling of how a function works. This lead me to spend a lot more type analyzing - and
overanalyzing - the functions
I had to look a lot more at the Cucumber steps, as the source code was not very helpful due to the variable and function naming
being obfuscated.
Looked more at pakage and class names. Went back and fourth as I forgot what the question was about. Looked more in the
source code but with small progress compared to the non-obfuscated code.
I tried to rely on the steps as they summarized the underlying code.
alot more time is spent on reading the source, and looking at the feature and even the step ¦les are needed to gain a more
complete picture.
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google. Rapportér misbrug - Servicevilkår
 Analyse
==PAGE:148==
Post-experiment questionnaire
6 svar
Participant ID (ask observer)
6 svar
G2P1
G2P2
G2P3
G2P4
G2P5
G2P6
Usefulness of project elements with obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and 2.2.0
for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
2 (33,3 %)
3 (50 %)
==PAGE:149==
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
Usefulness of project elements without obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and 4.2.0
for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
0
1
2
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
2 (33,3 %)
2 (33,3 %)
2 (33,3 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
3 (50 %)
3 (50 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
2 (33,3 %)
3 (50 %)
==PAGE:150==
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
The obfuscated code changed my behavior in regard to understanding the system
through other means/elements compared to what I am otherwise used to
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
2 (33,3 %)
1 (16,7 %)
1 (16,7 %)
2 (33,3 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
4 (66,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
Yes
No
100%
==PAGE:151==
If yes, how did it change the way you tried to answer the question / understand the
system? What type of ¦les did you use and why?
6 svar
I mostly had to rely on the feature and just hope the code did what it was supposed to.
The problem was that I did not understand from an external viewpoint the overall functionality of methods.
the feature ¦le was the most helpful, when looking at the source code the variable names was hard to understand and didn't give
any hints of what they contain.
The feature ¦les were useful all the time, in the obfuscated code I spent way more time looking at the code trying to ¦gure out
variable and function names.
If the code is obfuscated the source code is almost unusable to ¦gure what it does. This made me rely much more on the step
code and feature ¦les
obfuscated code, had a lot of information in it, that wasn't needed for the questions, and therefor was easy to get lost in
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google. Rapportér misbrug - Servicevilkår
 Analyse
==PAGE:152==
Post-experiment questionnaire
6 svar
Participant ID (ask observer)
6 svar
G3P1
G3P2
G3P3
G3P4
G3P5
G3P6
Usefulness of project elements without obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and 2.2.0
for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
2 (33,3 %)
3 (50 %)
==PAGE:153==
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
Usefulness of project elements with obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and 4.2.0
for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
0
1
2
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
2 (33,3 %)
2 (33,3 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
2 (33,3 %)
3 (50 %)
1 (16,7 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
5 (83,3 %)
==PAGE:154==
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
The obfuscated code changed my behavior in regard to understanding the system
through other means/elements compared to what I am otherwise used to
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
4 (66,7 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
1 (16,7 %)
3 (50 %)
1 (16,7 %)
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
Yes
No
16,7%
83,3%
==PAGE:155==
If yes, how did it change the way you tried to answer the question / understand the
system? What type of ¦les did you use and why?
5 svar
I used the feature ¦les to see where the related classes to perform a task were located and what functions where called as the
obfuscated code was unreadable and didn't help understanding the §ow
I knew that the source code would not be very helpful without some kind of guide and so I decided to use a high level strategy by
¦rst letting feature ¦les guide me through the step ¦les which in turn guided me through the source code.
I had to rely on the speci¦cations in the .Feature ¦les in a stronger degree, due to the code being unintuitive to navigate through.
I can't guess which methods does what, so i need to start at the feature ¦les, while in the start i could just look at the code.
I felt forced to read through entire classes and to spend more time understanding the individual lines of code, as the names of the
variables etc. did not make sense to me. It was also di¨cult to understand which class I should browse through to obtain which
information. It made me feel tired and I felt like I had to use more energy to focus my attention.
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google. Rapportér misbrug - Servicevilkår
 Analyse
==PAGE:156==
Post-experiment questionnaire
6 svar
Participant ID (ask observer)
6 svar
G4P1
G4P2
G4P3
G4P4
G4P5
G4P6
Usefulness of project elements with obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and 2.2.0
for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
5 (83,3 %)
==PAGE:157==
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0 and
2.2.0 for the EmployeeCard project
6 svar
Usefulness of project elements without obfuscated source code
The feature ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and 4.2.0
for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
0
1
2
3
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
1 (16,7 %)
3 (50 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
2 (33,3 %)
3 (50 %)
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
1 (16,7 %)
5 (83,3 %)
==PAGE:158==
The step code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
The source code ¦les helped me to answer a question like Task 3.1.0, 3.2.0, 4.1.0 and
4.2.0 for the Rejsekort project
6 svar
The obfuscated code changed my behavior in regard to understanding the system
through other means/elements compared to what I am otherwise used to
6 svar
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
1 (16,7 %)
1 (16,7 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
4 (66,7 %)
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
6 (100 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
0 (0 %)
Yes
No
100%
==PAGE:159==
If yes, how did it change the way you tried to answer the question / understand the
system? What type of ¦les did you use and why?
6 svar
I skimmed more agressively, instead of looking in deep in some ¦les. Looking at feature ¦les was very fast on occasion.
Method and variable names were useful in when not obfuscated, and following the test steps were signi¦cantly easier
With the normal code allowed me to quicker guess the behavior of methods based upon naming of variables.
The obfuscated code made me try to look for the answers elsewhere, than the source code. It felt near impossible to look over the
codes classes to quickly recognise something that might be the answer, when the code was obfuscated. I Learned of cucumber,
and after the warm-up's, i quickly adapted to look at them ¦rst.
I was not able to understand what the obfuscated code did in a su¨ciently fast manner (Tiem Limit). I needed to rely on the BDD
¦les more, but I used them in the unobsufcated code anyway, because I'm familiar with it and know it's value.
I had to relay more on feature ¦les and step code to answer the questions.
Dette indhold er hverken oprettet eller godkendt af Google. Rapportér misbrug - Servicevilkår
 Analyse
==PAGE:160==
146
Post-experiment questionnaires
==PAGE:161==
Appendix C
iTrace gaze database
creation
This appendix contains the list of SQL commands that were used before
all experiments to build the necessary tables for the iTrace plugin to be
able to export gaze data to a database.
1
CREATE TABLE session_info
2
(
3
session_ID
varchar (255) ,
4
session_purpose
varchar (255) ,
5
session_descrip
varchar (255) ,
6
developer_username
varchar (255) ,
7
developer_name
varchar (255) ,
8
screen_width
int ,
9
screen_height
int ,
10
PRIMARY KEY ( session_ID )
11
) ;
12
13
CREATE TABLE gazes
14
(
15
gaze_id
i n t
AUTO_INCREMENT ,
16
gaze_session_id
varchar (255) ,
17
gaze_name
varchar (255) ,
18
gaze_type
varchar (255) ,
19
x
int ,
==PAGE:162==
148
iTrace gaze database creation
20
y
int ,
21
left_validation
f l o a t ,
22
right_validation
f l o a t ,
23
left_pupil_diameter
f l o a t ,
24
right_pupil_diameter
f l o a t ,
25
timestamp
varchar (255) ,
26
session_time
bigint ,
27
tracker_time
bigint ,
28
system_time
bigint ,
29
nano_time
bigint ,
30
path
varchar (255) ,
31
line_height
int ,
32
font_height
int ,
33
line
int ,
34
col
int ,
35
line_base_x
int ,
36
line_base_y
int ,
37
PRIMARY KEY ( gaze_id ) ,
38
FOREIGN KEY ( gaze_session_id )
REFERENCES
session_info (←-
session_ID )
39
40
) ;
41
42
CREATE TABLE sces
43
(
44
sce_gaze_id
int ,
45
sce_name
varchar (255) ,
46
sce_type
varchar (255) ,
47
how
varchar (255) ,
48
total_length
int ,
49
start_line
int ,
50
end_line
int ,
51
start_col
int ,
52
end_col
int ,
53
depth
int ,
54
FOREIGN KEY ( sce_gaze_id )
REFERENCES
gazes ( gaze_id )
55
56
) ;
Listing C.1: SQL commands to build database for iTrace
==PAGE:163==
Appendix D
Experiment individual test
subject data
This appendix contains all the relevant data from the experiments for ev-
ery test subject. The data of how long a task took in total and with BDD
is extracted from the eye-tracking data when organised by artefact. The
audio recordings performed during the experiments give the correctness
and diﬃculty of the individual tasks.
To save space in the tables, some general facts can be given right away:
• There exist the following eight tasks: 1.1.0, 1.2.0, 2.1.0, 2.2.0, 3.1.0,
3.2.0, 4.1.0 and 4.2.0.
The remaining tasks are all used for the test subject to answer
questions and are therefore not relevant in these tables.
This is
because it is only important how long it takes to ﬁnd the answer to
the test subject.
• All tasks with numbers x.1.0 are domain understanding tasks. All
tasks with numbers x.2.0 are code understanding tasks.
==PAGE:164==
150
Experiment individual test subject data
• Group 1 and 2 starts with the Rejsekort project for task 1.x and
2.x and proceeds with the EmployeeCard project for task 3.x and
4.x. Group 3 and 4 go through the projects the opposite way.
• Group 1 and 3 starts with a non-obfuscated project for task 1.x and
2.x and an obfuscated project for task 3.x and 4.x. Group 2 and 4
go through the opposite way.
• All units for time spent is in seconds
D.1
Group 1
G1P1
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
23.40
0.00
31.33%
74.70
1.2.0
2
Yes
4.20
16.70
26.76%
78.10
2.1.0
1
No
16.30
0.00
32.53%
50.10
2.2.0
2
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
91.20
3.1.0
1
No
44.70
0.00
56.02%
79.80
3.2.0
4
No
29.00
90.40
33.34%
358.10
4.1.0
1
Yes
13.60
0.00
23.41%
58.10
4.2.0
5
No
0.00
32.60
9.06%
359.80
Total
6
11
50.00%
25.00%
131.20
139.70
20.61%
24.57%
1149.90
Table D.1: Experiment data for test subject G1P1
G1P2
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
42.30
0.00
50.84%
83.20
1.2.0
4
Yes
6.20
97.00
57.53%
179.40
2.1.0
1
No
30.80
0.00
36.36%
84.70
2.2.0
4
Yes
0.00
68.10
19.52%
348.90
3.1.0
1
Yes
71.60
0.00
63.25%
113.20
3.2.0
5
Yes
104.20
51.60
30.23%
515.30
4.1.0
3
No
0.00
42.30
23.06%
183.40
4.2.0
4
Yes
0.00
126.00
80.25%
157.00
Total
10
13
75.00%
75.00%
255.10
385.00
35.10%
40.84%
1665.10
Table D.2: Experiment data for test subject G1P2
==PAGE:165==
D.1 Group 1
151
G1P3
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
72.20
1.2.0
1
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
29.50
2.1.0
3
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
109.50
2.2.0
2
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
59.20
3.1.0
4
Yes
77.80
0.00
19.48%
399.40
3.2.0
4
No
107.20
132.00
60.71%
394.00
4.1.0
2
Yes
18.90
0.00
44.79%
42.20
4.2.0
3
Yes
2.50
45.50
22.23%
215.90
Total
8
13
75.00%
75.00%
206.40
177.50
0.00%
36.51%
1321.90
Table D.3: Experiment data for test subject G1P3
G1P4
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
43.00
0.00
41.75%
103.00
1.2.0
2
Yes
34.40
45.00
31.13%
255.10
2.1.0
2
Yes
43.60
62.60
32.33%
328.50
2.2.0
1
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
181.10
3.1.0
1
Yes
150.00
41.20
74.57%
74.57%
256.40
3.2.0
4
No
38.70
54.20
22.96%
22.96%
404.70
4.1.0
1
Yes
57.00
0.00
77.55%
77.55%
73.50
4.2.0
5
No
74.60
70.20
54.27%
54.27%
266.80
Total
6
11
75.00%
50.00%
441.30
273.20
26.35%
48.52%
1869.10
Table D.4: Experiment data for test subject G1P4
G1P5
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
48.80
0.00
40.84%
119.50
1.2.0
3
Yes
48.00
79.80
53.16%
240.40
2.1.0
4
Yes
16.30
45.60
21.55%
287.30
2.2.0
4
Yes
0.00
16.20
7.98%
203.10
3.1.0
3
Yes
132.00
34.40
73.96%
73.96%
225.00
3.2.0
5
No
126.00
89.20
56.38%
56.38%
381.70
4.1.0
2
Yes
37.40
0.00
44.47%
44.47%
84.10
4.2.0
5
No
73.50
63.30
52.51%
52.51%
260.50
Total
13
15
100.00%
50.00%
482.00
328.50
29.95%
58.43%
1801.60
Table D.5: Experiment data for test subject G1P5
==PAGE:166==
152
Experiment individual test subject data
G1P6
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
No
0.00
132.00
44.47%
296.80
1.2.0
3
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
118.90
2.1.0
2
Yes
17.50
29.20
13.97%
334.30
2.2.0
4
No
7.80
0.00
2.94%
265.40
3.1.0
2
Yes
138.00
0.00
66.76%
66.76%
206.70
3.2.0
3
No
0.00
59.20
20.28%
20.28%
291.90
4.1.0
2
Yes
15.40
73.80
58.88%
58.88%
151.50
4.2.0
4
No
15.40
37.40
23.15%
23.15%
228.10
Total
11
11
50.00%
50.00%
194.10
331.60
18.37%
38.62%
1893.60
Table D.6: Experiment data for test subject G1P6
D.2
Group 2
G2P1
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
42.20
0.00
30.10%
140.20
1.2.0
4
No
28.80
0.00
13.28%
216.80
2.1.0
2
Yes
75.40
0.00
60.71%
124.20
2.2.0
3
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
240.50
3.1.0
2
Yes
75.20
0.00
71.01%
105.90
3.2.0
2
Yes
93.00
0.00
60.19%
154.50
4.1.0
1
Yes
32.10
0.00
52.71%
60.90
4.2.0
4
Yes
44.10
0.00
13.32%
331.10
Total
9
11
100.00%
50.00%
390.80
0.00
37.46%
20.29%
1374.10
Table D.7: Experiment data for test subject G2P1
G2P2
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
4
Yes
0.00
4.40
7.41%
59.40
1.2.0
5
No
0.00
72.10
21.39%
337.10
2.1.0
3
Yes
29.60
79.80
33.39%
327.60
2.2.0
2
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
102.20
3.1.0
2
Yes
106.90
0.00
54.26%
197.00
3.2.0
2
Yes
56.70
86.90
49.13%
292.30
4.1.0
1
Yes
3.20
0.00
6.30%
50.80
4.2.0
2
Yes
0.00
58.20
54.91%
106.00
Total
7
14
100.00%
75.00%
196.40
301.40
48.27%
22.50%
1472.40
Table D.8: Experiment data for test subject G2P2
==PAGE:167==
D.2 Group 2
153
G2P3
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
58.70
0.00
53.61%
109.50
1.2.0
4
No
19.20
0.00
5.29%
362.90
2.1.0
2
Yes
88.70
0.00
71.82%
123.50
2.2.0
3
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
290.10
3.1.0
2
No
138.00
0.00
77.66%
177.70
3.2.0
4
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
310.60
4.1.0
3
Yes
72.20
0.00
26.51%
272.30
4.2.0
5
No
69.50
0.00
22.31%
311.50
Total
14
11
25.00%
50.00%
446.30
0.00
26.09%
18.80%
1958.10
Table D.9: Experiment data for test subject G2P3
G2P4
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
27.70
0.00
44.25%
62.60
1.2.0
3
Yes
45.90
0.00
31.52%
145.60
2.1.0
2
Yes
90.60
0.00
65.46%
138.40
2.2.0
3
Yes
7.30
0.00
2.32%
314.00
3.1.0
2
Yes
172.00
0.00
74.27%
231.60
3.2.0
4
No
107.10
0.00
34.66%
309.00
4.1.0
1
Yes
23.30
0.00
31.53%
73.90
4.2.0
3
Yes
9.30
0.00
4.61%
201.80
Total
10
9
75.00%
100.00%
483.20
0.00
38.18%
25.96%
1476.90
Table D.10: Experiment data for test subject G2P4
G2P5
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
63.70
0.00
56.88%
112.00
1.2.0
3
No
21.90
34.10
25.20%
222.20
2.1.0
1
Yes
60.90
0.00
55.06%
110.60
2.2.0
4
Yes
4.60
57.80
21.43%
291.20
3.1.0
2
Yes
192.00
0.00
73.68%
260.60
3.2.0
3
No
39.50
31.50
18.76%
378.40
4.1.0
1
Yes
23.10
0.00
18.87%
122.40
4.2.0
3
Yes
0.00
32.50
16.40%
198.20
Total
9
9
75.00%
75.00%
405.70
155.90
33.20%
33.02%
1695.60
Table D.11: Experiment data for test subject G2P5
==PAGE:168==
154
Experiment individual test subject data
G2P6
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
16.80
0.00
39.34%
42.70
1.2.0
3
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
194.60
2.1.0
2
Yes
92.90
0.00
63.1%
147.20
2.2.0
3
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
77.80
3.1.0
2
No
86.60
0.00
59.56%
145.40
3.2.0
3
No
119.30
0.00
37.06%
321.90
4.1.0
3
No
25.00
120.00
56.22%
257.90
4.2.0
4
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
48.20
Total
12
9
0.00%
50.00%
340.60
120.80
45.37%
23.73%
1235.70
Table D.12: Experiment data for test subject G2P6
D.3
Group 3
G3P1
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
48.80
29.90
40.30%
195.30
1.2.0
2
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
191.90
2.1.0
3
Yes
56.40
0.00
13.13%
429.50
2.2.0
2
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
222.80
3.1.0
4
Yes
216.00
0.00
63.49%
340.20
3.2.0
4
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
223.10
4.1.0
2
Yes
64.90
0.00
41.82%
155.20
4.2.0
4
No
8.10
83.50
30.11%
304.20
Total
9
14
100.00%
50.00%
113.40
13.00%
36.42%
2062.20
Table D.13: Experiment data for test subject G3P1
G3P2
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
42.80
0.00
36.18%
118.30
1.2.0
3
Yes
35.70
71.90
43.04%
250.00
2.1.0
3
No
23.70
30.40
19.40%
278.80
2.2.0
1
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
103.70
3.1.0
1
No
27.90
0.00
31.56%
88.40
3.2.0
3
Yes
100.90
82.00
42.94%
425.90
4.1.0
1
Yes
29.40
0.00
57.76%
50.90
4.2.0
4
Yes
3.10
14.00
10.70%
159.80
Total
9
9
75.00%
75.00%
263.50
198.30
27.24%
35.49%
1475.80
Table D.14: Experiment data for test subject G3P2
==PAGE:169==
D.3 Group 3
155
G3P3
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
3
Yes
56.80
100.70
58.44%
269.50
1.2.0
3
Yes
16.50
0.00
14.68%
112.40
2.1.0
3
Yes
52.20
0.00
54.77%
95.30
2.2.0
4
Yes
10.80
0.00
6.92%
156.10
3.1.0
4
Yes
33.00
27.40
48.79%
123.80
3.2.0
5
No
64.10
99.60
49.11%
333.30
4.1.0
1
Yes
12.80
0.00
39.51%
32.40
4.2.0
4
Yes
34.80
23.10
14.72%
393.40
Total
13
14
100.00%
75.00%
281.00
250.80
37.42%
33.39%
1516.20
Table D.15: Experiment data for test subject G3P3
G3P4
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
3
Yes
7.90
0.00
3.42%
231.00
1.2.0
2
Yes
14.80
0.00
10.07%
147.00
2.1.0
4
No
2.50
2.50
1.62%
307.70
2.2.0
2
Yes
0.00
16.10
11.68%
137.90
3.1.0
4
No
49.10
96.40
47.41%
306.90
3.2.0
5
No
22.40
22.80
13.13%
344.20
4.1.0
1
Yes
12.10
0.00
22.41%
54.00
4.2.0
4
Yes
7.50
10.30
10.91%
163.10
Total
11
14
75.00%
50.00%
116.30
148.10
5.32%
25.41%
1691.80
Table D.16: Experiment data for test subject G3P4
G3P5
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
No
46.60
36.60
33.39%
249.20
1.2.0
2
Yes
38.20
22.90
25.28%
241.70
2.1.0
2
No
32.40
33.70
35.77%
184.80
2.2.0
3
Yes
33.10
40.30
36.57%
200.70
3.1.0
1
Yes
67.10
0.00
57.40%
116.90
3.2.0
3
Yes
78.50
90.80
49.60%
341.30
4.1.0
1
Yes
32.50
0.00
44.83%
72.50
4.2.0
3
No
50.10
27.00
26.94%
286.20
Total
9
8
50.00%
75.00%
378.50
251.30
32.38%
42.36%
1693.30
Table D.17: Experiment data for test subject G3P5
==PAGE:170==
156
Experiment individual test subject data
G3P6
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
42.70
0.00
33.05%
129.20
1.2.0
4
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
300.30
2.1.0
3
No
132.00
0.00
51.32%
257.20
2.2.0
4
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
286.80
3.1.0
3
Yes
62.20
0.00
55.73%
55.73%
111.60
3.2.0
4
No
138.00
0.00
44.95%
44.95%
307.00
4.1.0
3
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
0.00%
60.30
4.2.0
5
No
1.10
0.00
0.79%
0.79%
139.90
Total
13
15
25.00%
50.00%
376.00
0.00
17.95%
32.53%
1592.30
Table D.18: Experiment data for test subject G3P6
D.4
Group 4
G4P1
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
47.50
0.00
29.43%
161.40
1.2.0
3
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
247.40
2.1.0
2
Yes
72.60
0.00
73.71%
98.50
2.2.0
4
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
236.00
3.1.0
1
Yes
34.60
0.00
41.54%
83.30
3.2.0
2
Yes
34.50
0.00
56.28%
61.30
4.1.0
1
Yes
6.30
0.00
19.21%
32.80
4.2.0
4
Yes
0.00
0.00
0.00%
176.30
Total
8
11
100.00%
75.00%
195.50
0.00
21.32%
16.16%
1097.00
Table D.19: Experiment data for test subject G4P1
G4P2
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
4
No
0.00
192.00
44.69%
429.60
1.2.0
4
No
162.00
138.00
48.11%
623.60
2.1.0
4
No
48.60
14.60
56.83%
111.20
2.2.0
3
No
60.20
109.50
51.50%
329.50
3.1.0
1
Yes
97.70
4.30
77.10%
132.30
3.2.0
2
Yes
6.00
14.20
17.97%
112.40
4.1.0
1
Yes
No data
No data
No data
No data
4.2.0
2
Yes
No data
No data
No data
No data
Total
6
15
100.00%
0.00%
374.50
472.60
49.94%
48.52%
1738.60
Table D.20: Experiment data for test subject G4P2. No eye-tracking
data was collected for task 4.x
==PAGE:171==
D.4 Group 4
157
G4P3
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
87.60
0.00
65.47%
133.80
1.2.0
4
Yes
26.50
61.40
44.46%
197.70
2.1.0
2
Yes
90.70
0.00
69.77%
130.00
2.2.0
5
Yes
0.00
156.00
37.32%
418.00
3.1.0
2
Yes
83.90
0.00
72.83%
115.20
3.2.0
5
Yes
111.00
156.00
55.44%
481.60
4.1.0
1
Yes
51.10
0.00
52.41%
97.50
4.2.0
2
Yes
11.70
12.70
32.19%
75.80
Total
10
13
100.00%
100.00%
462.50
386.10
55.37%
48.00%
1649.60
Table D.21: Experiment data for test subject G4P3
G4P4
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
1
Yes
40.80
0.00
41.38%
98.60
1.2.0
4
No
0.00
0.00
0.00%
340.80
2.1.0
1
Yes
75.90
22.70
64.53%
152.80
2.2.0
4
No
3.60
162.00
52.17%
317.40
3.1.0
2
Yes
92.80
0.00
59.34%
156.40
3.2.0
4
No
26.90
0.00
7.93%
339.40
4.1.0
1
Yes
36.70
0.00
47.17%
77.80
4.2.0
3
Yes
92.30
88.50
50.96%
354.80
Total
10
10
75.00%
50.00%
369.00
273.20
36.32%
33.53%
1838.00
Table D.22: Experiment data for test subject G4P4
G4P5
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
31.20
0.00
39.54%
78.90
1.2.0
3
No
35.60
138.00
54.11%
320.80
2.1.0
2
No
52.20
0.00
51.18%
102.00
2.2.0
4
No
31.10
138.00
47.41%
356.70
3.1.0
2
Yes
65.90
0.00
70.94%
92.90
3.2.0
2
Yes
16.00
40.90
24.17%
235.40
4.1.0
1
Yes
20.00
0.00
38.02%
52.60
4.2.0
3
Yes
24.30
42.90
30.24%
222.20
Total
8
11
100.00%
25.00%
276.30
359.80
34.82%
49.64%
1461.50
Table D.23: Experiment data for test subject G4P5
==PAGE:172==
158
Experiment individual test subject data
G4P6
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
Diﬃculty
obfus
Correct
non-obfus
Correct
obfus
Feature ﬁle
time spent
Step code
time spent
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
1.1.0
2
Yes
44.60
0.00
50.86%
87.70
1.2.0
3
Yes
28.80
81.40
38.72%
284.60
2.1.0
4
No
53.40
51.80
35.39%
297.30
2.2.0
4
No
69.80
69.90
41.21%
339.00
3.1.0
2
Yes
49.10
0.00
64.10%
76.60
3.2.0
3
Yes
39.50
107.20
59.10%
251.60
4.1.0
1
Yes
36.70
0.00
51.11%
71.80
4.2.0
3
Yes
3.30
56.90
31.37%
191.90
Total
9
13
100.00%
50.00%
327.20
367.20
49.79%
39.63%
1600.50
Table D.24: Experiment data for test subject G4P6
==PAGE:173==
Appendix E
Experiment grouped test
subject data
This appendix contains similar data compared to appendix D, but in this
case, with data clustered into the four groups that exist. Finally, it also
shows the data of the combined data of both projects.
The columns Correct non-obfus average and Correct obfus average con-
tain how many out of the six persons in the group that had the individual
question correct. The last row, therefore, indicated the average percent-
age of correctly answered questions in total for that group.
The facts from appendix D also applies to these tables.
==PAGE:174==
160
Experiment grouped test subject data
Group 1
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
average
Diﬃculty
obfus
average
Correct
non-obfus
average
Correct
obfus
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
average
1.1.0
1.50
5/6
26.25
22.00
38.63%
124.90
1.2.0
2.50
6/6
15.47
39.75
36.75%
150.23
2.1.0
2.17
4/6
20.75
22.90
21.93%
199.07
2.2.0
2.83
2/6
1.30
14.05
8.02%
191.48
3.1.0
2.00
5/6
102.35
12.60
53.86%
213.42
3.2.0
4.17
1/6
67.52
79.43
37.59%
390.95
4.1.0
1.83
5/6
30.77
12.30
43.59%
98.80
4.2.0
4.33
2/6
27.67
62.50
36.36%
248.02
Total
9
12.33
70.83%
54.17%
292.07
265.53
24.41%
41.54%
1616.87
Table E.1: Experiment data for test subjects in group 1
Group 2
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
average
Diﬃculty
obfus
average
Correct
non-obfus
average
Correct
obfus
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
average
1.1.0
1.83
6/6
34.85
0.73
40.56%
87.73
1.2.0
3.67
1/6
19.30
17.70
15.01%
246.53
2.1.0
2.00
6/6
73.02
13.30
53.31%
161.92
2.2.0
3.00
3/6
1.98
9.63
5.30%
219.30
3.1.0
2.00
4/6
128.45
0.00
68.92%
186.37
3.2.0
3.00
2/6
69.27
19.73
30.23%
294.45
4.1.0
1.67
5/6
29.82
20.00
35.66%
139.70
4.2.0
3.50
4/6
20.48
15.12
17.85%
199.47
Total
10.17
10.5
62.5%
66.67%
377.17
96.22
36.94%
23.83%
1535.47
Table E.2: Experiment data for test subjects in group 2
Group 3
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
average
Diﬃculty
obfus
average
Correct
non-obfus
average
Correct
obfus
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
average
1.1.0
2.33
5/6
40.93
27.87
34.62%
198.75
1.2.0
2.67
5/6
17.53
15.80
16.09%
207.22
2.1.0
3.00
2/6
49.87
11.10
23.55%
258.88
2.2.0
2.67
5/6
7.32
9.40
9.05%
184.67
3.1.0
2.83
4/6
75.88
20.63
53.24%
181.30
3.2.0
4.00
2/6
67.32
49.20
35.40%
329.13
4.1.0
1.50
6/6
25.28
0.00
35.67%
70.88
4.2.0
4.00
3/6
17.45
26.32
18.15%
241.10
Total
10.67
12.33
70.83%
54.17%
301.58
160.32
21.17%
34.30%
1671.93
Table E.3: Experiment data for test subjects in group 3
==PAGE:175==
161
Group 4
Task
Diﬃculty
non-obfus
average
Diﬃculty
obfus
average
Correct
non-obfus
average
Correct
obfus
average
Feature ﬁle
time spent
average
Step code
time spent
average
% use BDD
non-obfus
% use BDD
obfus
Total time
spent
average
1.1.0
2.17
5/6
41.95
32.00
44.82%
165.00
1.2.0
3.50
3/6
42.15
69.80
33.34%
335.82
2.1.0
2.50
3/6
65.57
14.85
54.10%
148.63
2.2.0
4.00
1/6
27.45
105.90
40.07%
332.77
3.1.0
1.67
6/6
70.67
0.72
65.22%
109.45
3.2.0
3.00
5/6
39.32
53.05
37.40%
246.95
4.1.0
1.00
6/6
30.16
0.00
45.35%
66.50
4.2.0
2.83
6/6
26.32
40.20
32.58%
204.20
Total
8.50
12.17
95.83%
50.00%
343.58
316.52
41.53%
40.69%
1609.32
Table E.4: Experiment data for test subjects in group 4
==PAGE:176==
162
Experiment grouped test subject data
==PAGE:177==
Appendix F
Histograms & Kernel
Density Estimation (KDE)
scripts
This appendix contains one of the scripts that were used to create the
KDE ﬁgures in the data analysis. Additional it is the scripts that created
the histograms referenced in the data analysis. Since KDE is based on
estimations, the histograms are relevant to have as comparisons.
Since the scripts creating KDE/histograms for the remaining variable are
almost the same, these can be found at this link:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QeyD_OV3FWLmj__8VZu53pt6M89ov1Jw?
usp=sharing
Below, an example of the script creating the KDE and histograms for the
total time used can be seen.
1
import
pandas
as pd
2
import
numpy as np
3
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as plt
4
import
seaborn
as sns
5
from
scipy
import
stats
==PAGE:178==
164
Histograms & Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) scripts
6
7
# Read
in
data
8
datafile = ' Histogram_time_both . xlsx '
9
data = pd . read_excel ( datafile ,
sheet_name=0, header=0)
10
11
# Change
obfuscated
v a r i a b l e s
to
0 and 1 and group
other
v a r i a b l e ←-
on
these
rows
12
no_inds = data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] == 'No '
13
yes_inds = data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] == ' Yes '
14
obfuscated = np . zeros_like ( data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] ,
dtype=np . i n t )
15
obfuscated [ yes_inds ] = 1
16
data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] = obfuscated
17
without_obfuscation = data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ no_inds ]
18
with_obfuscation = data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ yes_inds ]
19
20
# Plot
histogram
21
plt . figure ( figsize =(12 ,
4) )
22
ax1 = plt . subplot (1 ,
2 ,
1)
23
plt . hist ( without_obfuscation ,
bins=20, density=True ,
facecolor='←-
white ' ,
edgecolor=' black ' ,
align=' l e f t ' )
24
plt . xlabel ( 'Time ( s ) ' )
25
plt . ylabel ( ' Density
(No .
p a r t i c i p a n t s ) ' )
26
plt . title ( ' Without
obfuscation ' )
27
plt . subplot (1 ,
2 ,
2 ,
sharex=ax1 ,
sharey=ax1 )
28
plt . hist ( with_obfuscation ,
bins=20, density=True ,
facecolor='←-
white ' ,
edgecolor=' black ' ,
align=' l e f t ' )
29
plt . xlabel ( 'Time ( s ) ' )
30
plt . ylabel ( ' Density
(No .
p a r t i c i p a n t s ) ' )
31
plt . title ( 'With
obfuscation ' )
32
plt . tight_layout ()
33
plt . savefig ( ' Histogram_time_both_sideBySide . png ' ,
dpi=100)
34
35
# Kernel
density
estimation
and
histograms
together
36
plt . figure ( figsize =(9 ,
6) )
37
#p l t . h i s t ( without_obfuscation ,
bins =20,
density=True ,
alpha =0.5 , ←-
edgecolor =' black ' ,
a l i g n =' l e f t ' ,
l a b e l ='Without
obfuscation ')←-
# Histogram
38
sns . kdeplot ( without_obfuscation ,
bw=20, label=' Without ←-
obfuscation ' ,
shade=True ) # Kernel
density
estimation
39
#p l t . h i s t ( with_obfuscation ,
bins =20,
density=True ,
alpha =0.5 , ←-
edgecolor =' black ' ,
a l i g n =' l e f t ' ,
l a b e l ='With
obfuscation ') # ←-
Histogram
40
sns . kdeplot ( with_obfuscation ,
bw=20, label='With
obfuscation ' , ←-
shade=True ) # Kernel
density
estimation
41
plt . xlabel ( 'Time ( s ) ' )
42
plt . ylabel ( ' Density
(No .
p a r t i c i p a n t s ) ' )
43
plt . title ( ' Total
time
comparison ' )
44
plt . legend ()
45
plt . tight_layout ()
46
#p l t . s a v e f i g ( ' Histogram_time_both_onTop . png ' ,
dpi =100) # ←-
Histogram
47
plt . savefig ( 'KDE_time_both . png ' ,
dpi=100) # Kernel
density ←-
estimation
48
49
# One−way ANOVA t e s t
==PAGE:179==
165
50
print ( stats . f_oneway ( without_obfuscation ,
with_obfuscation ) )
Listing F.1: Python histogram & KDE script
==PAGE:180==
166
Histograms & Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) scripts
==PAGE:181==
Appendix G
One-way Analysis of
variance (ANOVA) test
script
This appendix contains the script that was used to do the one-way ANOVA
test on the variables aﬀected by obfuscation.
The script was also run on the domain- and code-speciﬁc tasks with just
the data ﬁle loaded in as the diﬀerence. The data loaded as well as the
script can also be seen at this link:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QeyD_OV3FWLmj__8VZu53pt6M89ov1Jw?
usp=sharing
1
import
pandas
as pd
2
import
numpy as np
3
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as plt
4
import
seaborn
as sns
5
from
scipy
import
stats
6
import
statsmodels . api as sm
7
from
statsmodels . formula . api
import
ols
8
9
# Read
in
data
==PAGE:182==
168
One-way Analysis of variance (ANOVA) test script
10
datafile = 'ANOVA_all_both . xlsx '
11
data = pd . read_excel ( datafile ,
sheet_name=0, header=0)
12
13
# Change
obfuscated
v a r i a b l e s
to
0 and 1 and group
other
v a r i a b l e ←-
on
these
rows
14
no_inds = data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] == 'No '
15
yes_inds = data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] == ' Yes '
16
obfuscated = np . zeros_like ( data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] ,
dtype=np . i n t )
17
obfuscated [ yes_inds ] = 1
18
data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] = obfuscated
19
without_obfuscation = data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ no_inds ]
20
with_obfuscation = data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ yes_inds ]
21
22
# DIFFICULTY
23
model = ols ( " D i f f i c u l t y
~ Obfuscated " ,
data ) . fit ()
24
print ( ' D i f f i c u l t y :\ n ' ,
sm . stats . anova_lm ( model ,
typ=2)) # Type 2 ←-
i s
used
s i n c e
no
s i g n i f i c a n t
i n t e r a c t i o n
i s
assumed
25
26
# ACCURACY
27
model = ols ( " Correct ~ Obfuscated " ,
data ) . fit ( )
28
print ( ' Accuracy :\ n ' ,
sm . stats . anova_lm ( model ,
typ=2)) # Type 2
i s ←-
used
s i n c e
no
s i g n i f i c a n t
i n t e r a c t i o n
i s
assumed
29
30
# Percentagewise
use
of BDD
31
model = ols ( "Percent_use_BDD ~ Obfuscated " ,
data ) . fit ( )
32
print ( ' Percentagewise
use
of BDD:\ n ' ,
sm . stats . anova_lm ( model ,
←-
typ=2)) # Type 2
i s
used
s i n c e
no
s i g n i f i c a n t
i n t e r a c t i o n
i s
←-
assumed
33
34
# TOTAL TIME
35
model = ols ( "Total_time_spent ~ Obfuscated " ,
data ) . fit ( )
36
print ( ' Total
time :\ n ' ,
sm . stats . anova_lm ( model ,
typ=2)) # Type 2 ←-
i s
used
s i n c e
no
s i g n i f i c a n t
i n t e r a c t i o n
i s
assumed
Listing G.1: Python ANOVA test script
==PAGE:183==
Appendix H
Additional analysis of
variance (ANOVA) results
This appendix contains results of several two-way ANOVA tests. These
were performed to check whether the individual projects or test subjects
would have an impact on the results found in the one-way ANOVA tests
in the data analysis.
Finally, the results of two one-way ANOVA tests testing the P-values of
BDD usage ﬁltered by the project of domain-speciﬁc tasks are included.
All results were generated from the script provided in appendix G.
1
Difficulty :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
Project
3.065679
1.0
3.420443
0.067640
4
Obfuscated
0.541300
1.0
0.603940
0.439094
5
Obfuscated : Project
1.847904
1.0
2.061746
0.154466
6
Residual
81.561594
91.0
NaN
NaN
7
Accuracy :
8
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
9
Project
0.809044
1.0
5.157350
0.025507
10
Obfuscated
0.101598
1.0
0.647646
0.423053
11
Obfuscated : Project
0.007792
1.0
0.049670
0.824138
12
Residual
14.275362
91.0
NaN
NaN
==PAGE:184==
170
Additional analysis of variance (ANOVA) results
13
14
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
15
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
16
Project
0.026904
1.0
0.671390
0.414708
17
Obfuscated
0.147646
1.0
3.684502
0.058053
18
Obfuscated : Project
0.024540
1.0
0.612400
0.435917
19
Residual
3.646575
91.0
NaN
NaN
20
21
Total
time :
22
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
23
Project
58186.618251
1.0
6.800695
0.010650
24
Obfuscated
10435.556265
1.0
1.219680
0.272335
25
Obfuscated : Project
8301.915274
1.0
0.970306
0.327216
26
Residual
778594.238714
91.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.1: Two-way ANOVA, domain-speciﬁc data with formula
Obfuscated * Project
1
Difficulty :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
ID
35.355459
23.0
2.491314
0.004001
4
Obfuscated
0.380282
1.0
0.616319
0.436358
5
Obfuscated : ID
22.119718
23.0
1.558661
0.098133
6
Residual
29.000000
47.0
NaN
NaN
7
8
Accuracy :
9
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
10
ID
4.817551
23.0
1.514548
0.113148
11
Obfuscated
0.142019
1.0
1.026905
0.316075
12
Obfuscated : ID
3.774648
23.0
1.186679
0.302326
13
Residual
6.500000
47.0
NaN
NaN
14
15
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
16
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
17
ID
1.392395
23.0
1.849081
0.037137
18
Obfuscated
0.135505
1.0
4.138833
0.057574
19
Obfuscated : ID
0.766843
23.0
1.018357
0.463536
20
Residual
1.538780
47.0
NaN
NaN
21
22
Total
time :
23
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
24
ID
242981.315619
23.0
1.150517
0.333248
25
Obfuscated
12630.310047
1.0
1.375504
0.246778
26
Obfuscated : ID
170532.736620
23.0
0.807473
0.705703
27
Residual
431568.720000
47.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.2: Two-way ANOVA, domain-speciﬁc data with formula
Obfuscated * ID
1
Difficulty :
==PAGE:185==
171
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
Project
1.298730
1.0
1.563369
0.214378
4
Obfuscated
21.079315
1.0
25.374588
0.000002
5
Obfuscated : Project
0.240007
1.0
0.288913
0.592230
6
Residual
75.596014
91.0
NaN
NaN
7
8
Accuracy :
9
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
10
Project
0.234900
1.0
1.077976
0.301902
11
Obfuscated
3.632507
1.0
16.669841
0.000095
12
Obfuscated : Project
0.006311
1.0
0.028963
0.865242
13
Residual
19.829710
91.0
NaN
NaN
14
15
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
16
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
17
Project
0.121121
1.0
3.067184
0.083257
18
Obfuscated
0.065643
1.0
1.662297
0.200561
19
Obfuscated : Project
0.365635
1.0
9.259097
0.003063
20
Residual
3.593528
91.0
NaN
NaN
21
22
Total
time :
23
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
24
Project
50070.757664
1.0
5.002588
0.027753
25
Obfuscated
165503.932487
1.0
16.535559
0.000101
26
Obfuscated : Project
11689.043044
1.0
1.167857
0.282698
27
Residual
910816.376105
91.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.3: Two-way
ANOVA,
code-speciﬁc
data
with
formula
Obfuscated * Project
1
Difficulty :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
ID
25.275597
23.0
1.781039
0.046825
4
Obfuscated
21.390845
1.0
34.667921
0.0000004
5
Obfuscated : ID
22.859155
23.0
1.610765
0.082765
6
Residual
29.000000
47.0
NaN
NaN
7
8
Accuracy :
9
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
10
ID
8.704725
23.0
2.371722
0.006061
11
Obfuscated
3.550469
1.0
22.249609
0.000022
12
Obfuscated : ID
3.866197
23.0
1.053399
0.426537
13
Residual
7.500000
47.0
NaN
NaN
14
15
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
16
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
17
ID
1.430754
23.0
1.712861
0.058941
18
Obfuscated
0.056528
1.0
1.556508
0.218358
19
Obfuscated : ID
0.942612
23.0
1.128471
0.353142
20
Residual
1.706919
47.0
NaN
NaN
21
22
Total
time :
==PAGE:186==
172
Additional analysis of variance (ANOVA) results
23
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
24
ID
206168.321813
23.0
0.809136
0.703795
25
Obfuscated
155660.636667
1.0
14.050964
0.000487
26
Obfuscated : ID
245728.270000
23.0
0.964394
0.523311
27
Residual
520679.585000
47.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.4: Two-way
ANOVA,
code-speciﬁc
data
with
formula
Obfuscated * ID
1
Difficulty :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
Project
4.177572
1.0
3.058000
0.081990
4
Obfuscated
14.188210
1.0
10.385829
0.001500
5
Obfuscated : Project
0.377990
1.0
0.276690
0.599505
6
Residual
254.096920
186.0
NaN
NaN
7
8
Accuracy :
9
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
10
Project
0.957914
1.0
4.428427
0.036689
11
Obfuscated
1.259554
1.0
5.822906
0.016789
12
Obfuscated : Project
0.014064
1.0
0.065019
0.799014
13
Residual
40.233696
186.0
NaN
NaN
14
15
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
16
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
17
Project
0.131097
1.0
2.606041
0.108152
18
Obfuscated
0.205092
1.0
4.076967
0.044907
19
Obfuscated : Project
0.289813
1.0
5.761097
0.017371
20
Residual
9.356751
186.0
NaN
NaN
21
22
Total
time :
23
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
24
Project
1.081051 e+05
1.0
8.678747
0.003631
25
Obfuscated
4.641104 e+04
1.0
3.725910
0.055095
26
Obfuscated : Project
1.445175 e+02
1.0
0.011602
0.914340
27
Residual
2.316871 e+06
186.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.5: Two-way
ANOVA,
domain+code-speciﬁc
data
with
formula Obfuscated * Project
1
Difficulty :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
ID
32.265158
23.0
0.981292
0.492967
4
Obfuscated
13.737676
1.0
9.609606
0.002335
5
Obfuscated : ID
23.387324
23.0
0.711287
0.828279
6
Residual
203.000000
142.0
NaN
NaN
7
8
Accuracy :
9
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
10
ID
7.008491
23.0
1.492062
0.082154
==PAGE:187==
173
11
Obfuscated
1.136150
1.0
5.563218
0.019704
12
Obfuscated : ID
5.197183
23.0
1.106447
0.345570
13
Residual
29.000000
142.0
NaN
NaN
14
15
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
16
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
17
ID
1.738583
23.0
1.547651
0.064640
18
Obfuscated
0.183538
1.0
3.757774
0.054546
19
Obfuscated : ID
1.103493
23.0
0.982307
0.491681
20
Residual
6.935584
142.0
NaN
NaN
21
22
Total
time :
23
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
24
ID
2.202247 e+05
23.0
0.706421
0.833267
25
Obfuscated
3.980540 e+04
1.0
2.936753
0.088767
26
Obfuscated : ID
2.801967 e+05
23.0
0.898795
0.599971
27
Residual
1.924699 e+06
142.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.6: Two-way
ANOVA,
domain+code-speciﬁc
data
with
formula Obfuscated * ID
1
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
Obfuscated
0.025241
1.0
0.665993
0.418751
4
Residual
1.705507
45.0
NaN
NaN
Listing H.7: One-way ANOVA, domain-speciﬁc data checking of the
obfuscation eﬀect on BDD usage in the Rejsekort project
1
Percentagewise
use of BDD :
2
sum_sq
df
F
PR(>F )
3
Obfuscated
0.146945
1.0
3.482352
0.06841
4
Residual
1.941068
46.0
NaN
NaN
5
Total
time :
Listing H.8: One-way ANOVA, domain-speciﬁc data checking of the
obfuscation eﬀect on BDD usage in the EmployeeCard
project
==PAGE:188==
174
Additional analysis of variance (ANOVA) results
==PAGE:189==
Appendix I
Bar chart with error bars
script
This appendix contains the script that was used to make the bar plot with
standard deviations, showing how the variables tested in the experiment
was changed due to obfuscation.
The script, the data used and the resulted bar charts can be found at this
link:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1cW4KK4NbDH2R1lfIKhiB0QLWvrQ26TxV?
usp=sharing
1
import
pandas
as pd
2
import
numpy as np
3
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as plt
4
import
seaborn
as sns
5
from
scipy
import
stats
6
7
# Read
in
data
8
datafile = ' All_data . xlsx '
9
data = pd . read_excel ( datafile ,
sheet_name=0, header=0)
10
11
# Change
obfuscated
v a r i a b l e s
to
0 and 1 and group
other
v a r i a b l e ←-
on
these
rows
==PAGE:190==
176
Bar chart with error bars script
12
no_inds = data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] == 'No '
13
yes_inds = data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] == ' Yes '
14
obfuscated = np . zeros_like ( data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] ,
dtype=np . i n t )
15
obfuscated [ yes_inds ] = 1
16
data [ ' Obfuscated ' ] = obfuscated
17
18
# Calculate mean
v a r i a b l e
values
19
accuracy_without_mean = np . mean ( data [ ' Correct ' ] [ no_inds ] )
20
accuracy_with_mean = np . mean ( data [ ' Correct ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
21
22
BDD_without_mean = np . mean ( data [ 'Percent_use_BDD ' ] [ no_inds ] )
23
BDD_with_mean = np . mean ( data [ 'Percent_use_BDD ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
24
25
difficulty_without_mean = np . mean ( data [ ' D i f f i c u l t y ' ] [ no_inds ] )
26
difficulty_with_mean = np . mean ( data [ ' D i f f i c u l t y ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
27
28
time_without_mean = np . mean ( data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ no_inds ] )
/ ←-
60
29
time_with_mean = np . mean ( data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
/ 60
30
31
# Calculate
standard
deviation
values
32
accuracy_without_std = np . std ( data [ ' Correct ' ] [ no_inds ] )
33
accuracy_with_std = np . std ( data [ ' Correct ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
34
35
BDD_without_std = np . std ( data [ 'Percent_use_BDD ' ] [ no_inds ] )
36
BDD_with_std = np . std ( data [ 'Percent_use_BDD ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
37
38
difficulty_without_std = np . std ( data [ ' D i f f i c u l t y ' ] [ no_inds ] )
39
difficulty_with_std = np . std ( data [ ' D i f f i c u l t y ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
40
41
time_without_std = np . std ( data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ no_inds ] )
/ 60
42
time_with_std = np . std ( data [ ' Total_time_spent ' ] [ yes_inds ] )
/ 60
43
44
# Create
l i s t s
f o r
the
plot
45
variables = [ ' Accuracy (%) ' ,
'BDD usage (%) ' ,
' D i f f i c u l t y
( user ←-
r a t i n g ) ' ,
' Time_used (min) ' ]
46
x_pos = np . arange ( len ( variables ) )
47
width = 0.35
48
49
meanHeightsNoObfus = [ accuracy_without_mean ,
BDD_without_mean ,
←-
difficulty_without_mean ,
time_without_mean ]
50
51
meanHeightsObfus = [ accuracy_with_mean ,
BDD_with_mean ,
←-
difficulty_with_mean ,
time_with_mean ]
52
53
errorBarNoObfus = [ accuracy_without_std ,
BDD_without_std ,
←-
difficulty_without_std ,
time_without_std ]
54
55
errorBarObfus = [ accuracy_with_std ,
BDD_with_std ,
←-
difficulty_with_std ,
time_with_std ]
56
57
# Build
the
plot
58
fig ,
ax = plt . subplots ()
59
ax . bar ( x_pos −width /2 ,
meanHeightsNoObfus ,
width ,
yerr=←-
errorBarNoObfus ,
align=' center ' ,
alpha =0.5 ,
ecolor=' red ' , ←-
==PAGE:191==
177
capsize =10, label=' Not
obfuscated ' )
60
ax . bar ( x_pos + width /2 ,
meanHeightsObfus ,
width ,
yerr=←-
errorBarObfus ,
align=' center ' ,
alpha =0.5 ,
ecolor=' red ' , ←-
capsize =10, label=' Obfuscated ' )
61
62
ax . set_ylabel ( ' Variable mean value ' )
63
ax . set_xticks ( x_pos )
64
ax . set_xticklabels ( variables )
65
ax . set_title ( ' Change
in
v a r i a b l e s
due
to
obfuscation ' )
66
ax . yaxis . grid ( True )
67
ax . legend ( )
68
69
# Save
the
f i g u r e
and show
70
plt . tight_layout ()
71
plt . savefig ( ' All_Barplot_with_error_bars . png ' ,
dpi=100)
72
plt . show ()
Listing I.1: Python Barplot and standard deviation script
==PAGE:192==
178
Bar chart with error bars script
==PAGE:193==
Bibliography
[1] Tobii AB. Eye tracker sampling frequency, 2019.
[2] Tobii AB. How do tobii eye trackers work?, 2019.
[3] Tobii AB. How fast is human perception?, 2019.
[4] Tobii AB. Types of eye movement, 2019.
[5] Thilina Gamage Ashen. Jbehave vs cucumber jvm: Comparison and
experience sharing, 2017.
[6] Dan North & Associates. Introducing bdd, 2018.
[7] Thomas Barabosch and Elmar Gerhards-Padilla.
Behavior-driven
development in malware analysis. Le Journal De La Cybercriminalité
and Des Investigations Numériques, 2016.
[8] Leonard Peter Binamungu, Suzanne M. Embury, and Nikolaos Kon-
stantinou. Maintaining behaviour driven development speciﬁcations:
Challenges and opportunities. 25th Ieee International Conference on
Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering, Saner 2018 - Pro-
ceedings, 2018-:8330207, 175–184, 2018.
[9] Scott Blinman and Andy Cockburn. Program comprehension: In-
vestigating the eﬀects of naming style and documentation. ., 2008.
==PAGE:194==
180
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Raluca Budiu. Between-subjects vs. within-subjects study design,
2018.
[11] Michael Burch. Mining and visualizing eye movement data. Siggraph
Asia 2017 Symposium on Visualization, Sa 2017, page 3139304,
2017.
[12] Andrea Burrattin. Process mining. Lecture Notes in Business Infor-
mation Processing, 207:33–47, 2015.
[13] Teresa Busjahn, Carsten Schulte, and Andreas Busjahn. Analysis of
code reading to gain more insight in program comprehension. In Pro-
ceedings of the 11th Koli Calling International Conference on Com-
puting Education Research, Koli Calling ’11, pages 1–9, New York,
NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[14] Teresa Busjahn, Carsten Schulte, Bonita Sharif, Simon, Andrew
Begel, Michael Hansen, Roman Bednarik, Paul Orlov, Petri Ihan-
tola, Galina Shchekotova, and Maria Antropova.
Eye tracking in
computing education. Icer 2014 - Proceedings of the 10th Annual
International Conference on International Computing Education Re-
search, pages 3–10, 2014.
[15] Jan Cappaert. Code Obfuscation Techniques for Software Protection
(Code obfuscatietechnieken voor softwarebeveiliging) ; Code Obfus-
cation Techniques for Software Protection. PhD thesis, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven – Faculty of Engineering, 2012.
[16] Mariano Ceccato, Massimiliano Penta, Paolo Falcarin, Filippo Ricca,
Marco Torchiano, and Paolo Tonella. A family of experiments to as-
sess the eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of source code obfuscation tech-
niques. Empirical Softw. Engg., 19(4):1040–1074, August 2014.
[17] Mariano Ceccato, Massimiliano Di Penta, Jasvir Nagra, Paolo Fal-
carin, Filippo Ricca, Marco Torchiano, and Paolo Tonella. The ef-
fectiveness of source code obfuscation: An experimental assessment.
2009 IEEE 17th International Conference on Program Comprehen-
sion, pages 178–187, 2009.
[18] Christian Collberg.
Code obfuscation: Why is this still a thing?
Proceedings of the Eighth Acm Conference, pages 173–174, 2018.
==PAGE:195==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
181
[19] docs.cucumber.io Github. Bdd tutorial.
[20] Fluxicon. Analyzing process maps, 2018.
[21] Fluxicon. Disco user guide, importing of data sets, 2018.
[22] Komal Gohil, Nagalakshmi Alapati, and Sunil Joglekar. Towards be-
havior driven operations (bdops). Iet Seminar Digest, 2011(2):262–
264, 2011.
[23] Guardsquare. Proguard manual, usage.
[24] Johannes C. Hofmeister, Janet Siegmund, and Daniel V. Holt.
Shorter identiﬁer names take longer to comprehend. Empirical Soft-
ware Engineering, 24(1):417–443, 2019.
[25] Constantina Ioannou, Indira Nurdiani, Andrea Burattin, and Bar-
bara Weber. Understanding developers’ sense-making behavior using
eye-tracking and process mining: An exploratory study (submitted).
., 2019.
[26] Phanchaporn Jaisooki and Wichian Premchaiswadi.
Time perfor-
mance analysis of medical treatment processes by using disco. Inter-
national Conference on Ict and Knowledge Engineering, pages 110–
115, 2015.
[27] java decompiler.github.io. Jd-gui, a standalone java decompiler gui,
2019.
[28] Java-source.net. Open source obfuscators in java, 2019.
[29] Katja Kevic, Braden M. Walters, Timothy R. Shaﬀer, Bonita Sharif,
David C. Shepherd, and Thomas Fritz. Tracing software developers’
eyes and interactions for change tasks. 2015 10th Joint Meeting of
the European Software Engineering Conference and the Acm Sigsoft
Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, Esec/fse
2015 - Proceedings, pages 202–213, 2015.
[30] Meng Lung Lai, Meng Jung Tsai, Fang Ying Yang, Chung Yuan
Hsu, Tzu Chien Liu, Silvia Wen Yu Lee, Min Hsien Lee, Guo Li
Chiou, Jyh Chong Liang, and Chin Chung Tsai. A review of us-
ing eye-tracking technology in exploring learning from 2000 to 2012.
Educational Research Review, 10:90–115, 2013.
==PAGE:196==
182
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[31] Dawn Lawrie, Christopher Morrell, Henry Feild, and David Binkley.
Eﬀective identiﬁer names for comprehension and memory. Innova-
tions in Systems and Software Engineering, 3(4):303–318, 2007.
[32] Sander J J Leemans, Dirk Fahland, and Wil M P Van Der Aalst.
Discovering block-structured process models from event logs - a con-
structive approach. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
Subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes
in Bioinformatics), 7927:311–329, 2013.
[33] S. Letovsky. Cognitive processes in program comprehension. Journal
of Systems and Software, 7(4):325–39, 325–339, 1987.
[34] Popa Marius. Techniques of program code obfuscation for secure soft-
ware. Journal of Mobile, Embedded and Distributed Systems, 3:205–
219, 12 2011.
[35] Abhishek Mishra. Introduction to behavior-driven development. Ios
Code Testing, pages 317–327, 2017.
[36] Amir Soltani Nezhad, Johan J. Lukkien, and Rudolf H. Mak.
Behavior-driven development for real-time embedded systems. 2018
Ieee 23rd International Conference on Emerging Technologies and
Factory Automation (etfa), pages 59–66, 2018.
[37] Andrew Schall and Jennifer Romano Bergstrom. Introduction to eye
tracking. Eye Tracking in User Experience Design, pages 3–26, 2014.
[38] Timothy R. Shaﬀer, Jenna L. Wise, Braden M. Walters, Sebastian C.
Müller, Michael Falcone, and Bonita Sharif. Itrace: Enabling eye
tracking on software artifacts within the ide to support software
engineering tasks. 2015 10th Joint Meeting of the European Soft-
ware Engineering Conference and the Acm Sigsoft Symposium on the
Foundations of Software Engineering, Esec/fse 2015 - Proceedings,
pages 954–957, 2015.
[39] Zohreh Sharaﬁ, Timothy Shaﬀer, Bonita Sharif, and Yann Gael Gue-
heneuc. Eye-tracking metrics in software engineering. Proceedings -
Asia-paciﬁc Software Engineering Conference, Apsec, 2016-:7467288,
96–103, 2016.
==PAGE:197==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
183
[40] Zohreh Sharaﬁ, Zéphyrin Soh, and Yann Gaël Guéhéneuc. A sys-
tematic literature review on the usage of eye-tracking in software
engineering. Information and Software Technology, 67:79–107, 2015.
[41] J.F. Smart. BDD in Action: Behavior-Driven Development for the
Whole Software Lifecycle. Manning Publications, 2014.
[42] Tobii. Tobii eye tracker 4c, 2019.
[43] Technotiﬁcation Vicky Singh Rao. 5 best java decompilers to convert
programs into source code, 2019.
[44] Peter Watson. Rules of thumb on magnitudes of eﬀect sizes, 2018.
[45] Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin Höst, Magnus C. Ohlsson,
Bjöorn Regnell, and Anders Wesslén. Experimentation in Software
Engineering: An Introduction. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Nor-
well, MA, USA, 2000.
