==PAGE:1==
Experimental analyses of flow and 
forces on roughness elements on a 
seabed
 
Simone de Lemos & Markus Pai Sørensen   
Master Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Project type
Master Thesis
Title
Experimental analyses of flow and forces on roughness elements on a seabed
Credits
35 ECTS points
Supervisor
Erik Damgaard Christensen, DTU
Project period
January 28th 2019 - July 28th 2019
Deadline
July 28th 2019
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1960
info@mek.dtu.dk
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Structures in the marine environment are exposed to loads induced by the movement of
water. The flow around and force on porous structures are important to investigate as
these will differ depending on which element is considered. In this thesis an experimental
investigation of wave induced forces on and flow around a simplified porous structure is
presented. In the experimental investigation one-directional force measurements in the
in-line and transverse direction have been performed. The force measurements have also
been used for analysing bed friction. Several velocity measurements used to visualise the
flow have been performed, using Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV). The experimental
model consisted of a series of aligned and unaligned setups containing 1×1, 3×3, 6×5
and 6×6 roughness elements i.e. cubes. The 1×1 setup served as a reference. Cube
size was varied between D = 30 mm and D = 40 mm. Relating the model to real life
conditions the two cube sizes corresponds to rocks with diameters of 1 and 0.8 metres
in 10 metres of water. The gap-ratio was varied between d/D = 0.5 and d/D = 1.0.
The experimental model was subjected to four regular non-linear waves, resulting in low
Keulegan-Carpenter numbers ranging from 4 to 20.
The results from the force measurements showed the magnitude of the in-line forces
corresponded well with the reference experiment and the largest in-line forces was mea-
sured on the lee-side of the porous structure. Shielding effects in aligned setups were
increased with decreasing gap-ratio, though not subjected to further increase when in-
creasing the size of the porous structure. For unaligned setups, reduced shielding effects
are first seen on the third row of roughness elements.
Using the force measurements the friction factor was calculated for the entire porous
structure and for the individual rows of elements. From these amplification factors was
also determined showing the effect of a sudden change in roughness. For setups with
gap-ratio d/D = 0.5 the results corresponded quite well with (Fredsøe, Sumer, Laursen,
& Pedersen, 1993). For d/D = 1.0 the roughness elements were not placed close enough
for the porous structure to behave as a rough bed.
Velocity fields and velocity profiles was produced from the velocity measurements for
two cubes representing a corner cube and a cube being shielded. For gap-ratio d/D = 0.5
a separation region is observed above the front cube during the first half period. For
d/D = 1.0 separation is also seen during the second half period. No clear separation
occurs above the shielded cube. A non-zero mean velocity, called streaming, is observed
for both gap-ratios. For d/D = 0.5 streaming directed away from the porous structure
occurs above the front cube. Streaming to some degree is seen to occur over both cubes
for gap-ratio d/D = 1.0 in opposite directions.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis: ”Experimental analyses of flow and forces on roughness elements
on a seabed” is submitted as a requirement for obtaining a Master’s degree in civil
engineering from the Technical University of Denmark. The thesis has been prepared
at the department of Mechanical Engineering, Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and
Maritime Engineering, under supervision of Professor Erik Damgaard Christensen.
We would like to acknowledge the help and guidance received from Erik Damgaard
Christensen throughout the project. A thank you should also be directed towards Stefan
Carstensen, for help and guidance regarding experimental equipment and for fixing the
flume when necessary. A last thanks to Poul-Erik Hyldbo, for producing the required
elements for the experimental setup.
Kongens Lyngby, July 28, 2019
Markus Pai Sørensen (s143876)
Simone de Lemos (s133580)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
List of Symbols
a
Horizontal amplitude of wa-
ve motion
a0
Mean water level
A
Cross-sectional area
A
Area of applied force
b
Vertical amplitude of wave
motion
CD
Drag coefficient
Cm
Hydrodynamic-mass coeffici-
ent
CM
Inertia coefficient
d
Gap size between cubes
d
Water depth (Figure 2.4)
D
Cube diameter
fc,l
Lower cut-off frequency
fc,u
Upper cut-off frequency
fd
Drag term
fi
Inertia term
fw
Friction factor
F
Force
FD
Drag force
Fin
In-line force
Fm
Hydrodynamic-mass force
Fp
Froude-Krylov force
FT
Transverse force
g
Gravitational acceleration
h
Water depth
H
Wave height
HI
Incident wave height
HR
Reflected wave height
k
Wave number
kN
Equivalent roughness of the
bed
KC
Keulegan-Carpenter number
L
Wave length
L
Cube length (Section 2.3)
Re
Reynolds number
t
Time
T
Wave period
Tpos
Period of the positive part of
the horizontal velocity
Tneg
Period of the negative part
of the horizontal velocity
u
Horizontal velocity
√¯u2
Root-mean-squared value of
the horizontal velocity
um,crest
Absolute value of max veloc-
ity under the crest
um,trough
Absolute value of max veloc-
ity under the trough
uref
Reference horizontal velocity
==PAGE:8==
vi
List of Symbols
U
Horizontal flow velocity
Um
Maximum horizontal flow ve-
locity
U0m
Maximum free stream veloc-
ity
Ur
Ursell parameter
z
Distance from mean water
level (Chapter 2)
z
Distance from bed
w
Vertical velocity
√¯
w2
Root-mean-squared value of
the vertical velocity
α
Amplification factor
βR
Reflection coefficient
δ
Boundary layer thickness
δ1
Stokes length
ε
Least square error
ρ
Density of water
ρs
Density of sediment
η
Surface elevation
ω
Angular frequency
ν
Kinematic viscosity
τm
Bed shear stress magnitude
θ
Shields parameter
overbar
Denotes time average value
overdot
Denotes differentiation with
respect to time
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
List of Symbols
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Previous works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
5
2.1
Oscillatory flow around cylinders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Forces on cylinders in oscillatory flows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Method of least squares
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Wave boundary layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Experimental Setup
17
3.1
Experimental model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Measuring equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Data processing
33
4.1
Data filtering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Reference velocity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Data sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Displacement of force signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Phase averaging: Velocity measurements for flow visualisation
. . . . . .
40
5
Experimental Validation
41
5.1
Physical model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Ursell dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Experimental Results
49
6.1
Force measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.2
Bed friction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Visualisation of flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
7
Remarks
87
7.1
Linking of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7.2
Future research and lessons learned. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
8
Conclusion
89
References
91
A Dimensional analysis
93
B Elongation and waterproofing of load cell wires
95
C Detail Drawings
97
D Calibration
111
D.1 Calibration of load cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
D.2 Calibration of wave gauges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
E Frequency Analysis
119
E.1
Eigenfrequency Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
E.2
Frequency analysis: Waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
E.3
Effect of Hamming filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
F Validation: Experimental parameters and forces
127
G Results: Experimental parameters
131
G.1 Configuration: 3×3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
G.2 Configuration: 6×6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
G.3 Configuration: 6×5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
G.4 Configuration: offset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
H Results: Force coefficients
137
I
Grid specifications: Flow visualisation
139
I.1
Measurement grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
I.2
Wave parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142
J
Photos of experimental setup
143
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Many large structures are located in the marine environment creating an interest in
the forces and flow development around and within such structures. Oftentimes large
marine structures are comprised of multiple smaller structures or individual parts located
in close proximity of each other. This type of structure is referred to as porous, and
covers a wide range of structures in the marine environment. Two examples of porous
structures are shown in Figures 1.1 and 1.2.
Previous research has often dealt with obstacles and structures with a circular cross
section. However, this may not be the best representation of e.g. rubble mound struc-
tures or scour protection. Extensive research on flow around cylindrical structures in
both steady current and oscillatory flow, as well as the associated resulting forces is
available and well described. Less information and research exists regarding cross sec-
tions of a different geometric form. In this thesis the flow around and forces acting
on a porous structure is being investigated trough experimental work. The considered
structure will consist of cubic roughness elements on a sea bed. The experimental work
aspires to expand upon the available knowledge regarding structures comprised of sharp
edged elements, to better understand the internal forces in e.g. scour protection. Con-
sidering such a structure, which is made of individual roughness elements, or grains of
sediment, perspectives can also be drawn to movement of elements within the structure.
The study of forces and flow development inside a complex porous structure is important
for designing robust and economical structures.
Figure 1.1: Rubble mound breakwater with
square armour stones1.
Figure 1.2:
Installation of rock scour
protection around monopile2.
1http://cdr-international.nl/portfolio/netherlands-the-hague-port-breakwater-health-scan/
2https://www.jandenul.com/en/activities/offshore-services/rock-installation-and-ballasting
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The experimental work presented in this thesis will investigate the flow around and
forces induced on cubic roughness elements placed on the bed of a wave flume. Through
wave generation, the roughness elements are subjected to oscillatory flow with Keulegan-
Carpenter numbers ranging from 4 to 20. The roughness elements are placed in different
configurations, where the amount of cubes, the alignment, the cube size and the gap
ratio is varied. Thus allowing investigation of proximity and shielding effects through
force measurements. The flow around the roughness elements is visualised using laser
measurements (Laser Doppler Velocimetry).
The thesis has been written at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), De-
partment of Mechanical Engineering, Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime
Engineering. The experimental work has been conducted in wave flume 1 in building
114 at DTU, the Hydraulic Engineering Laboratory.
1.1
Previous works
To provide the investigation with a frame of reference, an examination of previous liter-
ature is presented in the following.
Parts of the historic background for research regarding wave induced forces on cylin-
ders can be traced back to (Morison, O’Brien, Johnson, & Schaaf, 1950). The investiga-
tion focused on forces on a pile in steady flow. Here the formulation of two coefficients
describing the in-line force was introduced. These are the drag coefficient, CD and the
inertia coefficient, CM, respectively. Few years later (Keulegan & Carpenter, 1958) intro-
duced a parameter to describe an oscillatory flow relative to the diameter of a structure.
This parameter is known as the Keulegan-Carpenter, KC, number.
Much research has followed on the forces on cylinders in oscillatory flows as function
of the KC number. This includes, but is not limited to, (Graham, 1980) who performed
an analysis of forces induced by separation and vortex shedding from sharp-edged cylin-
ders at high Reynolds numbers and low KC numbers. An analysis which was followed
by (Bearman, Graham, Obasaju, & Drossopoulos, 1984) detailing the specific effect of
corner radius of 2-dimensional elements. (Sarpkaya, 1986) presented an investigation of
in-line force coefficients for circular cylinders in planar oscillatory flows of small ampli-
tude.
Research regarding force coefficients of free hanging spheres and cubes in an oscilla-
tory flow have been performed by (Li, 1989). The investigation dealt with the connection
between evolution in force coefficients as a function of KC number and the variations
between spheres and cubes.
The flow around cylinders with a cubic cross section has been investigated in e.g.
(Gao & Chow, 2005) and (Larousse, Martinuzzi, & Tropea, 1993). Here the focus has
been directed towards investigation and visualisation of flow patterns in steady flow.
The effects of roughness and sudden changes in roughness has been investigated in
(Fredsøe et al., 1993) and (Fuhrman, Sumer, & Fredsøe, 2011). Here the influence of
spatial variation in roughness induced wave boundary layers, including the effect on the
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Previous works
3
bed shear stress, friction and streaming processes, have been studied both experimentally
and numerically.
This thesis is the most recent in a line of research projects at the Technical University
of Denmark regarding forces on and flow around porous structures.
(Bjørke, 2015)
performed a numerical study of hydrodynamic forces on complex structures in moon-
pools. This was followed by an experimental analysis of flow and turbulence in large
porous structures by (Petersen, 2016). Most recently an experimental investigation of
flow and forces on structural elements in large porous structures by (Nielsen & Borup,
2018) was performed. (Petersen, 2016) and (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) shares the method
of oscillating an experimental model by use of a carriage system. The present thesis is
a continuation of the study by (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) applying generated waves to a
similar structure.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
The following chapter presents the theoretical background for the experimental study.
First, a description of the flow and associated forces around cylinders in oscillatory flow
is presented. It should be highlighted that the description is general and is presented
for circular cross-sections. The difference in theory regarding circular and sharp-edged
cross-sections will be pointed out where necessary. Second, a brief description of linear
wave theory is given. This section will further contain a description of the theoretical
applicability range of waves and the theory behind the reflection phenomena. Moreover
the term wave boundary layer and relevant parameters in regard to roughness will be
described. Finally a brief description of the theory behind Laser Doppler Velocimetry
(LDV) is given.
The theory presented in this report is primarily based upon relevant material from
(Sumer & Fredsøe, 2006), (Holthuijsen, 2007), (Fredsøe & Deigaard, 1992) and (Tropea,
Yarin, & Foss, 2007).
2.1
Oscillatory flow around cylinders
This section holds a description of the relevant hydrodynamic quantities describing the
flow around a cylinder.
In a steady current the flow depends on a non-dimensional
parameter known as the Reynolds number.
Re = DU
ν
(2.1)
Here D represents the diameter of the cylinder, U the flow velocity and ν the kinematic
viscosity of the fluid. The Reynolds number is a measure of the ratio between inertial and
viscous forces within the fluid. It is an important quantity in predicting flow patterns
and can be used to estimate the transition from laminar to turbulent flow. Flow around
a cylinder will experience large changes as the Reynolds number increases from zero.
The introduction of a solid object into a flow, e.g. a cylinder, will change the nature
of the flow as it is forced around the cylinder. This result in two distinct flow regions
forming around the cylinder as shown in Figure 2.1.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Theory
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: Definition sketches. (a) The two flow regions created by a circular cylinder in a
flow and (b) detailed sketch of flow near separation point. (Sumer & Fredsøe, 2006, p. 3-7)
In Figure 2.1a it can be seen how a boundary layer and wake region will form around
the cylinder.
These regions form quickly as the Reynolds number is increased from
zero. The boundary layer and the wake is being separated due to an adverse pressure
gradient caused by the diverging geometry of the flow environment at the rear side of
the cylinder. When the separation of these flow regions occur, vortex shedding is seen.
Vortex shedding is perhaps the most important feature of flow around a cylinder.
For increasing Reynolds numbers the separation point will move further back on the
cylinder and an increasing level of turbulence will be observed. For a square cross-section
the separation will typically be well defined at the sharp corners. The evolution of flow
regimes will therefore differ from that seen for circular cross-sections in the sense that
no dependence of Reynolds number is expected.
When objects are placed in an oscillatory flow an additional parameter besides the
Reynolds number becomes important. This is the Keulegan-Carpenter number defined
as:
KC = UmT
D
(2.2)
where Um is the maximum velocity of the oscillatory motion and T is the period of the
motion. For a sinusoidal flow the velocity will be given by:
U = Um sin(ωt)
(2.3)
where ω = 2π/T is the angular frequency and t is the time. This leads to a maximum
velocity of:
Um = aω = 2πa
T
(2.4)
a being the amplitude of the oscillatory motion. In the case of a sinusoidal motion
Equation (2.2) can be rewritten as:
KC = 2πa
D
(2.5)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Forces on cylinders in oscillatory flows
7
Equation (2.5) gives the physical meaning of the KC number. The KC number is a
measure of the stroke of the motion, namely 2a, relative to the cylinder diameter, D.
From this it is clear that small KC numbers equals a small orbital motion relative to
the total diameter of the cylinder.
Linear wave theory assumes waves to be sinusoidal. The shape of a higher order
or non-linear wave may differ greatly from that seen for a sinusoidal wave. Hence the
method of calculating KC numbers in Equations (2.2) and (2.5) may give incorrect
results. The method used in this thesis is based upon Equation (2.2), with the numerator
being calculated from experimental data as a weighting between the crest and trough.
This weighting is an attempt to balance out any wave skewness which may lead to falsely
high or low KC numbers.
KC = (um,crest Tpos) (|um,trough| Tneg)
D
(2.6)
Here um,crest is the maximum velocity found under the crest, Tpos is the duration of the
positive part of the wave, |um,trough| is the absolute maximum velocity value found under
the trough and Tneg is the corresponding duration of the negative part of the wave.
Similarly as for the Reynolds number in steady currents, the Keulegan-Carpenter
number, in combination with the Reynolds number, can be used as an estimator of
flow patterns in oscillatory flows. For KC > 1.1 separation and formation of vortices
will be seen in the wake of a cylinder. Or put another way, the stroke length of the
oscillatory motion must be at least 10% larger than the cylinder diameter for separation
and vortices to form.
For a circular cross-section the initiation of vortex shedding is seen at KC > 7. The
vortex shedding phenomena influences the transverse force induced by the flow. This will
be further described in Section 2.2. For KC > 7 a series of vortex shedding regimes are
defined. These flow regimes are well described for circular cross-sections. The principal
of the regimes is that as the KC number is increased an increased number of vortices
will be shed during each half period of the oscillatory motion. The first vortex shedding
regime is known as the single pair regime and covers 7 < KC < 15. The following
regime covering 15 < KC < 24 is called the double-pair regime and so forth.
2.2
Forces on cylinders in oscillatory flows
The flow around an object, e.g. a cylinder, as described in Section 2.1 will exert a force
on said object. This force has two contributions. One that comes from the pressure and
one that comes from the friction. Combined, these two contributions are known as the
in-line force. Besides the in-line force the cylinder will also be subjected to a force in the
direction transverse to the flow and a lift force in the vertical direction. The lift force
will be omitted in the present section as it has not been considered in the experimental
work. The definition sketch in Figure 2.2 illustrates the forces exerted on a circular
cylinder in an oscillatory flow.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Theory
Figure 2.2: Definition sketch of forces exerted on a cylinder by oscillatory flow.
2.2.1
In-line force
In a steady current the in-line force on a cylinder is given as:
FD = 1
2ρCDDU|U|
(2.7)
where ρ is the density of the fluid, U|U| is the velocity squared, written in a form to
ensure that the force is in the direction of the flow, D is the cylinder diameter and CD
is the drag coefficient. FD in this form is known as the drag force per unit length of the
cylinder.
Considering a cylinder subjected to an oscillatory flow the in-line force will have two
additional contributions, besides the drag force.
F = 1
2ρCDDU|U|
|
{z
}
Drag force
+
Hydrodynamic-mass force
z
}|
{
ρCmA ˙U + ρA ˙U
| {z }
Froude-Krylov force
(2.8)
The two additional contributions are known as the hydrodynamic-mass force and the
Froude-Krylov force. ˙U = ∂u/∂t is the fluid acceleration, Cm is the hydrodynamic-mass
coefficient and A is the cross-sectional area cylinder per unit length. Equation (2.8) is
known as the Morison equation.
The drag force, defined in Equation (2.7), is the first term in the Morison equation.
This force is present in both steady currents and oscillatory flows and is composed of
the form drag and friction drag. The form drag is the in-line component of the mean
resultant force caused by pressure per unit length of the cylinder. The friction drag is
the component caused by the friction felt between the object and the passing fluid.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Method of least squares
9
The second term in Equation (2.8) is the hydrodynamic-mass force given in Equation
(2.9).
Fm = ρCmA ˙U
(2.9)
The physical meaning of the hydrodynamic-mass force can be illustrated by the follow-
ing example. If a cylinder is accelerated through still water the resistance against the
movement will be of considerable size. This is caused by the fact that not only the
cylinder needs to be accelerated but also the fluid in the immediate neighbourhood of
the cylinder due to the pressure created by the cylinder. The hydrodynamic mass can
thereby be defined as the mass of the fluid around the body which has to be accelerated
with the cylinder movement due to the action of pressure.
The last term of the Morison equation is the Froude-Krylov force defined in Equation
(2.10) per unit length of a cylinder.
Fp = ρA ˙U
(2.10)
While the hydrodynamic-mass force is caused by acceleration of fluid in the immediate
neighbourhood of the cylinder, the Froude-Krylov force is due to the accelerated motion
in the outer-flow region generating a pressure gradient. By summation the Morison
equation yields:
F = 1
2ρDCDU|U| + ρCMA ˙U
(2.11)
where CM = Cm + 1 collects the hydrodynamic-mass force and the Froude-Krylov force
in one term. This coefficient is known as the inertia coefficient.
2.2.2
Transverse force
A cylinder in an oscillatory flow may be subjected to a force in the transverse direc-
tion of the flow. The transverse force is directly related to the vortex motions around
the cylinder and will therefore oscillate at a fundamental frequency different from the
frequency of the oscillatory flow. The transverse force will obviously not be present in
an unseparated flow, i.e. at very small KC numbers. In (Sumer & Fredsøe, 2006) it is
stated that the onset of transverse force is expected at KC ≈4 for circular cross-sections.
For square cross-sections the separation points are well defined at the sharp corners. It
is therefore possible that transverse forces will be relevant even sooner than at KC ≈4.
2.3
Method of least squares
The in-line force is dependent on two force coefficients: the drag coefficient, CD and
the inertia coefficient, CM, as described in Section 2.2. Various techniques to determine
these coefficients experimentally are available. In the present study ”the method of least
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Theory
squares” is adopted. The idea behind this method is to calculate the force coefficients
in a manner which yields the minimum mean-squared difference between the predicted
force (by the Morison equation) and the measured force.
Fm(t) will represent the measured in-line force at any given instant in time t, while
the predicted in-line force at the same instant will be given as:
Fp(t) = 1
2ρCDDLU(t)|U(t)| + ρCMAL ˙U(t)
(2.12)
Note that the Morison equation (2.11) has been made independent of the length L of
the measurement section in both the drag and inertia term.
For convenience the drag and inertia term can be written in terms of fd and fi:
fd = 1
2ρCDDL
and
fi = ρCMAL
(2.13)
Substituting Equation (2.13) into the Morison equation yields:
Fp(t) = fdU(t)|U(t)| + fi ˙U(t)
(2.14)
Now, ε2 is introduced as the sum of the difference between the predicted force Fp
and the measured force Fm.
ε2 =
∑
[Fp(t) −Fm(t)]2 =
∑
[fdU(t)|U(t)| + fi ˙U(t) −Fm(t)]2
(2.15)
Differentiation of Equation (2.15) with respect to fd and fi and subsequently setting
them equal to zero, leads to a set of values for fd and fi, for a minimum ε2.
∂ε2
∂fd
= 0
and
∂ε2
∂fi
= 0
(2.16)
The first and second part of Equation (2.16) leads to the following expressions, re-
spectively.
fd
(∑
U 4(t)
)
+ fi
(∑
U(t)|U(t)| ˙U(t)
)
=
∑
U(t)|U(t)|Fm(t)
(2.17)
fd
(∑
U(t)|U(t)| ˙U(t)
)
+ fi
(∑˙U 2(t) ˙U(t)
)
=
∑˙U(t)Fm(t)
(2.18)
By solving Equations (2.17) and (2.18) with respect to the two unknowns, namely
fd and fi, the in-line force coefficients can be determined.
CD = 2fd
ρDL
and
CM =
fi
ρAL
(2.19)
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Waves
11
2.4
Waves
The experimental investigation is conducted by generation of regular waves. These waves
will cause an oscillatory motion around the cubic test elements as well as forces acting
on said elements. This section will contain a description of the relevant wave theory
related to the investigation.
2.4.1
Linear wave theory
Linear wave theory is the most basic description of water waves, assuming potential i.e.
irrotational, flow. The waves are furthermore assumed sinusoidal, with a constant wave
height H and wave period T. In Figure 2.3 a description sketch of such small amplitude,
linear waves are given.
Figure 2.3: Description sketch of small amplitude, linear waves (Sumer & Fredsøe, 2006, p.
519).
In waves i.e. oscillatory flow, the fluid particles move in circular or elliptical trajec-
tories, depending on the water depth. The horizontal and vertical amplitudes of this
motion is denoted a and b, as given on Figure 2.3, with corresponding velocities u and
w. From linear theory the horizontal particle velocity is given as:
u = πH
T
cosh(k(z + h))
sinh(kh)
cos(ωt −kx)
(2.20)
where z is the distance from mean water level (MWL), h is the water depth and t is the
time. ω is the wave angular frequency and k is the wave number, given as:
k = 2π
L
(2.21)
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Theory
Equation (2.21) assumes a known wave length L, which is not always the case. For
determining k the dispersion relation, Equation (2.22), is therefore often applied.
ω2 = gk tanh(kh)
(2.22)
Here g is the gravitational acceleration.
The corresponding surface elevation η for a linear wave can be written as:
η = H
2 cos(ωt −kx)
(2.23)
2.4.2
Theoretical applicability
The need for relatively large KC numbers considering the physical size of the experi-
mental setup gives cause to assume that waves of large wave height compared to the
water depth will become non-linear.
The Ursell number Ur is the non-dimensional ratio of wave steepness H/L to relative
water depth h/L and is a measure of the degree of non-linearity in waves.
Ur = H
L
( h
L
)3
= HL2
h3
(2.24)
The Ursell number is used to determine which wave theory can be applied to the waves
in question. The chart in Figure 2.4 indicates the ranges of wave theory applicability.
Note that the water depth on Figure 2.4 is denoted as d. For Ur > 26 it can be seen
that cnoidal wave theory should be used. Cnoidal waves covers a certain type of gravity
waves with short crests and long troughs.
It is necessary to get a measure of whether a certain degree of non-linearity in the
waves i.e. the Ursell number, will have an influence on the force experienced by an object
placed on the seabed. The force is assumed to be a function of the following variables:
F = f(T, D, h, H, L, ρ, ν, Um)
(2.25)
A dimensional analysis have been carried out and the full analysis can be found in
Appendix A. Through dimensional analysis, it has been found that the force can be
described by the following key parameters:
F
ρU 2
mD2 = f
(
KC, h
D, Ur, H
L , Re
)
(2.26)
From here it can be seen that the non-dimensional force on an object located on the
seabed is influenced by the KC number and the Reynolds number. It is also influenced
by the relative depth h/D, the wave steepness H/L and the Ursell number. It has to be
noted that dimensional analysis is sensitive to the chosen variables and the parameters
found may have varying significance.
From the dimensional analysis it is seen that
there is a possibility of the Ursell number being of importance when regarding the force.
Further investigation of the effect of this parameter should therefore be conducted if
non-linear waves are used. Such an investigation can be found in Section 5.2.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Waves
13
Figure 2.4: Theory applicability ranges (Holthuijsen, 2007, p. 138).
2.4.3
Wave reflection
For the experimental work the waves will propagate through a closed domain, i.e. the
test flume. When the waves reach the end of the flume they meet an artificial beach
designed to absorb the wave energy. However, it is not possible to absorb 100% of the
incoming wave energy resulting in some reflection of the incoming wave. Further details
regarding the flume and artificial beach can be found in Chapter 3.
The method used to determine the incoming and reflected waves in this project has
been adopted from (Jacobsen, Fuhrman, & Fredsøe, 2012). This method separates the
incoming and reflected waves by creating an over-determined set of equations. Equations
(2.27)-(2.29), gives an example of an over-determined set of equations for a system
consisting of two wave gauges.
ηi,1 = a0 +
N
∑
j=1
aI
jcos(j(ωti −kx1)) + bI
jsin(j(ωti −kx1))
+
N
∑
j=1
aR
j cos(j(ωti −kx1)) + bR
j sin(j(ωti −kx1))
(2.27)
ηi,2 = a0 +
N
∑
j=1
aI
jcos(j(ωti −kx2)) + bI
jsin(j(ωti −kx2))
+
N
∑
j=1
aR
j cos(j(ωti −kx2)) + bR
j sin(j(ωti −kx2))
(2.28)
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Theory
for
ti = t0, t0 + ∆t, ...., t0 + M∆t
(2.29)
a0 is the mean water level and ηi,1 and ηi,2 are the surface elevation at wave gauge 1
and wave gauge 2 at time step i, respectively. aj and bj are harmonic amplitudes in the
waves where superscripts I and R denotes incoming and reflected, respectively. x1 and
x2 are the positions of the two wave gauges, while k is the wave number which reflects
the assumption that all harmonics are bound. The subscript j refers to the jth harmonic
component of N total harmonic components. M is the total number of time steps in
the sample.
Solving this over-determined set of equations yields the amplitude of the incoming
wave, HI, and the reflected wave, HR. These are then used to calculate the reflection
coefficient defined as (2.30).
βR = HR
HI
(2.30)
2.5
Wave boundary layer
Force measurements are performed on roughness elements on the seabed why the notion
of wave boundary layers potentially become noteworthy. (Sumer, 2013) mentions several
processes in which wave boundary layers are of great importance, e.g. turbulent mixing
of mass and momentum, frictional dissipation and sediment transport.
(Fredsøe &
Deigaard, 1992) elaborates on the influence of sediment transport by stating that in
non-breaking waves without any resulting current turbulence is restricted to the thin
boundary layer just above the bed. It is also in this region that shear stresses become
important, and have great influence on bringing sediment into suspension.
In connection with analysing wave boundary layers and sediment processes a number
of parameters are relevant to mention. Some of these will be presented briefly in the
following.
Firstly, the wave boundary layer thickness, δ1 for laminar flows is introduced.
The
parameter is also known as the Stokes length and is defined as
δ1 =
(2ν
ω
)1/2
(2.31)
An alternative definition of the wave boundary layer thickness, δ, is given as the distance
from the bed to where the velocity becomes maximum at the phase value ωt = 90◦.
δ = 3π
4 δ1
(2.32)
When dealing with rough boundary layers (Fredsøe & Deigaard, 1992) offers a third
definition of the boundary layer thickness, defined in terms of the roughness.
δ
kN
= 0.09
( a
kN
)0.82
(2.33)
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Wave boundary layer
15
where kN is the equivalent roughness of the bed, i.e. in this case kN is the diameter of
the cubic roughness elements.
A definition sketch showing the wave boundary layer thickness is given in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Definition sketch of wave boundary layer thickness from (Fredsøe & Deigaard,
1992, p. 18).
The magnitude of the bed shear stress is given as:
τm = ρ fw U 2
0m
2
(2.34)
where fw is the wave friction factor and U0m is the magnitude of free stream velocity.
One of the focus areas of the present work is direct measurements of flow induced
forces on objects on the sea bed. In light of this a second definition of the bed shear
stress is introduced.
τm = max(
∑N
j=1 Fin)
A
(2.35)
here max(Fin) is the maximum of the measured inline force, j denotes to number of
roughness elements and A is the area over which the force is applied.
Substituting
Equation (2.35) into (2.34) yields an expression for the friction factor which is a measure
of the resistance felt by the flow at the bottom due to friction.
fw = 2 τm
ρ U 2
0m
(2.36)
The bed shear stress can further be used to estimate the stability of the roughness
elements on the seabed. This is done by use of the Shields parameter which describes
the initiation of motion of sediment in a fluid flow. The parameter is defined as:
θ =
τ
(ρs −ρ)gD
(2.37)
here ρs is the density of the sediment. In this case the sediment is assumed as having
a density of 2650 kg/m3.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Theory
2.6
Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV)
Laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV) has been utilised in the present work to measure and
record velocity profiles in the flume by doing point-wise velocity measurements. LDV
is a particle based technique, meaning it depends on tracer particles in the flow. Some
advantages of this technique compared to more conventional probe based techniques
includes; non-intrusiveness, high spatial and temporal resolution and high accuracy.
As stated in (Tropea et al., 2007, p. 296-297) the basic principle of the LDV technique
invokes the Doppler effect twice. Once when the incident laser light, characterised by
the wavelength λb and frequency fb, impinges on a moving seeding particle. Subscript
b denotes beam.
The second time occurs when light with a frequency fp, subscript
p denoting particle, is scattered from the moving seeding particle and received by a
stationary detector fr, where subscript r denotes receiver. The relation between the
detected frequency of the scattered light and the beam frequency includes a term of
difference between direction of propagation of the incident and scattered waves. This
difference is directly proportional to the Doppler shift and the velocity of the particle.
To avoid resolving the Doppler shift directly the present study utilises a laser which
circumvents this necessity by using a dual-beam configuration. This approach creates a
measurement volume at the intersection of two incident waves, and detects the scattered
waves with a single receiver. A difference frequency, fD known as the Doppler frequency,
is established as the difference between the two scattered waves. This Doppler frequency
holds a direct link between the light intensity at the detector and the flow velocity.
LDV is a particle based technique meaning data will only be gathered when a particle
passes the laser beam. This also means that a LDV time series will contain irregularly
sampled, or non-equidistant, data. Direct estimation of flow field statistics from sampling
statistics will have to be done using a weighting technique.
The applied weighting
technique is presented in the following equations. Firstly the individual weight is defined
as
wi =
1
|−→u |
(2.38)
where u is the measured velocity.
The weighting technique will in the present work be used to estimate the mean of
the velocity component and the corresponding root-mean-squared-value (r.m.s-value).
Using the individual weight the mean is defined as
u =
∑N
i=1 uiwi
∑N
i=1 wi
(2.39)
Similarly the r.m.s-value will be given as
√
u2 =
(∑N
i=1 uiwi
∑N
i=1 wi
)1/2
(2.40)
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup presented in this thesis is designed to allow for investigation of
flow and forces around cubic roughness elements placed on the sea bed and exposed to
waves.
The experiment can be divided into two parts. The first part is concerned with LDV
measurements of free stream velocity and wave induced forces on three dimensional cu-
bic objects. This includes analyses of associated cube shielding and effects of sudden
change in roughness. The second part is a qualitative investigation i.e. visualisation of
the flow velocities and flow separation close to and around the cubes also using LDV
measurements. The experiments has been conducted in flume 1 in the hydraulic engi-
neering laboratory in building 114 at the Technical University of Denmark. Definition
sketches of the flume are shown in Figure 3.1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.1: Definition sketches of flume 1. (a) being a cross sectional view parallel to the
flow direction and (b) a cross sectional view transverse to the flow.
The part of the investigation concerned with force measurements is based upon the
second setup by Nielsen and Borup (2018). Here, cubes were placed in various grid
configurations and subsequently oscillated through still water using a carriage system.
In the experiment by Nielsen and Borup (2018) cubes of size D = 40 mm placed with
a gap ratio of 1.0 was used. For the present study the setup has been modified such
that the cubes can be placed on the bottom of the flume and the oscillatory motion
will be achieved by applying real waves. The experiment will consist of different grid
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Experimental Setup
configurations of cubes covering a range of KC numbers of roughly 4 to 20. Initiation
of vortex shedding is known to occur for KC > 7 as stated in 2.1. Considering that
the roughness elements in question has sharp corners the vortex shedding might occur
earlier. Likewise for the transverse force which for circular cross-sections are initiated
at KC ≈4.
The flume used in the experiments was a wave flume with dimensions of 0.6×0.8×25
m. Approximately in the middle of the flume a trench is located where the experiments
has been performed. The trench is covered by a false bottom attached to a frame as
shown in Figure 3.1a and allows for measuring equipment such as cables to pass through
the flume bed. This is desired as the cables should not influence the flow around the
cubes.
The waves are generated by a hydraulic piston wave maker run by the Wave Syn-
thesizer version 2.30 software by DHI. The hydraulic wave generator is placed at one
end and at the other end, flume 1 is equipped with a passive wave energy absorption
mechanism in the shape of an artificial beach, see Figure 3.2. The artificial beach imi-
tates the absorption effect seen naturally when waves impinge on a real beach to reduce
reflection. It is approximately 2.5 metres long and has been found to be most effective
when the back edge is located at mean water level (MWL). Further photographs of the
experimental setup can be found in Appendix J.
Figure 3.2: Artificial beach installed in flume 1 for absorption of wave energy.
Table 3.1 indicates parameters concerning the flume which have been held constant
throughout the experiments unless stated otherwise.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Experimental model
19
Table 3.1: Parameters held constant throughout the experiments.
Water
Water
Gravitational
Kinematic
depth, h
density, ρ
acceleration, g
viscosity, ν
[m]
[kg/m3]
[m/s2]
[m2/s]
0.40
1025
9.81
10−6
3.1
Experimental model
The experimental model is based on the second setup by (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) as pre-
viously stated. The present model consist of a series of plates made from polycarbonate
(PC), which makes it possible to attach measuring devices in multiple grid configura-
tions. Detail drawings of the PC-plates are presented in Appendix C.0.1. A varying
number of hollow cubes - also made of polycarbonate - can be mounted on the plates.
A maximum of 36 cubes can be mounted on one plate at a time, consisting of 9 cubes
containing strain gauge load cells (LC) and 27 empty cubes, referred to as dummy cubes.
The cubes has been produced in two sizes. The ones containing load cells are shown
in Figure 3.3. The first kind measures D = 30 mm while the second kind measures
D = 40 mm. The smaller size cubes allow for investigation at higher KC numbers than
possible with D = 40 mm cubes. Dummy cubes, cubes containing load cells, plates and
means of attaching the cubes on the plates have been manufactured specifically for this
experiment or have been reused from the experiment by (Nielsen & Borup, 2018). Detail
drawings for both the 40 mm and 30 mm cubes can be found in Appendix C.
Figure 3.3: The two types of load cell housing cubes in size D = 30 mm and D = 40 mm.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Experimental Setup
3.1.1
Grid configurations
Six different grid configurations have been used in the experimental investigation. Figure
3.4 shows the different setups and how these can be varied through the cube size D and
the gap between cubes d.
Figure 3.4: The layout of the six grid configurations used in the experimental investigation.
The first configuration involves a single cube. This setup is used for model validation
and as a reference throughout the project. For the following three configurations: 3×3,
6×5 and 6×6, the amount of cubes in the setup is varied with the cubes aligned in
both the x and y direction. The purpose of varying the number of cubes is to allow
investigation of different effects, such as edge effects and shielding effects. For the last two
grid configurations every second column has been offset in the y direction by D/2. This
makes it possible to investigate the effect of partial shielding. An experiment overview
for the force measurements, containing details and variations of the six configurations
can be found in Table 3.2.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Experimental model
21
Table 3.2: Experiment overview concerning in-line and transverse force measurements. The
grid configuration is given as x × y following the notation on Figure 3.4. The plate no. refers
to the numbering given in Appendix C.0.1.
Grid configuration
Cube size D
Spacing d
Gap ratio d/D
Plate no.
[mm]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
1×1
(reference)
30
-
-
-
40
-
-
-
3×3
30
15
0.5
2
30
30
1.0
1
40
20
0.5
1
40
40
1.0
3
6×5
30
15
0.5
2
30
30
1.0
1
40
20
0.5
1
40
40
1.0
3
6×6
30
15
0.5
2
30
30
1.0
1
40
20
0.5
1
40
40
1.0
3
3×3 (offset)
40
20
0.5
1
6×6 (offset)
40
20
0.5
1
3.1.2
Model scaling
The test objects in the present work are cubes of diameter D = 40 mm and D = 30 mm.
These cubes are placed on the bottom of a wave flume with a MWL of h = 0.40 m and
subjected to waves. The wave height varies between approximately H = 0.07 m and
H = 0.20 m, see Section 3.2 for wave parameters. In order to relate this experimental
model setup to real life conditions a brief scaling example is presented.
The water depth in the flume is assumed to represent an area at the danish west coast
with a depth of 10 metres. The test elements, i.e. the large and small diameter cubes,
would then represent stones with diameters of D = 1 m and D = 0.8 m, respectively.
This is not unrealistically large if comparing with stones found in armour layers of coastal
protection structures. An example of such an armour stone is the Cubipod1 which can
easily have a diameter of 1 metre. The size of the waves generated in the flume would
in this scenario correspond to wave heights ranging between H = 1.75 m and H = 5 m.
1http://www.cubipod.com/en
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Experimental Setup
3.2
Waves
Throughout the duration of the project the experimental model has been subjected to
wave loads generated with a hydraulic piston wave maker. In flume 1 the wave generator
is in the form of a flat PVC paddle which is oscillated by a hydraulic piston system.
Figure 3.5 shows the wave generator. The hydraulic piston system is connected to a
computer running DHI’s Wave Synthesizer version 2.30. This program enables the user
to generate a wide variety of waves, both regular and irregular. In the current study the
waves generated by the wave maker are regular waves defined by two input parameters:
the wave height and period.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: Hydraulic piston wave maker installed in flume 1 (building 114 at DTU).
The generated waves are controlled and validated using a series of wave gauges. A
wave gauge measures the displacement of the surface elevation from a set zero value.
The piston output is not necessarily the same as the input in the Wave Synthesizer
program. Wave gauges are used to control that the height and period correspond with
what is desired. Furthermore they are used to determine the amount of reflection in the
flume. Reflection along with calibration and location of the wave gauges are described
in Section 3.3.1.
Four different waves have been applied in the experimental work, thus providing
a range of KC numbers between 4 and 20 depending on the cube size.
The wave
parameters are presented in Table 3.3, with input parameters (entered into the Wave
Synthesizer program) and approximate output parameters (measured by wave gauges in
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Waves
23
the flume). The output parameters are subject to some variation and are represented
by approximate values of what is expected. Appendix F and G holds a comprehensive
documentation of the wave parameters achieved in the experiments.
The variability in waves with identical input parameters is likely linked to: reflection
in the flume, slight variation in mean water level and a given margin of error in the wave
maker.
Table 3.3: Overview of wave parameters used in the experimental work. Subscript in denotes
input, out denotes output while subscript 30 and 40 denotes cube D = 30 mm and D = 40
mm, respectively. Note that all values aside from inputs, are approximate.
Tin
Hin
Tout
Hout
KC30
KC40
Re30
Re40
Um
βR
[s]
[m]
[s]
[m]
[-]
[-]
[-]×103
[-]×103
[m/s]
[%]
Wave 1
1.4
0.080
1.4
0.070
5
4
3.5
4.5
0.11
4
Wave 2
1.5
0.130
1.5
0.115
11
8
6.5
9
0.22
7.5
Wave 3
1.6
0.175
1.6
0.150
15
11
8.5
11
0.28
6
Wave 4
1.7
0.210
1.7
0.180
20
15
11
14.5
0.36
3
The applied waves have been noted to become increasingly non-linear as these in-
crease in wave height, as well as period, from Wave 1 through 4. It is therefore of interest
to determine how non-linear they are. This is achieved by plotting the four waves onto a
theory applicability chart such as the one seen in Figure 2.4. Figure 3.6 shows the waves
on said chart and supports the claim that the waves become increasingly non-linear, the
smallest being a Stokes 2nd order wave and the largest being a Cnoidal wave.
Figure 3.6: Wave theory applicability for Wave 1-4.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Experimental Setup
The wave maker is set to generate 1st order waves, which is clearly not the reality.
A reason for this could be that the input parameters does not correspond to a 1st order
wave, i.e. the wave height to period ratio is too large. The effect of increasing degree
of non-linearity in terms of the Ursell number, given in Equation 2.24, is investigated
further in Section 5.2.
It should be mentioned that throughout the experiment, the horizontal velocity is
measured directly using LDV, and all relevant parameters are calculated from this.
3.2.1
Convergence of waves
When initiated the wave maker has a warm up period where the wave heights will
vary. For this reason a convergence analysis of the wave height measured in the flume is
performed. This is done to establish the time needed before a steady level in wave height
is reached. The wave heights measured during the analysis are presented in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Wave heights measured for each wave in the flume during the wave convergence
test. In the plot a marker is plotted for every 10th wave.
The intention of the convergence analysis is to identify a steady level after which force
measurements can can be used. To ease the process the evolution of mean wave height
and the standard deviation is estimated for each wave type. In the calculation of the
statistical parameters the procedure has been to first calculate the mean and standard
deviation for n = 1...end secondly from n = 2...end and so forth. This method was
chosen to highlight at which point measurements could be used without further change
in wave heights. The statistical parameters are presented in Figure 3.8.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Measuring equipment
25
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: (a) Mean wave height as a function of no. of periods and (b) evolution of standard
deviation for Wave 1-4. In the plots a marker is plotted for every 20th data point.
Figure 3.8a shows the evolution in the mean wave height measured in the flume
for the four waves used in the experimental work, respectively. It is observed that the
waves appear steady throughout the time series. Figure 3.8b details the evolution in
standard deviation. Here more variation can be seen. Note that the standard deviation
is presented in millimetres and the mean wave height in metres. Based on Figure 3.8
it is chosen to work with a ”warm-up period” of 10 minutes before utilising recorded
data. This corresponds to a minimum of between 350-430 periods, depending on the
wave period.
This ”warm-up period” further allows for a steady level in force measurements to be
reached, as data will be gathered throughout 15.5 minutes, though only data recorded
after the 10 minute mark is analysed.
3.3
Measuring equipment
The following section will describe the measuring equipment and the techniques used for
gathering and evaluating data in the experimental work. During different phases of the
project different equipment has been used. The force measurements require load cells
and recording equipment for these, while the velocity measurements require the use of
a LDV system. Throughout the project wave gauges have been used in the flume to
monitor the waves.
A detailed description of load cells, wave gauges and the LDV system is given. Besides
these elements a number of instruments from National Instruments (NI) has been utilised.
The load cell data signal ran through NI 9949 RJ 50 ScrewTerminal to a strain gauge
module. Wave gauge data ran through a similar wave gauge module. Both signals were
passed through a NI output terminal (NI USB-6218 BNC) before being recorded in NI’s
LabVIEW Data Acquisition (DAQ) software. All wave gauge and load cell measurements
are conducted using a sampling frequency of 120 Hz.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Experimental Setup
3.3.1
Wave gauges
As previously stated the test cubes have been exposed to a series of regular waves
generated by a hydraulic piston wave maker. Since the precision of the output, i.e. the
waves, of the wave maker does not correspond 1:1 with the input to the wave generation
program it is necessary to monitor the waves. This is done using a series of wave gauges.
Conventional resistance type wave gauges was used to measure the surface elevation in
the flume during experiments. In total six wave gauges has been used to record data
regarding the surface elevation during the experiments. The positioning of the wave
gauges in the flume is shown in Figure 3.9.
Figure 3.9: Principal sketch showing positions of wave gauges in unit [mm]. The blue line
indicates MWL.
During force measurements wave gauge 1 has primarily been used for controlling
the wave height, as it is located above the cubes. Wave gauge 2-5 have been used for
calculation of the reflection coefficient, while wave gauge 0 is used to control the wave
height during velocity measurements.
The wave gauges needs to be calibrated before use to ensure a linear relation between
the recorded voltage signal and the actual surface elevation. In the calibration process
the water level in the flume is kept constant. The wave gauges are then set in different
positions in the water column by pulling on the rod of the wave gauge. The voltage
output in each calibration position is recorded and using linear regression a calibration
expression is created for each wave gauge. The calibration is performed at the beginning
of every measuring sequence.
An example of recorded data and corresponding linear regression can be seen in
Figure 3.10.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Measuring equipment
27
Figure 3.10: Example of calibration curve for wave gauges.
For further information on the calibration procedure for the wave gauges and cali-
bration results see Appendix D.2.
Besides controlling the wave height the wave gauges are also used to determine the
reflection coefficient between the incoming and reflected wave in the flume. A reflection
coefficient as low as possible is desired in order to achieve results that closely resem-
ble real life conditions. Wave gauge 2-5 have been used in determining the reflection
coefficient by establishing an over-determined set of equations as described in Section
2.4.3. In the present analysis two harmonic components have been used in the over-
determined set of equations. As seen in Figure 3.9 the horizontal spacing between the
wave gauges is not the same. The reason for this is to avoid the possibility of nodes of
standing waves to coincide with the position of multiple wave gauges, which would lead
to an ill-conditioned system of equations and therefore poor accuracy in estimating the
reflection.
3.3.2
Load cells
The force measurements have been performed using Phidgets RB-Phi-117 load cells,
with a measuring capacity of 0.780 kg. The Phidgets load cells measure 45×9.3×6 mm
and are installed in test cubes and subsequently mounted to the test plates as illustrated
in Appendix C.
To establish the linear relation between the recorded voltage output and the actual
applied forces a calibration procedure is performed on each of the utilised load cells.
Figure 3.11 shows a definition sketch for the setup used in calibration of the load cells.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Experimental Setup
Figure 3.11: Principal sketch showing the setup used for load cell calibration.
The process of calibrating the load cells is to progressively apply an increasing loading
and relate this to the recorded voltage signal. Each calibration measurement is five
minutes long, where the first 30 seconds of each minute are reserved for adding weight
and the last 30 seconds are used for recording an undisturbed voltage signal at the
given load. Using linear regression on the measured calibration data yields a calibration
expression for each load cell used in calculating the force experienced during testing.
Figure 3.12 shows an example of the measured calibration data for the nine load cells.
Figure 3.12: Example of a calibration curve for the nine LCs used in the experiments.
A more comprehensive explanation of the calibration procedure and calibration re-
sults is reported in Appendix D.1.
The Phidget load cells are manufactured with approximately 0.2 m of wire.
To
prepare the load cells for use in the test flume the wires have been elongated and wa-
terproofed. Throughout the experiment trouble have occasionally arisen in connection
with load cells malfunctioning. Each time a new load cell has been put into use the
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Measuring equipment
29
wires have been elongated and waterproofed, and the load cell calibrated. The method
can be found in Appendix B.
3.3.2.1
Eigenfrequency analysis
An investigation of the eigenfrequency of the experimental setup has been performed for
both cube sizes. The investigation method is a Hammer test. Details concerning the
Hammer test can be found in Appendix E.
The Hammer test is performed in order to verify that the eigenfrequency does not
coincide with the frequency of the oscillatory motions (waves) used in the experimental
work. The waves analysed have a period ranging between 1.4 and 1.7 s. The majority of
wave energy is therefore expected to lie at frequencies below 1 Hz. The power spectra
found for the D = 30 mm cube and D = 40 mm cube can be seen in Figure 3.13a and
3.13b respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: (a) Power spectrum for 30×30×30 mm cube setup based upon the Hammer
test and (b) power spectrum for 40×40×40 mm cube setup based upon the Hammer test.
As seen in the figures above the small cube setup has an eigenfrequency of approx-
imately 190 Hz while the larger cube has an eigenfrequency of approximately 185 Hz.
Both cubes lie well above the range in which the majority of the wave energy is expected
to be found. The eigenfrequency analysis is shown in Appendix E.
3.3.3
LDV
Velocity profiles and reference free stream velocities in the flume has been measured
using a two-component Dantec laser-Doppler velocimeter (LDV). The LDV system from
Dantec is a DopplerLite DPSS laser system with a two-colour high-performance fibre-
optic system using a 60×11 fibre-optic probe head. The laser produces two beams with
wave lengths of λ = 532 and λ = 561 nm and run in back-scatter mode using two burst
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Experimental Setup
spectrum analysers (BSA). The output power of the laser beams are 500 mW, which
is reduced first through a splitter, secondly through a fibre-optic cable to 170 mW at
the probe head. Photos of the laser system used can be found in Appendix J, while a
principal sketch of the probe head at the test section can be seen in Figure 3.14a. In
addition the figure shows an example of a measurement section above the centre-line of
two cubes when performing flow velocity measurements.
Measurements have been recorded using Dantec Dynamics BSA flow software v5.02.
In order to match the velocity measurements in time with other relevant data an analogue
connection was made to WG0 using a splitter at the signal amplifier and recorded in the
BSA software.
The LDV measurement method is as mentioned in Section 2.6 a particle based
method. In order to sustain a reasonable data rate in the measurement process seeding
particles were added to the flow. The seeding particles used in the present work was
Polyamid Seeding Particles (PSP) with diameter of 5 µm. The PSP powder was dis-
solved in rubbing alcohol before being added to the flume. This is done to remove some
of the surface tension on the powder allowing it to dissolve in the water column instead
of floating.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.14:
(a) a definition sketch of the probe head and mount and (b) example of
measurement section above cubes for LDV velocity measurements.
3.3.3.1
Convergence of velocity measurements
In order to investigate the velocity distribution over the depth and create vertical velocity
profiles, measurements have as mentioned been performed with a LDV system. Before
conducting the experiments a convergence analysis of the velocity has been performed
by estimating some statistical values. In Section 3.2.1 it is mentioned that the waves
are allowed to converge over a period of 10 minutes before force data is acquired. The
same start time has been adopted in regards to velocity measurements.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Measuring equipment
31
LDV is a point wise measuring method meaning that in the creation of the velocity
profiles between 120-160 individual points are tested. The convergence analysis is used to
establish the measuring time required in each point to achieve consistent results. Seven
measuring points in a 3×3 cube setup, with D = 40 mm and d/D = 1.0, have been
chosen to be representative of the profiles. Wave no. 3 was generated and data was
gathered in the seven points for 120 periods. The seven points are indicated in Figure
3.15
Figure 3.15: Sketch showing the positions of the seven representative points utilised in the
convergence analysis. D = 40 mm.
The mean and root mean square (r.m.s) value of the two velocity components, i.e. in
the z- and x-direction, measured in each point is estimated using Equations (2.38)-(2.40).
Figure 3.16 holds the evolution of the mean for the two velocity components over
120 periods. Figure 3.17 shows the same evolution of the r.m.s-value.
Based upon the evolution seen in Figure 3.16 and 3.17 it has been decided to measure
for a duration of 65 periods, as illustrated with the vertical line in the two plots. A couple
of flow features in the x-direction can also be identified from Figure 3.16a. Point 1-2
both show a negative mean velocity. This mean current in the negative x-direction will
probably be generated as a counterbalance to the Stokes drift seen in the top of the
water column. Secondly a positive mean velocity is seen right in front of the cube, i.e.
in point 6. This can be explained by the sheltering effect caused by the nearby presence
of the cube. Similarly a few features can be identified for the z-direction. For points 1-4
and 6 a zero mean velocity is found, not unexpected, in the vertical direction. However
a negative mean is found at P5 indicating a down-flow over a wave period at the top
edges of the cube. Simultaneously a positive mean is found at P7, i.e. an up-flow, which
could be expected in order to have conservation of mass between the two cubes.
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Experimental Setup
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.16: Mean value for the two velocity components measured. u being the horizontal
component and w the vertical component.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.17: r.m.s-value for the two velocity components measured. u being the horizontal
component and w the vertical component.
Similarly as for the estimated means, the chosen test duration of 65 periods is il-
lustrated by the vertical line in Figure 3.17. For the w-component of the velocity a
relatively large jump is seen in P4 after the cut-off time. P4 is placed at the centre-
line, 2 mm above the cube. At this location it could be expected to see some coherent
structures passing or forming and subsequently momentarily effecting the r.m.s-value,
before it moves towards a converged value again. For this reason it is not expected to
significantly change the results of the velocity profiles, why the cut-off time at 65 periods
is maintained.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Data processing
In this chapter the most important aspects of the data processing will be highlighted.
It has to be noted that the data collected in the experiments, are acquired through
several kinds of software and simultaneously on multiple computers located relatively
far from each other. A large part of the data processing has therefore been concerned
with matching the relevant time series in phase or time. The data processing steps are
presented in the same order as they have been performed.
4.1
Data filtering
All data acquired through the DAQ software - such as surface elevation measured by
wave gauges and force signals measured by strain gauge load cells - contain varying
amounts of noise. To achieve a signal which can be used for further processing data
filtering is applied. In this case a low-pass Hamming filter has been utilised, based on
the formulae found in (Smith, 1997). The Hamming filter is a bell shaped window-sized
filter where the amplitude of frequencies below a certain cut-off frequency fc is unity
and the above frequencies are zero. The Hamming filter includes a band of transition
located at fc where the frequency amplitude increases gradually from zero to unity.
Four waves of varying height and period are generated, see Table 3.3. They are all
non-linear to a degree but most pronounced in the largest waves, having a high steep
crest and flat low trough. For these waves it is important to specify the cut-off frequency
such that no relevant information concerning the wave is being removed by the filter.
To determine the cut-off frequency a power spectrum analysis is performed using Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT), where a time series is broken down into its corresponding
frequency components. Figure 4.1 shows the in-line power spectrum corresponding to a
single cube subjected to the largest and most non-linear wave, i.e. Wave 4.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Data processing
Figure 4.1: In-line power spectrum corresponding to a single cube subjected to Wave 4. (Left)
shows the full magnitude of the spectrum and (right) shows a zoom on the spectrum.
The power of the wave is known to be located at low frequencies, and looking at
Figure 4.1, the majority of the power is located at approximately 0.6 Hz. A cut-off
frequency fc,inline of 9 Hz appears to contain all relevant information about the wave
induced force.
A corresponding power spectrum for the transverse force can be seen in Figure 4.2,
the majority of the power is still located at 0.6 Hz. In this case a cut-off frequency of 9 Hz
seems excessive. Also, the transverse force is significantly smaller than the in-line force
making the signal more sensitive to noise, i.e. a poor signal-to-noise ratio. Therefore a
different cut-off frequency of fc,transverse = 6 Hz is applied when dealing with transverse
force time series.
Figure 4.2: Transverse power spectrum corresponding to a single cube subjected to Wave 4.
(Left) shows the full magnitude of the spectrum and (right) shows a zoom on the spectrum.
During the measuring campaign several problems arose concerning the load cells
- the biggest being insufficient waterproofing leading to breakage.
Another problem
was concerned with the signals drifting during measurements.
This signal drift has
been accounted for by applying an additional low-pass Hamming filter with a cut-off
frequency fc,l = 0.1 Hz. This filter only keeps the trend of the signal and can thus be
used to remove the drift by subtracting the lower filtered signal from the upper filtered
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Data filtering
35
signal. The effect of this adjustment on an entire in-line and transverse force time series
can be seen in Figure 4.3 and 4.4.
Figure 4.3: In-line force time series for a single cube of size D = 40 mm subjected to Wave
4, showing the effect of using two low-pass filters.
The figures illustrates an example of how all data has been processed. For the in-
line force the effect is most obvious in the first 100 seconds. The effect is slightly more
pronounced for the transverse force, noting that the magnitude of the transverse force is
notably smaller and therefore more susceptible to noise. Appendix E.3 includes examples
of the effect of the Hamming filter in the frequency domain.
Figure 4.4: Transverse force time series for a single cube of size D = 40 mm subjected to
Wave 4, showing the effect of using two low-pass filters.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Data processing
4.2
Reference velocity
One challenge concerning acquisition of data is how to measure the undisturbed hori-
zontal free stream velocity Um close to the bed of the flume. Though quite accurate,
the LDV measuring equipment has limitations in terms of placement. Firstly, the LDV
probe is mounted on a frame which takes up quite a lot of space and does not yield
much in terms of flexibility. The frame is illustrated in Figure 3.14a. Secondly, the
point of measuring is found 30 cm from the LDV probe. This point should be located
approximately in the middle of the 60 cm flume, why the probe is to be placed as close to
the flume as possible. Thirdly, though the waves are assumed to be regular and similar
everywhere in the flume, this is not actually the case. The point of interest is above
and around the examined cubes and the velocity should therefore be measured at this
location.
A solution to this could be to measure the velocity above the cubes at a distance
where these would not disturb the flow.
The velocity profile under waves has been
touched upon in Section 2.4. The velocity does not change linearly over the depth and
it can therefore be uncertain to relate the velocity at the bottom to a velocity measured
at e.g. z = h/2. Thus, the undisturbed free stream velocity is measured below WG1 at
approximately 3.5 cm above the bed and with no cubes attached to the bottom.
Five velocity measurements has been performed for each of the four waves used in
the experiment. Each measurement includes a velocity time series measured with LDV,
as well as a corresponding time series for the surface elevation measured through an
analogue output connected to WG1 located directly above the measuring point. Simul-
taneously a similar time series of the surface elevation for WG1 is measured in the DAQ
software. The two surface elevation time series are two outputs of the same signal and
provides a clear connection between measurements, when matching the signals. Figure
4.5 shows a small section of the five velocity and corresponding surface elevation mea-
surements for Wave 3. The black dashed line on Figure 4.5a indicates the averaged
time series which from here on will be referred to as the reference velocity uref. The
waves generated by the wave maker is not perfectly similar in each experiment. Thus it
is argued that an average velocity can be used for all waves generated. Of course five
samples is not enough to achieve a statistically independent average, but in this case it
has been deemed acceptable.
Similarly, an average has been found for the two surface elevation time series. Figure
4.5b shows one of these, namely the surface elevation output from the BSA flow software,
which corresponds to the velocity measurements in time.
Interesting to note from Figure 4.5 is that the velocity signal more closely resembles
a 1st order wave, even though the Wave 3 is grouped as 3rd order, see the theory applica-
bility chart in Figure 3.6. Clearly the velocity at the bottom does not feel the effect of
3rd order theory to the same degree as the surface elevation. This is expected as higher
order wave components become decreasingly important for the velocity with increasing
depth.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Data sorting
37
Figure 4.5:
Times series of the five measurements (
) used to determine the reference
velocity and surface elevation (
) for Wave 3. (a) shows the measured horizontal velocity
from the BSA Flow software and (b) shows the output of the surface elevation at WG1 from
the BSA Flow software.
There is a certain variation in the wave generation and it is necessary to ensure that
the reference velocity fits well with every generated wave. The two surface elevation time
series corresponding to the velocity, are compared with the surface elevation time series
for the particular experiment being processed. From these a mean wave height HWG1
and a corresponding mean reference wave height HWG1,ref can be determined.
The
difference in mean wave height in percentage is multiplied with the reference velocity
profile, yielding a corresponding undisturbed free stream velocity for each experiment:
u = uref
(
1 + HWG1 −HWG1,ref
HWG1
)
(4.1)
4.3
Data sorting
In Section 3.2.1 it was found that it takes approximately 10 minutes for the waves
to converge in the flume, why each experiment has a duration of 15.5 minutes. It is
important to only use the data collected after the waves are converged. The data has
therefore been sorted such that the interval t = [930 −105T : 930] seconds is the part of
the time series used for further processing.
Another part of the data sorting is concerned with aligning the corresponding in-
dependent time series. All alignment of time series is done by matching the surface
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Data processing
elevation time series from the reference velocity with the one corresponding to the force
measurement. This step is extremely important when determining the force coefficients
CD and CM. These are calculated based on the velocity, see Section 2.3. The value of
the force coefficients are therefore very sensitive to a phase shift between the force and
the velocity. Figure 4.6 shows how the surface elevation time series have been aligned
for the four waves. For Wave 1 and 2 the time series are aligned very well. Wave 3 and
4 are more non-linear and the variation in wave parameters are greater. Having this in
mind the fit is quite good. How well the time series are aligned, especially for Wave 3
and 4, are dependent on the generated wave and whether the shape of the generated
wave matches the one corresponding to the reference velocity.
Figure 4.6: Alignment of surface elevation time series for Wave 1-4. (
) ηWG1: Correspond-
ing to force time series (DAQ), (
) ηWG1: Corresponding to velocity time series (BSA Flow
Software) and (
) ηWG1: Corresponding to velocity time series (DAQ).
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Displacement of force signals
39
4.4
Displacement of force signals
As described in the section above, the velocity time series is directly linked with the
surface elevation time series. This means that ideally every load cell should be placed
directly under a wave gauge to measure the surface elevation at that exact location. This
is not possible having configurations of up to nine cubes standing in close proximity of
each other. Transverse to the flow the cubes will in every configuration be placed in
three rows, not considering the 1×1 configuration, which only contains a single cube.
Here it is assumed that the waves do not vary in the transverse direction.
The first row is located under WG1, and utilising the corresponding surface elevation
time series from WG1 and WG0 located as shown on Figure 3.9 it is possible to determine
the time it takes the wave crest to travel between the wave gauges. Following Equation
(4.3), the remaining rows of cubes can then be displaced in time to also ”stand” below
WG1.
tdisp = xrow · tHmax,WG0 −tHmax,WG1
xWG0 −xWG1
(4.2)
Frow,disp(t) = Frow(t −tdisp)
(4.3)
here xrow is the location of a row of cubes and xWG is the location of the wave gauges
from a designated x = 0. tHmax,WG denotes the time corresponding to the maximum
wave height measured by a wave gauge, considering only the last period of the time
series. It is important to use two corresponding periods or the force time series would
be displaced too far. Frow,disp(t) is the force time series displaced in time.
Figure 4.7 shows the effect of displacing force time series.
Figure 4.7: Ensemble average over 100 periods showing how the effect of displacing the force
time series to match WG1, as well as the normalised velocity.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Data processing
4.5
Phase averaging: Velocity
measurements for flow visualisation
LDV data is non-equidistant and the data rate in tests is of varying quality. A technique
of phase-averaging, inspired by (Kruse & Wagner, 1998), has therefore been adopted in
the present work. The technique uses slots in time to estimate the amplitude and phase
of the oscillations in the flow investigated. The advantage of this method is that data
gaps in one period are likely to be filled with data from another.
The technique is
sketched as a fictive example in three steps, see Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Sketch detailing the process of phase averaging. (•) indicates data points, (
)
the real wave and (■) the slot averages.
In the first step on Figure 4.8 the time series of measured data is visualised next to
a time series of the desired oscillation. The second step in the technique is to divide
the time series into periods and subsequently placing these periods on-top of each other.
Finally this is divided into slots which then holds a given number of data points. Based
upon a slot average for each slot the oscillatory motion measured in tests is defined for
a single period.
In this project 65 periods have been used in the phase-averaging, as described in
Section 3.3.3.1. These have been divided into 31 slots, which yields varying time steps
depending on the period.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental Validation
The following chapter holds a description of the validation process of the experimental
setup. A discussion and comparison of the reference experiments in a 1 × 1 cube setup
with relevant literature will be presented. Additionally an examination of the generated
waves in terms of applicability range and the effect hereof is provided.
5.1
Physical model
Before initiating the main part of the measuring campaign it is critical to validate the
physical model used. The validation should both ensure that the load cells measure the
correct forces during experiments but also that the results achieved reflects real-life con-
ditions. Firstly it is desired to evaluate whether or not the waves generated in the flume
will result in a loading comparable to that from known literature. Secondly a number
of factors could compromise the force measurements and lead to incorrect results, e.g.
when assembling test cubes internal forces could change the load cell calibration curve.
The validation will function as a safety check of the chosen assembly and installation of
the physical model not having an effect on load cell performance.
5.1.1
Reference experiments
The validation process for the force measurements and the physical model, including
the load cells, cube behaviour and wave generation, consists of a series of 1×1 cube
reference experiments. The experiments were performed for both cube sizes and for
all four test waves, generating eight reference data points to be compared with known
literature. The reference experiments were performed two times in the in-line direction
to allow for an estimation of the variability of results from the flume tests. Figure 5.1
defines the orientation of the coordinate system, positive force direction and the position
of the 1×1 cube setup.
The output from the reference results, i.e. the force measurements, will be analysed
and used to calculate force coefficients, CD and CM. It is these force coefficients which
will be compared to known literature and form the basis of validation. Tables containing
the actual experimental parameters can be found in Appendix F.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Experimental Validation
Figure 5.1: Definition sketch for the reference experiments.
5.1.2
Validation of force coefficients CD and CM
The drag and inertia coefficient is calculated using the method of least squares as pre-
sented in Section 2.3. The determined drag and inertia coefficients are compared with
known literature in Figure 5.2 and 5.3 respectively. In the two figures the results from
the present work are compared with experimental results from (Nielsen & Borup, 2018)
and (Li, 1989).
Figure 5.2 shows a general good correspondence between the present experimental
data and results from (Nielsen & Borup, 2018). It is noted that the data from both ex-
perimental works finds drag coefficients slightly higher than those reported by (Li, 1989).
An explanation to this tendency could be that (Li, 1989) analysed free hanging cubes,
allowing for flow to pass around cubes in all directions, thereby reducing the total drag.
The data from the present study exhibits some deviation from the expected curve. Fur-
ther it shows a varying degree of variability for the two rounds of reference experiments.
It is expected that these deviations are caused by imperfections in the method of aligning
velocity data to force measurements from two separate runs in addition to variation in
wave shape and reflection effects. For KC > 14 the present data more closely represents
the data from (Li, 1989). This is unexpected due to the difference between setups as
previously mentioned, and indicates that drag perhaps is slightly underestimated by the
physical model used in the present work.
Figure 5.3 shows the inertia coefficient determined from the reference experiments.
Again a very good correspondence between the evolution in inertia coefficient as a func-
tion of KC number is seen between the present work and that of known literature. Again
data from the present work shows a degree of variability, both from the expected curve
and between the two rounds of tests.
Additionally it is noted from Figure 5.3 that the overlapping KC numbers for two
different cubes sizes results in similar inertia coefficients. This observation supports the
argument that the force coefficients in the present work is not in fact a function of the
Reynolds number.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Physical model
43
Figure 5.2: Drag coefficient CD for a single cube of size D = 30 mm and D = 40 mm,
comparison with the experimental work of (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) and (Li, 1989).
Figure 5.3: Inertia coefficient CM for a single cube of size D = 30 mm and D = 40 mm,
comparison with the experimental work of (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) and (Li, 1989).
The overall performance of the physical model in the present work is deemed satisfac-
tory. The reference experiments follow a similar tendency as those seen both in (Nielsen
& Borup, 2018) and (Li, 1989). Especially the correspondence seen between the present
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Experimental Validation
work and (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) is satisfactory. The deviation seen as an increase in
values compared to (Li, 1989) could be expected as that work considers a free hanging
cube. Keeping this in mind the physical model is verified.
5.1.3
Force reference
Part of the objective of the present work is to investigate the effect of gap ratio, edge
effects and alignment on force measurements. For this reason it is highly important that
the force impact on a single test element is understood. The force measurements in both
the in-line and transverse direction will be presented in the following.
When increasing the size of the wave from Wave 1 through Wave 4 a corresponding
increase in the force experienced by the cube is expected. Also, by reducing the cube
size from D = 40 mm to D = 30 mm, the magnitude of the force should be reduced
accordingly. This is clearly illustrated in Figure 5.4 where the force time series for the
four waves and the two cube sizes are presented. Another effect of reducing the cube
size is an increase in the KC number, in case of Wave 4, from roughly KC = 15 to
KC = 20. Figure 5.5 presents the ensemble average of the in-line force for a single
Figure 5.4: In-line force time series for a single cube subjected to Wave 1-4. (
) indicates
D = 40 mm cubes and (
) indicates D = 30 mm.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Physical model
45
cube of D = 40 mm and D = 30 mm, respectively, compared to the normalised velocity.
Correspondingly, Figure 5.6 presents the ensemble average of the transverse force. It
should also be noted that Um used to normalise the velocity is found as a weighted
maximum due to the non-linearity of the waves. Thus, the positive part of the non-
dimensional velocity is slightly larger than 1 and the negative part slightly smaller than
1, due to the crest being narrower than the trough.
The in-line force is observed to follow the acceleration - first derivative of the velocity
- thus peaking approximately around flow reversal. It is noted that the peak for D = 30
mm is more skewed towards the right. This is caused by the increase in KC number
when reducing the size of the cube. From (Sumer & Fredsøe, 2006) it is known that
for large KC numbers the in-line force is more drag dominated than at smaller KC
numbers, thus delaying the force in regards to the acceleration.
Figure 5.5: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force on a single cube subjected
to Wave 4. (
) indicates the in-line force and (
) the normalised velocity.
Figure 5.6:
Ensemble average over 100 periods of the transverse force on a single cube
subjected to Wave 4. (
) indicates the in-line force and (
) the normalised velocity.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Experimental Validation
Transverse forces are induced by vortex shedding and the amount of vortices being
shed increase with increasing KC. From figure 5.6 it is observed that for both cube
sizes two distinct peaks are present in the first half period, suggesting a pair of vortices
being shed. This is not seen quite as clearly in the second half period, perhaps because
the velocity is smaller under the trough compared to the crest.
5.2
Ursell dependency
The waves generated by the hydraulic piston wave maker become increasingly non-linear
with increasing wave height as described in Section 3.2 and shown in Figure 3.6. For this
reason the force coefficients’ dependency on the Ursell number versus the dependency
on KC number is of interest. An experimental matrix covering different Ur and KC
numbers have been generated and explored. The principle behind the experiment is to
calculate the inertia coefficient, CM, based upon measurements for three different Ursell
numbers and overlapping KC numbers. Hopefully the overlap in KC number will reveal
any dependency upon the Ursell number. The achievable precision in the flume is limited
by a number of factors. For one, the water depth is controlled by eye, secondly the exact
wave height generated and measured is subjected to variation. Therefore, the Ursell
numbers are are defined as groups of ±10%. The three Ursell number groups are as
follows; Ur = 13 ± 10%, Ur = 20 ± 10% and Ur = 31 ± 10%. The details concerning
the waves used in this analysis can be found in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Overview of waves used in investigation of Ursell dependency.
Wave
h [m]
T [s]
H30 [m]
H40 [m]
KC30 [-]
KC40 [-]
Ur30 [-]
Ur40 [-]
Ur 13
No. 1
0.34
1.45
0.0823
0.0822
7.50
5.62
11.65
11.65
No. 2
0.40
1.60
0.1020
0.1021
8.87
6.66
12.81
12.83
No. 3
0.46
1.80
0.1096
0.1118
12.22
9.34
13.47
13.74
Ur 20
No. 4
0.34
1.70
0.0908
0.0902
8.73
6.51
13.47
13.74
No. 5
0.40
1.70
0.1242
0.1238
13.80
10.32
18.10
18.03
No. 6
0.46
1.90
0.1505
0.1514
17.09
12.89
21.05
21.18
Ur 31
No. 7
0.34
1.80
0.1265
0.1253
16.38
12.16
30.04
29.75
No. 8
0.40
1.90
0.1791
0.1820
18.98
14.48
33.94
33.50
No. 9
0.46
2.00
0.2080
0.2067
23.47
17.49
32.82
32.61
Each wave in Table 5.1 have been run for both cubes sizes resulting in a total of 18
data points. The parameters varying from test to test is denoted with subscript 30 and
40 to indicate cube size D = 30 mm and D = 40 mm respectively.
The result of the investigation is presented in Figure 5.7. While the figure to some
extent shows an expected link between the KC number and inertia coefficient, no clear
relationship is seen between the inertia coefficient and the Ursell number.
The link
between the KC number and CM is seen as a slight increase in CM for increasing KC.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Ursell dependency
47
A drop in CM is seen in the range of approximately KC = 10 −14. No clear reason for
this is known, but it could be explained by an imbalance in wave period to wave height
ratio, i.e. small waves of long period, which the wave maker struggles to produce.
The lack of dependency with the Ursell number is seen clearest for KC ≃7 and
KC ≃9 where two different Ursell numbers coincide for KC and CM. At KC ≃12 all
three groups approximately achieve similar KC and CM.
Figure 5.7: Inertia coefficients as function of KC number for each of the three investigated
Ursell groups.
In Figure 5.8 the validation results and results from (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) pre-
sented in Section 5.1.2 are plotted alongside the Ursell dependency investigation. The
same tendencies as previously observed are repeated when collecting all inertia coeffi-
cients in one graph.
Based upon Figure 5.7 and 5.8 it is deemed reasonable to work with the premise
that the wave steepness, i.e.
Ursell number, has no significant impact on the force
measurements.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Experimental Validation
Figure 5.8: Inertia coefficients as function of KC number for Ursell groups, validation results
and (Nielsen & Borup, 2018)
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Experimental Results
This chapter will focus on presenting and discussing the results obtained through the
experimental work. First, results regarding force measurements will be presented, cover-
ing the different grid configurations. Secondly, observations regarding bed friction will
be reviewed and thirdly, the velocity fields and profiles obtained through LDV will be
presented.
6.1
Force measurements
In this section the results obtained from the force measurements are presented covering
the multiple grid configurations stated in Table 3.2.
The force measurements have
been performed in both the in-line and transverse direction and aims to investigate the
force development inside and around a layer of cubic roughness elements. Sumer and
Fredsøe (2006) states that as a rough guide: KC < 20 −30 is inertia dominated, while
KC > 20−30 is drag dominated. This guideline is directed towards cylindrical structures.
For square cross-sections the separation is well defined at the corners, and will happen
earlier (at smaller KC numbers) than for circular cross-sections. It is therefore argued
that analyses concerning drag for KC = 4 −20 is justified.
For configurations 3×3, 6×6 and 6×5, the investigation is directed towards the in-
fluence of varying gap-ratio, as well as edge and shielding effects. The results are shown
for cube size D = 30 mm subjected to Wave 4, as this yields the largest KC number of
approximately 20. Specific parameters for each experiment can be found in Appendix G
and results for the remaining Waves and cube size can be found in the provided Digital
Appendix. This is submitted as a USB drive.
Experiments for configurations 3×3 (offset) and 6×6 (offset), have only been per-
formed in the in-line direction for cube size D = 40 mm with gap-ratio d/D = 0.5.
These results will serve to give an indication of the effect of partial shielding.
6.1.1
Grid configuration: 3×3
Grid configuration 3×3 consists of nine cubes all containing load cells. Figure 6.1 shows
the placement of each load cell, along with positive directions of forces and velocity.
The validation experiments from Section 5.1.1 serves as a general comparison. This
configuration will be used as a direct comparison between the individual load cells, in
the following configurations.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.1: Definition sketch for experiments in 3×3 configuration. Row 1: cubes 1-3, Row
2: cubes 4-6 and Row 3: cubes 7-9.
The in-line forces experienced by nine D = 30 mm cubes can be seen in Figure 6.2.
The force development is shown for both gap-ratios and is observed to follow the same
development as the reference experiment. It is noted that the in-line forces for the 3×3
setup are generally smaller than the reference force. For gap-ratio d/D = 0.5 the forces
are observed to be smaller then for gap ratio d/D = 1.0. Larousse et al. (1993) has found
that for steady flow around cubes a stagnation point is located at approximately 0.76H,
H being the height of the cube. Considering a single cube, the on-coming flow would be
directed around the cube. On the other hand, a group of cubes can be considered as a
wide obstacle especially when the gap-ratio is small. For a wide obstacle the flow might
go over the cubes instead of around them, leading to smaller in-line forces.
This particular configuration has also been investigated by Nielsen and Borup (2018).
Considering the differences in set-up, and velocity profiles, the force analysis yield much
the same conclusions. The lee-side cubes are found to be exposed to the largest in-line
forces. The middle cubes are noted to be exposed to the smallest in-line force due to
shielding effects. The force on the outer middle cubes, 4 and 6, does not vary compared
to the inner middle cube 5, suggesting that these are not affected by the outer flow. It is
also noted that the force on cubes 4-6 decrease noticeably when decreasing the gap-ratio,
as the shielding effect will be more pronounced. Another thing to be mentioned is that
for the middle cubes the maximum peak in in-line force occur earlier when the gap ratio
is small. This is caused by an increase in shielding which will result in a smaller pressure
gradient affecting the middle cubes. This will then decrease the in-line force and in turn
the drag. When the shielding effect is less pronounced the middle cubes will also feel
the drag as seen for d/D = 1.0.
Looking at Figure 6.2 it is observed that the in-line force on cubes 2 and 8 are
noticeably larger than the neighbouring cubes, in the y-direction, during positive velocity.
This has been noted for all variations of the 3×3 set-up. This is likely a result of cubes
1, 3, 7 and 9 being corner cubes. The flow around corner cubes will differ from cubes
placed centrally in the porous structure. Around cubes 2 and 8 the flow is constricted to
==PAGE:61==
6.1 Force measurements
51
going over the structure or through the gaps, which will increase the acceleration, thus
leading to a larger in-line force compared to the corner cubes.
Figure 6.2: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force for nine cubes of D = 30
mm in a 3×3 configuration subjected to Wave 4 (KC = 20). Both gap-ratios are presented.
Figure 6.3 presents the corresponding transverse forces measured for the 3×3 config-
uration. The peaks in the transverse force indicates vortices being shed. From the figure
it can be observed that the transverse force is most pronounced for the corner cubes 1,
3, 7 and 9. Cube 1 and 3 peaks in opposite directions at approximately the same times,
and the same is seen for cube 7 and 9. The remaining cubes are seen to be less affected
by transverse forces. This corresponds well with the in-line force results and shows that
the middle cubes are not affected as much by vortex shedding due to shielding effects.
Comparing the transverse force for the two gap-ratios it is seen that forces on the corner
cubes stay unchanged, while the force on the remaining cubes decreases with smaller
gap-ratio. Finally it is noted that for d/D = 1.0 the transverse force on cube 4 is as large
as for the corner cubes. This could be an effect of misalignment of the cubes. Unlike
the dummy cubes fixed to the setup with one bolt, the cubes used for measuring are not
possible to adjust when the plates have been manufactured.
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.3: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the transverse force for nine cubes of D = 30
mm in a 3×3 configuration subjected to Wave 4 (KC = 20). Both gap-ratio are presented.
The resulting forces for every 24◦corresponding to the corner cubes 1, 3, 7 and 9,
and the middle cube 5, is shown in Figure 6.4 and 6.5 for d/D = 0.5 and d/D = 1.0,
respectively. This is shown to visualise the force development throughout an average
period. It is seen that the forces are generally smaller for d/D = 0.5 as expected. The
effect of changing the gap-ratio is most clearly seen by comparing the force corresponding
to cube 5. Cube 5 is the middle cube and thus shielded on all sides. For d/D = 0.5 it is
observed throughout the period that the force on cube 5 is leading in phase compared to
the four corner cubes. This is most clearly seen at 96◦and 288◦where the force on cube
5 points in the opposite direction of the corner cubes. This phase lead is also seen for
d/D = 1.0 on Figure 6.5 though not as pronounced. Comparing the forces at 96◦, cube
5 is pointing in the same direction as the remaining cubes, though the phase lead can
still be seen. The Morison equation, see Equation (2.12), indicates a phase difference
between inertia and drag, as the inertia term is related to the acceleration and the drag
term to the velocity. The phase lead seen in the following figures is a result of the middle
cubes being less drag-dominated than the outer cubes, and even less when the gap-ratio
is small.
It should also be noted that the resulting force on corner cubes 1 and 3, are opposite
directed due to the transverse force. The same applies for the corner cubes 7-9.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Force measurements
53
Figure 6.4: Series of plots indicating the resulting force for cube no. 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 subjected
to Wave 4 at intervals of 24◦as indicated by (×) on the velocity profile. The cubes have size
D = 30 mm, gap-ratio d/D = 0.5 and stand in configuration 3×3.
==PAGE:64==
54
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.5: Series of plots indicating the resulting force for cube no. 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 subjected
to Wave 4 at intervals of 24◦as indicated by (×) on the velocity profile. The cubes have size
D = 30 mm, gap-ratio d/D = 1.0 and stand in configuration 3×3.
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Force measurements
55
Figure 6.6 and 6.7 shows the drag and inertia force coefficients associated with cube
size D = 30 mm. Note that only one set of the force coefficients found in the reference
experiment is used as comparison. The coefficients are taken as the mean of each row of
cubes transverse to the flow. There is a variation in the rows which for simplicity is not
considered in the following. Corresponding plots for D = 40 can be found in the pro-
vided Digital Appendix. Force coefficients for each cube corresponding to experiments
presented in the report are listed in Appendix H.
Figure 6.6: Mean drag coefficients for configuration 3×3 and cube size D = 30 mm. Row 1:
mean of cubes 1-3, Row 2: mean of cubes 4-6 and Row 3: mean of cubes 7-9.
Figure 6.7: Mean inertia coefficients for configuration 3×3 and cube size D = 30 mm. Row
1: mean of cubes 1-3, Row 2: mean of cubes 4-6 and Row 3: mean of cubes 7-9.
Looking at the drag coefficients CD it is seen that the values determined for the
3×3 setup follow the same pattern as the reference. The drag coefficients decrease with
increasing KC. CD is furthermore seen to be generally lower than the reference values
as a consequence of smaller in-line forces. This is most pronounced for row 2 when
d/D = 0.5 where CD becomes close to zero.
==PAGE:66==
56
6 Experimental Results
The inertia coefficients show much the same tendency as the drag coefficients by
being generally lower than the reference. Also here the lowest values belong to row 2
with gap ratio d/D = 0.5. A decrease in CM indicates that less fluid is being accelerated
close to the cubes. It is evident that by adding cubes and reducing the gap-ratio, the
inertia coefficient will decrease as well.
6.1.2
Grid configuration: 6×6
Grid configuration 6×6 also consists of nine cubes containing load cells as well as 27
dummy cubes. Figure 6.8 indicate how the cubes have been placed along with directions
of positive forces and velocity. In this configuration none of the cubes containing load
cells are placed at corners.
Figure 6.8: Definition sketch for experiments in 6×6 configuration. Row 1: cubes 1-3, Row
2: cubes 4-6 and Row 3: cubes 7-9.
The in-line forces for D = 30 mm cubes are presented in Figure 6.9. The largest
in-line forces are seen on cube 1-3 which constitutes the free edge and these forces
correspond well with the force measured on a single cube. The effect of the dummy
cubes is seen by the clear reduction in in-line forces for cubes 7-9 when compared to
the 3×3 experiment, seen in Figure 6.2. The in-line force for cubes 7-9 now corresponds
with the force experienced by cubes 4-6. Both rows 2 and 3 are now shielded from both
sides in the in-line direction and clearly no increase in shielding effects are seen when
expanding the field of cubes from 3×3 to 6×6. The outcome of changing the gap-ratio
is the same as observed for configuration 3×3.
An interesting thing to note is that the in-line forces for each row in Figure 6.9 is
grouped very nicely compared to the forces in 3×3 setup, see Figure 6.2. This is caused
by a lack of corner cubes in the present setup, such that cubes 1-3 are now subjected to
the same conditions.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Force measurements
57
Figure 6.9: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force for nine cubes of D = 30
mm in a 6×6 configuration subjected to Wave 4 (KC = 20). Both gap-ratios are presented.
The corresponding transverse forces are presented in Figure 6.10. All nine cubes
are shielded in the transverse direction and a decrease in the forces is expected when
compared to the 3×3 configuration, see Figure 6.3. Also, there are no corner cubes in
this configuration where the transverse force is expected to be largest.
In the case of d/D = 0.5 the close proximity of the cubes and the added dummy
cubes reduce the transverse forces quite notably. For d/D = 1.0 on the other hand,
the transverse force is still felt by the free edge consisting of cubes 1-3. A quite large
transverse force associated with cube 4 is seen, as also noted for configuration 3×3.
==PAGE:68==
58
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.10: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the transverse force for nine cubes of
D = 30 mm in a 6×6 configuration subjected to Wave 4 (KC = 20). Both gap-ratios are
presented.
A visualisation of the resulting forces at every 24◦over an average period for con-
figuration 6×6 with D = 30 mm and gap-ratio d/D = 1.0 is shown in Figure 6.11. To
study the effect of change in gap-ratio on the resulting forces refer to Figure 6.4 and 6.5.
From the resulting forces it is seen that the shielded cubes 5, 7 and 9 are leading in
phase compared to cubes 1 and 3 located on the free edge. The decrease in transverse
force is also evident.
Figures 6.12 and 6.13 present the drag and inertia coefficients, respectively, compared
to one data set from the reference experiment. In this case both force coefficients are still
generally lower than the reference. It is observed that the tendency for CD to decrease
with increasing KC is not clear. Also the coefficients determined for rows 2 and 3 are
seen to be of similar values, indicating the flow around these two rows to be similar and
adding to the assumption that no increase in shielding effect occur.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Force measurements
59
Figure 6.11:
Series of plots indicating the resulting force for cube no.
1, 3, 5, 7 and 9
subjected to Wave 4 at intervals of 24◦as indicated by (×) on the velocity profile. The cubes
have size D = 30 mm, gap-ratio d/D = 1.0 and stand in configuration 6×6.
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.12: Mean drag coefficients for configuration 6×6 and cube size D = 30 mm. Row
1: mean of cubes 1-3, Row 2: mean of cubes 4-6 and Row 3: mean of cubes 7-9.
Figure 6.13: Mean inertia coefficients for configuration 6×6 and cube size D = 30 mm. Row
1: mean of cubes 1-3, Row 2: mean of cubes 4-6 and Row 3: mean of cubes 7-9.
6.1.3
Grid configuration: 6×5
For this configuration nine cubes containing load cells and 21 dummy cubes have been
positioned as indicated in Figure 6.14. The cubes are placed such that two out of four
edges of the original 3×3 setup are shielded and one cube is placed in a corner. This
setup allows for simultaneous investigation of edge and shielding effects.
This section only presents parts of the analysis which cannot be described by obser-
vations made in the previous sections.
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Force measurements
61
Figure 6.14: Definition sketch for experiments in 6×5 configuration.
The in-line and transverse forces for cube size D = 30 mm and both gap-ratios are
presented in Figure 6.15 and 6.16, respectively.
Figure 6.15: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force for nine cubes of D = 30
mm in a 6×5 configuration subjected to wave 4 (approximately KC = 20). Both gap-ratio are
presented.
==PAGE:72==
62
6 Experimental Results
Both in-line and transverse forces generally show the same tendencies as observed for
the 6×6 configuration when considering shielding effects on rows 2 and 3. The effect of
having a free edge is seen by the decrease in in-line force and increase in transverse force
on cube 3, i.e. the corner cube. It is noted that for this configuration the transverse
force on cube 4 is still quite pronounced for d/D = 1.0, considering the position of cube
4.
Figure 6.16: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the transverse force for nine cubes of
D = 30 mm in a 6×5 configuration subjected to wave 4 (approximately KC = 20). Both
gap-ratio are presented.
6.1.4
Grid configuration: Offset
This section covers the experiments using the two offset grid configurations as shown in
Figure 6.17. Figure 6.17a shows the 3×3 setup where row 2 has been offset a distance
of D/2 compared to row 1 and 3. The same is done for the 6×6 setup shown in Figure
6.17b. It should be noted that only in-line forces have been measured for these two
configurations using cubes of size D = 40 mm. The gap ratio is d/D = 0.5 to ensure
partial shielding in the in-line direction.
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Force measurements
63
(a) 3×3 offset
(b) 6×6 offset
Figure 6.17: Definition sketch for offset experiment.
The measured in-line forces for both configurations are presented in Figure 6.18. It
is observed that despite the partial shielding the in-line forces measured in the 3×3
configuration are approximately the same size for all 3 rows. The largest still being felt
by the lee-side cubes.
Figure 6.18: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force for nine cubes of D = 40
mm with gap-ratio d/D = 0.5 subjected to wave 4 (KC = 15).
==PAGE:74==
64
6 Experimental Results
In the 6×6 offset setup the in-line forces for row 3 is seen to have been reduced,
though not to the same degree as when the cubes are aligned in both the in-line and
transverse direction, see Figure 6.9 for d/D = 0.5.
For the 6×6 setup with cubes aligned in both the x- and y-direction, the effect of
shielding was not notably increased when reaching row 3. In the case of partial shielding
there is a possibility that the in-line forces would decrease further in a larger setup.
Figures 6.19 and 6.20 show the force coefficients determined for the offset experiments.
The same tendencies as for previous configurations are observed. The force coefficients
are smaller than the reference. The shielding effect is seen but not as pronounced as
for the aligned experiments. For both offset configurations CD decreases with increasing
KC, interesting to note is that this was not observed for the aligned 6×6 setup.
Figure 6.19: Mean drag coefficients for cube size D = 40 mm with gap-ratio d/D = 0.5. Row
1: mean of cubes 1-3, Row 2: mean of cubes 4-6 and Row 3: mean of cubes 7-9.
Figure 6.20: Mean inertia coefficients for cube size D = 40 mm with gap-ratio d/D = 0.5.
Row 1: mean of cubes 1-3, Row 2: mean of cubes 4-6 and Row 3: mean of cubes 7-9.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Bed friction
65
6.2
Bed friction
The force measurements from the 3×3 and 6×6 cube setups have been used to directly
estimate the bed shear stress using Equation (2.35). The area used in the calculation
of the bed shear stress is the area covered by the cube plus a surrounding area reaching
d/2 out to all sides off the cube:
A = (D + d)2
(6.1)
The estimated bed shear stress is then inserted in Equation (2.36) to calculate the
wave friction factor for the area in the flume covered with roughness elements, i.e. test
cubes.
The free stream velocity magnitude, Um, has been approximated by setting it equal to
the maximum value of the reference velocity corresponding to each of the four specified
test waves. This is only an approximation as the reference velocity has been measured
z = 35 mm above the bed, and Um is normally specified at the top of the wave boundary
layer, i.e. at z = δ. The effect of this is expected to be minimal, based upon the plot
in Figure 6.21. The figure presents a vertical velocity distribution from the bottom of
the flume to approximately half way up the water column. The velocity distribution
is based upon a measured free surface elevation for Wave 3 combined with linear wave
theory. In the experimental work Um has been measured at approximately z/δ = 20. No
significant variation is seen between the velocity at the top of the wave boundary layer
and at the measurement point. Thus the approximation is deemed acceptable.
Figure 6.21: Vertical velocity distribution for Wave 3, over half the water column normalised
with the boundary layer thickness.
==PAGE:76==
66
6 Experimental Results
The boundary layer thickness, δ, is calculated as shown in Equation (2.32). The wave
period is varied between 1.4 - 1.7 s for Waves 1 - 4, hence four different boundary layer
thicknesses are expected. These are found to range between δ = 1.57 mm and δ = 1.73
mm. The range of δ is very small compared to the diameter of roughness elements. For
this reason no significant influence of the wave boundary layer is expected in regards to
the roughness elements.
Figure 6.22 shows the friction factors determined for the aligned 3 × 3 and 6 × 6
experiments. Here the friction factor is calculated for all nine cubes collectively, as a
sum of the forces over the combined area. These are plotted up against values from
known literature, i.e. Kamphuis (1975).
For both grid configurations good alignment is seen for the two different gap ratios
individually, while a variability is seen going from one gap ratio to another. This change
is likely due to the definition of area in Eq.
(6.1), leading to a reduced area for a
reduced gap ratio. The values from Kamphuis are observed to be slightly lower than the
experimental results though the tendency is seen to be similar.
The estimation of bed shear stress based directly upon force measurements is meant
to be viewed as an alternative to the more widely used method of doing linear regression
of the logarithmic-layer part of the velocity distribution, from which a friction velocity
is determined and used to estimate the bed shear stress. In terms of being an alterna-
tive method of estimation, the results are somewhat satisfactory. The size of the area
incorporated in the calculations are seen to have at notable influence, why the size of
the area should be chosen carefully.
The friction factors are plotted as a function of the KC number. For relatively small
KC numbers, as those used in the present work, the friction factor is known to have
little or no dependence on the Reynolds number. In (Fredsøe & Deigaard, 1992) the
Kamphuis values are reported as a function of a/kN being the stroke of the motion in
relation to the size of roughness element. It is seen from Equation (2.5) that multiplying
a/kN with 2π yields the KC number.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Bed friction
67
Figure 6.22: Friction factor for configuration 3×3 and 6×6 for all experimental variations.
Measurements are compared to experimental results by Kamphuis (1975) seen on (Fredsøe
& Deigaard, 1992, p. 33) and (Sumer, 2013). Note that in the present plot a/kN has been
converted to KC.
A different factor influencing the friction factor is whether measurements has been
made in the inner part of porous structure or the outer part. Figure 6.22 presented
friction factors calculated for all nine load cells. Figure 6.23 presents the friction factor
calculated for each row of load cells in the 3×3 and 6×6 setup, respectively. From the
figure it is clear that the outer parts of the roughness elements, i.e. row 1 and 3 in
the 3×3 setup and row 1 in the 6×6 setup, has a higher friction factor, as the largest
in-line forces are measured here. Row 2, which is the inner part of the setup in the
3×3 configuration is slightly smaller in magnitude. In the 6×6 setup it is seen that
row 3 moves below row 2 as this becomes the most sheltered part of the setup. This
separation into rows further show that the inner parts of the setups more closely resemble
the values from Kamphuis, though still larger. In the 6×6 setup the effects are expected
to be mirrored on the dummy cubes when the flow is reversed.
==PAGE:78==
68
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.23: Friction factor for individual rows of cubes for size D = 30 mm and gap-ratio
d/D = 1.0. Measurements are compared to experimental results by Kamphuis (1975) seen on
(Fredsøe & Deigaard, 1992, p. 33) and (Sumer, 2013).
The effect of gap ratio and smooth to rough transition is investigated in Figure 6.24
for the 3×3 cube configuration. This is done in terms of the amplification factor α which
is defined as.
αi =
fw,i
fw,min
(6.2)
Here fw,min is corresponding to the row with the lowest friction factor in the given
setup and will return α = 1 as amplification factor, for this row. The friction factor
is determined based on bed shear stress, why α is also the amplification in bed shear
stress.
Figure 6.24 shows the transition areas where the flow goes from the smooth to rough
domain, x = 0 being the outer edge of row 1. In the 3×3 setup both row 1 and 3
are affected by this transition, showing an amplification factor larger than 1. It is also
observed that the amplification factor assumes approximately similar values for row 1,
exempting Wave 1 for gap-ratio d/D = 0.5. The effect of gap ratio also becomes evident
when comparing the two plots seen on Figure 6.24. The amplification in friction factor,
and effectively bed shear stress, becomes smaller when increasing the gap ratio from
d/D = 0.5 to d/D = 1.0.
The force difference recorded between the rows become
smaller when increasing the gap-ratio as shielding effects are reduced.
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Bed friction
69
Figure 6.24: Amplification factor regarding the shear stress over nine cubes of size D = 30
mm in configuration 3×3. All four waves are represented.
Figure 6.25 shows the amplification factor for the 6×6 cube configuration. Here the
results obtained for the four waves are compared to values from (Fredsøe et al., 1993).
The experiments performed by (Fredsøe et al., 1993) were conducted in a U-shaped
oscillatory-flow water tunnel, and investigated the effect of going from a smooth section
to a section with pebbles, i.e. a rough section. This resembles the transition from smooth
to rough seen in the present work, though the roughness elements are a great deal larger
in the present work. Where the work performed by (Fredsøe et al., 1993) looked upon
sediment transport effects the present study considers the behaviour of larger structural
elements, e.g. rocks in scour protection.
The data is plotted as amplification factor as function of x/a which shows how far
away the data point is from the smooth to rough transition compared to the stroke of
the wave motion. The transition point is set at the leading edge of the front row i.e.
row 1. For gap ratio d/D = 0.5 a good correspondence in tendency is present for the
first two rows compared to (Fredsøe et al., 1993). (Fredsøe et al., 1993) saw a small
increase in friction factor as the motion moved further into the roughness domain, while
the present work sees a continuous decrease in amplification factor when moving from
row 1 to 3.
Again the effect of gap ratio becomes evident as the amplification factor is visibly
reduced for increasing gap-ratio. For a larger gap ratio of i.e. d/D = 1.0, the assumed
rough section starts to behave more like individual elements instead of a rough bed.
==PAGE:80==
70
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.25: Amplification factor regarding shear stress over nine cube of size D = 30 mm
in configuration 6×6.
All four waves are represented and measurements are compared to
experimental results from (Fredsøe et al., 1993, Fig. 9)
The bed shear stress can further be used to calculate the Shields parameter defined
in Equation (2.37). In short this parameter describes the ratio of the driving forces
in the numerator and the stabilising forces in the denominator, and can therefore be
used as an estimate of whether sediment will move or not. Figure 6.26 from (Fredsøe
& Deigaard, 1992) shows the critical Shields parameter as a function of the Reynolds
number. The bed shear stress estimated from the present work has for the 3×3 setups
with gap ratio 1.0 been used to calculate the Shields parameter. These values have been
added to Figure 6.26. The Reynolds numbers used in the present work exceeds the ones
from (Fredsøe & Deigaard, 1992), but if it is assumed that the value of 0.06 reached for
turbulent flow at the bed is an asymptotic value, a comparison can be drawn.
It is seen that all measurements result in stable roughness elements, though the 30
mm cube for Wave 4 is very close to the critical Shields parameter.
Figure 6.26: Shields diagram giving the threshold value of theta as a function of Re from
(Fredsøe & Deigaard, 1992, p. 203).
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
71
6.3
Visualisation of flow
The following section holds a presentation of the velocity measurements performed using
the LDV system described in Section 3.3.3.
The results are presented in the form
of a series of velocity contour plots and profiles.
The presented results are deemed
representative for the remaining tests, unless stated otherwise. The results corresponding
to the remaining tests can be found in the provided Digital Appendix. The velocity
measurements has been performed for different setups of the physical model, varying in
both cube size, gap ratio and the generated wave. An overview of the specifications of
the velocity measurement can be seen in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Overview of velocity measurements.
Test No
Wave
Cube size
Grid configuration
Gap ratio
[-]
[mm]
[-]
[-]
1
3
40
1×1
-
2
1
40
3×3
1
3
3
40
3×3
1
4
1
40
3×3
0.5
5
3
40
3×3
0.5
6
2
30
3×3
1
7
4
30
3×3
1
8
3
30
3×3
0.5
9
4
30
3×3
0.5
10
3
40
3×3 offset
0.5
The measurements of the flow fields have been conducted using a 3×3 grid configu-
ration, exempting the reference configuration consisting of a single cube. Measurements
has been performed in front off, above and behind the first cube and above the second
cube. All measurements have been performed on the same line in the x-direction. This
line goes through the centre-line of the cube 1. A varying number of measuring points
in the z-direction have been analysed depending on the test. Please consult Appendix
I Figures I.1 to I.5 for illustrations of positioning of measuring points. Figure 6.28 also
illustrates an example of placement of measuring points for the 1×1 test.
It was chosen to measure on a 3×3 cube setup and on the row closest to the laser,
due to the limited range of the laser. Adding additional cubes around the test section
would result in the laser hitting the other cubes, as it is fired at an angle.
For each test two velocity vector animations and a contour animation has been
generated. These are all reported in the provided Digital Appendix. In the following a
number of flow visualisations will be presented in the form of contour plots.
==PAGE:82==
72
6 Experimental Results
6.3.1
Reference: 1×1
The flow fields around cubes in different grid configurations are analysed why it is bene-
ficial to get an understanding of the flow patterns seen around a single cube. Hence, the
first results presented corresponds to the reference experiment with a 1×1 configuration.
The corresponding measured surface elevation over a single period is illustrated in Figure
6.27.
Figure 6.27: Surface elevation of the wave measured in the flume over a single period during
the reference 1×1 experiment with Wave 3.
In Figure 6.28 the measured velocities are illustrated as velocity vectors in the grid
surrounding the cube. The velocity vectors are plotted in a series of chosen phase values,
showing the evolution of the flow field around the cube.
Figure 6.28 shows the flow development in magnitude over an average period of the
wave. For phase values below approximately 140◦a down flow is identified at the front
edge of the cube. After flow reversal this flow becomes upwards directed and a down
flow is seen at the back side. Above the cube a separation region can be identified in
both half periods. In the first half period the separation region is seen growing from
initially a single point with zero velocity, to a region covering approximately 3/4 of the
cube size. The same is visible after flow reversal. In this region above the cube flow
reversal is observed before the remainder of the flow turns.
To further visualise the flow patterns observed a contour plot is generated from the
grid of measurement points shown in Figure 6.28 and considers only the horizontal part
of the velocity measurements. In order to generate a proper mesh of data points to use
in the contour plots a cubic method of interpolation has been applied. The generation
of additional data points using cubic interpolation introduces the risk of errors in the
flow visualisation but it is still perceived that the general nature of the flow is correctly
represented. The contour plot for the reference 1×1 experiment is shown in Figure 6.29.
The same evolution in flow patterns is seen in the contour plot as in the velocity vector
illustration. The contour plot further shows the development of a high velocity region
above the separation region where the flow is accelerated as separation and flow reversal
occurs above the cube.
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
73
Figure 6.28: Velocity vector plot for reference experiment, 1×1 cube setup exposed to Wave
3. The red arrow is used is scaling reference, and has a value of u = 0.40 m/s.
==PAGE:84==
74
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.29: Contour plot of the horizontal velocity component measured for the 1×1 cube
reference experiment. The scale unit is [m/s].
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
75
6.3.2
Configuration 3×3
In the following an examination of results from the 3×3 velocity measurements are
presented. The measurement section and an example of how measurement points are
placed around a 3×3 cube setup is illustrated in Figure 6.30. The first test presented
is test 4 from Table 6.1. Here cubes of D = 40 mm in a 3×3 setup with gap ratio
d/D = 0.5 exposed to Wave 1. Figure 6.31 shows the surface elevation registered in the
flume over a single period.
Figure 6.30: Figure detailing an example of placement of measuring points around a 3×3
cube setup.
The results of the experiment is presented in Figure 6.32 in the form of a contour
plot. Some similar tendencies are identified for this test as for the reference experiment.
At ωt = 36◦a small region with approximately zero velocity appears at the left part
of the front cube. This region grows in size over the course of the first half period as
observed in the reference test. In the second half period no such region is observed above
the front cube . Here the flow follows the outer flow.
In the total duration of the wave no separation region is observed above the second
cube. This is likely due to shielding effects from the other cubes.
When the same setup was exposed to Wave 3, i.e. test no. 5 similar results were
observed.
When the cube diameter was decreased to 30 mm however a change was
observed. In these tests, i.e. test no. 8 and 9, no separation were seen in either of the
half periods over neither the front or second cube. In these tests the flow close to the
cubes simply followed the flow in the outer region.
Figure 6.31: Surface elevation of Wave 1 measured in the flume over a single period during
test no. 4.
==PAGE:86==
76
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.32: Contour plot of the horizontal velocity component measured for the 3 × 3 40
mm cube setup with gap ratio 0.5 exposed to Wave 1. The left cube is defined as the front
cube, and the right cube the back cube. The scale unit is [m/s].
==PAGE:87==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
77
A similar measurement has been performed for the offset grid configuration. Results
for this are not shown as the centre-line above the front cube is free and simply resembles
the reference experiment. No measurements were made above the second cube in the
offset grid configuration.
The experiment has also been conducted on 3×3 cube setups with gap ratio d/D =
1.0 for both cube sizes. Firstly the results for d = 40 mm cubes exposed to Wave 3 is
presented. Figure 6.33 shows the progression of surface elevation over a single period.
Figure 6.33: Measured surface elevation in the flume during velocity test no. 3.
The results of this experiment is shown in the form of a contour plot in Figure 6.34.
Measurements have, see Figure I.2, been made up to a height of x/D = 3, for D = 40
mm. In the contour plot only data up to a height of x/D = 2 is included for the sake of
visibility. No significant change is seen above this height as the outer region is reached
and it approximately follows the same pattern over the course of a period. The full
height plot is reported as an animation in Digital Appendix.
In the first half period of the wave a similar tendency as observed in the reference
experiment is again visible. A separation region is formed above the front cube at around
ωt = 24◦which grows as the flow velocity increases and starts to turn. Above this low
velocity region a corresponding high velocity region is observed at phase values ωt = 24◦
and ωt = 48◦. In the second half period the front cube only shows early signs of forming
a separation region but it does not grow in a similar fashion as was seen for the reference
experiment.
With the increased gap ratio it is expected that the shielding effect would become
less important. In Figure 6.34 there is however still no visible signs of a separation
region above the second cube as was the case for the smaller gap ratio. A zoom of the
flow above the two cubes is presented in Figure 6.35 to illustrate the details in point
measurements in form of velocity vectors. The velocity vectors are plotted at four chosen
phase values. Here it becomes evident that there is measured points with zero velocity
in the second half period above the second cube. These are located at the right hand
side of the cube. The separation region does not grow in the same manner as observed
for the front cube in the first half period. Still some effects of the shielding for the larger
gap ratio are seen.
==PAGE:88==
78
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.34: Contour plot of the horizontal velocity component measured for the 3×3, 40
mm cube setup with gap ratio 1.0 exposed to Wave 3. The left cube is defined as the front
cube, and the right cube the back cube. The scale unit is [m/s].
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
79
Figure 6.35: Velocity vectors showing data measured above the two cubes in row 1 and 2
respectively for four chosen phase values. Red arrow is used as scale and has a value of u = 0.2
m/s
The measurements for the D = 40 mm cubes are compared to a similar test performed
for the D = 30 mm cubes. The smaller cubes were subjected to Wave 4, i.e. test no.
7. The results of this test is presented in Figure 6.37 and the progression of surface
elevation over a single period can be seen in Figure 6.36. The same patterns as seen for
the larger cubes size can be identified for the smaller cubes. This is in terms of both the
formation of a separation region with early flow reversal, a high velocity region above
aforementioned region. Again points with zero velocity is observed above the second
cube during the second half period.
Figure 6.36: Surface elevation of Wave 4 measured in the flume over a single period during
test no. 7.
==PAGE:90==
80
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.37: Contour plot of the horizontal velocity component measured for the 3×3, D = 30
mm cube setup with gap ratio 1.0 exposed to Wave 4. The left cube is defined as the front
cube, and the right cube the back cube. The scale unit is [m/s].
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
81
6.3.3
Roughness induced streaming
In this section it will be investigated whether the spatial variation in roughness causes
any streaming processes to occur around the roughness elements. Streaming is a period
averaged net flow, or non-zero mean, which can be caused by e.g. roughness.
Firstly the mean u- and w-components of the velocity is plotted for the reference
experiment containing a single cube. This is shown in Figure 6.38. It is observed that
non-zero mean velocities are found close to the edges of the cube. The non-zero means
are identified to be in opposite directions at the two edges. This corresponds with the
flow patterns seen on the Figure 6.29, where a separation cell is generated above the
cube at the left-hand side and right-hand side for each half period respectively. The
separation cells are identified as areas where the velocity is approximately zero at first.
Flow reversal in these areas are initiated earlier than in the outer region giving rise to a
non-zero mean.
Figure 6.38: Measured time-averaged velocity vectors.
The red arrow is used as scaling
reference, with u = 0.2 m/s.
The behaviour of the flow is further investigated in Figure 6.39 which presents velocity
profiles for different positions above the cube over the duration of an average period. It
is observed that when the wave velocity is positive a boundary layer which turns earlier
than the remainder of the flow forms at x/D = −0.25 and x/D = 0.
Similarly, a
boundary also forms during negative wave velocity, as expected when keeping in mind
the non-zero mean seen on Figure 6.38. In Figure 6.39 the depth is normalised as z/δ,
where z = 0 at the top of the cube. The boundary layer thickness is calculated for a
rough boundary layer using Equation (2.33).
==PAGE:92==
82
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.39: Velocity profiles measured above the cube in a 1×1 cube setup. (+) are located
at x/D = −0.25, (◦) at x/D = 0 and (∗) at x/D = 0.25. δ = 6.1 mm.
Figure 6.40: Period-averaged velocity profiles. (+) are located at x/D = −0.25 and (∗) are
located at x/D = 0.25. δ = 6.1 mm.
==PAGE:93==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
83
Figure 6.40 presents a period-averaged velocity profile for positions x/D = −0.25
and x/D = 0.25. At both positions the non-zero mean is identified as was the case in
Figure 6.38. The non-zero mean reaches a larger magnitude at x/D = −0.25 as the
velocity measured under the crest during the first half period is larger than under the
trough. It is noted that the non-zero mean could reach a magnitude of approximately
45% of Um.
Next the streaming phenomena will be investigated for the 3×3 setup with D = 40
mm cubes and gap ratio d/D = 0.5. This is done to get an overall image of period-
averaged velocity around the cubes and the result is shown in Figure 6.34. A distinctive
non-zero mean is identified at the left-hand side of the front cube. This corresponds with
where a separation region with subsequent relative early flow reversal is seen. It is also
seen that above the second cube, being the middle row, the sheltering effect leads to an
approximately zero mean above the centre-line of the cube. This indicates a dependence
of the spatial variation in roughness and flow direction.
Figure 6.41: Measured time-averaged velocity vectors for 3×3 cube setup with D = 40 mm
and gap ratio 0.5. The setup was exposed to Wave 3. Again the red arrow is used as scaling
reference, with u = 0.2 m/s.
To further illustrate the behaviour observed in Figure 6.41 velocity profiles over the
centre of the two cubes over an average period are presented in Figure 6.42. The figure
shows that when then flow moves from a smooth to a rough section the boundary layer
formed above the front cube will experience flow reversal out of phase with the cube on
the lee-side. When the flow moves from rough to rough the boundary layers are in phase.
This flow behaviour in transition zones deviates from the results presented by (Fredsøe
et al., 1993) and (Fuhrman et al., 2011). These studies found a non-zero period-averaged
mean directed towards the rough section i.e. in the opposite direction of the present
==PAGE:94==
84
6 Experimental Results
study. The behaviour of the flow over the test cubes do therefore not in terms of the
streaming exactly represent transition to a roughness section.
Figure 6.42: Velocity profiles measured above the cubes in a 3×3 cube setup with D = 40
mm. (◦) are located at x/D = 0 and (+) at x/D = 1.5. δ = 6.1 mm.
The non-uniformity of the boundary layer above the front cube results in the non-zero
mean seen in Figure 6.41. The significance of the streaming is assessed using Figure 6.43
which presents the period-averaged velocity profiles above the two cubes. The non-zero
mean above the front cube is seen to reach a magnitude of approximately 45% of Um as
was the case for the 1×1 cube setup. Simultaneously it is once more visible that there
will be no streaming present when moving to the inner part of the roughness elements.
This corresponds with the results from (Fredsøe et al., 1993), who found a reduction in
the streaming with the distance to the transition area. In the present work it is most
likely due to shielding effects.
It is noted that fluid is being ejected out of the boundary layer at the front cube
during the half period where flow goes from smooth to rough. A possible consequence of
this could be additional generation of bed friction and shear stress at the leading edge
of the front cube. If the roughness elements represented a scour protective layer, risk
of initiating sediment movement at the edge of transition from a smooth to rough bed,
would be present due to increased shear stresses.
It is further noted that the constant ejection of fluid in the boundary layer above the
front cube indicates that there will be an opposite directed flow to counterbalance the
==PAGE:95==
6.3 Visualisation of flow
85
streaming. A area with non-zero mean in the opposite direction is located in front of
the front cube. Some re-circulation of fluid could occur here.
Figure 6.43: Period-averaged velocity profiles for 3×3, D = 40 mm cube setup with gap ratio
0.5 exposed to Wave 3. (◦) are located at x/D = 0 and (+) are located at x/D = 1.5. δ = 6.1
mm.
Lastly the the streaming processes for a 3×3 setup with D = 40 mm and gap ratio
d/D = 1.0 is considered. An overall view of the mean velocity profile around the cubes
in the test section is shown in Figure 6.44. From the figure a non-zero mean is identified
above the front cube, similar to the one seen for gap-ratio d/D = 0.5 in Figure 6.43.
However when increasing the gap ratio from 0.5 to 1.0 a new tendency is observed. The
second cube, located at x/D = 1.5 begins to show a streaming process in the opposite
direction of the front cube as illustrated in Figure 6.45. This is likely caused by the
gap between cubes reaching a size which allows for the stroke of the motion between
cubes to move more freely and thereby resemble that of the 1×1 reference setup. Figure
6.44 shows the period-averaged velocity profile over the two cubes. It is noted from
Figure 6.44 that the magnitude of the streaming is lower at the second cube than what
is measured at the front cube. This magnitude of streaming is closer to the one found
in (Fredsøe et al., 1993).
Many of the same tendencies as seen for the D = 40 mm cubes are present in the
tests performed for the D = 30 mm cubes. The smaller gap ratio for D = 30 mm cubes
achieves a lower magnitude of streaming while the larger gap ratio shows streaming from
the front cube when the flow is transitioning from smooth to rough. Figures detailing
the results for the remaining tests presented in Table 6.1 can be found in the provided
Digital Appendix.
==PAGE:96==
86
6 Experimental Results
Figure 6.44: Measured time-averaged velocity vectors for 3×3 D = 40 mm cube setup with
gap ratio 1.0. The setup was exposed to Wave 3. Again the red arrow is used as scaling
reference, with u = 0.2 m/s.
Figure 6.45: Period-averaged velocity profiles for 3×3, D = 40 mm cube setup with gap ratio
1.0 exposed to Wave 3. (◦) are located at x/D = 0 and (+) are located at x/D = 2. δ = 6.1
mm.
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 7
Remarks
This chapter presents some final remarks concerning the obtained results and the exper-
imental work. First is given an attempt at linking the force measurements to the flow
properties observed in the visualisations. Second, some comments concerning lessons
learned during the experimental work and suggestions regarding future research.
7.1
Linking of results
This section attempts at linking the quantitative results obtained through force mea-
surements on cubic roughness elements and the qualitative investigation of flow around
said elements. The flow visualisation has only been performed for configuration 3×3,
why this is the only directly comparable setup.
The calculated drag coefficients for the 3×3 cube setup and the changes in this as
the gap ratio is varied, have been shown in Figure 6.6. Here it was observed that for
gap-ratio d/D = 0.5 the second row of cubes achieves a drag coefficient far lower than
the ones determined for the reference experiment and for the larger gap ratio. This is
explained by the cubes in row 2 being shielded by row 1 and 3. The results concerning
the drag coefficient can be related to the velocity measurements presented in Section
6.3.3. Here period-averaged velocity profiles over cubes from the first and second row
are presented. These showed a non-zero mean velocity above the front cube and an
approximate zero mean above the second cube. It is assumed that the patterns seen for
the cube in row 1 can be mirrored to cubes in row 3. These non-zero means were related
to the separation regions seen in the contour plots in Section 6.3. It is known from
aerodynamics that separation of flow can lead to an increase in pressure drag. Since it
is suspected that separation will be seen above cubes in row 1 and row 3 and not in row
2 for gap ratio 0.5, this could be the explanation for the large drop in CD seen in Figure
6.6.
When increasing the gap ratio to 1.0 it is seen from Figure 6.6 that the drag coeffi-
cients measured in row 2 will closer represent those seen for the two other rows. Again
a period-averaged velocity profile for a 3×3 cube setup with gap ratio 1.0 has been
analysed and can be seen in Figure 6.45. This shows an non-zero mean for the cubes
in both row 1 and 2 indicating that some separation may be present above the second
cube, thus leading to an increase in drag.
==PAGE:98==
88
7 Remarks
7.2
Future research and lessons learned.
If further experimental investigations were to be performed on the same or a similar
model a few thoughts on optimising the outcome of experiments are presented in the
following. These are merely suggestions and is not a full list of possibilities.
Firstly, if the forces measured in the flume were to give a more complete picture of
the loads induced by the wave motion on the roughness elements a three-directional load
cell could be used. The use of such a load cell would possibly give a more representative
picture of the loads as the transverse and in-line force could be measured simultaneously.
In addition the lift force exerted on the roughness elements could be measured and reveal
further details about the stability of elements, were these to be related to e.g. individual
elements in a scour protective layer.
Secondly a more detailed investigation of the flow fields and more advanced visualisa-
tion method could reveal further details in regards to the connection between observed
flow patterns and measured forces. An example could be to perform a Particle Image
Velocimetry (PIV) analysis of the flow and measure in all three dimensions instead of
single planes as in the present work. A PIV analysis would also allow for internal veloc-
ity measurement. The LDV system is not able to measure internal points as it collides
with the roughness elements which disrupts the signal.
Further variations in the model scale could also allow for an investigation more
representative of stone sizes utilised in e.g. rubble mound structures or scour protection.
The current scale of the model leads to relative large stone sizes compared to the water
depth. Increasing the physical frames surrounding the model, such as the water depth
and wave height, could help cover a larger range of applicability.
Finally it is mentioned that numerical modelling of the physical model could provide
data which could both serve as a frame of reference and as adding new information to
help the understanding of the tendencies observed. This could e.g. be in the form of
pressure or velocity investigations.
During the measuring campaign a few relevant lessons were learned considering equip-
ment and measuring techniques.
First, the load cells used are not made to be used in water thus it is necessary to
waterproof the wires. Also wires attached to the load cells are quite fragile and easy
to rip off, if the load cells are not handled with care.
Second, optimal use of LDV
equipment, requires that the glass on the flume does not have any scratches, for the
laser to pass through unobstructed. The flume in the hydraulic laboratory at DTU has
quite a lot of scratches, which will impair the data rate of the measurements if hit by
the laser. This is also one of the reasons why measurements were not conducted closer
to the bed.
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis aims to contribute and broaden the available knowledge in the field of flow
induced forces on roughness elements in a porous structure and the flow around said
elements. An experimental investigation of cubic elements placed on the bottom of a
test flume and subjected to oscillatory motion in form of waves has been conducted. Four
regular non-linear waves of varying height and period are applied to cover a range of
relatively low KC numbers of approximately 4 to 20. Cubic elements have well defined
separation at the corners regardless of the Reynolds number.
The flow induced forces has been determined through one-directional measurements
in both the in-line and transverse direction. These has been performed for a series of
grid configurations to show the effect of shielding, gap ratio and alignment. The grid
configurations contains; 1×1, 3×3, 6×5 and 6×6 cubes, utilising cube sizes of D = 40
mm and D = 30 mm as well as gap-ratios of d/D = 0.5 and d/D = 1.0.
Flow patterns and visualisation of velocity fields is based on measurements performed
using a LDV system on the 1×1 and 3×3 cube setup. Here the configuration has been
varied in cube size and gap-ratio to visualise how these parameters influence the flow
behaviour.
From the force measurements it has been observed that the in-line forces are largest
on the lee-side row of cubes, and the maximum force in this row was felt by the centre
cube. The in-line forces measured in the 3×3, 6×5 and 6×6 configurations are smaller
than the 1×1 reference experiment, as the flow will feel the roughness elements as a
wide structure.
The cubes being shielded experience a decrease in in-line force and
subsequently a decrease in drag and inertia seen from the calculated force coefficients
CD and CM. The shielding effect were more pronounced for gap-ratio d/D = 0.5. For
aligned configurations, it has been found that the effect of shielding does not increase
after the second row in larger cube setups. When the cubes are not aligned, shielding was
first observed on row 3 in a 6×6 configuration, and the effect was reduced compared to
aligned setups. The transverse forces were most pronounced on corner cubes suggestion
vortex shedding.
The bed shear stress felt around the roughness elements, and in turn the friction fac-
tor, has been estimated from the force measurements. Considering the entire structure,
a trend of declining friction factor as a function of KC number was found corresponding
to known literature. Assuming that the porous structure represents a rough bed, the
friction factor was calculated for each row. Here it was observed that the friction factor
was lower than the average for inner (shielded) rows and larger for outer rows. The
amplification for the friction factor, or bed shear stress, over the porous structure is seen
to correspond well with findings by (Fredsøe et al., 1993) for gap-ratio d/D = 0.5. For
==PAGE:100==
90
8 Conclusion
d/D = 1.0 the gap-ratio is large enough for the cubes to start acting as individual rough-
ness elements, yielding smaller amplification. The bed shear stress was additionally used
to determine the Shields parameter. An indication that the roughness elements would
remain stable in the analysed flow was found.
The velocity measurements resulted in a series of flow fields and velocity profiles
illustrating the behaviour of flow seen over the course of a average period. For gap-ratio
d/D = 0.5 a separation region in the first half period was identified above the front cube.
During the second half period the front cube were shielded and did not exhibit the same
pattern as observed in the first half period. No separation region occurred above the
second cube. A new tendency was observed for gap-ratio d/D = 1.0. Here separation
was again found above the front cube in the first half period. In the second half period
separation is once more seen over the first cube, but to a far lesser extent.
This non-uniformity in behaviour over the course of a period result in streaming.
Period-averaged profiles of the velocity around the cubes showed that a noticeable
amount of streaming could be observed especially the front cube for both gap ratios.
This streaming was orientated away from the rest of the roughness elements. Also, it
was found that for an increased gap ratio opposite directed streaming could be observed
over the second cube as well.
==PAGE:101==
References
Bearman, P. W., Graham, J. M. R., Obasaju, E. D., & Drossopoulos, G. M. (1984). The
influence of corner radius on the forces experienced by cylindrical bluff bodies in
oscillatory flow. Applied Ocean Research, 6, 83-89.
Bjørke, A.-S. (2015). Numerical study of hydrodynamic forces on complex structures
with application to objects in moonpool (Unpublished master’s thesis). Technical
University of Denmark.
Fredsøe, J., & Deigaard, R. (1992). Mechanics of Coastal Sediment Transport (Vol. 3).
World Scientific.
Fredsøe, J., Sumer, B. M., Laursen, T. S., & Pedersen, C. (1993). Experimental inves-
tigation of wave boundary layers with a sudden change in roughness. Journal of
Fluid Mechanics, 252, 117-145.
Fuhrman, D. R., Sumer, B. M., & Fredsøe, J. (2011). Roughness-induced streaming in
turbulent wave boundary layers. Journal of Geophysical Research.
Gao, Y., & Chow, W. (2005). Numerical studies on air flow around a cube. Journal of
Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 93, 115-135.
Graham, J. M. R. (1980). The forces on sharp-edged cylinders in oscillatory flow at low
keulegan-carpenter numbers. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 97, 331-346.
Holthuijsen, L. H. (2007). Waves in oceanic and coastal waters. In (p. 106-144). Cam-
bridge University Press.
Jacobsen, N. G., Fuhrman, D. R., & Fredsøe, J. (2012). A wave generation toolbox for
the open-source CFD library: OpenFoam ®. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Fluid.
Keulegan, G. H., & Carpenter, L. H. (1958). Forces on Cylinders and Plates in an
Oscilating Fluid. In (Vol. 60). Journal of Research of the National Bureau of
Standards.
==PAGE:102==
92
References
Kruse, M., & Wagner, S. (1998). Visualization and laser Doppler measurements of
the development of Lambda vortices in laminarturbulent transition. Measurement
Science and Technology.
Larousse, A., Martinuzzi, R., & Tropea, C.
(1993).
Flow Around Surface-Mounted,
Three-Dimensional Obstacles. In (Vol. Turbulent Shear Flows 8). Springer Verlag.
Li, C. (1989). Force coefficients of spheres and cubes in oscillatory flow with and without
current. Norwegian Institute of technology.
Morison, J. R., O’Brien, M. P., Johnson, J. W., & Schaaf, S. A. (1950). The force
exerted by surface waves on piles. Journal of Petroleum Technology.
Nielsen, F. T., & Borup, M. (2018). Experimental analyses of flow and forces on struc-
tural elements in large porous structures (Unpublished master’s thesis). Technical
University of Denmark.
Petersen, K. P. (2016). Experimental analyses of flow and turbulence in large porous
structures (Unpublished master’s thesis). Technical University of Denmark.
Phidgets. (2019). Datasheet. 3132 - Micro Load Cell (0-780g) - CZL616C. (https://
www.phidgets.com/?tier=3&catid=9&pcid=7&prodid=223)
Sarpkaya, T. (1986). Force on a cylinder in viscous oscillatory flow at low keulegan-
carpenter numbers. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 165, 61-71.
Smith, S. W. (1997). The Scientist and Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Processing.
In (chap. Windowed-Sinc Filters). California Technical Publishing. (http://www
.dspguide.com/ch16.htm)
Sumer, B. M. (2013). Lectures notes on turbulence. Technical Univeristy of Denamrk.
Sumer, B. M., & Fredsøe, J.
(2006).
Hydrodynamics around cylindrical structures
(Vol. 26). World Scientific.
Tropea, C., Yarin, A. L., & Foss, J. F. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook of experimental fluid
mechanics. Springer.
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX A
Dimensional analysis
To determine which non-dimensional parameters will have an influence on the in-line
force on a cubic element located on a seabed, a dimensional analysis is conducted.
The in-line force Fin is given as a function of the following variables:
Fin = f(T, D, h, H, L, ρ, ν, Um)
(A.1)
where T is the wave period, D is the cube diameter, h is the water depth, H is the wave
height, L is the wave length, ρ is the density of water, ν is the kinematic viscosity and
Um is the maximum horizontal velocity.
In this case there are n = 9 relevant variables, as given in Eq. (A.1) and m = 3
independent dimensions: mass M, length L and time T. Table A.1 shows the variables
given in terms of the independent dimensions. Following Buckingham’s Pi theorem, this
results in n −m = 6 non-dimensional π-groups. To form the non-dimensional pi-groups,
a number of m = 3 scaling variables are chosen: the diameter D, the density ρ and the
velocity Um.
Table A.1: Relevant variables given in terms of the independent dimensions M, L and T.
Variable
SI unit
Independent dimensions
Fin
kg · m/s2
MLT −2
T
s
T
D
m
L
h
m
L
H
m
L
L
m
L
ρ
kg/m3
ML−3
ν
m2/s
L2T −1
Um
m/s
LT −1
The 6 π-groups can then be written as:
π1 =
Fin
ρU 2
mD2
π2 = TUm
D
π3 = h
D
π4 = H
D
π5 = L
D
π6 =
ν
UmD
==PAGE:104==
94
A Dimensional analysis
The aim of a dimensional analysis is, as mentioned, to determine a number of non-
dimensional parameters which could influence a chosen parameter.
It is allowed to
combine π-groups as well as taking the reciprocal of a π-group, to shape these into
known parameters. Note that the amount of π-group does not change when reshaping
the parameters.
π1 is the non-dimensional in-line force, π3 is the relative depth and π2 is the Keulegan-
Carpenter number, KC, describing the relative importance of drag to inertia forces in
oscillatory flow. Taking the reciprocal of π6 yields the Reynolds number, Re, which
describes the ratio between inertia and viscous forces. The Reynolds number might
have an influence when considering boundary layers in relation to experimental scaling.
Combining π4 and π5 yields the wave steepness H/L, which will become increasingly
important as the waves becomes more non-linear. Finally, combining π3, π4 and π5 gives
the Ursell parameter, see Eq. (A.2). The Ursell parameter indicates how non-linear the
waves are, and is used to determine applicability of wave theories.
Ur = H/D · (L/D)2
(h/D)3
= HL2
h3
(A.2)
The non-dimensional in-line force can therefore be described by the following key pa-
rameters:
Fin
ρU 2
mD2 = f
(TUm
D , h
D, HL2
h3 , H
L , UmD
ν
)
= f
(
KC, h
D, Ur, H
L , Re
)
(A.3)
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX B
Elongation and
waterproofing of load cell
wires
In the present work Phidgets RB-Phi-117 load cells have been used to perform force
measurements on the roughness elements analysed. The load cells are manufactured
with an 0.2m four-part wire. The wires have been extended by soldering additional
wire to the load cells to accommodate use in the test flume. This extension of wires
creates a connection which needs to be waterproofed. The method of elongating and
waterproofing is the same as presented by (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) and will be detailed
shortly in the following.
1. Wire insulation is cut and removed in varying lengths from the load cell
2. Wires are soldered together in the following colour scheme:
Red = Red
Black = Black
Orange = White
Brown = Green
3. Varnish is applied to each wire connection and allowed to dry for 60 minutes
4. Liquid tape is applied to each wire connection and allowed to dry for 240 minutes
5. A shrinkflex is pulled over each connection and heated
6. Wires are twisted and covered by liquid tape, which is allowed to dry for 240
minutes
7. All wires are covered by a shrinkflex and heated
Before the load cells are taken into use the connections are tested to ensure these are
waterproof.
==PAGE:106==
96
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Detail Drawings
The following section will include detail drawings of the material used in experimental
setup. This includes detail drawings of the new test cubes, plates used to setup the test
grids etc.
==PAGE:108==
98
C Detail Drawings
Test Cubes
PVC block 1
PVC block 1
22*
11*
Ø 3.2
8*
15,3*
* Note: Tilpasses efter limning af cubes
18 stk. = PVC block 1
Cube type 1
9 stk. = Cube type 1
* Note: Tilpasses efter limning af cubes
7,3*
4*
30
30
4
30
30
15
10,6*
7,3*
7
Ø3.2
Begge sider
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.1: Cube type 1 used for load cells. PVC block used to fixate the load cell. All
measurements in mm.
==PAGE:109==
C Detail Drawings
99
* Note: Tilpasses efter limning af cubes
27 stk. = PVC block 2
27 stk. = Cube type 2
Cube type 2
PVC block 2
22*
22*
11*
11*
10
4
30
31
4
30
31
PVC block 2
M5
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.2: Cube type 2 used as dummies for variability of model setup. PVC block used
for installation of type 2 cubes. All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:110==
100
C Detail Drawings
Cube type 1
Cube type 2
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.3: Definition sketch of the two types of cubes used. Type 1 containing a load cell
and type 2 used as a dummy.
==PAGE:111==
C Detail Drawings
101
The following drawings were produced by (Nielsen & Borup, 2018) in connection with
their experimental work. The drawings show the detail drawings for manufacturing of
40x40x40 mm cubes and follows the same principal as for the 30x30x30 mm cubes.
==PAGE:112==
102
C Detail Drawings
18 stk. = Alu
L-profile 1
Figure C.4: Detail drawings of aluminium profiles for mounting 40x40x40 mm cubes on test
plate from (Nielsen & Borup, 2018). All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:113==
C Detail Drawings
103
18 stk. =
PVC block 4
27 stk. =
PVC block 3
*
Note: tilpasses PC Profile 2
EFTER Limning
*
Note: tilpasses PC Profile 2
EFTER Limning
Figure C.5: Detail drawings of PVC blocks for 40x40x40 mm cubes from (Nielsen & Borup,
2018). All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:114==
104
C Detail Drawings
27 stk. = PC
profile 2
8 stk. = Alu
L-profile 2
9 stk. = PC
profile 1
Figure C.6: Detail drawings of PC profiles for 40x40x40 mm cubes from (Nielsen & Borup,
2018). All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:115==
C Detail Drawings
105
C.0.1
Test plates
The experiment work was performed using three different test plates. Plate no.1 was
used in creating a grid with D/d = 0.5 for 40x40x40 mm cubes, and a grid with D/d
= 1.0 for 30x30x30 mm cubes. The second plate, plate no.2, was was configured to
allow a grid with D/d = 0.5 for 30x30x30 mm cubes. The third plate, plate no.3, is the
plate originally used in the experimental work by (Nielsen & Borup, 2018). This plates
enables analysis of 40x40x40 mm cubes in a grid with D/d = 1.0. The plate design was
however revised to allow for better compatibility with the new experimental setup.
Detail drawings for all three plates are presented below in figures C.7-C.11.
==PAGE:116==
106
C Detail Drawings
Ø14
M3
Ø5.2
13,51
13,51
40
40
556
542
188
248
106
136
166
196
226
256
128
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.7: Detail drawing showing measurement for plate no.1 used in creating aligned and
offset grid for 40x40x40 cubes with D/d = 0.5. Also used for creating aligned and offset grid
for 30x30x30 cubes with D/d = 1.0. All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:117==
C Detail Drawings
107
Ø14
M3
Ø5.2
13,51
13,51
40
40
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.8: Drawing showing offset grid for plate no.1. All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:118==
108
C Detail Drawings
Ø14
M3
Ø5.2
13,51
13,51
40
40
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.9: Drawing showing aligned grid for plate no.1. All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:119==
C Detail Drawings
109
Ø14
M3
Ø5.2
13,51
13,51
40
40
13,51
13,51
542
165,5
210,5
255,5
158,5
203,5
248,5
556
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.10: Detail drawing showing measurement for plate no.2 used in creating an aligned
grid for 30x30x30 cubes with D/d = 0.5. All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:120==
110
C Detail Drawings
Ø14
M3
Ø5.2
13,51
13,51
40
40
13,51
13,51
556
542
78
158
238
71
151
231
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
PRODUCED BY AN AUTODESK STUDENT VERSION
Figure C.11: Detail drawing showing measurement for plate no.3 used in creating an aligned
grid for 40x40x40 cubes with D/d = 1.0. All measurements in mm.
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX D
Calibration
D.1
Calibration of load cells
The horizontal force subjected to the cubic roughness elements by flow and waves have
been measured with load cells of a strain gauge type. Specifically, nine Phidgets RB-Phi-
117 micro load cells have been used in various constellations throughout the experiment.
This type of load cell has a capacity of maximum 0.780 kg and a voltage output range
of ±10 V. Further specification can be found in (Phidgets, 2019).
The calibration setup can be seen in Figure D.1. The calibration of the load cells is
conducted while the cubes are assembled and attached to a PC plate. Pulleys are placed
on both sides of the cube/load cell and a string is attached approximately around the
middle of the cube such that load can be added in both positive and negative direction.
The load is added in steps to complete the following load sequence. Step 1 = 0.01 kg,
Step 2 = 0.02 kg, Step 3 = 0.07 kg and Step 4 = 0.17 kg.
Figure D.1: Setup for load cell calibration
The actual weight of the applied load is determined by weighing on a Satorius Basic
Series B3100P weight scale. The accuracy of the weight scale is checked using three
calibration weights of 0.100, 0.500 and 1.000 kg.
The calibration is performed using five load steps in each direction giving an approx-
imate maximum load of ±0.170 kg. The voltage output is measured at 120 Hz over 60
==PAGE:122==
112
D Calibration
s. An average is taken in the 30 - 55 s time slot. This is done to allow time for placing
additional load and minimise the initial noise when adding the load. Table D.1, D.2 and
D.3 states the load steps and the corresponding mean voltage output for the nine micro
load cells.
Table D.1: Applied load and corresponding mean voltage output for Phidgets RB-Phi-117
micro load cell 1, 2 and 3
LC1
LC2
LC3
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
0
-0.4283
0
0.8678
0
-0.4675
-0.0102
-0.5280
-0.0102
0.7652
-0.05018
-0.5659
-0.0202
-0.6298
-0.0202
0.6637
-0.09994
-0.6627
-0.0704
-1.1324
-0.0704
0.1527
-0.14970
-1.1486
-0.1703
-2.1254
-0.1703
-0.8611
-0.19954
-2.1133
0
-0.4301
0
0.8659
0
-0.4662
0.0102
-0.3267
0.0102
0.9691
0.0102
-0.3689
0.0202
-0.2280
0.0202
1.0728
0.0202
-0.2716
0.0704
0.2734
0.0704
1.5854
0.0704
0.2144
0.1703
1.2708
0.1703
2.5965
0.1703
1.1783
Table D.2: Applied load and corresponding mean voltage output for Phidgets RB-Phi-117
micro load cell 4, 5 and 6
LC4
LC5
LC6
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
0
0.2720
0
2.0731
0
0.1962
-0.0102
0.1726
-0.0102
1.9741
-0.0102
0.0961
-0.0202
0.0736
-0.0202
1.8768
-0.0202
-0.0021
-0.0704
-0.4214
-0.0704
1.3903
-0.0704
-0.4991
-0.1703
-1.3918
-0.1703
0.4278
-0.1703
-1.4965
0
0.2798
0
2.0697
0
0.1908
0.0102
0.3779
0.0102
2.1650
0.0102
0.2934
0.0202
0.4756
0.0202
2.2611
0.0202
0.3940
0.0704
0.9647
0.0704
2.7449
0.0704
0.8935
0.1703
2.7449
0.1703
3.7058
0.1703
1.8912
==PAGE:123==
D.1 Calibration of load cells
113
Table D.3: Applied load and corresponding mean voltage output for Phidgets RB-Phi-117
micro load cell 7, 8 and 9
LC7
LC8
LC9
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
Load [kg]
Volt [V]
0
0.6141
0
0.5328
0
-0.7127
-0.0102
0.5140
-0.0102
0.4324
-0.0102
-0.8110
-0.0202
0.4135
-0.0202
0.3348
-0.0202
-0.9096
-0.0704
-0.0802
-0.0704
-0.1562
-0.0704
-1.4004
-0.1703
-1.4965
-0.1703
-1.1272
-0.1703
-2.3721
0
0.6124
0
0.5349
0
-0.7059
0.0102
0.7121
0.0102
0.6346
0.0102
-0.6089
0.0202
0.8115
0.0202
0.7320
0.0202
-0.5123
0.0704
1.3065
0.0704
1.2201
0.0704
-0.0275
0.1703
2.2907
0.1703
2.1907
0.1703
0.9443
The mean voltage output and the corresponding load is fitted utilising linear regres-
sion. The fit for all nine load cells can be seen in figure D.2
==PAGE:124==
114
D Calibration
Figure D.2: Linear fitting of mean voltage output and the corresponding load.
Table D.4: Linear regression coefficients a and b and the coefficient of determination R2
achieved from calibration of the nine Phidgets RB-Phi-117 micro load cells
Load cell
Slope
y-intercept
R2
a [V/kg]
b [V]
[-]
1
9.9755
-0.4285
1.0000
2
10.1571
0.8678
1.0000
3
9.6694
-0.4672
1.0000
4
9.7885
0.2739
1.0000
5
9.6245
2.0688
1.0000
6
9.9388
0.1957
1.0000
7
9.8559
0.6129
1.0000
8
9.7504
0.5329
1.0000
9
9.7444
-0.7116
1.0000
==PAGE:125==
D.2 Calibration of wave gauges
115
D.2
Calibration of wave gauges
The project is intended to investigate and visualise wave loads on test cubes in a wave
flume. The waves generated in the flume have been measured using conventional re-
sistance type wave gauges. The wave gauges are used to measure a time series of the
displacement of the free surface in a given point in the flume. In this experimental
analysis a set of six wave gauges have been used to determine both time series of surface
elevation and reflection in the flume. At the start of every experiment session the wave
gauges are calibrated to ensure correspondence in measurements throughout the project.
The wave gauge setup is illustrated in Figure D.3.
(a)
(b)
Figure D.3: Wave gauge setup. (a) photograph showing the wave gauges in the flume and
(b) a definition sketch of the wave gauges with distances. All measurements in mm.
In the calibration process the water level in the flume is kept constant. The wave
gauges are set in different positions in the water column by pulling on the upper rod
of the wave gauge. The calibration positions are the measurement point 0.00, +0.08m
and -0.07m. A voltage signal is recorded in a time series for each position, and is subse-
quently converted to a measurement of length using linear regression. The calibration
is measured a 120 Hz, and each step in the time series has a duration of 60 s.
Below data from an example calibration of the wave gauges is presented. Table D.5
and D.6 show the offset steps and the corresponding mean voltage output for the five
wave gauges.
Table D.5: Offset position and mean voltage output for wave gauge 0, 1 and 2
WG0
WG1
WG2
Offset [m]
Volt [V]
Offset [m]
Volt [V]
Offset [m]
Volt [V]
-0.07
-0.0577
-0.07
-0.0788
-0.07
-0.0736
0.08
0.1368
0.08
0.1110
0.08
0.1166
0
0.0375
0
0.0134
0
0.0190
==PAGE:126==
116
D Calibration
Table D.6: Offset position and mean voltage output for wave gauge 3, 4 and 5
WG3
WG4
WG5
Offset [m]
Volt [V]
Offset [m]
Volt [V]
Offset [m]
Volt [V]
-0.07
-0.0818
-0.07
-0.0853
-0.07
-0.4762
0.08
0.1111
0.08
0.0046
0.08
-0.2836
0
0.0106
0
-0.0999
0
-0.3825
Figure D.4 shows the linear fitting of the time series while Table D.7 states the slope,
y-intercept and R-squared value for the linear regression performed on each measurement
time series.
Figure D.4: Linear fitting of mean voltage and corresponding offset value for wave gauge 1
through 5.
==PAGE:127==
D.2 Calibration of wave gauges
117
Table D.7: Linear regression coefficients a and b and the coefficient of determination R2
achieved from calibration of the five wave gauges used in the experimental work.
Wave Gauge
Slope
y-intercept
R2
a [V/kg]
b [V]
[-]
1
1.2821
0.0352
0.9996
2
1.2642
0.0110
0.9995
3
1.2673
0.0164
0.9995
4
1.2849
0.0090
0.9998
5
1.2334
0.0023
0.9995
6
1.2829
-0.3850
0.9995
==PAGE:128==
118
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX E
Frequency Analysis
E.1
Eigenfrequency Analysis
This section will contain a description of the eigenfrequency or natural frequency of the
experimental setup. This has been tested by conducting a Hammer test for the setup of
a 30x30x30 mm and a 40x40x40 mm cube respectively. The Hammer test is performed
in order to verify that the eigenfrequency doesn’t coincide with the frequency of the
oscillatory motions (waves) used in the experimental work. The waves analysed have a
frequency between 1.4 s and 2.0 s. The majority of wave energy is therefore expected to
lie at frequencies below 1 Hz.
A Hammer consists of subjecting a structure, in this case the test cubes, to an impulse
and recording a time series of the response. Traditionally the impulse is introduced by
striking the structure with a hammer. In this case the impulse will be introduced by
releasing a weight attached to the cube. The setup in the Hammer test is presented in
Figure E.1.
Figure E.1: Test setup used in the Hammer test. The blue line indicates the water level.
The setup shown in Figure E.1 consists of a 700 g weight placed above the water
surface. The weight is attached to the test cube (load cell) via a string going through
==PAGE:130==
120
E Frequency Analysis
two pulleys. To induce the impulse the string holding the weight is cut and creating
a reaction similar to a hammer strike. The vibrations created by the impulse will be
recorded by the load cell. The load cell measures with a frequency off 1000 Hz.
The Hammer test is performed for both the D = 30 mm cube and the D = 40 mm
cube to investigate any influence on the stiffness of the experimental setup. Figure E.2
shows the normalised force measured for the 30x30x30 mm cube.
Figure E.2: Normalised force measurement from the Hammer test of a D = 30 mm cube.
The power spectrum of the signal shown in Figure E.2 is analysed by doing a Fast
Fourier Transform of the signal. This will show which frequencies of the response con-
tains the most energy, and thereby reveal the eigenfrequency of the system tested. The
power spectrum is shown in Figure E.3.
==PAGE:131==
E.1 Eigenfrequency Analysis
121
Figure E.3: Power spectrum for Hammer test performed on 30x30x30 mm cube.
The power spectrum details that the eigenfrequency of the experimental setup with
D = 30 mm cubes is around 190 Hz.
A similar Hammer test and subsequent analysis of test results have been performed
for a D = 40 mm cube. The normalised force measured during the Hammer is shown
in Figure E.4. A power spectrum is similarly as for the D = 30 mm cube shown for the
D = 40 mm cube in Figure E.5. Here it is seen that the eigenfrequency of the larger
cube lies slightly lower than for the small cube. The eigenfrequency of the D = 40 mm
cube setup is found around 185 Hz. This means that the experimental setup with the
smaller cube is stiffer, however only by a few percentage.
==PAGE:132==
122
E Frequency Analysis
Figure E.4: Normalised force measurement from the Hammer test of a D = 40 mm cube.
Figure E.5: Power spectrum for Hammer test performed on D = 40 mm cube.
==PAGE:133==
E.2 Frequency analysis: Waves
123
E.2
Frequency analysis: Waves
This section is dedicated to an investigation of the frequency domain related to the waves
used in the experimental work. As previously mentioned the main part of the wave
energy is expected to lie far below the two eigenfrequencies found for the experimental
setups. Figure E.6 and E.7 shows the power sepctra found for the four types of waves
used in the experimental work. As seen the vast majority of the wave energy is located
at frequencies below 2 Hz, i.e. far below the eigenfrequencies. There should therefore
be no danger of resonance of the system in the experimental work.
(a)
(b)
Figure E.6: (a) Power spectrum for wave no. 1 and (b) power spectrum for wave no. 2.
(a)
(b)
Figure E.7: (a) Power spectrum for wave no. 3 and (b) power spectrum for wave no. 4.
==PAGE:134==
124
E Frequency Analysis
E.3
Effect of Hamming filter
In this section the effect of applying the Hamming filter on the force signals can be seen.
A stated in the report, two filters are used to account for signal drift. The filtered signal
used in further calculations are the difference between these two filters. In the following
plots this difference is seen as the remaining signal filtered at fc,u = 9 Hz and fc,u = 6,
respectively. Putting it another way: the red part of the signal is the part used in further
calculations.
Figure E.8: Effect of the Hamming filter on the in-line force signal, for each of the four Waves.
This corresponds to the reference experiment, configuration 1×1 and cube size D = 40 mm.
==PAGE:135==
E.3 Effect of Hamming filter
125
Figure E.9: Effect of the Hamming filter on the transverse force signal, for each of the four
Waves. This corresponds to the reference experiment, configuration 1×1 and cube size D = 40
mm.
==PAGE:136==
126
==PAGE:137==
APPENDIX F
Validation: Experimental
parameters and forces
This appendix presents the specific parameters for each experiment performed for vali-
dation of the experimental model. This concerns configuration 1×1 for cube size D = 30
mm and D = 40 mm. Keep in mind that 2 sets of experiments have been conducted
for in-line forces. Figures showing the ensemble average of both in-line and transverse
forces are also presented for all waves used in the experiment.
Table F.1: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 1×1
validation experiment.
Configuration 1×1: In-line
D = 30 mm
D = 40 mm
H
T
um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1.1
7.06
1.4
0.11
5.29
3.40
3.93
6.98
1.4
0.11
3.93
4.49
4.04
Wave 1.2
11.43
1.5
0.23
11.25
6.75
9.04
11.28
1.5
0.22
8.33
8.88
8.89
Wave 1.3
15.69
1.6
0.28
14.93
8.40
4.92
15.25
1.6
0.27
10.90
10.90
6.20
Wave 1.4
17.07
1.7
0.34
19.13
10.13
4.07
16.87
1.7
0.33
14.19
13.35
4.11
Wave 2.1
7.09
1.4
0.11
5.31
3.42
3.76
6.99
1.4
0.11
3.93
4.49
3.49
Wave 2.2
11.44
1.5
0.23
11.25
6.75
8.55
11.33
1.5
0.22
8.36
8.92
8.35
Wave 2.3
16.15
1.6
0.29
15.32
8.62
6.62
15.48
1.6
0.28
11.05
11.06
5.64
Wave 2.4
18.00
1.7
0.36
20.14
10.66
3.49
17.95
1.7
0.35
15.07
14.19
3.44
Table F.2: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the 1×1
validation experiment.
Configuration 1×1: Transverse
D = 30 mm
D = 40 mm
H
T
um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.86
1.4
0.11
5.16
3.32
4.14
6.92
1.4
0.11
3.90
4.46
3.86
Wave 2
11.24
1.5
0.22
11.13
6.68
8.07
11.32
1.5
0.22
8.41
8.97
7.63
Wave 3
15.39
1.6
0.28
14.72
8.28
5.59
14.98
1.6
0.27
10.76
10.76
4.95
Wave 4
18.63
1.7
0.37
20.85
11.04
2.90
18.48
1.7
0.37
15.54
14.63
3.05
==PAGE:138==
128
F Validation: Experimental parameters and forces
Figure F.1: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force on a single cube of size
D = 30 mm. Note that the average for both sets of measurements are plotted.
Figure F.2: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the transverse force on a single cube of
size D = 30 mm.
==PAGE:139==
F Validation: Experimental parameters and forces
129
Figure F.3: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the in-line force on a single cube of size
D = 40 mm. Note that the average for both sets of measurements are plotted.
Figure F.4: Ensemble average over 100 periods of the transverse force on a single cube of
size D = 40 mm.
==PAGE:140==
130
==PAGE:141==
APPENDIX G
Results: Experimental
parameters
This appendix presents the specific parameters for each experiment performed for con-
figurations: 3×3, 6×6, 6×5 and offset.
G.1
Configuration: 3×3
Table G.1: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 3×3
configuration for D = 30 mm.
D = 30 mm: In-line
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.93
1.4
0.11
5.20
3.34
4.21
7.01
1.4
0.11
5.25
3.38
3.85
Wave 2
11.35
1.5
0.22
11.17
6.70
7.95
11.32
1.5
0.22
11.14
6.68
8.55
Wave 3
16.08
1.6
0.29
15.26
8.58
6.03
15.54
1.6
0.28
14.80
8.32
5.81
Wave 4
18.27
1.7
0.36
20.41
10.81
3.04
17.69
1.7
0.35
19.81
10.49
3.48
Table G.2: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the 3×3
configuration for D = 30 mm.
D = 30 mm: Transverse
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.95
1.4
0.11
5.22
3.36
4.31
6.88
1.4
0.11
5.17
3.33
3.73
Wave 2
11.34
1.5
0.22
11.23
6.74
8.18
11.27
1.5
0.22
11.16
6.70
8.35
Wave 3
16.34
1.6
0.29
15.52
8.74
6.52
15.35
1.6
0.28
14.69
8.26
5.27
Wave 4
18.16
1.7
0.36
20.40
10.80
3.20
17.92
1.7
0.36
20.17
10.68
3.43
==PAGE:142==
132
G Results: Experimental parameters
Table G.3: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 3×3
configuration for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm: In-line
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.98
1.4
0.11
3.92
4.48
3.75
6.98
1.4
0.11
3.92
4.48
3.98
Wave 2
11.32
1.5
0.22
8.36
8.91
7.71
11.43
1.5
0.22
8.43
8.99
7.78
Wave 3
15.43
1.6
0.28
11.03
11.03
5.60
15.18
1.6
0.27
10.86
10.86
5.21
Wave 4
17.87
1.7
0.35
15.01
14.13
2.90
18.19
1.7
0.36
15.25
14.35
3.10
Table G.4: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the 3×3
configuration for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm: Transverse
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
7.00
1.4
0.11
3.95
4.51
4.30
6.84
1.4
0.11
3.85
4.40
4.18
Wave 2
11.38
1.5
0.22
8.46
9.02
7.65
11.25
1.5
0.22
8.36
8.91
7.59
Wave 3
15.11
1.6
0.27
10.85
10.85
5.19
15.08
1.6
0.36
15.22
14.32
3.06
Wave 4
18.33
1.7
0.36
15.42
14.52
3.38
18.06
1.7
0.36
15.22
14.32
3.06
G.2
Configuration: 6×6
Table G.5: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 6×6
configuration for D = 30 mm.
D = 30 mm: In-line
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
7.15
1.4
0.11
5.35
3.44
4.02
7.12
1.4
0.11
5.34
3.43
4.63
Wave 2
11.44
1.5
0.23
11.25
6.75
7.73
11.28
1.5
0.22
11.10
6.66
7.66
Wave 3
15.40
1.6
0.28
14.67
8.25
5.71
16.52
1.6
0.29
15.62
8.78
7.49
Wave 4
18.13
1.7
0.36
20.28
10.74
2.07
18.11
1.7
0.36
20.26
10.73
2.86
==PAGE:143==
G.2 Configuration: 6×6
133
Table G.6: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the 6×6
configuration for D = 30 mm.
D = 30 mm: Transverse
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.92
1.4
0.11
5.20
3.34
4.34
6.98
1.4
0.11
5.25
3.37
4.08
Wave 2
11.34
1.5
0.22
11.27
6.74
7.60
11.25
1.5
0.22
11.14
6.68
7.90
Wave 3
15.65
1.6
0.28
14.96
8.41
6.10
15.38
1.6
0.28
14.71
8.28
6.23
Wave 4
18.32
1.7
0.36
20.56
10.86
2.62
18.03
1.7
0.36
20.26
10.73
2.81
Table G.7: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 6×6
configuration for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm: In-line
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.98
1.4
0.11
3.92
4.48
4.07
7.02
1.4
0.11
3.94
4.51
3.80
Wave 2
11.26
1.5
0.22
8.31
8.86
7.37
11.36
1.5
0.22
8.38
8.94
7.68
Wave 3
15.75
1.6
0.28
11.24
11.24
6.68
16.23
1.6
0.29
11.54
11.54
5.11
Wave 4
17.81
1.7
0.35
14.95
14.07
2.63
17.69
1.7
0.35
14.87
13.99
2.71
Table G.8: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the 6×6
configuration for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm: Transverse
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.87
1.4
0.11
3.87
4.42
5.28
6.98
1.4
0.11
3.94
4.50
4.59
Wave 2
11.17
1.5
0.22
8.29
8.85
7.01
11.34
1.5
0.22
8.42
8.98
6.91
Wave 3
15.11
1.6
0.27
10.85
10.85
6.41
16.02
1.6
0.29
11.45
11.45
5.42
Wave 4
18.40
1.7
0.36
15.47
14.56
2.61
17.97
1.7
0.36
15.15
14.26
2.31
==PAGE:144==
134
G Results: Experimental parameters
G.3
Configuration: 6×5
Table G.9: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 6×5
configuration for D = 30 mm.
D = 30 mm: In-line
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
7.06
1.4
0.11
5.29
3.40
4.16
7.04
1.4
0.11
5.28
3.39
4.40
Wave 2
11.47
1.5
0.22
11.29
6.77
7.77
11.38
1.5
0.22
11.20
6.72
8.28
Wave 3
15.75
1.6
0.28
14.99
8.43
5.98
16.37
1.6
0.29
15.50
8.72
7.12
Wave 4
18.50
1.7
0.36
20.64
10.93
2.86
18.20
1.7
0.36
20.34
10.77
3.02
Table G.10: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the
6×5 configuration for D = 30 mm.
D = 30 mm: Transverse
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.91
1.4
0.11
5.20
3.34
4.69
6.94
1.4
0.11
5.22
3.36
4.06
Wave 2
11.26
1.5
0.22
11.15
6.69
7.61
11.14
1.5
0.22
11.03
6.62
8.16
Wave 3
16.13
1.6
0.29
15.36
8.64
6.70
15.46
1.6
0.28
14.78
8.31
5.91
Wave 4
18.91
1.7
0.36
20.43
10.82
2.64
17.86
1.7
0.35
20.09
10.64
3.04
Table G.11: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the 6×5
configuration for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm: In-line
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.94
1.4
0.11
3.90
4.46
4.39
7.03
1.4
0.11
3.95
4.52
4.02
Wave 2
11.27
1.5
0.22
8.32
8.87
6.75
11.40
1.5
0.22
8.41
8.97
7.23
Wave 3
16.04
1.6
0.29
11.43
11.43
6.07
16.07
1.6
0.29
11.44
11.44
5.54
Wave 4
18.05
1.7
0.36
15.14
14.25
1.90
18.02
1.7
0.36
15.12
14.23
2.16
==PAGE:145==
G.4 Configuration: offset
135
Table G.12: Experimental parameters concerning transverse force measurements from the
6×5 configuration for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm: Transverse
d/D = 0.5
d/D = 1.0
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
6.98
1.4
0.11
3.94
4.50
4.48
6.88
1.4
0.11
3.88
4.43
4.30
Wave 2
11.28
1.5
0.22
8.38
8.94
7.12
11.24
1.5
0.22
8.35
8.90
7.47
Wave 3
15.74
1.6
0.28
11.28
11.28
6.71
15.37
1.6
0.28
11.03
11.03
5.34
Wave 4
18.18
1.7
0.36
15.31
14.41
2.31
17.88
1.7
0.36
15.09
14.20
2.62
G.4
Configuration: offset
Table G.13: Experimental parameters concerning in-line force measurements from the offset
configurations for D = 40 mm.
D = 40 mm, d/D = 0.5: In-line
Configuration: 3×3 offset
Configuration: 6×6 offset
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
Wave 1
7.07
1.4
0.11
3.97
4.54
3.51
7.08
1.4
0.11
3.98
4.55
4.12
Wave 2
11.51
1.5
0.23
8.49
9.06
7.33
11.37
1.5
0.22
8.39
8.95
6.58
Wave 3
16.38
1.6
0.29
11.63
11.63
5.43
17.35
1.6
0.30
12.18
12.18
7.64
Wave 4
18.80
1.7
0.37
15.68
14.76
2.04
18.95
1.7
0.37
15.80
14.87
1.85
==PAGE:146==
136
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX H
Results: Force coefficients
This appendix presents the force coefficients CD and CM for all nine cubes. Note that
only force coefficients corresponding to plots shown in the report are presented. Plots
showing the force coefficients for all remaining setups, cube size and gap ratio can be
found in the provided Digital Appendix.
Table H.1: Force coefficients CD and CM for all 9 cubes for configuration 3×3 with cube size
D = 30 mm, subjected to Wave 4.
d/D = 0.5
Cube no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CD
0.6496
0.6944
0.7644
0.1102
0.1022
0.1229
0.7372
0.8209
0.8258
CM
1.7690
2.0832
1.7196
1.5491
1.6294
1.5859
1.6860
1.9146
1.6719
d/D = 1.0
Cube no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CD
0.8100
0.8613
0.8818
0.5853
0.6610
0.6730
0.9839
1.0985
1.0051
CM
2.0252
2.5058
2.1461
1.9406
2.1357
1.9809
1.8797
1.9951
1.8947
Table H.2: Force coefficients CD and CM for all 9 cubes for configuration 6×6 with cube size
D = 30 mm, subjected to Wave 4.
d/D = 0.5
Cube no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CD
0.8979
0.9377
0.9340
0.2044
0.1790
0.1969
0.2521
0.2745
0.2969
CM
1.9983
2.0369
1.9735
1.4902
1.5194
1.5287
1.4757
1.4501
1.4104
d/D = 1.0
Cube no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CD
0.8926
0.9384
0.9601
0.4203
0.4503
0.4452
0.3318
0.3579
0.3465
CM
1.9059
2.0575
2.0166
1.9490
1.9920
1.9854
1.8810
1.9222
1.8933
==PAGE:148==
138
H Results: Force coefficients
Table H.3: Force coefficients CD and CM for all 9 cubes in the offset configurations with
cube size D = 40 mm and gap-ratio d/D = 0.5, subjected to Wave 4.
Configuration: 3×3 offset
Cube no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CD
1.0526
0.8611
0.7659
0.8937
1.0346
1.2262
1.1572
1.0763
0.9288
CM
1.7762
2.0395
1.8289
1.7208
1.8338
1.6963
1.7397
1.8950 1.7011
Configuration: 6×6 offset
Cube no.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
CD
0.9325
0.9455
0.9429
0.8283
0.8302
0.8260
0.4942
0.5197
0.4950
CM
1.8006
1.8573
1.8916
1.7683
1.7576
1.7020
1.5862
1.5961
1.5797
==PAGE:149==
APPENDIX I
Grid specifications: Flow
visualisation
I.1
Measurement grids
The following appendix will hold information, figures and tables related to the velocity
measurements performed during the experimental.
Figures I.1 - I.5 shows the measuring grids for the vertical velocity profiles.
Figure I.1: Measuring points for reference experiment.
==PAGE:150==
140
I Grid specifications: Flow visualisation
Figure I.2: Measuring points for velocity test no. 2 & 3 as detailed in Table 6.1.
Figure I.3: Measuring points for velocity test no. 4 & 5 as detailed in Table 6.1.
==PAGE:151==
I.1 Measurement grids
141
Figure I.4: Measuring points for velocity test no. 6 & 7 as detailed in Table 6.1.
Figure I.5: Measuring points for velocity test no. 8 & 9 as detailed in Table 6.1.
==PAGE:152==
142
I Grid specifications: Flow visualisation
I.2
Wave parameters
Table I.1: Experimental parameters for test no 1 and 2 in relation to Table 6.1.
Test 1
Test 2
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
15.10
1.59
0.27
10.79
10.80
5.63
6.66
1.4
0.11
3.73
4.27
-
Table I.2: Experimental parameters for test no 3 and 4 in relation to Table 6.1.
Test 3
Test 4
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
15.33
1.6
0.27
10.95
10.94
-
7.12
1.4
0.11
4.00
4.57
-
Table I.3: Experimental parameters for test no 5 and 6 in relation to Table 6.1.
Test 5
Test 6
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
15.37
1.6
0.28
11.02
10.99
-
11.49
1.5
0.23
11.31
6.78
-
Table I.4: Experimental parameters for test no 7 and 8 in relation to Table 6.1.
Test 7
Test 8
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
18.00
1.69
0.36
20.14
10.66
-
15.22
1.6
0.27
14.51
8.16
-
Table I.5: Experimental parameters for test no 9 and 10 in relation to Table 6.1.
Test 9
Test 10
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
H
T
Um
KC
Re
βR
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
[cm]
[s]
[m/s]
[-]
[-]×103
[%]
18.00
1.69
0.36
20.14
10.66
-
17.49
1.7
0.35
19.61
10.38
-
==PAGE:153==
APPENDIX J
Photos of experimental setup
(a)
(b)
Figure J.1: (a) 1x1 cube setup on test plate and (b) 3x3 cube setup on test plate.
(a)
(b)
Figure J.2: (a) 5x6 cube setup on test plate and (b) 6x6 cube setup on test plate.
==PAGE:154==
144
J Photos of experimental setup
(a)
(b)
Figure J.3: 6x6 offset cube setup in flume.
(a)
(b)
Figure J.4: (a) assembled and disassembled cube for housing of load cells and (b) the two
types of load cell housing cube.
==PAGE:155==
J Photos of experimental setup
145
(a)
(b)
Figure J.5: Dummy cubes.
(a)
(b)
Figure J.6: (a)Load cell wires connected to National Instruments (NI) ScrewTerminal and
(b) close-up of wire order in ScrewTerminal.
==PAGE:156==
146
J Photos of experimental setup
(a)
(b)
Figure J.7:
(a)Wires exit from test section in flume and (b) Labview software for data
recording.
(a)
(b)
Figure J.8: (a) Aqua Acquisition Mermaid series strain gauge and wave gauge amplifier
panels and (b) National Instruments BNC data acquisition module USB-6218.
==PAGE:157==
J Photos of experimental setup
147
(a)
(b)
Figure J.9: (a) Conventional resistance type wave gauge as the ones used in the present
project and (b) close-up on the back four wave gauges.
(a)
(b)
Figure J.10: (a) Up stream view of the wave gauge setup and (b) side view of the six wave
gauge setup
==PAGE:158==
148
J Photos of experimental setup
(a)
(b)
Figure J.11: (a) Dantec DopplerLite DPSS laser system and (b) laser probe head at test
section.
(a)
(b)
Figure J.12: Trench
==PAGE:159==
J Photos of experimental setup
149
==PAGE:160==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé, Bld. 403
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Tlf.: +45 4525 1360
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
July 2019
==PAGE:161==
==PAGE:162==
