==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Machine Learning and Ensemble
Classification Methods for Automatic
Detection of Cardiac Arrhythmias
Mona J. Jajroodi
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Authors
Mona Jafar Jajroodi (S122898)
Supervisor
Sadasivan Puthusserypady (sapu@dtu.dk)
Co-Supervisor
Abdolrahman Peimankar (apeima@dtu.dk)
Project period: 28-01-2019 _ 28-07-2019
ECTS points: 35
Education: Master of Science (MSc)
Field: Biomedical Engineering (Medicine and Technology)
Class: Confidential
Edition: 1.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Health Technoloy
Ørsteds Plads
Building 349
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tel (+45)45 25 38 00
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cardiac arrhythmia is an important manifestation of cardiovascular disease,
defined as any disturbance in the regularity and rate of the cardiac electric
impulses. Electrocardiogram (ECG) is an important clinical method to de-
scribe the behaviour of the heart by recording and monitoring the heartbeats
and rhythms, which can be used for diagnosing cardiac arrhythmias. The
analysis of ECG signals is therefore, one of the most effective approaches for
improving the timely detection and diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmias. Physi-
cians can diagnose cardiac arrhythmias by examining the visual output of
the ECG recordings. However, analysing a large number of ECG record-
ings is time consuming and cumbersome. Hence, developing an improved
analytic software is important to analyse the ECG signals and detect the
common cardiac arrhythmias.
During the last decade, various methods for automatic ECG-based heart-
beat classification and arrhythmia detection have been introduced. In this
study, an ensemble learning approach is proposed for automatic processing
of ECG signals and classification of heartbeats into one of the five classes rec-
ommended by the Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumenta-
tion (AAMI) standard, considering both intra- and inter-patient paradigms.
Twenty six features (based on wavelet transform (WT), heartbeat in-
tervals, and RR-intervals (RRI)) are extracted and five algorithms, namely,
Random Forest (RF), Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost), K nearest neighbor
(KNN), linear discriminant analysis (LDA), and Artificial Neural Network
(ANN) are utilized for classification. Later, an ensemble learning approach
is used for combining the outputs of the classifiers to enhance the perfor-
mance of the classification models.
The data required for this study is
obtained from the database called the Physionet database, which can be
used to validate the developed algorithm and compare its performance with
other models. The study concludes that the performance of the ensemble
model for ECG heartbeat classification improves the overall accuracy.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was written at the Department of Health Technology,
as a part of requirements for obtaining a M.Sc. in Biomedical Engineeing
at Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project deals with the
automatic processing of ECG for the classification of heartbeats into the
five beat classes recommended by association for the AAMI.
The project has been carried out from January 2019 to July 2019, in col-
laboration with DTU. This study consists of the report, along with Matlab
code and an accepted conference article.
Kongens Lyngby, July 28, 2019
Mona J. Jajroodi
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my main supervisor Sadasivan
Puthusserypady and my Co-Supervisor, Abdolrahman Peimankar for their
valuable advises and support during the entire process of this thesis. Fur-
thermore, I would like to thank Rig Das for his guidance and valuable
comment throughout the project. Finally, I would like to thank my hus-
band and my family for their encouragement during my education, and
supporting me to finalize this thesis.
Thank you.
Mona Jajroodi
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
ix
List of Abbreviations
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contribution of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Clinical Background
4
2.1
Anatomy and Physiology of the Cardiovascular System . . . .
4
2.2
Cardiac Conduction System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Electrocardiogram (ECG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
State-of-the-Art
10
4
Materials and Methods
14
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Heartbeat Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Feature Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
4.6
Beat Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.7
The Dempster-Shafer Combination Rule (DST) . . . . . . . .
30
4.8
Evaluation Protocol
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results and Discussion
36
5.1
Shuffling the data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Signal Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Feature Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Comparing Performance of Classifiers With Different Param-
eters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
59
Appendix A
64
Appendix B
71
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
2.1
Two main circulatory paths of the cardiovascular system. The
right side of the heart pumps blood to the lungs, and the left
side of the heart pumps blood to the systemic circulation [9]. . .
5
2.2
The cardiac conduction system, which consists of SA node, AV
node, bundle of His, the right and left bundle branches, and
Purkinje fibers [9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The components and intervals of a typical ECG waveform (lead
II) [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.1
An example of how ADASYN classifier is working. . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
The examples of typical mother wavelets that can be used for
ECG processing: (a) Daubechies (db), (b) Morlet, (c) Biorthog-
onal (bior), (d) Orthogonal Cubic Spline (ocs), (e) Mexican Hat
(MH), (f) Haar, (g) Complex Gaussian (CG), and (h) Coiflet
(coif) wavelet [28].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Example of one segmented ECG beat. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Subband decomposition of discrete wavelet transform implemen-
tation.
The approximations (A) boxes represent the low fre-
quency components obtained by the low pass filter (LP), and
the details (D) boxes represent the high frequency components
obtained by the high pass filter (HP). The high-pass and low-pass
filters are applied at each level, until the required resolution is
obtained.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.5
The decomposition of ECG beat into four levels by using (db4)
mother wavelet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
An example of how RF classifier is working for a binary classi-
fication. In this example, class N gets the majority of voting.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
vii
4.7
Methology of how AdaBoost is working. Iteration 1: training
a weak classifier (decision tree), in this step, the mis-classified
samples are three plus sign. Iteration 2: The mis-classified sam-
ples from iteration 1 get higher weighting, in this step, the mis-
classified samples are three minus sign. Iteration 3: The mis-
classified samples from iteration 2 get higher weighting. In final
classifier: combination of three classifiers from iteration 1 to 3.
.
25
4.8
An example of a feedforward neural network with two hidden
layers. The first and second hidden layers consist of three and
four neurons, respectively, while output layer has two neurons.
.
27
4.9
An example of the binary classification (pink and green) by LDA.
LDA projects the data into a direction where the distance be-
tween mean of each class is maximized, while the within class
variances are minimized. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.10 An example of KNN classification model for a binary classifica-
tion. For K=1, the model will classify the red star as the green
circle class; for K=3, it is assigned to class of gray square; As
conclusion, K=5 model classifies the red star as green circles,
since the five nearest neighbors consists more green circles (by a
9–6 majority voting). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.11 A graphical representation of how the 5-fold cross-validation works. 33
4.12 Flowchart of ECG classification technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.13 Three examples of ROC curves; lines A on the upper and left
corner which indicates the most accurate classifier.
Curve B
is a typical ROC curve. Finally, line C that is a diagonal line
corresponding to random classifier. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1
Scatter plots of two arbitrary features for two classes (N and F):
(a) Imbalanced, and (b) Synthetically balanced. . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
A part of the ECG signal, before and after signal filtering; Top:
Original ECG and bottom: Filtered ECG. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Colormaps of PCC values for the extracted features. . . . . . . .
39
5.4
PCC values for the extracted features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Colormaps of corresponding p-values for the extracted features. .
41
5.6
Colormaps of PCC values for the remaining features. . . . . . . .
42
5.7
PCC values for the remaining features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.8
Comparison of the results of all classifiers and the ensemble
model on the validation set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Figures
5.9
Confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on the valida-
tion set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.10 ROC curve of the proposed ensemble model on validation set. . .
51
5.11 Comparison of the results of all classifiers and the ensemble
model on the testing set. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.12 Confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on testing set.
55
5.13 ROC curve of the proposed ensemble model on testing set.
. . .
56
==PAGE:11==
List of Tables
3.1
State-of-the-Art method comparison for cardiac arrhythmia de-
tection.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1
Categories of heartbeats in MITDB database based on AAMI [23]. 15
4.2
Features Description. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1
Number of imbalanced and balanced data sets. . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, before fea-
ture selection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, after feature
selection.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
The required time to train and test the classification algorithms,
before and after features selection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Accuracy of RF with three different numbers of trees and corre-
sponding computation time required for training them. . . . . . .
45
5.6
Accuracy of KNN with four different values for K and corre-
sponding computation time required for training them. . . . . . .
45
5.7
Accuracy of ANN model with seven different numbers of hidden
neurons on one hidden layer, and the corresponding computa-
tion time required for training them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.8
Accuracy of ANN model with three different numbers of hidden
neurons on two hidden layer, and the corresponding computa-
tion time required for training them. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.9
Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-
patient paradigm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.10 F1-score of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-patient
paradigm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.11 Sensitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-
patient paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Tables
5.12 Specitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-
patient paradigm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.13 Performance of ensemble algorithm on training and validation
set over all classes in intra-patient paradigm.
. . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.14 Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-
patient paradigm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.15 F1-score of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-patient
paradigm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.16 Sensitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-
patient paradigm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.17 Specitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-
patient paradigm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.18 Performance of ensemble algorithm on training and validation
set over all classes in inter-patient paradigm.
. . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:13==
List of Abbreviations
AAMI Association for the
Advancement of Medical
Instrumentation
ACC Accuracy
AdaBoost Adaptive Boosting
ADASYN Adaptive Synthetic
Over-sampling Technique
ANN Artificial Neural Network
AP Action Potential
AV Atrio-ventricular
db Daubechies
DST Dempster-Shafer
Combination Rule
ECG Electrocardiogram
FS Feature Selection
ICA Independent Component
Analysis
KNN K-Nearest Neighbor
LDA Linear Discriminant
Analysis
MITDB MIT-BIH Database
MLPNN Multilayer Perceptron
Neural Network
PCA Principal Component
Analysis
PCC Pearson Correlation
Coefficient
ROC Receiver Operating
Characteristics
RF Random Forest
RRI RR-Intervals
SA Sino-atrial
Se Sensitivity
Sp Specificity
SVM Support Vector Machine
WT Wavelet Transform
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Cardiac arrhythmia results from any disturbance in the rate of cardiac mus-
cle contractions and is a critical issue due to its high prevalence, associated
high mortality and high cost of treatment [1, 2, 3]. According to the World
Health Organization (WHO), “Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the num-
ber one cause of death in the world: more people die annually from CVDs
than from any other cause. An estimated 17.7 million people died from
CVDs in 2015, representing 31 % of all global deaths” [3].
In order to diagnose cardiac arrhythmia and provide important informa-
tion about heart’s condition, the most basic and available method is electro-
cardiography, which is non-invasive, inexpensive and easy to use [2]. ECG
signal is the recording of the bioelectrical activity of the heart. Thus the
exact analysis of ECG beats is crucial to diagnose different types of cardiac
arrhythmia [4, 5]. However, it can be troublesome for a human to analyse
long ECG beats in short time. For instance, diagnosis of certain arrhyth-
mia may take up to several hours or even days by visual inspection. Fur-
thermore, human eye is not always reliable to detect the variation of ECG
records and there is the possibility of error during the manual ECG analysis
[6]. Additionally, an important step to identify arrhythmia is the effective
classification of heartbeats in the signal, which is also time-consuming for
long-term recordings [1, 4]. Therefore, to facilitate the analysis of long ECG
recordings, there is a need to use computational techniques and develop ef-
fective algorithms for automatic analysis and classification of cardiac beats.
This can significantly simplify the diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmia, which is
a great assistance to the clinician [1, 4, 5, 6].
==PAGE:15==
2
1 Introduction
Several machine-learning techniques have been reported for ECG beats
classification such as support-vector machines (SVM), ANN, KNN, RF, Ad-
aBoost, and LDA. Although, these techniques have shown promising results,
the development of automated systems for arrhythmia diagnosis and clas-
sification with high accuracy rates are still an active area of research [4,
6].
Besides of the machine-learning techniques, ensemble learning is also one
of the popular approaches, which can be used in different types of problems
such as classification and regression [7]. By utilizing ensemble learning, the
accuracy of classification model might be higher due to avoiding selection
of a single weak classifier [7].
The aim of this study is to investigate and develop the classification
of cardiac arrhythmias into five beat classes recommended by AAMI, i.e.,
normal beat (N), ventricular ectopic beat (V), supraventricular ectopic beat
(S), fusion of a normal and a ventricular beats (F), and unknown beat
(Q). To such extend, three different feature extraction methods, namely,
WT, RRI and heart-beat morphology features are proposed for classification
of ECG beats.
Later, the extracted features are classified by using five
different machine-learning algorithms, namely, RF, AdaBoost, KNN, LDA
and ANN. The performance of these classifiers are conducted on recordings
of the MIT-BIH arhythmia database (MITDB), by considering both intra-
and inter patient paradigms. Finally, a novel model is developed to combine
the predictions of the mentioned classifiers by using ensemble learning, in
order to enhance the performance of the proposed models.
Assessment
of the five classifiers and proposed ensemble model were evaluated using
accuracy (ACC), sensitivity (Se), specificity (Sp), F-score measures as well
as confusion matrix and Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curves.
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Contribution of the Thesis
3
1.2
Contribution of the Thesis
A short overview of the thesis is described as follows:
Chapter 1: The motivation for the research followed by the aims of this
study and contribution of the thesis are presented.
Chapter 2: The anatomy and physiology of the human heart and its con-
duction system, followed by the pathology of cardiac arrythmia and the
ECG description are explained.
Chapter 3: Presents an overview of the starte-of-the-art algorithms within
the field of automatic detection of cardiac arrythmia.
Chapter 4: Presents the database used to evaluate the proposed meth-
ods followed by the detailed description of the utilized methods, including
signal de-noising technique, feature extraction, feature selection, beat seg-
mentation, five different classifiers, and finally ensemble learning approach.
Chapter 5: The experimental results, and optimization on the model pa-
rameters, followed by discussion of the proposed methods are presented.
Chapter 6: The final chapter presents a conclusion of the thesis.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Clinical Background
In each heartbeat, the electrical activity is transmitted throughout the body
and can be measured from skin surface by using electrodes. ECG machine
records the electrical activity and detects small electrical changes for each
heart rate and displays them graphically [8]. In order to understand and
interpret the ECG waveforms, the basic knowledge of the cardiac function
and its electrical activity is required. The aim of this chapter is to explain
the anatomy and physiology of the human heart, the cardiac conduction sys-
tem, different types of cardiac arrhyhmia, as well as ECG and its important
components.
2.1
Anatomy and Physiology of the
Cardiovascular System
The cardiovascular system is an important organ to flow the blood and
transport the oxygen, hormones, carbon dioxide, and nutrients to and from
the tissues and consequently nourish the body. The cardiovascular system or
circulatory system is divided into two major circuits: the pulmonary circuit;
which transports blood to the lungs for gas exchange, and the systemic
circuit; which transports blood to the body tissues, as seen in Fig.
2.1.
The heart acts as pump for the cardiovascular system, which lies inside the
thoracic cavity and is enclosed in the pericardium. The heart consists of
four chambers: two atria and two ventricles, separated by cardiac valves
that regulate the passage of blood. The right side of the heart receives the
deoxygenated blood from the body and pumps it through the pulmonary
circuit, and the left side of the heart receives the oxyganeted blood from
the pulmonary circulation and pumps it to the organs [9, 10]. A detailed
blood flow pathway through the heart is shown in Fig. 2.1.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Anatomy and Physiology of the Cardiovascular System
5
Figure 2.1: Two main circulatory paths of the cardiovascular system. The right
side of the heart pumps blood to the lungs, and the left side of the heart pumps
blood to the systemic circulation [9].
The heart wall consists of three layers: external layer (epicardium) is a
thin, smooth and transparent outer layer of the heart composed of the con-
nective tissues. The middle layer (myocardium) consists of cardiac muscle
tissues, and is responsible for the electrical activity and pumping action of
the heart. The inner layer (endocardium) provides a smooth lining for the
chambers of the heart and covers the valves [11].
==PAGE:19==
6
2 Clinical Background
2.2
Cardiac Conduction System
The cardiac muscle is able to generate and conduct its own electrical im-
pulses, known as Action Potentials (APs), which makes it unique among
other muscles. The cardiac conduction system is a group of muscle cells
in myocardium, which is responsible for generating APs and controling the
heart rhythm. These APs cause contraction of muscles fibers and conse-
quently, pump the blood through the body [9, 10, 12]. The cardiac con-
duction system consists of following components: sino-atrial (SA) node,
atrio-ventricular (AV) node, bundle of His, bundle branches, and Purkinje
fibers, as illustrated in Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: The cardiac conduction system, which consists of SA node, AV node,
bundle of His, the right and left bundle branches, and Purkinje fibers [9].
In a healthy human heart, SA node starts the cardiac conduction system
by generating APs. SA node has the fastest rate of firing (60 to 100 beats
per minute), and it is usually known as the pacemaker of the heart, as it
can generates the heart’s rhythmic contractions [10]. From SA node, APs
move to AV node which results in depolarization of the atrial muscle cells
and cause the blood ejects to the ventricle. In this process, AV node reduces
the speed of the electrical impulse before it moves to the ventricles. This
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Cardiac Conduction System
7
slight delay gives the atria more time to contract and empty the blood
into the ventricles before ventricular contraction occurs. Later, APs move
into a large AV bundle (bundle of His), and spreads down to the Purkinje
fibers, which conduct the impulses to all parts of the ventricles and results
in contraction of ventricles.
The heart has two conduction systems, one is responsible for controlling
the atrial activity, and the other one is responsible for controlling the ven-
tricular activity [10]. AV junction provides connection between these two
conduction systems and results in a one-way conduction between the atria
and ventricles.
In conclusion, the formation and conduction of APs, generate electrical
currents, which spread throughout the body and can be recorded by the
ECG [9, 10]. This will be discussed in detailed in the following section.
2.2.1
Cardiac Arrhythmia
Cardiac arrhythmia result from any disturbance in the rhythm or conduc-
tion of the cardiac electric impulses. The normal heart rate is 60 to 100
beats per minute. However, during an arrhythmia, the heart beat is too
fast (greater than 100 beats per minute), or too slow (less than 60 beats
per minute). The arrhythmias causing an increase in heart rate is known
as tachycardia, while the arrhythmias causing a decrease in heart rate is
known bradycardia [10, 13, 14].
From another perspective, arrhythmias divided into two categories, known
as supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias. The supraventricular ar-
rhythmias is originated in SA node, atria, AV node, and junctional tissues,
while the ventricular arrhythmias is originated in the ventricular conduc-
tion system and muscular. In general, the ventricular arrhythmias are more
life-threatening than the supraventricular arrhythmias, since the ventricles
are the pumping chambers of the heart [10].
==PAGE:21==
8
2 Clinical Background
2.3
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
The contraction and relaxation of the cardiac muscles leads to electrical
depolarization and repolarization of the heart. ECG is used to record the
electrical activity in each heartbeat, which are caused by the electrical depo-
larization and repolarization. Each ECG signal is recorded as a difference
between electrical potentials in two points inside of the heart. The potential
difference is the recorded voltage between two points, where the measure-
ments were taken, and represents the amplitude of ECG signal. The system
of two-electrode for recording the ECG signal is referred as ECG lead. In
the cardiac electrical activity analysis, an ECG record from 12 leads is usu-
ally used. These 12-lead ECG consists of following leads; 3 bipolar limb
leads (I, II, and III), 3 unipolar limb leads (AVR, AVL, and AVF), and 6
unipolar chest leads, also called precordial or V leads (V1, V2, V3, V4, V5
and V6). Each lead is a view of the electrical activity of the heart from
different orientations and views. In the heart disease diagnosing, lead II is
one of the most utilized leads, since it displays the most important ECG
components and intervals, which are shown in Fig. 2.3, and described as
follows [3]:
Figure 2.3: The components and intervals of a typical ECG waveform (lead II)
[8].
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Electrocardiogram (ECG)
9
• The P wave: The first deflection of ECG, is the P wave, which
represents the atrial depolarization. The duration of a typical P-wave
is no longer than 0.12 s [14].
• The QRS complex: The largest group of waves on ECG, is the
QRS complex, which normally begins with a downward deflection (the
Q-wave), followed by a large upwards deflection (the R-wave), and
once more a downwards deflection (the S-wave). The QRS complex
represents the ventricular depolarization, and the duration of it should
not exceed 0.12 s [14].
• The T wave: This wave is normally represented as a positive deflec-
tion in ECG, and indicates ventricular repolarisation [14].
• The PR interval: The PR interval is also known as PQ interval, and
is measured from the beginning of the P wave to the first deflection
of the QRS complex. The PR interval indicates the transition time
for propagating electrical impulse from the SA node through the AV
node, bundle of His and the Purkinje fibers. The duration of the PQ
interval is normally in the interval 0.12–0.20 s [14].
• The ST segment: This part of ECG starts from the end of the
QRS complex to the beginning of the T wave, and comprise the re-
gion between the end of ventricular depolarization and the onset of
ventricular repolarization [14].
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
State-of-the-Art
In the last decades, several techniques in the area of automatic ECG-based
heartbeat classification and arrhythmia detection have been proposed. In
this section, some of the current state-of-the-art methods for the automated
ECG classification of cardiac arrhythmia are described. To such extend, var-
ious heartbeat segmentation techniques, feature extraction methods, learn-
ing algorithms and finally the obtained results are presented. In this section,
only the studies which evaluated their algorithms on MITBD are studied.
The arrhythmia classification systems can be divided into two categories
known as inter-patient and intra-patient paradigms (also known as “subject-
oriented” and “class-oriented” respectively). In the intra-patient paradigm,
the whole database is utilized to generate and test the classification mod-
els. However, in inter-patient paradigm, the heartbeat sets for training and
testing comes from different individuals [15, 16]. The proposed approaches
that either investigates one paradigm or both of them are presented in this
section.
Chazal et.al [1] proposed an algorithm based on LDA where ECG heart-
beat is classified into five groups (Table 4.1). In this study, the database
records are divided into two different sets: one for training and the other
for testing (inter-patient paradigm). The proposed ECG heartbeat segmen-
tation consists of one beat. In this study, the feature selection was based
on RRI and ECG morphology. RRI features are extracted directly from
RRI and include pre-RRI, post-RRI, average RRI, and local average RRI.
Moreover, the ECG morphology features include QRS duration, T-wave du-
ration, and P-wave flag. Finally, these extracted features were classified by
using two linear-discriminant classifier and an average accuracy of 85.9 %
was obtained.
Melgani and Bazi [17] compared the SVM performance with two other
reference classifiers; the KNN and the radial basis function (RBF) neural
network. Moreover, a method known as particle swarm optimization (PSO)
==PAGE:24==
3 State-of-the-Art
11
is proposed to improve the performances of SVM classifiers by optimizing
the SVM parameters in ECG signal classification, and detecting the best
subset of features that fits well to the classifier. Initially, the morphologi-
cal and RRI features were extracted and classified by using SVM into six
classes. Later, the features are represented in lower-dimensional space by
using principal component analysis (PCA) and classified by SVM. More-
over, the proposed PSO-SVM classification system is applied to increase
the accuracy of the SVM classifier. The obtained results for the PSO–SVM
classifier showed an overall accuracy of 89.72% against 85.98%, 83.70%, and
82.34% for SVM, KNN, and RBF classifiers, respectively [17].
Faezipour et.al proposed a technique to classify ECG beats into two
classes (normal and abnormal heartbeat) [4] where feature extraction tech-
nique was based on wavelet-base beat-detection.
Later, the features are
classified by applying packet-processing techniques, (namely, repetition-
detection approaches) to profile normal cardiac behavior of each patient.
The obtained results showed an accuracy of 99.6% in detecting the normal
ECG beats and 99.4% accuracy in identifying abnormal beats.
Ye et al. [16] presented a method for classification of heartbeat by con-
sidering both intra- and inter patient variability.
Initially, ECG signals
were divided into heartbeat segments, by using R peak locations. In or-
der to extract features, WT and independent component analysis (ICA)
were applied separately to each segment. Then, the dimensionality of the
features were reduced by using PCA. Moreover, four RRI features were
computed to provide dynamic features for each heartbeat. Finally, the ex-
tracted features were classified into 16 classes by using SVM. The obtained
results showed an accuracy of 99.3% in the intra-patient variability (known
as class-oriented in this work) evaluation and an accuracy of 86.4% in the
inter-patient variability (subject-oriented) evaluation.
Das and Ari [5] presented a method for automatic classification of ECG
into the five groups (Table 4.1) where two features, namely, the S-transform
(ST) and WT are combined. Later, the extracted features were classified by
using multilayer perceptron neural network (MLPNN). The average sensi-
tivity performances of the proposed feature extraction technique for N, S, F,
V, and Q are 95.70 %, 78.05%, 49.60 %, 89.68 %, and 33.89 %, respectively.
Masetic et al. [18] proposed RF algorithm to detect Congestive heart
failure (CHF). In this study, the autoregressive (AR) Burg method was per-
formed for feature extraction. Later, Five different classification algorithms
==PAGE:25==
12
3 State-of-the-Art
namely, C4.5 decision tree, KNN, SVM, ANN and RF classifier are evalu-
ated. The results showed that RF gives the highest classification accuracy
among other algorithms.
There are other studies that proposed combining the predictions of sev-
eral models results in a higher prediction accuracy than accuracy of the
individual models [3, 19, 20]. Güler and Übeyl [19] have used a combined
neural network for classification of ECG beats into four groups. Initially,
WT is used in order to extract features. Later, four sets of neural networks
were trained. In this study, the learning targets are modified in a way that
the trained networks predict one particular ECG beat with higher accuracy
than the other types of ECG beats. The increased accuracy was obtained
by training new neural networks to combine the predictions of the original
networks. The provided results showed by combining the neural network
model the accuracy is 96.94%, which is higher than accuracy of individual
neural network model.
Kallas et al.[20] proposed a multi-SVM classification system to classify
two different abnormalities and normal beats. In this study, Gaussian Ker-
nel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) is used for feature extraction.
Initially, the multi-SVM classifiers were trained, cross-validated and tested
on the original beats before and after feature extraction. Later, two kinds of
multi-SVM system are used; One-Against-One (OAO) and One-Against-All
(OAA), to classify ECG signals. According to the results, SVM combined
with KPCA performs better than that without feature extraction. The av-
erage classification accuracy for the OAA classifier combined with KPC is
97.39%, which is higher than the accuracy obtained with the OAO classifier.
Mondéjar-Guerra [3] proposed a method for ECG classification based
on an ensemble of SVMs.
In this study, ECG signals were divided into
heartbeat segments, by using R peak locations.
Later, a set of features
were extracted based on wavelets, higher order statistics (HOS), local binary
patterns (LBP), RRI and also morphological features. In this work, they
combine several SVM models, each one trained with a different feature. The
results showed that ensemble of SVM models provided frequently better
results compare to merging all the features and training of one single SVM
model on them.
Table 3.1 provides a brief comparison between the mentioned state-of-
the-art techniques in the terms of their features, classifiers and accuracy.
==PAGE:26==
3 State-of-the-Art
13
Table 3.1: State-of-the-Art method comparison for cardiac arrhythmia detection.
Article
Classes
Feature
Classifier
Acc (%)
Chazal et.al [1]
5
R-R intervals, morphological
LDA
85.90
Melgani et al. [17]
6
morphological
SVM
85.98
RRI
KNN
83.70
RBF
82.34
SVM-PSO
89.72
Faezipour et.al [4]
2
wavelet
Feature repetition profiling
97.42
Ye et al. [16]
16
wavelet, ICA, RRI
SVM
86.40
Das et.al [5]
5
ST, wavelet
MLPNN
69.38
Masetic et al. [18]
2
AR
decision tree, KNN
SVM, ANN, RF
100.00
Güler and Übeylı [19]
4
Wavelet
Ensemble of NNs
96.94
Kallas et al.[20]
3
Kernal PCA
SVM
97.39
Mondéjar-Guerra et al. [3]
2
wavelet, HOS, LBP,
ensemble of SVMs
89.00
RRI, morphological
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Materials and
Methods
A full system for automatic arrhythmia classification can be divided in to
four steps, as follows: (1) ECG signal preprocessing; (2) heartbeat segmenta-
tion; (3) feature extraction and feature selection; and (4) beat classification.
The purpose of this chapter is to explain the mentioned steps in detail. The
agenda of this chapter is as follows; section 4.1 introduces the utilized data
in this work. Section 4.2 describes the pre-processing step. The heartbeat
segmentation step is explained in section 4.3. Additionally, sections 4.4
and 4.5 deal with the feature extraction and feature selection techniques,
respectively. The heartbeat classification algorithms are also explained in
detail in section 4.6, following by the Dempster-Shafer combination rule
in section 4.7. Finally, the evaluation protocol is presented in section
4.8.
4.1
Data
Several databases are consist of cardiac heartbeat grouped in patients records,
which can be used for evaluation of the developed algorithms, such as
MITDB, AHA, EDB and CSE [6]. One of the popular databases for ar-
rhythmia analysis is MITDB, which is available in Physionet [21]. MITDB
was the first available set of standard test material for evaluation of ar-
rhythmia detectors, and since 1980 it has been used for that purpose in
more than 500 sites worldwide [22]. This database is also recommended by
AAMI [1][6]. Therefore, in this study, ECG data from MITDB are utilized
for the training, evaluation and testing the proposed ECG beat classification
technique.
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Data
15
MITDB contains 48 recordings obtained from 47 subjects (records 201
and 202 are from the same subject) and studied by the BIH Arrhythmia
Laboratory between 1975 and 1979 [22]. Twenty-three records of MITDB
(numbered from 100 to 124 inclusive with some numbers missing) are in-
tended to serve as a representative sample of routine clinical recordings,
while the remaining records (numbered from 200 to 234 inclusive with some
numbers missing), are intended to serve less common but clinically sig-
nificant arrhythmias such as ventricular, junctional, and supraventricular
arrhythmias and conuction abnormalities [22]. The subjects consist of 25
men (aged 32 to 89 years) and 22 women (aged 23 to 89 years); From them,
almost 60% were inpatients. Each recording is about 30 min long and was
sampled at 360 Hz. In MITDB, each record has an annotation file which
has been identified by expert cardiologist. These annotations are used as
beat labels in the training and evaluation of the classifiers [22].
In the
agreement with AAMI, four recordings (namely, 102, 104, 107, and 217)
containing paced beats are removed from the analysis since those beats
do not preserve appropriate signal quality for reliable processing [22, 23].
AAMI convention that is used to combine the beats into five classes are as
shown in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: Categories of heartbeats in MITDB database based on AAMI [23].
Group
Class
N
Normal beat (N)
Left and right bundle branch block beats (L,R)
Atrial escape beat (e)
Nodal (junctional) escape beat (j)
S
Atrial premature beat (A)
Aberrated atrial premature beat (a)
Nodal (junctional) premature
Supraventricular premature beat (S)
V
Premature ventricular contraction (V)
Ventricular escape beat (E)
F
Fusion of ventricular and normal beat (F)
Q
Fusion of paced and normal beat (f)
Unclassifiable beat (U)
==PAGE:29==
16
4 Materials and Methods
4.1.1
Shuffling the data set
In this study, the utilized data set is highly imbalanced and the numbers of
normal heartbeats are much more than the number of heartbeats for other
classes. Thus, using this imbalanced data set increase the chance of a biased
classification, and consequently results in higher error rate on the minority
classes [24].
In order to balance the data set and consequently improve the train-
ing procedure of the classifiers, adaptive synthetic over-sampling technique
(ADASYN) is applied to improve the performance of the classification al-
gorithms.
ADASYN algorithm generates synthetic data samples for the
minority class to reduce the bias which is resulted by the imbalanced data
distribution [24]. ADASYN consists of three main steps as follows: assum-
ing that the minority class has ms elements and the majority class has ml
elements ( ml ≥ms):
• (i) The degree of imbalance class is computed in order to calculate
the number of synthetic samples for the minority class.
r = ms
ml
,
(4.1)
• (ii) For each sample in a minority class, the Euclidean distance is
calculated to find the K nearest neighbours in n-dimensional space.
• (iii) The synthetic samples are generated for the minority class by:
di = xi + λ(xj −xi),
(4.2)
where i, j = 1, 2, ..., ms and (j ̸= i). Additionally, in the above equation,
xi is a minority class sample, xj is a randomly chosen sample from the
determined K nearest neighbors, and λ ∈[0, 1], is a random number in the
range of [0, 1] [24]. As an example, Fig. 4.1 shows how ADASYN is working
for a binary classification.
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Preprocessing
17
Figure 4.1: An example of how ADASYN classifier is working.
4.2
Preprocessing
ECG recordings are commonly affected by different types of artifacts and
noises, which reduce the accuracy of the diagnosis and results in wrong
assessments for patients [25]. The aim of preprocessing step in ECG analysis
is to reduce the artifacts and noises, in order to determine the fiducial points
(P, Q, R, S, T, P-onset, P-peaks, P-offset, QRS-onset, QRS-offset, T-onset,
T-peaks and T-offset) accurately.
There are different types of noise, such as baseline wander, power line
interference, electrode contact noise, electromyography noise (muscle con-
tractions), etc. [25]. The noise that usually affect ECG signals is baseline
wander, which are normally appears from respiration. Elimination of the
baseline wander is required in ECG signal analysis to minimize the irregu-
larities in the beat morphology [26].
==PAGE:31==
18
4 Materials and Methods
In this work, ECG signals are filtered based on wavelet-based denois-
ing procedure. This provides a good performance for removing the baseline
wander, since it preserve ECG signal properties and avoids the loss of its im-
portant physiological details [6]. In wavelet applications, selecting a wavelet
function that closely matches ECG signal is important. Based on the types
of the mother wavelets, Daubechies (db) types provide high accuracy results
on ECG signals due to their similarity to ECG signal morphologies, as it
can be seen in Fig. 4.2. Among all of the db wavelets, (db4) has the highest
similarity to ECG signal and consequently is utilized in our study [27].
Figure 4.2: The examples of typical mother wavelets that can be used for ECG
processing: (a) Daubechies (db), (b) Morlet, (c) Biorthog-onal (bior), (d) Orthog-
onal Cubic Spline (ocs), (e) Mexican Hat (MH), (f) Haar, (g) Complex Gaussian
(CG), and (h) Coiflet (coif) wavelet [28].
==PAGE:32==
4.3 Heartbeat Segmentation
19
4.3
Heartbeat Segmentation
As described in section 2.3, one heart beat of ECG signal includes three basic
waveform components: P-wave, QRS complex, and T- wave. The segmenta-
tion of ECG signal requires detection of the boundaries and peak locations
of these three components. To such extend, a function called ecgpuwave is
utilized from the WFDB Toolbox in Physionet [21, 29]. This function anal-
yses each ECG records and detect the QRS complexes as well as locating
the beginning, peak, and end of the P, QRS, and ST-T waveforms.
After detection of ECG components, the signals are segmented into
beats, which means that it starts from P-wave onset and ends at T-wave
offset. If P-wave is not present, then each segment start from QRS onset
and end at T-wave offset. As an example, Fig. 4.3 shows one segment in a
normal heartbeat.
Figure 4.3: Example of one segmented ECG beat.
==PAGE:33==
20
4 Materials and Methods
4.4
Feature Extraction
ECG signals consist of several data points, which can be compressed by fea-
ture extraction technique into fewer features. Hence, the aim of extracting
features is to reduce the pattern vector to a lower dimension and improve
the algorithms. The extracted features characterize the behavior of ECG
signals and have the most important information from the original vector.
These information are mostly lying in the P, Q, R, S, and T waves of the
ECG signal. Therefore, each ECG beat should be classified based on the
mentioned features [19, 30].
In this work, initially, twenty-six different features based on RRI, heart-
beat morphology, and WT have been extracted from each ECG segment
(Table 4.2). Later, a feature selection method based on Pearson Correlation
Coefficient (PCC) utilized to select the most representative features (this
will be described in more detail in the next section). The selected features
are used as inputs to the five chosen classifiers to distinguish between normal
heartbeats and the four different arrhythmia. In the following subsections,
the extracted features will be described in detail.
4.4.1
Wavelet transform (WT)
WT provides a characterization in both temporal and frequency domains.
This capability allows WT to effectively analyse ECG signals [16]. WT is
a linear transform that decompose a signal into components in different
scales.
It utilizes one type of wavelets for decomposing the signal into
simpler elements. Initially, the signal is decomposes into its low-frequency
components (approximation components), and later is decomposes into high-
frequency components (detail components) [25].
As mentioned before, the Daubechies wavelet function (db4) is utilized
due to its similariy to ECG signal morphology. Additionally, the number
of decomposition levels is taken to be four. This means that ECG signals
are decomposed into the details D1 −D4, and one approximation coefficient
A4, as shown in Figs. 4.4 and 4.5 [31]. These five components are called
subbands. Later, the dimensionality of the extracted features are reduced
by extracting various statistical features from the wavelet coefficients, such
as the minimum, maximum, average and coefficient variance. These twenty
features are extracted from each subband.
==PAGE:34==
4.4 Feature Extraction
21
Figure 4.4: Subband decomposition of discrete wavelet transform implementation.
The approximations (A) boxes represent the low frequency components obtained
by the low pass filter (LP), and the details (D) boxes represent the high frequency
components obtained by the high pass filter (HP). The high-pass and low-pass
filters are applied at each level, until the required resolution is obtained.
D1
D2
D3
D4
A4
ECG 
Signal
Figure 4.5: The decomposition of ECG beat into four levels by using (db4) mother
wavelet.
==PAGE:35==
22
4 Materials and Methods
4.4.2
RR-interval (RRI)
RRI is the distance between two heartbeat’s R peaks. Three RRI based
features were extracted, which are pre-RRI, post-RRI and local average
RRI. The pre-RRI is the RRI between a given heartbeat and the previous
heartbeat. The post-RRI is the RRI between a given heartbeat and the
following heartbeat. Lastly, the local average RRI is defined as the average
of RRI of ten RRI neighboring one heartbeat i.e. five RRI to the left and
five RRI to the right of the given heartbeat.
4.4.3
Heart-beat morphology
Three morphology features, which are QRS duration (time interval between
the beginning and end of the QRS segment (from QRS onset to QRS offset)),
T-wave duration (time interval between the QRS offset and the T-wave
offset) and P-wave flag, are extracted from each ECG heartbeat intervals.
The P wave flag is defined as a Boolean variable indicating the presence
or absence of a P-wave in each heartbeat segmentation. These twenty six
features are summarised in Table 4.2.
Table 4.2: Features Description.
Features
Feature Description
F1-F5
Minimum of wavelet coefficients in each subband
F6-F10
Maximum of wavelet coefficients in each subband
F11-F15
Mean of wavelet coefficients in each subband
F16-F20
Variance of wavelet coefficients in each subband
F21
Post-RRI
F22
Pre-RRI
F23
Local average RRI
F24
QRS duration
F25
T-wave duration
F26
P-wave flag
==PAGE:36==
4.5 Feature Selection
23
4.5
Feature Selection
High dimensionality of the feature space is one of the important issues
in ECG signal analysis due to the computational time, and classification
accuracy. The aims of feature selection step are to reduce of redundancy,
feature dimensions, and consequently computational time, by eliminating
the redundant features from the original feature set [25].
In this work, the feature selection is based on PCC technique. In this
method, the features that are highly correlated with others are determined
to be redundant and should be removed from the feature set.
PCC de-
termines linear correlation between two variables; if this correlation is one,
there is a positive correlation, while if the obtained value is zero, there is
no relation between the two variables, and finally, the value -1 illustrates
negative correlation between the two variables. Mathematical description of
PCC is as follows: let u and v be two random feature vectors, that should
be compared. The PPC is calculated as follows [32, 33]:
Fuv = Cuv
σuσv
,
(4.3)
where Cuv is the cross-correlation matrix between u and v, and σu and σv
are the standard deviation of features u and v, respectively.
Besides of PCC, the measure of the correlation between each pair of fea-
ture is also estimated by the matrix of p-values, which is utilized for testing
the hypothesis that there is a relationship between each pair of feature. If
the obtained p-value is larger than the significance level (> 0.5), there will
be a relation between the two type of features and one of them should be
removed. Based on the PCC values and the corresponding p-values, the re-
dundant features are determined and extracted from the features set. Later,
the remaining features are used as inputs to the five chosen classifiers.
==PAGE:37==
24
4 Materials and Methods
4.6
Beat Classification
After the preprocessing, heartbeat segmentation and feature extraction steps,
an effective beat classification is needed in order to classify cardiac beats
correctly. The five types of classifiers that are utilized in this study, are
described as follows:
4.6.0.1
Random Forest (RF)
RF is one of the commonly used ensemble machine learning techniques,
which is introduced by Tin Kam Ho in 1995 [34]. This algorithm constructs
different decision trees during the training phase.
Each of the decision
trees cast a vote on a class and then, the final prediction is based on the
majority voting, as seen in Fig 4.6.
One of the advantages of decision
trees is that they are stable models to transformation of feature inputs and
also adding irrelevant features. Moreover, in this technique, different deep
decision trees are trained on different parts of the training set, in order to
alleviate the overfitting problem [35]. In order to achieve optimal values
for trees, different values of trees are implemented and their classification
accuracy are compared (Table 5.5). Accordingly, in this study, 30 trees are
chosen in RF as it gave the optimal accuracy results.
Figure 4.6: An example of how RF classifier is working for a binary classification.
In this example, class N gets the majority of voting.
==PAGE:38==
4.6 Beat Classification
25
4.6.0.2
Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost)
AdaBoost is an iterative boosting process introduced by Yoav Freund and
Robert Schapire in 1997 [36]. This classifier is more sensitive to the noisy
data and outliers but less susceptible to the over-fitting compared to RF.
In AdaBoost, the decision trees are used as weak learners and weights the
mis-classification samples in the next iteration. This means that the mis-
classification samples from decision trees are given higher weighting in sub-
sequent iterations of learning. This methods is illustrated in Fig. 4.7. As
shown in this figure, the chance of incorrectly classified samples to be cho-
sen for training the next decision trees are higher. The AdaBoost can be
written as a weighted combination of the weak learners as follows [37]:
H(Ω) = sign
( Q
∑
q=1
whq(Ω)
)
,
(4.4)
where hq(Ω) is a weak learner, and w is the corresponding weight that
should be chosen in the way that error rate is minimum. In this equation,
for q = 1, 2, ..., Q, where Q is the total number of iterations.
Figure 4.7: Methology of how AdaBoost is working. Iteration 1: training a weak
classifier (decision tree), in this step, the mis-classified samples are three plus sign.
Iteration 2: The mis-classified samples from iteration 1 get higher weighting, in this
step, the mis-classified samples are three minus sign. Iteration 3: The mis-classified
samples from iteration 2 get higher weighting. In final classifier: combination of
three classifiers from iteration 1 to 3.
==PAGE:39==
26
4 Materials and Methods
4.6.0.3
Artificial Neural Network (ANN)
ANN is a model inspired by the human brain since in this model, the struc-
tured layers are connected to the nodes similar to the neurons in the human
brain. It is capable of self-learning from data and can be trained for the
purposes of pattern recognition, data classification and prediction. The ba-
sic components of ANN are the units (neurons), which joined together in
a pattern of connections, as it can be seen in Fig. 4.8. The neurons are
responsible for receiving inputs from other neurons or an external source
to compute the outputs [30]. In ANN, each input has a weight w which
is responsible for evaluating the signification of the input. The output of
the neuron is calculated as a function φ (known as activation function) as
follows:
output = φ
( ∑
j
wjxj + b
)
,
(4.5)
where wj, xj and b are the weight, input and the bias of the neuron, respec-
tively. As it can be seen in the above equation, the bias is an additional
parameter in ANN, which is utilized to adjust the output along with the
weighted sum of the inputs to the neuron and helps the model to fit well
for the given data. Moreover, the connection weights are adjusted automat-
ically during the training until ANN performs the desired task accurately
[38].
ANN can be classified into feedforward and feedback network. Examples
of feedforward network are multi-layer perceptrons and radial basis function
networks. An example of feedback network is the Elman network [39].
In this study, we utilized the feed-forward neural network. In this type
of network, each neuron in a layer has only connection to the neuron in the
next layer, without any inter-layer connection, as it shown in Fig. 4.8. Ad-
ditionally, the performance of ANN with two different numbers of hidden
layers and different number of hidden neurons on them is evaluated (the
results of them are shown in Figs. 5.7 and 5.8). According to the results,
ANN has the best performance with 2 hidden layers (when the first and
second layers contain 310 and 512 numbers of neurons, respectively). How-
ever the computational time in this configuration is significantly high (720.5
minutes). Therefore, we decided to implement ANN with one hidden layer
and 310 hidden neurons on it, since according to Table 5.7, in the configu-
ration of ANN with one hidden layer, 310 hidden neurons on the layer has
the best performance.
==PAGE:40==
4.6 Beat Classification
27
Figure 4.8: An example of a feedforward neural network with two hidden layers.
The first and second hidden layers consist of three and four neurons, respectively,
while output layer has two neurons.
4.6.0.4
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)
LDA is a common technique based on the discriminant functions used for
classification and dimensionality reduction, which is developed by Ronald
Fisher in 1936 [40]. The discriminant functions are estimated from a training
set of data and try to make the highest possible discrimination between
different classes. The overall aim of using LDA method is to project the
data set by using a transformation matrix, in a way that maximize the ratio
of the between class variance to the within-class variance of the transformed
data set, as follows [40, 41]:
maxJ(W) = WT SbW
WT SwW,
(4.6)
where Sw and Sb are defined as the within class scatter matrix and between-
class scatter matrix, respectively. Moreover, the matrix W transforms the
samples into the new subspace. The within class scatter matrix (Sw) is
==PAGE:41==
28
4 Materials and Methods
given as follows:
Sw =
N
∑
i=1
Si,
(4.7)
where N is the number of classes and Si is the covariance matrix. Addition-
ally, the between-class matrix (Sb) is calculated as follows:
Sb =
N
∑
i=1
ni(µi −µ)(µi −µ)T ,
(4.8)
where µ is the overall mean, and µi and ni are the mean vector and sample
size of the respective classes.
As an example, Fig.
4.9 shows a binary
classification by using LDA.
Figure 4.9: An example of the binary classification (pink and green) by LDA.
LDA projects the data into a direction where the distance between mean of each
class is maximized, while the within class variances are minimized.
==PAGE:42==
4.6 Beat Classification
29
4.6.0.5
K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
KNN is a simple classification algorithm presented by Fix and Hodges in
1951 [42]. KNN is used to classify an unrecognized sample based on the
known classification of its nearest neighbor, in a way that an unrecognized
sample is assigned to the class where the closest K samples belong to. There-
fore, the majority voting approach is applied in this method [25]. The first
step in KNN is to reduce the dimension of feature space by using distance
function between a specified training set and the test set [18]. The next step
is to select the K closest training samples to test sample, and then classify
the new sample based on majority class among its nearest neighbors. Fig.
4.10 illustrates a KNN classification model for a binary classification, with
5-nearest neighbors.
Figure 4.10: An example of KNN classification model for a binary classification.
For K=1, the model will classify the red star as the green circle class; for K=3, it
is assigned to class of gray square; As conclusion, K=5 model classifies the red star
as green circles, since the five nearest neighbors consists more green circles (by a
9–6 majority voting).
The value of K is a positive integer and has influence on the accuracy of
the classification [25]. In this work, four different values of K were applied
to the data set, such as K =3, 5, 7, 9 and the results of them are shown in
Table 5.6. According to the results, 3 number of the nearest neighbors are
chosen in KNN, since it has the optimal accuracy results compared to the
other numbers of the nearest neighbors.
==PAGE:43==
30
4 Materials and Methods
4.7
The Dempster-Shafer Combination Rule
(DST)
DST is a commonly used technique for information merging from different
information sources, which was introduced by Garvey et al. in 1981 [43].
The aim of this method is its capability to combine certainty information
from multiple sources, which is in this work multiple classifiers [44, 45].
There are three main functions used in DST: The basic probability as-
signment or mass probability function (BPA or m), belief function (Bel),
and plausibility function (Pl).
BPA or m represents a mapping of the
power set to the interval between zero and one; BPA of the null set is zero,
while the summation of BPA’s of all the subsets of the power set is one.
The value of BPA for a given set A represented as m(A)) and expresses the
proportion of all relevant evidence that supports the claim that a particular
element of X (the universal set) belongs to the set A. The function m is
the most important in binary classification problems and should meet the
following conditions [45, 46]:
m : 2X →
[0, 1
],
(4.9)
m(∅) = 0,
(4.10)
∑
A⊆X
m(A) = 1,
(4.11)
where X and ∅are defined as the universal and the empty set, respectively,
and A is a set in the power set.
The two other functions, namely, (Bel) and (Pl), is based on the mass
probability functions as the upper and lower bounds of the probability in-
terval, which are defined as follows:
Bel(A) ≤P(A ≤Pl(A),
(4.12)
Bel(A) =
∑
B|B⊆A
m(B),
(4.13)
Pl(A) =
∑
B|B∩A̸=∅
m(B),
(4.14)
where A and B are two subsets.
==PAGE:44==
4.7 The Dempster-Shafer Combination Rule (DST)
31
DST is also able to combine independent evidences (mass probability
functions), m1 and m2, to produce more informative evidence, as follows:
(m1 ⊕m2, ) =
1
1 −G
∑
B∩C=A̸=∅
m1(B)m2(C),
(4.15)
where, G represents the amount of conflict between the sources and is given
by:
G =
∑
B∩C=∅
m1(B)m2(C).
(4.16)
==PAGE:45==
32
4 Materials and Methods
4.8
Evaluation Protocol
In this study, we followed two main paradigms to evaluate our algorithm:
inter-patient and intra-patient paradigms. In the intra-patient paradigm, all
the 44 records are utilized for training and validation of the proposed model,
by using a 5 fold cross validation (described in section 4.8.1). Therefore, in
this paradigm, the train and evaluation sets have heartbeats from the same
individuals.
In the inter-patient paradigm, the data set are divided into two different
sets. The first set of records are utilized for training and validation, while
the rest of them are utilized for testing. Initially, our model is trained on
the training set, then the performance of this is evaluated on the testing
set to ensure the model is also assessed on the unseen data. Each data set
contains 22 records with almost the same proportion of beat types, such as:
Training: 101, 106, 108, 109, 112, 114, 115, 116, 118, 119, 122, 124, 201,
203, 205, 207, 208, 209, 215, 220, 223, 230.
Testing: 100, 103, 105, 111, 113, 117, 121, 123, 200, 202, 210, 212, 213,
214, 219, 221, 222, 228, 231, 232, 233, 234.
4.8.1
Cross Validation
As mentioned before, in the intra-patient paradigm, the dataset is divided
into training and validation sets using the 5-fold cross validation. Initially,
each classifier is trained on 4/5 of the recording in MITDB. Later, the
trained classifiers are evaluated on the remaining records to assess the per-
formance of each single classification algorithm as seen in Fig 4.11. The
final performance is calculated as the average of the mentioned five runs.
==PAGE:46==
4.8 Evaluation Protocol
33
Figure 4.11: A graphical representation of how the 5-fold cross-validation works.
Figure 4.12 illustrates the flowchart of the proposed ensemble model for
heartbeat classification.
Figure 4.12: Flowchart of ECG classification technique.
==PAGE:47==
34
4 Materials and Methods
4.8.2
Performance Measure
In this study, some performance measures are utilized to report the perfor-
mance of the individual classifiers and the proposed ensemble model. The
same performance measures as other state-of-the-art works is utilized in this
study for easier comparison. The utilized performance measured are defined
as follows:
Sensitivity (Se) also known as true positive rate, is one of the statistical
measures in the classification problem, which provides the proportion of
correctly identified cardiac arrhythmia segments. Sensitivity is calculated
as follows:
Se =
TP
TP + FN ,
(4.17)
where TP and FN represent the number of the true positive and False
Negative, respectively.
Specificity (Sp) also called the true negative rate is also an statistical
measure in the classification setting, which measures the proportion of cor-
rectlyc identified normal (without cardiac arrhythmia) segments. Specificity
is calculated as follows:
Sp =
TN
TN + FP ,
(4.18)
where TN and FP represent the number of true negative and false positive,
respectively.
F-score can be used as a single measure of the test performance for the
positive class, and is calculated as following:
F −score = (1 + β2)
PPV.Se
(β2.PPV ) + Se,
(4.19)
where PPV stands for the Positive Predictive Value and is defined as,
PPV =
TP
TP+FP . This measure is called the balanced F-score (F1-score),
when β = 1. Its range is between 0 (lowest classification ability) and +1
(highest classification ability).
Accuracy (Acc) is the most typical statistical measure in the classifica-
tion problem, which describes the overall proportion of correctly classified
segments.
This means that low accuracy indicates difference between a
result and a ”true” value and vise versa. Accuracy is calculated as:
Acc =
TP + TN
TP + FN + FP + TN
(4.20)
==PAGE:48==
4.8 Evaluation Protocol
35
Besides of the mentioned performance measures, a confusion matrix is
used to display the performance of proposed ensemble model. A confusion
matrix shows the number of the correct and incorrect predictions that made
by each classifier compared with the actual classifications in the data set.
The confusion matrix is n-by-n, where n is the number of classes. Each
column of the matrix represents the predictions, while each row represents
the actual classifications.
By using confusion matrix, one can see if the
system is mis-labeling classes [47].
Finally, the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve is
utilized to evaluate the performance of proposed ensemble model.
ROC
curve is a plot of true positive rate on the y axis against false positive rate
on the x axis (Figure 4.13) [48].
The 45° diagonal line connecting (0,0)
to (1,1), (line C in this figure) is ROC curve corresponding to a random
classifier, while ROC curve for a perfect classifier is the line connecting
(0,0) to (0,1) and (0,1) to (1,1) (line A in the figure).
Generally, ROC
curves lie between these 2 extremes, as line B [48].
Figure 4.13: Three examples of ROC curves; lines A on the upper and left corner
which indicates the most accurate classifier.
Curve B is a typical ROC curve.
Finally, line C that is a diagonal line corresponding to random classifier.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results of the proposed model for the heartbeat classifica-
tion is described in detail. The agenda of this chapter is as follows; section
5.1 presents the shuffling effect of the data set. Later, the results of the
signal filtering is described in section 5.2. Moreover, section 5.3 provides
the results of the feature selection, and its effect on the performance of the
classifiers. Finally in section 5.5, the performance of the classifiers as well
as the proposed ensemble model are discussed.
5.1
Shuffling the data set
The imbalanced data set in MITDB is composed of 100464 beats.
The
numbers of the beats for the five classes before and after creating synthetic
data are given in Table 5.1. As an example, Fig. 5.1 shows the distribution
of the imbalanced and balanced number of beats of two arbitrary features
(Maximum of wavelet coefficients and QRS-duration) for two classes (N and
F), respectively. According to the Fig. 5.1, the scatter plot shown in Fig.
5.1b shows more balanced distribution of the features compared to Fig. 5.1a.
Table 5.1: Number of imbalanced and balanced data sets.
Class
Imbalanced beats
Balanced beats
N
89727
89727
S
2766
97773
V
6755
93815
F
798
99764
Q
418
100056
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Shuffling the data set
37
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
Feature #9
0
50
100
150
200
Feature #24
Class N
Class F
(a) Distribution of the imbalanced number of beats.
(b) Distribution of the balanced number of beats.
Figure 5.1: Scatter plots of two arbitrary features for two classes (N and F): (a)
Imbalanced, and (b) Synthetically balanced.
==PAGE:51==
38
5 Results and Discussion
5.2
Signal Filtering
An interval of ECG signal before and after removing the baseline wander is
shown in Fig. 5.2. As it can be seen in this figure, the wavelet filtering is
effective in removing the baseline wander. Additionally, it can be seen that
wavelet filtering does not smooth QRS complex or deform RRI.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time (s)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Amplitude (mV)
Record MITBD 234
Original signal
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time (s)
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Amplitude (mV)
Filtered signal
Figure 5.2:
A part of the ECG signal, before and after signal filtering; Top:
Original ECG and bottom: Filtered ECG.
==PAGE:52==
5.3 Feature Selection
39
5.3
Feature Selection
5.3.1
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC)
Visualization of the calculated correlation values and the corresponding p-
values for the extracted features are shown in Figs. 5.3 and 5.5, respectively.
According to the Fig. 5.3, the white color indicates the redundant features
that have high correlation, while in Fig.
5.5, the yellow color and the
colors that are near yellow, indicates the high correlated features. Fig. 5.4
represents corresponding PCC values in the format of number. Based on
the PCC values and the corresponding p-values, the features were reduced
from 26 to 18, in a way where features with a correlation equal to +1, and
a p-value > 0.5 are consider to be high correlated and are removed from the
feature sets. Consequently, the following features were removed: features 2,
3 (from the set: minimum of wavelet coefficients in each subband), 7 (from
the set:maximum of wavelet coefficients in each subband), 11, 13, 15 (from
the set: mean of wavelet coefficients in each subband), 17, 19 (from the set:
variance of wavelet coefficients in each subband).
Figure 5.3: Colormaps of PCC values for the extracted features.
==PAGE:53==
40
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.4: PCC values for the extracted features.
==PAGE:54==
5.3 Feature Selection
41
Figure 5.5: Colormaps of corresponding p-values for the extracted features.
Fig.
5.6 shows PCC values using a colormap for remaining features,
while Table 5.7 represents corresponding PCC values in the format of num-
ber. Based on these results, none of the features has correlation value equal
to +1. Therefore, all the 18 features are utilized as input in the classifica-
tion.
==PAGE:55==
42
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.6: Colormaps of PCC values for the remaining features.
Figure 5.7: PCC values for the remaining features.
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Feature Selection
43
5.3.2
Performance of Classifiers Before and After
Feature Selection
The average accuracy for the training, validation and testing sets for the five
single classifiers, before and after features selection are reported in the Ta-
bles 5.2 and 5.3, respectively. By comparing these two tables, it is concluded
that the performance of the classifiers is improved slightly after elimination
of the redundant features from the original feature set.
Moreover, Table 5.4 presentes the time (in minutes) required to train
and test the chosen five classifiers before and after feature selection. Based
on this table, the required time to train and test the classification algo-
rithms after removal of the redundant features is slightly less compared to
the scenario where features were not removed. Therefore, it is concluded
that selecting features is an important step in the classification, in order to
improve the efficiency and accuracy of the classifier as well as the computa-
tional time reduction.
Table 5.2:
Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, before feature
selection.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
Testing (%)
AdaBoost
96.25 ± 0.56
96.21 ± 0.68
95.24
RF
96.25 ± 0.56
96.21 ± 0.68
95.24
ANN
95.80 ± 1.79
95.74 ± 1.83
87.95
LDA
91.80 ± 2.04
91.77 ± 2.38
82.30
KNN
99.36 ± 0.42
99.15 ± 0.23
89.91
Table 5.3: Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, after feature se-
lection.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
Testing (%)
AdaBoost
96.27 ± 0.64
96.22 ± 0.61
95.26
RF
96.27 ± 0.64
96.22 ± 0.61
95.26
ANN
95.81 ± 1.88
95.76 ± 1.26
87.96
LDA
91.76 ± 1.93
91.76 ± 2.59
82.34
KNN
99.38 ± 0.35
99.17 ± 0.55
89.93
==PAGE:57==
44
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.4: The required time to train and test the classification algorithms, before
and after features selection.
Time
Training time (min)
Testing time (min)
Before Feature Extraction
514.51
4.38
After Feature Extraction
500.88
3.94
5.4
Comparing Performance of Classifiers
With Different Parameters
An important step in the classification is to determine the optimal value
of parameters in each classifier, since the accuracy of the algorithms, is
sensitive to the choice of parameters. In this section, the results of differ-
ent values of parameters are investigated in order to achieve the optimal
accuracy for the classifiers.
It should be noted that in this section, the
inter-patient paradigms is followed, where the data set is divided into two
parts; one for training and validation and the other for testing the models.
5.4.1
RF and AdaBoost Classification With Different
Numbers of Trees:
The average accuracy for different number of trees in RF classifier are pre-
sented in Table 5.5. According to this table, the accuracy of RF increases
by increasing the number of trees, hence, more trees improve the results.
However, the improvement decreases as the number of trees reaches to 30.
This means that the gain of getting higher accuracy from learning more
than 30 trees, is lower than the cost in computation time for learning them.
Hence, RF with 30 number of trees is chosen in this work.
The average accuracy for different number of trees in AdaBoost is exactly
the same as the results of RF. Therefore, 30 number of trees is utilized in
AdaBoost algorithm, as well.
==PAGE:58==
5.4 Comparing Performance of Classifiers With Different Parameters
45
Table 5.5: Accuracy of RF with three different numbers of trees and corresponding
computation time required for training them.
Number of trees
Training (%)
Training time (min)
Testing (%)
5
95.29 ± 0.76
4.18
94.25
10
95.65 ± 1.04
4.59
95.45
20
95.93 ± 0.33
5.45
94.89
30
96.27 ± 0.64
6.40
95.26
40
96.35 ± 1.44
7.51
95.37
50
96.40 ± 2.08
8.42
95.42
5.4.2
KNN Classification With Different Numbers of
Nearest Neighbors:
The K in KNN algorithm represents the number of nearest neighbors. In
general, there is a rule to determine the value of parameter K, which ex-
presses that the number of the K should be an odd number, in order to
avoid ties (i.e. to avoid two classes labels achieving the same score) [30].
Hence, KNN is tested four times with K values equal to 3, 5, 7, 9. Table
5.6 presented the accuracy of these four trials. According to the results, by
decreasing the number of K, accuracy of KNN decreases. Hence, K=3 is
chosen in our analysis. KNN is easy to implement, however, it has high
computation time since it needs to compute distances of each test instance
to all training samples.
Table 5.6: Accuracy of KNN with four different values for K and corresponding
computation time required for training them.
Value of K
Training (%)
Training time (min)
Testing (%)
3
99.38 ± 0.35
24.01
89.93
5
99.36 ± 0.38
25.83
89.78
7
99.33 ± 0.45
27.86
89.15
9
99.29 ± 0.41
31.04
88.82
==PAGE:59==
46
5 Results and Discussion
5.4.3
ANN Classification With Different Numbers of
Hidden Layers and Corresponding Neurons on
each Layer:
In this part, the performance of ANN with different numbers of hidden
layers and hidden neurons is evaluated in two steps:
• Initially, the performance of ANN is evaluated with one hidden layer,
and seven different numbers of the neurons on this layer is tested.
Table 5.7 presented the results of these trials. As it can be seen in
this table, the accuracy of ANN increases by increasing the number
of hidden neurons until the number of neurons reaches to 310, while
for above 310 neurons, the accuracy is decreased (for 384 and 512
number of neurons, the accuracy decreases by 0.83 % and 1.06 %,
respectively).
• Later, ANN is evaluated with two hidden layers, and three different
numbers of hidden neurons on each layer. Table 5.8 presents the result
of the test. As it can be seen in Table 5.8, the accuracy of ANN has the
best performance with 2 hidden layers (310 on the first hidden layer
and 512 on the second hidden layer). However the computational time
is significantly high in this configuration. Therefore, it is decided to
implement ANN with one hidden layer and 310 hidden neurons on it.
Table 5.7: Accuracy of ANN model with seven different numbers of hidden neu-
rons on one hidden layer, and the corresponding computation time required for
training them.
Number of Neurons
Training (%)
Training time (min)
Testing (%)
10
94.43 ± 1.92
6.87
95.28
20
94.63 ± 1.56
13.01
86.33
100
95.00 ± 0.93
26.48
87.04
256
95.23 ± 1.05
47.22
87.37
310
95.81 ± 1.88
55.04
87.96
384
94.98 ± 0.64
70.33
86.03
512
94.75 ± 1.83
128.65
85.26
==PAGE:60==
5.5 Classification
47
Table 5.8: Accuracy of ANN model with three different numbers of hidden neu-
rons on two hidden layer, and the corresponding computation time required for
training them.
Number of Neurons
Training (%)
Training time (min)
Testing (%)
310/310
95.91 ± 1.89
623.07
88.24
310/512
97.56 ± 2.14
720.58
90.18
310/620
96.20 ± 1.95
789.22
86.66
5.5
Classification
This section presents the overall performance of the five classifiers as well as
the proposed ensemble model. The section is divided into two subsections;
the first part presents the results of the intra-patient paradigm, while, the
results of the inter-patient paradigms are presented in the second part.
5.5.1
intra_patient ECG Heartbeat Classification
In the intra-paient case, both training and validation is applied on the whole
44 record where the results are disscussed as follows:
5.5.1.1
Classification performance for the five chosen classifiers
The average accuracy on the training and validation sets for the five single
classifiers are reported in Table 5.9. According to the table, KNN achieves
the highest accuracy followed by AdaBoost and RF (performance of Ad-
aBoost is similar to RF), while LDA achieves the lowest accuracy.
The average F1 −score, Se, Sp on the training, validation and testing
sets for the five single classifiers are reported in Tables 5.10, 5.11 and 5.12,
respectively. According to the results, KNN gets the highest average for
F1 −score, Se and Sp followed by AdaBoost and RF in both training and
validation.
==PAGE:61==
48
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.9: Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-patient
paradigm.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
AdaBoost
96.31 ± 0.98
96.28 ± 0.84
RF
96.31 ± 0.98
96.28 ± 0.84
ANN
96.23 ± 1.73
96.20 ± 1.97
LDA
91.42 ± 2.76
91.41 ± 2.02
KNN
99.36 ± 0.23
99.16 ± 0.22
Table 5.10: F1-score of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-patient
paradigm
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
AdaBoost
90.69 ± 1.03
90.60 ± 0.96
RF
90.69 ± 1.03
90.60 ± 0.96
ANN
88.76 ± 0.95
88.71 ± 1.80
LDA
77.78 ± 2.41
77.78 ± 2.56
KNN
98.32 ± 0.23
97.80 ± 0.12
Table 5.11: Sensitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-patient
paradigm
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
AdaBoost
90.72 ± 1.77
90.63 ± 1.85
RF
90.72 ± 1.77
90.63 ± 1.85
ANN
90.23 ± 0.45
90.17 ± 0.63
LDA
78.04 ± 2.73
78.03 ± 2.84
KNN
98.28 ± 0.43
97.76 ± 1.02
Table 5.12: Specitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in intra-patient
paradigm
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
AdaBoost
97.71 ± 1.23
97.68 ± 1.76
RF
97.71 ± 1.23
97.68 ± 1.76
ANN
97.64 ± 0.87
97.62 ± 0.80
LDA
94.63 ± 1.97
94.63 ± 1.65
KNN
99.60 ± 0.31
99.47 ± 0.18
==PAGE:62==
5.5 Classification
49
5.5.1.2
DST performance
The average performance of the ensemble algorithm on the training and
validation sets are presented in Table 5.13.
Based on these results, the
accuracy of the ensemble algorithm is higher than Adaboost, RF, ANN and
LDA, however, KNN has still the highest accuracy, as it also illustrated
in Fig.
5.8.
It should be noted that the obtained results in the intra-
patient case are not sufficient to claim the superiority of DST performance.
Therefore, in the next section, the algorithms are tested on the unseen data
set in order to evaluate performance of the model on some new data.
Table 5.13: Performance of ensemble algorithm on training and validation set
over all classes in intra-patient paradigm.
Measure
Acc
F1-score
Se
Sp
Training (%)
96.94 ± 1.46
91.87 ± 2.03
92.02 ± 1.76
98.8 ± 0.76
Validation (%)
96.33 ± 1.34
91.10 ± 1.98
91.50 ± 1.81
97.71 ± 0.91
AdaBoost
RF
ANN
LDA
KNN
DST
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Accuracy
F1-score
Sensitivity
Specificity
Figure 5.8: Comparison of the results of all classifiers and the ensemble model
on the validation set.
==PAGE:63==
50
5 Results and Discussion
The confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on the validation
set is presented in Fig. 5.9. As it can be seen in this figure, the number of
mis-classifications for class N is higher than other classes followed by class
V, class S and class F. On the contrary, class Q has the lowest number of
the mis-classifications. According to Fig. 5.9 class N is mostly predicted
as S and F classes. Moreover, class S is mainly mis-classified as class N,
while class V is mostly mis-classified as class F and Q. Additionally, F and
Q classes are mostly predicted as class N and V, respectively.
94.5%
19501
2.8%
580
0.7%
147
1.9%
388
0.1%
30
2.3%
493
96.4%
20255
0.6%
120
0.5%
98
0.2%
52
1.1%
222
0.9%
183
95.3%
19227
1.6%
313
1.1%
229
1.7%
378
0.1%
17
1.8%
414
96.5%
21987
0.0%
0
0.4%
96
0.4%
92
1.0%
230
0.1%
19
98.1%
21997
N
S
V
F
Q
Target Class
N
S
V
F
Q
Output Class
Figure 5.9: Confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on the validation
set.
The corresponding ROC curve of the proposed ensemble model on validation
set is illustrated in Fig. 5.10. The bottom part of the Fig. 5.10 is the
zoomed in version of the original ROC curve. According to the figure, the
performance of class Q is better than other classes followed by class F, S, V
and N. The results are consistent with the obtained results from confusion
matrix in Fig. 5.9.
==PAGE:64==
5.5 Classification
51
Figure 5.10: ROC curve of the proposed ensemble model on validation set.
==PAGE:65==
52
5 Results and Discussion
5.5.2
inter_patient ECG Heartbeat Classification
In this part the 44 records are divided into two parts. The first one is for
the training and validation of classifiers, while the second part is for the
testing.
5.5.2.1
Classification Performance for the five chosen classifiers
The average accuracy of the training, validation and testing sets for the
five single classifiers are reported in Table 5.14. According to the table, the
accuracy of the testing of all classifiers are less compared to their validation
set, as expected, since in testing, the performance of the models is performed
on some unseen data. Moreover, it can be seen that the performance of
AdaBoost is similar to RF, and they both achieve the highest accuracy for
testing set, although LDA achieves the lowest accuracy.
Additionally, it can be seen that accuracy of KNN for testing is signif-
icantly less than validation. This reduction of accuracy could be due to
the over fitting of KNN during training. Beside of KNN, the accuracy of
ANN is also decreases from 95.81% (validation accuracy) to 87.97% (testing
accuracy). This also could be due to overfitting issue in the design of ANN.
The overfitting problem comes from the close match between the network
and data where it loses its generalization ability over the test data [39].
The average F1 −score, Se, Sp of the training, validation and testing
sets for the five single classifiers are reported in Tables 5.15, 5.16 and 5.17,
respectively. According to the results, the average F1 −score, Se, Sp on
testing are also lower than training and validation. Moreover, AdaBoost
and RF achieved the highest average of F1 −score, Se, Sp on the testing
set.
Table 5.14: Accuracy of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-patient
paradigm.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
Testing (%)
AdaBoost
96.27 ± 0.64
96.22 ± 0.61
95.26
RF
96.27 ± 0.64
96.22 ± 0.61
95.26
ANN
95.81 ± 1.88
95.76 ± 1.26
87.96
LDA
91.76 ± 1.93
91.76 ± 2.59
82.34
KNN
99.38 ± 0.35
99.17 ± 0.55
89.93
==PAGE:66==
5.5 Classification
53
Table 5.15: F1-score of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-patient
paradigm.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
Testing (%)
AdaBoost
90.58 ± 1.23
90.46 ± 1.09
89.07
RF
90.58 ± 1.23
90.46 ± 1.09
89.07
ANN
87.72 ± 2.41
87.63 ± 2.76
85.12
LDA
78.48 ± 2.65
78.47 ± 2.43
75.25
KNN
98.33 ± 0.43
97.83 ± 0.16
89.01
Table 5.16: Sensitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-patient
paradigm.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
Testing (%)
AdaBoost
90.60 ± 1.62
90.48 ± 1.05
89.11
RF
90.60 ± 1.62
90.48 ± 1.05
89.11
ANN
89.33 ± 2.81
89.27 ± 2.75
85.01
LDA
78.82 ± 2.83
78.80 ± 2.16
76.17
KNN
98.30 ± 0.78
97.80 ± 1.13
75.45
Table 5.17: Specitivity of the individual classification algorithms, in inter-patient
paradigm.
Algorithms
Training (%)
Validation (%)
Testing (%)
AdaBoost
97.68 ± 0.97
97.65 ± 1.05
97.23
RF
97.68 ± 0.97
97.65 ± 1.05
97.23
ANN
97.38 ± 2.81
97.35 ± 2.75
96.72
LDA
94.84 ± 2.83
94.83 ± 2.16
94.01
KNN
99.60 ± 0.78
99.48 ± 1.03
91.13
5.5.2.2
DST performance
The outputs of testing the five classifiers are once again combined using
DST. Table 5.18 reports the accuracy of DST, as well as other classification
measures ( F1 −score, Se and Sp) for the proposed ensemble algorithm.
Based on the Table 5.18, DST improves the overall classification accuracy
of the best classifiers from 95.26% to 96.15%
==PAGE:67==
54
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.18: Performance of ensemble algorithm on training and validation set
over all classes in inter-patient paradigm.
Measure
Acc
F1-score
Se
Sp
Training (%)
96.58 ± 1.17
89.95 ± 1.24
91.26 ± 2.13
97.96 ± 0.51
Validation (%)
96.63 ± 1.05
89.66 ± 1.33
89.89 ± 1.98
97.56 ± 0.63
Testing (%)
96.15
89.27
89.23
97.42
Additionally, Fig. 5.11 shows the comparison of the results of all five
classifiers and ensemble model on the testing set. As it can be seen in Fig.
5.11, DST has the best performance compared to the other classifiers.
AdaBoost
RF
ANN
LDA
KNN
DST
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
0.85
0.9
0.95
1
Accuracy
F1-score
Sensitivity
Specificity
Figure 5.11: Comparison of the results of all classifiers and the ensemble model
on the testing set.
The confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on the testing
set is shown in Fig.
5.12.
According to the figure, the number of the
mis-classifications for class N is higher than other classes followed by class
V, class S and class F, while class Q has the lowest number of the mis-
classifications. It can be also seen that, class N and S are mostly predicted
==PAGE:68==
5.5 Classification
55
as class S and N, respectively. Moreover, class V and Q are mainly mis-
classified as class F and V, respectively, while class F are mostly predicted
as class N and V.
94.5%
45920
2.7%
1328
0.9%
434
1.6%
798
0.2%
94
2.3%
1166
96.4%
47990
0.4%
204
0.5%
240
0.3%
158
1.6%
902
0.6%
366
95.6%
54284
1.4%
802
0.7%
422
0.9%
404
0.2%
102
2.2%
1028
96.7%
45686
0.1%
42
0.8%
392
0.3%
130
1.4%
684
0.1%
62
97.3%
46578
N
S
V
F
Q
Target Class
N
S
V
F
Q
Output Class
Figure 5.12: Confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on testing set.
The corresponding ROC curve of the proposed ensemble model on the
testing set is illustrated in Fig. 5.13. The trend in this figure is similar to
the ROC curve for validation set, which indicates the performance of class
Q is better than other classes followed by class F, S, V and N. The results
are also consistent with the confusion matrix in Fig. 5.12.
In conclusion, the results for the inter-patient paradigm show that the
performance of the proposed ensemble model is higher than RF and Ad-
aBoost, which were the best classifiers.
==PAGE:69==
56
5 Results and Discussion
Figure 5.13: ROC curve of the proposed ensemble model on testing set.
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this study, a novel ensemble method has been proposed to detect cardiac
arrhythmias in ECG recordings. Initially, ECG signals are obtained from
MITDB. In order to make the data set balanced and consequently improve
the training procedure of the classifiers, ADASYN was applied to improve
the performance of classification algorithms. Based on the results in section
5.1, it can be concluded that ADASYN can tackle the imbalanced data set
and reduce the bias caused by the class imbalance.
Later, the recorded
ECG signals are filtered by wavelet based denoising system. The results in
section 5.2 showed that, wavelet filtering is effective in removing the baseline
wandering noises (as it can be seen in Fig. 5.2).
Additionally, the P-waves, QRS complexes,and T-waves in all ECG sig-
nals are detected using the PhysioNet WFDB Toolbox, and then the signals
are segmented into beats. Later, three set of features, namely, RRI, Heart-
beat morphology, and WT features were extracted from the recorded signals.
The most significant features, were selected based on PCC method and uti-
lized as inputs to the five chosen classification algorithms (AdaBoost, RF,
ANN, KNN and LDA). Comparing the results before and after FS step (in
section 5.3.2) showed that, performance of the classifiers is improved slightly
after elimination the redundant features from the original feature set. Ad-
ditionally, the computational time is decreased by removing the redundant
features.
The arrhythmia classification systems is investigated in both the inter-
patient and intra-patient paradigms.
In the intra-patient paradigm, the
whole database is utilized to generate and validate the classification models,
while, in inter-patient paradigm, the heartbeat are divided into two sets,
one for training and the other for testing. In the intra-patient paradigms,
KNN achives the highest performance among all of the classifiers followed
by RF and AdaBoost. However, in inter-patient case, RF and AdaBoost
achives the highest performance.
==PAGE:71==
58
6 Conclusion
Lastly, the outputs of the classifiers were combined using DST combi-
nation method. The results in section 5.5 implies the performance of the
ensemble model in the intra-patient case does not improve the validation
accuracy of KNN, which was the best single classification algorithms (in sec-
tion 5.5.1). However, the obtained result in the intra-patient case are not
adequate to claim the superiority of DST performance, since the training
and testing samples are from the same patients. The high performance of
DST is observed by applying it to the testing set in the inter-patient case
(section 5.5.2). It can be seen that the performance of the ensemble model
has higher accuracy among all single classification algorithms. It should be
noted, testing the models in the inter-patient case provides more realistic re-
sults, since the models are evaluated on the unseen data, which means that
the heartbeat sets for the test and training come from different individuals.
The proposed ensemble algorithm for cardiac arrhythmia detection has
shown a good performance in ECG recordings, however future perspectives
can be further investigated. Possible investigation could be utilizing differ-
ent methods to extract the features which may improve the classification
accuracy. Additionally, different dimensionality reduction techniques, such
as PCA or ICA could be used for feature selections. Finally, to improve
the evaluation of the model performance, the algorithm could be tested on
different larger database, such as physionet PTB Diagnostic ECG database
or Apnea ECG database.
In conclusion, the performance of the ensemble model is slightly bet-
ter compare to the best single classification algorithms to detect cardiac
arrhythmias in the inter-patient scheme. However, the main advantage of
the ensemble model is the robustness of the algorithm which is less likely
to over-fit compare to the single classification algorithms.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
P. de Chazal and R. B. Reilly. “A Patient-Adapting Heartbeat Clas-
sifier Using ECG Morphology and Heartbeat Interval Features”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 53.12 (2006), pp. 2535–
2543.
[2]
Özal Yıldırım et al. “Arrhythmia detection using deep convolutional
neural network with long duration ECG signals”. In: Computers in
biology and medicine 102 (2018), pp. 411–420.
[3]
V Mondéjar-Guerra et al. “Heartbeat classification fusing temporal
and morphological information of ECGs via ensemble of classifiers”.
In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 47 (2019), pp. 41–48.
[4]
Miad Faezipour et al. “A patient-adaptive profiling scheme for ECG
beat classification”. In: IEEE transactions on information technology
in biomedicine 14.5 (2010), pp. 1153–1165.
[5]
Manab Kumar Das and Samit Ari. “ECG beats classification using
mixture of features”. In: International scholarly research notices 2014
(2014).
[6]
Eduardo José da S Luz et al. “ECG-based heartbeat classification for
arrhythmia detection: A survey”. In: Computer methods and programs
in biomedicine 127 (2016), pp. 144–164.
[7]
R. Polikar. “Ensemble based systems in decision making”. In: IEEE
Circuits and Systems Magazine 6.3 (Third 2006), pp. 21–45. issn:
1531-636X. doi: 10.1109/MCAS.2006.1688199.
[8]
Euan A Ashley and Josef Niebauer. Cardiology Explained. Remedica,
2004. Chap. 3.
[9]
Jahangir Moini. Phlebotomy: Principles and Practice. Jones & Bartlett,
2013. Chap. 5, pp. 36–51.
==PAGE:73==
60
Bibliography
[10]
Carol Mattson Porth. Essentials of Pathophysiology: Concepts of Al-
tered States. Wolters Kluwer Health, 2014. Chap. 17, pp. 375–513.
[11]
Wendy Ware. Cardiovascular Disease in Small Animal Medicine. Man-
son publishing, 2011. Chap. 3, pp. 34–68.
[12]
Leonard S. Lilly. Pathophysiology of heart disease : a collaborative
project of medical students and faculty. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2016.
[13]
David Rakel. Integrative Medicine. ELSEVIER, 2018. Chap. 28, pp. 276–
286.
[14]
Adam Gacek and Witold Pedrycz. An Introduction to ECG Interpre-
tation. Springer, London, 2012.
[15]
Sajad Mousavi and Fatemeh Afghah. “Inter- and intra- patient ECG
heartbeat classification for arrhythmia detection: a sequence to se-
quence deep learning approach”. In: (Dec. 2018).
[16]
Can Ye, BVK Vijaya Kumar, and Miguel Tavares Coimbra. “Heart-
beat classification using morphological and dynamic features of ECG
signals”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 59.10 (2012),
pp. 2930–2941.
[17]
Farid Melgani and Yakoub Bazi. “Classification of electrocardiogram
signals with support vector machines and particle swarm optimiza-
tion”. In: IEEE transactions on information technology in biomedicine
12.5 (2008), pp. 667–677.
[18]
Zerina Masetic and Abdulhamit Subasi. “Congestive heart failure de-
tection using random forest classifier”. In: Computer methods and pro-
grams in biomedicine 130 (2016), pp. 54–64.
[19]
İnan Güler and Elif Derya Übeylı. “ECG beat classifier designed by
combined neural network model”. In: Pattern recognition 38.2 (2005),
pp. 199–208.
[20]
Maya Kallas et al. “Multi-class SVM classification combined with ker-
nel PCA feature extraction of ECG signals”. In: 2012 19th Interna-
tional Conference on Telecommunications (ICT). IEEE. 2012, pp. 1–
5.
[21]
Ary L Goldberger et al. “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet:
components of a new research resource for complex physiologic sig-
nals”. In: Circulation 101.23 (2000), e215–e220.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
61
[22]
George B Moody and Roger G Mark. “The impact of the MIT-BIH
arrhythmia database”. In: IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Magazine 20.3 (2001), pp. 45–50.
[23]
Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation et al.
“Testing and reporting performance results of cardiac rhythm and
ST segment measurement algorithms”. In: ANSI/AAMI EC38 1998
(1998).
[24]
Haibo He et al. “ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic sampling approach
for imbalanced learning”. In: 2008 IEEE International Joint Confer-
ence on Neural Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational
Intelligence). IEEE. 2008, pp. 1322–1328.
[25]
Selcan Kaplan Berkaya et al. “A survey on ECG analysis”. In: Biomed-
ical Signal Processing and Control 43 (2018), pp. 216–235.
[26]
Hari Mohan Rai, Anurag Trivedi, and Shailja Shukla. “ECG signal
processing for abnormalities detection using multi-resolution wavelet
transform and Artificial Neural Network classifier”. In: Measurement
46.9 (2013), pp. 3238–3246.
[27]
Keun-Chang Kwak and Witold Pedrycz. “Face recognition using fuzzy
integral and wavelet decomposition method”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics) 34.4 (2004),
pp. 1666–1675.
[28]
Oliver Faust et al. “Wavelet-based EEG processing for computer-aided
seizure detection and epilepsy diagnosis”. In: Seizure 26 (2015), pp. 56–
64.
[29]
Ikaro Silva and George B Moody. “An open-source toolbox for analysing
and processing physionet databases in matlab and octave”. In: Journal
of open research software 2.1 (2014).
[30]
Ilias G Maglogiannis. Emerging artificial intelligence applications in
computer engineering: real word ai systems with applications in ehealth,
hci, information retrieval and pervasive technologies. Vol. 160. Ios
Press, 2007.
[31]
Ali Mohammad Alqudah et al. “Developing of robust and high ac-
curate ECG beat classification by combining Gaussian mixtures and
wavelets features”. In: Australasian physical & engineering sciences in
medicine 42.1 (2019), pp. 149–157.
==PAGE:75==
62
Bibliography
[32]
Jacob Benesty et al. “Pearson correlation coefficient”. In: Noise reduc-
tion in speech processing. Springer, 2009, pp. 1–4.
[33]
K Pearson. Notes on Regression and Inheritance in the Case of Two
Parents Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 58, 240-242. 1895.
[34]
Tin Kam Ho. “Random decision forests”. In: Proceedings of 3rd in-
ternational conference on document analysis and recognition. Vol. 1.
IEEE. 1995, pp. 278–282.
[35]
Hastie Trevor, Tibshirani Robert, and Friedman JH. The elements of
statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction. 2009.
[36]
Yoav Freund and Robert E Schapire. “A decision-theoretic generaliza-
tion of on-line learning and an application to boosting”. In: Journal
of computer and system sciences 55.1 (1997), pp. 119–139.
[37]
Kandala NVPS Rajesh and Ravindra Dhuli. “Classification of imbal-
anced ECG beats using re-sampling techniques and AdaBoost ensem-
ble classifier”. In: Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 41 (2018),
pp. 242–254.
[38]
Simon Haykin. Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation. Prentice
Hall PTR, 1994.
[39]
K Gnana Sheela and Subramaniam N Deepa. “Review on methods to
fix number of hidden neurons in neural networks”. In: Mathematical
Problems in Engineering 2013 (2013).
[40]
Patricia Cohen, Stephen G West, and Leona S Aiken. Applied multiple
regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences. Psychology
Press, 2014.
[41]
N Mohanty et al. “Shape-Based Image Classification and Retrieval”.
In: Handbook of Statistics. Vol. 31. Elsevier, 2013, pp. 249–267.
[42]
Evelyn Fix and Joseph L Hodges Jr. Discriminatory analysis-nonparametric
discrimination: consistency properties. Tech. rep. California Univ Berke-
ley, 1951.
[43]
Thomas D Garvey, John D Lowrance, and Martin A Fischler. “An In-
ference Technique for Integrating Knowledge from Disparate Sources.”
In: IJCAI. Vol. 7. 1981.
[44]
Glenn Shafer. A mathematical theory of evidence. Vol. 42. Princeton
university press, 1976.
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
63
[45]
Lawrence A Klein and Lawrence A Klein. Sensor and data fusion: a
tool for information assessment and decision making. Vol. 324. SPIE
press Bellingham, 2004.
[46]
Kari Sentz, Scott Ferson, et al. Combination of evidence in Dempster-
Shafer theory. Vol. 4015. Citeseer, 2002.
[47]
Nahit Emanet. “ECG beat classification by using discrete wavelet
transform and Random Forest algorithm”. In: 2009 Fifth International
Conference on Soft Computing, Computing with Words and Percep-
tions in System Analysis, Decision and Control. IEEE. 2009, pp. 1–
4.
[48]
Kelly H Zou, A James O’Malley, and Laura Mauri. “Receiver-operating
characteristic analysis for evaluating diagnostic tests and predictive
models”. In: Circulation 115.5 (2007), pp. 654–657.
==PAGE:77==
Appendix A
In this section, the accepted conference article for TENCON 2019 is pro-
vided.
==PAGE:78==
Automatic Detection of Cardiac Arrhythmias Using
Ensemble Learning
Abdolrahman Peimankar*
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
apeima@dtu.dk
Mona Jafar Jajroodi*
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
s122898@student.dtu.dk
Sadasivan Puthusserypady
Department of Health Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
sapu@dtu.dk
Abstract—Objectives: Electrocardiogram (ECG) is an impor-
tant clinical tool for diagnosis of cardiac abnormalities. Physi-
cians make diagnoses by visual examination of ECGs. Analysing
huge amounts of ECGs however, can be very time consuming
and cumbersome. Hence, developing analytic software is of
great importance to automatically analyse these ECG signals
to detect efﬁciently the common cardiac arrhythmias. Methods:
In this study, an ensemble learning approach is proposed for
the automatic processing of ECG signals and classiﬁcation of
arrhythmias. Twenty six features (based on wavelets, heartbeat
intervals, and RR-intervals) are extracted and three algorithms,
namely, Random Forest (RF), Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost) and
Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) are utilized for classiﬁcation.
Results: The proposed method is evaluated on ECG signals
from 44 recordings of the MIT-BIH arrhythmia database. The
overall classiﬁcation accuracy of the RF, AdaBoost, and ANN
are 96.16%, 96.16% and 94.49%, respectively. Additionally, the
overall classiﬁcation accuracy of the ensemble model is improved
to 96.18%. Conclusion: Experimental results show that the per-
formance of the ensemble model for ECG heartbeat classiﬁcation
improves the overall accuracy. Signiﬁcance: This paper proposes
an accurate and easy to use approach to classify heartbeats into
one of the ﬁve classes recommended by ANSI/AAMI standard,
which can be used in real-time within a tele-health monitoring
framework.
Index Terms—electrocardiogram (ECG), heartbeat classiﬁca-
tion, ensemble learning, feature extraction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cardiac arrhythmia is an important issue due to its high
prevalence, associated high mortality and high cost of treat-
ment [1]–[3]. As reported by the World Health Organization
(WHO), cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the number one
cause of death in the world [3].
In order to diagnose cardiac arrhythmia and provide im-
portant information about heart’s conditions, the most basic
and available method is the electrocardiography (ECG) [2],
[4], [5]. However, it can be cumbersome for a physician to
visually analyse these long ECGs in a short time. For instance,
diagnosis of certain arrhythmia may take up to several hours
to even days by visual analysis [1], [4]. Therefore, to facilitate
the analysis of long ECG recordings, there is a need to use
computational techniques and develop effective algorithms for
*Both authors contributed equally to this work.
This work is supported by the Danish Innovation funded project, REAFEL
(IFD Project No: 6153-00009B).
automatic analysis and classiﬁcation of cardiac rhythms. This
can signiﬁcantly simplify the diagnosis of cardiac arrhythmia,
which is a great assistance to the clinicians [1], [4]–[6].
In the past decades, several techniques have been pro-
posed for automatic ECG-based heartbeat classiﬁcation and
arrhythmia detection. Faezipour et.al proposed a wavelet based
technique to classify ECG beats [4]. A heartbeat classiﬁcation
algorithm based on linear discriminant analysis was proposed
by Chazal et.al [1]. In [5], the authors presented a neural
network (NN) based method for automatic classiﬁcation of
ﬁve different ECG classes (Table I). Support vector machine
(SVM) based methods are also applied to classify ECG signals
[3] [7] [8]. Melgani and Bazi proposed a SVM based method
to automatically classify ECG beats and compared it with
two other classiﬁers (k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) and Radial
Basis Function (RBF) NN classiﬁer) [7]. Mond´ejar-Guerraa
proposed a new method for ECG classiﬁcation based on an
ensemble of SVMs [3].
Ensemble learning is one of the popular machine learning
techniques, which can be used in different types of problems
such as classiﬁcation and regression [9]. It has been widely
used in various applications such as biomedical [10], ﬁnancial
[11], and power systems engineering [12]. Every ensemble
learning models consists of three main parts, which are: (i)
Creating a training set by sampling from the dataset, (ii)
Training a group of different classiﬁers, and (iii) Combining
the predictions of classiﬁers. One of the most desirable advan-
tages of using ensemble learning is having a more accurate
classiﬁcation model by avoiding selection of a single weak
classiﬁer [9].
Twenty-six different features (Table II) have been extracted
and used as inputs to the three chosen classiﬁers to distin-
guish between normal heartbeats and four different arrhythmia
classes. The three classiﬁcation algorithms used in this study
are, Random Forests (RF) [13], Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost)
[14], and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN) [15]. Each of
these three single classiﬁers is trained using 5-fold cross
validation technique. Then, the outputs of these classiﬁers
are combined using Dempster-Shafer theory (DST) [16] to
improve the classiﬁcation performance.
The remainder of this paper consists of 5 sections. Section
II brieﬂy introduces the methods used in this study. Ensemble
Appendix A
65
==PAGE:79==
heartbeat classiﬁcation algorithm is described in Section III.
Section IV presents experimental results and comparison with
other algorithms, and ﬁnally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Database
In this study, ECG data from the MIT-BIH arrhythmia
database are used for evaluation of the proposed ECG beat
classiﬁcation technique [17], [18]. It contains 48 recordings
each about 30 min long (sampled at 360Hz). In agreement with
the AAMI recommended practice, four recordings (namely,
102, 104, 107, and 217) containing paced beats are removed
from the analysis because these beats do not preserve appro-
priate signal quality for reliable processing. In addition, the
AAMI convention is used to combine the beats into ﬁve classes
as shown in Table I [19].
TABLE I: Categories of Heartbeats in the MIT-BIH Database
Based on AAMI
Group
Class
Normal beat (N)
Left and right bundle branch block beats (L,R)
N
Atrial escape beat (e)
Nodal (junctional) escape beat (j)
Atrial premature beat (A)
Aberrated atrial premature beat (a)
S
Nodal (junctional) premature beat (J)
Supraventricular premature beat (S)
V
Premature ventricular contraction (V)
Ventricular escape beat (E)
F
Fusion of ventricular and normal beat (F)
Fusion of paced and normal beat (f)
Q
Unclassiﬁable beat (U)
B. Preprocessing
1) Signal ﬁltering: The ECG signals are ﬁltered using a
band-pass ﬁlter with a minimum-order FIR ﬁlter (due to the
input signal is long enough) [20], and in range of 0.5-40 Hz,
in order to remove wander and high frequency noise.
2) QRS complex detection and heartbeat segmentation:
One complete heart cycle of an ECG signal includes three
basic waveform components: P-wave, QRS complex, and T-
wave. The complete segmentation of ECG signal requires
detection of boundaries and peak locations of these three
waves [8]. In order to detect the QRS complexes and locating
the beginning, peak as well as the end of the P, QRS, and T
waves, the WFDB Toolbox in Physionet is used [17], [21].
Next, the signals are segmented into beats, which means that
it starts from P-wave onset and ends at T-wave offset. If P-
wave is not present, then each segment start from QRS onset
and end at T-wave offset.
C. Feature Extraction
1) Wavelet transform: Wavelet transform provides a char-
acterization in both temporal and frequency domains. This
capability allows wavelet transform to effectively analyse ECG
signals [8]. In this paper, the Daubechies wavelet function
(db2) is used, because it is more similar to the ECG signal
morphology compared to other wavelet functions. Addition-
ally, the number of decomposition levels is taken to be four.
This means that ECG signals are decomposed into the details
D1 −D4, and one approximation coefﬁcient A4. These ﬁve
decomposition are called subbands. Next, various statistical
features are extracted from the wavelet coefﬁcients, such as the
minimum, maximum, average and coefﬁcient variance. These
twenty features are extracted from each subband.
2) RR-interval features: RR-intervals is the distance be-
tween the heartbeats R peaks. Three RR-intervals based fea-
tures were extracted, which are the pre-RR interval, post-RR
interval and local average RR-interval. The pre-RR interval is
the RR-interval between a given heartbeat and the previous
heartbeat. The post-RR interval is the RR-interval between a
given heartbeat and the following heartbeat. Lastly, the local
average RR-interval is deﬁned as the average of the RR-
intervals of ten RR-intervals neighboring one heartbeat i.e.
ﬁve RR-intervals to the left and ﬁve RR-intervals to the right
of the given heartbeat.
3) Heart-beat morphology: Three morphology features,
which are QRS duration (time interval between the beginning
and end of the QRS segment (from QRS onset to QRS offset),
T-wave duration (time interval between the QRS offset and the
T-wave offset) and P-wave absence/present, are extracted from
each ECG heartbeat intervals. The P wave ﬂag is deﬁned as
a Boolean variable indicating the presence or absence of a P-
wave in each heartbeat segmentation. These twenty six features
are summarised in Table II.
TABLE II: Features Description
Features
Feature Description
F1-F5
Minimum of wavelet coefﬁcients in each subband
F6-F10
Maximum of wavelet coefﬁcients in each subband
F11-F15
Mean of wavelet coefﬁcients in each subband
F16-F20
Variance of wavelet coefﬁcients in each subband
F21
Post-RR interval
F22
Pre-RR interval
F23
Local average RR-interval
F24
QRS duration
F25
T-wave duration
F26
P-wave ﬂag
D. Beat Classiﬁcation
1) Random Forest (RF): RF is one of the commonly used
ensemble machine learning techniques, which is introduced
by Tin Kam Ho in 1995 [22]. This algorithm constructs
different decision trees during the training phase and then
makes a prediction based on the majority voting. One of the
advantages of decision trees is that they are stable models
to transformation of feature inputs and also adding irrelevant
features. Moreover, in this technique, different deep decision
trees are trained on different parts of the training set, in
order to alleviate the overﬁtting problem [23]. In order to
achieve optimal values for trees, different values of trees are
implemented and their classiﬁcation accuracy are compared.
66
Appendix A
==PAGE:80==
Accordingly, in this study, 20 trees are chosen in RF as it gave
the optimal accuracy results.
2) Adaptive Boosting (AdaBoost): This algorithm was in-
troduced by Yoav Freund and Robert Schapire in 1997 [14].
AdaBoost is more sensitive to noisy data and outliers but less
susceptible to the over-ﬁtting compared to RF. In this method,
the decision trees are used as weak learners and weighs the
mis-classiﬁcation samples in the next iteration. In this way,
the chance of incorrectly classiﬁed samples to be chosen for
training the next decision trees are higher.
3) Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN): In ANN, the struc-
tured layers are connected to the nodes similar to the neurons
in the human brain. It is capable of self-learning from data
and can be trained for the purposes of pattern recognition,
data classiﬁcation and prediction. In ANN, the input is bro-
ken down to abstraction layers. Therefore, it can be trained
over many samples to identify the patterns in the data. The
connection of each element, its strength and weight deﬁne the
behaviour of the network. The connection weights are adjusted
automatically during the training (based on speciﬁed learning
rule) until the NN performs the desired task accurately [15].
E. Dempster-Shafer combination rule
Dempster-Shafer theory (DST) is a commonly used tech-
nique for information fusion and capture the degree of certain-
ties from different information sources [16], [24]. There are
three main functions used in DST: mass probability function
(m), belief function (Bel), and plausibility function (Pl).
Function m is the most important in binary classiﬁcation
problems and should meet the following conditions [24]:
m : 2X →

0, 1

,
(1)
m(∅) = 0,
(2)
X
A⊆X
m(A) = 1,
(3)
where X and ∅are deﬁned as the universal set and the empty
set, respectively. DST is also able to combine independent
evidences (mass probability functions), m1 and m2, to produce
more informative evidence, as follows:
(m1 ⊕m2, ) =
1
1 −P
X
B∩C=A̸=∅
m1(B)m2(C),
(4)
where, P = P
B∩C=∅m1(B)m2(C).
III. ENSEMBLE HEARTBEAT CLASSIFICATION
Figure 1 illustrates the ﬂowchart of the proposed ensemble
model for heartbeat classiﬁcation. The algorithm is described
in nine steps as follows:
1) Noise reduction: The recorded ECG signals are ﬁltered
in order to remove any artifacts and baseline wanders.
2) QRS complex detection: The P-waves, QRS complexes,
and T-waves in all ECG signals are detected using the
PhysioNet WFDB Toolbox.
3) Segmentation: In this step, the signals are segmented into
beats, as mentioned in Section II-B.
4) Feature extraction: The aim of extracting features is to
reduce the pattern vector to a lower dimension, with
the most important information from the original vector.
Three different types of features are extracted as men-
tioned in Section II-C, which are based on RR-Intervals,
Heart-beat morphology, and Wavelet transform.
5) Create a synthetic dataset: In this study, the used dataset
is found to be highly imbalanced and the number of
normal heartbeats are much more than the number of
heartbeats for other classes. Thus, using this imbal-
anced dataset leads to increase the chance of a biased
classiﬁcation, and consequently obtain a higher error
rate on the minority classes [25]. In order to make the
dataset balanced and consequently improve the training
procedure of the classiﬁers, adaptive synthetic over-
sampling technique (ADASYN) was applied to enable
the classiﬁcation algorithms achieving their desirable
performance [25]. The ADASYN algorithm consists of
three main steps: (i) computing the degree of class
imbalance to calculate the number of synthetic samples
for the minority class, (ii) the Euclidean distance is
calculated to ﬁnd the K nearest neighbours in a minority
class, and (iii) the synthetic samples are generated for
the minority class by: di = xi + λ(xki −xi), where xi
is a minority class sample, xki is a randomly chosen
sample from the K nearest neighbors, and λ ∈[0, 1], is
a random number.
6) Cross validation: In this step, the dataset is divided
into training and validation sets using the 5-fold cross
validation.
7) Train all classiﬁers: The 5-fold training sets are used to
train the single classiﬁcation algorithms (RF, AdaBoost
a,d ANN).
8) Evaluate all the trained classiﬁers: The trained classi-
ﬁers are tested on the 5-fold validation sets to evaluate
the performance of each single classiﬁcation algorithm.
9) Combination of classiﬁer outputs: The outputs of all the
classiﬁers, which are the posterior probabilities of the
predicted classes, are combined using DST technique.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experimental Validation
In this study, we have used MIT-BIH arrhythmia database on
PhysioNet [18] to evaluate the performance of the developed
algorithm. The imbalanced dataset is composed of 100464
beats. The number of beats for the ﬁve classes before and
after creating synthetic data are given in Table III. As an
example, Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b, show the distribution of the
imbalanced and balanced number of beats of two arbitrary
features (Maximum of wavelet coefﬁcients and QRS-duration)
for two classes (N and F), respectively. It can be seen that
scatter plot shown in Fig. 2b shows more balanced distribution
of the features compared to Fig. 2a.
The three classiﬁers are trained using 5-fold cross validation
techniques and the synthetically balanced features as inputs.
Appendix A
67
==PAGE:81==
Filtering
2
Filtering
QRS complex detection
Feature Extraction
ADASYN
Cross Validation
Train all classifiers
Evaluate trained classifiers
Combined the outputs of 
the classifiers using DST
Segmentation
Training set
Validation set
ECG (MIT-BIH)
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Fig. 1: Flowchart of the ECG classiﬁcation technique.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: Scatter plots of two arbitrary features for two classes
(N and F): (a) Imbalanced, and (b) Synthetically balanced.
The average accuracy on training and validation sets for the
three single classiﬁers are reported in Table IV. According to
this table, the performance of AdaBoost is similar to RF while
ANN achieves the lowest accuracy.
Then, the outputs of these three classiﬁers are combined
using DST. This slightly improves the overall classiﬁcation
TABLE III: Number of Imbalanced and Balanced Datasets.
Class
Imbalanced beats
Balanced beats
N
89727
89727
S
2766
97773
V
6755
93815
F
798
99764
Q
418
100056
TABLE IV: 5-Fold Cross Validation Accuracy of Individual
Classiﬁcation Algorithms.
Algorithms
AdaBoost
RF
ANN
Training (%)
96.21
96.21
94.50
Validations (%)
96.16
96.16
94.49
accuracy of the best classiﬁers from 96.16% to 96.18%.
The confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on
validation set is shown in Fig. 3. For example, the number
of misclassiﬁcations for class N is higher than other classes,
which are mostly predicted as S and F classes. From Fig.
3, it can be also seen that S, V, F, and Q classes are
mainly misclassiﬁed as class N, class F, class N, and class
S, respectively.
In addition, other classiﬁcation measures such as sensitivity
(Se), speciﬁcity (Sp), and F1-score for the proposed ensemble
algorithm are also reported in Table V. These metrics are
deﬁned as follows:
Se
=
TP
TP + FN ,
(5)
Sp
=
TN
TN + FP ,
(6)
F −score
=
(1 + β2)
PPV.Se
(β2.PPV ) + Se,
(7)
Acc
=
TP + TN
(TP + FN + FP + TN ,
(8)
where TP, TN, FN, and FP represent the number of true
positive, true negative, false negative, and false positive cases,
respectively. PPV in (7) stands for the Positive Predictive
Value and is deﬁned as, PPV =
T P
T P +F P . The F-score can
be used as a single measure of performance of the test for
the positive class. This measure is called the balanced F-
score (F1-score), when β = 1. Its range is between 0 (lowest
classiﬁcation ability) and +1 (highest classiﬁcation ability).
TABLE V: Average Performance of Ensemble Algorithm on
Training and Validation Set Over All Classes.
Measure (%)
Acc
F1-score
Se
Sp
Training
96.20
90.39
90.41
97.63
Validation
96.18
90.35
90.37
97.62
Moreover, the performance of the proposed ensemble model
on validation set using different metrics for the ﬁve classes is
illustrated in Fig. 4. In general, the model performs the best
68
Appendix A
==PAGE:82==
TABLE VI: Comparison with Published Algorithms in Literature Using MIT-BIH Database in an Intra-patient Scheme.
Reference
Number of classes
Feature
Classiﬁer
Acc (%)
Chen et al. [26]
2
RR-interval
Set of rules
95
Tsipouras et al. [27]
9
RR-interval
Deterministic automata
96
G¨uler and ¨Ubeylı [28]
4
Wavelet
Ensemble of NNs
96
Yeh et al. [29]
9
Morphological, RR-interval
Clustering
94
Kallas et al. [30]
3
Kernel PCA
SVM
97
Mehmet [31]
4
Higher-order statistics, Wavelet
Minimum Distance, kNN, Bayes
98
Kor¨urek and Nizam [32]
6
RR-interval, ECG-segments
Clustering, kNN
94
Lin et al. [33]
7
Wavelet
Adaptive wavelet network
90
This work
5
RR-interval, Morphological, Wavelets
Ensemble learning
96
Fig. 3: Confusion matrix of the proposed ensemble model on
validation set. Numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 correspond to class
N, S, V, F, and Q, respectively.
Fig. 4: Overall performance of the proposed ensemble model
for ﬁve different classes.
on class Q. However, as shown in Fig. 4, its performance is
high for other classes as well. For example, the sensitivity of
the algorithm is the highest on class Q and the lowest on class
N, while other classes are in the same range.
B. Comparison with Other Heartbeat Classiﬁcation Models
Table VI lists some of the main models, considered by us,
published in literature. All the references in this table have
used the same MIT-BIH arrhythmia database in an intra-patient
scheme to evaluate the performance of their algorithms. The
proposed algorithm in this study outperforms most of the other
models listed in Table VI. Although, the proposed ensemble
algorithm is outperformed by [30], [31], the number of classes
(3 and 4, respectively) classiﬁed in these two models are less
than the standard ﬁve classes considered in this study.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an ensemble method has been proposed to
detect cardiac arrhythmias in ECG recordings. First, three set
of features (RR-Interval, Heart-beat morphology, and Wavelet
transform features) were extracted from the recorded signals.
Next, these features were used as inputs to three classiﬁcation
algorithms (AdaBoost, RF and ANN). Moreover, each of these
three single classiﬁers is trained using 5-fold cross validation
technique. Lastly, the outputs of the classiﬁers were combined
using the DST combination method in order to increase the
overall accuracy. Results show that the performance of the
ensemble model is slightly better the best single classiﬁcation
algorithms for the detection of cardiac arrhythmias. However,
the main advantage of the ensemble model is the robustness
of the algorithm which is less likely to over-ﬁt compared to
single classiﬁcation algorithms.
REFERENCES
[1] P. de Chazal and R. B. Reilly, “A patient-adapting heartbeat classiﬁer
using ECG morphology and heartbeat interval features,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 2535-2543, 2006.
[2]
¨O. Yldrm, P. Pławiak, R.-S. Tan, and U. R. Acharya, “Arrhythmia
detection using deep convolutional neural network with long duration
ECG signals,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 102, pp. 411-
420, 2018.
[3] V. Mond´ejar-Guerraa, J. Novo, J. Rouco, M. Penedo, and M. Ortega,
“Heartbeat classiﬁcation fusing temporal and morphological information
of ECGs via ensemble of classiﬁers,” Biomedical Signal Processing and
Control, vol. 47, pp. 41-48, 2019.
[4] M. Faezipour, A. Saeed, S. C. Bulusu, M. Nourani, H. Minn, and L.
Tamil, “A patient-adaptive proﬁling scheme for ECG beat classiﬁcation,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 14,
no. 5, pp. 1153-1165, 2010.
[5] M. K. Das and S. Ari, “ECG beats classiﬁcation using mixture of
features,” International Scholarly Research Notices, vol. 2014, 2014.
[6] E. J. d. S. Luz, W. R. Schwartz, G. C´amara-Ch´avez, and D. Menotti,
“ECG-based heartbeat classiﬁcation for arrhythmia detection: A survey,”
Computer Methods and Programs in biomedicine, vol. 127, pp. 144-164,
2016.
[7] F. Melgani and Y. Bazi, “Classiﬁcation of electrocardiogram signals
with support vector machines and particle swarm optimization,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 12, no.
5,pp. 667–677, 2008.
Appendix A
69
==PAGE:83==
[8] C. Ye, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, and M. T. Coimbra, “Heartbeat classiﬁca-
tion using morphological and dynamic features of ECG signals,” IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2930–
2941, 2012.
[9] R. Polikar, “Ensemble based systems in decision making,” IEEE Circuits
and Systems Magazine, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 21–45, 2006.
[10] L. Shi, L. Xi, X. Ma, M. Weng, and X. Hu “A novel ensemble algo-
rithm for biomedical classiﬁcation based on Ant Colony Optimization,”
Applied Soft Computing, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 5674–5683, 2011.
[11] D. West, S. Dellana, and J. Qian “Neural network ensemble strategies
for ﬁnancial decision applications,” Computers & Operations Research,
vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 2543–2559, 2005.
[12] A. Peimankar, S. J. Weddell, T. Jalal, and A. C. Lapthorn “Evolutionary
multi-objective fault diagnosis of power transformers,” Swarm and
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 36, pp. 62–75, 2017.
[13] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine Learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp.
5-32, 2001.
[14] Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire, “A decision-theoretic generalization of
on-line learning and an application to boosting,” Journal of Computer
and System Sciences, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 119–139, 1997.
[15] Haykin, Simon. Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation. Prentice
Hall PTR, 1994.
[16] Shafer, Glenn. A mathematical theory of evidence. Vol. 42. Princeton
University Press, 1976.
[17] I. Silva and G. B. Moody, “An open-source toolbox for analyzing and
processing Physionet databases in Matlab and octave,” Journal of Open
Research Software, vol. 2, no. 1, 2014.
[18] MIT-BIH
Arrhythmia
Database.
(2010).
[Online].
Available:
www.physionet.org/physiobank/database/mitdb
[19] Testing and Reporting Performance Results of Cardiac Rhythm and ST
Segment Measurement Algorithms. Association for the Advancement of
Medical Instrumentation, 1998.
[20] Oppenheim, Alan V., and Alan S. Willsky. “with Ian T. Young.” Signals
and Systems, 1983.
[21] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff , P. C.
Ivanov, R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C. K. Peng, H. E.
Stanley, “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components of a
New Research Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals,” Circulation,
vol. 10, no. 23, pp. e215–e220, 2000.
[22] Ho, Tin Kam. “Random decision forests,” Proceedings of 3rd IEEE
International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, Vol.
1, 1995.
[23] Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. “The elements
of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction, Springer
Series in Statistics.”: xxii–745, 2009.
[24] Klein, Lawrence A., and Lawrence A. Klein. Sensor and data fusion:
a tool for information assessment and decision making. Vol. 324.
Bellingham: SPIE press, 2004.
[25] He, Haibo, et al. “ADASYN: Adaptive synthetic sampling approach
for imbalanced learning.” 2008 IEEE International Joint Conference
on Neural Networks (IEEE World Congress on Computational Intel-
ligence)”, IEEE, 2008.
[26] S-W. Chen, P. M. Clarkson, and Q. Fan “A robust sequential detection
algorithm for cardiac arrhythmia classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 54–64, 1996.
[27] M. G. Tsipouras, C. Voglis, and D. I. Fotiadis “A robust sequential detec-
tion algorithm for cardiac arrhythmia classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 2089–2105, 2007.
[28] I. G¨uler and E. ¨Ubeylı “ECG beat classiﬁer designed by combined neural
network model,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 199–208, 2005.
[29] Y-C. Yeh, C. W. Chiou, and H-J. Lin “Analyzing ECG for cardiac
arrhythmia using cluster analysis,” Expert Systems with Applications,
vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1000–1010, 2012.
[30] M. Kallas, C. Francis, L. Kanaan, D. Merheb, P. Honeine, and H.
Amoud “Multi-class SVM classiﬁcation combined with kernel PCA
feature extraction of ECG signals,” 2012 19th International Conference
on Telecommunications (ICT), pp. 1–5, 2012.
[31] E. Mehmet “ECG beat classiﬁcation using neuro-fuzzy network,” Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 25, no. 15, pp. 1715–1722, 2004.
[32] M. Kor¨urek and A. Nizam “A new arrhythmia clustering technique based
on Ant Colony Optimization,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol.
41, no. 6, pp. 874–881, 2008.
[33] C-H. Lin, Y-C. Du, and T. Chen “Adaptive wavelet network for multiple
cardiac arrhythmias recognition,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol.
34, no. 4, pp. 2601–2611, 2008.
70
Appendix A
==PAGE:84==
Appendix B
In this chapter, all the MATLAB code that utilized to obtained the results
are provided.
==PAGE:85==
% Intra_patient or subject oriented, where all 44 records used for training and 
validation  
close all;clear;clc; 
  
load all_sig_44;        
load time_44;  
load all_Fs;      
load ann_44;  
load anntype_44;        load('loc_44.mat');      
load('P_waves_44.mat'); load('QRS_ann_44.mat');  
load('T_waves_44.mat'); load('wave_44.mat'); 
load all_sig_44; 
  
%% Number of total samples 
num_rec = length(loc); 
% ECG morphology sample number 
mor_sample = 10; 
fs =360; %frekvens 
  
  
%% denoising by wavedec (calling the denoising function) 
y = wavelettesBackup(sig); 
  
for sample_no= 1:num_rec  
 
%finding corresponding N in ann (from wave and loc(toolbox))     
% it gives os location of N (fx: 5, 15.. in {1,1}) 
N_loc_matrix{1,sample_no} = find(loc{1,sample_no}=='N');  
% finding correspoinding values for N in Wave ( we get the values on x-   
akse(from toolbox(wrong)))     
    for N_no = 1:length(N_loc_matrix{1,sample_no}) 
        N_loc = N_loc_matrix{1,sample_no}(N_no); 
        wave_New{1,sample_no}(N_no,1) = wave{1,sample_no}(N_loc);  
         
        %finding the index of the closest value in N_wave to some number in ann        
        a = ann{1,sample_no}; 
        n = wave{1,sample_no}(N_loc); 
        [val,idx] = min(abs(a-n)); 
        ann_New{1,sample_no}(N_no,1) = a(idx);   
         
        %find out in which row an element is equal to a specific number  
        %fiding the new labels (instead of(2274), use N-anntype(2268)), size of      
this matches to our segmenents 
  
        for anntype_no = 1:length(anntype{1,sample_no}) 
            if a(idx) == ann{1,sample_no}(anntype_no) 
                anntype_New{1,sample_no}(N_no,1) = 
anntype{1,sample_no}(anntype_no);  
            end  
        end 
         
    end 
     
   %% FEATURE EXTRACTION (R-R intervals)%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
    RRI = zeros(0); 
    ann_no = ann_New{1,sample_no}; 
     
    for  ann_index= 1:size(ann_no,1) 
72
Appendix B
==PAGE:86==
        if ann_index == length(ann_no)  
            break 
        end 
        RRI(ann_index,1)=(ann_no(ann_index+1)-ann_no(ann_index)); 
    end 
     
    % Average R-R interval 
    avg_RRI{1,sample_no} = mean(RRI); 
     
    % The pre RR-interval value for the first point is zero 
    pre_RRI{1,sample_no}(1,1) = 0;     
    for  ann_index= 2:size(ann_no,1) 
     pre_RRI{1,sample_no}(ann_index,1)=(ann_no(ann_index)-ann_no(ann_index-1)); 
    end 
     
    % The post RR-interval value for the last point is zero 
    post_RRI{1,sample_no}(length(ann_no),1) = 0; 
    for  ann_index= 1:size(ann_no,1)-1 
        post_RRI{1,sample_no}(ann_index,1)=(ann_no(ann_index+1)-
ann_no(ann_index)); 
    end 
     
    % The local avarage RR-interval value  
    for i=1:length(RRI)+1 
        sum_RRI = 0; 
        num_RRI = 0; 
        for j=-5:4 
            if i+j>=1 && i+j<=length(RRI) 
                sum_RRI = sum_RRI + RRI(i+j,1); 
                num_RRI = num_RRI + 1;  
             
            end 
        end 
        local_avg_RRI{1,sample_no}(i,1) = sum_RRI/num_RRI; 
    end 
     
     
    %% making start and end point for each segment  
    segment_no = 0; 
    for loc_no = 1:length(loc{1,sample_no}) % kigger ind i hver cell 
        
        % (:40    p:112   ):41   N:78   t:116 
        if double(loc{1,sample_no}(loc_no)) == 78  %starting from            
            QRS_onset = loc_no-1; 
            QRS_offset = loc_no+1; 
            p_wave_flag = 0; 
             
            %start 
            if loc_no-1 == 1 % loc{1,8} 
                segment_start = 1; 
                 
            elseif double(loc{1,sample_no}(loc_no-3)) == 112  % if 3 befor is p 
                segment_start = loc_no-4; 
                p_wave_flag = 1; 
             
            else 
                segment_start = loc_no-1; % sixth N in loc{1,8} 
            end 
Appendix B
73
==PAGE:87==
             
            %end 
            if loc_no+4 > length(loc{1,sample_no})% recording 220 in loc{1,39} 
                segment_end = length(loc{1,sample_no}); 
                 
            elseif double(loc{1,sample_no}(loc_no+4)) == 116 % if after 4-->t 
                segment_end = loc_no+5; 
                 
            else 
                segment_end = loc_no+4;  
            end 
             
            %% making segment which start from P/N onset  to t offset (x-aksen)- 
-> Each beat is a segment 
   
            segment_no = segment_no + 1; 
            seg = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_start:segment_end); 
            seg_RRI{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = num2cell(seg); 
  
            %% amplitude for each seg_RRI   
             
            beat_start = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_start); 
            beat_stop = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_end);             
            if beat_stop > length(sig{1,sample_no}) 
                beat_stop = length(sig{1,sample_no}); 
            end 
              
            beat_rang = sig{1,sample_no}(beat_start:beat_stop); 
            beat_RRI{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = num2cell(beat_rang); %  
             
            
            %% identify QRS_onset and ofseT 
             
            beat_QRS_onset = wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_onset); 
            beat_QRS_offset = wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_offset); 
            if beat_QRS_offset > length(sig{1,sample_no}) 
                beat_QRS_offset = length(sig{1,sample_no}); 
            end 
                   
             
            %% 1. Heart-beat intervals (3) 
             
            % 1.1. QRS duration 
            QRS_duration_range = wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_offset) -   
wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_onset); 
            QRS_duration{1,sample_no}(segment_no,1) = QRS_duration_range; 
             
            % 1.2. T-wave duration 
            t_wave_duration_range = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_end) - 
wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_offset); 
            t_wave_duration{1,sample_no}(segment_no,1) = t_wave_duration_range; 
             
            % 1.3. P-wave flag 
            p_wave_flags{1,sample_no}(segment_no,1) = p_wave_flag; 
             
  
           %% 3. wavelet Features (20) 
74
Appendix B
==PAGE:88==
            wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = modwt(beat_rang,4); 
            for row=1:5 
                wt_min{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(min(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                wt_max{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(max(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                wt_mean{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(mean(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                wt_var{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(var(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
            end 
            wtrec{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = 
zeros(size(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1})); 
            wtrec{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(1:4,:) = 
wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(1:4,:); 
            ecgQRSBand{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = 
imodwt(wtrec{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1},'db2'); 
             
        end 
    end 
     
 %% Labels %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
    
    Target = zeros(0); 
    for i=1:length(anntype_New{1,sample_no}) 
        % N 
        if double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 78      %N 
            Target(i) = 1; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 76  %L 
            Target(i) = 1; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 82  %R 
            Target(i) = 1; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 101  %e 
            Target(i) = 1; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 106  %j 
            Target(i) = 1; 
  
        % S 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 83  %S 
            Target(i) = 2; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 65  %A 
            Target(i) = 2; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 97  %a 
            Target(i) = 2; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 74  %J 
            Target(i) = 2; 
  
        % V 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 86 % V 
            Target(i) = 3; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 69 % E 
            Target(i) = 3; 
         
        % F 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 70 % F 
            Target(i) = 4; 
         
        % Q 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 81 %Q 
Appendix B
75
==PAGE:89==
            Target(i) = 5; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 102 % f 
            Target(i) = 5; 
        elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 49 % 1 
            Target(i) = 5; 
         
        % Non 
        else 
            Target(i) = 5; 
        end 
    end 
     
    All_labels{sample_no,1} = Target;  
    Y = Target'; 
    YY{sample_no,1} = Y; 
     
  %X = making feature vector    
    X = zeros(0); 
    for i=1:length(wt{1,sample_no}) 
        jj = 0; 
        for j=1:5 
            X(i,jj+1) = wt_min{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
            X(i,jj+2) = wt_max{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
            X(i,jj+3) = wt_mean{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
            X(i,jj+4) = wt_var{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
            jj = jj + 4; 
        end 
    end 
     
    jj = jj + 1; 
    X(:,jj) = post_RRI{1,sample_no}; 
     
    jj = jj + 1; 
    X(:,jj) = pre_RRI{1,sample_no}; 
  
    jj = jj + 1; 
    X(:,jj) = local_avg_RRI{1,sample_no}; 
     
    jj = jj + 1; 
    X(:,jj) = QRS_duration{1,sample_no}; 
     
    jj = jj + 1; 
    X(:,jj) = t_wave_duration{1,sample_no}; 
     
    jj = jj + 1; 
    X(:,jj) = p_wave_flags{1,sample_no}; 
     
    XX{sample_no,1} = X; 
     
end 
  
  
 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%shuffling the dataset %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
Data_all=cell2mat(XX); 
Labels_all=cell2mat(YY); 
  
Balanced_Data = Make_Balanced(Data_all, Labels_all); 
76
Appendix B
==PAGE:90==
  
[row, col] = size(Balanced_Data.Features_Balanced); 
idx = randperm(row); 
Shuffled_Bal_Features = Balanced_Data.Features_Balanced(idx,:); 
Shuffled_Bal_Labels = Balanced_Data.Labels_Balanced(idx,:); 
  
 
%% Plot balanced data 
whole_data=[Data_all Labels_all]; 
ss1=whole_data(whole_data(:,end)==1,1:end); 
ss2=whole_data(whole_data(:,end)==4,1:end); 
ss12=[ss1;ss2]; 
figure(1) 
scatterhist(ss12(:,9), 
ss12(:,24),'Group',ss12(:,end),'Kernel','on','Location','SouthEast',... 
    'Direction','out','Marker','o+','MarkerSize',[4,5]); 
ax = gca; 
ax.FontSize = 14; 
xlim([-1.2 0.05]) 
xlabel('Feature #9') 
ylabel('Feature #24') 
legend('Class N','Class F') 
  
whole_data_bal=[Shuffled_Bal_Features Shuffled_Bal_Labels]; 
bb1=whole_data_bal(whole_data_bal(:,end)==1,1:end); 
bb2=whole_data_bal(whole_data_bal(:,end)==4,1:end); 
bb12=[bb1;bb2]; 
figure(2) 
scatterhist(bb12(:,9), 
bb12(:,24),'Group',bb12(:,end),'Kernel','on','Location','SouthEast',... 
    'Direction','out','Marker','o+','MarkerSize',[4,5]); 
ax = gca; 
ax.FontSize = 14; 
xlim([-1.2 0.05]) 
xlabel('Feature #9') 
ylabel('Feature #24') 
legend('Class N','Class F') 
  
  
  
 %%   Classification algorithms 
  
c = cvpartition(length(Shuffled_Bal_Features),'KFold',5); 
  
for i=1:c.NumTestSets 
    TrainX{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Features(c.training(i)==1,:); 
    TrainY{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Labels(c.training(i)==1,:); 
    ValX{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Features(c.test(i)==1,:); 
    ValY{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Labels(c.test(i)==1,:); 
  
%% LDA 
     MdlLinear{1,i} = 
fitcdiscr(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'DiscrimType','pseudoQuadratic'); 
    % Training 
     [Train_LDA_pred{1,i},scores_LDA_tr{1,i}]= predict(MdlLinear{1,i},   
     TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i} = softmax(scores_LDA_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i}'; 
Appendix B
77
==PAGE:91==
  
     LDA_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_LDA_pred{1,i}); 
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_LDA_pred{1,i},scores_LDA_val{1,i}]= predict(MdlLinear{1,i}, ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i} = softmax(scores_LDA_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i}'; 
  
    LDA_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_LDA_pred{1,i});    
     
    outLDA.Train_LDA_pred{1,i} = Train_LDA_pred{1,i}; 
    outLDA.scores_LDA_tr{1,i} = scores_LDA_tr{1,i}; 
    outLDA.Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i}; 
    outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,i} = LDA_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outLDA.Val_LDA_pred{1,i} = Val_LDA_pred{1,i}; 
    outLDA.scores_LDA_val{1,i} = scores_LDA_tr{1,i}; 
    outLDA.Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i}; 
    outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,i} = LDA_Val_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outLDA.TrainY{1,i} = TrainY{1,i}; 
    outLDA.ValY{1,i} = ValY{1,i}; 
    %% KNN 
    KNN_Mdl{1,i} = fitcknn(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'NumNeighbors',3); 
  
    % Training 
     [Train_KNN_pred{1,i},scores_KNN_tr{1,i}]= predict( KNN_Mdl{1,i},   
     TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i} = softmax(scores_KNN_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i}'; 
  
     KNN_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_KNN_pred{1,i}); 
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_KNN_pred{1,i},scores_KNN_val{1,i}]= predict( KNN_Mdl{1,i}, ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i} = softmax(scores_KNN_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i}'; 
  
    KNN_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_KNN_pred{1,i});    
     
    outKNN.Train_KNN_pred{1,i} = Train_KNN_pred{1,i}; 
    outKNN.scores_KNN_tr{1,i} = scores_KNN_tr{1,i}; 
    outKNN.Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i}; 
    outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,i} = KNN_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outKNN.Val_KNN_pred{1,i} = Val_KNN_pred{1,i}; 
    outKNN.scores_KNN_val{1,i} = scores_KNN_tr{1,i}; 
    outKNN.Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i}; 
    outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,i} = KNN_Val_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outKNN.TrainY{1,i} = TrainY{1,i}; 
    outKNN.ValY{1,i} = ValY{1,i}; 
     
%% fitcensemble - Random forest 
    t = templateTree('MaxNumSplits',30); 
    Mdl{1,i} = fitcensemble(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'NumLearningCycles',100,... 
        'Learners',t); %,'LearnRate',0.1 
    % Training 
78
Appendix B
==PAGE:92==
    [Train_DT_pred{1,i},scores_DT_tr{1,i}]= predict(Mdl{1,i}, TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i} = softmax(scores_DT_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i}'; 
  
    DT_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_DT_pred{1,i}); 
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_DT_pred{1,i},scores_DT_val{1,i}]= predict(Mdl{1,i}, ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_DT{1,i} = softmax(scores_DT_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_val_DT{1,i}'; 
  
    DT_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_DT_pred{1,i});    
     
    outDT.Train_DT_pred{1,i} = Train_DT_pred{1,i}; 
    outDT.scores_DT_tr{1,i} = scores_DT_tr{1,i}; 
    outDT.Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i}; 
    outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,i} = DT_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outDT.Val_DT_pred{1,i} = Val_DT_pred{1,i}; 
    outDT.scores_DT_val{1,i} = scores_DT_tr{1,i}; 
    outDT.Post_prob_val_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_val_DT{1,i}; 
    outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,i} = DT_Val_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outDT.TrainY{1,i} = TrainY{1,i}; 
    outDT.ValY{1,i} = ValY{1,i}; 
  
 %% AdaBoost 
    t_AdaB = templateTree('MaxNumSplits',30); 
    Mdl_AdaB{1,i} =  
         
fitcensemble(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'Method','AdaBoostM2','NumLearningCycles',1
00,... 
        'Learners',t_AdaB); %,'LearnRate',0.1 
    % Training 
    [Train_AdaB_pred{1,i},scores_AdaB_tr{1,i}]= predict(Mdl_AdaB{1,i}, 
TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i} = softmax(scores_AdaB_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i}'; 
  
    AdaB_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_AdaB_pred{1,i}); 
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_AdaB_pred{1,i},scores_AdaB_val{1,i}]= predict(Mdl_AdaB{1,i},    
ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i} = softmax(scores_AdaB_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i}'; 
     
    %confusion matrix 
    AdaB_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_AdaB_pred{1,i}); 
     
     
    outAdaB.Train_AdaB_pred{1,i} = Train_AdaB_pred{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.scores_DT_tr{1,i} = scores_DT_tr{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,i} = AdaB_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outAdaB.Val_AdaB_pred{1,i} = Val_AdaB_pred{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.scores_AdaB_val{1,i} = scores_AdaB_val{1,i}; 
Appendix B
79
==PAGE:93==
    outAdaB.Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,i} = AdaB_Val_stats{1,i}; 
      
 %% ANN 
    
    Mdl_ann{1,i} = patternnet(310); 
     
    Mdl_ann{1,i} = train(Mdl_ann{1,i},TrainX{1,i}',full(ind2vec(TrainY{1,i}'))); 
  
    %Training 
    Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i} = Mdl_ann{1,i}(TrainX{1,i}'); 
    Train_ANN_pred{1,i} = vec2ind(Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i}); 
  
    %Validation 
    Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i} = Mdl_ann{1,i}(ValX{1,i}'); 
    Val_ANN_pred{1,i} = vec2ind(Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i}); 
  
    %Confusion matrix 
    ANN_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_ANN_pred{1,i}); 
    ANN_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_ANN_pred{1,i}); 
     
     
    outANN.Train_ANN_pred{1,i} = Train_ANN_pred{1,i}'; 
    outANN.Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i}'; 
    outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,i} = ANN_Train_stats{1,i}'; 
     
    outANN.Val_ANN_pred{1,i} = Val_ANN_pred{1,i}'; 
    outANN.Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i} = Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i}'; 
    outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,i} = ANN_Val_stats{1,i}'; 
  
end 
  
 
 
 
%% Dempster-Shafer combination 
  
 outDST = DempsterShafer(outDT, outAdaB, outANN, c); 
 outDST2 = DempsterShafer2(outDT, outAdaB, outANN, outLDA,outKNN, c); 
 outDST3 = DempsterShafer3( outANN,outLDA,outKNN, c); 
 outDST4 = DempsterShafer4( outDT, outAdaB, c); 
%% Performance report 
NumClasses = 5; 
for f=1:c.NumTestSets 
    for CL=1:NumClasses 
         
        %Accuracy 
        ACC_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
80
Appendix B
==PAGE:94==
       
         
        ACC_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        %Sensitivity 
        SEN_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        %Specificity 
        SPEC_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
         
Appendix B
81
==PAGE:95==
        SPEC_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        %F1-score 
        Fscore_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
  
        Fscore_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
  
        Fscore_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
  
    end 
     
    %Accuracy 
    PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DT_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(ACC_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val(f)=mean(ACC_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
82
Appendix B
==PAGE:96==
     
     
    PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val(f)=mean(ACC_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val(f)=mean(ACC_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST3_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST4_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
     
    %Sensitivity 
    PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DT_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(SEN_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val(f)=mean(SEN_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val(f)=mean(SEN_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
         
    PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val(f)=mean(SEN_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST3_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST4_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
     
    %Specificity 
    PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
Appendix B
83
==PAGE:97==
    PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
     
    %F1-score 
    PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
end 
 
 
%Accuracy Average 
Avg_ACC_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DT_Val); 
sd_ACC_DT_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_DT_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_DT_Val)*100; 
  
84
Appendix B
==PAGE:98==
  
Avg_ACC_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val); 
sd_ACC_AdaB_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_AdaB_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_ACC_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val); 
sd_ACC_ANN_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_ANN_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_ACC_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val); 
sd_ACC_LDA_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_LDA_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val)*100; 
  
  
Avg_ACC_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val); 
sd_ACC_KNN_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_KNN_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_ACC_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST_Val); 
sd_ACC_DST_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_DST_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_DST_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_ACC_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val); 
sd_ACC_DST2_Tr = std(PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr)*100; 
sd_ACC_DST2_Val = std(PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_ACC_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST4_Val); 
  
  
%Sensitivity Average  
Avg_SEN_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DT_Val); 
sd_SEN_DT_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr)*100; 
sd_SEN_DT_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_DT_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val); 
sd_SEN_AdaB_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr)*100; 
sd_SEN_AdaB_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val); 
sd_SEN_ANN_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr)*100; 
sd_SEN_ANN_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val); 
sd_SEN_LDA_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr)*100; 
Appendix B
85
==PAGE:99==
sd_SEN_LDA_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val); 
sd_SEN_KNN_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr)*100; 
sd_SEN_KNN_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST_Val); 
sd_SEN_DST_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr)*100; 
sd_SEN_DST_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_DST_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val); 
sd_SEN_DST2_Tr = std(PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr)*100; 
sd_SEN_DST2_Val = std(PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SEN_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST4_Val); 
  
%Specificity Average 
Avg_SPEC_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val); 
sd_SPEC_DT_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_DT_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val); 
sd_SPEC_AdaB_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_AdaB_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SPEC_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val); 
sd_SPEC_ANN_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_ANN_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SPEC_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val); 
sd_SPEC_LDA_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_LDA_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SPEC_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val); 
sd_SPEC_KNN_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_KNN_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val); 
sd_SPEC_DST_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_DST_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_SPEC_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val); 
sd_SPEC_DST2_Tr = std(PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr)*100; 
sd_SPEC_DST2_Val = std(PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val)*100; 
86
Appendix B
==PAGE:100==
  
Avg_SPEC_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Val); 
  
%F1-score 
Avg_Fscore_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val); 
sd_Fscore_DT_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_DT_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val); 
sd_Fscore_AdaB_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_AdaB_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val); 
sd_Fscore_ANN_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_ANN_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val); 
sd_Fscore_LDA_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_LDA_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val); 
sd_Fscore_KNN_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_KNN_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val); 
sd_Fscore_DST_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_DST_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val); 
sd_Fscore_DST2_Tr = std(PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr)*100; 
sd_Fscore_DST2_Val = std(PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val)*100; 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Val); 
  
 
%% 
  
DT_Results_Tr.ACC_DT_Tr=ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.SEN_DT_Tr=SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.SPEC_DT_Tr=SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Fscore_DT_Tr=Fscore_DT_Tr; 
  
DT_Results_Val.ACC_DT_Val=ACC_DT_Val; 
Appendix B
87
==PAGE:101==
DT_Results_Val.SEN_DT_Val=SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.SPEC_DT_Val=SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Fscore_DT_Val=Fscore_DT_Val; 
  
  
LDA_Results_Tr.ACC_LDA_Tr=ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.SEN_LDA_Tr=SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.SPEC_LDA_Tr=SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Fscore_LDA_Tr=Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
  
LDA_Results_Val.ACC_LDA_Val=ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.SEN_LDA_Val=SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.SPEC_LDA_Val=SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Fscore_LDA_Val=Fscore_LDA_Val; 
  
KNN_Results_Tr.ACC_KNN_Tr=ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.SEN_KNN_Tr=SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.SPEC_KNN_Tr=SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Fscore_KNN_Tr=Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
  
KNN_Results_Val.ACC_KNN_Val=ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.SEN_KNN_Val=SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.SPEC_KNN_Val=SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Fscore_KNN_Val=Fscore_KNN_Val; 
  
  
ANN_Results_Tr.ACC_ANN_Tr=ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.SEN_ANN_Tr=SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.SPEC_ANN_Tr=SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Fscore_ANN_Tr=Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
  
ANN_Results_Val.ACC_ANN_Val=ACC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.SEN_ANN_Val=SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.SPEC_ANN_Val=SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Fscore_ANN_Val=Fscore_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_ANN_Val=Avg_ACC_ANN_Val; 
  
DST_Results_Tr.ACC_DST_Tr=ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.SEN_DST_Tr=SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST_Tr=SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST_Tr=Fscore_DST_Tr; 
  
DST_Results_Val.ACC_DST_Val=ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.SEN_DST_Val=SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.SPEC_DST_Val=SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Fscore_DST_Val=Fscore_DST_Val; 
  
  
DST2_Results_Tr.ACC_DST2_Tr=ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.SEN_DST2_Tr=SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST2_Tr=SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST2_Tr=Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
  
DST2_Results_Val.ACC_DST2_Val=ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.SEN_DST2_Val=SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.SPEC_DST2_Val=SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Fscore_DST2_Val=Fscore_DST2_Val; 
  
88
Appendix B
==PAGE:102==
DST3_Results_Tr.ACC_DST3_Tr=ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.SEN_DST3_Tr=SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST3_Tr=SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST3_Tr=Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
  
DST3_Results_Val.ACC_DST3_Val=ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.SEN_DST3_Val=SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.SPEC_DST3_Val=SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Fscore_DST3_Val=Fscore_DST3_Val; 
  
AdaB_Results_Tr.ACC_AdaB_Tr=ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.SEN_AdaB_Tr=SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.SPEC_AdaB_Tr=SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Fscore_AdaB_Tr=Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
  
AdaB_Results_Val.ACC_AdaB_Val=ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.SEN_AdaB_Val=SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.SPEC_AdaB_Val=SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Fscore_AdaB_Val=Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
%%  
for i=1:NumClasses 
     
    %Accuracy 
    PerClass_ACC_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.ACC_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.ACC_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
  
    PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.ACC_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.ACC_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.ACC_ANN_Tr(:,i));   
    PerClass_ACC_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.ACC_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.ACC_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.ACC_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.ACC_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.ACC_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.ACC_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.ACC_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.ACC_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.ACC_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.ACC_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.ACC_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
     
    %Sensitivity 
    PerClass_SEN_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.SEN_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.SEN_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.SEN_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.SEN_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.SEN_ANN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.SEN_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
Appendix B
89
==PAGE:103==
     
    PerClass_SEN_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.SEN_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.SEN_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.SEN_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.SEN_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.SEN_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.SEN_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.SEN_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.SEN_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.SEN_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.SEN_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
     
    %Specificity 
    PerClass_SPEC_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.SPEC_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.SPEC_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.SPEC_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.SPEC_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.SPEC_ANN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.SPEC_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.SPEC_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.SPEC_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.SPEC_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.SPEC_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.SPEC_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
     
    PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.SPEC_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.SPEC_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
     
    %Fscore 
    PerClass_Fscore_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.Fscore_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.Fscore_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.Fscore_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.Fscore_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.Fscore_ANN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.Fscore_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.Fscore_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.Fscore_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.Fscore_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.Fscore_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
90
Appendix B
==PAGE:104==
     
    PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.Fscore_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.Fscore_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
     PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.Fscore_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
  
end 
  
  
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DT_Tr=Avg_ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DT_Tr=Avg_SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DT_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DT_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DT_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DT_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DT_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DT_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DT_Tr; 
  
DT_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DT_Val=Avg_ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DT_Val=Avg_SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DT_Val=Avg_SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DT_Val=Avg_Fscore_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DT_Val=PerFold_ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DT_Val=PerFold_SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DT_Val=PerClass_ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DT_Val=PerClass_SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DT_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DT_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DT_Val; 
  
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Tr=Avg_ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Tr=Avg_SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Tr=Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Tr=Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
  
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val=Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val=Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val=Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val=Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val=PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val=PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val=PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
Appendix B
91
==PAGE:105==
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val=PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Val=PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Val=PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Val=PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Val=PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
  
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_KNN_Tr=Avg_ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_KNN_Tr=Avg_SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_KNN_Tr=Avg_SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_KNN_Tr=Avg_Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr=PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr=PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_KNN_Tr=PerClass_ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_KNN_Tr=PerClass_SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
  
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_KNN_Val=Avg_ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_KNN_Val=Avg_SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val=Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val=Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val=PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val=PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val=PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val=PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_KNN_Val=PerClass_ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_KNN_Val=PerClass_SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Val=PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Val=PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
  
 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DST_Tr=Avg_ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DST_Tr=Avg_SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr; 
  
DST_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val=Avg_ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val=Avg_SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val=Avg_SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val=Avg_Fscore_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DST_Val=PerFold_ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DST_Val=PerFold_SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val=PerClass_ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val=PerClass_SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val; 
  
92
Appendix B
==PAGE:106==
  
  
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DST2_Tr=Avg_ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DST2_Tr=Avg_SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DST2_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DST2_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DST2_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DST2_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
  
  
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val=Avg_ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val=Avg_SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val=Avg_SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val=Avg_Fscore_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DST_Val=PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DST_Val=PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val=PerClass_ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val=PerClass_SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Val; 
  
  
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DST_Tr=Avg_ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DST_Tr=Avg_SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
  
  
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val=Avg_ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val=Avg_SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val=Avg_SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val=Avg_Fscore_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DST_Val=PerFold_ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DST_Val=PerFold_SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val=PerClass_ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val=PerClass_SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Val; 
  
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_ANN_Tr=Avg_ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_ANN_Tr=Avg_SEN_ANN_Tr; 
Appendix B
93
==PAGE:107==
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Tr=Avg_SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Tr=Avg_Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr=PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr=PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_ANN_Tr=PerClass_ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_ANN_Tr=PerClass_SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
  
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_ANN_Val=Avg_SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val=Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val=Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val=PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val=PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val=PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val=PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_ANN_Val=PerClass_ACC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_ANN_Val=PerClass_SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Val=PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Val=PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
  
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_LDA_Tr=Avg_ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_LDA_Tr=Avg_SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_LDA_Tr=Avg_SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_LDA_Tr=Avg_Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr=PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr=PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_LDA_Tr=PerClass_ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_LDA_Tr=PerClass_SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
  
 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_LDA_Val=Avg_ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_LDA_Val=Avg_SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val=Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val=Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val=PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val=PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val=PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val=PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_LDA_Val=PerClass_ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_LDA_Val=PerClass_SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Val=PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Val=PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
  
 
 
 
%% Plor results 
  
figure(3) 
DST_all_Val_perClass = [DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(1) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(1) DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(1) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(1); 
94
Appendix B
==PAGE:108==
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(2) DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(2) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(2) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(2); 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(3) DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(3) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(3) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(3); 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(4) DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(4) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(4) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(4); 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(5) DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(5) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(5) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(5)]; 
bar(DST_all_Val_perClass,'FaceColor','flat'); 
ylim([0.7 1]); 
xticklabels({'Class N','Class S','Class V','Class F','Class Q'}); 
xtickangle(45); 
set(gca,'FontSize',14); 
lgd = legend('Accuracy','Sensitivity','Specificity','F1-
score','Location','northoutside'); 
lgd.NumColumns = 4; 
  
%% 
figure(4) 
DST_all_Val_perModel = [DT_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DT_Val 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DT_Val DT_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DT_Val 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DT_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_ANN_Val ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_ANN_Val 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val ANN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val DST_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val DST_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val]; 
  
bar(DST_all_Val_perModel,'FaceColor','flat'); 
ylim([0.85 1]); 
xticklabels({'RF','AdaBoost','ANN','DST'}); 
xtickangle(45); 
set(gca,'FontSize',14); 
lgd = legend('Accuracy','Sensitivity','Specificity','F1-
score','Location','northoutside'); 
lgd.NumColumns = 4; 
%% Plor results 2 
  
figure(5) 
DST2_all_Val_perClass = [DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(1) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(1) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(1) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(1); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(2) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(2) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(2) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(2); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(3) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(3) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(3) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(3); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(4) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(4) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(4) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(4); 
Appendix B
95
==PAGE:109==
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(5) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(5) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(5) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(5)]; 
bar(DST2_all_Val_perClass,'FaceColor','flat'); 
ylim([0.8 1]); 
xticklabels({'Class N','Class S','Class V','Class F','Class Q'}); 
xtickangle(45); 
set(gca,'FontSize',14); 
lgd = legend('Accuracy','Sensitivity','Specificity','F1-
score','Location','northoutside'); 
lgd.NumColumns = 4; 
%% 
  
figure(6) 
DST2_all_Val_perModel = [DT_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DT_Val 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DT_Val DT_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DT_Val 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DT_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_ANN_Val ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_ANN_Val 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val ANN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_LDA_Val LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_LDA_Val 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val LDA_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_KNN_Val KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_KNN_Val 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val KNN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val 0.92 DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val 0.92]; 
bar(DST2_all_Val_perModel,'FaceColor','flat'); 
  
ylim([0.70 1]); 
xticklabels({'RF','AdaBoost','ANN','LDA','KNN','DST'}); 
xtickangle(45); 
set(gca,'FontSize',14); 
lgd = legend('Accuracy','Sensitivity','Specificity','F1-
score','Location','northoutside'); 
lgd.NumColumns = 6; 
  
%% ROC curve 
% figure(4) 
fig = figure(5); 
% hold on; 
plotroc(full(ind2vec(ValY{1,1}')),outDST.ClassProb_Val{1,1}') 
set(gca,'FontSize',18); 
  
%% ROC curve badtar 
% figure(4) 
fig = figure(6); 
% hold on; 
plotroc(full(ind2vec(ValY{1,1}')),outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,1}') 
set(gca,'FontSize',18); 
  
 
  
%% Confusion Matrix DST VAL   
for j=1:size(outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,1},1) 
    [~,PredDST_1(j)] = max(outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,1}(j,:)); 
end 
PredDST_1=PredDST_1'; 
TARG=full(ind2vec(ValY{1,1}')); 
96
Appendix B
==PAGE:110==
PRED=outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,1}'; 
  
[~,idx] =max(TARG); 
[~,idx_pred] =max(PRED); 
  
  
cn = confusionchart(idx, idx_pred); 
conf = cn.NormalizedValues; 
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}); 
  
 
cn = confusionchart(idx, idx_pred); 
conf = cn.NormalizedValues; 
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}); 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B
97
==PAGE:111==
 
%% Inter_patient case--> divide data set into two parts 
 
 
close all;clear;clc; 
  
load all_sig_44;        load time_44;  
load all_Fs;            load ann_44;  
load anntype_44;        load('loc_44.mat');      
load('P_waves_44.mat'); load('QRS_ann_44.mat');  
load('T_waves_44.mat'); load('wave_44.mat'); 
load all_sig_44; 
  
all_samples = [100, 101, 103, 105, 106, 108, 109, 111, 112, 113,... 
    114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121,122, 123, 124, 200, 201, 202, 203, 205, 
207, 208,... 
    209, 210, 212, 213, 214, 215, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 228, 230, 231, 232, 
233, 234]; 
  
test_samples = [100, 103, 105, 111, 113, 117, 121, 123, 200, 202, 210, 212, 
213,... 
214, 219, 221, 222, 228, 232, 223, 234]; 
  
%% save test samples in x_test cells 
for test_sample_no=1:length(test_samples) 
    for sample_no=1:length(all_samples) 
         if all_samples(sample_no) == test_samples(test_sample_no) 
            ann_test{1,test_sample_no} = ann{1,sample_no}; 
            anntype_test{1,test_sample_no} = anntype{1,sample_no}; 
            loc_test{1,test_sample_no} = loc{1,sample_no}; 
            P_waves_test{1,test_sample_no} = P_waves{1,sample_no}; 
            T_waves_test{1,test_sample_no} = T_waves{1,sample_no}; 
            QRS_annotation_test{1,test_sample_no} = QRS_annotation{1,sample_no}; 
            sig_test{1,test_sample_no} = sig{1,sample_no}; 
            tm_test{1,test_sample_no} = tm{1,sample_no}; 
            wave_test{1,test_sample_no} = wave{1,sample_no}; 
         end 
    end 
end 
  
%% remove test samples from data 
j = 0; 
for sample_no=1:length(all_samples) 
    j = j + 1; 
    include = 1; 
    for test_sample_no=1:length(test_samples) 
        if all_samples(sample_no) == test_samples(test_sample_no) 
            j = j - 1; 
            include = 0; 
        end 
    end 
    if include == 1 
        ann_new{1,j} = ann{1,sample_no}; 
        anntype_new{1,j} = anntype{1,sample_no}; 
        loc_new{1,j} = loc{1,sample_no}; 
        P_waves_new{1,j} = P_waves{1,sample_no}; 
        T_waves_new{1,j} = T_waves{1,sample_no}; 
        QRS_annotation_new{1,j} = QRS_annotation{1,sample_no}; 
        sig_new{1,j} = sig{1,sample_no}; 
98
Appendix B
==PAGE:112==
        tm_new{1,j} = tm{1,sample_no}; 
        wave_new{1,j} = wave{1,sample_no}; 
    end 
end 
  
clear all_samples sample_no test_sample_no j include; 
  
ann = ann_new;  
clear ann_new; 
anntype = anntype_new; 
clear anntype_new; 
loc = loc_new; 
clear loc_new; 
P_waves = P_waves_new; 
clear P_waves_new; 
T_waves = T_waves_new; 
clear T_waves_new; 
QRS_annotation = QRS_annotation_new; 
clear QRS_annotation_new; 
sig = sig_new; 
clear sig_new; 
tm = tm_new; 
clear tm_new; 
wave = wave_new; 
clear wave_new; 
  
% Number of total samples 
num_rec = length(loc); 
% ECG morphology sample number 
mor_sample = 10; 
frekvans =360; %frekvens 
  
%% Feature extraction (calling the function for feature extraction) 
XY = FeatureExtraction(ann, anntype, loc, P_waves, T_waves, QRS_annotation, sig, 
tm, wave); 
XX = XY{1}; 
YY = XY{2}; 
  
%% Feature selection  
red_feat_matrix = [2, 3, 7, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19]; 
  
for sample_no=1:length(XX) 
    j = 0; 
    for feature_no = 1:length(XX{sample_no,1}(1,:)) 
        j = j + 1; 
        include = 1; 
        for red_feature_no = 1:length(red_feat_matrix) 
            if feature_no == red_feat_matrix(red_feature_no) 
                j = j - 1; 
                include = 0; 
            end 
        end 
        if include == 1 
            XX_red{sample_no,1}(:,j) = XX{sample_no,1}(:,feature_no);  
        end 
    end 
end 
%% Feature extraction of test 
XY_Test = FeatureExtraction(ann_test, anntype_test, loc_test, P_waves_test, 
Appendix B
99
==PAGE:113==
T_waves_test, QRS_annotation_test, sig_test, tm_test, wave_test); 
XX_Test = XY_Test{1}; 
YY_Test = XY_Test{2}; 
Y_Test = YY_Test'; 
  
%% Feature extraction for test data  
  
for sample_no=1:length(XX_Test) 
    j = 0; 
    for feature_no = 1:length(XX_Test{sample_no,1}(1,:)) 
        j = j + 1; 
        include = 1; 
        for red_feature_no = 1:length(red_feat_matrix) 
            if feature_no == red_feat_matrix(red_feature_no) 
                j = j - 1; 
                include = 0; 
            end 
        end 
        if include == 1 
            XX_Test_red{sample_no,1}(:,j) = XX_Test{sample_no,1}(:,feature_no); 
        end 
    end 
end 
%% shuffling 
Data_all=cell2mat(XX_red); 
Labels_all=cell2mat(YY); 
  
Balanced_Data = Make_Balanced(Data_all, Labels_all); 
  
[row, col] = size(Balanced_Data.Features_Balanced); 
idx = randperm(row); 
Shuffled_Bal_Features = Balanced_Data.Features_Balanced(idx,:); 
Shuffled_Bal_Labels = Balanced_Data.Labels_Balanced(idx,:); 
  
 %% Classification 
  
c = cvpartition(length(Shuffled_Bal_Features),'KFold',5); 
%% 
for i=1:c.NumTestSets 
    TrainX{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Features(c.training(i)==1,:); 
    TrainY{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Labels(c.training(i)==1,:); 
    ValX{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Features(c.test(i)==1,:); 
    ValY{1,i} = Shuffled_Bal_Labels(c.test(i)==1,:); 
%% 
 [R,P] = corrcoef(TrainX{1,i}); 
%% LDA 
     MdlLinear{1,i} = 
fitcdiscr(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'DiscrimType','pseudoQuadratic'); 
    % Training 
     [Train_LDA_pred{1,i},scores_LDA_tr{1,i}]= predict(MdlLinear{1,i}, 
TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i} = softmax(scores_LDA_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i}'; 
  
     LDA_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_LDA_pred{1,i}); 
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_LDA_pred{1,i},scores_LDA_val{1,i}]= predict(MdlLinear{1,i}, ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i} = softmax(scores_LDA_val{1,i}'); 
100
Appendix B
==PAGE:114==
    Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i}'; 
  
    LDA_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_LDA_pred{1,i});    
     
    outLDA.Train_LDA_pred{1,i} = Train_LDA_pred{1,i}; 
    outLDA.scores_LDA_tr{1,i} = scores_LDA_tr{1,i}; 
    outLDA.Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,i}; 
    outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,i} = LDA_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outLDA.Val_LDA_pred{1,i} = Val_LDA_pred{1,i}; 
    outLDA.scores_LDA_val{1,i} = scores_LDA_tr{1,i}; 
    outLDA.Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_val_LDA{1,i}; 
    outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,i} = LDA_Val_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outLDA.TrainY{1,i} = TrainY{1,i}; 
    outLDA.ValY{1,i} = ValY{1,i}; 
    %% KNN 
    KNN_Mdl{1,i} = fitcknn(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'NumNeighbors',5); 
  
    % Training 
    [Train_KNN_pred{1,i},scores_KNN_tr{1,i}]= predict( KNN_Mdl{1,i},  
TrainX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i} = softmax(scores_KNN_tr{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i}'; 
  
    KNN_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_KNN_pred{1,i});     
     
    % Validation 
    [Val_KNN_pred{1,i},scores_KNN_val{1,i}]= predict( KNN_Mdl{1,i}, ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i} = softmax(scores_KNN_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i}'; 
  
    KNN_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_KNN_pred{1,i});    
     
    outKNN.Train_KNN_pred{1,i} = Train_KNN_pred{1,i}; 
    outKNN.scores_KNN_tr{1,i} = scores_KNN_tr{1,i}; 
    outKNN.Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,i}; 
    outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,i} = KNN_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outKNN.Val_KNN_pred{1,i} = Val_KNN_pred{1,i}; 
    outKNN.scores_KNN_val{1,i} = scores_KNN_tr{1,i}; 
    outKNN.Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_val_KNN{1,i}; 
    outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,i} = KNN_Val_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outKNN.TrainY{1,i} = TrainY{1,i}; 
    outKNN.ValY{1,i} = ValY{1,i}; 
     
     
%% fitcensemble - Random forest 
    t = templateTree('MaxNumSplits',30); 
    Mdl{1,i} = fitcensemble(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'NumLearningCycles',100,... 
        'Learners',t); %,'LearnRate',0.1 
    % Training 
    [Train_DT_pred{1,i},scores_DT_tr{1,i}]= predict(Mdl{1,i}, TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i} = softmax(scores_DT_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i}'; 
  
    DT_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_DT_pred{1,i}); 
Appendix B
101
==PAGE:115==
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_DT_pred{1,i},scores_DT_val{1,i}]= predict(Mdl{1,i}, ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_DT{1,i} = softmax(scores_DT_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_val_DT{1,i}'; 
  
    DT_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_DT_pred{1,i});    
     
    outDT.Train_DT_pred{1,i} = Train_DT_pred{1,i}; 
    outDT.scores_DT_tr{1,i} = scores_DT_tr{1,i}; 
    outDT.Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_DT{1,i}; 
    outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,i} = DT_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outDT.Val_DT_pred{1,i} = Val_DT_pred{1,i}; 
    outDT.scores_DT_val{1,i} = scores_DT_tr{1,i}; 
    outDT.Post_prob_val_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_val_DT{1,i}; 
    outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,i} = DT_Val_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outDT.TrainY{1,i} = TrainY{1,i}; 
    outDT.ValY{1,i} = ValY{1,i}; 
  
 %% AdaBoost 
    t_AdaB = templateTree('MaxNumSplits',30); 
    Mdl_AdaB{1,i} = 
fitcensemble(TrainX{1,i},TrainY{1,i},'Method','AdaBoostM2','NumLearningCycles',1
00,... 
        'Learners',t_AdaB); %,'LearnRate',0.1 
    % Training 
    [Train_AdaB_pred{1,i},scores_AdaB_tr{1,i}]= predict(Mdl_AdaB{1,i}, 
TrainX{1,i}); 
     Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i} = softmax(scores_AdaB_tr{1,i}'); 
     Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i}'; 
  
    AdaB_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_AdaB_pred{1,i}); 
  
    % Validation 
    [Val_AdaB_pred{1,i},scores_AdaB_val{1,i}]= predict(Mdl_AdaB{1,i}, 
ValX{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i} = softmax(scores_AdaB_val{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i}'; 
     
    %confusion matrix 
    AdaB_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_AdaB_pred{1,i}); 
     
     
    outAdaB.Train_AdaB_pred{1,i} = Train_AdaB_pred{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.scores_DT_tr{1,i} = scores_DT_tr{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,i} = AdaB_Train_stats{1,i}; 
     
    outAdaB.Val_AdaB_pred{1,i} = Val_AdaB_pred{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.scores_AdaB_val{1,i} = scores_AdaB_val{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,i}; 
    outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,i} = AdaB_Val_stats{1,i}; 
      
 %% ANN 
    Mdl_ann{1,i} = patternnet(310); 
     
102
Appendix B
==PAGE:116==
    Mdl_ann{1,i} = train(Mdl_ann{1,i},TrainX{1,i}',full(ind2vec(TrainY{1,i}'))); 
  
    %Training 
    Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i} = Mdl_ann{1,i}(TrainX{1,i}'); 
    Train_ANN_pred{1,i} = vec2ind(Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i}); 
  
    %Validation 
    Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i} = Mdl_ann{1,i}(ValX{1,i}'); 
    Val_ANN_pred{1,i} = vec2ind(Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i}); 
  
    %Confusion matrix 
    ANN_Train_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(TrainY{1,i},Train_ANN_pred{1,i}); 
    ANN_Val_stats{1,i} = confusionmatStats(ValY{1,i},Val_ANN_pred{1,i}); 
     
     
    outANN.Train_ANN_pred{1,i} = Train_ANN_pred{1,i}'; 
    outANN.Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i} = Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,i}'; 
    outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,i} = ANN_Train_stats{1,i}'; 
     
    outANN.Val_ANN_pred{1,i} = Val_ANN_pred{1,i}'; 
    outANN.Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i} = Post_prob_val_ANN{1,i}'; 
    outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,i} = ANN_Val_stats{1,i}'; 
  
  
end 
  
%% Dempster-Shafer combination 
outDST = DempsterShafer(outDT, outAdaB, outANN, c); 
outDST2 = DempsterShafer2(outDT, outAdaB, outANN, outLDA,outKNN, c); 
outDST3 = DempsterShafer3( outANN,outLDA,outKNN, c); 
outDST4 = DempsterShafer4( outDT, outAdaB, c); 
%% Performance report 
NumClasses = 5; 
for f=1:c.NumTestSets 
    for CL=1:NumClasses 
         
        %Accuracy 
        ACC_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
       
         
        ACC_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
Appendix B
103
==PAGE:117==
        ACC_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        ACC_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
        ACC_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.accuracy(CL); 
         
        %Sensitivity 
        SEN_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        SEN_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
        SEN_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.sensitivity(CL); 
         
        %Specificity 
        SPEC_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
         
        SPEC_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
104
Appendix B
==PAGE:118==
        SPEC_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        SPEC_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
        SPEC_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST4.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.specificity(CL); 
         
        %F1-score 
        Fscore_DT_Tr(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DT_Val(f,CL) = outDT.DT_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_AdaB_Tr(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_AdaB_Val(f,CL) = outAdaB.AdaB_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_ANN_Tr(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_ANN_Val(f,CL) = outANN.ANN_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_LDA_Tr(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_LDA_Val(f,CL) = outLDA.LDA_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_KNN_Tr(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_KNN_Val(f,CL) = outKNN.KNN_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_DST_Tr(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST_Val(f,CL) = outDST.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
         
        Fscore_DST2_Tr(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST2_Val(f,CL) = outDST2.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
  
        Fscore_DST3_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST3_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
  
        Fscore_DST4_Tr(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Train_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
        Fscore_DST4_Val(f,CL) = outDST3.DST_Val_stats{1,f}.Fscore(CL); 
  
    end 
     
    %Accuracy 
    PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DT_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(ACC_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val(f)=mean(ACC_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
     
    PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val(f)=mean(ACC_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val(f)=mean(ACC_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST_Val(f,:)); 
Appendix B
105
==PAGE:119==
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST3_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(ACC_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_ACC_DST4_Val(f)=mean(ACC_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
     
    %Sensitivity 
    PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DT_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(SEN_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val(f)=mean(SEN_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val(f)=mean(SEN_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
         
    PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val(f)=mean(SEN_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST3_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SEN_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(SEN_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SEN_DST4_Val(f)=mean(SEN_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
     
    %Specificity 
    PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST_Val(f,:)); 
106
Appendix B
==PAGE:120==
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(SPEC_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Val(f)=mean(SPEC_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
     
    %F1-score 
    PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DT_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DT_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_AdaB_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_AdaB_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_ANN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_ANN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_LDA_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_LDA_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_KNN_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_KNN_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST2_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST2_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST3_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST3_Val(f,:)); 
     
    PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Tr(f)=mean(Fscore_DST4_Tr(f,:)); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Val(f)=mean(Fscore_DST4_Val(f,:)); 
end 
  
%Accuracy 
Avg_ACC_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DT_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST_Val); 
Appendix B
107
==PAGE:121==
  
Avg_ACC_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_ACC_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_ACC_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST4_Val); 
  
  
%Sensitivity 
Avg_SEN_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DT_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_SEN_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_SEN_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST4_Val); 
  
%Specificity 
Avg_SPEC_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val); 
108
Appendix B
==PAGE:122==
  
Avg_SPEC_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_SPEC_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_SPEC_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST4_Val); 
  
%F1-score 
Avg_Fscore_DT_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DT_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_ANN_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_LDA_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_KNN_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST2_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST2_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST3_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST3_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Val); 
  
Avg_Fscore_DST4_Tr = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Tr); 
Avg_Fscore_DST4_Val = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST4_Val); 
  
%% 
  
DT_Results_Tr.ACC_DT_Tr=ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.SEN_DT_Tr=SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.SPEC_DT_Tr=SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Fscore_DT_Tr=Fscore_DT_Tr; 
  
DT_Results_Val.ACC_DT_Val=ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.SEN_DT_Val=SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.SPEC_DT_Val=SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Fscore_DT_Val=Fscore_DT_Val; 
  
  
LDA_Results_Tr.ACC_LDA_Tr=ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.SEN_LDA_Tr=SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.SPEC_LDA_Tr=SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Fscore_LDA_Tr=Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
  
LDA_Results_Val.ACC_LDA_Val=ACC_LDA_Val; 
Appendix B
109
==PAGE:123==
LDA_Results_Val.SEN_LDA_Val=SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.SPEC_LDA_Val=SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Fscore_LDA_Val=Fscore_LDA_Val; 
  
KNN_Results_Tr.ACC_KNN_Tr=ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.SEN_KNN_Tr=SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.SPEC_KNN_Tr=SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Fscore_KNN_Tr=Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
  
KNN_Results_Val.ACC_KNN_Val=ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.SEN_KNN_Val=SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.SPEC_KNN_Val=SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Fscore_KNN_Val=Fscore_KNN_Val; 
  
  
ANN_Results_Tr.ACC_ANN_Tr=ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.SEN_ANN_Tr=SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.SPEC_ANN_Tr=SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Fscore_ANN_Tr=Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
  
ANN_Results_Val.ACC_ANN_Val=ACC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.SEN_ANN_Val=SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.SPEC_ANN_Val=SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Fscore_ANN_Val=Fscore_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_ANN_Val=Avg_ACC_ANN_Val; 
  
DST_Results_Tr.ACC_DST_Tr=ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.SEN_DST_Tr=SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST_Tr=SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST_Tr=Fscore_DST_Tr; 
  
DST_Results_Val.ACC_DST_Val=ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.SEN_DST_Val=SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.SPEC_DST_Val=SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Fscore_DST_Val=Fscore_DST_Val; 
  
  
DST2_Results_Tr.ACC_DST2_Tr=ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.SEN_DST2_Tr=SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST2_Tr=SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST2_Tr=Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
  
DST2_Results_Val.ACC_DST2_Val=ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.SEN_DST2_Val=SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.SPEC_DST2_Val=SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Fscore_DST2_Val=Fscore_DST2_Val; 
  
DST3_Results_Tr.ACC_DST3_Tr=ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.SEN_DST3_Tr=SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST3_Tr=SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST3_Tr=Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
  
DST3_Results_Val.ACC_DST3_Val=ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.SEN_DST3_Val=SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.SPEC_DST3_Val=SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Fscore_DST3_Val=Fscore_DST3_Val; 
  
AdaB_Results_Tr.ACC_AdaB_Tr=ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
110
Appendix B
==PAGE:124==
AdaB_Results_Tr.SEN_AdaB_Tr=SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.SPEC_AdaB_Tr=SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Fscore_AdaB_Tr=Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
  
AdaB_Results_Val.ACC_AdaB_Val=ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.SEN_AdaB_Val=SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.SPEC_AdaB_Val=SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Fscore_AdaB_Val=Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
  
for i=1:NumClasses 
     
    %Accuracy 
    PerClass_ACC_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.ACC_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.ACC_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.ACC_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.ACC_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.ACC_ANN_Tr(:,i));   
    PerClass_ACC_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.ACC_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.ACC_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.ACC_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.ACC_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.ACC_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.ACC_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.ACC_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.ACC_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.ACC_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_ACC_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.ACC_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_ACC_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.ACC_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
     
    %Sensitivity 
    PerClass_SEN_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.SEN_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.SEN_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.SEN_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.SEN_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.SEN_ANN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.SEN_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.SEN_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.SEN_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.SEN_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.SEN_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.SEN_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.SEN_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
       PerClass_SEN_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.SEN_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.SEN_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
Appendix B
111
==PAGE:125==
     
    PerClass_SEN_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.SEN_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.SEN_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
     
    %Specificity 
    PerClass_SPEC_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.SPEC_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.SPEC_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.SPEC_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.SPEC_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.SPEC_ANN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.SPEC_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.SPEC_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.SPEC_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.SPEC_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.SPEC_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.SPEC_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
     
    PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.SPEC_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.SPEC_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.SPEC_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
     
    %Fscore 
    PerClass_Fscore_DT_Tr(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Tr.Fscore_DT_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DT_Val(1,i) = mean(DT_Results_Val.Fscore_DT_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Tr(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Tr.Fscore_AdaB_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Val(1,i) = mean(AdaB_Results_Val.Fscore_AdaB_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Tr(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Tr.Fscore_ANN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Val(1,i) = mean(ANN_Results_Val.Fscore_ANN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Tr(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Tr.Fscore_LDA_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Val(1,i) = mean(LDA_Results_Val.Fscore_LDA_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Tr(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Tr.Fscore_KNN_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Val(1,i) = mean(KNN_Results_Val.Fscore_KNN_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(1,i) = mean(DST_Results_Val.Fscore_DST_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST2_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Val(1,i) = mean(DST2_Results_Val.Fscore_DST2_Val(:,i)); 
     
    PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Tr(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Tr.Fscore_DST3_Tr(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Val(1,i) = mean(DST3_Results_Val.Fscore_DST3_Val(:,i)); 
  
 
 
112
Appendix B
==PAGE:126==
end 
  
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DT_Tr=Avg_ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DT_Tr=Avg_SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DT_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DT_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DT_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DT_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DT_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DT_Tr; 
DT_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DT_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DT_Tr; 
  
  
DT_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DT_Val=Avg_ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DT_Val=Avg_SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DT_Val=Avg_SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DT_Val=Avg_Fscore_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DT_Val=PerFold_ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DT_Val=PerFold_SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DT_Val=PerClass_ACC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DT_Val=PerClass_SEN_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DT_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DT_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DT_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DT_Val; 
  
  
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Tr=Avg_ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Tr=Avg_SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Tr=Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Tr=Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Tr; 
AdaB_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Tr; 
  
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val=Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val=Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val=Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val=Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val=PerFold_ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val=PerFold_SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val=PerFold_SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val=PerFold_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Val=PerClass_ACC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Val=PerClass_SEN_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Val=PerClass_SPEC_AdaB_Val; 
AdaB_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Val=PerClass_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
  
  
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_KNN_Tr=Avg_ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_KNN_Tr=Avg_SEN_KNN_Tr; 
Appendix B
113
==PAGE:127==
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_KNN_Tr=Avg_SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_KNN_Tr=Avg_Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr=PerFold_ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr=PerFold_SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_KNN_Tr=PerClass_ACC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_KNN_Tr=PerClass_SEN_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Tr; 
KNN_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Tr; 
  
  
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_KNN_Val=Avg_ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_KNN_Val=Avg_SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val=Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val=Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val=PerFold_ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val=PerFold_SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val=PerFold_SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val=PerFold_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_KNN_Val=PerClass_ACC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_KNN_Val=PerClass_SEN_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Val=PerClass_SPEC_KNN_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Val=PerClass_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
  
  
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DST_Tr=Avg_ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DST_Tr=Avg_SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr; 
DST_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr; 
  
  
  
DST_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val=Avg_ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val=Avg_SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val=Avg_SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val=Avg_Fscore_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DST_Val=PerFold_ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DST_Val=PerFold_SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val=PerClass_ACC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val=PerClass_SEN_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val; 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val; 
  
  
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DST2_Tr=Avg_ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DST2_Tr=Avg_SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DST2_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DST2_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
114
Appendix B
==PAGE:128==
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DST2_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DST2_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Tr; 
DST2_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Tr; 
  
  
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val=Avg_ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val=Avg_SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val=Avg_SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val=Avg_Fscore_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DST_Val=PerFold_ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DST_Val=PerFold_SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val=PerClass_ACC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val=PerClass_SEN_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DST2_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DST2_Val; 
  
  
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_DST_Tr=Avg_ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_DST_Tr=Avg_SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_DST_Tr=Avg_SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_DST_Tr=Avg_Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_DST_Tr=PerFold_ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_DST_Tr=PerFold_SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_DST_Tr=PerClass_ACC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_DST_Tr=PerClass_SEN_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Tr; 
DST3_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Tr; 
  
  
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val=Avg_ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val=Avg_SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val=Avg_SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val=Avg_Fscore_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_DST_Val=PerFold_ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_DST_Val=PerFold_SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_DST_Val=PerFold_SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_DST_Val=PerFold_Fscore_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val=PerClass_ACC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val=PerClass_SEN_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val=PerClass_SPEC_DST3_Val; 
DST3_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val=PerClass_Fscore_DST3_Val; 
  
  
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_ANN_Tr=Avg_ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_ANN_Tr=Avg_SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Tr=Avg_SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Tr=Avg_Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr=PerFold_ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr=PerFold_SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
Appendix B
115
==PAGE:129==
ANN_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_ANN_Tr=PerClass_ACC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_ANN_Tr=PerClass_SEN_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Tr; 
ANN_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Tr; 
  
  
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_ANN_Val=Avg_SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val=Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val=Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val=PerFold_ACC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val=PerFold_SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val=PerFold_SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val=PerFold_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_ANN_Val=PerClass_ACC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_ANN_Val=PerClass_SEN_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Val=PerClass_SPEC_ANN_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Val=PerClass_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
  
  
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_ACC_LDA_Tr=Avg_ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_SEN_LDA_Tr=Avg_SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_SPEC_LDA_Tr=Avg_SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.Avg_Fscore_LDA_Tr=Avg_Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr=PerFold_ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr=PerFold_SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr=PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr=PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_ACC_LDA_Tr=PerClass_ACC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_SEN_LDA_Tr=PerClass_SEN_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Tr=PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Tr; 
LDA_Results_Tr.PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Tr=PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Tr; 
  
  
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_LDA_Val=Avg_ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_LDA_Val=Avg_SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val=Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val=Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val=PerFold_ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val=PerFold_SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val=PerFold_SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val=PerFold_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_LDA_Val=PerClass_ACC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_LDA_Val=PerClass_SEN_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Val=PerClass_SPEC_LDA_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Val=PerClass_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
  
  
  
%% Confusion Matrix validation for classifiers 
  
for j=1:size(outAdaB.Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,1},1) 
    [~,PredDST_1(j)] = max(outAdaB.Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,1}(j,:)); 
end 
PredDST_1=PredDST_1'; 
TARG=full(ind2vec(ValY{1,1}')); 
PRED=outAdaB.Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,1}'; 
  
116
Appendix B
==PAGE:130==
[~,idx] =max(TARG); 
[~,idx_pred] = max(PRED); 
  
cn = confusionchart(idx, idx_pred); 
conf = cn.NormalizedValues; 
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}) 
  
%% Confusion Matrix validation for classifiers % 
  
for j=1:size(outKNN.Post_prob_val_KNN{1,1},1) 
    [~,PredDST_1(j)] = max(outKNN.Post_prob_val_KNN{1,1}(j,:)); 
end 
PredDST_1=PredDST_1'; 
TARG=full(ind2vec(ValY{1,1}')); 
PRED=outKNN.Post_prob_val_KNN{1,1}'; 
  
[~,idx] =max(TARG); 
[~,idx_pred] = max(PRED); 
  
  
cn = confusionchart(idx, idx_pred); 
conf = cn.NormalizedValues; 
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}) 
%% Confusion Matrix validation for classifiers 
  
for j=1:size(outDT.Post_prob_val_DT{1,1},1) 
    [~,PredDST_1(j)] = max(outDT.Post_prob_val_DT{1,1}(j,:)); 
end 
PredDST_1=PredDST_1'; 
TARG=full(ind2vec(ValY{1,1}')); 
PRED=outDT.Post_prob_val_DT{1,1}'; 
  
[~,idx] =max(TARG); 
[~,idx_pred] = max(PRED); 
  
 
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}); 
%% Confusion Matrix validation for classifiers % 93.52 
  
for j=1:size(outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,5},1) 
    [~,PredDST_1(j)] = max(outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,1}(j,:)); 
end 
PredDST_1=PredDST_1'; 
TARG=full(ind2vec(ValY{1,2}')); 
PRED=outDST2.ClassProb_Val{1,2}'; 
  
[~,idx] =max(TARG); 
[~,idx_pred] = max(PRED); 
  
  
cn = confusionchart(idx, idx_pred); 
conf = cn.NormalizedValues; 
Appendix B
117
==PAGE:131==
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}); 
  
  
%% testing data 
for sample_no=1:length(test_samples) 
    
    X_Test{1,sample_no} = XX_Test_red{sample_no,1}; 
     
    % testing data (KNN model) 
    Out_Test_KNN{1,sample_no} = predict(KNN_Mdl{1,1}, X_Test{1,sample_no}); 
    KNN_Test_stats{1,sample_no} = 
    confusionmatStats(YY_Test{sample_no,1},Out_Test_KNN{1,sample_no}); 
    KNN_Res_acc_Test(sample_no,:) = KNN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.accuracy; 
    KNN_Res_fscore_Test(sample_no,:) =  KNN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.Fscore; 
    KNN_Res_sen_Test(sample_no,:) = KNN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.sensitivity; 
    KNN_Res_spec_Test(sample_no,:) =  KNN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.specificity; 
     
    % testing data (RF model) 
    Out_Test_RF{1,sample_no} = predict(Mdl{1,1}, X_Test{1,sample_no}); 
    RF_Test_stats{1,sample_no} = 
    confusionmatStats(YY_Test{sample_no,1},Out_Test_RF{1,sample_no}); 
    RF_Res_acc_Test(sample_no,:) = RF_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.accuracy; 
    RF_Res_fscore_Test(sample_no,:) =  RF_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.Fscore; 
    RF_Res_sen_Test(sample_no,:) =  RF_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.sensitivity; 
    RF_Res_spec_Test(sample_no,:) =  RF_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.specificity; 
     
    % testing data (adaab model) 
    Out_Test_adab{1,sample_no} = predict(Mdl_AdaB{1,1}, X_Test{1,sample_no}); 
    Adab_Test_stats{1,sample_no} =  
    confusionmatStats(YY_Test{sample_no,1},Out_Test_adab{1,sample_no}); 
    Adab_Res_acc_Test(sample_no,:) =Adab_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.accuracy; 
    Adab_Res_fscore_Test(sample_no,:) = Adab_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.Fscore; 
    Adab_Res_sen_Test(sample_no,:) = Adab_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.sensitivity; 
    Adab_Res_spec_Test(sample_no,:) = Adab_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.specificity; 
     
    % testing data (LDA model) 
    Out_Test_LDA{1,sample_no} = predict(MdlLinear{1,1}, X_Test{1,sample_no}); 
    lda_Test_stats{1,sample_no} =    
    confusionmatStats(YY_Test{sample_no,1},Out_Test_LDA{1,sample_no}); 
    lda_Res_acc_Test(sample_no,:) = lda_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.accuracy; 
    lda_Res_fscore_Test(sample_no,:) = lda_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.Fscore; 
    lda_Res_sen_Test(sample_no,:) = lda_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.sensitivity; 
    lda_Res_spec_Test(sample_no,:) = lda_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.specificity; 
     
    % testing data (ANN model) 
    Post_prob_ts_ANN{1,sample_no} = Mdl_ann{1,1}(X_Test{1,sample_no}'); 
    Test_ANN_pred{1,sample_no} = vec2ind(Post_prob_ts_ANN{1,sample_no}); 
    ANN_Test_stats{1,sample_no} =  
    confusionmatStats(Y_Test{1,sample_no},Test_ANN_pred{1,sample_no}); 
    ANN_Res_acc_Test(sample_no,:) = ANN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.accuracy; 
    ANN_Res_fscore_Test(sample_no,:) = ANN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.Fscore; 
    ANN_Res_sen_Test(sample_no,:) = ANN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.sensitivity; 
    ANN_Res_spec_Test(sample_no,:) = ANN_Test_stats{1,sample_no}.specificity; 
     
end 
  
118
Appendix B
==PAGE:132==
KNN_Res_acc_avg_Test = mean(mean(KNN_Res_acc_Test)); 
KNN_Res_fscore_avg_Test =mean(mean(KNN_Res_fscore_Test)); 
KNN_Res_sen_avg_Test =mean(mean(KNN_Res_sen_Test)); 
KNN_Res_spec_avg_Test =mean(mean(KNN_Res_spec_Test)); 
  
RF_Res_acc_avg_Test = mean(mean(RF_Res_acc_Test)); 
RF_Res_fscore_avg_Test =mean(mean(RF_Res_fscore_Test)); 
RF_Res_sen_avg_Test =mean(mean(RF_Res_sen_Test)); 
RF_Res_spec_avg_Test =mean(mean(RF_Res_spec_Test)); 
  
Adab_Res_acc_avg_Test = mean(mean(Adab_Res_acc_Test)); 
Adab_Res_fscore_avg_Test =mean(mean(Adab_Res_fscore_Test)); 
Adab_Res_sen_avg_Test =mean(mean(Adab_Res_sen_Test)); 
Adab_Res_spec_avg_Test =mean(mean(Adab_Res_spec_Test)); 
  
lda_Res_acc_avg_Test =mean(mean(lda_Res_acc_Test)); 
lda_Res_fscore_avg_Test =mean(mean(lda_Res_fscore_Test)); 
lda_Res_sen_avg_Test =mean(mean(lda_Res_sen_Test)); 
lda_Res_spec_avg_Test =mean(mean(lda_Res_spec_Test)); 
  
  
ANN_Res_acc_avg_Test =mean(mean(ANN_Res_acc_Test)); 
ANN_Res_fscore_avg_Test =mean(mean(ANN_Res_fscore_Test)); 
ANN_Res_sen_avg_Test =mean(mean(ANN_Res_sen_Test)); 
ANN_Res_spec_avg_Test =mean(mean(ANN_Res_spec_Test)); 
  
%% Plot results for overall performance 
  
figure() 
DST_all_Val_perClass = [DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(1) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(1) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(1) 
DST_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(1); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(2) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(2) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(2) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(2); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(3) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(3) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(3) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(3); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(4) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(4) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(4) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(4); 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_ACC_DST_Val(5) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SEN_DST_Val(5) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_SPEC_DST_Val(5) 
DST2_Results_Val.PerClass_Fscore_DST_Val(5)]; 
bar(DST_all_Val_perClass,'FaceColor','flat'); 
ylim([0.5 1]); 
xticklabels({'Class N','Class S','Class V','Class F','Class Q'}); 
xtickangle(45); 
set(gca,'FontSize',14); 
lgd = legend('Accuracy','Sensitivity','Specificity','F1-
score','Location','northoutside'); 
lgd.NumColumns = 4; 
  
  
Appendix B
119
==PAGE:133==
%% 
figure(4) 
DST2_all_Val_perModel = [AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_AdaB_Val 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_AdaB_Val AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_AdaB_Val 
AdaB_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_AdaB_Val; 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DT_Val DT_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DT_Val 
DT_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DT_Val DT_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DT_Val; 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_ANN_Val ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_ANN_Val 
ANN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_ANN_Val ANN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_ANN_Val; 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_LDA_Val LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_LDA_Val 
LDA_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_LDA_Val LDA_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_LDA_Val; 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_KNN_Val KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_KNN_Val 
KNN_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_KNN_Val KNN_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_KNN_Val; 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_ACC_DST_Val DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SEN_DST_Val 
DST2_Results_Val.Avg_SPEC_DST_Val DST2_Results_Val.Avg_Fscore_DST_Val]; 
  
     
bar(DST2_all_Val_perModel,'FaceColor','flat'); 
ylim([0.73 1]); 
xticklabels({'AdaBoost','RF','ANN','LDA','KNN','DST'}); 
xtickangle(45); 
set(gca,'FontSize',14); 
lgd = legend('Accuracy','Sensitivity','Specificity','F1-
score','Location','northoutside'); 
lgd.NumColumns = 4; 
  
  
%% DST for test records 
  
for i=1:length(test_samples) 
    %% LDA 
    [Test_LDA_pred{1,i},scores_LDA_ts{1,i}]= predict(MdlLinear{1,1}, 
X_Test{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_ts_LDA{1,i} = softmax(scores_LDA_ts{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_ts_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_LDA{1,i}'; 
  
    outLDA.Post_prob_ts_LDA{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_LDA{1,i}; 
  
    outLDA.Y_Test{1,i} = Y_Test{1,i}; 
     
    %% KNN 
    [Test_KNN_pred{1,i},scores_KNN_ts{1,i}]= predict( KNN_Mdl{1,1},   
X_Test{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_ts_KNN{1,i} = softmax(scores_KNN_ts{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_ts_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_KNN{1,i}'; 
  
    outKNN.Post_prob_ts_KNN{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_KNN{1,i}; 
  
    outKNN.Y_Test{1,i} = Y_Test{1,i}; 
  
    %% fitcensemble - Random forest 
    [Test_DT_pred{1,i},scores_DT_ts{1,i}]= predict(Mdl{1,1}, X_Test{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_ts_DT{1,i} = softmax(scores_DT_ts{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_ts_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_DT{1,i}'; 
  
    outDT.Post_prob_ts_DT{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_DT{1,i}; 
  
    outDT.Y_Test{1,i} = Y_Test{1,i}; 
120
Appendix B
==PAGE:134==
  
    %% AdaBoost 
    [Test_AdaB_pred{1,i},scores_AdaB_ts{1,i}]= predict(Mdl_AdaB{1,1}, 
X_Test{1,i}); 
    Post_prob_ts_AdaB{1,i} = softmax(scores_AdaB_ts{1,i}'); 
    Post_prob_ts_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_AdaB{1,i}'; 
  
  
    outAdaB.Post_prob_ts_AdaB{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_AdaB{1,i}; 
  
    outAdaB.Y_Test{1,i} = Y_Test{1,i}; 
  
    %% ANN 
    Post_prob_ts_ANN{1,i} = Mdl_ann{1,1}(X_Test{1,i}'); 
    outANN.Post_prob_ts_ANN{1,i} = Post_prob_ts_ANN{1,i}'; 
  
  
end 
%% 
outDST_Test = DempsterShaferTest(outDT, outAdaB, outANN, outLDA,outKNN, c); 
  
for f=1:5 
     
    PerFold_ACC_DST_test(f) = mean(outDST_Test.DST_Test_stats{1,f}.accuracy);   
    PerFold_SEN_DST_test(f) = mean(outDST_Test.DST_Test_stats{1,f}.sensitivity); 
    PerFold_SPEC_DST_test(f) = 
mean(outDST_Test.DST_Test_stats{1,f}.specificity); 
    PerFold_Fscore_DST_test(f) = mean(outDST_Test.DST_Test_stats{1,f}.Fscore);   
  
end  
  
Avg_ACC_DST_test = mean(PerFold_ACC_DST_test); 
Avg_SEN_DST_test = mean(PerFold_SEN_DST_test); 
Avg_SPEC_DST_test = mean(PerFold_SPEC_DST_test); 
Avg_Fscore_DST_test = mean(PerFold_Fscore_DST_test); 
  
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_ACC_DST_test=PerFold_ACC_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_SEN_DST_test=PerFold_SEN_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_SPEC_DST_test=PerFold_SPEC_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_Fscore_DST_test=PerFold_Fscore_DST_test; 
  
for i=1:5 
     
    PerClass_DST_Test(1,i) = 
mean(outDst_Results_test.PerFold_ACC_DST_test(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SEN_DST_Test(1,i) = 
mean(outDst_Results_test.PerFold_SEN_DST_test(:,i)); 
    PerClass_SPEC_DST_test(1,i) = 
mean(outDst_Results_test.PerFold_SPEC_DST_test(:,i)); 
    PerClass_Fscore_DST_test(1,i) = 
mean(outDst_Results_test.PerFold_Fscore_DST_test(:,i)); 
end  
  
  
outDst_Results_test.Avg_ACC_DST_test=Avg_ACC_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.Avg_SEN_DST_test=Avg_SEN_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.Avg_SPEC_DST_test=Avg_SPEC_DST_test; 
Appendix B
121
==PAGE:135==
outDst_Results_test.Avg_Fscore_DST_test=Avg_Fscore_DST_test; 
  
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_ACC_DST_test=PerFold_ACC_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_SEN_DST_test=PerFold_SEN_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_SPEC_DST_test=PerFold_SPEC_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerFold_Fscore_DST_test=PerFold_Fscore_DST_test; 
  
outDst_Results_test.PerClass_DST_Test= PerClass_DST_Test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerClass_SEN_DST_Test=PerClass_SEN_DST_Test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerClass_SPEC_DST_tes=PerClass_SPEC_DST_test; 
outDst_Results_test.PerClass_Fscore_DST_test=PerClass_Fscore_DST_test; 
  
  
%% Confusion Matrix DST VAlidation  
TARG_test=full(ind2vec(Y_Test{1,1}')); 
PRED_test=outDST_Test.ClassProb_Ts{1,1}'; 
  
[~,idx_test] =max(TARG_test); 
[~,idx_pred_test] =max(PRED_test); 
  
cn = confusionchart(idx_test, idx_pred_test); 
conf = cn.NormalizedValues; 
lab = cn.ClassLabels; 
figure () 
plotConfMat(conf, {'N', 'S', 'V', 'F', 'Q'}); 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
Appendix B
==PAGE:136==
 
 
 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%Function for denoising by wavelet %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
 
function y = wavelettestBackup(sig) 
% Number of total samples 
num_rec = length(loc); 
% ECG morphology sample number 
mor_sample = 10; 
fs =360; 
  
for sample_no= 1: num_rec  
%% denoising by wavedec 
signal = sig{1, sample_no}; 
signal_time = tm{1, sample_no}; 
wt = modwt(signal,5); 
wtrec = zeros(size(wt)); 
wtrec(3:5,:) = wt(3:5,:); 
y{1,sample_no} = imodwt(wtrec,'db4'); 
  
end 
  
%% wavelet subplot 
sample_no = 44; 
figure(11) 
subplot(2,1,1); 
plot(tm{1, sample_no}, sig{1, sample_no},'LineWidth',1) 
xlim([1 40]) 
ylim([-1 2]) 
  
legend('Original signal') 
hold off 
ylabel('Amplitude (mV)') 
xlabel('Time (s)') 
title('Record MITBD 234') 
  
  
subplot(2,1,2);  
plot(tm{1, sample_no}, y{1, sample_no},'LineWidth',1) 
xlim([1 40]) 
ylim([-1 2]) 
legend('Filtered signal') 
% hold off 
ylabel('Amplitude (mV)') 
xlabel('Time (s)') 
end  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B
123
==PAGE:137==
 
 
 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%  ecqpuwave  %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
clear all 
clc 
  
file_numbers = [100, 101, 103, 105, 106, 108, 109, 111, 112, 113,... 
    114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 121,122, 123, 124, 200, 201, 202, 203, 205, 
207, 208,... 
    209, 210, 212, 213, 214, 215, 219, 220, 221, 222, 223, 228, 230, 231, 232, 
233, 234]; 
  
  
curdir=pwd; 
[~,config]=wfdbloadlib;eval(['cd ' config.WFDB_JAVA_HOME filesep 'examples']) 
  
% loading recordings 
for i=1:length(file_numbers) 
     
    [sig{i}, Fs,tm{i}] = rdsamp(strcat('mitdb/',num2str(file_numbers(i))),1);  
end 
  
%loading annotations 
for i=1:length(file_numbers) 
    [ann{i}, anntype{i}] = 
rdann(strcat('mitdb/',num2str(file_numbers(i))),'atr');  
end 
  
%loading P-wave & QRS & & T-wave 
for i=1:length(file_numbers) 
   ecgpuwave(num2str(file_numbers(i)),'test'); 
   [signal{1,i},Fs,tm{1,i}]=rdsamp(num2str(file_numbers(i)));      
   [P_waves{1,i}]=rdann(num2str(file_numbers(i)),'test',[],[],[],'p'); %p-wave 
   T_waves{1,i}=rdann(num2str(file_numbers(i)),'test',[],[],[],'t'); %T-wave 
   QRS_annotation{1,i}=rdann(num2str(file_numbers(i)),'test',[],[],[],'N'); %ORS  
   [wave{1,i},loc{1,i}]= rdann(num2str(file_numbers(i)),'test',[],[],[],''); % p 
& QRS & T waveonset and offset 
end 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124
Appendix B
==PAGE:138==
 
 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% Feature extraction %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
 
function XY = FeatureExtraction(ann, anntype, loc, P_waves, T_waves, 
QRS_annotation, sig, tm, wave) 
    for sample_no= 1:length(loc) 
  
    % finding corresponding N in ann (from wave and loc(toolbox)) 
  
        % it gives os location of N (fx: 5, 15.. in {1,1}) 
        N_loc_matrix{1,sample_no} = find(loc{1,sample_no}=='N');  
  
  
        % finding correspoinding values for N in Wave ( we get the values on x-
akse(from toolbox(wrong)))     
        for N_no = 1:length(N_loc_matrix{1,sample_no}) 
            N_loc = N_loc_matrix{1,sample_no}(N_no); 
            wave_New{1,sample_no}(N_no,1) = wave{1,sample_no}(N_loc);  
  
            %finding the index of the closest value in N_wave to some number in 
ann        
            a = ann{1,sample_no}; 
            n = wave{1,sample_no}(N_loc); 
            [val,idx] = min(abs(a-n)); 
            ann_New{1,sample_no}(N_no,1) = a(idx);   
  
            %find out in which row an element is equal to a specific number  
            %fiding the new labels (instead of(2274), use N-anntype(2268)), size 
of this matches to our segmenents 
  
            for anntype_no = 1:length(anntype{1,sample_no}) 
                if a(idx) == ann{1,sample_no}(anntype_no) 
                    anntype_New{1,sample_no}(N_no,1) = 
anntype{1,sample_no}(anntype_no);  
                end  
            end 
  
        end 
  
  
        %% FEATURE EXTRACTION (R-R intervals)(4) %% 
        %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
        RRI = zeros(0); 
        ann_no = ann_New{1,sample_no}; 
  
        for  ann_index= 1:size(ann_no,1) 
            if ann_index == length(ann_no)  
                break 
            end 
            RRI(ann_index,1)=(ann_no(ann_index+1)-ann_no(ann_index)); 
        end 
  
        % average R-R interval 
        avg_RRI{1,sample_no} = mean(RRI); 
  
        % the pre RR-interval value for the first point is zero 
Appendix B
125
==PAGE:139==
        pre_RRI{1,sample_no}(1,1) = 0;     
        for  ann_index= 2:size(ann_no,1) 
            pre_RRI{1,sample_no}(ann_index,1)=(ann_no(ann_index)-
ann_no(ann_index-1)); 
        end 
  
        % the post RR-interval value for the last point is zero 
        post_RRI{1,sample_no}(length(ann_no),1) = 0; 
        for  ann_index= 1:size(ann_no,1)-1 
            post_RRI{1,sample_no}(ann_index,1)=(ann_no(ann_index+1)-
ann_no(ann_index)); 
        end 
  
        % the local avarage RR-interval value  
        for i=1:length(RRI)+1 
            sum_RRI = 0; 
            num_RRI = 0; 
            for j=-5:4 
                if i+j>=1 && i+j<=length(RRI) 
                    sum_RRI = sum_RRI + RRI(i+j,1); 
                    num_RRI = num_RRI + 1;  
  
                end 
            end 
            local_avg_RRI{1,sample_no}(i,1) = sum_RRI/num_RRI; 
        end 
  
  
        %% making start and end point for each segment  
        segment_no = 0; 
        for loc_no = 1:length(loc{1,sample_no}) % kigger ind i hver cell 
  
            % (:40    p:112   ):41   N:78   t:116 
            if double(loc{1,sample_no}(loc_no)) == 78  %starting from  
                segment_no = segment_no + 1; 
                QRS_onset = loc_no-1; 
                QRS_offset = loc_no+1; 
                p_wave_flag = 0; 
  
                %start 
                if loc_no-1 == 1 % loc{1,8} 
                    segment_start = 1; 
  
                elseif double(loc{1,sample_no}(loc_no-3)) == 112  % if 3 befor 
is p 
                    segment_start = loc_no-4; 
                    p_wave_flag = 1; 
  
                else 
                    segment_start = loc_no-1; % sixth N in loc{1,8} 
                end 
  
                %end 
                if loc_no+4 > length(loc{1,sample_no})% recording 220 in 
loc{1,39} 
                    segment_end = length(loc{1,sample_no}); 
  
                elseif double(loc{1,sample_no}(loc_no+4)) == 116 % if after 4--
126
Appendix B
==PAGE:140==
>t 
                    segment_end = loc_no+5; 
  
                else 
                    segment_end = loc_no+4;  
                end 
  
                %% making segment which start from P/N onset  to t offset (x-
aksen)--> Each beat is a segment 
                seg = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_start:segment_end); 
                seg_RRI{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = num2cell(seg); 
  
                %% amplitude for each seg_RRI   
  
                beat_start = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_start); 
                beat_stop = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_end);             
                if beat_stop > length(sig{1,sample_no}) 
                    beat_stop = length(sig{1,sample_no}); 
                end 
  
                beat_rang = sig{1,sample_no}(beat_start:beat_stop); 
                beat_RRI{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = num2cell(beat_rang);  
  
  
                %% identify QRS_onset and ofseT 
  
                beat_QRS_onset = wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_onset); 
                beat_QRS_offset = wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_offset); 
                if beat_QRS_offset > length(sig{1,sample_no}) 
                    beat_QRS_offset = length(sig{1,sample_no}); 
                end 
  
  
                %% FEATURE EXTRACTION  
                %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
  
                %% 1. Heart-beat intervals (3) 
  
                % 1.1. QRS duration 
                QRS_duration_range = wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_offset) - 
wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_onset); 
                QRS_duration{1,sample_no}(segment_no,1) = QRS_duration_range; 
  
                % 1.2. T-wave duration 
                t_wave_duration_range = wave{1,sample_no}(segment_end) - 
wave{1,sample_no}(QRS_offset); 
                t_wave_duration{1,sample_no}(segment_no,1) = 
t_wave_duration_range; 
  
                % 1.3. P-wave flag 
                p_wave_flags{1,sample_no}(segment_no,1) = p_wave_flag; 
  
  
                %% 3. wavelet Features (20) 
                wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = modwt(beat_rang,4); 
                for row=1:5 
                    wt_min{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
Appendix B
127
==PAGE:141==
double(min(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                    wt_max{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(max(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                    wt_mean{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(mean(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                    wt_var{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,1) = 
double(var(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(row,:))); 
                end 
                wtrec{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = 
zeros(size(wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1})); 
                wtrec{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(1:4,:) = 
wt{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}(1:4,:); 
                ecgQRSBand{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1} = 
imodwt(wtrec{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1},'db2'); 
  
            end 
        end 
  
     %% Classification 
     %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
    % Y= Target 
        Target = zeros(0); 
        for i=1:length(anntype_New{1,sample_no}) 
            % N 
            if double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 78      %N 
                Target(i) = 1; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 76  %L 
                Target(i) = 1; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 82  %R 
                Target(i) = 1; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 101  %e 
                Target(i) = 1; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 106  %j 
                Target(i) = 1; 
  
            % S 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 83  %S 
                Target(i) = 2; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 65  %A 
                Target(i) = 2; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 97  %a 
                Target(i) = 2; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 74  %J 
                Target(i) = 2; 
  
            % V 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 86 % V 
                Target(i) = 3; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 69 % E 
                Target(i) = 3; 
  
            % F 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 70 % F 
                Target(i) = 4; 
  
            % Q 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 81 %Q 
                Target(i) = 5; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 102 % f 
128
Appendix B
==PAGE:142==
                Target(i) = 5; 
            elseif double(anntype_New{1,sample_no}(i)) == 49 % 1 
                Target(i) = 5; 
  
            % Non 
            else 
                Target(i) = 5; 
            end 
        end 
  
        All_labels{sample_no,1} = Target;  
        Y = Target'; 
        YY{sample_no,1} = Y; 
  
    %% X = Features     
        X = zeros(0); 
        for i=1:length(wt{1,sample_no}) 
            jj = 0; 
            for j=1:5 
                X(i,jj+1) = wt_min{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
                X(i,jj+2) = wt_max{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
                X(i,jj+3) = wt_mean{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
                X(i,jj+4) = wt_var{1,sample_no}{i,1}(j); 
                jj = jj + 4; 
            end 
        end 
        jj = jj + 1; 
        X(:,jj) = post_RRI{1,sample_no}; 
  
        jj = jj + 1; 
        X(:,jj) = pre_RRI{1,sample_no}; 
  
        jj = jj + 1; 
        X(:,jj) = local_avg_RRI{1,sample_no}; 
  
        jj = jj + 1; 
        X(:,jj) = QRS_duration{1,sample_no}; 
  
        jj = jj + 1; 
        X(:,jj) = t_wave_duration{1,sample_no}; 
  
        jj = jj + 1; 
        X(:,jj) = p_wave_flags{1,sample_no}; 
  
        XX{sample_no,1} = X; 
         
    end  
   
%plot(seg_RRI{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1},beat_RRI{1,sample_no}{segment_no,1}); 
     
    XY{1} = XX; 
    XY{2} = YY; 
    XY{3} = seg_RRI; 
    XY{4} = beat_RRI; 
    XY{5} = wave; 
end 
 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%Function for Adasyn-->make dataset balanced 
 
Appendix B
129
==PAGE:143==
function [out_featuresSyn, out_labelsSyn] = ADASYN(in_features, in_labels, 
in_beta, in_kDensity, in_kSMOTE, in_featuresAreNormalized) 
%this function implements the ADASYN method as proposed in the following 
%paper: 
% 
%[1]: H. He, Y. Bai, E.A. Garcia, and S. Li, "ADASYN: Adaptive Synthetic 
%Sampling Approach for Imbalanced Learning", Proc. Int'l. J. Conf. Neural 
%Networks, pp. 1322--1328, (2008). 
% 
%the implementation follows the notation and equation numbers given in 
%section 3.1.4 of another paper: 
% 
%[2]: H. He and E.A. Garcia, "Learning from imbalanced data", 
%Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 21, no. 9, 
%pp. 1263--1284, (2009). 
% 
% 
%the purpose of the ADASYN method is to improve class balance towards 
%equally-sized classes for a given input dataset. this is achieved by 
%synthetically creating new examples from the minority class via linear 
%interpolation between existing minority class samples. this approach is 
%known as the SMOTE method, cf. section 3.1.3 in [2]. ADASYN is an 
%extension of SMOTE, creating more examples in the vicinity of the boundary 
%between the two classes, than in the interior of the minority class. 
%cf. the supplied script demo_ADASYN for an example of this. 
% 
% 
% INPUTS: 
%---------- 
%in_features: 
%(N \times P) matrix of numerical features. each row is one example, each 
%column is one feature, hence there are N examples with P features each. 
% 
%in_labels: 
%boolean N-vector of labels, defining the classes to which the examples in 
%in_features belong. 
% 
%in_beta [default: 1]: 
%desired level of balance, where 0 means that the size of the minority 
%class will not be changed, and 1 means that the minority class will be 
%ADASYNed to have (approximately, due to rounding) the same size as the 
%majority class. any value of in_beta between 0 and 1 provides a compromise 
%between these two extremes. 
%note that in_beta IS NOT the resulting class ratio, but a percentage of 
%how much class balance is improved in comparison to the given class 
%balance! 0 means nothing is improved in comparison to the given class 
%balance and 1 means class sizes are perfectly equalized (except for small 
%rounding-related deviations). 
% 
%in_kDensity [default: 5]: 
%k for kNN used in ADASYN density estimation, i.e. in calculation of the 
%\Gamma_i values in eq. (4) of reference [2]. this is the kNN call that 
%regards examples from both classes. 
% 
%in_kSMOTE [default: 5]:  
%k for kNN used in subsequent SMOTE-style synthesis of new examples. 
%this is the kNN call that regards only examples from the minority class. 
%cf. eq. (1) in reference [2]. 
% 
%in_featuresAreNormalized [default: true]: 
130
Appendix B
==PAGE:144==
%boolean indicating whether the features (i.e. the different columns) in 
%in_features are already normalized to the same scale or not. 
%by default normalized features are assumed as the input, i.e. the user is 
%expected to apply a normalization method of choice before passing the data 
%to the ADASYN function. 
%the practical difference in the two values of in_featuresAreNormalized is 
%the following: 
%true:  Euclidean distance is used in all kNN calls. for reasonable 
%       results, in_features should already be normalized when calling 
%       ADASYN(). 
%false: standardized Euclidean distance (type "doc knnsearch" into MATLAB 
%       console and look for 'seuclidean' for an explanation) is used in 
%       all kNN calls. any normalization already present in in_features is 
%       ignored, and instead unit variance normalization is used. 
%       however, this does NOT modify the data. the normalization is only 
%       applied within knnsearch. 
% 
% 
% OUTPUTS: 
%---------- 
%out_featuresSyn, out_labelsSyn: 
%features and labels of ONLY the synthetically created examples. 
%note that each entry of out_labelsSyn is the label of the minority class 
%since only examples of the minority class are created. 
%concatenating [in_features out_featuresSyn] and [in_labels out_labelsSyn] 
%gives a new example set with the desired class balance. 
% 
% 
% 
% 
%------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
% Version: 1.0 
% Date: 2015-04-17 
% Author: Dominic Siedhoff 
%------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
% 
% 
%------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
% Copyright (c) 2015 Dominic Siedhoff 
%------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
% 
% License: This software may be freely used, shared and modified. It must 
%          not be sold. It is provided without any explicit or implicit 
%          warranty of any kind. This license text must be included with 
%          every copy made. 
% 
%------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  
  
  
  
if nargin < 3 || isempty(in_beta) 
    in_beta = 1; 
end 
  
if nargin < 4 || isempty(in_kDensity) 
    in_kDensity = 5; 
end 
  
Appendix B
131
==PAGE:145==
if nargin < 5 || isempty(in_kSMOTE) 
    in_kSMOTE = 5; 
end 
  
if nargin < 6 || isempty(in_featuresAreNormalized) 
    in_featuresAreNormalized = true; 
end 
  
  
if in_beta == 0 
    %nothing needs to be done because beta==0 is defined to mean that 
    %current class ratio is kept: 
    out_featuresSyn = []; 
    out_labelsSyn   = []; 
    return; 
end 
  
  
if ~all(in_labels==0 | in_labels==1) 
    error('ADASYN: in_labels may contain only the values 0 and 1.'); 
end 
  
  
numZeros = sum(in_labels==0); 
numOnes  = sum(in_labels==1); 
  
if numOnes == numZeros 
    %nothing needs to be done because if classes are already balanced, then 
    %for any in_beta, this is already the desired result. 
    out_featuresSyn = []; 
    out_labelsSyn   = []; 
    return; 
else 
    if numZeros > numOnes 
        majLabel = logical(0); 
        minLabel = logical(1); 
    else 
        majLabel = logical(1); 
        minLabel = logical(0); 
    end 
end 
  
%rename: 
S = in_features; 
clear in_features; 
  
%feature sets by class: 
Smin = S(in_labels==minLabel,:); 
Smaj = S(in_labels==majLabel,:); 
  
%eq (3): 
G = (size(Smaj,1) - size(Smin,1)) * in_beta; 
G = round(G); 
  
%handle boundary cases: 
if size(Smin,1)==0 
    warning('ADASYN: there were no examples of the minority class in the data. 
hence balancing is not possible. Returning empty matrices.'); 
132
Appendix B
==PAGE:146==
    out_featuresSyn = []; 
    out_labelsSyn   = []; 
    return; 
end 
  
if size(Smin,1)==1 
    warning('ADASYN: there was only one example of the minority class in the 
data. Hence returning G copies of that single example for balancing.'); 
    out_featuresSyn = repmat(Smin, [G 1]); 
    out_labelsSyn   = logical(minLabel * ones([G 1])); 
    return; 
end 
  
  
if in_featuresAreNormalized 
    knnDistance = 'euclidean'; 
else 
    %IMPORTANT: using 'seuclidean' as the distance measure means that 
    %standardized Euclidean distance is used, i.e. the standard deviation 
    %of the coordinates is automatically divided away. hence, using 
    %'seuclidean' instead of 'euclidean' saves the effort of normalizing 
    %the feature values by a Z-transformation (0mean,1var). 
    %cf. documentation of input parameter in_featuresAreNormalized for more 
    %information. 
    knnDistance = 'seuclidean'; 
end 
  
%kNN for density estimation: 
idcs = knnsearch_nonflat(S,Smin, 'K',in_kDensity+1, 'Distance',knnDistance); 
%note: why in_kDensity+1? because Smin is a subset of S and hence all 
%points in Smin have a trivial nearest neighbor in S with distance 0. 
%but that neighbor is not interesting because it's the point from Smin 
%itself. hence remove it: 
idcs = idcs(:,2:end); 
  
  
%compute the \Gamma values (eq. (4) in reference [2]): 
Gamma = zeros([size(Smin,1) 1]); 
for cmi=1:size(Smin,1)  %cmi: current minority example index 
    cNNs = idcs(cmi,:);             %current NearestNeighbors 
    cNNsLabels = in_labels(cNNs);   %labels of cNNs: 
    cNNsLabelsMaj = (cNNsLabels == majLabel); 
    cDelta = nnz(cNNsLabelsMaj);    %the Delta_i of eq. (4) in reference [2] 
     
    %write Gamma, not yet normalized: 
    Gamma(cmi) = cDelta / in_kDensity; 
  
end 
  
%normalize Gamma to give a distribution function: 
if sum(Gamma)==0 
    %if there is no class overlap w.r.t. these knn settings, create a 
    %uniform distribution: 
    Gamma = 1/length(Gamma) * ones(size(Gamma)); 
else 
    %create nonuniform distribution: 
    Gamma = Gamma / sum(Gamma);     %this makes it exactly eq. (4) in reference 
[2] 
end 
Appendix B
133
==PAGE:147==
  
%compute g_i (eq. (5) in reference [2]): 
%these g_i are the numbers of synthetic examples to be generated from each 
%example in Smin 
g = round(Gamma * G); 
  
if sum(g)==0 
    warning('ADASYN: Classes are already well-balanced (i.e. sum(g)==0). 
Returning empty matrices.'); 
    out_featuresSyn = []; 
    out_labelsSyn   = []; 
    return; 
end 
  
%with this g known, call the ADASYN_SMOTE subroutine...: 
out_featuresSyn = ADASYN_SMOTE(Smin,g,in_kSMOTE,knnDistance); 
%...and generate the labels: 
out_labelsSyn = logical(minLabel * ones([size(out_featuresSyn,1) 1])); 
  
  
  
function Ssyn = ADASYN_SMOTE(Smin,g,k,knnDistance) 
%subroutine implementing SMOTE algorithm as it is to be used by function 
%ADASYN(). cf. section 3.1.3 in the following paper for details: 
% 
%[2]: H. He and E.A. Garcia, "Learning from imbalanced data", 
%Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 21, no. 9, 
%pp. 1263--1284, (2009). 
% 
% 
% INPUTS: 
%---------- 
% 
%Smin: 
%minority set from ADASYN() 
% 
%g: 
%minority example synthesis counts as computed by ADASYN() 
% 
%k: 
%number of neighbors to be regarded in kNN for SMOTE algorithm 
% 
%knnDistance: 
%distance function used in kNN for SMOTE algorithm. depends on ADASYN's 
%parameter in_featuresAreNormalized. please type "help ADASYN" into 
%MATLAB's console for more information 
% 
% 
% OUTPUTS: 
%---------- 
%Ssyn: set of synthetic examples created from input set Smin by applying 
%the SMOTE algorithm 
  
  
%determine nearest neighbors: 
idcs = knnsearch_nonflat(Smin,Smin, 'K',k+1, 'Distance',knnDistance); 
%note: why k+1? because we search kNNs of Smin in Smin itself and hence all 
%points in Smin have a trivial nearest neighbor in Smin with distance 0. 
%but that neighbor is not interesting because it's the point from Smin 
134
Appendix B
==PAGE:148==
%itself. hence remove it: 
idcs = idcs(:,2:end); 
  
%initialize output and writing target as an empty matrix 
Ssyn = zeros([0 size(Smin,2)]); 
  
%for every minority example xi... 
for cei=1:size(Smin,1)  %cei: current example index 
     
    %current minority example: 
    xi = Smin(cei,:); 
     
    %number of synthetic examples to be created from xi: 
    gi = g(cei); 
     
    %allocate space for gi examples to be created from xi: 
    xiSyn = zeros(gi, size(Smin,2)); 
     
    %...iterate over synthetic examples to be created from xi and 
    %random partner from set of nearest neighbors: 
    for csi=1:gi    %csi: current synthetic example index 
         
        %get random partner example from nearest neighbors of xi: 
        %neighbor index: 
        nIdx = idcs(cei, randi(size(idcs,2))); 
        %neighbor: 
        xiHat = Smin(nIdx,:); 
         
        %create synthetic example as according to eq. (1) in reference [2]: 
        delta = rand(1); 
        xSyn = xi + delta * (xiHat - xi); 
         
        %write it to xiSyn: 
        xiSyn(csi,:) = xSyn; 
         
    end 
     
    %append examples synthesized from xi to overall synthetic example set: 
    Ssyn = [Ssyn; xiSyn]; 
     
end 
  
function [IDX,D] = knnsearch_nonflat(X,Y, varargin) 
%wraps knnsearch from MATLAB's statistics toolbox. 
%knnsearch_nonflat executes knnsearch only on the dimensions with nonzero 
%standard deviation, i.e. the flat dimensions are not passed on to 
%knnsearch. this prevents pdist2 from producing the following warning in 
%the context of standardized Euclidean distance ('seuclidean') in the 
%presence of flat dimensions: 
%"Warning: Some columns of S are zeros." 
%if this warning occurs, pdist2 (and as a consequence knnsearch) gives only 
%bad dummy results because the standardized Euclidean distance can not be 
%computed properly in the presence of flat dimensions. 
%using knnsearch_nonflat prevents this by filtering out flat dimensions. 
  
nonflatX = std(X) ~= 0; nonflat = nonflatX & nonflatY; 
  
Appendix B
135
==PAGE:149==
[IDX,D] = knnsearch(X(:,nonflat), Y(:,nonflat), varargin{:}); 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% DST Function %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% 
 
function outDST = DempsterShafer2(outDT, outAdaB, outANN, outLDA, outKNN, c) 
  
    for m = 1:c.NumTestSets 
       p = 1; 
        for k = 1:c.TrainSize(m)  
             
            n = 1; 
            Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = outDT.Post_prob_tr_DT{1,m}(p,:); 
            n = n+1; 
            Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outAdaB.Post_prob_tr_AdaB{1,m}(p,:); 
            n = n+1; 
            Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = outANN.Post_prob_tr_ANN{1,m}(p,:); 
             n = n+1; 
             Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outLDA.Post_prob_tr_LDA{1,m}(p,:); 
             n = n+1; 
             Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outKNN.Post_prob_tr_KNN{1,m}(p,:); 
             
             
            p = p+1; 
        end 
        Targets_Tr{1,m} = outDT.TrainY{1,m}; 
    end 
  
  
    for m = 1:c.NumTestSets 
       p = 1; 
        for k = 1:c.TestSize(m)  
             
            n = 1; 
            Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = outDT.Post_prob_val_DT{1,m}(p,:); 
            n = n+1; 
            Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outAdaB.Post_prob_val_AdaB{1,m}(p,:); 
            n = n+1; 
            Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outANN.Post_prob_val_ANN{1,m}(p,:); 
             n = n+1; 
             Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outLDA.Post_prob_val_LDA{1,m}(p,:); 
             n = n+1; 
             Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(n,:) = 
outKNN.Post_prob_val_KNN{1,m}(p,:); 
             p = p+1; 
%              
        end 
        Targets_Val{1,m} = outDT.ValY{1,m}; 
    end 
  
     
    %% DST 
     
    C=5;%Number of Classes 
136
Appendix B
==PAGE:150==
    one=ones(C,C)-eye(C,C); 
    NumClassifiers = 5; 
     
    for m = 1:c.NumTestSets 
                 
            for k = 1:c.TrainSize(m) 
                 
                 for f =1:(NumClassifiers-1) 
  
                    Fusion_Tr = 
Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(1,:)'*Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(2,:); 
                    kk_Tr{k} = 1-sum(sum(Fusion_Tr.*one)); 
  
                    for r = 1:C  
                        Combined_Classifiers_Tr(1,r) = Fusion_Tr(r,r)/kk_Tr{k}; 
                    end 
  
                     
                    if size(Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k},1)>2 && f<5 
                        Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(1,:) = []; 
                        Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(1,:) = []; 
                        Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k} = [Combined_Classifiers_Tr; 
Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}]; 
                    else 
    
                         
                        Fusion_Tr = 
Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(1,:)'*Probabilities_Tr{1,m}{1,k}(2,:); 
                        kk_Tr{k} = 1-sum(sum(Fusion_Tr.*one)); 
  
                        for r = 1:C  
                            Combined_Classifiers_Tr(1,r) = 
Fusion_Tr(r,r)/kk_Tr{k}; 
                        end 
  
                        [Prob_Combined_Tr{1,m}(k), Predicted_Class_Tr{1,m}(k)] = 
max(Combined_Classifiers_Tr); 
                         
                         
                         
                    end 
                     
                 end 
                  
                 ClassProb_Tr{1,m}(k,:)=Combined_Classifiers_Tr; 
            end 
             
  
            DST_Train_stats{1,m} = 
confusionmatStats(Targets_Tr{1,m},Predicted_Class_Tr{1,m});  
 
    end 
     
  
     
     for m = 1:c.NumTestSets 
Appendix B
137
==PAGE:151==
                 
            for k = 1:c.TestSize(m) 
                 
                 for f =1:(NumClassifiers-1) 
  
                    Fusion_Val = 
Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(1,:)'*Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(2,:); 
                    kk_Val{k} = 1-sum(sum(Fusion_Val.*one)); 
  
                    for r = 1:C  
                        Combined_Classifiers_Val(1,r) = 
Fusion_Val(r,r)/kk_Val{k}; 
                    end 
  
                     
                     
                    if size(Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k},1)>2 && f<3 
                        Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(1,:) = []; 
                        Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(1,:) = []; 
                        Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k} = [Combined_Classifiers_Val; 
Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}]; 
                    else 
    
                         
                        Fusion_Val = 
Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(1,:)'*Probabilities_Val{1,m}{1,k}(2,:); 
                        kk_Val{k} = 1-sum(sum(Fusion_Val.*one)); 
  
                        for r = 1:C  
                            Combined_Classifiers_Val(1,r) = 
Fusion_Val(r,r)/kk_Val{k}; 
                        end 
  
                        [Prob_Combined_Val{1,m}(k), Predicted_Class_Val{1,m}(k)] 
= max(Combined_Classifiers_Val); 
                         
                                                 
                    end 
                     
                 end 
                 ClassProb_Val{1,m}(k,:)=Combined_Classifiers_Val;  
            end 
  
 
            DST_Val_stats{1,m} = 
confusionmatStats(Targets_Val{1,m},Predicted_Class_Val{1,m});  
                 
     end 
  
outDST.DST_Train_stats = DST_Train_stats; 
outDST.DST_Val_stats = DST_Val_stats; 
  
outDST.ClassProb_Tr = ClassProb_Tr; 
outDST.ClassProb_Val = ClassProb_Val; 
end 
138
Appendix B
