==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Environmental Assessment of factors influ-
encing the sustainability of textiles and their
end of life
Erica Spadavecchia (s171990)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 25 16 00
www.env.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report is a master thesis project of 35 ECTS, which was prepared at the De-
partment of Environmental Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark in
fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master Degree in Environmental Engi-
neering. The MSc thesis project was conducted by Erica Spadavecchia at Danmarks
Tekniske Universitet (DTU) from February 2019 to July 2019, under the supervi-
sion of the Assistant Professor Valentina Bisinella and the Senior Researcher Anders
Damgaard.
The topic of this study is the solid waste management system for industrial textile
waste for the Veneto region in Northern Italy.
The document comprises of six chapters. Chapter 1 is an introductory to the topic
of the thesis. Chapter 2 provides background information and the objective of the
study.
Chapter 3 describes the methodologies used to carry out the project, and
Chapter 4 presents the results of these analyses. Chapter 5 provides an interpretation
of the obtained results.
Finally, Chapter 6 presents the conclusions of this study.
Additionally, the Appendices contain detailed information and results.
Kongens Lyngby, July 28, 2019
Erica Spadavecchia (s171990)
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor, Anders Damgaard for
coordinating the DTU course ”LCA-Modelling of Waste Management Systems” which
lead me to choose this thesis, for introducing me to my main supervisor Valentina
Bisinella and for the support and help he gave to me during this semester.
Then, I feel to thanks endlessly my main supervisor Valentina Bisinella, for the help
and the guidance throughout the whole thesis period. I´m feeling grateful for the
opportunity she gave to me, for the support and the constructive work we made to
build up the thesis which is based on a topic I was willing to work on. She has always
been available and ready to guide me and at the same time, giving me the freedom
to develop my ideas and to follow my interests.
Finally, I would like to thank my mum, my dad and my brother for the endless
love and support they gave me during these two years I spent here in Denmark. It
is not possible to express in words how much they are important to me, and their
endless faith in me gave me the strength to reach my goals. Then, a special thanks
go to all my friends in Italy and all the new ones I made here in DTU with which I
shared so many academic passions. To conclude, I would like to thank Aki, Ioanna,
and Valentina for being by my side during my master and for making this period
memorable. I´m glad to have shared this journey with them. I could have asked for
nothing better.
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The textile and clothing industry is one of the most polluting manufacture sectors,
and it is accountable for significant environmental burdens. In light of the Circular
Economy targets for source segregation of textile waste in Europe by 2025, factors
affecting the sustainability of alternative management schemes need to be evaluated
with scenarios for the management of textile waste in Europe.
This study assessed the waste management system of pre-consumer textile waste
in the Veneto region in Northern Italy and compared it with improved scenarios imple-
menting textile recycling. The methodologies developed for waste Life Cycle Assess-
ment were applied, while EASETECH was the software where the systems were mod-
elled. The consequential modelling framework with system expansion was followed,
and the reference flow of 1 tonne of pre-consumer textile has been defined to enable
the scale-up of the results.
The LCA investigated four alternative waste manage-
ment scenarios for recycling separately collected cotton, nylon, polyester and blended
fibre 50% cotton and 50% polyester textile waste fibres. Finally, the “best-case” sce-
nario where all the fibres are ideally separately collected into different fractions and
recycled simultaneously. Data for the modelling were retrieved from governmental
sources, private contacts, and literature, although default processes were modelled
with EASETECH or downloaded from Ecoinvent and were improved to fit the ac-
tual technologies. The characterised and normalised results were obtained using the
method recommended from the ILCD.
These results show that the current management of pre-consumer textile waste
is connected to environmental burdens for its disposal. With the available data and
technologies, source segregation and recycling can be beneficial for most fibres except
for polyester. Moreover, the ”best-case” scenario results, suggest that waste manage-
ment strategies for pre-consumer textile waste should focus on source segregating and
recycling selected fibres. Combined sensitivity and uncertainties analyses allowed to
identify the parameters affecting the most the sustainability of the scenarios. The
sorting efficiency and the ratio of substitution, which expresses the avoided produc-
tion of virgin products, are the most influential factors for all the fibres systems.
Based on the results, the polyester recycling process is the only technology producing
environmental loads and further investigations might be required to assess the influ-
ence of methanol and toluene solvents on the overall sustainability of the scenario.
The distances travelled have a significant impact on the environmental profile of the
scenario, and they closely depend on the efficiency of the sorting process.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Abstract
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Textile and Clothing Industry in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Textile Waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Textile Waste Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Textile Waste in Italy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Textile Waste in Veneto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.2
Textile Waste Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.3
Textile Recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.4
Pre-Consumer Textile Waste Management in Italy . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Objectives Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Life Cycle Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
LCA of Solid Waste Management Systems and Modelling Tools
12
3.2
Goal and Scope definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.1
Textile Baseline scenario and Textile with Impurities Baseline
scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Cotton Recycling Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.3
Nylon Recycling Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.4
Polyester Recycling Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.5
Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3.6
Best Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Life Cycle Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4.1
Cotton Recycling Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.4.2
Nylon Recycling Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4.3
Polyester Recycling Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.4
50% Cotton and 50% Polyester Recycling Technology
. . . . .
31
3.5
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.6
Uncertainty Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Results
35
4.1
Characterised and Normalised Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Process Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1
Perturbation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1.1
Baseline Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3.1.2
Cotton Recycling Scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3.1.3
Nylon Recycling Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3.1.4
Polyester Recycling Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.1.5
Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario
. . . . . . .
50
4.3.1.6
Best Case Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3.2
Scenario Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Uncertainty Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.5
Transport Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5
Discussion
61
5.1
Contribution Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Conclusion
68
A Appendix
70
A.1 Goal Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1.1
Intended Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1.2
Method Assumption and Impact Limitation . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1.3
Reasons for Carrying out the LCA Study and Decision Context
70
A.1.4
Target Audience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.1.5
Comparative Studies to Be Disclosed to the Public . . . . . . .
71
A.1.6
Commissioner of the Study and Other Influential Actors . . . .
71
A.2 Scope Definition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.2.1
Deliverables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.2.2
Function, Functional Unit and Reference Flow
. . . . . . . . .
72
A.2.3
LCI Modelling and Handling of Multifunctional Processes . . .
75
A.2.4
System Boundaries and Completeness Requirements . . . . . .
75
A.2.5
Representativeness of LCI Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2.5.1
Geographical Representativeness . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2.5.2
Time-related Representativeness . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2.5.3
Technological Representativeness . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
A.2.6
Basis for Impact Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2.7
Requirements for Comparative Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.2.8
Critical Review Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.4.1
Characterized Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
A.4.2
Normalized Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
Bibliography
181
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Textile and clothing industries represent a vital manufacture sector in the European
Union and the rest of the world, and compared to the other major industrial sectors, is
second for size and importance only to information technology and tourism (Shishoo
2012). Concurrently, textile and clothing industries are one of the most polluting
industries (Gray 2017) and are associated with a wide range of environmental and
social impacts along the value chain and mainly related to the production and the
processing of raw fibres (Sajn 2019).
Among the natural fibres, cotton is the most common, and it accounts for more
than 90% of the production (Yu 2015). A considerable amount of water both from
precipitation and from irrigation system is required for its cultivation and estimations
report that 2.6% of global water use is destined to cotton production causing drought
in cultivation areas while the damage to the water environment associated with it
is 17% (Esteve-Turrillas and Guardia 2017). The cotton plant is highly sensitive to
fungi and insect attacks, and it requires the application of pesticides and fungicides
along with synthetic fertilisers to improve the poor uptake efficiency.
The whole
manufacture process requires high volumes of water, and it is highly energy demand-
ing (Pensupa et al. 2017), although the adverse environmental effects correlated with
it are chiefly due to the cotton dyeing. Moreover, high volumes of wastewater are
produced with harmful impacts on continental waters especially regarding toxic dyes
(Zhang et al. 2015).
Negative environmental effects are also associated with polyester and synthetic
fibres production. A massive amount of crude oil and energy are required throughout
the production processes as a considerable volume of different chemicals. Particular
concerns are reserved for the emission of volatile organic compound, specifically ac-
etaldehyde and dioxins hence they pose a threat to human health and also to the
ozone layer (Chen and Burns 2006).
Nowadays, global textile demand is steadily increasing, and textile represents one
of the largest growing streams of waste and is forecast to grow. This trend is likely
to continue maintained by population growth, economic development, fashion cycles,
and notably the new phenomenon of ”fast fashion”. Globalisation coupled with con-
sumers needs leads to a radical transition from the luxury fashion industry to the
”street fashion” also called ”fast fashion” which peculiar business strategy is based
on smaller but more frequent collections and lower prices for apparel (Turker and
Altuntas 2014) which makes the consumers willing to buy more items.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Industries and consumers awareness on the negative environmental and social im-
pacts related to the linear trend, take - make - dispose, that characterise the textile
sector is increasing.
However, the major efforts are made to improve the current
system rather than focusing on the redesign of the textile industry following the prin-
ciples of the circular economy. The adoption of a circular mindset for the textile
economy allows a systemic and upstream approach to involve all the relevant as-
pects as product design, manufacture processes, consumption and waste generation
to tackle problems from their root causes.
Legislative bodies in Europe are working to support the transition toward a circu-
lar economy, foster sustainable economic growth, and boost global competitiveness.
In 2015, European Commission adopted an action plan which sets out measures and
targets to ”close the loop” of product lifecycles focusing of production, consumption,
and waste management highlighting the importance of secondary materials markets.
The action plan recognises that the implementation of the European Strategy for
Plastics in a Circular Economy mindset and holistic approach could lead to benefit,
whether applied to other highly environmentally impactful sectors as textile. In 2018,
a revised legislative framework on waste was issued, and targets were set up to pursue
waste reduction and to achieve a credible and long-term path for waste management
and recycling. One of the primary target it the set up of separate waste collection
schemes for textile waste by 2025.
The dysfunctional nature of the linear economy can not be longer ignored by
textile and clothing industries which have to work to ease the transformation into a
circular economy. On the other side, consumers awareness on the disruptive effects
due to the fast fashion phenomenon can no be longer underestimated, and a more
conscientious behaviour have to be adopted buying fewer products with higher quality
and supporting the shift into a more sustainable slow fashion consumption trend.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Textile and Clothing Industry in Europe
Textile and clothing industry plays a vital role in the European industrial scenario, as
reported by Eurostat in 2015, it accounted for 2.1% of the production value and 5.2%
of employment (Giannini, Iacobucci, and Perugini 2019). Textile manufacture sector
is heterogeneous and covers the entire chain for the production and transformation
of natural and synthetic fibres into the final products, including cloths, industrial
textiles, garments and household goods.
The five most populous countries, Italy, Germany, Spain, France and the United
Kingdom are the biggest producers of textiles, and they account for more than three-
quarters of the total European’s production. Specifically, Italy plays a leading role
in the European textile and fashion industry sector having in its territory 27% of the
companies which generate 30.9% of the turnover (Marenzi 2016). The main contrib-
utors to textile production and remarkably to technical textile manufacture are the
northern countries, like Germany, Netherlands, Austria, United Kingdom, Belgium
and Sweden. The clothing production is dominated by southern countries, mainly
Italy and Portugal and to a lesser extent, France, Spain and the new EU countries of
Bulgaria, Poland and Romania. 20% of the clothing and European textile production
is sold outside the EU regardless of the restrict access to several non-EU markets
(European Commission: Internal Market and SMEs 2019).
Unfortunately, the textile and clothing sector is not only one of the essential indus-
trial reality but also one of the most polluting and harmful to the environment. On of
the primary source of the significant environmental issues is the modern consumption
pattern aggravated by the fast fashion phenomenon, which has led to an exponential
growth of purchases. Between 2000 and 2014, an average consumer raised by 60%
the number of apparel items bought every year (Koszewska 2018). The natural con-
sequence of this new consumption pattern and of the linear trend characterizing the
economy is a steadily increasing demand for new textiles and the design of products
with poorer appearance retention, durability and dimensional stability. The increased
demand for textile supports the increase in the demand for new fibres and therefore,
the escalation in the generation of textile waste.
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Background
2.2
Textile Waste
In 2016, in the European Union, 2,190,000 tonnes of textile waste (Eurostat 2019b)
have been produced and gathered data from EU reports that textile waste represents
0.2% of the total waste generated and it forecast to grow in the future (Eurostat
2019a).
2.2.1
Textile Waste Classification
The EU compiled the List of Waste to provide a common terminology to facilitate
waste definition, classification and waste management practices.
Codes for waste
generated from textile industry are reported into Chapter Four: ”Waste from leather,
fur and textile industries” and are depicted in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: European Waste Catalogue Codes for Textile Waste (* = Hazardous
waste).
CODE
Description
04 02
Wastes from textile industry
04 02 09
Wastes from composite materials ( impregnated textile, elastomer,
plastomer)
04 02 10
Organic matter from natural products (grease, wax)
04 02 14*
Wastes from finishing containing organic solvents
04 02 15
Wastes from finishing others than those mentioned in 04 02 14
04 02 16*
Dyestuffs and pigments containing dangerous substances
04 02 17
Dyestuffs and pigments different from those mentioned in 04 02
16
04 02 19*
Sludges from on- site effluent treatment containing dangerous sub-
stances
04 02 20
Sludges from on-site effluent treatment different from those men-
tioned in 04 02 19*
04 02 21
Wastes from unprocessed textile fibers
04 02 22
Wastes from processed textile fibers
04 02 99
Wastes not otherwise specified
The generation of solid waste is a common problem for both natural and synthetic
fibres manufacture, and they arise during all the production steps, and the disposal of
textile and apparel whenever they reach their end of life. Textile waste is composed of
different fibrous materials made of synthetic or natural fibers. Moreover, textiles are
often engineered to improve their features, and frequently different type of polymers
are blended with other materials to form new and more complex articles. Due to
this complexity, textile waste is classified into ”pre-consumers” or ”industrial” and
”post-consumers” textile waste according to the life cycle stage in which it is produced.
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Textile Waste in Italy
5
The first category refers to materials discarded before being ready for consumers use.
As the adjective industrial suggests, the waste is generated during the manufacturing
processes of fibres materials, and it is characterized by either single polymers whether
it is produced in the early stages or blended fibres systems if occurred in the last
stages. On the other hand, fibrous materials discarded at the end of their service
life are classified as post-consumer textile waste and represent a more complex waste
category due to the complexity and variety of the composition.
2.3
Textile Waste in Italy
Italy is a parliamentary republic of south-central Europe with around 60 million in-
habitants, and it is subdivided into 20 regions, 5 of them under a special autonomous
status which allows them to pass legislation on local matters. In 2018, Italy had the
ninth´s biggest economy in the world and the third in the Euro-Zone if the United
Kingdom is not accounted (Fund 2019). The state is economically divided into two
different areas, a developed and highly industrialized northern part where it is pro-
duced almost 75% of the national wealth and a more agricultural depended and less
developed southern part. The Italian economy relies mainly on the service and indus-
try sectors. The service sector is responsible for the production of three-quarter of
the national GDP (Gross Domestic Product), and it employs around 65% of the total
workforce. The industrial sector is primarily based on SMEs (Small and Medium-size
Enterprises), which are typically family-owned and specialized in the production of
high-quality goods. The manufacturing sector accounts for one-quarter of the na-
tional GDP and it employs 30% of the workforce (ISTAT 2018). The textiles, apparel
and leather sector plays a crucial role in the industrial scene, in 2015, 62.2% of the
turnover produced by the sector was generated by the clothing and fashion branch
while the 37,8% by the textile (Marenzi 2016).
Alongside with the relevance in textile and clothing production, Italy in Europe
has a leading role also in the generation of textile waste as it is displayed in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Total textile waste from all NACE activities + households (Eurostat
2019a).
Total [t]
Percentage [%]
EU
2,190,000
100
Italy
465,925
21.28
Furthermore, Italy is the first producer of pre-consumer textile waste and as pre-
sented in Table 2.3 it contributes with more than 40% to the total amount generated
in Europe.
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Background
Table 2.3: Pre consumer textile waste from manufacture of textiles, wearing apparel,
leather and related products (Eurostat 2019a).
Total [t]
Percentage [%]
EU
620,000
100
Italy
253,145
40.83
Nevertheless, data on the entire generation of industrial textile waste in Italy are
scares for two main reasons: firstly as there is uncertainty on data for industrial waste
and secondly because industrial waste is often assimilated to household waste. The
national production of industrial waste is quantified by ISPRA (The Italian Institute
for Environmental Protection and Research) through the information contained in
the MUD (Environmental Declaration Form) database in which are reported data
relative to the annual declaration drawn up following the Italian legislation. Despite
this, in the last ISPRA waste report has been stated that for the textile and clothing
industrial sector, the MUD coverage rate is remarkably low, below 10%. This trend is
mainly influenced by the presence of many small and medium-size enterprises which
are exempted from the obligation to fill out the environmental declaration form. To
gain more comprehensive knowledge on the waste amount, data contained in the
MUD database are integrated with estimation carried out by ISTAT (Italian Na-
tional Institute of Statistics) made through the application of specific methodology.
Nevertheless, the data are still an underestimation of the reality (Alessandra Vaccari1
2017).
2.3.1
Textile Waste in Veneto
The Italian manufacturing sector is regionalised. The northwest also called ”Indus-
trial Triangle” (Milan - Turin - Genoa), is the old industrial pole and it is characterised
by a large and modern group of industries specialised in machinery, aerospace, naval
and automotive production. On the other hand, the industrial sector developed in the
Northeast and to a lesser extent in the centre, previously an agricultural and rural
area, is typified by high craftsmanship but low technology enterprises specialised in
textiles, clothing, footwear, machine tools, jewellery and furniture.
One of the most industrialised region in the north-east is Veneto, and in its terri-
tory, there are two of the leading textile and clothing districts: the district of Treviso
mainly focused on clothing and the district of Vicenza famous for the leather manu-
facture. In 2016, the amount of pre-consumer textile waste generated in the region is
reported in Table 2.4.
==PAGE:15==
2.3 Textile Waste in Italy
7
Table 2.4: Industrial textile waste in Veneto (ISPRA 2018).
Textile waste category
Amount [t]
Non Hazardous
29,454
Hazardous
3,686
Total
33,140
2.3.2
Textile Waste Management
Europe legislative bodies have been working to minimize adverse impacts of waste
while maximizing the positive impacts of proper waste management promoting the
role of individuals, households, businesses, local and national governments (Commis-
sion 2010). EU waste management policies, as the Waste Framework Board, which
represents the waste policies foundation, have been imposed and evolved over the
past 30 years. The objectives were to define a harmonic regulation to prevent and to
reduce the waste generation and consequently to decrease environmental and health
impacts and rising resources efficiency. In 2008, the EU issued the Waste Framework
Directive, which brought a modern perception of waste, from an unwanted load to a
valuable secondary raw material and introducing the distinction between waste and
by-products (Commission June 2016). The Directive delineated the basic principle for
waste management; it demands waste management practices which do not threaten
human health and the environment, which not provoke nuisance and which not endan-
ger places of particular interest and countryside. Finally, EU Member State waste
management legislation shall adopt as priority order the five-step waste management
hierarchy represented in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Waste management hierarchy.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Background
According to this new strategy, prevention is the preferred option, followed by
reuse, recycling and other forms of recovery while the disposal as landfilling is the
less preferable alternative. Moreover, in July 2018, the revised version of the legisla-
tive framework on waste had entered into force, and it clearly targets for the reduction
of waste generation and for the establishment of a long term, credible and ambitious
programme for waste management and recycle. Along with all the European Strate-
gies for the adoption of a circular economy mindset, targets and requirements it is
demanded the separate collection of textile waste by the end of 2025 (European Par-
liament and Council 2018).
Every year in the EU, 75% of the collected textile waste is assigned to landfill or
incineration plants, while only 25% is recycled (Ernantez, Barrera, and Navacerrada
2017). Of this, 50% could be suitable for reuse, 25% might be adequate as multi-use
cloths while 30% might be used as a raw material in industrial processes (Ernantez,
Barrera, and Navacerrada 2017). The landfill is the least desirable option for the
management of textile waste. Fibres are not biodegradable, and the energy employed
in the production processes of textile is lost. Incineration allows reclaiming part of
the energy used in the manufacture with an efficiency of 60% (Bartl 2011) and, in
view of the above, it is a more convenient treatment for this waste stream. Recy-
cling faces several issues, and only less than one percent of all materials employed to
produce clothing is recycled back into clothing. This is a consequence of a lack of
sorting technologies for collected clothes and blended fibres and a lack of recycling
technologies.
2.3.3
Textile Recycling
Processes implemented for textile recycling are classified as either mechanical and
chemical methods, and Table 2.5 illustrates the input and output of each recycling
approach.
Table 2.5: Mechanical and Chemical Recycling Input and Output (Le 2018).
Mechanical Recycle
Chemical Recycle
Process
Downcycling
High Value Recycling
High Value Recycling
Input fiber
Plant Based
Animal Based
Petroleum Based
Plant Based
Petroleum Based
Output
Non-Woven
New Yarn
New Yarn
Recycling technologies are usually classified into primary, secondary, tertiary and
quaternary approaches. The first approach consists in the recycling of a product into
its original form, the secondary involves mechanical processes, the tertiary is the py-
rolysis and hydrolysis of polymeric waste to obtain fuel or monomers, and eventually
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Textile Waste in Italy
9
the quaternary is the burning of textile waste to recover the energy content into it.
The mechanical approaches are classified as a secondary recycling scheme as they
generally consist of cutting, shredding and pulling into new fibres that are re-spun
into new yarn or melted and re-extruded or re-blended. Instead, the chemical ap-
proaches are classified as a tertiary recycling technology as they are characterized by
the partial or entire break down of the chemical structure (depolymerization) with
a consecutive re-polymerization or by the melting and dissolution processes through
which the material is extruded into re-usable fibres (Le 2018). Cotton and wool me-
chanical recycling technologies are well defined and established, but the volume is
low, for synthetic fibres and specifically for polyester, the recycling feedstocks mainly
consist of PET plastic bottle. Chemical recycling for synthetic fibres is established
but limited to a few suppliers, while technologies for cellulosic fibre are going towards
the industrial scale-up. Since both these two recycling schemes lead to a loss in the
quality of textiles are defined as down-cycling and their final products are fibres used
as insulation material, wiping cloths or mattress stuffing. Nowadays, researches are
focused on the ”textile-to-textile” recycling practice, which allows maintaining the
quality of the product that is recycled. The pre-consumer textile waste category is
evaluated as it represents a suitable stream for recycling in reason of its simpler com-
position which mainly consist of single fibers and in a less extent of blended materials.
Presently, ”textile-to-textile” recycling may not represent a viable solution consid-
ering that the available technologies are not cost-efficient whether implemented in
full-scale and because recycled fibres are more expensive than virgin products. Ad-
equate technologies to separate and manage the heterogeneous textile waste steam
to allow the characterization, identification and separation of potential constituent
components, dyes, chemicals and fibres blends are the main requirements for future
efficient recycling systems. Finally, textile recycling might not be a viable solution
until it is not less energy demanding, less polluting and less expensive than tradi-
tional production processes for virgin fibres. Efforts need to be made to overcome
technological barriers and to scale-up the processes to commercialize the technologies.
2.3.4
Pre-Consumer Textile Waste Management in Italy
Detailed data on the end of life practises implemented to handle pre-consumer textile
waste are absent or generalised for the total industrial waste flow.
ISPRA 2018
reports that 74.9% of the total Italian industrial waste is recycled, 9% is landfilled
and the remaining part is incinerated, although it is not possible to assume that these
percentages are applicable to industrial textile waste. It is reasonable to suppose that
the main portion of this waste stream is designated to landfill while a small share
is sent to incineration for energy recovery.
This estimation is in accordance with
the data available in Meoni 2016 where is reported the fate of the waste generated
within the textile district of Prato in the region of Toscana, which is on of the most
important in the Italian textile manufacture sector. Accordingly, the current waste
management practises for industrial textile waste in Veneto are assumed to consist of
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Background
90% of the waste landfilled and 10% intended to energy recovery.
2.4
Objectives Statement
The purpose of this work is to apply the LCA methodology to identify those factors
that influencing the sustainability of textile and their end of life will allow minimizing
the impact of textile production through the recycling of textile. The practice of
textile-to-textile recycle is the one chosen for the research as the aim is to obtain a
fibre with properties as similar as possible to the virgin one.
In view of the Circular Economy initiatives and the ambitious target of reaching
the separate collection of textiles by the end of 2025, this study wants to identify on
which textile waste is convenient to focus the attention. Besides, the analysis has the
further objective of assessing which management option for the separately collected
textile waste would provide the most significant environmental benefits.
The geographical area analyzed is Italy as it is the first producer of industrial
textile waste in Europe with a share of 21.2% and specifically it is focused on Veneto
where it is concentrated one of the most relevant textile and clothing industrial reality
of Italy. The waste flow investigated is the pre-consumer textile waste as it has been
identified as the most promising due to the lower degree of physical complexity.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
Life Cycle Assessment
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a valuable decision-support tool for industries and
policy makers which allows the identification, quantification and evaluation of the
environmental burdens associated with a product, activity or system, over its entire
life cycle, from raw materials extraction through production and manufacturing, use,
end of life treatment and disposal (IS0 2006). Strengths of LCA are associated to its
comprehensive nature as the implementation of this methodology grants the coverage
of all the environmental impacts associated to the product or product systems that are
constituted by several processes and which is responsible for emissions taking place in
different times and spaces (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018). Moreover, the
life cycle thinking perspective adopted prevents practitioners to burden shifting, and
at the same time, it covers a broad spectrum of impacts assigning numbers to facts
and therefore facilitating the comparison of different products and systems (Hauschild,
Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018). The main limitation is the significant amount of data
that need to be analyzed and evaluated, causing generalizations and simplifications
in the modelling and as a consequence, increasing the uncertainties associated with
the finals results.
LCA methodology development and harmonization have been a process carried out
from the early 1970s and culminated into a series of ISO standards (ISO 14040-14044).
Alongside with the standards, several guidelines and manuals have been issued, and
the most recent and worthy of mentioning is the European ILCD Handbook which
provides more detailed recommendations for the practitioners, for instance, more
data for the impact assessment (Tillman 2010). As reported into either standards
and guidelines, an LCA is an iterative process which comprises of four phases: the
goal and scope definition, the inventory analysis, the impact assessment and the
interpretation as it is represented in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:20==
12
3 Methodology
Figure 3.1: LCA framework (ISO, 2006).
In the Goal and Scope phases are defined the context of the LCA study, the
reasons why it is carried out, for whom it is performed, the functional unit, the data
quality requirements and the system boundaries are outlined. During the life cycle
inventory, all the direct inputs and outputs related to the production processes are
collected. The aim of the third phase, the life cycle impact assessment, is to translate
the information collected in the second phase into potential environmental impacts
using characterisation factors to assess their contribution. Other two discretionary
steps may be performed. The normalisation could be carried out to assess the relative
magnitude of the impact scores, expressing them through a standard set of reference
impacts (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018), while the weighting might be
performed to compare scores among all the impact categories. Finally, in the last
phase, the results of both life cycle impact assessment and inventory are interpreted,
and the sensitivity and uncertainties analysis are carried out to support a correct
evaluation of the results and to define the robustness of the conclusions.
3.1.1
LCA of Solid Waste Management Systems and Modelling
Tools
LCA is an appropriate tool to handle comprehensively and systematically the assess-
ment of the environmental impacts connected to the activities for the management of
solid waste taking into account also the correlation between other economic sectors
(Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018). Usually, the nature of the LCA study on
waste management systems and on the end-of-life stages of a product, is comparative
and therefore the other life stages are neglected. Particular attention has to be paid
in the definition of the system boundaries, as the waste treatment operations lead to
the production of valuable by-products, for instance, electricity or fertilisers. In the
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Goal and Scope definition
13
case of multi-functionalities, the system boundaries are expanded to account in the
analysis the burdens avoided due to the recovery of resources from waste instead of
producing by conventional means (Björklund, Finnveden, and Roth 2010).
Several tools have been developed to carry out LCA of waste management sys-
tems, such as ORWARE, IWN, WISARD, WRATE and EASETECH (Björklund,
Finnveden, and Roth 2010). Potential discrepancies on the results obtained using
different tools may derive from the dissimilarity on the waste management strategies
adopted in the countries where the tools are developed, or alteration in the intended
users and objectives as on the modelling assumption (Gentil et al. 2010).
The Environmental Assessment System for Environmental Technologies
(EASETECH) is a tool for Waste LCA developed at the Technical University of Den-
mark with the aim of modelling a spectrum of different environmental technologies
adopting a system perspective (Clavreul et al. 2014). The main feature that makes
this software unique compared to others is the use of material fractions for the ref-
erence flow definition instead of original materials. It is obtained a more realistic
representation of the reality, and the fate of each fraction, in the reference flow, can
be tracked throughout all the system (Clavreul et al. 2014). Eventually, it is essen-
tial to emphasise that data present in the software are specific for Denmark and the
other Northern countries conditions and technologies. Nevertheless, users have the
possibility to modify and insert new data or eventually import data from external
database as Ecoinvent.
3.2
Goal and Scope definition
The objective of this study is to evaluate the environmental performance of the cur-
rent waste management system for industrial textile waste in the Italian region of
Veneto and to compare it with improved scenarios implementing recycling technolo-
gies for different fibres. This LCA is limited by the area where it is applied and
analyses the waste stream generated and treated within Veneto disregarding the pro-
duction of textile waste from other industrial sectors and the import from other
regions. The focus of the analysis is on the pre-consumer textile waste while the
post-consumer is neglected. This decision has been made since the industrial stream
present a lower complexity in the composition, and this characteristic makes it more
suitable for textile-to-textile recycling. The decision context identified is specified as
”B: meso/macro-level decision support” since the LCA aims at supporting decisions
regarding future waste management systems and the system modelled is supposed to
affect the present system. A detailed Goal definition is reported in Appendix A.1.
The functional unit of this study is the management of pre-consumer textile waste
generated within the region of Veneto during the 2017/2018 year, in accordance with
the Italian Legislative Decree 152/2006 (Environmental Protection Code) and the
Waste Framework Directive (European Commission, 2008). The amount correspond-
ing to the functional unit is 33140 tonnes. Despite this, the reference flow defined as
one tonne of pre-consumer textile waste to facilitate the scale-up of the results to any
==PAGE:22==
14
3 Methodology
amount is considered significant to analyse. The composition of the industrial waste
generated in the region of Veneto is not available, and it is assumed to be as reported
in Table 3.1. The assumption is based on a case study realised in Turkey by Barışçı
and Öncel 2014.
Table 3.1: Waste Composition.
Waste Fraction
Percentage [%]
Amount [kg]
Cotton
53
530
Acrylic
17
170
Polyester
16
160
Nylon
4
30
Viscose
3
30
Elastane
1
10
Municipal solid waste, Southern Europe
6
60
Summing up the percentages of textile fibres in the waste feedstock is obtained
94%. The remaining 6% in the waste flow is assumed to be municipal solid waste
since it is relevant to model the influence of impurities as a consequence of incorrect
segregation of textiles at the source. The composition of these impurities stream is
modelled with the EASETECH process for the generation of Municipal Solid ¨Waste
in Southern Europe.
The LCI modelling framework for decision context B is consequential accordingly
with the ISO 14044 standard IS0 2006 and the ILCD guidelines ILCD 2010. Multi-
functionalities are addresses with system expansion and the modelling is performed
with consequential data when available, otherwise attributional to the point of sub-
stitution (average data) are employed. Two different scenarios are defined to perform
this study. In the first one represented in Figure 3.2 is displayed the current waste
management for industrial textile waste in Veneto while in the second one pictured
in Figure 3.3 is shown the expanded and improved waste management system which
incorporate the recycling of textile fibres.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Goal and Scope definition
15
Figure 3.2: System Boundary for the current industrial textile waste management.
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Methodology
Figure 3.3: System Boundary for industrial textile waste management system implementing textile recycling.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Goal and Scope definition
17
The dashed line represents the boundary between foreground and background sys-
tems. The boxes in the background system symbolize the inputs required for the
processes and their outputs. The dashed arrows represent the avoided production
of virgin materials and energy in the background system, while the black arrows
represent the waste flow. In the current waste management system, the waste flow
generated is collected by private companies and driven to the sorting facility. From
here, 90% of the waste stream is transported to the landfill and 10% to the energy
recovery facility. The waste to energy plant secondary products are electricity, heat,
fly ash and bottom ash. The electricity is recovered and fed in the grid while the heat
is not recovered as there is not district heating in Veneto. The fly ashes are sold to
companies for ”underground reutilization” in exhausted salt mines in Germany, and
the bottom ashes are used to substitutes primary or secondary aggregates. Eventu-
ally, from bottom ashes are also recovered metals like Aluminum and Iron.
The alternative scenario has been built up as the previous one with one main
change. In the sorting facility, the textile fibres segregated at the source are sepa-
rated and are sent to the recycling facility where are treated and spun to obtain a
new fibre. The residues produced during the processes are sent to the energy recov-
ery facility. Transport to each treatment facility is included in both scenarios since
it contributes to the environmental impact of the whole waste management systems.
The study is carried out for the region of Veneto, and thus, data for processes
and technologies are expected to be found for the geographical area of interest. Data
for Italy or countries of south - centre Europe are representative under their climatic
and technological similarity with Veneto. The study is considered to be representa-
tive for five years since waste management technologies, and practices are continually
evolving, and therefore, they can be outdated rapidly.
The study aim is to perform a complete environmental impact assessment of the
pre-consumer textile waste management, and thus, all the impact categories are in-
vestigated. In Table 3.2 are reported the impact categories with their description and
the abbreviations that are used in this study. Firstly, for the impact category ”deple-
tion of abiotic resources” is not used the ILCD version but the CML which splits it
into two different categories: ”Depletion of abiotic resources - fossil” and ”Depletion
of abiotic resources - elements”. An important remark is that the impact categories:
”land use”, ”ionising radiation for ecosystem” and ”resource depletion - water” are
not included in the LCIA method. Finally, the chosen method is not accounting the
”long term” compartment and therefore the emissions occurring in more than 100
years.
A detailed Scope definition is reported in Appendix A.2.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Methodology
Table 3.2: Impact categories used in the study and their abbrevi-
ations.
EASETECH Name
Unit
Abbreviation
ILCD2011, Climate change w/o LT;
midpoint; GWP100; IPPC2007
kg CO2-Eq
CC
ILCD2011, Ozone depletion w/o LT,
ODP w/o LT
kg CFC-11 Eq
OD
ILCD2011, Human toxicity, cancer ef-
fects, w/o LT, USEtox
CTUh
HTC
ILCD2011, Human toxicity, non-cancer
effects, w/o LT, USEtox
CTUh
HTNC
ILCD2011, Particulate matter w/o LT,
from Humbert 2009, PM
kg PM2.5-eq
PM
ILCD2011, Ionising radiation human
health
w/o
LT,
IRP100
w/o
LT,
ReCiPe 1.05 midpoint (H)
kBq U235 eq
IR
ILCD2011, Photochemical ozone forma-
tion, human health w/o LT, POCP
kg NVOC
POF
ILCD2011, Terrestrial acidification, Ac-
cumulated Exceedance
mol H+ eq
TA
ILCD2011, Eutrophication Terrestrial,
Accumulated Exceedance
mol N eq
TE
ILCD2011, Eutrophication Freshwater,
FEP ReCiPe 1.05 midpoint (H)
mol P eq
FE
ILCD2011, Eutrophication Marine w/0
LT, ReCiPe2008 1.05
mol N eq
ME
ILCD2011, Ecotoxicity freshwater w/o
LT, USEtox
CTUe
ET
CML 2001, Depletion of abiotic re-
sources, fossil - updated 2016
MJ
RD - F
CML 2001, Depletion of abiotic re-
sources, elements (reserve base) - up-
dated 2016
kg antimony-eq
RD
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Scenarios
19
3.3
Scenarios
The Life Cycle Assessment is carried out analysing seven different scenarios, two base-
lines to evaluate the current waste management system for textile waste in Veneto.
Four different scenarios are built up to study the environmental feasibility of the
recycling technologies for cotton, nylon, polyester and blended fibres containing 50%
cotton and 50% polyester. The analysis is concluded with a best-case scenario con-
ceived to test the hypothesis of all the textile fibres segregated at the source and
sorted to be recycled simultaneously.
3.3.1
Textile Baseline scenario and Textile with Impurities Baseline
scenario
The Textile Baseline Scenario is based on Figure 3.2 and schematized in Figure 3.4.
It is a representation of the current waste management system implemented for in-
dustrial textile waste in the region of Veneto. The composition of the pre-consumer
textile waste is normalised to 100% to simulate the absence of impurities in the waste
stream. The normalized composition is reported in
Table A.4 in Appendix A.3.
Figure 3.4: Textile Baseline Scenario.
The generated waste is collected by private companies with small trucks of 10
tonnes and consuming 0.00907 litres of diesel per kilometre driven, and it is trans-
ported to the sorting facility. Afterwards, the waste is loaded in 28t - 32t Euro5
trucks and 90% of it is sent to the landfill facility of Sommacampagna in Verona and
the remaining 10% to the incineration plant of San Lazzaro in Padua. The current
handling of the waste does not require a sorting process to separate the different fibres
as is not implemented any recycling process, and the waste is landfilled or incinerated.
For this reason, in the baseline scenarios, the sorting facility has the function of a
collection point.
The distances travelled have been calculated as average distances between a col-
lection centre identified for each province in the region of Veneto and the designated
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Methodology
treating facility. The facilities used for the study were selected based either on the
location, the accepted volume and their representativeness. The calculations are re-
ported in Table A.5 and Table A.6 in Appendix A.3. Details regarding the processes
that were modelled on EASETECH are presented in Appendix A.3 Table A.11.
The Textile with Impurities Baseline Scenario is based on Figure 3.2 and schema-
tized in Figure 3.5 which depicts the current waste management system for pre-
consumer textile waste in the region of Veneto as the Textile Baseline scenario.
Figure 3.5: Textile with Impurities Baseline Scenario.
The only difference between the two scenarios is the waste generation since, in this
case, the waste stream contains 94% of textile fibres and 6% of municipal solid waste.
The compositions are reported in Appendix A.2 in Table A.1 and Table A.2. All the
other processes and the parameters are the same as the one in the Textile Baseline
scenario.
The decision of carrying out two distinguished analysis for the current
management system was taken to evaluate how the environmental performances of
the system are affected by the presence of impurities. Details regarding the processes
that were modelled on EASETECH are presented in Appendix A.3 in Table A.12.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Scenarios
21
3.3.2
Cotton Recycling Scenario
The Cotton Recycling Scenario is based on Figure 3.3 and schematized in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6: Cotton Recycling Scenario.
The waste composition, in all the recycling scenarios, is the one reported in the
Appendix A.2 in Table A.1, including both pre-consumer textile fibres and municipal
solid waste as more representative of the reality. The waste flow produced is collected
by private companies as described in Section 3.3.1, and it is driven to a sorting centre.
Within the facility, the cotton fibres are separated with an assumed efficiency of 90%.
The rejected 10% is aggregate to the other waste which is handled in accordance with
the management described in the baseline scenario. The 90% sorting efficiency is
assumed on the basis of expected segregation of the different fibres at the generation
source.
An insight into the mass balance at the facility is reported in detail in
Appendix A.3 in Table A.13. The landfill, the energy recovery plant and the transport
are modelled as in the baseline scenario.
The cotton fibres, previously sorted, are transported into a recycling plant where
they undergo a series of processes to produce high-quality cotton yarn.
There is
no recycling facility in the region of Veneto, and thus, the distances driven from
the sorting facility to the final destination is a significant factor, and it is later on
investigated.
For the modelling, it is assumed a distance of 1 km.
The residues
produced alongside the recycling processes are collected and treated in the energy
recovery facility. Details regarding the processes that were modelled on EASETECH
are presented in Appendix A.3 in Table A.14.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Methodology
3.3.3
Nylon Recycling Scenario
The Nylon Recycling Scenario is based on Figure 3.3 and schematized in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.7: Nylon Recycling Scenario.
The industrial textile waste produced in Veneto is collected and driven to the
sorting facility wherein nylon fibres are separated from the stream and transported
to the recycling plant. The 90% sorting efficiency is assumed based on the expected
segregation of nylon fibres. The detailed mass balance for the sorting plants is re-
ported in Appendix A.3 in Table A.15. The landfill, the energy recovery plant and
the transport are modelled as in the baseline scenario.
The nylon fibres, previously sorted, are transported into a recycling plant where
they are treated to produce high-quality nylon yarn. The residues produced alongside
the recycling processes are collected and sent to the energy recovery facility. Details
regarding the processes that were modelled on EASETECH are presented in Appendix
A.3 in Table A.16.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Scenarios
23
3.3.4
Polyester Recycling Scenario
The Polyester Recycling Scenario is based on Figure 3.3 and schematized in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Polyester Recycling Scenario.
As aforementioned, the textile waste stream is collected by private companies and
driven to the sorting facility whereby the polyester fibres are separated and afterwards
transported to the recycling plant. The 90% sorting efficiency is assumed based on
the expected segregation of the polyester fibres at the generation source. The detailed
mass balance for the sorting plants is reported in Appendix A.3 in Table A.17. The
landfill, the energy recovery plant and the transport are modelled as in the baseline
scenario.
The polyester fibres, previously sorted, are transported into a recycling plant
where they undergo a series of processes to produce high-quality polyester yarn.
The residues produced alongside the recycling processes are collected and treated
in the energy recovery facility. Details regarding the processes that were modelled on
EASETECH are presented in Appendix A.3 Table A.19.
3.3.5
Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario
The Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario is based on Figure 3.3 and schematized
in Figure 3.9. As explained for the other scenarios, the textile waste stream is col-
lected by private companies and driven to the sorting facility wherein the polyester
and cotton blended fibres are separated and afterwards transported to the recycling
plant. The 90% sorting efficiency is assumed based on the expected segregation of the
different fibres at the generation source. The detailed mass balance for the sorting
plants is reported in Appendix A.3 in Table A.20. The landfill, the energy recovery
plant and the transport are modelled as in the baseline scenario.
The fibres, previously sorted, are transported into a recycling plant where they
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Methodology
are treated to produce high-quality polyester and cotton yarns. The residues gen-
erated alongside the recycling processes are collected and incinerated in the energy
recovery facility. Details regarding the processes that were modelled on EASETECH
are presented in Appendix A.3 Table A.21
Figure 3.9: Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario.
3.3.6
Best Case Scenario
The seventh and last scenario schematized in Figure 3.10 implements the simultane-
ous recycling of all the textile fibres contained in the waste stream. Precisely, the
choice of building up this scenario was made to evaluate the interaction of all the tech-
nologies and the combined environmental performance. The industrial textile waste
generated within the textile districts of Veneto is collected by private companies and
driven to the sorting facility.
In this specific case, all the textile fibres for which
it was identified a recycling technology are sorted and subsequently transported to
the respective recycling plant. The detailed mass balance for the sorting plants is
reported in Appendix A.3 in Table A.22.
The recycling technologies were modelled as in the previous scenarios, and all the
residues are collected and treated at the energy recovery facility. The landfill, the
waste to energy modules and the transport are modelled as in the baseline scenario.
Details regarding the processes that were modelled on EASETECH are presented in
Appendix A.3 Table A.23.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Scenarios
25
Figure 3.10: Best Case scenario.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Methodology
3.4
Life Cycle Inventory
Data for the modelling of the scenarios were obtained from different sources. Spe-
cific information for textile waste and facilities in Veneto were retrieved from ARPAV
2019, and whenever they were not available, on the annual report drawn up by ISPRA
2018. For the Landfill and Energy Recovery modules, the modelling was carried out
with data either found on the official web site of the facilities and based on Susanna
Andreasi Bassi 2019. The research of textile recycling technologies available in the
market allows the identification of mechanisms only for cotton, nylon, polyester and
the blended fibre composed of 50% cotton and 50% polyester. Those have been mod-
elled with information obtained from companies, and whether the sources were not
sufficient, scientific literature was used. The majority of the processes were found in
EASETECH while the remaining were retrieved from the Ecoinvent 3.5 Database.
To provide an accurate representation of the reality, the electricity and heat
sources present in EASETECH were substituted with the electricity and the space
heating mixes of Italy as reported in Table 3.3 and Table 3.4.
Table 3.3: Marginal Electricity Mix for Italy (Susanna Andreasi Bassi 2019).
Name
Amount
Unit
Electricity production, hydro, reser-
voir, alpine region; IT
0.03*0.026838/(0.026838+0.015097)
kWh
Electricity production, hydro, run-
of-river; IT
0.03*0.015097/(0.026838+0.015097)
kWh
Electricity production, natural gas,
combined cycle power plant; IT
0.25
kWh
Electricity
production,
wind,
1-
3MW turbine, onshore; IT
0.3
kWh
Electricity production,
wood,
fu-
ture; GLO
0.14
kWh
Electricity production, photovoltaic,
3kWp
slanted-roof
installation,
multi-Si, panel, mounted;
0.21
kWh
Market for transmission network,
long-distance; GLO
3.17E-10
km
Market for transmission network,
electricity, high voltage; GLO
6.582E-09
km
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Life Cycle Inventory
27
Table 3.4: Marginal Space Heat Mix for Italy (Susanna Andreasi Bassi 2019).
Name
Amount
Unit
Heat, central or small-scale, other than natural gas,heat
production, wood pellet, at furnace 300kW, state-of-the-art
2014,CH
0.2911
MJ
Heat, air-water heat pump 10kW,heat production, air-water
heat pump 10kW,Europe without Switzerland
0.138
MJ
Heat, solar+electric, multiple-dwelling, for hot water,heat
production, at hot water tank, solar+electric, flat plate,
multiple dwelling,CH
0.1485
MJ
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas,heat pro-
duction, hardwood chips from forest, at furnace 5000kW,
state-of-the-art 2014,CH
0.2129
MJ
Heat production, at heat pump 30kW, allocation exergy;
CH
0.1147
MJ
Heat, district or industrial, other than natural gas,heat pro-
duction, hardwood chips from forest, at furnace 5000kW,
state-of-the-art 2014,CH
0.0948
MJ
The landfill site utilized for this case study is the landfill located in Sommacam-
pagna in Verona. It is modelled based on processes already existing in EASETECH
and changing parameters in accordance with the information obtained from the web-
site of the company operating the facility. It is a landfill for non-hazardous and inert
waste and the little amount of methane produced is not recovered but burned in flares
(HERAmbiente 2019a).
The waste to energy processes are modelled based on the incineration plant of San
Lazzaro in Padua according to information reported in the facility web site (HERAm-
biente 2019b) and data provided by Susanna Andreasi Bassi 2019. Eventually, each
textile fibre in the waste flow was characterized by a specific LHV (Lower Heating
Value). The steam produced in the energy recovery facility is used to supply three
turbines for the production of electricity, which substitutes the electricity from the
grid with an energy efficiency of 24%. The discharged steam is condensed in heat
exchangers which use the water from a nearby canal as a coolant. The condensed
water is reused in the system in the degasser, but there is no heat substitution as
there is no district heating grid in Veneto. Both the bottom ash and the fly ash,
the residues from the Air Pollution Control system, produced in the facility undergo
recovery processes. The fly ashes, after inertization, are employed in ”underground
reutilization” activities to fill exhausted salt mines in Germany. Metals contained
in the bottom ashes, especially aluminium and iron are recycled and substitute the
production of virgin materials while the bottom ashes are treated and successively
used as aggregate for road construction (HestAmbiente 2017).
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Methodology
3.4.1
Cotton Recycling Technology
The cotton recycling plant was modelled following the mechanical recycling technology
implemented in Spain by ”Hilaturas Ferre” and illustrated in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: Cotton Recycling Technology.
Pre-consumer textile cotton clips are meticulously sorted in accordance with their
colour and quality as they are produced from different industrial plants. Subsequently,
the waste is cut into small piece, shredded and eventually it is mildly opened into
fibres without causing irreversible damages to the length of the fibre. In the final
step, an open-end spinning technology allows the production of the cotton yarn with
a yield of 90% (Esteve-Turrillas and Guardia 2017). The residues and the rejects
originated alongside the recycling processes are collected and treated in the energy
recovery facility. The final product is substituting the virgin cotton yarn production
and allow to avoid the environmental impacts associated with the manufacture of
cotton and especially the dyeing step.
Data for the modelling of Cotton Recycling technology are reported in Table 3.5.
Table 3.5: Data for Cotton Recycling Technology.
EASETECH Process
Data for Modelling
Value
Unit
Cotton Recycling Technology
Efficiency
96
%
Electricity
0.3639
kWh
Cotton Spinning
Efficiency
90
%
Electricity
1.714
kWh
3.4.2
Nylon Recycling Technology
The nylon recycling facility was modelled based on the information provided by
the Italian company Aquafil that developed the ”ECONYL Regeneration System”
through which it recovers nylon waste like fishing nets from the oceans and aqua-
culture, fabric scraps from textile manufacturers and carpets destined for landfill
(ECONYL 2019). The recycling plant is located in Slovenia, and it implements a
combined mechanical and chemical technology returning two different final products:
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Life Cycle Inventory
29
ECONYL FDY yarns on beam and ECONYL texturized yarns on cones. The gen-
eral system boundaries defined by the company are displayed in Appendix A.3 in
Figure A.4, while the recycling technology implemented in the model is outlined in
Figure 3.12.
Figure 3.12: Nylon Recycling Technology.
Data for the modelling of the Nylon Recycling technology are reported in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Data for Nylon Recycling Technology.
EASETECH Process
Data for Modelling
Value
Unit
Efficiency
90
%
Process water
28.37
kg/kg total wet weight
Calcium carbonate
0.1035
kg/kg total wet weight
Nylon Recycling Technology
Sodium chloride
0
kg/kg total wet weight
Electricity
5.51
kWh
Clay
0.04612
kg/kg total wet weight
Inert filler
4.394
kg/kg total wet weight
Depending on the type, the quality and the shape of the waste, it can be either
sorted, cleaned, grinded, pelletized or granulated. Then is fed into the system and
depolymerized back into secondary raw materials (caprolactam) which undergo a
further purification step. The purified caprolactum is polymerized and is obtained
the nylon polymer, which is spun to get the yarn (Aquafil 2018).
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Methodology
3.4.3
Polyester Recycling Technology
The recycling processes for polyester was modelled based on the chemical technology
adopted by Patagonia Inc. to treat its polyester waste and illustrated in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Polyester Recycling Technology.
According to the flow chart, the waste is cut and shredded into smaller pieces until it
is completely broken down into granules. Afterwards, a chemical reaction is applied
to depolymerize the polyester into DMT (dimethyl terephthalate) and EG (ethylene
glycol) which are the intermediates in the synthesis of polyester. DMT is chemically
treated and polymerized to produce new granules of polyester. The last step is the
spinning, which led to the production of the recycled polyester yarn (Zamani 2011).
According to Inc. 2011, the conversion rate from polyester textile waste to DMT is
assumed to be 90%, and this value is assumed as overall efficiency for the recycling
technology. The residues generated alongside the recycling processes are collected and
treated in the energy recovery facility. The recycled polyester yarn is substituting the
virgin material allowing the avoidance of the environmental impacts associated with
the manufacturing process.
Data for the modelling of the Polyester Recycling technology are reported in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Data for Polyester Recycling Technology.
EASETECH Process
Data for Modelling
Value
Unit
Efficiency
90
%
Methanol
12.6
kg/kg total wet
weight
Toluene
3.468
kg/kg total wet
weight
Polyester Recycling Technology
Heat (DMT Production)
11
MJ
Heat (depolymerization)
3.454
MJ
Electricity
0.83
kWh
Catalyst
0.10
kg/kg total wet
weight
Polyester Spinning
Efficiency
97
%
Electricity
0
kWh
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Life Cycle Inventory
31
3.4.4
50% Cotton and 50% Polyester Recycling Technology
The recycling technology for blended fibres containing 50% cotton and 50% polyester
is based on the chemical process called Lyocell Process, and it is illustrated in Fig-
ure 3.14. The technology based on Lyocell process dissolve the cellulose, the cotton,
while it keeps the polyester unaltered. The industrial textile waste analysed in this
study is composed of 53% cotton, corresponding to 530 kg and for 16% polyester,
corresponding to 160 kg. In this scenario, it was assumed that 160 kg of polyester
and 160 kg of cotton are blended while the remaining 370 kg of cotton is aggregated
with the other waste stream intended for the landfill and the waste to energy plant.
Figure 3.14: 50% Cotton and 50% Polyester Recycling Technology.
The waste flow is fed into the system and mixed the NMMO (N-methyl morpholine-
N-oxide) solvent, which dissolves the cellulosic fibres . The required amount of NMMO
required is estimated to be 0.05 kg per kg of cellulose in the textile waste stream. The
solution is then pumped through a filter to separate the cellulosic solution from the
polyester which is remained undissolved. The quality of the recovered polyester is
assumed high, and therefore, it is redirected to the spinning process to obtain the new
yarn. On the other hand, the cellulosic solution with the NMMO is then pumped into
showerhead spinner to produce long fibres which are passed through a drying zone to
evaporate the water (Le 2018; Zamani 2011). The residues generated alongside the
recycling processes are collected and treated in the energy recovery facility. The final
products are substituting the virgin cotton and polyester yarn production and allow
to avoid the environmental impacts associated with the manufacture processes.
Data for the modelling of the 50% Polyester and 50% Cotton Recycling Technology
are reported in Table 3.8.
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Methodology
Table 3.8: Data for 50% Polyester and 50% Cotton Recycling Technology.
EASETECH Process
Data form
Modelling
Value
Unit
Efficiency Cotton
97
%
Efficiency Polyester
100
%
50% Polyester and 50% Cotton
Recycling Technology
NMMO
0.025
kg/kg total wet
weight
Electricity
0.001
kWh
Heat
5
MJ
Process water
19.4
kg/kg total wet
weight
Polyester Spinning
Efficiency
97
%
Electricity
0.0033
kWh
Cotton Spinning
Efficiency
90
%
Electricity
1.714
kWh
3.5
Sensitivity Analysis
Uncertainties of different types and from different sources are always present in LCA
study, and correct management of them allow to improve and to quantify the ro-
bustness of the results and the precision of the whole study (Rosenbaum, Georgiadis,
and Fantke 2018). Specifically, the sensitivity analysis is a tool to evaluate to which
extent the variation of an assumption or a parameter influences the results of the
model. A system is defined as sensitive toward a parameter if a small change of this
parameter leads to a large change in the results (Hauschild, Rosenbaum, and Olsen
2018).
The sensitivity analysis is subdivided into two distinguished analyses: the pertur-
bation analysis and the scenario analysis. The first step to perform the perturbation
analysis is the selection of the parameters that are tested based on the uncertainties
of the assumption made and on the results of the process contribution analysis. Af-
terwards, each parameter is changed by the fixed amount of 10% and tested one at
the time while the others are left unaltered. For every parameter perturbed a new
set of impact scores is calculated and compared with the initial scores. Ultimately,
the response of the model is evaluated through the calculation of the sensitivity ratio
(SR) which explicit the ratio between the relative change in the score of the impact
category and the change in the parameter. The formula for the calculation of the SR
is reported in Equation 3.1.
SR =
Result2−Result1
Result1
P arameter2−P arameter1
P arameter1
(3.1)
To perform a comparison of the parameters influence, the sensitivity ratios are nor-
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Uncertainty Analysis
33
malised dividing their absolute value with the maximum absolute SR of each impact
category applying the Equation 3.2. In this way, the most sensitive parameter is de-
fined by a normalised sensitivity ratio of 1, and all the others are scaled with respect
to the latter.
nSR =
| SR |
| MaxSR |
(3.2)
The scenario analysis is carried out to test the robustness of the model results in a
different setting than the original, and therefore, a combination of parameter values
and processes are changed at the same time. For each configuration, a new set of
impact scores is calculated and compared with the initial results. The response of the
system is quantified by the relative change calculated applying Equation 3.3.
RelativeChange(%) = (Resultalternative −Resultinitial
Resultinitial
) ∗100%
(3.3)
The model is defined as sensitive to a particular scenario, whether in at least one
of the impact category, there is an absolute value of relative change higher than 50%.
3.6
Uncertainty Analysis
The increased application of LCA to assess the sustainability of different waste man-
agement solutions and to quantify their environmental performances in decision-
making contests has led to the need of balanced interpretation of the results and
the need to ensure transparency and reliability. Nonetheless, due to the complexity
of the modelled systems, the results are subject to uncertainty related with the as-
sumptions made in the modelling phase of the study, the inherent data variability
and unrepresentative datasets (Bisinella et al. 2016). Therefore, the identification
of those factors influencing the outcomes of the study is a fundamental step, and
it should be carried out applying a rigorous approach to integrate sensitivity and
uncertainty analysis. The uncertainty analysis is performed propagating input un-
certainties into output uncertainties with sampling and analytical methods.
The
complexity of LCA for waste managements systems usually does not allow to have a
set of samples for each factor of interest to carry out the analytical uncertainty prop-
agation. A probability distribution is assigned to each parameter and, specifically
the distribution employed in this study is the uniform. It is a function with constant
probability and whose domain is defined by a maximum and a minimum value. For
all the parameters tested in the sensitivity analysis, an uncertainties interval (a,b)
was defined and the input variance for uniform distribution was calculated applying
the Equation 3.4 in which ”b” is the maximum and ”a” is the minimum.
(Vinput) = 1
12 ∗(b −a)
2
(3.4)
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Methodology
For each parameters, the sensitivity coefficient was calculated as reported in Equa-
tion 3.5 where, with i = 1,..,n are identified the factors tested and with j = 1,..,m the
impact categories.
SC
j
i =
(Result2 −Result1)j
(Parameter2 −Parameter1)i
(3.5)
The output variance was eventually calculated with Equation 3.6 where Xi represents
the generic i-th parameter.
Voutput(Xi) = (SC
j
i )2 ∗Vinput(Xi)
(3.6)
To conclude, the total analytic variance for each impact category was approximated
summing up the output variance of each factor. The output variance is used as a
measure of the total uncertainty in the system.
Once concluded with the analytical uncertainty propagation, the Monte Carlo
analysis was carried out. As explained in Bisinella et al. 2016, each parameter is
represented by a variable with a defined probability distribution. The Monte Carlo
tool in EASETECH allows to randomly sample values within the uncertainties prob-
ability distribution interval and to calculate the impact scores. These series of LCA
impact scores are treated in Excel and their statistical properties are calculate.The
variance obtained is the compared with the analytical results to give an estimation
of the analysis robustness.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Results
The results were generated using the EASETECH software which implements the
LCIA method: “ILCD recommended 2013 Prosuit Global NR w/o LT” containing
the impact categories suggested in the ILCD Handbook (EC-JRC 2011) by the Euro-
pean Commission.
4.1
Characterised and Normalised Results
The characterised results for all the scenarios analysed in the study are reported in
Table 4.1 and the detailed overview of the characterised results for each scenario can
be found in Appendix A.4.1, Tables A.24 - A.44. The normalised result are reported
in Table 4.2 and the detailed overview of the normalized results for each scenario can
be found in Appendix A.4.2, Tables A.46 - A.66. For the normalized results, a color
format was applied to show the ranking of the scenarios for each impact category
and to facilitate the identification of the scenario performing better. Green identify a
more preferable situation while red a less preferable one. Negative impact scores are
defined as crediting and correspond to the impacts avoided while the positive values
represent environmental loads.
The normalised results are easier to compare as all the impact categories have the
same units. Based on the results presented in Table 4.2, it is clear that the baseline
scenarios have comparable environmental performances, although the textile scenario
presents lower impact scores because of the absence of the impurities. The 6% of
municipal solid waste in the waste stream, analysed in the textile with impurities
scenario, leads to higher impact because of the presence of an organic fraction which
undergoes biodegradation processes in the landfill with the consequential release of
methane.
The analysis of the normalised results for the recycling scenarios allows spotting
that the polyester recycling scenario is the worst as it reports the highest impact scores
in twelve out of fourteen impact categories. Nevertheless, it is not straightforward
the identification of the scenario performing better in absolute terms.
The best-
case scenario is performing better than the others in eight categories out of fourteen,
but it is not the absolute majority, and thus, it is not correct to assert that is the
environmentally preferable option.
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Results
Table 4.1: Characterized Results.
Impact Category
Textile
Textile and
Impurities
Cotton
Nylon
Polyester
Polyester
and Cotton
Best Case
CC [kg CO2-Eq]
3.26E+01
6.58E+01
-2.73E+02
-1.92E+02
2.46E+03
-4.83E+02
5.14E+02
OD [kg CFC-11 Eq]
-5.36E-07
2.36E-05
-9.31E-05
3.03E-05
5.20E-04
-6.14E-06
1.81E-04
HTC [CTUh]
3.08E-08
-7.37E-09
-2.02E-05
-1.34E-06
9.68E-06
-6.76E-06
-1.86E-05
HTNC [CTUh]
7.35E-06
7.44E-06
-4.05E-04
1.44E-05
1.35E-05
-1.02E-04
-4.26E-04
PM [PM kgPM2.5-eq]
2.27E-02
2.26E-02
-6.64E-01
-9.72E-02
-1.26E-02
-2.76E-01
-9.28E-01
IR [kBq U235 eq]
8.46E-02
7.09E-02
-3.48E+01
1.43E+00
-4.86E+01
-5.14E+00
-6.12E+01
POF [kg NMVOC]
3.61E-01
3.78E-01
-2.84E+00
-4.11E-01
5.09E+00
-3.22E+00
-2.72E+00
TA [mol H+ eq]
2.92E-01
2.94E-01
-1.38E+01
-7.56E-01
4.45E+00
-7.04E+00
-1.55E+01
TE [mol N eq]
1.47E+00
1.48E+00
-5.44E+01
-6.95E-01
1.12E+01
-2.14E+01
-5.97E+01
FE [kg P eq]
-2.01E-04
-1.96E-04
-2.50E-01
-1.56E-03
-2.65E-02
-7.91E-02
-2.92E-01
ME [kg N eq]
1.33E-01
1.34E-01
-1.03E+00
-1.50E-01
1.09E+00
-6.17E-01
-1.13E+00
ET [CTUe]
4.07E+00
3.66E+00
-1.58E+04
-8.20E+01
1.38E+03
-5.32E+03
-1.69E+04
RD - fossil [MJ]
4.38E+02
4.40E+02
-1.53E+04
-2.67E+03
1.00E+05
-1.55E+04
2.96E+04
RD [kg Sb-eq]
-2.29E-04
-2.66E-04
-2.33E-02
-2.24E-03
6.20E-02
-8.01E-03
6.52E-03
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Characterised and Normalised Results
37
Table 4.2: Normalised Results.
Impact
Category [PE]
Textile
Textile and
Impurities
Cotton
Nylon
Polyester
Polyester
and Cotton
Best Case
CC
4.03E-03
8.15E-03
-3.37E-02
-2.37E-02
3.04E-01
-6.01E-02
6.34E-02
OD
-1.29E-05
5.71E-04
-2.25E-03
7.33E-04
1.26E-02
-1.59E-04
4.38E-03
HTC
5.68E-04
1.36E-04
-3.73E-01
-2.48E-02
1.79E-01
-1.25E-01
-3.42E-01
HTNC
6.69E-03
6.79E-03
-3.68E-01
1.31E-02
1.23E-02
-9.32E-02
-3.87E-01
PM
8.22E-03
8.23E-03
-2.41E-01
-3.52E-02
-4.56E-03
-1.00E-01
-3.36E-01
IR
6.36E-05
6.29E-05
-2.62E-02
1.07E-03
-3.66E-02
-4.25E-03
-4.60E-02
POF
6.37E-03
6.67E-03
-5.01E-02
-7.24E-03
8.98E-02
-5.70E-02
-4.80E-02
TA
5.89E-03
5.95E-03
-2.78E-01
-1.52E-02
8.97E-02
-1.42E-01
-3.13E-01
TE
1.28E-02
1.29E-02
-4.73E-01
-6.05E-03
9.75E-02
-1.86E-01
-5.19E-01
FE
-3.25E-04
-3.03E-04
-4.04E-01
-2.52E-03
-4.27E-02
-1.28E-01
-4.71E-01
ME
1.42E-02
1.43E-02
-1.10E-01
-1.60E-02
1.16E-01
-6.61E-02
-1.20E-01
RD - F
7.02E-03
7.07E-03
-2.45E-01
-4.28E-02
1.60E+00
-2.50E-01
4.74E-01
RD
-6.67E-03
-6.41E-03
-6.80E-01
-6.52E-02
1.81E+00
-2.34E-01
1.90E-01
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Results
4.2
Process Contribution
The contribution analysis was performed for each scenario with the purpose of iden-
tifying the processes contributing the most to the total impact score of each impact
category. The normalised results were used in the analysis. The processes were ag-
gregated in general categories. The ”Landfill” and ”WTE” processes contain all the
impacts associated with the sub-modules utilised to model the facilities, the ”Trans-
portation” contains the impacts correlated with the transport to landfill, incineration
and recycling plants. The ”Recycling Technology” category aggregates the impacts
of the recycling processes, the spinning step and the substitution of virgin material.
Positive values in the scores represent a negative impact to the environment while on
the other hand, negative values in the scores mean benefit to the system.
In Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 are reported the contribution analyses carried out for
the baseline scenarios which present as the unique difference the composition of the
input waste stream. For both scenarios, the Waste to Energy is the most contributing
process to the total environmental crediting while the collection is the most contribut-
ing to the environmental loads of the systems. It is worth mentioning that for the
climate change impact category, the difference between the two scenarios is due to
the Landfill process. In the textile scenario, only textile is landfilled and therefore the
methane production is negligible but in the textile with impurities scenario, a fraction
of organic waste is landfilled, and thus the methane generation is not insignificant
and plays a crucial role in the total score of the impact category.
-4.00E-02
-3.00E-02
-2.00E-02
-1.00E-02
0.00E+00
1.00E-02
2.00E-02
3.00E-02
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.1: Process Contribution for Textile Baseline Scenario.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Process Contribution
39
-4.00E-02
-3.00E-02
-2.00E-02
-1.00E-02
0.00E+00
1.00E-02
2.00E-02
3.00E-02
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.2: Process Contribution for Textile and Impurities Baseline Scenario.
In the graphs below are reported the contribution analyses for each recycling sce-
nario modelled in this study.
In Figure 4.3 is displayed the analysis for the cotton scenario, but in the graph,
the Ecotoxicity freshwater (ET) category is not present due to its much higher score
compared to others. The recycling technology is the most contributing process in all
the impact categories with negative scores, and thus, it is leading to environmental
benefits to the system.
In Figure 4.4 is depicted the process contribution analysis for the recycle of nylon.
The recycling technology is the most impactful aggregate process for this scenario,
and it is contributing negatively providing benefits to the system. The collection
module has the most significant positive impact in all the impact categories with the
only exception of the abiotic resources depletion - element category for which the
most contributing process is the sorting facility.
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Results
-8.00E-01
-7.00E-01
-6.00E-01
-5.00E-01
-4.00E-01
-3.00E-01
-2.00E-01
-1.00E-01
0.00E+00
1.00E-01
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
RD - F
RD
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.3: Process Contribution for Cotton Recycling Scenario.
-1.60E-01
-1.40E-01
-1.20E-01
-1.00E-01
-8.00E-02
-6.00E-02
-4.00E-02
-2.00E-02
0.00E+00
2.00E-02
4.00E-02
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.4: Process Contribution for Nylon Recycling Scenario.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Process Contribution
41
In Figure 4.5 is displayed the process contribution analysis for the scenario imple-
menting the recycling of polyester. The abiotic resources depletion and the ecotoxicity
freshwater categories are not included, due to their much higher scores. As for the
other scenarios, the recycling processes are the most contributing to the environmen-
tal impacts of the system. Nevertheless, for this scenario, the aggregate process is
contributing positively and it is associated with environmental loads in almost all the
impact categories apart in the Particulates matter, Ionizing radiation and Eutrophi-
cation freshwater.
-1.00E-01
-5.00E-02
0.00E+00
5.00E-02
1.00E-01
1.50E-01
2.00E-01
2.50E-01
3.00E-01
3.50E-01
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.5: Process Contribution for Polyester Recycling Scenario.
In Figure 4.6 are illustrated the results of the process contribution analysis per-
formed for the polyester and cotton recycling scenario. The ecotoxicity freshwater is
not included due to the much higher impact score. This scenario shows a similar trend
with the cotton recycling scenario. The recycling process is the most contributing in
all the impact categories bringing benefits to the environment. The collection is the
most impactful process in all the impact categories with the exception of the abiotic
resources depletion - element in which the main contribution to the environment load
is due to the sorting efficiency.
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Results
-3.00E-01
-2.50E-01
-2.00E-01
-1.50E-01
-1.00E-01
-5.00E-02
0.00E+00
5.00E-02
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
RD - F
RD
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.6: Process Contribution for Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario.
Finally, Figure 4.7 presents the results of the process contribution analysis for the
best-case scenario in which all the textile fibres are recycled. The ecotoxicity fresh-
water is not included due to the much higher score. The cotton recycling process is
the most contributing to the environmental benefits associated with the best-case sce-
nario. The environmental loads are mainly due to the recycling processes for polyester
and it is clearly visible for the climate change and the abiotic resources depletion cat-
egories.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Process Contribution
43
-1.00E+00
-5.00E-01
0.00E+00
5.00E-01
1.00E+00
1.50E+00
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
RD -F
RD
PE
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Polyester
Recycling Nylon
Recycling Polyester and Cotton
Recycling Cotton
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
Figure 4.7: Process Contribution for Best-Case Scenario.
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Results
4.3
Sensitivity Analysis
4.3.1
Perturbation Analysis
The sensitivity analysis was carried out in EASETECH for all the important pa-
rameters introduced in the scenarios. The choice was made based on the results of
the process contribution analyses, and on the uncertainties of the assumptions made
throughout the modelling steps.
As introduced in the Methodology Chapter in Section 3.5, for each parameter its
default value was either increased or decreased of 10% and the system response to
the parameter perturbation was quantified through the calculation of the sensitivity
ratio SR. In this study, the system is considered sensitive to a parameter if the nor-
malised sensitivity coefficient of at least one impact category is over 0.5 (Hauschild,
Rosenbaum, and Olsen 2018). Since, the comparison is performed evaluating the nor-
malised sensitivity ratio (NSR), the most sensitive parameter for each impact category
is represented by an NSR equal to one.
4.3.1.1
Baseline Scenarios
The parameters tested in both baseline scenarios are the same, and they are shown
in Table 4.3.
The decision of evaluating these parameters was taken to test the
uncertainty of the assumptions made in the modelling. Even though the scenarios
are representing the current waste management system for the industrial textile waste
in Veneto, data were not always available, and assumptions were made. There are no
sorting facilities for textile, and the electricity and the efficiency are assumed based on
literature data, and for the fuel consumption in the collection, the process was taken
from EASETECH. Moreover, also the calculations for the distances driven after the
sorting process are based on assumptions.
Table 4.3: Parameters tested in the perturbation analysis for the Baseline Scenarios.
Parameters
Unit
Default Value
SA Value
Collection Consumption (coll)
Liter*kg
0.00907
0.009977
Sorting Efficiency (sort_eff)
%
90
99
Sorting Electricity (sort_elec)
kWh
0.07
0.077
Electricity Substitution (sub_elec)
MJ
24
26.40
Transportation to Incineration (t_inc)
km
65
71.5
Transportation to Landfill (t_land)
km
107
117.7
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
45
The results are summarised in Table 4.4 and in Table 4.5 in which are reported
the normalised sensitivity ratio.
Table 4.4: Sensitivity analysis results for Textile Scenario.
Parameters
Impact category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact category
with NSR = 1
coll
2
0
sort_eff
14
14
sort_elec
0
0
sub_elec
0
0
t_inc
0
0
t_land)
0
0
Table 4.5: Sensitivity analysis results for Textile and Impurities Scenario.
Parameter
Impact Category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact Category
with NSR = 1
coll
2
0
sort_eff
14
14
sort_elec
0
0
sub_elec
0
0
t_inc
0
0
t_land
0
0
The sorting efficiency parameter (sort_eff) is the most sensitive for both the base-
line textile scenario and the textile and impurities scenario. As displayed in Table 4.3
the sorting efficiency is increased of 10%, and as a consequence, also the amount of
waste intended for each treatment facilities is modified. Specifically, in the perturbed
scenarios, 99% of the waste stream is sent to landfill, and thus the impact scores are
higher with relative changes over 20% in all the impact categories.
Baseline scenarios are sensitive also to the collection factor (coll) as it presents
a normalised sensitivity ratios higher than 0.5 in the particulate matter and in the
photochemical ozone formation impact categories.
==PAGE:54==
46
4 Results
4.3.1.2
Cotton Recycling Scenario
The parameters tested in the perturbation analysis for the cotton recycling scenarios
are those identified for the baseline systems and besides, all the parameters inserted
in EASETECH for the modelling of the recycling technology processes. This choice
was made based on the results of the process contribution analysis, which highlights
that the Recycling processes are the most contributing in all the impact categories.
The additional parameters tested are depicted in are reported in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6: Parameters tested in the perturbation analysis for Cotton Recycling Sce-
nario.
Parameters
Unit
Default Value
SA Value
Recycling Efficiency (r_eff)
%
96
86.40
Recycling Electricity (r_elec)
kWh
0.3639
0.4003
Spinning Efficiency (s_eff)
%
90
99.00
Spinning Electricity (s_elec)
kWh
1.714
1.885
Virgin Substitution (virg_sub)
-
-1
-0.90
The summarised perturbation analysis results for the cotton recycling scenario
are reported in Table 4.7 in which is possible to observe that the scenario is sensitive
to four of the tested parameters.
Table 4.7: Sensitivity analysis results for Cotton Recycling Scenario.
Parameters
Impact category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact categoy
with NSR = 1
coll
0
0
r_eff
14
0
r_elec
0
0
s_eff
14
4
s_elec
0
0
sort_eff
14
0
sort_elec
0
0
sub_elec
0
0
t_inc
0
0
t_land
0
0
virg_sub
14
10
The efficiency for the spinning process (s_eff) and the substitution ratio for the
recycled cotton (virg_sub) are the most sensitive parameters tested as they have a
normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 1 in more than one impact category. More-
over, the recycling efficiency (r_eff) and the sorting efficiency (sort_eff) influence the
system since they have an NSR higher than 0.5 in all the impact categories evaluated
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
47
in the study. It is worthily to mention that the system is sensitive to all the parame-
ters associated with changes in the amount of waste processed.
4.3.1.3
Nylon Recycling Scenario
The perturbation analysis for the nylon recycling scenario is performed for the param-
eters tested in baseline scenarios and besides those, for all the factors implemented in
EASETECH to model the recycling technology processes. The decision of studying
these parameters was made based on the results of the contribution analysis, which
highlights that the recycling processes are the major contributor to the environmen-
tal performance of the system. The additional parameters tested in the analysis are
displayed in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Parameters tested in the perturbation analysis for Nylon Recycling Sce-
nario.
Parameter
Unit
Default Value
SA Value
Recycling Efficiency [r_eff]
%
90
99
Water [wat]
kg
25.533
28.0863
Calcium Carbonate [cal]
kg
0.09081
0.099891
Sodium Chloride [sod]
kg
0.008271
0.0090981
Recycling Electricity [r_elec]
kWh
4.959
5.4549
Clay [cla]
kg
0.04612
0.050732
Inert Filler [ine]
kg
3.447
3.7917
Virgin Substitution [virg_sub]
-
-1
-0.9
The summarised perturbation analysis results for the nylon recycling scenario are
reported in Table 4.9 in which are reported only the seven parameters presenting a
normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 0.5.
Table 4.9: Sensitivity analysis results for Nylon Recycling Scenario.
Parameter
Impact Category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact Category
with NSR >1
coll
1
0
r_eff
11
4
r_elec
3
1
sort_eff
12
2
sub_elec
1
0
virg_sub
11
7
wat
1
0
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Results
The scenario is sensitive to four different parameters: the recycling efficiency
(r_eff), the electricity consumption for the recycling process(r_elec), the efficiency of
the sorting facility (sort_eff) and the nylon substitution ratio (virg_sub) since they
have a normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 1.
Looking at the results table it is possible to observe that also other parameters
influence the system. These parameters are the collection fuel consumption (coll), the
electricity substitution ratio (sub_elec) and the process water needed in the recycling
process (wat) and they all have a normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 0.5 in one
impact category. The collection and the substitution ratio for the electricity influence
the human health non-cancer effect category, while the water is influential for the
ionising radiation category.
4.3.1.4
Polyester Recycling Scenario
As aforementioned, the perturbation analysis for the polyester recycling scenario was
carried out testing the parameters selected for the baseline scenarios and in common
to all the scenarios. Besides, the factors presented in Table 4.10 were tested as they
were used in the modelling of the recycling technology processes, which are the most
contributing in all the impact categories.
Table 4.10: Parameters tested in the perturbation analysis for Polyester Recycling
Scenarios.
Parameters
Unit
Default Value
SA Value
Recycling Efficiency (r_eff)
%
88.5
97.35
Methanol (met)
kg
12.6
13.86
Heating_1 (heat_1)
MJ
10.52
11.572
Toluene (tol)
kg
3.468
3.8148
Recycling Electricity (r_elec)
kWh
0.81
0.891
Heating_2 (heat_2)
MJ
3.36
3.696
Catalyst (cat)
kg
0.1
0.11
Spinning Efficiency (s_eff)
%
97
87.3
Spinning Electricity (s_elec)
kWh
0.003
0.00363
Virgin Substitution (virg_sub)
-1.0
-0.9
The results of the sensitivity analysis for the polyester recycling scenario are sum-
marised in Table 4.11 in which are presented only the parameters having at least one
normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 0.5.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
49
Table 4.11: Sensitivity analysis results for Polyester Recycling Scenario.
Parameter
Impact category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact category
with NSR = 1
heat_1
1
0
met
13
4
r_eff
1
0
s_eff
1
0
sort_eff
12
10
tol
5
0
virg_sub
1
0
The methanol (met) used as solvent in the DMT production and the sorting
efficiency (sort_eff) are the most sensitive parameters in the scenario and they have
a normalised sensitivity ratio higher than one.
Beside, the polyester scenario is influenced by the efficiencies for the recycling
technology and the spinning process (r_eff; s_eff), the polyester substitution ratio
(virg_sub) and eventually, the amount of heat and toluene (heat_1; tol) required for
the first phase in the recycling process.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Results
4.3.1.5
Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario
The sensitivity analysis for the polyester and cotton recycling scenario is carried out
perturbing the parameters reported in Table 4.12 in addition to those in common
to all the scenarios and presented in Table 4.3. As for the previous scenarios, the
additional parameters are those implemented in EASETECH to model the recycle
technology. Moreover, in this system was also modelled the synthesis of the solvent
(NMMO) required for the Lyocell chemical process, and thus also these values are
analysed.
Table 4.12: Parameters tested in the perturbation analysis for Polyester and Cotton
Recycling Scenario.
Parameter
Unit
Default Value
SA Value
Sorting Efficiency Cotton (s_eff_c)
%
30.19
33.21
Sorting Efficiency Polyester (s_eff_p)
%
100
90.00
Sorting Electricity (s_elec)
kWh
0.07
0.077
Recycling Efficiency Cotton (r_eff_c)
%
97
87.30
Recycling Efficiency Polyester (r_eff_p)
%
100
90.00
Virgin Substitution (virg_sub)
-1
-0.90
Electricity Methylamine (elec_1)
kWh
0.00556
0.01
Heating Methylamine (heat_1)
MJ
1.72
1.89
Ammonia (amm)
kg
0.13
0.14
Methanol (met)
kg
0.25
0.28
Methylamine (methy)
kg
0.23
0.25
Electricity NMM (elec_2)
kWh
0.0056
0.01
Heating NMM (heat_2)
MJ
4.24
4.66
Diethylene Glycol (diet)
kg
0.44
0.48
NMM (nmm)
kg
0.51
0.56
Electricity NMMO (elec_3)
kWh
0.025
0.03
Heating NMMO (heat_3)
MJ
3.93
4.32
Hydrogen Peroxide (hyd)
kg
0.5
0.55
NMMO (nmmo)
kg
0.025
0.03
Recycling Electricity (r_elec)
kWh
0.001
0.0011
Recycling Heating (r_heat)
MJ
5
5.50
Water (wat)
kg
19.4
21.34
Spinning Electricity Cotton (s_elec_c)
kWh
1.714
1.89
Spinning Electricity Polyester (s_elec_p)
kWh
0.0033
0.0036
Spinning Efficiency Cotton (s_eff_c)
%
90
99.00
Spinning Efficiency Polyester (s_eff_p)
%
97
87.30
The results of the sensitivity analysis for the scenario are summarised in Table 4.13.
The parameters without any normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 0.5 are not
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
51
reported.
Table 4.13: Sensitivity analysis results for Polyester and Cotton Recycling Scenario.
Parameter
Impact Category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact Category
with NSR >1
r_eff_c
11
0
r_eff_p
6
2
s_eff_c
12
2
s_eff_p
6
2
sort_eff_c
11
0
sort_eff_p
5
0
virg_sub_c
12
8
virg_sub_p
6
2
The scenario implementing the recycling of cotton and polyester blended fibers is
sensitive to five parameters which are the efficiency for the spinning processes of both
cotton and polyester (s_eff_c; s_eff_p), the cotton and polyester substitution ratio
(virg_sub_c; virg_sub_p) and, eventually the recycling efficiency for the polyester
(r_eff_p). For these parameters, the normalised sensitivity ratio is higher than one.
Besides, it is worthily to mention that the efficiency for the sorting process of both
cotton and polyester and for the cotton recycling process (sort_eff_p; sort_eff_c;
r_eff_c) have an influence on the system and a normalised sensitivity ratio higher
than 0.5. For the 50% cotton and 50% polyester recycling scenario all the sensitive
parameters are associated with efficiencies and in general with factors responsible for
the definition of the amount of waste treated in the specific process, and therefore
the system is strongly influenced by the total amount of waste entering the system.
4.3.1.6
Best Case Scenario
All the parameters investigated in the baselines and recycling scenarios were tested
for the best case and the most relevant results are summarised in Table 4.14.
Table 4.14: Perturbation analysis result for the Best-Case Scenario.
Parameter
Impact Category
with NSR > 0.5
Impact Category
with NSR >1
c_eff
11
0
p_met
6
0
s_eff_c
13
4
s_eff_p
1
0
sort_eff_p
6
3
virg_sub_c
12
7
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Results
The best case scenario consists of all the recycling technologies implemented si-
multaneously and it results to be sensitive to three parameters: s_eff_c; sort_eff_p;
virg_sub_c which represent respectively the efficiency of the cotton spinning technol-
ogy, the efficiency for the sorting of polyester and the cotton substitution ratio and
all these parameters have a normalised sensitivity ratio higher than one.
In addition, the table shows the parameters that are the most influential to the
system. These parameters have a normalised sensitivity ratio higher than 0.5 in more
than one impact categories and beside those set out previously also the efficiency of
the cotton recycling technology (c_eff), the amount of methanol in the polyester recy-
cling technology (p_met), the spinning efficiency for polyester(s_eff_p) are relevant.
The results of the perturbation analysis for the best-case scenario let to pinpoint as
the system is predominantly sensitive to the processes for the cotton and the polyester
which are respectively the fibres to which are associated the highest environmental
benefits and burdens.
4.3.2
Scenario Analysis
The sensitivity analysis is completed performing a scenario analysis which evaluates
the response of the system to discrete changes instead to the variation of one parame-
ter value at the time. Discrete changes could be variation in the system boundaries, in
the technologies or the LCIA methods. The first scenario analysis was performed mod-
ifying the marginal electricity technologies, and the electricity mix in EASETECH
was replaced by the sources reported in Table 4.15.
Table 4.15: Marginal Electricity Mix for Scenario Analysis (Susanna Andreasi Bassi
2019).
Name
Amount
Unit
Electricity production, hard coal; IT
0.93
kWh
Electricity production, oil; IT
0.07
kWh
Market for transmission network,
electricity, high voltage; GLO
6.582E-09
km
Market for transmission network,
long-distance; GLO
3.17E-10
km
All the scenarios were found to be sensitive to a change in the technology used for
the electricity produced in Italy.
The ranking between recycling scenarios does not change with the change in
the electricity mix, although a different behaviour is observed between the system
response for the textile baseline scenarios and the recycling scenarios. The major
changes are seen for the electricity substitution process within the waste to energy
module. The production of electricity from fossil fuel resources leads to more signifi-
cant environmental burdens. However, the benefits associated with the production of
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Sensitivity Analysis
53
electricity from other sources, the WTE plant, instead the fossil resources are much
higher than the benefits connected with the substitution of the electricity produced
from renewable resources. This explains the trends observed in the scenario analysis
results. The baseline scenarios respond to the change in the electricity technologies
with lower impact scores since the saving from the electricity substitution overcomes
the negative scores due to the other processes. On the other hand, for the recycling
scenarios, the electricity change leads to an increase in the impact score of all the
impact categories.
In Figure 4.8 are presented the different responses to the electricity technologies
changes between the baseline and the recycling scenarios for climate change, which
is the most sensitive impact category. They are reported into two different graphs as
they have different magnitude in the scores.
-1.00E+03
-5.00E+02
0.00E+00
5.00E+02
1.00E+03
1.50E+03
2.00E+03
2.50E+03
3.00E+03
Cotton
Nylon
Polyester
Polyester
and Cotton
Best-Case
kg CO2 -Eq
Baseline
Scenario
0.00E+00
1.00E+01
2.00E+01
3.00E+01
4.00E+01
5.00E+01
6.00E+01
7.00E+01
Baseline
Scenario
kg CO2 - Eq
Textile
Impurities
Figure 4.8: Comparison between baseline and electricity alternative scenario for cli-
mate change and depletion of abiotic resources, elements.
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Results
The second scenario analysis was performed changing the marginal space heating
technologies and the space heating sources in EASETECH were replaced by those
reported in Table 4.16.
Table 4.16: Marginal Space Heat Mix for Scenario Analysis (Susanna Andreasi
Bassi 2019).
Name
Amount
Unit
Heat, district or industrial, natural gas,heat production,
natural gas, at industrial furnace >100kW,Europe without
Switzerland
0.84
MJ
Marginal electricity negative - SUAN
1/3.6*0.16/0.9 kWh
Auxiliary heating unit, electric, 5kW,auxiliary heating unit
production, electric, 5kW,CH
6.55
E-
08*0.16/0.9
MJ
For this study, the heat scenario analysis is not meaningful for all the recycling
systems. In the baseline scenarios as in the cotton and nylon recycling scenarios, the
consumption of heat is limited to only one process in the aluminium recovery mod-
ule. Hence, there is no system response to a change in the marginal technologies for
heating space and the relative changes in the impact scores are equal to zero for each
impact category. However, the same does not apply to the other scenario as the recy-
cling technology for polyester, and the blended fibres 50% cotton and 50% polyester
are highly thermal energy demand. The three systems investigated are sensitive, al-
though the ranking between the recycling scenario does not change in response to the
alternative marginal space heat mix.
The analysis was concluded testing the response of the system to the simultaneous
change of the marginal electricity and space heat technologies. The alternative elec-
tricity and the space heat mix are the same as those applied in the previous analysis
and reported in Table 4.15 and Table 4.16. As aforementioned, the combined change
for electricity and space heat is meaningful only for the best-case scenario and for the
scenarios implementing the recycling technologies for polyester and the blended fibre
polyester and cotton. The investigated systems are sensitive to the combined change
of the marginal technologies for electricity and heat, even though the ranking of the
recycling scenarios is unmodified.
4.4
Uncertainty Analysis
The input uncertainty was propagated into output with sampling and analytical meth-
ods. Analytical uncertainty values were calculated with the equations reported in
Section 3.6 for all the parameters once at the time and for all the impact categories,
and it allowed to evaluate the contribution of each parameter to the overall scenario
variance. The Monte Carlo uncertainty propagation was performed with a number
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Uncertainty Analysis
55
of sample N = 10,000 and for all the set of parameters identified in each scenario,
through this method the resulting variance score is a single value which represents
the total parametric variance for the analysed scenario (Bisinella et al. 2016).
Once the output variance was obtained in both cases, then the coefficient of variation
(CV) was calculated with the Equation 4.1
CV J =
√
V (Y )j
Y j
(4.1)
in which
√
V (Y )j is the standard deviation and Yj is the normalized impact score for
the analytical method while it represents the mean of the random samples generated
with the Monte Carlo simulations. Eventually, the analysis was completed defining
the relative change between the output variance defined with the analytical and the
Monte Carlo methods. The relative changes, RC, between the analytical and the
Monte Carlo sampling variance are calculated with the Equation 4.2.
RC = (V arianceMonteCarlo −V arianceanalytical
V arianceanalytical
) ∗100
(4.2)
Generally, it is possible to observe that the relative changes between the variance
obtained with the analytical and the numerical methods are below 10% for the base-
line scenarios, below 20% for the recycling scenario for cotton, nylon and polyester
and eventually, below 30% for the best-case scenario. A different trend is seen for the
50% polyester and 50% cotton recycling scenario in which the relative changes are
much higher in the majority of the impact categories and for the depletion of abiotic
resources elements, it reaches 248%.
The parameters tested and analysed with the analytical method were defined by
different uncertainty range, and therefore, it is relevant to evaluate the importance
of each factor within the impact categories of each scenario. The uncertainty contri-
bution analysis for the parameters included in the recycling scenarios is reported in
Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10.
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Results
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
DR - F
DR
Cotton Scenario
coll
r_eff
e_elec
s_eff
s_elec
sort_eff
sort_elec
sub_elec
t_inc
t_land
virg_sub
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
DR - F
DR
Nylon Scenario
coll
r_eff
r_elec
sort_eff
sort_elec
sub_elec
t_land
virg_sub
wat
Figure 4.9: Uncertainties contribution analysis for cotton and nylon recycling sce-
narios.
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Uncertainty Analysis
57
5
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
DR - F
DR
Polyester Scenario
coll
heat_1
met
r_eff
s_elec
sort_eff
tol
virg_sub
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
DR - F
DR
50% Polyester & 50% Cotton Scenario
nmmo
r_eff_c
r_eff_p
s_eff_c
s_eff_p
s_elec_p
sort_eff_c
sort_eff_p
sort_elec
virg_sub_c
virg_sun_p
wat
Figure 4.10: Uncertainties contribution analysis for polyester and 50% polyester
and 50% cotton recycling scenarios.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Results
In the cotton recycling scenario, the total uncertainty is mainly defined by the
cotton substitution ratio (virg_sub), which contributes more than 69% in each im-
pact category. The uncertainties associated with the sorting, recycling and spinning
efficiencies are responsible for the remaining share. As for the cotton scenario, the
total uncertainty for the nylon scenario, in eleven of the fourteen investigated impact
categories, is mainly due to the parameter defining the nylon substitution ratio. The
uncertainty related to the collection factor (coll) is the main contributor for the hu-
man health non-cancer effect impact category with a percentage of 53.13%, and the
uncertainty of the water factor (wat) contributes for 61.97% to the total uncertainty of
the ionising radiation category. The ozone depletion uncertainty is equally controlled
by the uncertainties of the sorting electricity (sort_elec) and efficiency (sort_elec)
factors which are contributing to 40% each.
The total uncertainty in the polyester scenario is predominantly controlled by the
parameter identifying the amount of methanol consumed in the first phase of the
recycling process as solvent (met) which contributes for more than 75% to the overall
uncertainty in more than half of the impact categories. The parameter representing
the amount of toluene (tol) and the sorting efficiency (sort_eff) are mainly respon-
sible for the remaining portions of uncertainty. For the 50% polyester and the 50%
cotton scenario, the uncertainty contribution analysis is not as straightforward as
for the polyester scenario. Generally, the cotton sorting efficiency (sort_eff_c) and
the cotton substitution ratio (virg_sub_c) are the major contributors to the total
uncertainty in each impact category. Nevertheless, the water consumption in the Ly-
ocell process, represented by the parameter ”wat” is controlling with a percentage of
57.37% the uncertainty in the ionising radiation category, and the polyester substitu-
tion ratio (virg_sub_p) is the main responsible for the depletion of abiotic resources
- fossil category total uncertainty.
4.5
Transport Analysis
There are no recycling plants for textile waste in the region of Veneto, and thus, the
transport from the sorting facility to final destination requires a broad investigation.
The transport analysis aims to evaluate whether the distances between the sorting
facility and the different recycling plants could cause a significant change in the envi-
ronmental performance of the scenarios.
The analysis was carried out excluding the polyester recycling in reason of the
magnitude of the impact scores, which are not comparable with those of other sce-
narios. The polyester facility may be located everywhere in Italy and still be the
one performing the worst among all the systems. The first step of the analysis was
the calculation of the characterised impact scores associated with the treatment and
the transport of one tonne of industrial textile waste generated within Veneto. The
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Transport Analysis
59
calculation was performed for different sorting efficiencies and the options tested are
illustrated in Table 4.17.
Table 4.17: Sorting efficiencies evaluated for the transport analysis.
Options
% to Recycling
% to Incineration
% to Landfill
Option 0
90
1
9
Option 1
55
35
10
Option 2
55
45
0
Option 3
60
30
10
Option 4
60
40
0
Option 5
65
25
10
Option 6
65
35
0
The choice of evaluating different sorting efficiencies was taken as the preliminary
transport analysis, performed comparing the scenarios adopting option 0, leads to
meaningless results. The distances obtained were in the order of millions of kilome-
tres, meaning that the recycling facilities could be located everywhere in the word
without any modification in the ranking of the environmental performances.
The transport analysis was performed for each impact category and comparing
two scenarios at the time:
• Cotton - Nylon;
• Cotton - 50% Polyester and 50% Cotton
• Nylon - 50% Polyester and 50% Cotton 25
To define the kilometres that need to be driven to have one recycling technology to be
preferable to another one, the difference between the impact scores were calculated
for all the 49 possible combinations obtained with the available options of Table 4.17.
Eventually, these differences were divided by the impacts associated with the trans-
port process of the fibre taken into consideration.
The results for the comparison between cotton and nylon are summarised in Ta-
ble 4.18.
Only distances below 1200 kilometres (approximately the length of the
Italian peninsula) are reported as for distances above this threshold the interpreta-
tion is that the recycling facilities can be located everywhere without modifying the
ranking of the environmental performances.
Table 4.18: Transport Analysis results for Cotton - Nylon recycling scenarios.
CC [kg CO2 - Eq]
Sorting efficiencies
Impact scores difference [kg CO2 - Eq]
Distances [km]
Cotton 5 - Nylon 0
-1
49 (cotton)
Cotton 6 - Nylon 0
-8
421 (cotton)
==PAGE:68==
60
4 Results
The distances are always calculated for the scenario performing better, and the result
table can be read as follows. Negative impact score difference means that the cotton
recycling scenario with a sorting facility characterized by a 65% efficiency (Option
5) and with 25% of the waste stream sent to landfill and the remaining 10% to
incineration is performing better than the nylon recycling scenario with a sorting
efficiency of 90% (Option 0) with 9% of the waste stream going to landfill and 1%
to incineration. Therefore, cotton scenario (option 5) is keep performing better than
nylon (option 0) in the climate change impact category, as long as the cotton recycling
plant is within a 49 km radius from the nylon recycling facility.
The results for the comparison between cotton and 50% polyester and 50% cotton
are summarised in Table 4.19.
Table 4.19: Transport Analysis results for Cotton - 50% polyester and 50% cotton
(pc) recycling scenarios.
ME [ kg N - Eq]
Sorting Efficiency
Impact score difference [ kg N - Eq]
Distances [km]
Cotton 4 - PC 0
2.12E-02
973 (pc)
Cotton 3 - PC 0
8.62E-03
395 (pc)
DR - FOSSIL [MJ]
Sorting Efficiency
Impact score difference [MJ]
Distances [km]
Cotton 0 - PC 0
264
1155 (pc)
Cotton 1 - PC 2
-131
1043 (cotton)
Cotton 5 - PC 6
-239
1608 (cotton)
The distances are calculated for the scenario performing better, and for instance,
in the marine eutrophication impact category, it is possible to observe that the impact
score difference between the cotton scenario (option 4) and the polyester and cotton
(option 0) is positive.
A positive difference means that the polyester and cotton
scenario with a sorting efficiency of 90% (Option 0) and with 9% of the waste stream
going to landfill and 1% to incineration is performing better than the cotton scenario
with a sorting efficiency of 60% (option 4).
Therefore, the polyester and cotton
scenario in this assessment remains performing better, as long as the recycling plant
is within 973 km from the cotton recycling plant. The comparison between the nylon
and the 50% polyester and 50% cotton scenario had not generated any interesting
data as all the distances obtained were always above the threshold of 1200 km.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
5.1
Contribution Analysis
The characterised and normalised results of the life cycle impact assessment presented
in section 4.1 demonstrate that the baseline scenarios have positive impacts scores and
therefore are responsible for burdens to the environment. The process contribution
analysis allows identifying the collection as the most positively contributing process in
all the impact categories with the only exception of the depletion of abiotic resource -
elements category for which the sorting process is the most contributing. On the other
side, the waste to energy plant aggregate category is the most negatively contributing
process and thus, is leading to the highest environmental benefits. The explanation
for this lays on the fact that the WTE includes the electricity substitution module,
which provides savings as electricity produced from other resources is avoided. The
only significant difference between the two baseline scenarios results concerns the cli-
mate change and the ozone depletion impact categories. The impact scores for the
textile with impurities are higher in consequence of the landfill process. The industrial
textile waste stream is contaminated with general municipal solid waste, hence there
is an organic fraction which in the landfill undergoes biodegradation with the genera-
tion of methane. The substance contribution analysis supports this conclusion, in the
textile with impurities scenario ”Methane, non-fossil” emissions into air contributes
for 79.70% to the total score for the climate change while the ”Methane, dichloro
difluoro-, CFC-12” emissions into air contribute for 75.89% to the total score for the
ozone depletion.
As far as the recycling scenarios are concerned, the results of the life cycle impact
assessment differ according to the textile fibre investigated as the modelled technolo-
gies for the recycle are profoundly different both in terms of energy sources and
chemicals necessary for the processes. As shown in the graphs in section 4.2, the
recycling processes are always the most contributing in all the scenarios.
The process contribution analysis primary outcome is that for all the recycling
scenario, the collection, the recycling process, the spinning and the virgin substitution
modules are the most contributing processes in all the impact category. Investigating
deeper in the recycling technology, the overall negative impact score is due to the
virgin substitution process which creates benefits for the environments in reason of
the avoided impacts related to the avoided production of virgin materials. On the
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Discussion
other hand, the positive contribution is by cause of the recycling process itself. For
the cotton, nylon and 50% polyester and 50% cotton scenarios the environmental
savings due to the avoided production of virgin textile fibres overcomes the negative
impact due to the recycling processes and thus, leading to overall negative impact
scores. To investigate which factors have a major influence on the environmental
performance of each recycling technology, a process contribution analysis was carried
out. The electricity is accountable for the totality of the impacts in cotton recycling
technology since it is a mechanical process which requires only electricity consump-
tion. Figure 5.1 depicts the results of the nylon technology contribution analysis. The
electricity consumption is the process that contributes most followed by the inert filler
materials and the water employed in the process.
0.00E+00
1.00E-03
2.00E-03
3.00E-03
4.00E-03
5.00E-03
6.00E-03
7.00E-03
8.00E-03
9.00E-03
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
PE
Process Water
Calcium Carbonate
Sodium Chloride
Electricity
Clay
Inert Filler
Sum
Figure 5.1: Nylon recycling technology insight.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Contribution Analysis
63
-5.00E-01
0.00E+00
5.00E-01
1.00E+00
1.50E+00
2.00E+00
2.50E+00
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
DR - F
DR
PE
Methanol
Thermal Energy
Toluene
Electricity
Catalyst
Sum
Figure 5.2: Polyester recycling technology insight.
0.00E+00
1.00E-02
2.00E-02
3.00E-02
4.00E-02
5.00E-02
6.00E-02
7.00E-02
8.00E-02
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
ME
ET
DR - F
DR
PE
NMMO
Electricity
Heat
Water
Sum
Figure 5.3: Polyester and Cotton recycling technology insight.
Figure 5.2 illustrates the results of the analysis performed on the polyester technol-
ogy. Methanol and toluene, which are the solvents used within the DMT production
phase, are contributing the most in all the impact categories.
The two solvents
were modelled with processes retrieved from the Ecoinvent database, and the large
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Discussion
environmental impacts are primarily connected to the production of these ancillary
chemicals.
Figure 5.3 shows the results for the recycling technology employed to recycle the
blended fibre composed of 50% polyester and 50% cotton. It is mainly based on the
Lyocell process, which is a thermal procedure, and indeed, the heat is the major con-
tributor to the impact score of all the impact categories. The NMMO production,
the solvent used in the process, plays a worthwhile role in the human health cancer
effect, the terrestrial ecotoxicity and the depletion of abiotic resources - elements im-
pact categories while the contribution of water consumption is not negligible for the
climate change, the ionising radiation and the depletion of abiotic resources - fossil
impact categories.
The best-case scenario was conceived to evaluate the hypothesis of all the fibres
ideally source segregated and recycled simultaneously, and how suggested by the name
it was expected to be the preferable option for the management of industrial textile
waste. As evidenced in section 4.1 in the table reporting the normalised results, the
best case is not presenting the best score in the majority of the impact categories. The
contribution analysis shows that the impacts of the best case scenario mostly arise
from the polyester recycling technology, which is not levelled by the other recycling
scenarios.
5.2
Interpretation
The environmental performances for the baseline scenarios, modelled based on the
current industrial textile waste management system, were found to be comparable.
Nevertheless, the presence of impurities in the input waste stream is connected with
higher impact scores especially in landfill modules, because of the presence of an or-
ganic fraction which once landfilled undergoes biodegradation with the consequential
production of methane.
The best case scenario and thus, the simultaneous treatment of the textile fibres
are associated with relevant environmental burdens, and it is not an environmentally
preferable solution. It may be more valuable and advantageous to aim attention at the
recycling of those pre-consumer textile waste fractions which can potentially provide
benefits to the environment, rather than focus efforts on separately collecting each
single fibres to treat them. The polyester recycling technology is the worst among the
scenarios analysed since it has the highest impact scores in all the categories analysed
in the life cycle assessment. On the other hand, it is not straightforward to identify
which is the technology with the best performances. The 50% polyester and 50%
cotton scenario has the most significant benefits for climate change, photochemical
ozone formation and for the depletion of abiotic resources, fossil and eventually it has
negative scores in all the other categories. Generally, once excluded the best case,
the cotton scenario is the one performing better, and as a matter of fact, its recycling
technology gets the best scores in ten out of fourteen impact categories. Although
nylon recycling is not the scenario with the best performance in any of the categories,
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Interpretation
65
it is consistent to highlights that this scenario generates damages to the environment
only to the impact categories of the ozone depletion, human health non-cancer effects
and the ionising radiations.
Excluded the polyester scenario, all the recycling scenarios present negative im-
pact scores and thus environmental benefits in all the categories, representing a better
option in comparison to the current waste management system. The process contri-
bution analysis showed that the environmental benefits are mainly due to the virgin
substitution process in reason of the avoided impacts related to the avoided pro-
duction of virgin materials while the environmental burdens are associated with the
recycling technologies themselves. The electricity consumption and the virgin cotton
substitution processes are the main contributors to the impact scores in the cotton
scenario while for the nylon scenario alongside with the collection and the virgin
substitution processes also the electricity, the inert filler and water consumption in
the recycling process play a key role. The impact scores in the polyester scenario
are defined primarily by the recycling technology and specifically by the methanol
and toluene used as the solvent. Finally, the environmental performance of the 50%
polyester and 50% cotton scenario are controlled by the avoided production of both
cotton and polyester as much as the thermal energy, the water and the solvent needed
for the Lyocell process.
The results of the contribution analyses were the basis for the sensitivity and
the uncertainties analysis. In the baseline scenarios, the parameters expressing the
sorting facility was found to be the most sensitive with the highest sensitivity ratio
in all the impact categories. The electricity substitution ratio, the electricity for the
sorting facility and collection fuel consumption are influential factors for the systems.
The contribution analysis for the uncertainty of both scenarios leads to the same
conclusions. The collection (coll) and the sorting efficiency (sort_eff) are the main
contributors to the total variance in each impact category investigated.
The perturbation analysis for the recycling scenarios was carried out testing
the parameters identified in the baselines scenarios and all the factors inserted in
EASETECH for the modelling of the different recycling technologies. All the scenar-
ios result to be sensitive to the efficiencies of the sorting, the spinning and the recycling
processes specific for each fibre and to the substitution ratio for the virgin products.
This common behaviour is due to the main fact that a change in those parameters is
correlated to a change in the waste streams amount. The cotton scenario is primar-
ily sensitive to the sorting efficiency, which is also the factors bringing the highest
share of uncertainty in the system. The parameters representing the efficiency in the
sorting, recycling and spinning processes are accountable for the remaining portion
of uncertainty. The nylon recycling scenario is sensitive to the parameters mentioned
above and additionally to the electricity consumption in the recycling process, which
it is interesting to observe was identified as the most impactful factor in the contri-
bution analysis. The results of the uncertainty contribution analysis report that the
virgin substitution ratio is the main responsible for the scenario uncertainty in eleven
out of fourteen impact category and it is also the process associated to the highest
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Discussion
benefits for the environment. The polyester scenario is sensitive to the efficiency of
the sorting process and to the amount of methanol required for the DMT production,
which is the first step in the recycling of polyester. Moreover, it is relevant to men-
tion that the system is also influenced by the amount of toluene, which is the other
solvent employed in the first phase of the recycling process. The uncertainty results
are coherent to demonstrate that those are the most influential and uncertain param-
eters in the model. The 50% polyester and 50% cotton scenario has environmental
credits because of the avoiding production of both virgin cotton and polyester and
negative impacts associated with the consumption of thermal energy to carry out the
recycling process and with the consumption of NMMO and water. The system is
primarily sensitive to the efficiency for the sorting, the recycling and the spinning
processes, although the highest uncertainties are due to only the cotton sorting effi-
ciency and cotton substitution ratio. The results of the perturbation ad uncertainties
analyses spot that the factors towards which the systems are most sensitive are also
the one responsible for the highest share of the scenario uncertainty. These results,
coupled with those of the contribution analysis allow identifying for each scenario the
parameters affecting the environmental performance for the management of the end
of life of the different fibres within the industrial textile waste stream.
The sensitivity analysis was concluded performing a scenario analysis in which the
marginal technologies for the production of electricity and heat were modified. All
the scenarios result to be sensitive in changes in the electricity, while the analysis for
the heating scenario and the scenario in which are changed simultaneously both the
technologies for heat and electricity resulted in being relevant only for the polyester
and 50% cotton and 50% polyester recycling scenarios. The results for the electricity
scenario analysis are particularly interesting since the baseline scenarios respond to
the change in the electricity technologies with lower impact scores since the saving
from the electricity substitution overcomes the negative scores due to the other pro-
cesses. On the other hand, for the recycling scenarios, the electricity change leads to
an increase in the impact score of all the impact categories. This results may suggest
that a change in the management system adopted for the pre-consumer textile waste
in Italy has to be made as the transition to renewable resources for the production
of electricity have as a consequence an increase in the burdens associated with the
baselines scenario and an enhancement in the benefits associated with the recycling.
Eventually, the transport analysis was performed because of the absence of recy-
cling plants in the geographical area of Italy and specifically Veneto. Therefore the
evaluation of the impacts associated with the distances that the fibres have to cover
between the sorting and the recycling facilities plays a key role in the case study.
The preliminary analysis conducted assumed a sorting efficiency of 90% for all the
fibres did not produce any outstanding results. The ranking between the recycling
scenarios was changing only applying distances of more than ten thousand kilome-
tres, which has no relevance. Nevertheless, the analysis was carried out again but
changing the sorting efficiency, and therefore modifying the waste flows intended for
each treatment facility. In this new asset, relevant distances were obtained for some
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Interpretation
67
impact categories demonstrating that relevance of the transport process. However,
there is no a straightforward method to define the distances that might be travelled,
and they need to be assessed each time a different configuration is adopted in the
waste management system and in particular whether are made changes in the sorting
efficiency.
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The current waste management system implemented in Veneto for the industrial tex-
tile waste was investigated through the analysis of two baseline scenario differing in
the composition of the waste stream to evaluate the influence of the presence of con-
tamination in the textile waste. Additionally, four different scenarios were built up
to evaluate the environmental feasibility of the recycling technologies for the different
textile fibres in the waste stream. The analysis was concluded with a best-case sce-
nario conceived to test the hypothesis of all the textile fibres segregated at the source
and sorted to be recycled simultaneously.
The study resulted in the following conclusions:
• The current textile management represents a burden to the environment.
• The presence of impurities in the waste stream makes worse the environmental
performance of the current textile management system.
• The polyester scenario have the largest environmental impacts in all the cate-
gories investigated in the study.
• The recycling scenarios built up for cotton, nylon, and the blended fibre com-
posed of 50% cotton and 50% polyester are all generating benefits for the envi-
ronment.
• The best-case scenario where all fibres are ideally source segregated and recycled
separately do not present benefits for the environment.
• Waste management strategies focused on single textile waste fibres is advanta-
geous for cotton, nylon and the blended fibre composed of 50% cotton and 50%
polyester.
• The factor representing the efficiency of the sorting process is the most sensi-
tive in all the scenarios analysed. The systems are strongly influenced by the
amount of waste intended to each treatment facility, small changes in the sorting
efficiency lead to considerable changes in the environmental performances.
• The parameters influencing the most the sustainability of Cotton, Nylon and
50% Cotton and 50% Polyester scenarios are the factors representing the sorting
efficiency and the virgin substitution ratio.
==PAGE:77==
6 Conclusion
69
• The methanol and toluene consumptions are the parameters affecting the most
the sustainability of the Polyester Recycling scenario.
• Transport distances are playing a key role in the environmental performance of
the scenarios and are influenced by the efficiency of the sorting facility.
The results obtained depend on the quality of the data obtained in the literature
for textile recycling technologies. As indicated in the introduction, technologies in
this field are still at a developing stage and data in the literature may not be accu-
rate. Taking this into consideration and given the results, it is possible to conclude
that the current waste management system for textile waste is posing threats to the
environment and that an alternative has to be found. The source segregation ap-
pears not to be a beneficial solution for all the textile fibres, and therefore strategies
based on single textile fibres may be beneficial especially for cotton, nylon and for
the blended fibre 50% cotton and 50% polyester. Furthermore, the results highlight
the fundamental importance of the sorting process which has the strongest influence
on the sustainability of all the recycling scenario and which have a deep connection
with the impact associated with the transport process.
The complexity of the textile waste stream as the scarcity of information leads to
the need for further analyses which should be focused on the trade-off between im-
pact categories, on the research of more accurate data for the recycling technologies
for the different textile fibres. Since there are no recycling plants neither in Veneto
nor in Italy, future research should focus on assessing the impact associated with the
construction of these facilities and as consequences to define the optimal distances for
collection and transport.
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Goal Definition
A.1.1
Intended Application
This study aims to evaluate the environmental performance of the current waste
management practise for industrial textile waste in the Italian region of Veneto and to
compare it with improved scenarios implementing recycling technologies for different
fibres. The outcome of the study is supposed to be used by the region of Veneto as
a guideline to improve the current management system for textile waste in terms of
environmental performance and through the implementation of recycling practices.
Furthermore, the results are expected to be useful for textile companies to define
efficient handling of their fibrous waste and therefore, to improve the sustainability
of their products.
A.1.2
Method Assumption and Impact Limitation
The study is limited by the area where it is applied. This work analyses the waste
stream generated and treated within the region of Veneto disregarding the production
of textile waste from other industrial sectors and the import from other regions. The
method chosen in EASETECH to carry out the life cycle impact assessment of the
scenarios is the ”ILCD recommended 2013 Prosuit Global NR w/o LT” which do not
adopt any spatial specificity and therefore the impact scores are calculated as they
could have arisen in any part of Europe.
A.1.3
Reasons for Carrying out the LCA Study and Decision
Context
The region of Veneto has no gained knowledge on life cycle concept for its industrial
textile waste management, and it has not conducted or commissioned an LCA study.
The objective of the study is to evaluate the current waste management system and to
propose alternatives, including the recycling of pre-consumer textile waste. Eventu-
ally, these results are expected to be used as a basis for the environmental assessment
of factors that influence the sustainability of textiles and their end of life. Therefore,
==PAGE:79==
A.1 Goal Definition
71
it is supposed to be used to support decision making. The potential changes that
may be implemented in the waste management system and eventually in textile prod-
ucts are going to influence the present system. The decision context is situated in
Situation ”B: meso/macro-level decision support”.
A.1.4
Target Audience
The intended users of this study are the supervisors, Dr. Valentina Bisinella, Dr.
Anders Damgaard and external reviewers with knowledge on LCA. Also, this project
will be of interest for the region of Veneto and specifically the office responsible for the
Environment and the textile and clothing industries interested in the improvement of
their products.
A.1.5
Comparative Studies to Be Disclosed to the Public
This study is not disclosed to the public.
A.1.6
Commissioner of the Study and Other Influential Actors
This LCA study is commissioned by the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The region of Veneto and the textile and clothing industries belonging to the textiles
districts of Treviso and Vicenza are expected to influence the outcome
==PAGE:80==
72
A Appendix
A.2
Scope Definition
A.2.1
Deliverables
The deliverables of this study are: (i) detailed life cycle model for the current indus-
trial textile waste management system in Veneto, (ii) detailed life cycle models for the
industrial textile waste recycle, (iii) life cycle impact assessment and interpretation
of the results for all the scenarios evaluated.
A.2.2
Function, Functional Unit and Reference Flow
LCA is an environmental assessment which focuses on functions first and, after that,
on the systems that are necessary to carry out these functions. The function of the
presented system is the collection, the sorting, the transportation and the treating
of industrial textile waste generated within the region of Veneto and collected from
private companies. The system must sufficiently handle the waste properly and treat
it to reduce its environmental burden. Additionally, the system must accomplish the
Italian and European legislation as defined by the Italian Legislative Decree 152/2006
(Environmental Protection Code) and the Waste Framework Directive (European
Commission, 2008).
The importance of defining the function is based on the fact that the study has
to be as transparent as possible and allow future comparisons.
It is essential to
define a functional unit, which provides the qualitative and quantitative aspects of
the function. The functional unit of this study is the management of pre-consumer
textile waste generated within the region of Veneto during the 2017/2018 year, in
accordance with the legislation mentioned above. The amount corresponding to this
statement is 33140 tonnes (ISPRA 2018), but the study is carried out adopting a
reference flow of 1 ton to allow the scale-up of the results to any amount of waste is
considered significant to evaluate. The composition of industrial waste generated in
Veneto was not available and therefore for the scope of this LCA has been assumed the
composition reported in Table A.1 based on a study case realized in Turkey (Barışçı
and Öncel 2014).
Table A.1: Waste Composition.
Waste Fraction
Percentage [%]
Amount [kg]
Cotton
53
530
Acrylic
17
170
Polyester
16
160
Nylon
4
30
Viscose
3
30
Elastane
1
10
Municipal solid waste, Southern Europe
6
60
==PAGE:81==
A.2 Scope Definition
73
Summing up the percentages of textile fibres in the waste it is obtained 94%.
The remaining 6% in the waste flow is assumed to be municipal solid waste since it is
relevant to model the influence of impurities as a consequence of incorrect segregation
of textile at the source. The composition of these impurities is modelled with the
EASETECH process for the generation of municipal solid waste in Southern Europe.
The material fractions are reported in percentages in Table A.2.
Table A.2: Municipal
Solid
Waste,
Southern
Europe
2010,
EASETECH process.
Material fraction
%
Vegetable food waste
1.5978
Animal food waste
0.5022
Magazines
0.0732
Newsprints
0.2682
Advertisements
0.2586
Books, phone books
0.0174
Office paper
0.0588
Other clean paper
0.1638
Paper and carton containers
0.225
Other clean cardboard
0.0792
Milk cartons (carton/plastic)
0.1164
Juice cartons (carton/plastic/aluminium)
0.0102
Kitchen towels
0.0474
Dirty paper
0.036
Soft plastic
0.2376
Plastic bottles
0.1782
Hard plastic
0.0726
Non-recyclable plastic
0.1716
Yard waste, flowers
0.36
Animal excrements and bedding (straw)
0.012
Diapers, sanitary towels, tampons
0.24
Cotton, bandages
0.0018
Disposable sanitary products (cloths, gloves)
0.0036
Wood
0.3
Textiles
0.12
Shoes, leather
0.006
Rubber
0.0006
Plastic products (toys, hangers, pens)
0.0054
Cigarette butts
0.003
Other combustibles
0.0126
Vacuum cleaner bags
0.0132
Clear glass
0.1362
==PAGE:82==
74
A Appendix
Green glass
0.1362
Brown glass
0.1362
Non-recyclable glass
0.0114
Beverage cans (aluminium)
0.0204
Aluminium foil and containers
0.0246
Food cans (tinplate/steel)
0.0636
Plastic-coated aluminium foil
0.003
Other metals
0.0714
Soil
0.0156
Stones, concrete
0.0372
Ash
0.0138
Ceramics
0.0258
Cat litter
0.0636
Batteries
0.012
Other non-combustibles
0.0174
Dirty cardboard new
0.0186
To conclude, the textile fractions in EASETECH have been characterized adding
the specific chemical composition for textile waste generated in Italy and reported in
Table A.3.
Table A.3: Chemical composition textile waste.
Chemical Composition
Percentage %
H2O
25
O2 without H2O
27
H without H2O
5
C bio
39
C foss
0
S
0.3
N
3.1
P
0
Cl
0.3
Br
0
F
0.02
As
0
Ba
0
Cd
0.0002
Co
0
Cr
0
Cu
0.0058
Hg
0.0001
Mn
0
==PAGE:83==
A.2 Scope Definition
75
Ni
0
Pb
0.0024
Sb
0
Se
0
Sn
0
Zn
0.01
Si
0.2625
Fe
0
Ca
0
Al
0
K
0
Na
0
A.2.3
LCI Modelling and Handling of Multifunctional Processes
To identify the correct Life Cycle Inventory modelling framework to implement, it is
necessary to identify the multi-functionality of the system. A product or a system can
deliver primary functions which arise intentionally, and it also may deliver secondary
functions usually with low or no relevance for the final users Hauschild, Rosenbaum,
and Olsen 2018.
In the present study, the different treatment options for waste are multi-functional,
as their primary function is the handling of the waste while secondary functions are
arising during the process. Recycling processes lead to the substitution of virgin ma-
terials while avoiding the disposal of the waste. Also, the incineration reduces the
volume of the waste, and in the meantime, it produces energy in the form of both
heat and electricity. Landfilling results in the production of methane generated by
the presence of organic waste, and eventually, the anaerobic digestion leads to the
production of energy and digestates which may be used as substitutes for synthetic
fertilizers.
The LCI modelling framework for decision context B is consequential with system
expansion with the hierarchy accordingly with the ISO 14044 standard IS0 2006 and
the ILCD guidelines ILCD 2010. Multi-functionalities are addresses with system ex-
pansion, and therefore data are consequential when available, otherwise attributional
to the point of substitution (average data).
A.2.4
System Boundaries and Completeness Requirements
The system boundaries delineate the confines between the foreground system repre-
sented by the waste management system and the technosphere that is the surrounding
economy. For this study, two different system boundaries are defined. The first one
represented in Figure 3.2 displays the current waste management for industrial textile
==PAGE:84==
76
A Appendix
waste in Veneto while the second one pictured in Figure 3.3 shows the expanded and
improved waste management system which incorporate the recycling of textile fibres.
The dashed line represents the boundaries between foreground and background
systems, the boxes in the background system symbolize the inputs required for the
processes and their outputs and the dashed arrows represent the avoided production
of virgin materials and energy in the background system, while the arrows repre-
sent the waste flow. Figure A.1 represents the current waste management system
implemented in the region of Veneto for industrial textile waste. Once, the waste is
generated, private companies collect it and drive it to the sorting facility where 90%
of the waste flow is sent to the landfill and 10% to the energy recovery facility. The
methane produced in the landfill site is not recovered, but instead, it is burnt in flares.
On the other hand, in the incineration plant are produced electricity, heat, bottom
ash and fly ash. The electricity is recovered and fed in the grid while the heat is not
as there is not district heating in Veneto. The fly ashes are sold to companies for
”underground reutilization” in exhausted salt mines in Germany, the bottom ashes
are used to substitutes primary or secondary aggregates. Eventually, from bottom
ashes are also recovered metals like aluminium and iron. Figure A.2 Represents an
alternative waste management system which includes the recycling of textile waste.
The model has been built up as the previous one with one main change. In the sorting
facility, the textile fibres segregated at the source are separated and sent to the recy-
cling facility where are treated and spun to obtain a new fibre. The residues produced
during the process are sent to the energy recovery facility. Transport to each treat-
ment facility is included in both scenarios since it contributes to the environmental
impact of the whole waste management systems.
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Scope Definition
77
Figure A.1: Current Scenario System Boundaries.
==PAGE:86==
78
A Appendix
Figure A.2: Recycling Scenario System Boundaries.
==PAGE:87==
A.2 Scope Definition
79
A.2.5
Representativeness of LCI Data
A.2.5.1
Geographical Representativeness
The study is carried out for the region of Veneto in the north-east of Italy. Data
regarding the industrial textile waste are expected to be found for the geographical
area of interest, and whenever they are not available, data for the country of Italy
are considered representative. The technologies implemented for the landfilling and
the energy recovery of textiles are modelled with data from the facilities present on
the regional territory. The modelling of recycling technologies are expected to be
done with processes as much as possible geographically representative of Veneto, or
in case it is not possible with data for Italy and countries of south - centre Europe in
accordance with their climatic and technological similarity. The electricity and heat
used in the processes of the models are explicitly modelled for Italy, since the exact
mix of electricity sources within Veneto may not be available.
A.2.5.2
Time-related Representativeness
This study is considered to be representative for five years. The definition of a time
frame for the results is a crucial step for this LCA as waste management practises
and technologies are constantly evolving. So far, several recycling technologies are
available only in laboratory scale, and the procedures to scale them up for industrial
application are in development and may introduce new alternatives for the handling
of this waste stream.
Additionally, new waste policies and regulations are being
issued by national and European authorities leading to changes in the composition
and amount of waste generated as in the treatment systems implemented.
Also,
behavioural changes and the raised environmental awareness of industries have an
influence on the amount and composition of the generated waste.
A.2.5.3
Technological Representativeness
The technologies implemented for the treatment of industrial textile waste, as the
landfill and the waste to energy plant are modelled with data representative for the
region of Veneto. However, few recycling technologies are available in the global mar-
ket, and thus, there is no data representative for Veneto. For all the other processes,
data for Italy or other south - centre Europe countries are considered representative
in accordance with their climatic and technological similarities.
A.2.6
Basis for Impact Assessment
The impact categories evaluated in this study are: Climate Change (kg CO2-eq),
ozone depletion (kg CFC-11-eq), Human Toxicity (cancer and non-cancer effects,
CTUh), Particulate Matter (PM2.5-eq), Ionising Radiation (kBq U235-eq), Photo-
chemical Ozone Formation (kg NMVOC), Terrestrial Acidification (mol H+-eq), Ter-
==PAGE:88==
80
A Appendix
restrial Eutrophication (mol N-eq), Freshwater Eutrophication (kg P-eq), Marine
Eutrophication (kg N-eq), Freshwater Ecotoxicity (CTUe), Depletion of Fossil Abi-
otic Resources (MJ) and Depletion of Elements (kg antimony-eq) as recommended
by EC-JRC 2011.
The solid waste management systems are modelled with the EASETECH software
and adopting the method ”ILCD recommended 2013 Prosuit Global NR w/o LT” for
the LCIA. This method does not account for emissions that will occur in more than
100 years and the normalization references are based on Laurent et al. 2013.
A.2.7
Requirements for Comparative Studies
This LCA study is aimed for internal use only from the region of Veneto and textile
and clothing industries. Special requirements for comparative studies are demanded
whether the study and its results are disclosed to the public, and therefore, special
requirements are not necessarily fulfilled.
A.2.8
Critical Review Needs
A critical review is not needed as the LCA study is not disclosed to the public.
==PAGE:89==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
81
A.3
Life Cycle Inventory
Table A.4: Normalized Textile Waste Composition.
Waste Fraction
Percentage [%]
Cotton
56.38
Acrylic
18.09
Polyester
17.02
Nylon
4.26
Viscose
3.19
Elastane
1.06
Municipal solid waste, Southern Europe
0
Table A.5: Landfill Distance.
Province
Address
Distance to Landfill [km]
Treviso
Maser: Via dei Rizzi 4
107
Belluno
Alpago: Via dell´Industria 11
210
Rovigo
Badia Polesine: Via A.Volta 221/267
71
Vicenza
Quinto Vicentino: Via Stradone 1/A
54
Verona
Legnago: Via Ponzina 1/D
41
Venezia
San Doná di Piave: Via Argine di Mezzo 25
158
Padova
Teolo: Via Meucci 2/A
89
Table A.6: Energy Recovery Facility Distance.
Province
Address
Distance to Landfill [km]
Treviso
Maser: Via dei Rizzi 4
54
Belluno
Longarone: Via Zin Villanova 18
124
Rovigo
Rovigo: Via Amendola 12
47
Vicenza
Quinto Vicentino: Via Stradone 1/A
44
Verona
Legnago: Via Ponzina 1/D
95
Venezia
San Doná di Piave: Via Argine di Mezzo 25
65
Padova
Teolo: Via Meucci 2/A
25
==PAGE:90==
82
A Appendix
Table A.7: Ancillary Materials (Susanna Andreasi Bassi 2019).
Process
Amount
Unit
WtE_SodiumHydroxide
0.0008285
kg/kg input
WtE_CalciumCarbonate
0.004835
kg/kg input
WtE_Water
0.51
kg/kg input
WtE_HydratedLime
0.00167
kg/kg input
WtE_ActivatedCarbon
0.000833333
kg/kg input
WtE_Ammonia
0.001515
kg/kg input
Table A.8: Input Specific Emissions (Susanna Andreasi Bassi 2019).
Process
Amount
Unit
WtE_emiss_TC_air_C
99
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Cl
0.37865
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_S
10.495
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_As
0.0121
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Cd
0.0064
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Cr
0.0394
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Cu
0.002355
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Sb
0.119
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Pb
0.029905
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Zn
0.0125
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Ni
0.0329
%
WtE_emiss_TC_air_Hg
0.7476
%
Table A.9: Process Specific Emissions (Susanna Andreasi Bassi 2019).
Process
Amount
Unit
WtE_emiss_CO
5,46667
kg/kg input
WtE_emiss_dioxins
4.60E-14
kg/kg input
WtE_emiss_HCl
0.000017425
kg/kg input
WtE_emiss_HF
0.00000091
kg/kg input
WtE_emiss_NOx
0.000882375
kg/kg input
WtE_emiss_SOx
3,94088
kg/kg input
WtE_emiss_PM
0.0000088
kg/kg input
==PAGE:91==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
83
Table A.10: Lower Heating Value.
Waste Composition
LHV (MJ/Kg)
Reference
Cotton
20.2
Tiainen 2017
Acrylic
22.3
Bessi et al. 2015
Polyester
21.2
Tiainen 2017
Nylon
30.1
Shen and Patel 2008
Elastane
22.3
Bessi et al. 2015
Viscose - Rayon
16.3
Shen and Patel 2008
Table A.11: Processes on EASETECH: Textile Baseline Sce-
nario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.4
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer: Landfill = 90% Incineration =
10%; External Process: Marginal Electricity IT =
0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
==PAGE:92==
84
A Appendix
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtEElectricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
Table A.12: Processes on EASETECH: Textile with Impurities
Baseline Scenario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.1
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer: Landfill = 90% Incineration =
10%; External Process: Marginal Electricity IT =
0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
==PAGE:93==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
85
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtEElectricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
==PAGE:94==
86
A Appendix
Table A.13: Recycling cotton scenario Mass Balance for sorting process.
Material fraction
Recycling Facility
Landfill
Energy Recovery
Cotton
90% [477 kg]
9% [47.7 kg]
1% [5.3 kg]
Acrylic
0% [0 kg]
90% [153 kg]
10% [17 kg]
Polyester
0% [0 kg]
90% [144 kg]
10% [16 kg]
Nylon
0% [0 kg]
90% [36 kg]
10% [4 kg]
Elastane
0% [0 kg]
90% [9 kg]
10% [1 kg]
Viscose
0% [0 kg]
90% [27 kg]
10% [3 kg]
Municipal Solid waste
0% [0 kg]
90% [54 kg]
10% [6 kg]
Table A.14: Processes on EASETECH: Recycling Cotton Sce-
nario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.1
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer:see Table A.13; External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
==PAGE:95==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
87
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtE-Electricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
Transportation Recycling
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Cutting and Shredding
Material Transfer: Recycled = 96%, Residues = 4%
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = 0.3639
kWh
Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 90%, Residues = 10%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 1.714
Kwh
Virgin Cotton Substitution
Cotton fibre, cotton production, ROW = -1 kg
==PAGE:96==
88
A Appendix
Figure A.3: Recycling Cotton Scenario EASETECH.
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
89
Table A.15: Recycling nylon scenario Mass Balance for sorting process.
Material fraction
Recycling Facility
Landfill
Energy Recovery
Cotton
0% [0 kg]
90% [477 kg]
10% [53 kg]
Acrylic
0% [0 kg]
90% [153 kg]
10% [17 kg]
Polyester
0% [0 kg]
90% [144 kg]
10% [16 kg]
Nylon
90% [36 kg]
9% [3.6 kg]
1% [0.4 kg]
Elastane
0% [0 kg]
90% [9 kg]
10% [1 kg]
Viscose
0% [0 kg]
90% [27 kg]
10% [3 kg]
Municipal Solid waste
0% [0 kg]
90% [54 kg]
10% [6 kg]
Table A.16: Processes on EASETECH: Recycling Nylon Sce-
nario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.1
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer: see Table A.15; External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
==PAGE:98==
90
A Appendix
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtE-Electricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
Transportation Recycling
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Nylon Recycling Facility
Material Transfer: Recycled = 90%, Residues = 10%
External Process: Process water from surface water,
RER, 2005, ELCD = 28.37 kg
External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 5.51
kWh
External Process: clay, market fror clay, ROW =
0.04612 kg
External Process: inert filler, market foer inert filler,
GLO = 4.394 kg
External Process:
Calcium carbonate, limestone,
CaCO3 > 63 microns, EU-27, 2006, ELCD = 0.1035
kg
External
Process:Sodium
chloride,
1996,
RER,
ELCD = 0.01166 kg
Virgin Nylon Substitution
nylon 6, nylon 6 production, RER = -1 kg
==PAGE:99==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
91
Figure A.4: Nylon Recycling technology System Boundaries )Aquafil 2018.
==PAGE:100==
92
A Appendix
Figure A.5: Recycling Nylon Scenario.
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
93
Table A.17: Recycling polyester scenario Mass Balance for sorting process.
Material fraction
Recycling Facility
Landfill
Energy Recovery
Cotton
0% [0 kg]
90% [477 kg]
10% [53 kg]
Acrylic
0% [0 kg]
90% [153 kg]
10% [17 kg]
Polyester
90% [144 kg]
9% [14.4 kg]
1% [1.6 kg]
Nylon
0% [0 kg]
90% [36 kg]
10% [4 kg]
Elastane
0% [0 kg]
90% [9 kg]
10% [1 kg]
Viscose
0% [0 kg]
90% [27 kg]
10% [3 kg]
Municipal Solid waste
0% [0 kg]
90% [54 kg]
10% [6 kg]
Table A.19: Processes on EASETECH: Recycling Polyester Sce-
nario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.1
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer: see Table A.17; External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
==PAGE:102==
94
A Appendix
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtE-Electricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
Transportation Recycling
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Polyester Recycling Process
Material Transfer: Recycled = 88.5%, Residues =
11.5%
External Process: methanol, market for methanol,
GLO = 12.6 kg
External Process: Marginal Space Heating1 = 10.81
MJ
External Process: toluene, liquid, market for toluene,
liquid, ROW = 3.468 kg
External Process: Marginal Electricity = 0.83 kWH
External Process:
manganese sulfate, market for
manganese sulfate, GLO = 0.1 kg
External Process: Marginal Space Heating2 = 3.454
MJ
Polyester Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 97%, Residues = 3%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 0.0033
Kwh
Virgin Polyester Substitution
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) granulate; amor-
phous, 1999, RER, ELCD = -1 kg
==PAGE:103==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
95
Table A.20: Recycling Polyester and Cotton Scenario Mass Balance for Sorting Pro-
cess.
Material fraction
Recycling Facility
Landfill
Energy Recovery
Cotton
30.19% [160 kg]
62.83% [333 kg]
6.98% [37 kg]
Acrylic
0% [0 kg]
90% [153 kg]
10% [17 kg]
Polyester
100% [160 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
Nylon
0% [0 kg]
90% [36 kg]
10% [4 kg]
Elastane
0% [0 kg]
90% [9 kg]
10% [1 kg]
Viscose
0% [0 kg]
90% [27 kg]
10% [3 kg]
Municipal Solid waste
0% [0 kg]
90% [54 kg]
10% [6 kg]
Table A.21: Processes on EASETECH: Recycling Polyester and
Cotton Scenario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.1
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer: see Table A.20; External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
==PAGE:104==
96
A Appendix
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtE-Electricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
Transportation Recycling
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
50% Cotton + 50% Polyester
Recycling Facility
Material Transfer: Recycled Cotton = 97%, Residues
= 3%
Material Transfer:
Recycled Polyester = 100%,
Residues = 0%
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity1
IT
=
0.00556 kWh
External Process: Marginal Space Heating1 IT1 =
1.72 MJ
External Process: LIMITED - Ammonia (NH3) =
0.13 kg
External Process: methanol, market for methanol,
GLO = 0.25 kg
External Process: Methylamine Production = 0.23
kg
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity2
IT
=
0.005566 kWh
External Process: Marginal Space Heating2 IT =
4.24 MJ
==PAGE:105==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
97
External Process: diethylene glycol, market for di-
ethylene glycol, GLO = 0.44 kg
External Process: NMM Production = 0.51 kg
External Process: Marginal Space Heating3 IT =
3.93 MJ
External Process: Marginal Electricity3 IT = 0.025
kWh
External
Process:
hydrogen
peroxide,
without
waster, in 50% solution state, hydrogen peroxide pro-
duction, product in 50% solution state, RER = 0.5
kg
External Process: NMMO Production = 0.025 kg
External Process: Marginal Electricity4 IT = 0.001
kWh
External Process: Marginal Space Heating4 IT = 5
MJ
External Process: process water, RER, ELCD, 2005
- corrected = 19.4 kg
Polyester Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 97%, Residues = 3%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 0.0033
Kwh
Cotton Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 90%, Residues = 10%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 1.714
Kwh
Virgin Cotton Substitution
Cotton fibre, cotton production, ROW = -1 kg
Virgin Polyester Substitution
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) granulate; amor-
phous, 1999, RER, ELCD = -1 kg
==PAGE:106==
98
A Appendix
Table A.22: Best Case Scenario Mass Balance for sorting process.
Material
Cotton
Nylon
Polyester
Polyester and Cotton
Landfill
Energy
fraction
Recycling
Recycling
Recycling
Recycling
Recovery
Cotton
84.9% [450 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg] ]
15.1% [80 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
Acrylic
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
90% [153 kg]
10% [17 kg]
Polyester
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
50% [80 kg]
50% [80 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
Nylon
0% [0 kg]
100% [40 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
Elastane
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
90% [9 kg]
10% [1 kg]
Viscose
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
90% [27 kg]
10% [3 kg]
Municiapal
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
0% [0 kg]
90% [54 kg]
10% [6 kg]
solid waste
==PAGE:107==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
99
Table A.23: Processes on EASETECH: Best Case Scenario.
Module Names
Modelling Data
Textile Waste
Material generation, Composition reported in Ta-
ble A.1
Collection
External Process: Collection Vehicle, 10t Euro 3, ur-
ban traffic, 1 liter diesel, 2006 = 0.00907*1 l*km
Sorting Facility
Material Transfer: see Table A.22; External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.07 kWh
Transportation Landfill
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 107 km
Construction and Operation
of landfilling
Marginal Electricity IT = 0.008 kWh
LFG - Landfill gas generation
- moderate condition
Landfill gas Generation:
1st order decay rate for
methane generation = 0.021 yE-01
LFG - Addition of substances
No changes
LFG - Gas collection system -
Average performing landfill
No changes
Leaking of gas
Leaking = 2%
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- daily cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- intermediate cover
No changes
LFG - Oxidation in top cover
- final cover (average perform-
ing landfill)
No changes
Venting
No changes
LFG - Combustion and treat-
ment in flare
No changes
Transportation Incineration
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 65 km
WTE - Change of energy con-
tent, generic, DK, 2012
No changes
Waste
to
energy
plant,
generic, IT
Modelled with data reported in Table A.7, Table A.8,
Table A.9; Transfer coefficient for EnergyElectricity
= 24%
Utilization as ”Underground
Mining” in Germany
External Process: Marginal electricity IT = 0.028
kWh
Fe scrap recycling
No changes
WtE-Electricity Substitution
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = -1/3.6
kWh
Bottom Ash Landfill
External Process: Extraction of sub-base material -
gravel (L/S 10) = -1 kg
==PAGE:108==
100
A Appendix
Aluminium recycling
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity
IT
=
0.010*0.93 kWh;
Marginal Space Heating IT =
4.040*0.93 MJ
Substitution Aluminium Mar-
ket ratio 100%
No changes
Waste treatment landfill met-
als
No changes
Transportation
Recycling
Cotton
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Transportation Recycling Ny-
lon
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Transportation
Recycling
Polyester
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Transportation
Recycling
Polyester and Cotton
Input material = Output material; External Process:
Truck, 28 - 32t, Euro 5, highway = 1 km
Cotton Recycling Facility
Material Transfer: Recycled = 96%, Residues = 4%
External Process: Marginal Electricity IT = 0.3639
kWh
Cotton Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 90%, Residues = 10%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 1.714
Kwh
Nylon Recycling Facility
Material Transfer: Recycled = 90%, Residues = 10%
External Process: Process water from surface water,
RER, 2005, ELCD = 28.37 kg
External Process:
Marginal Electricity IT = 5.51
kWh
External Process: clay, market fror clay, ROW =
0.04612 kg
External Process: inert filler, market foer inert filler,
GLO = 4.394 kg
External Process:
Calcium carbonate, limestone,
CaCO3 > 63 microns, EU-27, 2006, ELCD = 0.1035
kg
External
Process:Sodium
chloride,
1996,
RER,
ELCD = 0.01166 kg
Polyester Recycling Process
Material Transfer: Recycled = 88.5%, Residues =
11.5%
External Process: methanol, market for methanol,
GLO = 12.6 kg
External Process: Marginal Space Heating1 = 10.81
MJ
==PAGE:109==
A.3 Life Cycle Inventory
101
External Process: toluene, liquid, market for toluene,
liquid, ROW = 3.468 kg
External Process: Marginal Electricity = 0.83 kWh
External Process:
manganese sulfate, market for
manganese sulfate, GLO = 0.1 kg
External Process: Marginal Space Heating2 = 3.454
MJ
Polyester Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 97%, Residues = 3%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 0.0033
Kwh
50% Cotton + 50% Polyester
Recycling Facility
Material Transfer: Recycled Cotton = 97%, Residues
= 3%
Material Transfer:
Recycled Polyester = 100%,
Residues = 0%
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity1
IT
=
0.00556 kWh
External Process: Marginal Space Heating1 IT1 =
1.72 MJ
External Process: LIMITED - Ammonia (NH3) =
0.13 kg
External Process: methanol, market for methanol,
GLO = 0.25 kg
External Process: Methylamine Production = 0.23
kg
External
Process:
Marginal
Electricity2
IT
=
0.005566 kWh
External Process: Marginal Space Heating2 IT =
4.24 MJ
External Process: diethylene glycol, market for di-
ethylene glycol, GLO = 0.44 kg
External Process: NMM Production = 0.51 kg
External Process: Marginal Space Heating3 IT =
3.93 MJ
External Process: Marginal Electricity3 IT = 0.025
kWh
External
Process:
hydrogen
peroxide,
without
waster, in 50% solution state, hydrogen peroxide pro-
duction, product in 50% solution state, RER = 0.5
kg
External Process: NMMO Production = 0.025 kg
External Process: Marginal Electricity4 IT = 0.001
kWh
==PAGE:110==
102
A Appendix
External Process: Marginal Space Heating4 IT = 5
MJ
External Process: process water, RER, ELCD, 2005
- corrected = 19.4 kg
Polyester Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 97%, Residues = 3%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 0.0033
Kwh
Cotton Spinning
Material Transfer: Spinned = 90%, Residues = 10%
External Process = Marginal Electricity IT = 1.714
Kwh
Virgin Cotton Substitution
Cotton fibre, cotton production, ROW = -1 kg
Virgin Nylon Substitution
nylon 6, nylon 6 production, RER = -1 kg
Virgin Polyester Substitution
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) granulate; amor-
phous, 1999, RER, ELCD = -1 kg
==PAGE:111==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
103
A.4
Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
A.4.1
Characterized Results
Table A.24: Characterized Results Textile Baseline Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
3.26E+01
-5.36E-07
3.08E-08
7.35E-06
2.27E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.55
1.84E-07
4.16E-08
4.16E-07
7.25E-04
LFG
-
Landfill
gas
generation
(1)
-
moderate
conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas (5)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting (4e)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.47E+01
-2.50E-06
-2.09E-07
-3.85E-06
-5.77E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:112==
104
A Appendix
Textile waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
1.73
3.86E-08
5.66E-09
5.42E-07
1.09E-03
Fe scrap recycling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
9.38E-04
2.35E-10
1.94E-11
3.17E-10
4.72E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.08E-02
1.34E-10
2.24E-09
2.36E-09
1.46E-06
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.51E-06
2.21E-02
Transportation
Landfill
5.12
1.84E-09
7.74E-09
1.94E-06
4.96E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.46E-01
1.24E-10
5.22E-10
1.31E-07
3.35E-05
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.25: Characterized Results Textile Baseline Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
8.46E-02
3.61E-01
2.92E-01
1.47
-2.01E-04
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
6.16E-03
1.11E-02
8.95E-03
3.87E-02
7.08E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare (4a)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:113==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
105
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-6.96E-02
-3.84E-02
-2.67E-02
-1.54E-01
-9.78E-04
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
5.25E-02
9.16E-02
7.55E-02
3.88E-01
1.07E-06
Fe scrap recycling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
6.05E-06
1.24E-06
4.86E-07
4.52E-06
9.18E-08
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.76E-05
5.17E-05
4.83E-05
2.20E-04
2.85E-07
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.38E-05
Transportation
Landfill
7.27E-03
1.73E-02
1.71E-02
7.50E-02
4.38E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.90E-04
1.17E-03
1.15E-03
5.06E-03
2.95E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:114==
106
A Appendix
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.26: Characterized Results Textile Baseline Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
1.33E-01
4.07
4.38E+02
-2.29E-04
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.29E-03
5.55E-01
4.47E+01
7.78E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare (4a)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.13E-02
-6.61
-2.51E+02
-1.08E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:115==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
107
Textile waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
7.81E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.53E-02
6.67E-02
2.27E+01
1.02E-06
Fe scrap recycling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.69E-07
5.98E-04
1.80E-02
1.01E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.93E-05
1.13E-01
1.48E-01
6.38E-08
Collection
9.07E-02
3.11
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
Transportation
Landfill
6.57E-03
2.12
6.87E+01
3.91E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.44E-04
1.43E-01
4.64
2.64E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.27: Characterized Results Textile with Impurities Base-
line Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Sum
6.58E+01
2.36E-05
-7.37E-09
7.44E-06
2.26E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.55
1.84E-07
4.16E-08
4.16E-07
7.25E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
6.57E-01
4.53E-07
2.35E-12
6.80E-11
0.00
==PAGE:116==
108
A Appendix
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
3.24E-01
4.34E-07
2.45E-10
2.78E-09
8.14E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.58E+01
1.15E-05
5.90E-11
1.80E-09
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
7.13
5.44E-06
2.79E-11
8.99E-10
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
7.43
6.30E-06
3.16E-11
1.12E-09
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.44E+01
-2.45E-06
-2.05E-07
-3.77E-06
-5.65E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.57
3.86E-08
6.28E-09
5.90E-07
1.09E-03
Fe scrap recycling
-1.75E-01
-9.41E-09
-2.93E-08
-1.60E-08
-1.79E-04
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.25E-03
3.13E-10
2.58E-11
4.21E-10
6.28E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.38E-02
1.72E-10
2.88E-09
3.03E-09
1.88E-06
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.51E-06
2.21E-02
Transportation
Landfill
5.12
1.84E-09
7.74E-09
1.94E-06
4.96E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.46E-01
1.24E-10
5.22E-10
1.31E-07
3.35E-05
==PAGE:117==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
109
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.38E-01
-1.27E-08
-1.49E-08
-3.61E-08
-1.22E-04
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
1.86E-05
3.98E-13
4.54E-12
3.45E-12
1.41E-08
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.00E-02
1.70E-09
1.79E-10
2.63E-09
5.21E-06
Table A.28: Characterized Results Textile with Impurities Base-
line Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
7.09E-02
3.78E-01
2.94E-01
1.48
-1.96E-04
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
6.16E-03
1.11E-02
8.95E-03
3.87E-02
7.08E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
3.08E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
2.09E-03
2.12E-03
7.78E-03
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
7.44E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
3.36E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
3.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:118==
110
A Appendix
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-6.82E-02
-3.76E-02
-2.62E-02
-1.50E-01
-9.58E-04
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
5.25E-02
9.16E-02
7.55E-02
3.88E-01
1.07E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-2.40E-03
-3.45E-04
4.54E-04
-2.71E-04
-6.75E-06
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
8.05E-06
1.65E-06
6.47E-07
6.02E-06
1.22E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.26E-05
6.63E-05
6.21E-05
2.83E-04
3.65E-07
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.38E-05
Transportation
Landfill
7.27E-03
1.73E-02
1.71E-02
7.50E-02
4.38E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.90E-04
1.17E-03
1.15E-03
5.06E-03
2.95E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.27E-02
-4.70E-04
-1.07E-03
-1.39E-03
-9.11E-06
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
4.82E-07
9.04E-08
8.30E-08
3.28E-07
5.58E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
4.75E-05
5.60E-05
4.56E-05
1.44E-04
6.67E-07
Table A.29: Characterized Results Textile with Impurities Base-
line Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
1.34E-01
3.66
4.40E+02
-2.66E-04
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.29E-03
5.55E-01
4.47E+01
7.78E-05
==PAGE:119==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
111
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
4.11E-06
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.10E-04
4.92E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.06E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.09E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
5.99E-05
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.11E-02
-6.48
-2.46E+02
-1.06E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
7.81E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.53E-02
8.03E-02
2.27E+01
1.02E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-2.44E-05
-3.88E-01
-1.63
-1.35E-05
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
2.25E-07
7.95E-04
2.40E-02
1.35E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.48E-05
1.45E-01
1.90E-01
8.19E-08
Collection
9.07E-02
3.11
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
==PAGE:120==
112
A Appendix
Transportation
Landfill
6.57E-03
2.12
6.87E+01
3.91E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.44E-04
1.43E-01
4.64
2.64E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.25E-04
-2.09E-01
-1.92
-4.71E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.61E-08
1.87E-04
2.04E-04
4.05E-12
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.11E-05
4.51E-03
1.71E-01
7.35E-07
Table A.30: Characterized
Results
Recycling
Cotton
Sce-
nario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kg PM2.5-Eq
Total
-2.73E+02
-9.31E-05
-2.02E-05
-4.05E-04
-6.64E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.33
9.64E-08
2.18E-08
2.18E-07
3.79E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
6.62E-01
4.57E-07
2.37E-12
6.85E-11
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
3.26E-01
4.38E-07
2.47E-10
2.81E-09
8.21E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.60E+01
1.16E-05
5.96E-11
1.82E-09
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
7.19
5.48E-06
2.81E-11
9.06E-10
0.00
==PAGE:121==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
113
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
7.45
6.31E-06
3.16E-11
1.13E-09
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.72E+01
-2.92E-06
-2.45E-07
-
4.50E-06
-6.75E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
Cutting
&
Shred-
ding
2.53E+01
4.28E-06
3.58E-07
6.60E-06
9.90E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-4.72E+02
-1.40E-04
-2.21E-05
-4.47E-04
-7.40E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.87
4.52E-08
7.25E-09
6.83E-07
1.28E-03
Spinning
1.14E+02
1.94E-05
1.62E-06
2.98E-05
4.47E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.41E-03
3.53E-10
2.94E-11
4.76E-10
7.09E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-1.75E-01
-9.41E-09
-2.93E-08
-1.60E-08
-1.79E-04
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.57E-02
1.95E-10
3.26E-09
3.43E-09
2.13E-06
Transportation
to
Landfill
2.68
9.64E-10
4.05E-09
1.01E-06
2.60E-04
Transportation
to
Incineration
1.81E-01
6.51E-11
2.73E-10
6.84E-08
1.75E-05
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.52E-06
2.21E-02
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.54E-02
9.13E-12
3.83E-11
9.60E-09
2.46E-06
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.38E-01
-1.27E-08
-1.49E-08
-3.61E-08
-1.22E-04
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
1.86E-05
3.98E-13
4.54E-12
3.45E-12
1.41E-08
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.15E-03
2.31E-10
6.66E-11
1.30E-09
5.22E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:122==
114
A Appendix
Table A.31: Characterized
Results
Recycling
Cotton
Sce-
nario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-3.48E+01
-2.84
-
1.38E+01
-
5.44E+01
-2.50E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.22E-03
5.79E-03
4.69E-03
2.02E-02
3.70E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
3.11E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
2.11E-03
2.13E-03
7.84E-03
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
7.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
3.38E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
3.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-8.14E-02
-4.49E-02
-3.13E-02
-1.80E-01
-1.14E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
==PAGE:123==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
115
Cutting
&
Shred-
ding
1.19E-01
6.58E-02
4.58E-02
2.63E-01
1.68E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-3.55E+01
-3.58
-
1.43E+01
-
5.73E+01
-2.59E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
6.15E-02
1.07E-01
8.84E-02
4.54E-01
1.25E-06
Spinning
5.39E-01
2.97E-01
2.07E-01
1.19
7.58E-03
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
9.09E-06
1.86E-06
7.31E-07
6.79E-06
1.38E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-2.40E-03
-3.45E-04
4.54E-04
-2.71E-04
-6.75E-06
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.56E-05
7.52E-05
7.04E-05
3.20E-04
4.14E-07
Transportation
to
Landfill
3.80E-03
9.07E-03
8.96E-03
3.93E-02
2.29E-06
Transportation
to
Incineration
2.57E-04
6.12E-04
6.04E-04
2.65E-03
1.55E-07
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.39E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
3.60E-05
8.58E-05
8.48E-05
3.72E-04
2.17E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.27E-02
-4.70E-04
-1.07E-03
-1.39E-03
-9.11E-06
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
4.82E-07
9.04E-08
8.30E-08
3.28E-07
5.58E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
3.77E-05
3.79E-05
3.43E-05
6.86E-05
2.36E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.32: Characterized
Results
Recycling
Cotton
Sce-
nario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-1.03
-1.58E+04
-1.53E+04
-2.33E-02
==PAGE:124==
116
A Appendix
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.72E-03
2.90E-01
2.34E+01
4.07E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
4.15E-06
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.16E-04
4.95E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.07E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.13E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.00E-05
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.32E-02
-7.74
-2.94E+02
-1.26E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
7.82E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
Cutting
&
Shred-
ding
1.94E-02
1.13E+01
4.31E+02
1.85E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.27
-1.58E+04
-1.80E+04
-3.30E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.14E-02
9.18E-02
2.66E+01
1.20E-06
Spinning
8.76E-02
5.13E+01
1.95E+03
8.36E-03
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:125==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
117
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
2.55E-07
9.00E-04
2.71E-02
1.52E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-2.44E-05
-3.88E-01
-1.63
-1.35E-05
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.81E-05
1.65E-01
2.16E-01
9.28E-08
Transportation
to
Landfill
3.44E-03
1.11
3.60E+01
2.05E-06
Transportation
to
Incineration
2.32E-04
7.48E-02
2.43
1.38E-07
Collection
9.08E-02
3.12
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
3.25E-05
1.05E-02
3.40E-01
1.94E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.25E-04
-2.09E-01
-1.92
-4.71E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.61E-08
1.87E-04
2.04E-04
4.05E-12
Aluminium
recy-
cling
5.93E-06
1.60E-03
1.88E-02
9.63E-09
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.33: Characterized Results Recycling Nylon Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
-1.92E+02
3.03E-05
-1.34E-06
1.44E-05
-9.72E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.46
1.78E-07
4.01E-08
4.01E-07
6.99E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
6.62E-01
4.57E-07
2.37E-12
6.85E-11
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
3.26E-01
4.38E-07
2.47E-10
2.81E-09
8.21E-05
==PAGE:126==
118
A Appendix
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.60E+01
1.16E-05
5.96E-11
1.82E-09
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
7.19
5.48E-06
2.81E-11
9.06E-10
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
7.45
6.31E-06
3.16E-11
1.13E-09
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.45E+01
-2.45E-06
-2.05E-07
-3.78E-06
-5.66E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
4.19E+01
6.57E-06
4.93E-07
8.50E-06
1.81E-02
Virgin
Nylon
Substitution-100%
-3.00E+02
-3.49E-08
-1.83E-06
-1.48E-06
-1.38E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.57
3.86E-08
6.28E-09
5.90E-07
1.09E-03
Fe scrap recycling
-1.75E-01
-9.41E-09
-2.93E-08
-1.60E-08
-1.79E-04
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
1.25E-03
3.13E-10
2.60E-11
4.21E-10
6.28E-07
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.38E-02
1.72E-10
2.88E-09
3.03E-09
1.88E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.34E-01
1.20E-10
5.04E-10
1.26E-07
3.23E-05
Transportation
Landfill
4.94
1.78E-09
7.46E-09
1.87E-06
4.78E-04
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.52E-06
2.21E-02
Transportation
to
Recycling
1.92E-03
6.89E-13
2.89E-12
7.24E-10
1.85E-07
==PAGE:127==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
119
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.38E-01
-1.27E-08
-1.49E-08
-3.61E-08
-1.22E-04
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
1.86E-05
3.98E-13
4.54E-12
3.45E-12
1.41E-08
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.15E-03
2.31E-10
6.66E-11
1.30E-09
5.22E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.34: Characterized Results Recycling Nylon Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
1.43
-4.11E-01
-7.56E-01
-6.95E-01
-1.56E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
5.94E-03
1.07E-02
8.63E-03
3.73E-02
6.83E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
3.11E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
2.11E-03
2.13E-03
7.84E-03
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
7.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
3.38E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
3.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:128==
120
A Appendix
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-6.83E-02
-3.76E-02
-2.62E-02
-1.51E-01
-9.59E-04
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
1.36
1.30E-01
1.27E-01
4.95E-01
2.24E-03
Virgin
Nylon
Substitution-100%
3.70E-03
-9.18E-01
-1.18
-2.67
-3.60E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
5.25E-02
9.16E-02
7.55E-02
3.88E-01
1.07E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-2.40E-03
-3.45E-04
4.54E-04
-2.71E-04
-6.75E-06
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
8.05E-06
1.65E-06
6.47E-07
6.02E-06
1.22E-07
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.26E-05
6.63E-05
6.21E-05
2.83E-04
3.65E-07
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.73E-04
1.13E-03
1.11E-03
4.88E-03
2.85E-07
Transportation
Landfill
7.01E-03
1.67E-02
1.65E-02
7.24E-02
4.22E-06
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.39E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.72E-06
6.48E-06
6.40E-06
2.80E-05
1.64E-09
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.27E-02
-4.70E-04
-1.07E-03
-1.39E-03
-9.11E-06
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
4.82E-07
9.04E-08
8.30E-08
3.28E-07
5.58E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
3.77E-05
3.79E-05
3.43E-05
6.86E-05
2.36E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:129==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
121
Table A.35: Characterized Results Recycling Nylon Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-1.50E-01
-8.20E+01
-2.67E+03
-2.24E-
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.17E-03
5.35E-01
4.31E+01
7.50E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
4.15E-06
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.16E-04
4.95E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.07E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.13E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.00E-05
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.11E-02
-6.49
-2.47E+02
-1.06E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
7.82E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
4.03E-02
2.26E+01
6.78E+02
2.38E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution 100%
-3.24E-01
-1.08E+02
-3.78E+03
-4.35E-03
==PAGE:130==
122
A Appendix
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.53E-02
8.04E-02
2.27E+01
1.02E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-2.44E-05
-3.88E-01
-1.63
-1.35E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
2.26E-07
7.97E-04
2.40E-02
1.35E-07
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.48E-05
1.45E-01
1.90E-01
8.19E-08
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.28E-04
1.38E-01
4.47
2.55E-07
Transportation
Landfill
6.34E-03
2.04
6.63E+01
3.77E-06
Collection
9.08E-02
3.12
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.46E-06
7.91E-04
2.57E-02
1.46E-09
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.25E-04
-2.09E-01
-1.92
-4.71E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.61E-08
1.87E-04
2.04E-04
4.05E-12
Aluminium
recy-
cling
5.93E-06
1.60E-03
1.88E-02
9.63E-09
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.36: Characterized
Results
Recycling
Polyester
Sce-
nario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
2.46E+03
5.20E-04
9.68E-06
1.35E-05
-1.26E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.18
1.58E-07
3.56E-08
3.56E-07
6.21E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:131==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
123
Venting
6.62E-01
4.57E-07
2.37E-12
6.85E-11
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
3.26E-01
4.38E-07
2.47E-10
2.81E-09
8.21E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.60E+01
1.16E-05
5.96E-11
1.82E-09
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
7.19
5.48E-06
2.81E-11
9.06E-10
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
7.45
6.31E-06
3.16E-11
1.13E-09
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.54E+01
-2.62E-06
-2.19E-07
-4.03E-06
-6.05E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-4.04E+02
0.00
-1.04E-06
-3.14E-07
-1.36E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.68
4.09E-08
6.62E-09
6.22E-07
1.16E-03
Polyester Spinning
6.12E-02
1.04E-08
8.68E-10
1.60E-08
2.40E-05
Polyester Recycling
Process
2.80E+03
4.97E-04
1.08E-05
6.92E-06
1.02E-01
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-1.75E-01
-9.41E-09
-2.93E-08
-1.60E-08
-1.79E-04
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
1.30E-03
3.27E-10
2.72E-11
4.40E-10
6.57E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.45E-02
1.80E-10
3.01E-09
3.17E-09
1.96E-06
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.52E-06
2.21E-02
==PAGE:132==
124
A Appendix
Transportation
Landfill
4.39
1.58E-09
6.63E-09
1.66E-06
4.25E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
2.96E-01
1.06E-10
4.47E-10
1.12E-07
2.87E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
7.66E-03
2.75E-12
1.16E-11
2.90E-09
7.42E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.38E-01
-1.27E-08
-1.49E-08
-3.61E-08
-1.22E-04
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
1.86E-05
3.98E-13
4.54E-12
3.45E-12
1.41E-08
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.15E-03
2.31E-10
6.66E-11
1.30E-09
5.22E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.37: Characterized
Results
Recycling
Polyester
Sce-
nario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-4.86E+01
5.09
4.45
1.12E+01
-2.65E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
5.28E-03
9.47E-03
7.67E-03
3.31E-02
6.06E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
3.11E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
2.11E-03
2.13E-03
7.84E-03
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
7.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:133==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
125
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
3.38E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Oxidation
in top cove - final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
3.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-7.29E-02
-4.02E-02
-2.80E-02
-1.61E-01
-1.02E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-2.22
-2.30
-3.89
-2.58E-05
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
5.57E-02
9.71E-02
8.00E-02
4.11E-01
1.13E-06
Polyester Spinning
2.89E-04
1.59E-04
1.11E-04
6.38E-04
4.06E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
-4.87E+01
6.93
6.46
1.36E+01
-2.62E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.40E-03
-3.45E-04
4.54E-04
-2.71E-04
-6.75E-06
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
8.42E-06
1.72E-06
6.76E-07
6.29E-06
1.28E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.36E-05
6.94E-05
6.50E-05
2.96E-04
3.83E-07
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.39E-05
Transportation
Landfill
6.22E-03
1.48E-02
1.47E-02
6.42E-02
3.75E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.20E-04
1.00E-03
9.89E-04
4.34E-03
2.53E-07
Transportation
to
Recycling
1.09E-05
2.59E-05
2.56E-05
1.12E-04
6.54E-09
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.27E-02
-4.70E-04
-1.07E-03
-1.39E-03
-9.11E-06
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
4.82E-07
9.04E-08
8.30E-08
3.28E-07
5.58E-11
==PAGE:134==
126
A Appendix
Aluminium
recy-
cling
3.77E-05
3.79E-05
3.43E-05
6.86E-05
2.36E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.38: Characterized Results Recycling Polyester Scenario
(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
1.09
1.38E+03
1.00E+05
6.20E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.82E-03
4.75E-01
3.83E+01
6.66E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
4.15E-06
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.16E-04
4.95E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.07E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.13E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.13E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.00E-05
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.18E-02
-6.93
-2.63E+02
-1.13E-03
==PAGE:135==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
127
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
7.82E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-3.56E-01
-1.54E+01
-9.21E+03
-6.97E-05
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.74E-02
8.43E-02
2.40E+01
1.08E-06
Polyester Spinning
4.69E-05
2.75E-02
1.04
4.48E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
1.31
1.40E+03
1.09E+05
6.24E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.44E-05
-3.88E-01
-1.63
-1.35E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
2.36E-07
8.33E-04
2.51E-02
1.41E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.60E-05
1.52E-01
1.99E-01
8.57E-08
Collection
9.08E-02
3.12
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
Transportation
Landfill
5.63E-03
1.81
5.88E+01
3.35E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.80E-04
1.22E-01
3.97
2.26E-07
Transportation
to
Recycling
9.83E-06
3.17E-03
1.03E-01
5.85E-09
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.25E-04
-2.09E-01
-1.92
-4.71E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.61E-08
1.87E-04
2.04E-04
4.05E-12
Aluminium
recy-
cling
5.93E-06
1.60E-03
1.88E-02
9.63E-09
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:136==
128
A Appendix
Table A.39: Characterized Results Recycling Polyester and Cot-
ton Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
-4.83E+02
-6.14E-06
-6.76E-06
-1.02E-04
-2.76E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.73
1.25E-07
2.83E-08
2.83E-07
4.93E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
6.62E-01
4.57E-07
2.37E-12
6.85E-11
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
3.26E-01
4.38E-07
2.47E-10
2.81E-09
8.21E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.60E+01
1.16E-05
5.96E-11
1.82E-09
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
7.19
5.48E-06
2.81E-11
9.06E-10
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
7.45
6.31E-06
3.16E-11
1.13E-09
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.35E+01
-2.29E-06
-1.92E-07
-3.54E-06
-5.30E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
50% Cotton + 50%
Polyester Recycling
Facility
8.15E+01
1.08E-05
1.51E-06
3.26E-05
1.08E-01
==PAGE:137==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
129
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.45
3.59E-08
5.89E-09
5.52E-07
1.02E-03
Polyester Spinning
7.68E-02
1.30E-08
1.09E-09
2.01E-08
3.01E-05
Cotton Spinning
3.87E+01
6.56E-06
5.49E-07
1.01E-05
1.52E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-5.08E+02
0.00
-1.31E-06
-3.95E-07
-1.71E-01
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.60E+02
-4.75E-05
-7.50E-06
-1.52E-04
-2.51E-01
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.18E-03
2.96E-10
2.47E-11
4.00E-10
5.96E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-1.75E-01
-9.41E-09
-2.93E-08
-1.60E-08
-1.79E-04
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.31E-02
1.63E-10
2.72E-09
2.87E-09
1.78E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
2.35E-01
8.46E-11
3.55E-10
8.90E-08
2.28E-05
Transportation
Landfill
3.49
1.25E-09
5.27E-09
1.32E-06
3.37E-04
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.52E-06
2.21E-02
Transportation
to
Recycling
1.70E-02
6.12E-12
2.57E-11
6.44E-09
1.65E-06
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.38E-01
-1.27E-08
-1.49E-08
-3.61E-08
-1.22E-04
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
1.86E-05
3.98E-13
4.54E-12
3.45E-12
1.41E-08
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.15E-03
2.31E-10
6.66E-11
1.30E-09
5.22E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.40: Characterized Results Recycling Polyester and Cot-
ton Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-5.14
-3.22
-7.04
-
2.14E+01
-7.91E-02
==PAGE:138==
130
A Appendix
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
4.19E-03
7.52E-03
6.09E-03
2.63E-02
4.82E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
3.11E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
2.11E-03
2.13E-03
7.84E-03
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Oxidation
in top cover- daily
cover
0.00
7.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
3.38E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
3.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-6.39E-02
-3.52E-02
-2.45E-02
-1.41E-01
-8.98E-04
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
50% Cotton + 50%
Polyester Recycling
Facility
6.64
3.11E-01
3.52E-01
1.11
6.32E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.89E-02
8.53E-02
7.03E-02
3.61E-01
9.95E-07
Polyester Spinning
3.63E-04
2.00E-04
1.39E-04
8.01E-04
5.10E-06
Cotton Spinning
1.83E-01
1.01E-01
7.02E-02
4.03E-01
2.57E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-2.79
-2.89
-4.89
-3.23E-05
==PAGE:139==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
131
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.20E+01
-1.21
-4.85
-
1.94E+01
-8.78E-02
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
7.64E-06
1.56E-06
6.14E-07
5.71E-06
1.16E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-2.40E-03
-3.45E-04
4.54E-04
-2.71E-04
-6.75E-06
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.14E-05
6.28E-05
5.87E-05
2.67E-04
3.46E-07
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.34E-04
7.96E-04
7.86E-04
3.44E-03
2.01E-07
Transportation
Landfill
4.94E-03
1.18E-02
1.16E-02
5.10E-02
2.98E-06
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.39E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.41E-05
5.76E-05
5.69E-05
2.49E-04
1.45E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.27E-02
-4.70E-04
-1.07E-03
-1.39E-03
-9.11E-06
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
4.82E-07
9.04E-08
8.30E-08
3.28E-07
5.58−11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
3.77E-05
3.79E-05
3.43E-05
6.86E-05
2.36E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.41: Characterized Results Recycling Polyester and Cot-
ton Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Impact Category
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-6.17E-01
-5.32E+03
-1.55E+04
-8.01E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.24E-03
3.78E-01
3.04E+01
5.29E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:140==
132
A Appendix
Venting
0.00
4.15E-06
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.16E-04
4.95E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.07E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.13E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.00E-05
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.04E-02
-6.07
-2.31E+02
-9.91E-04
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
7.82E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
50% Cotton + 50%
Polyester Recycling
Facility
1.03E-01
4.55E+01
1.05E+03
6.68E-04
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.29E-02
7.58E-02
2.11E+01
9.52E-07
Polyester Spinning
5.89E-05
3.45E-02
1.31
5.63E-06
Cotton Spinning
2.97E-02
1.74E+01
6.60E+02
2.83E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-4.47E-01
-1.93E+01
-1.16E+04
-8.75E-05
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-4.31E-01
-5.37E+03
-6.11E+03
-1.12E-02
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
2.14E-07
7.56E-04
2.28E-02
1.28E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-2.44E-05
-3.88E-01
-1.63
-1.35E-05
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:141==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
133
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.35E-05
1.38E-01
1.80E-01
7.75E-08
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.02E-04
9.72E-02
3.16
1.80E-07
Transportation
Landfill
4.47E-03
1.44
4.67E+01
2.66E-06
Collection
9.08E-02
3.12
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.18E-05
7.03E-03
2.28E-01
1.30E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.25E-04
-2.09E-01
-1.92
-4.71E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.61E-08
1.87E-04
2.04E-04
4.05E-12
Aluminium
recy-
cling
5.93E-06
1.60E-03
1.88E-02
9.63E-09
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.42: Characterized Results Best Case Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
5.14E+02
1.81E-04
-1.86E-05
-4.26E-04
-9.28E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
6.89E-01
4.97E-08
1.12E-08
1.12E-07
1.96E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
6.57E-01
4.53E-07
2.35E-12
6.80E-11
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
3.24E-01
4.34E-07
2.45E-10
2.78E-09
8.14E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:142==
134
A Appendix
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.58E+01
1.15E-05
5.90E-11
1.80E-09
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
7.13
5.44E-06
2.79E-11
8.99E-10
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
7.43
6.30E-06
3.16E-11
1.12E-09
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.72E+01
-2.92E-06
-2.44E-07
-4.50E-06
-6.74E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.02E+01
1.73E-06
1.45E-07
2.66E-06
3.99E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-2.25E+02
0.00
-5.78E-07
-1.75E-07
-7.58E-02
Textile and Resid-
ual
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.85
4.48E-08
7.19E-09
6.77E-07
1.27E-03
Polyester Spinning
3.40E-02
5.76E-09
4.82E-10
8.88E-09
1.33E-05
Polyester Recycling
Process
1.56E+03
2.76E-04
5.97E-06
3.84E-06
5.65E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-1.75E-01
-9.41E-09
-2.93E-08
-1.60E-08
-1.79E-04
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
1.40E-03
3.50E-10
2.89E-11
4.72E-10
7.04E-07
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
4.65E+01
7.30E-06
5.47E-07
9.44E-06
2.02E-02
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
-3.33E+02
-3.87E-08
-2.03E-06
-1.64E-06
-1.53E-01
Co + Polyester Re-
cycling Facility
3.87E+01
5.21E-06
7.56E-07
1.63E-05
5.36E-02
Polyester Spinning
3.84E-02
6.51E-09
5.45E-10
1.00E-08
1.51E-05
Cotton Spinning
1.94E+01
3.28E-06
2.75E-07
5.06E-06
7.59E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-8.00E+01
-2.37E-05
-3.75E-06
-7.58E-05
-1.25E-01
==PAGE:143==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
135
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-2.54E+02
0.00
-6.53E-07
-1.97E-07
-8.56E-02
Cotton
Recycling
Facility
2.38E+01
4.04E-06
3.38E-07
6.23E-06
9.34E-03
Cotton Spinning
1.08E+02
1.83E-05
1.53E-06
2.82E-05
4.22E-02
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-4.45E+02
-1.32E-04
-2.09E-05
-4.22E-04
-6.98E-01
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.55E-02
1.93E-10
3.24E-09
3.41E-09
2.11E-06
Transportation
Landfill
1.38
4.97E-10
2.09E-09
5.23E-07
1.34E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
9.34E-02
3.36E-11
1.41E-10
3.53E-08
9.04E-06
Transportation
Polyester
4.26E-03
1.53E-12
6.43E-12
1.61E-09
4.12E-07
Transportation
Polyester
and
Cotton
8.51E-03
3.06E-12
1.29E-11
3.22E-09
8.24E-07
Transportation
Cotton
2.39E-02
8.61E-12
3.62E-11
9.05E-09
2.32E-06
Transportation Ny-
lon
2.13E-03
7.65E-13
3.21E-12
8.05E-10
2.06E-07
Collection
2.74E+01
1.00E-08
3.76E-08
5.51E-06
2.21E-02
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.38E-01
-1.27E-08
-1.49E-08
-3.61E-08
-1.22E-04
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
1.86E-05
3.98E-13
4.54E-12
3.45E-12
1.41E-08
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.15E-03
2.31E-10
6.66E-11
1.30E-09
5.22E-06
Table A.43: Characterized Results Best Case Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-6.12E+01
-2.72
-
1.55E+01
-
5.97E+01
-2.92E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.66E-03
2.99E-03
2.42E-03
1.04E-02
1.91E-05
==PAGE:144==
136
A Appendix
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
3.08E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
2.09E-03
2.12E-03
7.78E-03
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
7.44E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
3.36E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
3.51E-03
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-8.13E-02
-4.48E-02
-3.12E-02
-1.79E-01
-1.14E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
4.81E-02
2.65E-02
1.85E-02
1.06E-01
6.76E-04
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-1.23
-1.28
-2.16
-1.43E-05
Textile and Resid-
ual
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
6.10E-02
1.06E-01
8.76E-02
4.50E-01
1.24E-06
Polyester Spinning
1.61E-04
8.85E-05
6.17E-05
3.54E-04
2.26E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
-2.71E+01
3.85
3.59
7.57
-1.45E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.40E-03
-3.45E-04
4.54E-04
-2.71E-04
-6.75E-06
==PAGE:145==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
137
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
9.03E-06
1.85E-06
7.25E-07
6.74E-06
1.37E-07
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
1.51
1.45E-01
1.41E-01
5.50E-01
2.49E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
4.11E-03
-1.02
-1.31
-2.96
-4.00E-03
Co + Polyester Re-
cycling Facility
3.07
1.51E-01
1.69E-01
5.39E-01
3.19E-03
Polyester Spinning
1.81E-04
1.00E-04
6.97E-05
4.00E-04
2.55E-06
Cotton Spinning
9.14E-02
5.04E-02
3.51E-02
2.02E-01
1.29E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-6.02
-6.06E-01
-2.43
-9.71
-4.39E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-1.39
-1.45
-2.44
-1.62E-05
Cotton
Recycling
Facility
1.13E-01
6.20E-02
4.32E-02
2.48E-01
1.58E-03
Cotton Spinning
5.09E-01
2.80E-01
1.95E-01
1.12
7.15E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-3.35E+01
-3.37
-
1.35E+01
-
5.41E+01
-2.44E-01
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.54E-05
7.46E-05
6.98E-05
3.18E-04
4.11E-07
Transportation
Landfill
1.96E-03
4.68E-03
4.62E-03
2.03E-02
1.18E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
1.32E-04
3.16E-04
3.12E-04
1.37E-03
7.97E-08
Transportation
Polyester
6.04E-06
1.44E-05
1.42E-05
6.23E-05
3.63E-09
Transportation
Polyester
and
Cotton
1.21E-05
2.88E-05
2.84E-05
1.25E-04
7.27E-09
Transportation
Cotton
3.39E-05
8.10E-05
8.00E-05
3.51E-04
2.04E-08
Transportation Ny-
lon
3.02E-06
7.20E-06
7.11E-06
3.12E-05
1.82E-09
Collection
3.96E-02
2.52E-01
1.98E-01
1.01
2.38E-05
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.27E-02
-4.70E-04
-1.07E-03
-1.39E-03
-9.11E-06
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
4.82E-07
9.04E-08
8.30E-08
3.28E-07
5.58E-11
==PAGE:146==
138
A Appendix
Aluminium
recy-
cling
3.77E-05
3.79E-05
3.43E-05
6.86E-05
2.36E-07
Table A.44: Characterized Results Best Case Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-1.13
-1.69E+04
2.96E+04
6.52E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
8.89E-04
1.50E-01
1.21E+01
2.10E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
4.11E-06
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.10E-04
4.92E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.06E-04
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.09E-05
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
5.99E-05
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.32E-02
-7.73
-2.94E+02
-1.26E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:147==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
139
Sorting Facility
7.81E-03
4.57
1.74E+02
7.46E-04
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-1.98E-01
-8.53
-5.11E+03
-3.87E-05
Textile and Resid-
ual
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.10E-02
9.11E-02
2.63E+01
1.19E-06
Polyester Spinning
2.61E-05
1.53E-02
5.80E-01
2.49E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
7.29E-01
7.75E+02
6.05E+04
3.47E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.44E-05
-3.88E-01
-1.63
-1.35E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
2.52E-07
8.91E-04
2.69E-02
1.51E-07
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
4.48E-02
2.51E+01
7.54E+02
2.65E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
-3.60E-01
-1.20E+02
-4.20E+03
-4.83E-03
Co + Polyester Re-
cycling Facility
5.01E-02
2.34E+01
5.80E+02
3.30E-04
Polyester Spinning
2.95E-05
1.72E-02
6.55E-01
2.81E-06
Cotton Spinning
1.49E-02
8.69
3.30E+02
1.42E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-2.16E-01
-2.69E+03
-3.06E+03
-5.60E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-2.24E-01
-9.64
-5.78E+03
-4.38E-05
Cotton
Recycling
Facility
1.83E-02
1.07E+01
4.07E+02
1.74E-03
Cotton Spinning
8.26E-02
4.84E+01
1.84E+03
7.89E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.20
-1.50E+04
-1.70E+04
-3.12E-02
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.79E-05
1.63E-01
2.14E-01
9.21E-08
Transportation
Landfill
1.77E-03
5.72E-01
1.86E+01
1.06E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
1.20E-04
3.86E-02
1.25
7.13E-08
Transportation
Polyester
5.46E-06
1.76E-03
5.71E-02
3.25E-09
==PAGE:148==
140
A Appendix
Transportation
Polyester
and
Cotton
1.09E-05
3.52E-03
1.14E-01
6.50E-09
Transportation
Cotton
3.07E-05
9.89E-03
3.21E-01
1.83E-08
Transportation Ny-
lon
2.73E-06
8.79E-04
2.85E-02
1.62E-09
Collection
9.07E-02
3.11
3.75E+02
2.13E-05
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.25E-04
-2.09E-01
-1.92
-4.71E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.61E-08
1.87E-04
2.04E-04
4.05E-12
Aluminium
recy-
cling
5.93E-06
1.60E-03
1.88E-02
9.63E-09
==PAGE:149==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
141
A.4.2
Normalized Results
Table A.45: Normalisation factors, Laurent et al. 2013 .
Impact Category
Unit
Normalisation factor
Climate change
kg CO2 eq./PE/year
8.10E+03
Ozone depletion
kg CFC-11 eq. /PE/year
4.14E-02
Human toxicity, cancer ef-
fects
CTUh/PE/year
5.42E-05
Human
toxicity,
non-
cancer effects
CTUh/PE/year
1.10E-03
Particulate matter
kg PM2.5 eq. /PE/year
2.76
Ionising radiation, human
health
kBq U235 eq.
(to air)
/PE/year
1.33E+03
Photochemical ozone for-
mation, human health
kg NMVOC eq. /PE/year
5.67E+01
Acidification
mol H+ eq. /PE/year
4.96E+01
Eutrophication terrestrial
mol N eq. /PE/year
1.15E+02
Eutrophication freshwater
kg P eq. /PE/year
6.20E-01
Eutrophication marine
kg N eq. /PE/year
9.38
Ecotoxicity freshwater
CTUe/PE/year
6.65E+02
Resource depletion, min-
eral,
fossils
and
renew-
ables
kg Sb eq. /PE/year
3.13E-01
Resources,
depletion
of
abiotic resources, fossil
MJ/PE/year
6.24E+04
Resources,
depletion
of
abiotic resources (reserve
base)
kg Sb eq. /PE/year
0.0343
Table A.46: Normalised Results Textile Baseline Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
4.03E-03
-1.29E-05
5.68E-04
6.69E-03
8.22E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.15E-04
4.45E-06
7.67E-04
3.78E-04
2.63E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:150==
142
A Appendix
Venting
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.82E-03
-6.03E-05
-3.86E-03
-3.50E-03
-2.09E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
2.13E-04
9.32E-07
1.05E-04
4.93E-04
3.95E-04
Fe scrap recycling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.16E-07
5.67E-09
3.57E-07
2.88E-07
1.71E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.33E-06
3.23E-09
4.13E-05
2.14E-06
5.30E-07
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.93E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Transportation
Landfill
6.33E-04
4.45E-08
1.43E-04
1.76E-03
1.80E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.27E-05
3.00E-09
9.64E-06
1.19E-04
1.21E-05
==PAGE:151==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
143
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.47: Normalised Results Textile Baseline Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
6.36E-05
6.37E-03
5.89E-03
1.28E-02
-3.25E-04
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
4.63E-06
1.95E-04
1.80E-04
3.36E-04
1.14E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:152==
144
A Appendix
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-5.23E-05
-6.77E-04
-5.39E-04
-1.34E-03
-1.58E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.95E-05
1.62E-03
1.52E-03
3.37E-03
1.72E-06
Fe scrap recycling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
4.55E-09
2.18E-08
9.80E-09
3.93E-08
1.48E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.32E-08
9.11E-07
9.75E-07
1.91E-06
4.59E-07
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.78E-03
3.85E-05
Transportation
Landfill
5.46E-06
3.06E-04
3.45E-04
6.52E-04
7.06E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.69E-07
2.06E-05
2.33E-05
4.40E-05
4.76E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.48: Characterized Results Textile Baseline Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
1.42E-02
6.12E-03
7.02E-03
-6.67E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.51E-04
8.34E-04
7.17E-04
2.27E-03
==PAGE:153==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
145
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.21E-03
-9.95E-03
-4.03E-03
-3.15E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.87E-03
2.79E-03
2.17E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.76E-03
1.00E-04
3.63E-04
2.98E-05
Fe scrap recycling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.80E-08
8.99E-07
2.89E-07
2.95E-06
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.06E-06
1.70E-04
2.37E-06
1.86E-06
Collection
9.67E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.21E-04
Transportation
Landfill
7.01E-04
3.18E-03
1.10E-03
1.14E-04
==PAGE:154==
146
A Appendix
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.73E-05
2.15E-04
7.43E-05
7.69E-06
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.49: Normalised Results Textile with Impurities Baseline
Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
8.15E-03
5.71E-04
1.36E-04
6.79E-03
8.23E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.15E-04
4.45E-06
7.67E-04
3.78E-04
2.63E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
8.11E-05
1.09E-05
4.34E-08
6.18E-08
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
4.00E-05
1.05E-05
4.53E-06
2.53E-06
2.95E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.95E-03
2.78E-04
1.09E-06
1.64E-06
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
8.81E-04
1.31E-04
5.14E-07
8.17E-07
0.00
==PAGE:155==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
147
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
9.18E-04
1.52E-04
5.82E-07
1.02E-06
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.78E-03
-5.91E-05
-3.78E-03
-3.43E-03
-2.05E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.41E-04
9.32E-07
1.16E-04
5.36E-04
3.95E-04
Fe scrap recycling
-2.16E-05
-2.27E-07
-5.41E-04
-1.45E-05
-6.50E-05
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.54E-07
7.55E-09
4.75E-07
3.83E-07
2.28E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.71E-06
4.15E-09
5.31E-05
2.75E-06
6.80E-07
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.93E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Transportation
Landfill
6.33E-04
4.45E-08
1.43E-04
1.76E-03
1.80E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.27E-05
3.00E-09
9.64E-06
1.19E-04
1.21E-05
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling 0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.50: Normalised Results Textile with Impurities Baseline
Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
==PAGE:156==
148
A Appendix
Total
6.29E-05
6.67E-03
5.95E-03
1.29E-02
-3.03E-04
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
4.63E-06
1.95E-04
1.80E-04
3.36E-04
1.14E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
5.44E-06
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
3.69E-05
4.27E-05
6.76E-05
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.31E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.92E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.19E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-5.12E-05
-6.63E-04
-5.28E-04
-1.31E-03
-1.54E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.95E-05
1.62E-03
1.52E-03
3.37E-03
1.72E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-1.80E-06
-6.08E-06
9.15E-06
-2.35E-06
-1.09E-05
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
6.06E-09
2.91E-08
1.30E-08
5.23E-08
1.97E-07
==PAGE:157==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
149
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.70E-08
1.17E-06
1.25E-06
2.46E-06
5.89E-07
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.78E-03
3.85E-05
Transportation
Landfill
5.46E-06
3.06E-04
3.45E-04
6.52E-04
7.06E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.69E-07
2.06E-05
2.33E-05
4.40E-05
4.76E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.51: Characterized Results Textile with Impurities Base-
line Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
1.43E-02
5.81E-03
7.07E-03
-6.41E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.51E-04
8.34E-04
7.17E-04
2.27E-03
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
6.19E-09
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.57E-05
7.39E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.59E-07
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:158==
150
A Appendix
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
7.65E-08
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
9.00E-08
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.18E-03
-9.74E-03
-3.95E-03
-3.08E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.87E-03
2.79E-03
2.17E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.76E-03
1.21E-04
3.63E-04
2.98E-05
Fe scrap recycling
-2.60E-06
-5.83E-04
-2.61E-05
-3.94E-04
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
2.40E-08
1.20E-06
3.84E-07
3.93E-06
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.65E-06
2.18E-04
3.05E-06
2.39E-06
Collection
9.67E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.21E-04
Transportation
Landfill
7.01E-04
3.18E-03
1.10E-03
1.14E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.73E-05
2.15E-04
7.43E-05
7.69E-06
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Aluminium
recy-
cling
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:159==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
151
Table A.52: Normalised Results Recycling Cotton Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
-3.37E-02
-2.25E-03
-3.73E-01
-3.68E-01
-2.41E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.65E-04
2.33E-06
4.02E-04
1.98E-04
1.37E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
8.17E-05
1.10E-05
4.38E-08
6.23E-08
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
4.03E-05
1.06E-05
4.56E-06
2.55E-06
2.97E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.97E-03
2.81E-04
1.10E-06
1.66E-06
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
8.87E-04
1.32E-04
5.18E-07
8.24E-07
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
9.19E-04
1.53E-04
5.83E-07
1.02E-06
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE_Electricity
substitution IT
-2.13E-03
-7.06E-05
-4.51E-03
-4.10E-03
-2.45E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
Cutting
&
Shred-
ding
3.12E-03
1.03E-04
6.61E-03
6.00E-03
3.59E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-5.83E-02
-3.38E-03
-4.08E-01
-4.07E-01
-2.68E-01
==PAGE:160==
152
A Appendix
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.78E-04
1.09E-06
1.34E-04
6.21E-04
4.63E-04
Spinning
1.41E-02
4.68E-04
2.99E-02
2.71E-02
1.62E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.74E-07
8.52E-09
5.42E-07
4.33E-07
2.57E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-2.16E-05
-2.27E-07
-5.41E-04
-1.45E-05
-6.50E-05
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.93E-06
4.70E-09
6.02E-05
3.12E-06
7.71E-07
Transportation
to
Landfill
3.31E-04
2.33E-08
7.47E-05
9.22E-04
9.40E-05
Transportation
to
Incineration
2.23E-05
1.57E-09
5.04E-06
6.22E-05
6.35E-06
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.94E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Transportation
to
Recycling
3.13E-06
2.20E-10
7.07E-07
8.72E-06
8.90E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.71E-05
-3.08E-07
-2.75E-04
-3.29E-05
-4.44E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
2.30E-09
9.62E-12
8.37E-08
3.14E-09
5.10E-09
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.42E-07
5.57E-09
1.23E-06
1.18E-06
1.89E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.53: Normalised Results Cotton Recycling Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-2.62E-02
-5.01E-02
-2.78E-01
-4.73E-01
-4.04E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.42E-06
1.02E-04
9.45E-05
1.76E-04
5.97E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:161==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
153
Venting (4e)
0.00
5.48E-06
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
3.71E-05
4.30E-05
6.81E-05
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.32E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.97E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.20E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE_Electricity
substitution IT
-6.12E-05
-7.92E-04
-6.31E-04
-1.56E-03
-1.85E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
Cutting
&
Shred-
ding
8.97E-05
1.16E-03
9.24E-04
2.29E-03
2.70E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-2.67E-02
-6.31E-02
-2.89E-01
-4.98E-01
-4.18E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.63E-05
1.89E-03
1.78E-03
3.95E-03
2.02E-06
Spinning
4.06E-04
5.24E-03
4.18E-03
1.04E-02
1.22E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
6.84E-09
3.28E-08
1.47E-08
5.91E-08
2.23E-07
Fe
scrap
recy-
cling_EMPTY
-1.80E-06
-6.08E-06
9.15E-06
-2.35E-06
-1.09E-05
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.93E-08
1.33E-06
1.42E-06
2.79E-06
6.68E-07
==PAGE:162==
154
A Appendix
Transportation
to
Landfill
2.86E-06
1.60E-04
1.81E-04
3.41E-04
3.69E-06
Transportation
to
Incineration
1.93E-07
1.08E-05
1.22E-05
2.30E-05
2.49E-07
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.79E-03
3.85E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.71E-08
1.51E-06
1.71E-06
3.23E-06
3.50E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-9.58E-06
-8.29E-06
-2.16E-05
-1.21E-05
-1.47E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
3.62E-10
1.60E-09
1.67E-09
2.85E-09
8.99E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
2.84E-08
6.69E-07
6.92E-07
5.97E-07
3.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.54: Characterized
Results
Cotton
Recycling
Sce-
nario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-1.10E-01
-2.37E+01
-2.45E-01
-6.80E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.84E-04
4.37E-04
3.75E-04
1.19E-03
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting (4e)
0.00
6.24E-09
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.63E-05
7.45E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:163==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
155
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.60E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
7.72E-08
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
9.02E-08
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE_Electricity
substitution IT
-1.41E-03
-1.16E-02
-4.71E-03
-3.68E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.88E-03
2.79E-03
2.18E-02
Cutting
&
Shred-
ding
2.07E-03
1.70E-02
6.91E-03
5.39E-02
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.36E-01
-2.38E+01
-2.89E-01
-9.63E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.41E-03
1.38E-04
4.26E-04
3.49E-05
Spinning
9.34E-03
7.71E-02
3.12E-02
2.44E-01
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
2.72E-08
1.35E-06
4.34E-07
4.44E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-2.60E-06
-5.83E-04
-2.61E-05
-3.94E-04
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
3.00E-06
2.48E-04
3.46E-06
2.71E-06
Transportation
to
Landfill
3.67E-04
1.67E-03
5.76E-04
5.97E-05
Transportation
to
Incineration
2.47E-05
1.12E-04
3.89E-05
4.03E-06
Collection
9.68E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.22E-04
Transportation
to
Recycling
3.47E-06
1.58E-05
5.45E-06
5.65E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.34E-05
-3.14E-04
-3.08E-05
-1.37E-03
==PAGE:164==
156
A Appendix
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.98E-09
2.81E-07
3.27E-09
1.18E-10
Aluminium
recy-
cling
6.33E-07
2.41E-06
3.02E-07
2.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.55: Normalised Results Recycling Nylon Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
-2.37E-02
7.33E-04
-2.48E-02
1.31E-02
-3.52E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.04E-04
4.29E-06
7.40E-04
3.65E-04
2.53E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
8.17E-05
1.10E-05
4.38E-08
6.23E-08
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
4.03E-05
1.06E-05
4.56E-06
2.55E-06
2.97E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.97E-03
2.81E-04
1.10E-06
1.66E-06
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
8.87E-04
1.32E-04
5.18E-07
8.24E-07
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
9.19E-04
1.53E-04
5.83E-07
1.02E-06
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:165==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
157
WtE
-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.78E-03
-5.92E-05
-3.78E-03
-3.43E-03
-2.05E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
5.17E-03
1.59E-04
9.09E-03
7.72E-03
6.57E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
-3.70E-02
-8.42E-07
-3.37E-02
-1.34E-03
-5.00E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.41E-04
9.32E-07
1.16E-04
5.36E-04
3.95E-04
Fe scrap recycling
-2.16E-05
-2.27E-07
-5.41E-04
-1.45E-05
-6.50E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
1.54E-07
7.55E-09
4.80E-07
3.83E-07
2.28E-07
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.71E-06
4.15E-09
5.31E-05
2.75E-06
6.80E-07
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.12E-05
2.90E-09
9.29E-06
1.15E-04
1.17E-05
Transportation
Landfill
6.10E-04
4.29E-08
1.38E-04
1.70E-03
1.73E-04
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.94E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.36E-07
1.66E-11
5.34E-08
6.58E-07
6.72E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.71E-05
-3.08E-07
-2.75E-04
-3.29E-05
-4.44E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
2.30E-09
9.62E-12
8.37E-08
3.14E-09
5.10E-09
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.42E-07
5.57E-09
1.23E-06
1.18E-06
1.89E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.56: Normalised Results Nylon Recycling Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
==PAGE:166==
158
A Appendix
Total
1.07E-03
-7.24E-03
-1.52E-02
-6.05E-03
-2.52E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
4.47E-06
1.88E-04
1.74E-04
3.24E-04
1.10E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
5.48E-06
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
3.71E-05
4.30E-05
6.81E-05
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.32E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.97E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.20E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-Electricity
substitution IT
-5.13E-05
-6.64E-04
-5.29E-04
-1.31E-03
-1.55E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
1.02E-03
2.30E-03
2.56E-03
4.31E-03
3.61E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
2.78E-06
-1.62E-02
-2.37E-02
-2.32E-02
-5.81E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.95E-05
1.62E-03
1.52E-03
3.37E-03
1.72E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-1.80E-06
-6.08E-06
9.15E-06
-2.35E-06
-1.09E-05
==PAGE:167==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
159
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
6.06E-09
2.91E-08
1.31E-08
5.23E-08
1.97E-07
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.70E-08
1.17E-06
1.25E-06
2.46E-06
5.89E-07
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.56E-07
1.99E-05
2.25E-05
4.25E-05
4.59E-07
Transportation
Landfill
5.27E-06
2.95E-04
3.33E-04
6.29E-04
6.80E-06
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.79E-03
3.85E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.04E-09
1.14E-07
1.29E-07
2.44E-07
2.64E-09
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-9.58E-06
-8.29E-06
-2.16E-05
-1.21E-05
-1.47E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
3.62E-10
1.60E-09
1.67E-09
2.85E-09
8.99E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
2.84E-08
6.69E-07
6.92E-07
5.97E-07
3.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.57: Characterized Results Nylon Recycling Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-1.60E-02
-1.23E-01
-4.28E-02
-6.52E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.38E-04
8.05E-04
6.91E-04
2.19E-03
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
6.24E-09
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.63E-05
7.45E-07
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:168==
160
A Appendix
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.60E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
7.72E-08
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
9.02E-08
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-Electricity
substitution IT
-1.18E-03
-9.76E-03
-3.95E-03
-3.09E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.88E-03
2.79E-03
2.18E-02
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
4.30E-03
3.40E-02
1.09E-02
6.94E-02
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
-3.45E-02
-1.63E-01
-6.06E-02
-1.27E-01
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.76E-03
1.21E-04
3.63E-04
2.98E-05
Fe scrap recycling
-2.60E-06
-5.83E-04
-2.61E-05
-3.94E-04
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
2.41E-08
1.20E-06
3.84E-07
3.93E-06
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.65E-06
2.19E-04
3.05E-06
2.39E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.56E-05
2.07E-04
7.17E-05
7.42E-06
Transportation
Landfill
6.76E-04
3.07E-03
1.06E-03
1.10E-04
Collection
9.68E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.22E-04
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.62E-07
1.19E-06
4.12E-07
4.26E-08
==PAGE:169==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
161
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.34E-05
-3.14E-04
-3.08E-05
-1.37E-03
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.98E-09
2.81E-07
3.27E-09
1.18E-10
Aluminium
recy-
cling
6.33E-07
2.41E-06
3.02E-07
2.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.58: Normalised Results Recycling Polyester Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
3.04E-01
1.26E-02
1.79E-01
1.23E-02
-4.56E-03
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.70E-04
3.81E-06
6.57E-04
3.24E-04
2.25E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting (4e)
8.17E-05
1.10E-05
4.38E-08
6.23E-08
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare (4a)
4.03E-05
1.06E-05
4.56E-06
2.55E-06
2.97E-05
LFG - Gas collec-
tion system (3) -
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.97E-03
2.81E-04
1.10E-06
1.66E-06
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
8.87E-04
1.32E-04
5.18E-07
8.24E-07
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
9.19E-04
1.53E-04
5.83E-07
1.02E-06
0.00
==PAGE:170==
162
A Appendix
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE_Electricity
substitution IT
-1.91E-03
-6.32E-05
-4.04E-03
-3.67E-03
-2.19E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-4.99E-02
0.00
-1.92E-02
-2.86E-04
-4.94E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.54E-04
9.88E-07
1.22E-04
5.65E-04
4.19E-04
Polyester Spinning
7.56E-06
2.51E-07
1.60E-05
1.45E-05
8.69E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
3.46E-01
1.20E-02
1.98E-01
6.29E-03
3.69E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.16E-05
-2.27E-07
-5.41E-04
-1.45E-05
-6.50E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
1.61E-07
7.89E-09
5.02E-07
4.00E-07
2.38E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.78E-06
4.34E-09
5.55E-05
2.88E-06
7.12E-07
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.94E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Transportation
Landfill
5.42E-04
3.81E-08
1.22E-04
1.51E-03
1.54E-04
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.66E-05
2.57E-09
8.25E-06
1.02E-04
1.04E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
9.46E-07
6.65E-11
2.14E-07
2.63E-06
2.69E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.71E-05
-3.08E-07
-2.75E-04
-3.29E-05
-4.44E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
2.30E-09
9.62E-12
8.37E-08
3.14E-09
5.10E-09
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.42E-07
5.57E-09
1.23E-06
1.18E-06
1.89E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:171==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
163
Table A.59: Normalised Results Polyester Recycling Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-3.66E-02
8.98E-02
8.97E-02
9.75E-02
-4.27E-02
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.97E-06
1.67E-04
1.55E-04
2.88E-04
9.78E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting (4e)
0.00
5.48E-06
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
3.71E-05
4.30E-05
6.81E-05
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.32E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.97E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.20E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE_Electricity
substitution IT
-5.48E-05
-7.09E-04
-5.65E-04
-1.40E-03
-1.65E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-3.92E-02
-4.65E-02
-3.39E-02
-4.15E-05
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.19E-05
1.71E-03
1.61E-03
3.57E-03
1.83E-06
==PAGE:172==
164
A Appendix
Polyester Spinning
2.17E-07
2.81E-06
2.24E-06
5.55E-06
6.55E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
-3.66E-02
1.22E-01
1.30E-01
1.19E-01
-4.22E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-1.80E-06
-6.08E-06
9.15E-06
-2.35E-06
-1.09E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
6.33E-09
3.04E-08
1.36E-08
5.47E-08
2.06E-07
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.78E-08
1.22E-06
1.31E-06
2.57E-06
6.17E-07
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.79E-03
3.85E-05
Transportation
Landfill
4.68E-06
2.62E-04
2.95E-04
5.59E-04
6.04E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.16E-07
1.77E-05
1.99E-05
3.77E-05
4.08E-07
Transportation
to
Recycling
8.17E-09
4.57E-07
5.16E-07
9.76E-07
1.06E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-9.58E-06
-8.29E-06
-2.16E-05
-1.21E-05
-1.47E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
3.62E-10
1.60E-09
1.67E-09
2.85E-09
8.99E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
2.84E-08
6.69E-07
6.92E-07
5.97E-07
3.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.60: Characterized
Results
Polyester
Recycling
Sce-
nario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
1.16E-01
2.08
1.60
1.81
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.00E-04
7.15E-04
6.14E-04
1.94E-03
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:173==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
165
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
6.24E-09
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare (4a)
7.63E-05
7.45E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.60E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
7.72E-08
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
9.02E-08
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE_Electricity
substitution IT
-1.26E-03
-1.04E-02
-4.22E-03
-3.30E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.88E-03
2.79E-03
2.18E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-3.80E-02
-2.31E-02
-1.48E-01
-2.03E-03
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.99E-03
1.27E-04
3.85E-04
3.16E-05
Polyester Spinning
5.00E-06
4.13E-05
1.67E-05
1.31E-04
Polyester Recycling
Process
1.40E-01
2.10
1.75
1.82
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.60E-06
-5.83E-04
-2.61E-05
-3.94E-04
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
2.51E-08
1.25E-06
4.02E-07
4.11E-06
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.77E-06
2.29E-04
3.19E-06
2.50E-06
Collection
9.68E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.22E-04
==PAGE:174==
166
A Appendix
Transportation
Landfill
6.00E-04
2.73E-03
9.43E-04
9.76E-05
Transportation
In-
cineration
4.05E-05
1.84E-04
6.36E-05
6.59E-06
Transportation
to
Recycling
1.05E-06
4.76E-06
1.65E-06
1.70E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.34E-05
-3.14E-04
-3.08E-05
-1.37E-03
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.98E-09
2.81E-07
3.27E-09
1.18E-10
Aluminium
recy-
cling
6.33E-07
2.41E-06
3.02E-07
2.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.61: Normalised Results Recycling Polyester and Cotton
Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
-6.01E-02
-1.59E-04
-1.25E-01
-9.32E-02
-1.00E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.14E-04
3.03E-06
5.22E-04
2.57E-04
1.79E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
8.17E-05
1.10E-05
4.38E-08
6.23E-08
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
4.03E-05
1.06E-05
4.56E-06
2.55E-06
2.97E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.97E-03
2.81E-04
1.10E-06
1.66E-06
0.00
==PAGE:175==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
167
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
8.87E-04
1.32E-04
5.18E-07
8.24E-07
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
9.19E-04
1.53E-04
5.83E-07
1.02E-06
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.67E-03
-5.54E-05
-3.54E-03
-3.21E-03
-1.92E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
50% Cotton + 50%
Polyester Recycling
Facility
9.56E-03
2.52E-04
2.77E-02
2.96E-02
3.88E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.26E-04
8.68E-07
1.09E-04
5.02E-04
3.68E-04
Polyester Spinning
9.49E-06
3.15E-07
2.01E-05
1.83E-05
1.09E-05
Cotton Spinning
4.78E-03
1.58E-04
1.01E-02
9.20E-03
5.50E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-6.27E-02
0.00
-2.41E-02
-3.59E-04
-6.21E-02
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.97E-02
-1.15E-03
-1.38E-01
-1.38E-01
-9.08E-02
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
1.46E-07
7.16E-09
4.55E-07
3.63E-07
2.16E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-2.16E-05
-2.27E-07
-5.41E-04
-1.45E-05
-6.50E-05
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.61E-06
3.93E-09
5.02E-05
2.60E-06
6.44E-07
Transportation
In-
cineration
2.90E-05
2.04E-09
6.56E-06
8.09E-05
8.25E-06
Transportation
Landfill
4.30E-04
3.03E-08
9.72E-05
1.20E-03
1.22E-04
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.94E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.10E-06
1.48E-10
4.75E-07
5.85E-06
5.97E-07
==PAGE:176==
168
A Appendix
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.71E-05
-3.08E-07
-2.75E-04
-3.29E-05
-4.44E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
2.30E-09
9.62E-12
8.37E-08
3.14E-09
5.10E-09
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.42E-07
5.57E-09
1.23E-06
1.18E-06
1.89E-06
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.62: Normalised Results Polyester and Cotton Recycling
Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-4.25E-03
-5.70E-02
-1.42E-01
-1.86E-01
-1.28E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
3.15E-06
1.33E-04
1.23E-04
2.29E-04
7.77E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
5.48E-06
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
3.71E-05
4.30E-05
6.81E-05
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.32E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.97E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:177==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
169
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.20E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-4.80E-05
-6.21E-04
-4.95E-04
-1.23E-03
-1.45E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
50% Cotton + 50%
Polyester Recycling
Facility
4.61E-03
5.33E-03
6.81E-03
9.37E-03
1.02E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.68E-05
1.50E-03
1.42E-03
3.14E-03
1.61E-06
Polyester Spinning
2.73E-07
3.53E-06
2.81E-06
6.96E-06
8.22E-06
Cotton Spinning
1.37E-04
1.78E-03
1.42E-03
3.51E-03
4.14E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-4.92E-02
-5.83E-02
-4.25E-02
-5.22E-05
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-9.05E-03
-2.14E-02
-9.78E-02
-1.69E-01
-1.42E-01
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
5.74E-09
2.76E-08
1.24E-08
4.96E-08
1.87E-07
Fe scrap recycling
-1.80E-06
-6.08E-06
9.15E-06
-2.35E-06
-1.09E-05
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.61E-08
1.11E-06
1.18E-06
2.33E-06
5.58E-07
Transportation
In-
cineration
2.51E-07
1.40E-05
1.58E-05
3.00E-05
3.24E-07
Transportation
Landfill
3.72E-06
2.08E-04
2.35E-04
4.44E-04
4.80E-06
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.79E-03
3.85E-05
Transportation
to
Recycling
1.82E-08
1.02E-06
1.15E-06
2.17E-06
2.34E-08
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-9.58E-06
-8.29E-06
-2.16E-05
-1.21E-05
-1.47E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
3.62E-10
1.60E-09
1.67E-09
2.85E-09
8.99E-11
==PAGE:178==
170
A Appendix
Aluminium
recy-
cling
2.84E-08
6.69E-07
6.92E-07
5.97E-07
3.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table A.63: Characterized Results Polyester and Cotton Recy-
cling Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-6.61E-02
-8.01
-2.50E-01
-2.34E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
2.39E-04
5.68E-04
4.88E-04
1.54E-03
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
6.24E-09
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.63E-05
7.45E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.60E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
7.72E-08
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
9.02E-08
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:179==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
171
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.11E-03
-9.13E-03
-3.70E-03
-2.89E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.88E-03
2.79E-03
2.18E-02
50% Cotton + 50%
Polyester Recycling
Facility
1.07E-02
6.83E-02
1.62E-02
1.93E-02
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
3.50E-03
1.14E-04
3.38E-04
2.78E-05
Polyester Spinning
6.28E-06
5.19E-05
2.10E-05
1.64E-04
Cotton Spinning
3.17E-03
2.61E-02
1.06E-02
8.26E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-4.77E-02
-2.90E-02
-1.85E-01
-2.55E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-4.60E-02
-8.08
-9.80E-02
-3.27E-01
Utilization as ”Un-
derground Mining”
in Germany
2.28E-08
1.14E-06
3.65E-07
3.73E-06
Fe scrap recycling
-2.60E-06
-5.83E-04
-2.61E-05
-3.94E-04
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.50E-06
2.07E-04
2.88E-06
2.26E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
3.22E-05
1.46E-04
5.06E-05
5.23E-06
Transportation
Landfill
4.77E-04
2.17E-03
7.49E-04
7.76E-05
Collection
9.68E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.22E-04
Transportation
to
Recycling
2.33E-06
1.06E-05
3.66E-06
3.79E-07
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.34E-05
-3.14E-04
-3.08E-05
-1.37E-03
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.98E-09
2.81E-07
3.27E-09
1.18E-10
Aluminium
recy-
cling
6.33E-07
2.41E-06
3.02E-07
2.81E-07
Textile
waste
+
Residual waste
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:180==
172
A Appendix
Table A.64: Normalised Results Best Case Scenario(1).
Impact Category
CC
OD
HTC
HTNC
PM
Unit
kg CO2-Eq
kg
CFC-11
Eq
CTUh
CTUh
kgPM2.5-Eq
Total
6.34E-02
4.38E-03
-3.42E-01
-3.87E-01
-3.36E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
8.50E-05
1.20E-06
2.07E-04
1.02E-04
7.09E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
8.11E-05
1.09E-05
4.34E-08
6.18E-08
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
4.00E-05
1.05E-05
4.53E-06
2.53E-06
2.95E-05
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
1.95E-03
2.78E-04
1.09E-06
1.64E-06
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
8.81E-04
1.31E-04
5.14E-07
8.17E-07
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
9.18E-04
1.52E-04
5.82E-07
1.02E-06
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-2.13E-03
-7.05E-05
-4.51E-03
-4.09E-03
-2.44E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
1.26E-03
4.17E-05
2.67E-03
2.42E-03
1.45E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-2.77E-02
0.00
-1.07E-02
-1.59E-04
-2.75E-02
Textile and Resid-
ual
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:181==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
173
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.75E-04
1.08E-06
1.33E-04
6.15E-04
4.59E-04
Polyester Spinning
4.20E-06
1.39E-07
8.90E-06
8.08E-06
4.83E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
1.92E-01
6.66E-03
1.10E-01
3.49E-03
2.05E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.16E-05
-2.27E-07
-5.41E-04
-1.45E-05
-6.50E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
1.73E-07
8.46E-09
5.33E-07
4.29E-07
2.55E-07
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
5.74E-03
1.76E-04
1.01E-02
8.58E-03
7.31E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
-4.11E-02
-9.36E-07
-3.75E-02
-1.49E-03
-5.55E-02
Cotton + Polyester
Recycling Facility
4.78E-03
1.26E-04
1.40E-02
1.48E-02
1.94E-02
Polyester Spinning
4.74E-06
1.57E-07
1.01E-05
9.13E-06
5.45E-06
Cotton Spinning
2.39E-03
7.93E-05
5.07E-03
4.60E-03
2.75E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-9.88E-03
-5.73E-04
-6.92E-02
-6.89E-02
-4.54E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-3.13E-02
0.00
-1.20E-02
-1.79E-04
-3.10E-02
Cotton
Recycling
Facility
2.94E-03
9.75E-05
6.24E-03
5.66E-03
3.38E-03
Cotton Spinning
1.33E-02
4.41E-04
2.82E-02
2.56E-02
1.53E-02
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-5.50E-02
-3.19E-03
-3.85E-01
-3.84E-01
-2.53E-01
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.92E-06
4.67E-09
5.97E-05
3.10E-06
7.65E-07
Transportation
Landfill
1.71E-04
1.20E-08
3.86E-05
4.76E-04
4.85E-05
Transportation
In-
cineration
1.15E-05
8.11E-10
2.60E-06
3.21E-05
3.27E-06
Transportation
Polyester
5.26E-07
3.70E-11
1.19E-07
1.46E-06
1.49E-07
Transportation
Polyester
and
Cotton
1.05E-06
7.40E-11
2.37E-07
2.93E-06
2.99E-07
Transportation
Cotton
2.96E-06
2.08E-10
6.67E-07
8.23E-06
8.40E-07
Transportation Ny-
lon
2.63E-07
1.85E-11
5.93E-08
7.32E-07
7.46E-08
==PAGE:182==
174
A Appendix
Collection
3.39E-03
2.43E-07
6.93E-04
5.01E-03
8.02E-03
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.71E-05
-3.08E-07
-2.75E-04
-3.29E-05
-4.44E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
2.30E-09
9.62E-12
8.37E-08
3.14E-09
5.10E-09
Aluminium
recy-
cling
1.42E-07
5.57E-09
1.23E-06
1.18E-06
1.89E-06
Table A.65: Normalised Results Best Case Scenario(2).
Impact Category
IR
POF
TA
TE
FE
Unit
kBq
U235-
Eq
kg NMVOC
mol
H+
Eq
mol N-Eq
kg P-Eq
Total
-4.60E-02
-4.80E-02
-3.13E-01
-5.19E-01
-4.71E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
1.25E-06
5.27E-05
4.87E-05
9.08E-05
3.08E-05
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
5.44E-06
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
0.00
3.69E-05
4.27E-05
6.76E-05
0.00
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.31E-04
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
5.92E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
6.19E-05
0.00
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:183==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
175
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-6.11E-05
-7.90E-04
-6.30E-04
-1.56E-03
-1.84E-03
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
3.62E-05
4.68E-04
3.73E-04
9.23E-04
1.09E-03
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-2.18E-02
-2.58E-02
-1.88E-02
-2.31E-05
Textile and Resid-
ual
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.58E-05
1.88E-03
1.77E-03
3.91E-03
2.00E-06
Polyester Spinning
1.21E-07
1.56E-06
1.24E-06
3.08E-06
3.64E-06
Polyester Recycling
Process
-2.03E-02
6.79E-02
7.24E-02
6.58E-02
-2.34E-02
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-1.80E-06
-6.08E-06
9.15E-06
-2.35E-06
-1.09E-05
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
6.79E-09
3.26E-08
1.46E-08
5.86E-08
2.21E-07
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
1.13E-03
2.56E-03
2.85E-03
4.78E-03
4.01E-03
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
3.09E-06
-1.80E-02
-2.63E-02
-2.58E-02
-6.45E-03
Cotton + Polyester
Recycling Facility
2.31E-03
2.67E-03
3.41E-03
4.69E-03
5.15E-03
Polyester Spinning
1.36E-07
1.76E-06
1.41E-06
3.48E-06
4.11E-06
Cotton Spinning
6.87E-05
8.89E-04
7.08E-04
1.75E-03
2.07E-03
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-4.53E-03
-1.07E-02
-4.89E-02
-8.45E-02
-7.09E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
0.00
-2.46E-02
-2.92E-02
-2.13E-02
-2.61E-05
Cotton
Recycling
Facility
8.46E-05
1.09E-03
8.72E-04
2.16E-03
2.55E-03
Cotton Spinning
3.83E-04
4.95E-03
3.94E-03
9.76E-03
1.15E-02
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-2.52E-02
-5.95E-02
-2.72E-01
-4.70E-01
-3.94E-01
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
1.91E-08
1.32E-06
1.41E-06
2.76E-06
6.63E-07
==PAGE:184==
176
A Appendix
Transportation
Landfill
1.47E-06
8.25E-05
9.31E-05
1.76E-04
1.91E-06
Transportation
In-
cineration
9.96E-08
5.57E-06
6.29E-06
1.19E-05
1.29E-07
Transportation
Polyester
4.54E-09
2.54E-07
2.87E-07
5.42E-07
5.86E-09
Transportation
Polyester
and
Cotton
9.08E-09
5.08E-07
5.73E-07
1.08E-06
1.17E-08
Transportation
Cotton
2.55E-08
1.43E-06
1.61E-06
3.05E-06
3.30E-08
Transportation Ny-
lon
2.27E-09
1.27E-07
1.43E-07
2.71E-07
2.93E-09
Collection
2.98E-05
4.44E-03
3.99E-03
8.78E-03
3.85E-05
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-9.58E-06
-8.29E-06
-2.16E-05
-1.21E-05
-1.47E-05
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
3.62E-10
1.60E-09
1.67E-09
2.85E-09
8.99E-11
Aluminium
recy-
cling
2.84E-08
6.69E-07
6.92E-07
5.97E-07
3.81E-07
Table A.66: Normalised Results Best Case Scenario(3).
Impact Category
ME
ET
RD - F
RD
Unit
kg N-Eq
CTUe
MJ
kg antimony-
Eq
Total
-1.20E-01
-2.54E+01
4.74E-01
1.90E-01
Construction
and
operation of land-
filling
9.47E-05
2.25E-04
1.94E-04
6.13E-04
LFG - Landfill gas
generation - moder-
ate conditions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Leaking of gas
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Venting
0.00
6.19E-09
0.00
0.00
LFG - Combustion
and
treatment
in
flare
7.57E-05
7.39E-07
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:185==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
177
LFG
-
Gas
col-
lection
system
-
Average performing
landfill
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - daily
cover
0.00
1.59E-07
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top cover - interme-
diate cover
0.00
7.65E-08
0.00
0.00
LFG - Oxidation in
top
cover
-
final
cover (average per-
formance landfill)
0.00
9.00E-08
0.00
0.00
WTE
-
Change
of energy content,
generic, DK, 2012
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
WtE
-
Electricity
substitution IT
-1.41E-03
-1.16E-02
-4.71E-03
-3.67E-02
LFG - Addition of
substances
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Sorting Facility
8.33E-04
6.87E-03
2.79E-03
2.17E-02
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-2.11E-02
-1.28E-02
-8.20E-02
-1.13E-03
Textile and Resid-
ual
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Waste
to
energy
plant, generic, IT
4.37E-03
1.37E-04
4.22E-04
3.46E-05
Polyester Spinning
2.78E-06
2.29E-05
9.30E-06
7.26E-05
Polyester Recycling
Process
7.77E-02
1.17
9.70E-01
1.01
Multiple Inputs
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Fe scrap recycling
-2.60E-06
-5.83E-04
-2.61E-05
-3.94E-04
Utilization
as
”background
min-
ing” in Germany
2.69E-08
1.34E-06
4.31E-07
4.40E-06
Nylon Recycling Fa-
cility
4.78E-03
3.78E-02
1.21E-02
7.71E-02
Virgin Nylon Sub-
stitution
-3.84E-02
-1.81E-01
-6.73E-02
-1.41E-01
Cotton + Polyester
Recycling Facility
5.34E-03
3.53E-02
9.29E-03
9.63E-03
==PAGE:186==
178
A Appendix
Polyester Spinning
3.14E-06
2.59E-05
1.05E-05
8.20E-05
Cotton Spinning
1.58E-03
1.31E-02
5.29E-03
4.13E-02
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-2.30E-02
-4.04
-4.90E-02
-1.63E-01
Virgin
Polyester
Substitution
-2.38E-02
-1.45E-02
-9.26E-02
-1.28E-03
Cotton
Recycling
Facility
1.95E-03
1.61E-02
6.51E-03
5.09E-02
Cotton Spinning
8.81E-03
7.27E-02
2.95E-02
2.30E-01
Virgin Cotton Sub-
stitution
-1.28E-01
-2.25E+01
-2.73E-01
-9.09E-01
Bottom Ash Land-
fill
2.98E-06
2.46E-04
3.43E-06
2.69E-06
Transportation
Landfill
1.89E-04
8.59E-04
2.97E-04
3.08E-05
Transportation
In-
cineration
1.28E-05
5.80E-05
2.01E-05
2.08E-06
Transportation
Polyester
5.82E-07
2.64E-06
9.15E-07
9.47E-08
Transportation
Polyester
and
Cotton
1.16E-06
5.29E-06
1.83E-06
1.89E-07
Transportation
Cotton
3.27E-06
1.49E-05
5.15E-06
5.33E-07
Transportation Ny-
lon
2.91E-07
1.32E-06
4.57E-07
4.73E-08
Collection
9.67E-03
4.68E-03
6.00E-03
6.21E-04
Substitution
Alu-
minium
Market
ratio 100%
-1.34E-05
-3.14E-04
-3.08E-05
-1.37E-03
Waste
treatment
landfill metals
5.98E-09
2.81E-07
3.27E-09
1.18E-10
Aluminium
recy-
cling
6.33E-07
2.41E-06
3.02E-07
2.81E-07
==PAGE:187==
A.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment Results
179
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
climate change
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
ozone depletion
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
human toxicity - cancer effect
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
cotton
nylon
polyester
poly&cott
best case
PE
human toxicity - non cancer effect
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
cotton
nylon
polyester
poly&cott
best case
PE
particulate matter
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
cotton
nylon
polyester
poly&cott
best case
PE
ionizing radiation
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Figure A.6: Process contribution for each impact category.
==PAGE:188==
180
A Appendix
Figure A.7: Process contribution for each impact category.
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
photochemical ozone formation
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
terrestrial acidification
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
eutrophication terrestrial
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
eutrophication freshwater
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
eutrophication marine
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
ecotoxicity freshwater
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
depletion abiotic resources - fossil
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
cotton
nylon
polyester poly&cott best case
PE
depletion abioitc resources - elements
Landfill
WTE
Recycling Technology
Sorting Facility
Collection
Transportation
Sum
==PAGE:189==
Bibliography
Alessandra Vaccari1, Patrizia Ferri (2017). “Il tessile riutilizzabile cerca nuova vita”.
In: Ecoscienza 2, pp. 30–33.
Aquafil (2018). Environmental product declaration for Econyl nylon textile filament
yarn. Environdec.
ARPAV (2019). Industrial Waste Database. Accessed: 21.06.2019. url: http://www.
arpa.veneto.it/temi-ambientali/rifiuti/datirifiuti/impianti_rifiuti.
php.
Barışçı, Sibel and M Salim Öncel (2014). “The disposal of combed cotton wastes by
pyrolysis”. In: International journal of green energy 11.3, pp. 255–266.
Bartl, Andreas (2011). “Textile waste”. In: Waste. Elsevier, pp. 167–179.
Bessi, C et al. (2015). “Textile waste management in Prato District: Collection Models
and Technological Option for material recovery”. In:
Bisinella, Valentina et al. (2016). “A global approach for sparse representation of
uncertainty in Life Cycle Assessments of waste management systems”. In: The
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 21.3, pp. 378–394.
Björklund, Anna, Göran Finnveden, and Liselott Roth (2010). “Application of LCA
in waste management”. In: Solid Waste Technology & Management 1, pp. 137–160.
Chen, Hsiou-Lien and Leslie Davis Burns (2006). “Environmental analysis of textile
products”. In: Clothing and Textiles Research Journal 24.3, pp. 248–261.
Clavreul, Julie et al. (2014). “An environmental assessment system for environmental
technologies”. In: Environmental modelling & software 60, pp. 18–30.
Commission, European (2010). Being wise with waste: the EU´s approach to waste
management. Directorate-General Environment.
— (June 2016). Directive 2008/98/CE on waste (Waste Framework Directive). Ac-
cessed: 24.06.2019. url: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/.
EC-JRC (2011). ILCD Handbook: Recommendations for Life Cycle Impact Assessment
in the European context. eng.
ECONYL (2019). The ECONYL yarn: Sustainability. Accessed: 01.07.2019. url:
https://www.aquafil.com/sustainability/econyl/#econyl-03.
Ernantez, KPE, MMB Barrera, and MA Navacerrada (2017). “Textile Wastes: State
of the Art”. In: J Textile Sci Eng 7.322, p. 2.
Esteve-Turrillas, Francesc A and M de la Guardia (2017). “Environmental impact of
Recover cotton in textile industry”. In: Resources, conservation and recycling 116,
pp. 107–115.
==PAGE:190==
182
Bibliography
European Commission: Internal Market Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs (2019).
Textiles and clothing in the EU. Accessed: 21.06.2019. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/growth/sectors/fashion/textiles-clothing/eu_en.
European Parliament and Council (2018). DIRECTIVE (EU) 2018/851 of 30 May
2018 amending Directive 2008/98/EC on waste. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L:2018:150:FULL&from=EN, Accessed on
25.06.2019.
Eurostat (2019a). Eurostat Statistic Explained. Accessed: 21.06.2019. url: https:
/ / ec . europa . eu / eurostat / statistics - explained / index . php / Waste _
statistics#Total_waste_generation.
— (2019b). Generation of waste by waste category, hazardousness and NACE. Ac-
cessed: 21.06.2019. url: http : / / appsso . eurostat . ec . europa . eu / nui /
submitViewTableAction.do.
Fund, International Monetary (2019). World Economic Outlook Database. Accessed:
27.06.2019. url: https://www.imf.org/external/index.htm.
Gentil, Emmanuel C et al. (2010). “Models for waste life cycle assessment: review of
technical assumptions”. In: Waste Management 30.12, pp. 2636–2648.
Giannini, Valentina, Donato Iacobucci, and Francesco Perugini (2019). “Local va-
riety and innovation performance in the EU textile and clothing industry”. In:
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, pp. 1–17.
Gray, Sarah (2017). Mapping clothing impacts in Europe: the environmental costs.
Tech. rep. WRAP.
Hauschild, Michael Z, Ralph K Rosenbaum, and S Olsen (2018). Life cycle assessment.
Springer.
HERAmbiente (2019a). Landfill for non-hazardous waste located in Siberie, Som-
macampagna (VR). Accessed: 21.06.2019. url: http://ha.gruppohera .it/
plants/landfills/landfill_non_hazardous_waste_siberie_sommacampagna.
— (2019b). Padua waste to energy plant. Accessed: 22.06.2019. url: http://ha.
gruppohera.it/plants/waste_to_energy_plants/padua.
HestAmbiente (2017). Impianto di Incenerimento rifiuti Urbani e Speciali non peri-
colosi con recupero energetico.
ILCD (2010). ILCD Handbook: General guide for Life Cycle Assessment - Detailed
guidance. eng. Publications Office of the European Union. isbn: 978-92-79-19092-
6.
Inc., Patagonia (2011). Patagonias common Treads Garmet Recycling Program: A
detailed Analysis. Accessed: 01.07.2019. url: https://www.patagonia.com/on/
demandware.static/Sites-patagonia-us-Site/Library-Sites-PatagoniaShared/
en_US/PDF-US/common_threads_whitepaper.pdf.
IS0 (2006). ISO 14044: Environmental management—life cycle assessment—requirements
and guidelines.
ISPRA (2018). Rapporto rifiuti speciali.
ISTAT (2018). CONTI ECONOMICI TRIMESTRALI Prodotto interno lordo, valore
aggiunto, consumi, investimenti, domanda estera.
==PAGE:191==
Bibliography
183
Koszewska, Małgorzata (2018). “Circular Economy—Challenges for the Textile and
Clothing Industry”. In: Autex Research Journal 18.4, pp. 337–347.
Laurent, Alexis et al. (2013). “Deliverable 5.2: Normalisation factors for environmen-
tal, economic and socio-economic indicators”. In:
Le, Katherine (2018). Textile Recycling Technologies, Colouring and Finishing Meth-
ods. Solid Waste Services, Metro Vancouver.
Marenzi, Claudio (2016). Textile and Fashion.
Meoni, Roberto (2016). 1st Thematic Seminar: ”Recycling in textile and waste dis-
posal”. eng. url: "file:///C:/Users/s171990/Desktop/Prato\%20-\%20ASM.
pdf".
Pensupa, Nattha et al. (2017). “Recent trends in sustainable textile waste recycling
methods: Current situation and future prospects”. In: Chemistry and Chemical
Technologies in Waste Valorization. Springer, pp. 189–228.
Rosenbaum, Ralph K, Stylianos Georgiadis, and Peter Fantke (2018). “Uncertainty
Management and Sensitivity Analysis”. In: Life Cycle Assessment. Springer, pp. 271–
321.
Sajn, Nikolina (2019). Environmental impact of the textile and clothing industry. Tech.
rep. European Parliamentary Research Service.
Shen, Li and Martin K Patel (2008). “Life cycle assessment of polysaccharide materi-
als: a review”. In: Journal of Polymers and the Environment 16.2, p. 154.
Shishoo, R (2012). “Introduction: trends in the global textile industry”. In: The Global
Textile and Clothing Industry. Elsevier, pp. 1–7.
Susanna Andreasi Bassi Alessio Boldrin, Giorgia Faraca Thomas Astrup (2019). How
to un-lock the environmental and economic potential of plastic packaging waste: a
multi-stakeholder evaluation.
Tiainen, Arto (2017). “Textile Waste Recovery Potential within the HSY Waste Man-
agement Region: Life-Cycle Assessment and Yield Estimation for Textile Waste
Collection and Transportation”. In:
Tillman, Anne-Marie (2010). “Methodology for life cycle assessment”. In: Environ-
mental Assessment and Management in the Food Industry. Elsevier, pp. 59–82.
Turker, Duygu and Ceren Altuntas (2014). “Sustainable supply chain management
in the fast fashion industry: An analysis of corporate reports”. In: European Man-
agement Journal 32.5, pp. 837–849.
Yu, C (2015). “Natural textile fibres: vegetable fibres”. In: Textiles and Fashion. El-
sevier, pp. 29–56.
Zamani, Bahareh (2011). “Carbon footprint and energy use of textile recycling tech-
niques”. Chalmers University of Technology.
Zhang, You et al. (2015). “Life cycle assessment of cotton T-shirts in China”. In: The
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 20.7, pp. 994–1004.
==PAGE:192==
