==PAGE:1==
A Flexible Hardware Accelerator for
Neural Networks
Andreas Toftegaard Kristensen
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The goal of the thesis is the development of an eﬃcient and ﬂexible hardware
accelerator for neural networks, supporting the wide variety of requirements
present for these.
This is achieved by co-designing the processing ﬂow and
the hardware architecture itself and optimizing the design parameters of the
accelerator based on diﬀerent test-cases representative of common workloads.
To this end, a model of the accelerator has been developed to supplement the
RTL version and allow for quickly exploring the design-space and provide new
directions of improvement.
Results show that the initial version is capable of outperforming Eyeriss [1] (accel-
erator developed at MIT), when comparing using the same hardware parameters,
i.e., clock frequency, number of multiply-accumulate units, and assumptions on
the external memory interface, for the convolutional neural network architecture
VGG-16.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Telecommunication Circuits Laboratory (TCL)
at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), in fulﬁllment of the
requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
During my M.Sc. studies, I spent a semester at EPFL as an Erasmus exchange
student, completing a semester project at TCL. This experience convinced me
to extend my stay and complete the ﬁnal year of my M.Sc. studies at EPFL.
Additionally, I will continue at EPFL with a six-month internship and possibly
extended this towards a Ph.D. position.
The thesis deals with the development of an accelerator for neural networks
with support for diﬀerent methods of scheduling and mapping operations to
support the wide variety of requirements present for neural networks. Firstly, we
present a description of the main subject areas and the main problems. Then,
we present the implementation by describing the diﬀerent methods for schedul-
ing and mapping to the accelerator, and we provide details on the hardware
implementation. Finally, we provide an analysis of the accelerator by varying
the diﬀerent design parameters using a software model and then compare against
a similar accelerator.
Lausanne (CH), 11-July-2019
Andreas Toftegaard Kristensen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
Firstly, I would like to express my gratitude to the people who have helped me
during the project. I would like to thank the many people who have supervised
me during my thesis at EPFL, Andreas Burg, Alexios Balatsoukas-Stimming,
Robert Giterman, Christoph Müller, and Andrea Bonetti. Moreover, I would
like to thank my supervisor at DTU, professor Jens Sparsø for always being
there with support. Finally, I would also like to thank my family and friends for
supporting me in every endeavor I commit myself to.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Introduction to Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Feed-Forward Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Network Topologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Hardware for Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Data Reuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Data-Flow Taxonomy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
Hardware Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Design and Implementation
15
3.1
General System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Scheduling and Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Convolution: 3 × 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Convolution: 5 × 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Convolution: 1 × 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
System Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.1
Global Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Fetch Unit - Scheduling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.3
Fetch Unit - Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.4
Processing Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.5
Accumulator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.3.6
Mesh Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Evaluation and Results
39
4.1
Design Space Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Test 1-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.1.2
Test 3-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.3
Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.1.4
AlexNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.5
VGG-16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.6
Accelerator Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5
Conclusion
53
5.1
Contribution and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Neural networks are being deployed to solve problems related to a wide range of
application areas such as autonomous driving [2], speech-recognition [3], time-
series forecasting [4] and computer vision [5]. However, they have steadily grown
in computational complexity and larger networks may require billions of ﬂoating-
point multiply-and-add operations to generate results [6].
Moreover, larger
networks may require hundreds of MB of memory just to store the weights. This
is a problem for some applications of neural networks in real-time and embedded
platforms, often constrained by limited memory, computational resources, and
strict low-power requirements. These tight requirements have led to a meteoric
increase in hardware accelerators specialized for neural networks [7–19].
Accelerators for neural networks generally achieve high-performance by exploit-
ing the inherent parallelism available in neural networks, by splitting the com-
putations across hundreds of processing elements (PEs) performing multiply-
accumulate operations. Additionally, local memory is used for maximizing data-
reuse within and across PEs, reducing the penalty of fetching data from external
memory. To this end, most accelerator architectures are based on a 2-dimensional
grid-structure where the local shifting of data naturally represents the computa-
tional requirements for neural networks [11,20]. These architectures also have the
beneﬁt of allowing for simpliﬁed control as data-movement is localized, making
the architecture more easy to scale depending on the requirements.
While the architecture at a high-level is relatively simple, the large number of de-
sign parameters and requirements for diﬀerent neural networks have non-trivial
interactions and lead to complex design decisions at the diﬀerent stages of the
development process. Moreover, given the relatively high cost and eﬀort of FP-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
GA/ASIC implementations and the high rate of innovation in deep learning, it is
important that any such accelerator provides a certain level of ﬂexibility regard-
ing the programmability to support many of the current and future requirements
for neural networks.
In this thesis, we consider the development of a generic accelerator for neural
networks with support for diﬀerent methods of scheduling and mapping oper-
ations to support the wide variety of requirements present in neural networks.
This is achieved by co-designing the processing ﬂow and the hardware archi-
tecture itself and optimizing the design parameters of the accelerator based on
diﬀerent test-cases representative of common workloads. To this end, a model
of the accelerator has been developed to more quickly allow for exploring the
design-space and provide new directions of improvement.
Results show that the initial version is capable of outperforming Eyeriss [1] (accel-
erator developed at MIT) when comparing using the same hardware parameters,
i.e., clock frequency, number of multiply-accumulate units and assumptions on
the external memory interface, for a network with the characteristics of many
of the networks used primarily today. We further wish to extend this work to
a full platform for future research, allowing for easily modifying the diﬀerent
components of the accelerator to help explore the eﬀect of diﬀerent algorithmic
optimizations and requirements for a wider range of workloads.
The outline of the thesis is as follows:
Chapter 2 brieﬂy provides background theory on neural networks, hardware
for these and related challenges which form important considerations for
the design phase.
Chapter 3 presents the scheduling and mapping policies for the accelerator
and its hardware implementation.
Chapter 4 provides the evaluation and results for the thesis and gives a dis-
cussion of these.
Chapter 5 concludes the thesis and presents future work.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter provides a brief background on the subjects related to the thesis.
The ﬁrst section presents an overview of diﬀerent neural networks and their
requirements. The second section introduces hardware for neural networks and
the challenges related to implementing hardware for neural networks.
2.1
Introduction to Neural Networks
Neural networks represent one of the many areas of artiﬁcial intelligence research.
They are inspired by how the nervous system processes and communicates in-
formation. In a neural network, the raw input data is transformed as it passes
through the network into high-level abstract representations in order to extract
useful information.
This transformation, called inference, involves multiple
stages of non-linear processing, each of which is often referred to as a layer.
We provide an example of such a neural network and consider other types of
architectures.
2.1.1
Feed-Forward Neural Networks
Feed-forward neural networks represent one of the simpler architectures, however,
they are widely in-use and provide a simple way of explaining the main concepts
related to neural networks.
==PAGE:14==
4
Background
A neural network can be represented as a directed graph with three types of nodes,
shown in Figure 2.1. The input nodes, designated with xi, represent the input to
the network. The nodes generating the zi values are responsible for taking the
outputs of the previous layer and applying the weights and biases (only shown
in the formula) of the current layer to these. The weights and biases represent
the parameters of the network, like the coeﬃcients in a polynomial. Finally,
the ai nodes apply an activation function to zi. The nodes producing zi and ai
represent a layer in the network. Multiple diﬀerent activation functions may be
used within the same network. In general, the activation functions are used to
make the network work as a non-linear function or generate a pseudo-probability
distribution on the output nodes for classiﬁcation.
x0
x1
z[0]
1
z[0]
0
z[0]
2
a[0]
0
a[0]
1
a[0]
2
z[1]
0
a[1]
0
W[0](3 × 2)
b[0](3 × 1)
W[1](1 × 3)
b[1](1 × 1)
z[0] = W[0]x + b[0]
a[0] = f(z[0])
z[1] = W[1]a[0] + b[1]
a[1] = f(z[1])
Layer 0
Layer 1
Figure 2.1: General feed-forward network with 2 input nodes and 2 layers
of 3 and 1 neurons, respectively. Superscript [L] is used to denote the layer
number. The mathematical operations of each layer are shown beneath the
nodes and the parameters W and b are shown above the network for each layer
with their respective sizes.
Mathematically, the inference part is represented as
a[L] = f(W[L]a[L−1] + b[L]) ,
(2.1)
where [L] is used to denote the layer number. The matrix W[L] contains the
weights and b[L] contains the biases, these represent the parameters of the
network. To obtain these parameters, the network ﬁrst has to be trained, that is,
the parameters are ﬁtted to data. The training is usually performed oﬀ-line, i.e.,
on a local machine or on a server to enable supervision of the training process.
Therefore, we consider training out of scope for the thesis, however, we may in
the future consider evaluating this as well.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Introduction to Neural Networks
5
2.1.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
The convolutional neural network (CNN) is another type of network architecture,
being the most common deep neural network (DNN) for image processing and
the focus of this thesis. Before considering the network architecture, we have to
consider some nomenclature, referring to Figure 2.2 for a visual reference.
Given an input feature map consisting of ncin sets of 2-D inputs, each of which is
called a channel, a convolutional layer applies ncout sets of 3-D ﬁlters onto these
input feature maps to extract visual characteristics and generate the output
feature maps [21]. Each input channel is convolved with a distinct 2-D ﬁlter
from a 3-D ﬁlter, with one 2-D ﬁlter for each input channel. In addition, there
is a 1D bias that is added to the ﬁltering results for each set of 3-D ﬁlters.
Input Feature Map
(hin, win, ncin)
Output Feature Map
(hout, wout, ncout)
Filter
(hkernel, wkernel, ncin)
Figure 2.2: Example of cross-correlation operation for a single 3-D ﬁlter
stack, producing a single output pixel by performing element-wise multiplication
with each channel in the input feature map and adding up all these results.
With the nomenclature presented, we now brieﬂy consider the diﬀerent layer
types used for such an architecture:
Convolutional Layers (CONV) As previously discussed, this layer applies
sets of 3-D ﬁlters onto the input feature map to generate the output feature
map. Filter shapes may vary from layer to layer, and for kernels larger than
1 × 1 border eﬀects may reduce the output dimensions, which can require
padding. Moreover, the stride across the input window may also vary. The
simpliﬁed algorithm for the CONV layer is, presented as Program 1 on
page 12.
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
Fully-Connected Layers (FC) The end of a convolutional neural network
will often use one or more fully-connected layers, i.e., the layers used in a
feed-forward neural network. This is useful for reducing the feature maps
to class scores for classiﬁcation or single/multiple values for regression.
Activation Layers (ACT) The CONV and FC layers are also directly fol-
lowed by an activation layer. A popular activation layer uses the recti-
ﬁed linear unit function ReLU, which computes max(0, x) [22].
Other
widely used activation functions include the sigmoid and hyperbolic tan-
gent function, shown in Figure 2.3 along with the ReLU function. While
the ReLU activation function is quite simple, it has been used to obtain
many state-of-the-art results, and it is particularly interesting for hardware
implementations as it only requires a comparison to 0.
ReLU = max(0, x)
Sigmoid = 1/(1 + exp(−x)) Hyperbolic tangent = (ex −
e−x)/(ex + e−x)
Figure 2.3: Overview of some popular activation functions.
Pooling Layers (POOL) Reduces the spatial dimensions of the input by ap-
plying operations such as maximum (max-pooling) or average (avg-pooling)
on a neighborhood of the output feature map produced by a CONV layer,
producing a single value from this neighborhood. Figure 2.4 provides an
example for both of these, with the colors representing the diﬀerent neigh-
borhoods in the 4 × 4 window and results for max and average pooling
over these shown as the reduced feature maps.
7
16
4
15
2
15
1
12
6
9
11
7
14 15
2
4
16 15
15 11
10
8
11
6
max
avg
Figure 2.4: The result of applying max- and average-pooling, respectively,
on a 4 × 4 window with a stride of 2.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Introduction to Neural Networks
7
2.1.3
Network Topologies
CNNs can vary greatly in size, depending on the task. For a simple task such
as hand-written number recognition, 5 layers may be all that is needed [23].
However, if the task is very complex, up to a hundred layers can be used [24].
Moreover, the complexity of the individual networks may also vary signiﬁcantly,
and the depth of the network does not necessarily reﬂect this. The VGG-16
architecture shown in Figure 2.5, represents one of the more computationally
challenging deep neural networks, just storing it requires around 550 MB. VGG
utilizes stacks of convolutional layers followed by a max-pooling layer to reduce
the size of the window. At the end, the output of the last convolutional layer is
ﬂattened and used as input for a fully-connected layer.
Figure 2.5: The VGG-16 architecture [25].
However, some networks which are much deeper are able to obtain state-of-
the-art results with signiﬁcantly fewer parameters and MAC operations than
VGG-16. A brief overview of some other network topologies is shown in Ta-
ble 2.1 on the following page, used for reference later when we discuss the
diﬀerent requirements. Considering GoogLeNet-v1 versus VGG-16, we note that
GoogLeNet-v1 signiﬁcantly reduces both the computational requirements and
the memory footprint.
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
Table 2.1: Overview of some popular convolutional neural networks and
their parameters [26]. For FC layers, the number of channels refers to the width
of the matrix W and number of ﬁlters is the height.
Metric
Network
LeNet-5
AlexNet
VGG-16
GoogLeNet-v1
Input Size
32 × 32
227 × 227
224 × 224
224 × 224
# CONV Layers
2
5
13
57
Filter Sizes
5
3, 5, 11
3
1, 3, 5, 7
# Channels
1,16
3-256
3-512
3-832
# Filters
6,16
96-384
64-512
16-384
Stride
1
1, 4
1
1,2
Padding
0
1,2
1
1
Weights
1.7k
2.3M
14.7M
6.0M
MACs
274k
666M
15.3G
1.43G
# FC Layers
2
3
3
1
# Channels
120,400
4096-9216
4096,25088
1024
# Filters
84, 120
4096
1000,4096
1000
Weights
58k
58.6M
124M
1M
MACs
58k
58.6M
124M
1M
Reference
[23]
[27]
[25]
[28]
2.2
Hardware for Neural Networks
In this section, we discuss the main challenges related to hardware for neural
networks by considering the options for data reuse and the diﬀerent requirements
for the layers. Moreover, we consider diﬀerent types of hardware used for neural
networks and how they relate to the challenges.
2.2.1
Data Reuse
Several challenges present themselves when designing an accelerator for neu-
ral networks. Both CONV layers and FC layers mainly rely on multiply-and-
accumulate (MAC) operations. The number of MAC operations to perform can
be immense, as observed in Table 2.1, and it also leads to a large amount of
data movement. However, while the FC layers usually contain the most weights,
the CONV layers account for the greatest amount of computation and data
movement in most CNNs [25,27].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Hardware for Neural Networks
9
While the MAC operation can run at high parallelism, it also presents some issues
for the CONV layers. It is a high-intensity memory operation since we need to
pass over the input feature map and the weights several times over. Reading
this from DRAM for each operation would incur a high energy consumption and
signiﬁcantly impair overall system performance due to the slow DRAM interface.
To handle this issue, a few types of data reuse schemes can be applied:
Convolutional Reuse When performing convolution, the same weights and
activations are reused to compute the results as the computation requires
sliding the activations across the ﬁlter weights. Given an output feature
map of shape hout × wout, each ﬁlter is reused O(hout × wout) times for
the same input feature map plane as it is used for every output pixel.
Input Reuse Given a kernel of shape hkernel×wkernel and a total of ncout ﬁlters,
each pixel in the input feature map is reused O(hkernel × wkernel × ncout)
times as it has to be used for all ncout ﬁlters and in general multiplied with
all the kernel weights. Therefore, this type of reuse represents one of the
key goals when designing an accelerator.
Partial Sum Reuse Moreover, the operations accumulate a large number of
intermediate results in the form of partial sums (PSUMs), which requires
storage if not processed immediately. These can be reused locally by saving
them and adding them to other PSUMs to generate the ﬁnal output pixel
values. Since they represent intermediate values, it can be beneﬁcial to
accumulate them quickly to generate the ﬁnal results, as the PSUMs usually
require more bits for representation as it is the step before rounding.
Weight Reuse Given a batch of N input images, the weights can be reused N
times for both CONV and FC layers. If a system supports diﬀerent batch-
sizes, one additional option for optimizing the system would be to apply
the same weight on multiple diﬀerent input pixels, allowing for greater
speed-ups.
Considering the above, the convolutional reuse and input reuse represent a clear
design goal as they provide high reuse of both the input feature maps and the
weights. The PSUM reuse is also interesting since generating many of these
values require a signiﬁcant amount of on-chip memory storage.
For weight
reuse, while it may be beneﬁcial for some applications to potentially improve
throughput by reusing the weights for multiple input images, the experience of
the designers of the Tensor Processing Unit at Google is that many users prefer
reduced latency over waiting for bigger batches to accumulate and then process
this batch [20]. Therefore, the main focus will be on applying convolutional,
input, and PSUM reuse.
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
2.2.2
Data-Flow Taxonomy
The diﬀerent requirements for the layers in the networks shown in Table 2.1 on
page 8 mean that the accelerator has to support variations in the way data is
mapped and scheduled due to the diﬀerent kernel sizes, strides, padding options,
and input/output sizes.
The main characteristic of many systolic-array type accelerators is the data-ﬂow,
describing the movement of the main data-types. Therefore, the chosen data-
ﬂow will to some extent determine the level of reuse for the diﬀerent data-types,
moreover, depending on the underlying hardware, the chosen data-ﬂow may
also restrict the possible mappings of the data-structures onto the accelerator.
The data-ﬂow is therefore critical to the performance of the accelerator and its
ﬂexibility.
We now consider the basic data-ﬂows, shown in Figure 2.6 on the next page. The
stationary term of the data-ﬂow indicates the data-structure which is local to
the processing elements (PEs), that is, for the output-stationary data-ﬂow, each
pixel of the output is assigned to a given PE. Given inﬁnite resources, we would
only need as many PEs as the number of output pixels and this output pixel
therefore only exists at one location. While the literature contains many other
types of data-ﬂow, they usually represent a mix of the three due to physical
limitations and depending on the use-case an accelerator may be able to switch
data-ﬂow.
Output-Stationary (OS) Figure 2.6a on the facing page shows the output-
stationary dataﬂow. The input and weight values are streamed in every
cycle and the reduction of the operands takes place in the individual PEs,
with no sharing of intermediate results across PEs. For implementation,
where resources are limited, the PEs are time-multiplexed.
Once one
output pixel is generated by a PE, the result is transferred to memory
and the PE becomes available for another output pixel. A beneﬁt of this
data-ﬂow is that we keep the more expensive data-type local, the PSUMs.
The other data-ﬂows might require storing and loading back PSUMs.
Input-Stationary (IS) Figure 2.6b on the next page shows the input-stationary
dataﬂow, a mapping where each element of the input feature map is mapped
to their own PE in the array. Once placed, they are not replaced until all
computations involving them have completed. Reduction takes place by
communicating PSUMs across MAC units present in the array and may
often take multiple cycles due to pipelining.
Weight-Stationary (WS) Figure 2.6c on the facing page shows the weight-
stationary dataﬂow, a mapping where each element of the kernels are
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Hardware for Neural Networks
11
mapped to their own PE in the grid. Again, reduction takes place by
communicating PSUMs across MAC units present in the array and may
often take multiple cycles due to pipelining.
(a) Output-stationary
Input
Weight
Output
(b) Input-stationary
(c) Weight-stationary
Figure 2.6: Taxonomy of basic dataﬂows showing the ﬂow and mapping of
the three diﬀerent data-types:
Input,
weights, and
output.
Considering the execution of the cross-correlation algorithm1, i.e., a convolu-
tional layer, the chosen data-ﬂow can be represented by the order of the loops
of the cross-correlation algorithm, shown as Program 1 on the next page. This
just represents one choice of loop-ordering for a naive representation. For the
weight-stationary data-ﬂow, given inﬁnite resources, we would completely unroll
the loops given in lines 1, 3, and 4, as they represent loading the weights. The
inputs are then streamed in and the PSUMs (generated in the inner-most loop)
communicated across.
1In reality, the convolutional layers apply the cross-correlation algorithm and not convolu-
tion, but the two are used as synonymous.
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
In practice, given limited resources, we will apply loop-tiling to the diﬀerent
loops based on memory and other resource constraints, such as available PEs
and the structure of the data-delivery mechanism. The size of the inner-most
loops for each loop-tiling will then meet these resource constraints. Due to this
complexity, we will primarily use the loop descriptions for a high-level description
of the data-ﬂow and not all the internal mechanics of the accelerator.
Program 1 Cross-Correlation Algorithm for Convolutional Neural Networks. I
is the input feature map, W represents the weights, O is the output feature map.
We describe the size of these data-structures using nci for number of channels,
hi for height and wi for width. Let s denote the stride size and the currently
selected ﬁlter is designated as F.
Require: I[ncin][hin][win], W[ncout][ncin][hkernel][wkernel], O[ncout][hout][wout].
1: for filt ←1 to ncout do
2:
F ←W[filt]
3:
for rowF ←1 to hkernel do
4:
for colF ←1 to wkernel do
5:
for rowO ←1 to hout do
6:
for colO ←1 to wout do
7:
for ch ←1 to ncin do
8:
O[filt][rowO][colO] ←O[filt][rowO][colO]
+ I[ch][s×rowO+rowF][s×colO+colF]
× F[ch][rowF][colF]
9:
end for
10:
end for
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
end for
14: end for
2.2.3
Hardware Platforms
Due to the wide-ranging applications of neural networks, and their high computa-
tional demands, many hardware platforms have special features solely targeting
DNNs or are optimized towards executing DNNs. We now brieﬂy consider these
diﬀerent hardware platforms and their beneﬁts.
CPU Central processing units are the traditional workhorse and today many
optimized software libraries such as Open-BLAS [29], Intel MKL [30],
CMSIS-NN [31] provide exceptional performance, but the hardware itself
may also be optimized such as the special vector instructions in the Intel
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Hardware for Neural Networks
13
Knights landing CPU for deep learning which improves the throughput
of multiply-add operations with 8-bit and 16-bit integer data types and
are used to achieve performance gains in low-precision convolution and
matrix-matrix multiplication operations used in deep neural networks [32].
GPU Graphics processing units represent a signiﬁcant step in performance
compared to CPUs and they were the driving force behind the resurgence in
research into neural networks as they provided the computational capacity
required. While DNN processing was not their original purpose, modern
GPUs such as the NVIDIA PASCAL GP100 provide 16-bit ﬂoating-point
(FP16) arithmetic support to perform two FP16 operations on a single
precision core for faster deep learning computation [33]. However, both the
CPU and the GPU represent architectures where a centralized control unit
is used for a large number of ALUs, with these ALUs only being able to
fetch data from the memory hierarchy and not communicate data directly
with each other.
FPGA Field-programmable gate arrays provide the ﬂexibility of constructing a
custom accelerator with full support for communicating data across ALUs,
and therefore potentially many beneﬁts for neural networks where the main
bottleneck usually lies in data-movement. Additionally, their ability to be
reprogrammed and their reduced development time make them particularly
interesting for applications with low volumes and a high pace of algorithmic
innovation. Large companies such as Microsoft have used them to speed-up
applications such as ranking web-pages in their search engine [34].
ASIC Application-speciﬁc integrated circuits represent the ﬁnal specialization
step. Compared with FPGA implementations, they do not suﬀer the area
and timing overhead inherent to FPGAs due to the re-programmability
feature. However, the longer development cycle and higher upfront cost
make it less appealing for specializing towards very speciﬁc areas with a
high level of innovation, making it important to consider possible future
requirements and how they ﬁt the design. Accelerators such as the Tensor-
Processing Unit from Google [20] and Eyeriss from MIT [11] strive towards
ﬂexible ways of executing these networks by focusing mainly on the core
requirements of neural networks.
In this thesis, we target ASIC, beneﬁting fully from the customizability when it
comes to internally communicating values between the PEs. However, this also
requires us to maintain a high level of ﬂexibility in terms of programming.
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Design and Implementation
In the previous chapter, we introduced neural networks and the main require-
ments and challenges for implementing accelerators for these. We now present
the design and implementation of the accelerator by ﬁrst considering a simpliﬁed
view and diﬀerent mapping strategies along with the hardware requirements of
these. We then present the full system and the individual components.
3.1
General System Overview
Before discussing the scheduling and mapping, we provide an overview of the
accelerator in Figure 3.1 on the following page. The main control units shown
are:
Global Controller This controller is responsible for programming the other
controllers when receiving the main program and maintaining the overall
state of the accelerator, that is, controlling which fetch-units are running
and when the processing grid can start processing the data. It also contains
the static parts of the conﬁguration for the processing grid, that is, how the
processing elements (PEs) and accumulators are connected together and
how the PSUMs and input values are connected to the PEs. Depending on
the kernel sizes and other parameters, the global controller may reconﬁgure
the grid such that the groups of processing elements merge together.
==PAGE:26==
16
Design and Implementation
Fetch Units The fetch units are programmed with the schedule and mapping
used for the layer, i.e., which segments of the data structures the accelerator
is currently operating on and where these fetched values are mapped to
in the accelerator. This information provides the scheduling and mapping
information used to process the current set of data. When a fetch-unit
completes fetching a block of data, it forwards the information to the
scheduling table in the global controller, relating information on the size
of the currently scheduled data and how this is mapped. Note that for the
current version, the accelerator does not have a unit for writing back the
results, instead, this is done by accessing the memories for the PSUMs in
the accumulators during veriﬁcation.
Figure 3.1: Accelerator top-level architecture view with the main compo-
nents and a zoom-in on a single processing element in the top-right corner with
its scratch-pad memory (SPM), controller, and datapath.
Processing Grid Controller This controller is responsible for setting up the
mesh network between the input buﬀers and the PEs, requesting data from
the input buﬀers, conﬁguring the processing grid and setting the PEs to
use the correct weight from their local scratch-pad memory (SPM). When
a valid schedule is provided for both the inputs and the weights stored in
the SPMs of the PEs, the grid controller will request the mesh network
to set up the connections to the correct rows, activate the columns of
PEs and start moving data from the input buﬀers to the processing grid
for processing. The grid controller will then continue processing the data
until it has exhausted the data made available the last time the schedule
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Scheduling and Mapping
17
was read. The grid controller is also responsible for providing the global
controller with the current status of the results, i.e., when the partial sums
become valid output values.
The other main components are the input buﬀers, the mesh network, and the
processing grid.
Input Buﬀers The input buﬀers contain one input buﬀer per row of PEs and
extra memory banks can be added (as shown) to provide overlapping
fetching of input and computation.
Mesh Network The input buﬀers connect to the PEs through the mesh net-
work, which allows for diﬀerent ways of connecting the memories to the
PEs, increasing the local reuse of the input feature maps for diﬀerent
patterns.
Processing Grid Finally, the processing grid contains the processing element
groups (PEGs) and accumulator modules. Each PEG contains an accu-
mulator module, used to accumulate values across the rows of PEs. The
accumulators also contain the memories for the PSUMs. A simpliﬁed view
of a PE is shown in the upper right corner of Figure 3.1 on the preceding
page. A local controller in the PE is used to support the data patterns
required for the diﬀerent padding and striding options when streaming
in data. While the ﬁgures show the use of 3 × 3 groups, other conﬁgura-
tions of groups can be used and processing groups can also be merged by
reconﬁguring the networks inside the processing grid.
With a brief overview of the accelerator presented, we move to a discussion of
the scheduling and mapping strategies, and provide examples for diﬀerent layers.
3.2
Scheduling and Mapping
When considering mapping and scheduling strategies, it is important to keep
in mind the reuse opportunities discussed in Section 2.2.1 on page 8, and how
they can be utilized in the design of the accelerator. Moreover, we also have to
consider how eﬃcient the mapping/scheduling utilizes the resources, we desire a
uniform distribution of data across the memories and PEs to reduce requirements
for the worst-case mapping.
For this accelerator, an output-stationary data-ﬂow is used, which is reﬂected
by the structure of the processing grid. The current schedule is based on the
==PAGE:28==
18
Design and Implementation
fetch-units requesting the maximum amount of data possible and then updating
the schedule table. The maximum amount of data which can be fetched for
the input buﬀers is either set by the maximum number of rows we can ﬁt into
these, or, set by the number of output rows generated from these inputs that
we can store in the accumulator memories. Next, the fetch-units traverse along
the input channels to generate the results as fast as possible, and the results of
this process are kept local in the accumulators until complete. Additionally, the
accelerator can also keep the weights stationary, given enough space.
3.2.1
Convolution: 3 × 3
Figure 3.2 shows the mapping and scheduling of four 3 × 3 kernels and one
channel of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs. If the size of
the PEGs matches the kernels, the mapping is non-trivial and we just map the
weights of the current channel of the kernel directly and the accumulators are
programmed to read results from all the rows connected to it. Then, when
this channel has been processed we simply move to the next channel and the
accumulators will then fetch the previous PSUMs to add to the ones generated
for the new channel.
Input Buffers
Processing 
Elements
Accumulators Processing 
Elements
Accumulators
Input Feature Map
Kernels
Figure 3.2: Mapping and scheduling of four 3 × 3 kernels and one channel
of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Scheduling and Mapping
19
While there are data-ﬂows such as the row-stationary dataﬂow [11] which do not
require accumulators, the diagonal streaming of partial sums requires the PEs to
wait with performing the MAC operation depending on when the partial sums
are received, making the control and use of the PEs more complicated. The use
of accumulators in our case is more similar to the Tensor-Processing Unit [20].
Another scheduling and mapping choice, shown in Figure 3.3, would be to map
multiple channels from the input feature map, overlapping in the stream buﬀers.
This requires scheduling two channels at the same time. The accumulators in
the same column are then connected to accumulate results across all six rows of
PEs. The bottom accumulators are still in use, but they do not store the result
and instead forward it to the top accumulators.
Figure 3.3: Mapping and scheduling of two 3 × 3 kernels and two channels
of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs.
However, the scheduling and mapping option shown in Figure 3.2 on the pre-
ceding page is capable of running more kernels in parallel, reusing the inputs
better, and the storage space for the accumulators is better utilized. This could
be alleviated by simply considering the memory of each accumulator in the same
column, as a memory bank and when one overﬂows the data goes to the next
bank.
==PAGE:30==
20
Design and Implementation
3.2.2
Convolution: 5 × 5
Figure 3.4 shows the mapping and scheduling of two 5×5 kernels and one channel
of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs. Continuing with a size of
3 × 3 for a PEG, we need to decompose the kernels such that the lower rows are
loaded at a later point in order to ﬁt the height.
Figure 3.4: Mapping and scheduling of two 5 × 5 kernels and one channel
of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs. To ﬁt the kernel with
the size of the PE groups used before, we can decompose the kernel and later
load this segment.
Another implementation choice could have been to support 5×5 kernels natively
by resizing the PEGs, however, we have to balance the use of the accumulators
and the utilization of the PEs inside each group. Mapping by decomposing has a
PE utilization of 83.34% whereas mapping one 5×5 kernel across all four groups
would give a utilization of 69.45%, for this size of the accelerator. Moreover, the
more kernels we can map at the same, the more we reuse the current input.
We therefore simply disable one column of accumulators, map across the vertical
boundary to the next processing group, forming an extended processing group,
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Scheduling and Mapping
21
and disabling the last column of PEs. The choice of extending horizontally is
also based on the lower complexity, since cutting the kernel horizontally would
otherwise require reﬁlling the pipeline correctly to obtain the correct combination
of products to continue the convolution.
3.2.3
Convolution: 1 × 1
Figure 3.5 shows the mapping and scheduling of size 1 × 1 kernels and two
channels of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs.
Figure 3.5: Mapping and scheduling of size 1 × 1 kernels and two channels
of a 6 × 6 input feature map onto a grid of 6 × 6 PEs. Each ﬁlter is mapped out
across the height of the grid and we then accumulate back up.
The 1 × 1 ﬁlters are usually used in the later stages of the network to reduce
the number of channels, therefore, they are usually quite deep and mapping
single kernels to a column of PEs provide a way of reducing the worst-case
memory footprint on the PEs. Just as with the mapping of two channels for
the 3 × 3 kernel, we set the accumulators to forward the result upwards. This
same mapping is also used for the feed-forward neural networks. The rows of the
weight matrix for a feed-forward network are the ﬁlters (as each row produces
a single result) and the number of channels is equivalent to the width of the
matrix.
==PAGE:32==
22
Design and Implementation
3.3
System Components
With an overview of the accelerator presented, and a high-level view at how
the diﬀerent data structures are mapped and scheduled we now consider the
individual modules of the system and extend the discussion of how the mapping
and scheduling is supported.
3.3.1
Global Controller
The program to execute a layer is provided to the global controller, and it is the
responsibility of the global controller to maintain an overview of the current state
of the system. For a single layer, around 10-20 instructions are needed, each
of size 64-bit. However, the utilization of the bits in each instruction depends
on the size of the accelerator and some assumptions on the size of the data
structures. The instructions are given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Overview of the diﬀerent instruction op-codes and their meaning.
A full description of the instructions is provided in the sections related to
modules using the instructions.
Op-Code
Description
0000
Schedule for fetching the input feature-map.
0001
Schedule for fetching the weights to the PEs.
0010
Mapping of fetched data to the input buﬀer.
0011
Mapping of fetched data to the PEs.
0100
Instruction for a column of PEs.
0101
Instruction for the processing grid controller.
0110
Vector specifying connections of the multiplexers connecting the
network used for the partial sums to the PEs.
0111
Vector specifying connections of the multiplexers between the
nodes in the network used for the partial sums.
1000
Vector specifying how the processing groups are physically con-
nected and whether a column of accumulators are on.
After receiving these instructions and programming the related controllers, the
global controller starts the accelerator. Figure 3.6 on the next page provides a
==PAGE:33==
3.3 System Components
23
high-level description of this, assuming the use of dual-banking for the scratch-
pad memories (SPMs) in the PEs and the input buﬀers. Dual-banking allows
the accelerator to support overlapping of fetching new input values while the
previously fetched values are still in use by the processing grid.
The steps are then:
Figure 3.6: Example of the steps required to move past initial state of the
system by fetching data, updating the scheduling tables and then providing the
grid controller with the schedules related to the current data available in the
memories. If dual-banking is disabled, each table will only have 1 row.
1. After receiving the main program and setting up the components, the
global controller will activate one of the fetch units and let it run until it
reaches a synchronization point.
2. When the fetch unit completes the fetching of the scheduled subset of the
data structure up to the synchronization point, it updates the scheduling
table inside the global controller, providing information related to how
much was fetched and how it was mapped.
3. Initially, there is no data from the other fetch-unit and this will also fetch
its data once the other fetch-unit completes.
4. The other fetch unit completes and likewise updates the scheduling table.
5. With the scheduling information valid for each memory bank, the grid
controller will load the schedule and start processing the data based on the
information. At the same time, another fetch-unit can start fetching data
to the second memory bank, to reduce the overhead of memory transfers
by overlapping the compute and memory operations.
==PAGE:34==
24
Design and Implementation
Whenever the grid controller ﬁnishes the use of the data, it will request infor-
mation on the next memory bank, thus invalidating the old memory bank and
freeing a slot in the scheduling table. Depending on how the data is scheduled
the grid controller may invalidate the memory banks for e.g. the input buﬀer
many times over, waiting a long time before invalidating the PE SPM and thus
keeping the data local for a longer time. We now consider the fetch-units and
how they are programmed and operate.
3.3.2
Fetch Unit - Scheduling
The two fetch-units are each composed of a scheduler, which accepts a set of
instructions describing how to fetch the data structure and a mapping unit
which takes the received data and puts it in either the input buﬀers at the
correct address or into the PEs.
The scheduler inside the fetch-unit utilizes the instruction shown in Table 3.2
on the facing page. The op-code 0000 is used for the input feature maps and
0001 for scheduling data to the PEs. The instruction describes a loop, requiring
at minimum the stride and bound to be set, and the memory stride. Multiple
of these instructions are required to describe the full schedule. The order of
execution of the loops is simply determined by the order in which they are
provided when programming the fetch units.
As an example, if we want to fetch a feature-map of size 3 × 18 × 18 we have
to schedule this in such a way that we do not generate more results than we
have space for, and that we also do not fetch more than we have space for in
the input buﬀers. Consider that due to storage limitations, we only fetch 6 rows
at a time. When moving to the next set of rows after traversing all channels,
an overlap is required of kh −s, where s is the stride. Therefore, the outer loop
only increments by 4 for kh = 3 and s = 1. The pseudocode for fetching this is
shown as Program 2 on page 26 and the instructions are provided in Table 3.3
on the facing page.
The placement of the synchronization point and the size of the loop tiling thus
controls the size of the data block that we process. If multiple channels where
to be fetched at the same time we could tile loop ch and add the sync at the
outer-loop.
Note that we do not actually need the instruction for fetching the column ele-
ments, and can merge the two last loops assuming that the rows are stored next
to each other in the memory.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 System Components
25
Table 3.2: Instruction for the fetch unit.
Field
Size
Description
stride
X
Loop stride
bound
X
Loop bound
mem_stride
X
Memory stride which the value of the loop variable
is multiplied with and added to a linear combination
formed by all the loops having mem_stride ̸= 0 to in-
dex into memory.
tile
X
Indicates the loop is the outer-loop in a tiled loop and
the ﬁeld gives the number of the inner-loop. The outer-
loop will then forward information whenever it updates.
tile_bound
X
Bound of the inner-loop in the tiling. A speciﬁc ﬁeld
is used instead of the stride of the tiled loop since the
splitting of the loop is not necessarily perfect.
sync
1
Indicates a synchronization point, that is, the fetch
unit has fetched all the data needed to start processing.
When reaching a synchronization point, the mapping
unit will update the scheduling table.
Table 3.3: Set of fetch instructions for fetching a 3 × 18 × 18 input feature
map, with the schedule shown as 2 on the following page.
The 3 for tile
indicates that the loop row1 has to forward tiling information to loop row2
when updating.
Loop
stride
bound
mem_stride
tile
tile_bound
sync
row1
4
18
18
3
6
0
ch
1
3
18 × 18
0
0
1
row2
1
18
18
0
0
0
col
1
18
1
0
0
0
3.3.3
Fetch Unit - Mapping
The second part of the fetch unit is the mapping unit.
The scheduler is a
generic component and can be reused to generate addresses for any loop-structure.
However, the mapping is speciﬁc to the hardware we map to and we thus have
two diﬀerent mapping units. Note that many ﬁelds of these do not have speciﬁc
==PAGE:36==
26
Design and Implementation
Program 2 Fetching input feature map of size 3 × 18 × 18. Due to storage
limitations, we only fetch 6 rows at a time. When moving to the next set of
rows after traversing all channels, an overlap is required of kh −s, where s is the
stride. Therefore, the outer loop only increments by 4 for kh = 3 and s = 1.
Require: I[3][18][18]
1: for row1 ←1 to 18 step 4 do
2:
for ch ←1 to 3 step 1 do
3:
for row2 ←row1 to min(18, row1 + 6) step 1 do
4:
for col ←1 to 18 step 1 do
5:
addr ←ch × hin × win + row2 × win + col
6:
end for
7:
end for
8:
end for
9: end for
sizes, instead, they depend on the size of the accelerator and some assumptions
on the data to be fetched.
The mapper to the input buﬀer only requires a single ﬁeld in the current im-
plementation, the width. This ﬁeld indicates how much data to put into each
stream buﬀer before going to the next one. If we have mapped to all input buﬀers,
we simply loop around and start writing at a position next to the previously
written block.
Finally, for the unit mapping to the PEs in the grid, we use the instruction
described in Table 3.4 on the next page The reverse ﬁeld is needed when
performing matrix multiplication. For matrix multiplication, storing the rows
along the columns of the grid from 0 and up would mean that the results from
column 2 arrive before column 0 and so forth. Therefore, the reverse ﬁeld
reverses the mapping to provide the correct order of the outputs.
3.3.4
Processing Grid
We now consider the processing grid, as shown in Figure 3.1 on page 16. The
grid contains the processing element groups, with the PEs and the accumulators.
Moreover, it contains register lines for the output values from the mesh network
and registers lines for the partial sums. A simpliﬁed view of this is shown in
Figure 3.7 on page 28. The input values are registered and sent to the PEs.
The partial result is then forwarded to the next PE and so forth to chain the
computations together and reuse the partial sums between the PEs.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 System Components
27
Table 3.4: Instruction ﬁelds for the PE mapping unit.
Field
Size
Description
size
X
Size of each block we map, e.g., a full kernel or a set
of channels of a kernel.
height
X
Height of the structure we are mapping. When map-
ping, if the height is more than the grid height, we
simply wrap around and overlap.
width
X
Width of structure, and, if the width is larger than
the size of a processing element group, we map to the
next one and cross the horizontal boundary.
reverse
1
Reverse the mapping across the columns.
column_major
1
Use column-major order instead of row-major order.
strict
1
Stops the mapper from mapping across the boundary
of a processing group vertically, and instead causes
the loop around to happen at the border of the PEG.
Due to the ﬂexibility in the mapping, the register lines can be reconﬁgured.
Figure 3.7 on the following page shows the junction between two processing
element groups, with a multiplexer to merge the register lines and the accumu-
lator. Depending on the merge signal, the PEGs can be extended horizontally
by merging the register lines, otherwise, the input signal is directly forwarded
to the next group from the mesh network.
To communicate partial sums between PEs when performing cross-correlation,
and sending these partial sums to the accumulators we require a way for the
PEs and accumulators to connect together, with the view in Figure 3.7 on the
next page being a simpliﬁed one. For each PE in the processing grid a PSUM
network node, as shown in Figure 3.8 on the following page, is associated and it
connects the PEs together. The accumulators are also connected to these and
this is how they receive the data when it is ready.
This PSUM network can also be conﬁgured, we have the option of connecting
the data ﬂowing in the PSUM network to the PEs using pe_connect, when the
PSUMs have to be shared, and, we can also disconnect this sharing so the results
do not mix.
==PAGE:38==
28
Design and Implementation
Figure 3.7: Diagram showing the connections between two PEs in the same
group on the same row. The output of the left-most PE is a PSUM value, which
can be forwarded to the accumulator and the next PE to form the convolution.
For cross-correlation with kernels larger than 1 × 1, the PSUMs are connected
to the PEs. For cross-correlation with 1 × 1 kernels and matrix-multiplication,
the PEs accumulate locally as long as they need to and then forward to the
accumulators. The pipelining spacing means that there is no conﬂict in the
PSUM network and the output PSUMs simply go to the accumulator in order.
Figure 3.8: Node in the PSUM network. The pe_connect signal goes to a
column in the processing grid and determines if we input PSUMs to the PEs
in that column. The psum_connect signal determines if propagation between
nodes is enabled, note that the output of the PE takes precedence but the two
modes are used in a mutually exclusive way.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 System Components
29
3.3.4.1
Instructions
For the processing grid and the PEs, we have two instructions. The grid controller
takes the instruction shown in Table 3.5. The information of the instruction is
then combined with the schedules to correctly traverse the input and set up the
mesh network, accumulators and disable/enable the PEs.
Table 3.5: Instruction for the grid controller.
Field
Size
Description
reverse
1
If 1, mapping to the PEs is reversed
strict
1
If 1, mapping boundary vertically is bounded by processing
element group height
struct_h
X
Height of structure mapped to PEs
struct_w
X
Width of structure mapped to PEs
matmul
1
If 1, then 1 × 1 kernel or matrix multiplication
keep
1
If 1, go into weight-stationary mode
input_h
X
Height of input
input_ch
X
Number of input channels
stride
X
Stride across input
padding
X
Padding of input
The PEs take the instruction given in Table 3.6 on the following page.
A
column of PEs all take the same instruction, as they only have to deal with the
requirements present when streaming in a single row and do not consider e.g.
the stride and padding vertically.
Finally, the grid also needs to be instructed as to how the PSUM network and
the input lines are connected. For the PSUM network, we require two vectors to
set the two diﬀerent sets of multiplexers per column. For the input lines, we only
require a number of bits corresponding to the number of PEGs the grid contains
horizontally. When a group is merged with its neighbor, it disables the column
of accumulators, so this also controls the on/oﬀstate of the accumulators.
With the diﬀerent instructions described, we now consider brieﬂy how the grid
controller and the PEs operate.
==PAGE:40==
30
Design and Implementation
Table 3.6: Instruction for the PE.
Field
Size
Description
length
X
Length of the input to process. When the number
of inputs received matches this, the controller resets
itself to start over for the next input.
accum
1
If 1, the PE moves into local accumulation mode, and
will accumulate length inputs.
bypass
1
If 1, enable bypassing some input values, used for
padding and striding.
bypass_front
X
Number of initial inputs to bypass
bypass_tail
X
Numberof ﬁnal inputs to bypass
stride
X
Stride across input
3.3.4.2
Grid Controller
Figure 3.9 on the next page shows a simpliﬁed view of the operation of the grid
controller for a convolutional layer with kernel size larger than 1.
The steps are:
1. In the ﬁrst step, the grid controller waits for the schedule to be granted.
2. If the schedule is granted, the grid controller will use the provided information
on the data in the input buﬀers and the PE SPMs to program the mesh
network, accumulators and set the active PEs. Additionally, internal variables
are calculated such as the number of output rows which will be generated.
The controller then waits until the programming is acknowledged.
3. When the programming is acknowledged, it will run the cross-correlation by
draining the input buﬀers and streaming the data into the PEs.
4. When the draining is completed, the controller will check if all outputs rows
have been generated. If all the output rows have been generated for the
current input set, and we do not have any segments of a decomposed kernel
left, we move to the next step, otherwise, we run cross-correlation again.
5. In the ﬁnal step, the controller checks which data to invalidate. With the
current scheduling, the inputs are always invalidated and the kernel values
are only invalidated if keep = 0 or we have generated all outputs related to
the current set of kernels mapped to the PEs.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 System Components
31
Figure 3.9: High-Level view of the operation of the grid controller for cross-
correlation.
==PAGE:42==
32
Design and Implementation
3.3.4.3
Example - PE
We now provide a brief example of the programming of three columns of the
PEs. The example given is for an input feature map of width 5 and a kernel of
width 3. A padding of 1 is used and a stride of 1. The desired results are shown
in eq. (3.1), and a corresponding view of the behavior of the PEs to generate
these values is shown in Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10:
Example of generating results for a kernel of width 3 and
values [k0, k1, k2] and input of width 5 and values [i0, i1, i2, i3, i4]. Each bar
is a pipeline stage, and the bar inside the circles indicate the pipeline stage
separating the multiplier and the adder. A stride and padding of 1 are used
to show the bypassing of the input values, that is, in the full grid, column 2 is
programmed to ignore the ﬁrst value and column 0 programmed to ignore the
last value.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 System Components
33
In this case, the center PE is not programmed to ignore the inputs, whereas
column 0 is programmed to ignore the last input, i4, and column 2 programmed
to ignore the ﬁrst input, i0. The partial sums are then added together in the
second pipeline stage of the PEs, with the adder, in order to generate the results.
r0 = 0 ∗k0 + i0 ∗k1 + i1 ∗k2
r1 = i0 ∗k0 + i1 ∗k1 + i2 ∗k2
r2 = i1 ∗k0 + i2 ∗k1 + i3 ∗k2
(3.1)
r3 = i2 ∗k0 + i3 ∗k1 + i4 ∗k2
r4 = i3 ∗k0 + i4 ∗k1 + 0 ∗k2
This conﬁguration of the registers allows us to fully share the PSUMs to correctly
generate the result for cross-correlation. In the future, we can consider optimizing
the draining of the input buﬀers by immediately starting to drain as soon as
possible, that is, if we send in a new input row, the results must not overlap.
3.3.5
Accumulator
The accumulators are responsible for accumulating values across rows in the
processing grid. Figure 3.11 on the next page shows the components in a single
accumulator module, with these being:
Controller Responsible for draining the FIFOs based on which channels have
been activated and reading/writing to the local scratch-pad memory. The
currently active channels are determined by the conﬁguration of the mesh
network. The controller will then synchronize the input received from the
diﬀerent active channels.
Adder Responsible for adding values across all the active input channels, west-
channels from PEs, south from accumulator below and the local memory
in-case we have to accumulate with some previous values.
FIFOs Utilized for all the channels to synchronize the inputs from all the chan-
nels. Therefore, we assume that all input values arrive in the correct order,
but not necessarily at the same time. This allows us to connect accumula-
tor modules in the same column. Due to the nature of the accelerator, i.e.,
data is pushed to the PEs, the complexity involved in stalling the pipeline
is too high and the FIFOs have to be sized for the worst-case.
==PAGE:44==
34
Design and Implementation
Scratch-Pad Memory The storage for the PSUMs in the accelerator is in the
SPM of the accumulator modules. The controller is responsible for setting
this up and ensuring that the correct address is used for the memory to
read/write when accumulating.
Figure 3.11: Accumulator module showing the FIFOs, adder, SPM, and
controller. If required, the accumulator can be set up to send data north instead
of storing it locally.
3.3.6
Mesh Network
To eﬃciently support the diﬀerent data structures we wish to map, we require a
ﬂexible network for moving the data from the input buﬀers to the processing grid.
A mesh network is a type of network where nodes are able to connect directly
and dynamically to as many other nodes as possible and cooperate. However,
due to hardware constraints, and the fact that we only have to connect any row
of the processing grid with only a single buﬀer at any time, we use a partial mesh
network, with the diﬀerent conﬁgurations shown in Figure 3.12 on the facing
page.
The 1-to-1 network is useful for matrix multiplication, 1 × 1 convolution and
when streaming in multiple input channels. When moving across the input rows,
it is preferable if we can just stream the input data without physically moving
it from its current memory. This requires the all-to-all type connection between
the input memory and the rows of PEs.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 System Components
35
(a) 1-to-all conﬁguration
(b) 1-to-1 conﬁguration
(c) Interleaved multicast
(d) Grouped multicast
Figure 3.12: Mesh network conﬁguration examples [35].
Finally, the mesh network is then constructed as shown in Figure 3.13 on the
next page. The stream buﬀers are connected group-wise to the diﬀerent columns
available. The number of columns corresponds to the height of the PEGs.
The Mesh network consists of the following sub-components:
Controller The controller is responsible for setting up the nodes connecting
the input buﬀers to the crossbars and for conﬁguring the cross-bars as well.
When an input window is traversed, the mesh network ﬁrst moves to an
initial state based on the padding, and then it will simply move across the
window based on requests from the grid controller. An example of this
traversal is shown in Figure 3.14 on page 37.
Crossbars To enable the all-to-all connection for the stream buﬀers, each row
of PEGs has a crossbar allowing any node to connect to any row (only one
at a time).
Network Nodes To allow the diﬀerent stream buﬀers to connect to other
crossbars, we have the network nodes which takes input from the west and
==PAGE:46==
36
Design and Implementation
allows it to go north, east and south. Only one buﬀer can at any time
use a node. The nodes have the option of being pipelined for a larger
grid, requiring the accumulator FIFOs to then synchronize the outputs if
skewed.
Figure 3.13: Mesh network connected with the input buﬀers and the PEs.
The mesh controller is used to determine the connections between the input
buﬀers, the nodes, and the crossbars, based on requests from the grid controller.
When traversing the rows of the inputs, the mesh network is simply reconﬁgured,
and the input data can remain stationary in the memories. Figure 3.14 on the
next page shows an example of such a traversal for 4 rows, and a kernel of height
3.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 System Components
37
(a) Initialization with padding 1 at top.
(b) Stride of 1.
(c) Stride of 1.
(d) Stop with padding 1 at bottom.
Figure 3.14:
Mesh network conﬁguration examples when traversing an
input of height 4 with padding 1 and a kernel of height 3.
The grid controller requests each traversal, and the mesh network then uses the
information of the size, padding, and stride to correctly set the active rows/chan-
nels. Initially, with a padding of 1, the accumulators are told that row 0 is
disabled, meaning that it will not synchronize the input values. The input is
then traversed a total of 4 times, ending with padding 1 at the bottom, discon-
nected the last row of PEs as the weights stored in these are now outside the
window.
==PAGE:48==
38
Design and Implementation
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Evaluation and Results
This chapter presents the results and methods of the thesis and a discussion of
these. Firstly, the accelerator presents many diﬀerent design choices regarding
sizing of the memories, size of the grid, the eﬀect of dual-banking and the eﬀect
of the assumption on the memory interface. Therefore, we start by considering
a design space exploration based on a few tests, in order to determine a set of
parameters for the accelerator and determine its current limitations. The second
section is then dedicated to evaluating the accelerator for diﬀerent types of
networks and comparing against a similar accelerator. Finally, the third section
presents the hardware area results.
4.1
Design Space Exploration
For the design-space exploration, we consider a few test-cases, shown in Table 4.1
on the following page. The test-cases for the 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 kernels represent
two ends of the scale of the types of layers which can be encountered. Test
1 has a low requirement on the storage of the PEs, but the number of results
generated per kernel is quite large as the width of the input is 224. Test 2 has a
signiﬁcantly higher memory footprint on the PEs.
For test 3, with 1 × 1 convolution, the idea is to shrink the number of input
channels for the window and the number of ﬁlters is thus lower than the number
of input channels. Finally, test 4 is for matrix multiplication, the computational
complexity is much lower and we primarily expect this to be aﬀected by the
==PAGE:50==
40
Evaluation and Results
memory.
For all test cases, we assume a clock-frequency of 1 GHz for the
accelerator and data of size 8-bits for the inputs and 16-bits for the PSUMs.
Additionally, each memory bank for the input buﬀers are set to 256 B. Moreover,
when the keep option is used, we assume that the storage space for the PEs can
store the entire ﬁlter.
Table 4.1: Test-cases for design-space exploration. Test 4 represents matrix
multiplicaton.
Test
hinput
winput
ncin
hkernel
wkernel
ncout
1
224
224
3
3, 5
3, 5
64
2
64
64
64
3, 5
3, 5
64
3
32
32
64
1
1
32
4
1
1
1024
1
1
1024
To perform the grid-search and generate many of the other results in this section,
a model of the accelerator has been implemented to complement the RTL version,
as grid-searches would otherwise be infeasible within current time constraints.
The model is based on the length of processing steps, loosely deﬁned as the time
it takes before the accelerator switches state. As an example, Figure 4.1 shows
two processing steps. Initially, when the scheduling tables are all empty, the
ﬁrst processing step will simply be the time it takes to read both the data for
the PE SPMs and for the input buﬀers, in this case, 144 CC, measured as the
sum of the weights on the edges. The next processing step then starts with
the processing grid computing (C0 in the ﬁgure) and ends when the processing
grid has new data available, to start the next compute step. The reason that
the C0 operation is counted in the next step is that it can work in parallel with
R2, and the true cost is the worst-case path between the processing steps. The
time before each component starts can also be added, although these are usually
relatively small.
R0
R1
C0
R2
4
90
50
4
3
90
30
Figure 4.1: Example of how two processing steps are represented. The cost
of each processing step is simply the worst-case path from square to square. R
refers to read operations and C to compute operations, with the initial read
being part of step 0 so no full rectangle in front.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Design Space Exploration
41
Multiple operations can happen in parallel in the same processing step, e.g., the
compute unit can process the currently available data, while the fetch units are
fetching data from memory. If dual-banking is disabled, this process becomes
entirely sequential as the data has to be protected until it has been processed
and a new read can only occur after the data has been used.
The components of this model have been veriﬁed with unit-tests and the ﬁnal
results for total read, write and compute compared to a few results from top-level
RTL simulations. Therefore, since the accelerator can be modeled at a relatively
high-level, i.e., fetching of large input blocks and processing these, it is unlikely
that any errors are signiﬁcant to the conclusions of the grid-search as they will
either be small (usually below 5% when compared to the RTL simulation) or the
errors have the same eﬀect between points, i.e., making both estimates slightly
more pessimistic or optimistic.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Processing Step
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Clock Cycles
PE SPM
Input
Write
Compute
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage
Accumulated (Norm)
Mapping Utilization
Figure 4.2: Processing steps to complete test 2 for the 5 × 5 kernel for an
accelerator of size 15 × 12. PE SPM is the time it takes to ﬁll the SPMs in each
PE, Input is the time it takes to fetch the input value, Write is time to write
results, Compute is time it takes to iterate over the current data available in the
accelerator, Accumulated (Norm) is the accumulated number of clock cycles in
percentage and the mapping utilization describes the percentage of PEs which
are utilized in the processing step, i.e., if weights are mapped to the PEs. Due
to the number of data points, the latency of each step is shown using lines,
however, they are discrete values.
Figure 4.2 shows the processing steps required for test 2 for the 5 × 5 kernel,
==PAGE:52==
42
Evaluation and Results
extracted from the model, using the parameters in Table 4.2 on page 47.
We note a pattern of writes, with 6 large groups of writes and one ﬁnal smaller
groups. The last small group is an edge case where the number of ﬁlters remaining
is less than what was scheduled earlier. Since we only allow for either reading
or writing to occur the write operation blocks any other memory operations,
making the processing step much larger, which can be observed by the small
jump for the accumulated number of clock cycles.
4.1.1
Test 1-2
Figure 4.3 on the facing page shows the grid-search for test 1 and 2 for the 3 × 3
kernel and Figure 4.4 on page 45 for the 5 × 5 kernel. Each sub-plot represents a
variation of the parameters for the amount of memory in the accumulators (for
PSUMs) and the assumption on the speed of a 32-bit memory interface. For the
sub-plots, the x-axis represents a variation in the size of the accelerator and the
y-axis is the number of clock cycles, in thousands, that it takes to complete the
test. Finally, we have the option of using one or two memory banks and whether
the keep instruction is set to 1. If this is set to 1, it is assumed that we can ﬁt
the kernel in its entirety.
Considering the results for both tests, we note that in general, all tests signif-
icantly beneﬁt from increasing the memory speed, as observed in the shift of
the y-axis between sub-plots on diﬀerent rows. Independent of the speed of
the memory interface, increasing the size to 15 × 15 provides approximately a
35% speed-up for test 1 for the 3 × 3 kernel and 100% for the 5 × 5 test with
512B for each accumulator SPM storing the PSUMs. This eﬀect stems from the
accelerator being able to ﬁt more ﬁlters at the same time, allowing for the input
feature maps to be signiﬁcantly better reused.
For test 1, the eﬀect of increasing the space for the PSUMs has the most pro-
nounced eﬀect, whereas the results for test 2 are only slightly improved. Test 1
requires the processing of much wider rows, and the requirement for storing the
output is thus also larger. For 100 MHz on the memory interface, increasing the
PSUM storage to 2048 B per accumulator SPM provides approximately a 2×
performance improvement. Since the number of rows we can process is either
limited by the available space for input, or for output, increasing the space for
outputs will allow the accelerator to process more input rows before moving to
the next channel (when the PSUM memory footprint reaches the PSUM memory
size) and thus reuse them better.
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Design Space Exploration
43
Finally, considering the keep and dual-banking options, the dual-banking pro-
vides much higher performance gains, especially when the accumulator memory
is low as it allows the system to hide the cost of having to fetch the same input
rows multiple times due to the lower space for their associated results, making
the reuse lower, whereas a larger grid allows us to process more ﬁlters at the
same time for the same inputs. While the keep option does not provide the most
signiﬁcant improvement in performance, it is expected that this will help reduce
the energy consumption as the kernels are only fetched once for the entire input
feature map.
4000
8000
12000
16000
20000
PSUM: 512 B, Mem. Speed: 100 MHz
PSUM: 2048 B, Mem. Speed: 100 MHz
2500
5000
7500
10000
PSUM: 512 B, Mem. Speed: 175 MHz
PSUM: 2048 B, Mem. Speed: 175 MHz
9×9
15×15
21×21
27×27
2000
4000
6000
8000
PSUM: 512 B, Mem. Speed: 250 MHz
9×9
15×15
21×21
27×27
PSUM: 2048 B, Mem. Speed: 250 MHz
Grid Size
Clock Cycles (Thousands)
Test1
Test2
Keep=0, Bank=1
Keep=0, Bank=2
Keep=1, Bank=2
Figure 4.3: Grid-search for test 1 and 2 for the 3 × 3 kernel.
The reason that the keep option does not provide a signiﬁcant performance
increase has to do with the relative size of the inputs we have to fetch and the
dual-banking. In one case for test 2, with a grid of size 15 × 15 and 3 × 3 kernels,
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation and Results
the fetch-unit will get 15 rows of the input, i.e., 15 × 64 = 960 values, whereas
we only need to fetch 15 × 15 = 225 kernel weights for the channel. Considering
the dual-banking, the size of the inputs we have to fetch and the amount of data
we later have to write relative to the cost of fetching the weights, this represents
only a small part for these tests.
4.1.2
Test 3-4
Finally, we have the tests for 1 × 1 convolution and matrix multiplication in
Figure 4.5 on page 46. These test-cases are mainly limited by memory speed,
and there is no eﬀect in increasing the size of the memory for the PSUMs in a
signiﬁcant way, so the second column is used for the matrix multiplication test.
0
15000
30000
45000
60000
PSUM: 512 B, Mem. Speed: 100 MHz
PSUM: 2048 B, Mem. Speed: 100 MHz
0
8000
16000
24000
32000
PSUM: 512 B, Mem. Speed: 175 MHz
PSUM: 2048 B, Mem. Speed: 175 MHz
9×9
15×15
21×21
27×27
6000
12000
18000
24000
PSUM: 512 B, Mem. Speed: 250 MHz
9×9
15×15
21×21
27×27
PSUM: 2048 B, Mem. Speed: 250 MHz
Grid Size
Clock Cycles (Thousands)
Test1
Test2
Keep=0, Bank=1
Keep=0, Bank=2
Keep=1, Bank=2
Figure 4.4: Grid-search for test 1 and 2 for the 5 × 5 kernel.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Design Space Exploration
45
For 1 × 1, if we cannot store the kernel, i.e., if keep = 0, then we incur a
signiﬁcant performance degradation due to the memory overhead, as can be
observed on the plot when considering the curves for keep = 0 and keep = 1.
However, the true cost of storing is not too high since we spread out the weights
across the rows. So, for a 15 × 15 grid and 64 input channels, we would only
need ⌈64/15⌉= 5 words per PE, which is an insigniﬁcant cost compared to the
speed-up of approximately 10×.
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
PSUM: 256 B, Mem. Speed: 100 MHz
2800
2850
2900
2950
PSUM: 256 B, Mem. Speed: 100 MHz
0
6000
12000
18000
24000
PSUM: 256 B, Mem. Speed: 175 MHz
1590
1620
1650
1680
1710
PSUM: 256 B, Mem. Speed: 175 MHz
9×9
15×15
21×21
27×27
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
PSUM: 256 B, Mem. Speed: 250 MHz
9×9
15×15
21×21
27×27
1125
1150
1175
1200
PSUM: 256 B, Mem. Speed: 250 MHz
Grid Size
Clock Cycles (Thousands)
1x1
Matmul
Keep=0, Bank=1
Keep=0, Bank=2
Keep=1, Bank=2
Figure 4.5: Grid-search for test 3 for the 1 × 1 kernel and matrix multipli-
cation.
For the matrix multiplication test, we note only a small performance improvement
when increasing the size of the grid, with the main performance gains coming
from increasing the memory bandwidth.
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation and Results
4.1.3
Parameters
With these results, we choose the parameters shown in Table 4.2 on the next
page for further analysis. Regarding the grid-size, for many of the test cases,
the signiﬁcance in the performance increase is generally limited after the 15 × 15
mark. The reduction in width has to do with 2 things. It means that we are
closer to the total number of PEs for Eyeriss version 1 [1], to which we later
compare against, and the utilization of the PEs for varying number of kernel
sizes is generally better for grids which are taller than wider since the vertical
utilization is better due to the decomposition.
Given 8-bit input data, we size the input buﬀer memory banks to ﬁt at least 256
words. For the clock-speed, the accelerator has been synthesized and achieved
a maximum frequency of 1.6 GHz, but we use 1 GHz for the results since we
assume that the on-chip SRAM is limited to 1 GHz.
Table 4.2: Accelerator Parameters. For the input data, i.e., the kernel values
and the input feature map, we assume 8-bits. For the PSUMs, we assume 16-bits
for storage and 8-bits when they are written back.
Parameter
Value
Grid Size
15 × 12
Input/Kernel Size
1 B
PE SPM
32 B
Input Buﬀer
256 B
PSUM Size
2B
PSUM SPM
2048 B
Total Memory
60.16 KB
External Memory
100 MHz
On-Chip Clock Frequency
1 GHz
4.1.4
AlexNet
We now benchmark on AlexNet, shown in Table 4.3 on the following page. The
latency to process the individual layers is shown, assuming the parameters in
Table 4.2. The number of external memory access is computed for each layer.
Additionally, for the modeling, since the time for the fetch-units, the writing
and the processing grid are modeled directly, we can also list the percentage of
the total clock cycles where the diﬀerent components are active.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Design Space Exploration
47
Table 4.3: Results for Alexnet [27]. The percentages refer to the percentage
of the total clock-cycles that the operations are running, therefore, the total
percentage is larger than 100% since the compute and memory operations occur
in parallel.
Layer
Latency
Memory
PE
Input
Write
Compute
Access
Fetch
Fetch
CONV1
14.7 ms
46.9 MB
0.6%
94.4%
5.0%
20.7%
CONV2
11.0 ms
34.4 MB
43.0%
53.3%
3.7%
41.1%
CONV3
7.3 ms
22.1 MB
64.2%
33.5%
2.3%
21.7%
CONV4
7.3 ms
22.1 MB
64.2%
33.5%
2.3%
21.7%
CONV5
7.2 ms
21.8 MB
65.2%
33.2%
1.6%
21.5%
Total
47.5 ms
We note that the memory interface is used approximately 100% of the time, and
the compute mostly around 21% of the time, indicating that the processing grid
is waiting most of the time. The current scheduling of the accelerator is not
optimized for dealing with large kernels and reusing the input feature map at
the same time, which makes Alexnet results more pessimistic compared to those
of VGG-16, shown in Table 4.4 on page 49. However, this is not a fault in the
architecture and can be ﬁxed by allowing for the input blocks to be mapped to
any row when mapping at not just start at the top.
We note that as we go deeper in the network, the PE fetching starts taking up
more clock cycles relative to fetching the input. This is due to the increase in
the number of channels, making the ﬁlters much larger, relatively speaking, to
the input feature map.
4.1.5
VGG-16
We now benchmark on VGG-16, with the results shown in Table 4.4 on the next
page. Again, a signiﬁcant amount of the time is spent on fetching compared to
writing for the deeper layers, due to lower reuse of the input rows relative to
generating the result. We also note that the fetching to the PEs start dominating
the input fetching. Therefore, for the future, a new scheduler will be developed
which is able to better ﬁnd trade-oﬀs between the diﬀerent data-structures, the
ﬁlters and the feature maps, depending on the diﬀerent layers.
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation and Results
Table 4.4: Results for VGG-16 [25]. The percentages refer to the percentage
of the total clock-cycles that the operations are running, therefore, the total
percentage is larger than 100% since the compute and memory operations occur
in parallel.
Layer
Latency
Memory
PE
Input
Write
Compute
Access
Fetch
Fetch
CONV1-1
10.6 ms
33.7 MB
0.0%
23.7%
76.2%
6.1%
CONV1-2
68.8 ms
218.0 MB
10.7%
77.6%
11.7%
19.9%
CONV2-1
24.5 ms
77.5 MB
12.0%
71.6%
16.4%
25.1%
CONV2-2
45.0 ms
142.1 MB
13.1%
78.0%
9.0%
27.3%
CONV3-1
22.0 ms
69.0 MB
21.3%
69.5%
9.2%
27.9%
CONV3-2
42.1 ms
131.6 MB
22.4%
72.8%
4.8%
29.3%
CONV3-3
42.1 ms
131.6 MB
22.4%
72.8%
4.8%
29.3%
CONV4-1
25.2 ms
77.7 MB
37.3%
58.6%
4.1%
28.1%
CONV4-2
49.4 ms
152.3 MB
38.1%
59.8%
2.1%
28.7%
CONV4-3
49.4 ms
152.3 MB
38.1%
59.8%
2.1%
28.7%
CONV5-1
20.1 ms
60.9 MB
62.3%
36.5%
1.3%
22.9%
CONV5-2
20.1 ms
60.9 MB
62.3%
36.5%
1.3%
22.9%
CONV5-3
20.1 ms
60.9 MB
62.3%
36.5%
1.3%
22.9%
Total
439.4 ms
4.1.6
Accelerator Comparison
We can compare our results against that of Eyeriss by adjusting the parameters
of the model. The Eyeriss evaluation used a clock-speed of 200 MHz and 60 MHz
for the memory interface. To make the comparison fairer, we compare against
version 1 of Eyeriss and use the results based on what was supported in their
accelerator. They also have results where fetching and compute is overlapped,
however, that was not supported in version 1 of their accelerator and instead
modeled. Likewise, we could model a better scheduling policy for the input
fetching, which approximately halves the latency in both cases, but that is not
currently supported.
For Alex-net, our accelerator is approximately 3× as slow, whereas our accelerator
is close to twice as fast for VGG-16. As VGG-16 represents a more modern
workload, the results for the current version of the accelerator are satisfactory.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Area
49
Table 4.5: Adjusting the model to the parameters of Eyeriss [1], we can
compute similar results. Note that the Eyeriss results are for larger batch-sizes,
and the results listed here have been divided with the batch-size to get the
latency per batch, approximately.
Network
Eyeriss
Ours
Speedup
AlexNet
28.8 ms
91.6 ms
0.31
VGG-16
1436.5 ms
773.0 ms
1.86
4.2
Area
Finally, Table 4.6 provides us with the area results for the accelerator and a
subset of the components, synthesized for 28nm at 1GHz and 1.00V.
Table 4.6: Area results for selected components synthesized for 28nm at
1GHz and 1V. We have subtracted the consumption of the memories for the
accumulators as they have been synthesized with ﬂip-ﬂops, however, the total
shows both with and without these. The size of the minimum NAND2 gate
is 0.46 µm2. The percentage refers to the percentage of the accelerator area
(without the memories) taken up by the component. Therefore, for duplicated
components we can show a percentage for all of these.
Component
[ µm2 ]
[NAND2]
Percentage
All (÷ Mem)
Accumulator
3 867
8 407
0.60 %
11.86 %
Global Controller
1 938
4 213
0.30 %
-
Grid Controller
1 626
3 535
0.25 %
-
Input Lines
10 910
23 717
1.67 %
-
Input Mapper
741
1 611
0.11 %
-
Mesh Network
2 373
5 158
0.36 %
-
PE
2 772
6 026
0.43 %
76.50 %
PE SPM Mapper
1 087
2 363
0.17 %
-
PSUM Network
29 072
63 200
4.46 %
-
Scheduler
7 700
16 739
1.18 %
2.36 %
Total (÷ Mem)
652 157
1 417 733
Total
1 206 989
2 623 889
We show the total area with and without the input buﬀers and the PSUM
memories. The PEs and the accumulators take up most of the area which is not
dedicated to memory, with the control logic taking up an insigniﬁcant portion.
The size of the PEs account for their own memory, as it is so relatively small
that synthesizing with ﬂip-ﬂops is not too pessimistic, whereas the accumulator
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation and Results
memory is not accounted for as this is signiﬁcantly larger. The scheduler is
relatively large as it contains two larger data-paths, one for computing loop
related updates and one for generating the linear combination which indexes
into the memory. Adding the memories approximately doubles the total area
for the accelerator.
In the future, we can work on optimizing the area consumption by performing
general optimizations such as removing the resets on the data registers as the
PEs check the valid bit on the input-lines before operating. Moreover, we can
try to determine an optimal clock-frequency given an implementation target to
allow the synthesis tool to use smaller, slower components and thereby reduce
the area consumption. This will also help reduce dynamic power consumption.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
This chapter concludes the thesis by listing the main contributions, the results
and proposing directions for future works.
5.1
Contribution and Results
In this thesis, we have provided the implementation of a conﬁgurable and scal-
able neural network accelerator with ﬂexible options for scheduling and mapping
to support the execution of neural networks. The processing ﬂow and the hard-
ware architecture have been co-designed in order to better utilize the available
resources to improve overall performance for the diﬀerent workloads.
To this end, a model of the accelerator has been developed to more quickly
allow for exploring the design-space and provide new directions of improvement.
We have used this model to study the eﬀect of varying the parameters of the
accelerator to better understand its current limitations for the diﬀerent types
of workloads and suggest future directions. We also brieﬂy compare the results
of the accelerator to that of Eyeriss [1], showing promising results when using
similar hardware parameters.
==PAGE:62==
52
Conclusion
5.2
Future Work
For future work, we propose the following improvements based on the analysis
of the results:
• Optimize the scheduling jointly with the memory design. As the optimal
scheduling policy can be hard to determine, we furthermore suggest im-
plementing a tool to automatically generate an optimized schedule and
mapping strategy for diﬀerent layers. This will then help automate the
process of generating the code required to run any layer.
• Implement a post-processing step to support pooling operations, activation
functions and possibly compression when writing back. This is particularly
beneﬁcial when the write time becomes dominant and pooling or ReLU
is used.
Pooling will help reduce the size of the block to write back
signiﬁcantly, and ReLU will help the compression by introducing zeros,
making the compression more eﬃcient.
• Perform a full power analysis under the diﬀerent workloads and add the
results of this power estimation back into the tool generating the schedule
to also consider the power consumption as part of the overall cost, and not
just the total latency.
• Finally, when the accelerator and its related tool-ﬂow reach a more mature
state, we will consider moving towards doing a tape-out.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1] Y.-H. Chen, J. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss: A Spatial Architecture for
Energy-Eﬃcient Dataﬂow for Convolutional Neural Networks,” in 2016
ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium on Computer Archi-
tecture (ISCA), pp. 367–379, IEEE, June 2016. ISSN: 02721732.
[2] M. Bojarski, D. Del Testa, D. Dworakowski, B. Firner, B. Flepp, P. Goyal,
L. D. Jackel, M. Monfort, U. Muller, J. Zhang, et al., “End to end learning
for self-driving cars,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316, 2016.
[3] G. Hinton, L. Deng, D. Yu, G. E. Dahl, A.-r. Mohamed, N. Jaitly, A. Senior,
V. Vanhoucke, P. Nguyen, T. N. Sainath, et al., “Deep neural networks for
acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research
groups,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 82–97, 2012.
[4] J. Schmidhuber, “Deep learning in neural networks: An overview,” Neural
networks, vol. 61, pp. 85–117, 2015.
[5] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep Learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
pp. 436–444, may 2015.
[6] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep Residual Learning for Image
Recognition,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, pp. 1–17, dec 2015.
[7] S. Han, X. Liu, H. Mao, J. Pu, A. Pedram, M. A. Horowitz, and W. J. Dally,
“Eie: eﬃcient inference engine on compressed deep neural network,” in
Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International
Symposium on, pp. 243–254, IEEE, 2016.
[8] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, “Bi-
narized neural networks,” in Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp. 4107–4115, 2016.
==PAGE:64==
54
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi, “Xnor-net: Ima-
genet classiﬁcation using binary convolutional neural networks,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 525–542, Springer, 2016.
[10] S. Zhou, Y. Wu, Z. Ni, X. Zhou, H. Wen, and Y. Zou, “Dorefa-net: Training
low bitwidth convolutional neural networks with low bitwidth gradients,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06160, 2016.
[11] Y.-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss: An energy-
eﬃcient reconﬁgurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural networks,”
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 127–138, 2017.
[12] Y. Umuroglu, N. J. Fraser, G. Gambardella, M. Blott, P. Leong, M. Jahre,
and K. Vissers, “Finn: A framework for fast, scalable binarized neural
network inference,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/SIGDA International
Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, pp. 65–74, ACM, 2017.
[13] N. J. Fraser, Y. Umuroglu, G. Gambardella, M. Blott, P. Leong, M. Jahre,
and K. Vissers, “Scaling binarized neural networks on reconﬁgurable logic,”
in Proceedings of the 8th Workshop and 6th Workshop on Parallel Program-
ming and Run-Time Management Techniques for Many-core Architectures
and Design Tools and Architectures for Multicore Embedded Computing
Platforms, pp. 25–30, ACM, 2017.
[14] R. Zhao, W. Song, W. Zhang, T. Xing, J.-H. Lin, M. Srivastava, R. Gupta,
and Z. Zhang, “Accelerating binarized convolutional neural networks with
software-programmable fpgas,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM/SIGDA
International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, pp. 15–24,
ACM, 2017.
[15] B. McDanel, S. Teerapittayanon, and H. Kung, “Embedded binarized neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.02260, 2017.
[16] X. Chen, X. Hu, H. Zhou, and N. Xu, “Fxpnet: Training a deep convo-
lutional neural network in ﬁxed-point representation,” in Neural Networks
(IJCNN), 2017 International Joint Conference on, pp. 2494–2501, IEEE,
2017.
[17] R. Andri, L. Cavigelli, D. Rossi, and L. Benini, “Yodann: An architecture
for ultralow power binary-weight cnn acceleration,” IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 37, no. 1,
pp. 48–60, 2018.
[18] Y.-H.
Chen, J. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss v2: A Flexible and High-
Performance Accelerator for Emerging Deep Neural Networks,” vol. 3, 2018.
arXiv: 1807.07928.
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
55
[19] K. Hegde, J. Yu, R. Agrawal, M. Yan, M. Pellauer, and C. W. Fletcher,
“UCNN: Exploiting computational reuse in deep neural networks via weight
repetition,” Proceedings - International Symposium on Computer Architec-
ture, pp. 674–687, 2018. arXiv: 1804.06508 ISBN: 9781538659847.
[20] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, G. Agrawal, R. Bajwa,
S. Bates, S. Bhatia, N. Boden, A. Borchers, et al., “In-datacenter perfor-
mance analysis of a tensor processing unit,” in 2017 ACM/IEEE 44th An-
nual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pp. 1–12,
IEEE, 2017.
[21] Y. LeCun, K. Kavukcuoglu, and C. Farabet, “Convolutional networks and
applications in vision,” in Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Proceedings of
2010 IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 253–256, IEEE, 2010.
[22] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted boltz-
mann machines,” in Proceedings of the 27th international conference on
machine learning (ICML-10), pp. 807–814, 2010.
[23] Y.
LeCun
et
al.,
“Lenet-5,
convolutional neural networks,”
URL:
http://yann. lecun. com/exdb/lenet, 2015.
[24] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.
[25] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[26] V. Sze, Y.-H. Chen, T.-J. Yang, and J. Emer, “Eﬃcient Processing of Deep
Neural Networks: A Tutorial and Survey,” pp. 1–32, Mar. 2017.
arXiv:
1703.09039.
[27] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation with
deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
[28] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, pp. 1–9, 2015.
[29] Z. Xianyi, W. Qian, and Z. Yunquan, “Model-driven level 3 blas performance
optimization on loongson 3a processor,” in 2012 IEEE 18th International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems, pp. 684–691, IEEE, 2012.
[30] Intel Math Kernel Library. Reference Manual.
Intel Corporation, 2009.
Santa Clara, USA. ISBN 630813-054US.
==PAGE:66==
56
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[31] L. Lai, N. Suda, and V. Chandra, “Cmsis-nn: Eﬃcient neural network
kernels for arm cortex-m cpus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.06601, 2018.
[32] Y. You, A. Buluç, and J. Demmel, “Scaling deep learning on gpu and
knights landing clusters,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, p. 9,
ACM, 2017.
[33] D. Foley and J. Danskin, “Ultra-performance pascal gpu and nvlink inter-
connect,” IEEE Micro, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 7–17, 2017.
[34] K. Ovtcharov, O. Ruwase, J.-Y. Kim, J. Fowers, K. Strauss, and E. S.
Chung, “Accelerating deep convolutional neural networks using specialized
hardware,” Microsoft Research Whitepaper, vol. 2, no. 11, pp. 1–4, 2015.
[35] X. Chen, X. Hu, H. Zhou, and N. Xu, “FxpNet: Training a deep convolu-
tional neural network in ﬁxed-point representation,” in 2017 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 2494–2501, IEEE, May
2017.
