==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
M.Sc. in Engineering in Physics and Nanotechnology
Exploring strong light-matter interaction in reduced dimen-
sional materials
Author: Mark Kamper Svendsen
Supervisor: Kristian Sommer Thygesen
Kongens Lyngby, July 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Physics
Center for atomic-scale materials design
Technical University of Denmark
Fysikvej
Building 311
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3344
info@fysik.dtu.dk
https://www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I have to thank Kristian Sommer Thygesen. Not only have you been a good super-
visor for this final project, but also a generally great mentor for me on the DTU Honours program. I’ve
learned a tremendous amount from you and I really appreciate the time that I’ve gotten to spend with
your group during my studies!
Next I have to thank Yaniv Kurman of the AdQuanta group from Techion university in Israel. Without
your great knowledge of MQED and brilliant insight to expand the vector potential in terms of the
Dyadic Green’s function for the coupling coefficients in the Weisskopf-Wigner framework, this project
would never have been this successful. The running discussions with you over the past 6 months have
been a pleasure and I sincerely hope that we can continue the collaboration in the future!
I also want to thank Frank Koppens and Peter Schmidt from the quantum nano-optoelectronic group
from ICFO for letting me visit the lab in Barcelona. It really sparked my interest in investigating the
intersubband transitions and it taught me a lot about the experimental side of things.
To my good friends Ulrik Leffers, Matthew Larsen and Rasmus Eilkær Hansen: Thank you for proof-
reading my very rough drafts for this thesis. It surely improved the quality of this work significantly
and it helped me a lot in figuring out how best to explain the ideas in here.
Finally, I have to thank Anna Krusell for always having my back when things got rough and being there
to celebrate the small victories with me along the way! I love you, you’re the best!
Kongens Lyngby, July 2019
Mark Kamper Svendsen
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates how graphene plasmons can be used to enhance the emission rate from intersub-
band transition in few layer stacks of transition metal dichalcogenides(TMDs). Specifically, a few layer
stack of TMD sandwiched between a graphene sheet and a mirror is considered. The finite momentum
carried by the plasmon opens up non-vertical transitions between the subbands. It is therefore impor-
tant to include the dispersion of the transition energy in the treatment. Additionally, the coupled mode
of the graphene and the mirror shows very rapid spatial variation across the TMD stack. This means
that the wave functions of the subband states and the electric field of the plasmon are going to vary
on the same length scales. For these two reasons the dipole approximation is rendered inadequate. To
overcome these challenges, a generalized framework based around the Weisskopf-Wigner model and the
minimal coupling Hamiltonian is conceived. Using MQED, it is shown possible to account for cumula-
tive effect of the coupling to all modes of the background electromagnetic field. The developed theory
is general in that it includes all possible linear coupling terms, it is non-pertubative and formulated
around geometric instead of material specific quantities. It can therefore potentially be applied to many
other systems in the future.
The importance of going beyond the dipole approximation for the configurations considered here, is
shown to depend strongly on a combination of the intersubband energy splitting, the effective mass of
the subband states and the graphene Fermi level. Interestingly, it is shown that due to the extreme
thinness of the TMD stacks, the dipole approximation decently describes the coupling to the plasmon,
but completely fails to account for the coupling to the intraband transitions in the graphene. This de-
ficiency leads to both quantitatively and qualitatively wrong results. Additionally, signs of a potential
transition into the strong coupling regime is observed as a breakdown of perturbation theory for large
graphene Fermi levels. However, due the complicated energy landscape, the usual conditions for strong
coupling cannot be directly applied and this is therefore not definitive.
Efficient coupling to the graphene plasmon is shown to be a complicated task due to the many different
types of excitations in the graphene. To address this, a way of estimating the β-factor based on per-
turbation theory is developed. It is generally observed that the thinner samples couple more efficiently
to the plasmon due to a combination of larger intersubband energy splitting and large effective masses.
Purcell enhancements in excess of P = 105 are observed across all thicknesses. Interestingly, the thin
samples display coupling rates to the plasmon in excess of the room temperature linewidth of the inter-
subband transition. This suggests that the coupling of graphene to the intersubband transition could
potentially lead to a new way of exciting graphene plasmons.
==PAGE:6==
Dedicated to Micka, Mathias, Joan and Jesper.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
i
Abstract
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Cavity quantum electrodynamics setups and the case for plasmonic cavities: . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Density functional theory: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
11
2.1
Intersubband transitions in few layer transition metal dichalcogenide stacks: . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Graphene as a plasmonic material: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Developing the theory of the coupling:
23
3.1
Classical electromagnetic fields in matter: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Macroscopic quantum electrodynamics:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Generalized Weisskopf-Wigner model:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Inserting the MQED mode expansion of the vector potential:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
Deriving the Dyadic Greens function: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.6
Inserting the wave functions:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.7
One dimensional envelope approximations: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.8
Perturbation theory expressions:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Implementation of the Weisskopf-Wigner framework:
47
4.1
Parallelized kernel calculation:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Note on the q-integration for the VBM subband states: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Numerical integration scheme: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.4
Simulation setup: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave func-
tion approximation:
57
5.1
Interpreting the coupling kernel K(q, ω): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2
Estimating coupling efficiency:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.3
Comparing wave function approximations: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Comparing the different approximations:
71
6.1
Importance of including the dispersion of the intersubband energy: . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.2
Comparing with the dipole approximation: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.3
Importance of the non-pertubative treatment: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.4
Summary of findings: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7
Comparing the different TMDs:
81
7.1
Coupling efficiency: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
7.2
Purcell enhancement: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
8
Discussion and outlook:
87
8.1
Limitations of the current model: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8.2
Outlook: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
9
Conclusion:
91
Bibliography
92
A The vector potential:
97
B Canonical quantization of vacuum quantum electrodynamics:
99
C Generalized reflection coefficient of the TMD-graphene-vacuum interface
103
D Convergence checks:
105
E β-factors and Purcell:
107
F Expressing the local field using the Dyadic greens tensor:
113
F.1
Calculating the doping concentration from the Fermi level shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
F.2
Comparing the simple model with the absorption calculated with GPAW . . . . . . . . . 118
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Engineering the way that light interacts with matter has played a key role in developing many of the
technologies that the modern world relies on. Underpinning many of these technologies is the theory of
how light interacts with the quantized energy levels in matter. In fact, without the quantum description,
many world defining technologies such as lasers and LEDs would have been impossible[1]. Continued
investigation of the way that light and matter interacts is therefore an interesting pursuit, as it is likely
to play a large role in define both the scientific and technological landscape of the future. Light-matter
interactions come in many forms and the response of a material to the electromagnetic field can both
linear and nonlinear in nature depending on the intensity of the light[2, 3]. This thesis is interested in
how the local electromagnetic environment(LEE) can be engineered to affect the emission/absorption
characteristics of a light source, called an emitter.
For an emitter to act as a source of light, energy has to somehow be transferred away from it and into
the electromagnetic environment as light. The way this works is that if the emitter is some excited
state, that is a non-equilibrium state of excess energy, then it can lose this energy by transferring it into
one of the modes of the local electromagnetic field as a photon. Depending on the way the LEE looks, it
can either be relatively easy or relatively hard for the emitter to emit the photon. The emission process
is thus a combined property of both the emitter and the LEE. The thing defining how hard it is for an
emitter to emit at a certain frequency is the so-called local density of states(LDOS) near the emitter.
The LDOS quantifies how many states of the LEE the emitter can emit into. If the LDOS is high
at the emission frequency then the emission rate will be high and vice versa. By modifying the LEE
it is therefore possible to enhance or inhibit emission at certain frequencies. This effect is called the
Purcell effect and by creating resonant (or antiresonant) conditions near the emitter, the emission rate
can significantly modified.[4]. The Purcell enhancement usually dominates in what is called the weak
coupling regime. In this regime, the interaction between the local environment enhances the emission
rates, but it remains weak or incoherent enough that the light and matter remain separate quantum
objects. Another regime is the so-called strong coupling regime. In this regime the interaction between
light and matter become so strong that the separate quantum nature of the two subsystems disappear
and it is instead necessary with a combined quantum description of the two systems[5]. In this regime,
the emission peaks split into two due to the hybridization of the photons and the emitter[6]. This effect
is called Rabi splitting and it means if the system can be brought into the strong coupling regime, it
becomes possible to engineer both the brightness and the spectral position of an emission peak. Ad-
ditionally, the coherent nature of the interaction makes it an interesting platform to both study the
intricacies of quantum physics and as a platform for future quantum information technologies[7, 8].
1.0.1
Approach of this thesis:
One way of modifying the LEE is by placing the emitter in a cavity. A cavity is usually an optical
resonator for example two mirror spaced by some distance d. In such a resonator, certain modes are
able to bounce back and forth due the distance between the mirrors being some multiple of half the
wavelength of the light, λ, that is d = n λ
2 where n is an integer. These modes therefore become resonant
in the cavity and the local density of states at the frequency of the modes is thus significantly enhanced.
This means that one of way realizing Purcell enhancement is by placing an emitter in a cavity where
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
one of the resonant cavity modes is at the same frequency as the emitter. This situation, along with the
resulting Purcell enhancement is illustrated in figure 1.1 for a cavity with two confocal mirrors. Another
way of modifying the LEE is via surface plasmon polaritons(SPP). An SPP is a collective oscillation
of the electromagnetic field and the surface electrons of a metal at the interface between the metal
and a dielectric[9]. The SPP is tightly bound to the interface and this means that the electric field
can be squeezed beyond the usual diffraction limit of light resulting in very large peak intensities[10].
This in turns leads to a very large LDOS near the plasmon frequency of the interface which means
that by placing an emitter near the interface supporting the plasmon significant Purcell enhancement
is possible[5, 11].
This thesis in fact considers somewhat a combination of the two ideas outlined above. The work builds
Figure 1.1: Illustration of an emitter embedded in dielectric cavity and corresponding Purcell enhance-
ment of resonant atomic transition.
Figure 1.2: Illustration of the plasmonic cavity configuration considered in this thesis. The TMD
stack is sandwiched between the graphene and a perfect conductor mirror. The idea is then to couple
the coupled plasmon mode in the gap to the intersubband transitions in the TMD.
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
3
on an idea first presented by Schmidt et al. in recent work. Here they showed that when monolay-
ers of transition metal dichalcogenides(TMD) where stacked on top of each other, a splitting of the
valence band maximum(VBM) and conduction band minimum(CBM) into subbands happens1. More-
over it was experimentally verified that light can be coupled to electronic transitions between these
subbands[12]. In fact, the out-of-plane transition dipole moment of these transitions was shown to be
very large. Because the transition dipole moment quantifies how strongly the transition couples to the
light, this makes the intersubband transitions interesting candidates for realizing strongly interacting
light-matter configurations. Another interesting fact is that the intersubband transitions in the TMD
stacks live in the mid to near IR region of the electromagnetic spectrum[13]. This means that they
live in the same spectral region as the graphene plasmon[14]. It is therefore possible to modify their
LEE by placing the TMD stack near a graphene sheet. For added confinement, this thesis considers
the TMD stack sandwiched between a graphene sheet and a mirror. The result is very strong con-
finement of the coupled plasmonic mode of the graphene and mirror, which results in a very strong
interaction between the intersubband transition and the plasmon mode in the gap. An illustration of
the setup can be seen in figure 1.2. This van der Waals heterostructure design not only provides an
interesting platform for strong coupling physics, but also presents a very challenging computational
problem. The computational difficulties arise because the finite momentum carried by the plasmons
means that non-vertical decay processes are opened up. Additionally, the setup also realizes a situation
where the electric field and the wave functions are going to vary on the same length scales. This means
that it is important to go beyond the dipole approximation, otherwise normally the approximation of
choice. An other interesting feature of this design is that because the graphene plasmon mode is easily
tuned via electrostatic gating of the graphene[15], the coupling is highly tunable. Building on ideas
presented by Kurman et al.[16], a non-perturbative theory of the coupling that goes beyond the dipole
approximation is developed. This theory goes significantly further than the original model by Kurman
et al. as it manages to go beyond the Drude approximation for the graphene conductivity and at the
same time manages to be non-pertubative. As shall be seen later, accounting for both of these effects
is critical to obtain a proper description of the system. The framework developed here also manages
to be quite general in the sense that it is formulated around generalized reflection coefficients of the
material interfaces and not the materials themselves. The hope is that this work can inspire interesting
experiments in van der Waals heterostructure plasmonic cavity designs, as well as perhaps serve as a
footprint for future theoretical investigation of similar systems.
The structure of the thesis is as follows: The rest of this chapter is dedicated to a discussion of the
central ideas of cavity quantum electrodynamics(CQED) in order to sheet light on what kind of effects
to look for in the results. Density functional theory is also briefly reviewed as it will provide the material
parameters needed for the simulations. Chapter 2 then provides a discussion of intersubband transi-
tions in TMD stacks and why they provide an interesting platform for strong light matter interactions.
This chapter also discusses graphene as a plasmonic platform. Chapter 3 then develops the theory of
the coupling between the intersubband transitions and the cavity plasmon modes. This will involve
a discussion of macroscopic quantum electrodynamics(MQED) and the Generalized Weisskopf-Wigner
model that underline the developed theory. Chapter 4 outlines how the model was implemented numer-
ically and how the difficulties that arise due to the significant computational footprint was addressed.
The subsequent chapters then discuss the results and finally a brief discussion of limitations and future
work is given.
1Technically not the monolayer VBM and CBM because of the characteristic direct to indirect band gap transition
when going from monolayer to multilayer in TMDs. Instead the VBM and CBM understood as the VBM and CBM of
the multilayer stack. See chapter 2 for more.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
1.1
Cavity quantum electrodynamics setups and the case for
plasmonic cavities:
Strongly interacting systems can in principle be realized by means of many different types of manip-
ulations of the local optical environment.
However, in practice the common way to push into the
fully quantum light-matter interaction regime is within the realm of cavity quantum electrodynam-
ics(CQED). In CQED an emitter inside or very near a high quality resonant cavity[8, 17, 18, 19]. A
resonant cavity is understood as a cavity where at least one of the cavity modes, ωc aligns with the
emitter frequency ωeg. When placing an emitter inside of a cavity there are essentially two regimes of
interaction. The first regime is the weak coupling regime. In this regime the cavity losses, κ, dwarf
the interaction strength, g, such that κ > g, and this means that the matter and light only interact
incoherently and thus remain separate quantum objects. In this regime the effect of the cavity is there-
fore ”merely” an increase in the decay rate due to a modification of the local density near the emitter
transition frequency. This effect is called the Purcell effect and for an emitter placed in some position,
x0, inside the cavity it is quantified in terms of the so-called Purcell enhancement. This might at first
glance seem uninteresting, but more efficient out-coupling of emission is in and of itself very interest,
even though the quantum nature of the constituents remain separate. The Purcell enhancement is
defined as the ratio of the decay rate in the presence of the cavity, Γ(x0, ωeg) over the free space rate
of the emitter, Γ0:
P = Γ(x0, ωeg)
Γ0(ωeg)
(1.1)
Note how the Purcell enhancement in equation 1.1 depends on the spatial position of the emitter, x0.
This can be understood as a consequence of the fact that the enhancement arises due to a modification
of the local density of states in the vicinity of the emitter. There is thus a big difference between different
emitter positions and this important to keep in mind in these kinds of setup[4]. For an emitter placed
in the anti-node of a resonant cavity the Purcell enhancement is given by the following expression[4]:
P =
3
4π2
(λ0
n
)3 Q
V
(1.2)
Here λ0 is the free space wavelength of the light, n is the refractive index of the dielectric material
inside the cavity, Q is the quality factor defined as the ratio of the cavity resonance frequency and
the cavity loss rate Q = ωc/κ and V is the mode volume. From equation 1.2 it can be deduced that
there are essentially two nobs to turn to increase the Purcell enhancement. One is to increase the
quality factor of the cavity by reducing loss and the other is the reduce the mode volume. The idea
behind a cavity is to bounce light back and forth between the two mirrors. The smallest cavity that in
which a given frequency can be resonant is a cavity with mirror spacing λ/2, that is a cavity where the
frequency is the frequency of the fundamental cavity mode. This means that the cavity size is limited
by the diffraction limit. The best bet to achieve large Purcell enhancement in optical cavities is thus
to increase the quality factor[5]. The placement of an emitter inside an optical cavity and the resulting
Purcell enhancement is illustrated in figure 1.1.
If the cavity losses are low enough this will allow the emitter to interact several times with the same
photon, leading to a situation where the states of the electromagnetic field become mixed with those
of the matter. This regime of light matter interaction is called the strong coupling regime and it is
characterized by the following relative size of the coupling strength, g, the cavity losses, κ and the
vacuum linewidth of the emitter, Γ0:
g > κ ≫Γ0
(1.3)
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Cavity quantum electrodynamics setups and the case for plasmonic cavities:
5
Figure 1.3: Illustration of an emitter embedded in dielectric cavity and the corresponding Rabi splitting
of resonant atomic transition in case of strong coupling.
The tell-tell sign of the strong coupling regime is the appearance of distinct polaritonic branches repre-
senting the hybridization of the light and matter[6]. This means that looking a the spectrum it should
be possible to observe a splitting of the emission peak into two in this regime. This splitting is called
the Rabi splitting and the situation is illustrated in figure 1.3 where it can be seen that the splitting of
the peaks is equal to 2g and for it to be observable the following should thus hold[11]:
g > Γ0 + κ
2
(1.4)
Another tell-tell sign of strong coupling is so-called Rabi oscillations. These result from the fact that
if the light and matter interacts strongly enough, the same photon can be coherently absorbed and
remitted. This means that energy will be transferred back and forth between the LEE and the emitter.
This manifests as oscillations in the excited state probability as a function of time.
The coupling strength is given in terms of the interaction Hamiltonian and for most molecular and
atomic emitters can be described within the dipole approximation:
g = d · E
(1.5)
where d is the dipole moment of the transition and E is the cavity field. Looking at equation 1.5 it
is observed that to maximize g one should seek to maximize E. This again amounts to minimizing
the mode volume. This again points to how optical cavities are limited, since, as discussed above, the
mirror spacing is limited by the diffraction limit. This in turn has the consequence that in order to
achieve strong interaction between the emitter and the cavity mode, cavities with very large quality
factors must be again be sought[4, 5].
1.1.1
Plasmonic cavities:
The problem with dielectric cavities is that the limited freedom in the manipulation of the mode volume
means that it is necessary to go to very high Q-factor cavities to achieve strong light-matter interaction.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
This high quality factor has two large drawbacks. Firstly because the bandwidth of a cavity is inversely
proportional to the quality factor, a very high quality cavity only enhances the LDOS over a very narrow
frequency range near the cavity frequency, ωc- This means that it only provides efficient enhancement
over a very narrow bandwidth. Secondly, the low loss of the cavity means that the out-coupling rate
from such dielectric cavities is very low limiting the potential operations speeds[5]. This has lead to
some interest in pursuing alternatives to the cavity configuration where it is possible to squeeze the
light beyond the diffraction limit. This at first seems a bit counter intuitive, because how can one break
the diffraction limit? The trick is in fact not to break the diffraction limit, but instead circumvent it.
In particular, the diffraction limit can be understood as a consequence of the Heisenberg uncertainty
relation obeyed by the electromagnetic waves[10]:
∆x · ∆kx ≥1
2
(1.6)
The total wave number has to obey:
|k| =
√
k2x + k2y + k2z = 2π
λ
(1.7)
This means that in free space the maximum resolution of the field becomes:
∆xmax =
1
2kx
= λ
4π
(1.8)
where kx has a maximum of |k|. Equation 1.8 is the free space diffraction limit and it is the reason for
the limited ability to engineer the mode volume in standard optical cavities. The middle equality in
equation 1.8 actually states that if it was somehow possible to make kx > k then the diffraction limit
could be broken. The question is simply how to do this. Staring at equation 1.7 for some time, one
realizes that this can be achieved if we use evanescent fields. This would make one or more of the wave
number components imaginary therefore allowing the light to be squeezed beyond the diffraction limit.
One realization of a system in which the diffraction limit is circumvented is interfaces supporting SPPs.
As mentioned, SPPs are collective oscillations of the electromagnetic field and the free electrons in a
material that can exist at the interface between a dielectric and a conductor. Because the SPP couples
the light to electrons bound near the surface of a material they are very tightly confined near the in-
terface, decaying exponentially away from the interface. This strong confinement of the SPPs means
that the electric field can be squeezed together far beyond the diffraction limit resulting in very large
peak intensities. The SPP by itself already results in a large reduction in the mode volume and it has
been predicted and experimentally verified that this can lead to strong light-matter interactions[5, 20].
However, by further engineering the environment by e.g. using the coupled plasmon mode of a narrow
gap between to conducting surfaces or making sub-wavelength size indents in the surface of a metal, the
field confinement can be increased even further leading to even higher field enhancements[5]. In other
words: By placing conductors surfaces in close proximity to one-another, coupled plasmon modes of the
two surfaces can result in very large peak intensities which any nearby emitter can couple very strongly
to. The big problem always haunting plasmonics is the very large losses associated with plasmonic
systems[21]. These losses actually turn out to be both a strength and a weakness of plasmonic cavity
designs. A weakness because it means that the Q-factors are very bad. This means that the mode
volume has to be squeezed extremely tight to reach strong coupling conditions[22]. On the other hand,
the large losses means that plasmonic configurations can serve as field enhancers over a wide bandwidth
and also leads to significantly higher out-coupling rates which might be interesting for technological
applications[5].
In summary: Plasmonic cavities are very interesting because they provide ultimate control of the mode
volume leading to a lot of engineering freedom for both scientific and engineering purposes.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Density functional theory:
7
1.2
Density functional theory:
Being able to calculate material properties from first principles or ab initio is a very powerful tool for
both scientific and engineering purposes. One particularly useful approach that provides a good trade
off between speed and accuracy is density functional theory(DFT). DFT usually formulated within the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation, where the nuclear and electronic degrees are assumed separable due
to the large mass differences. The central idea of DFT is that the ground state energy of a system can
be expressed in terms of the ground state density instead of the many body wave function[23]:
n(r) = N
∫
N
∏
i=1
dri|ψ(r1, ..., r, ..., rN)|2
(1.9)
The density is a much simpler object than the many body wave function as it only depends on three
coordinates instead of the 3N coordinates of the many body wave function. The idea of approaching the
many-electron problem from the point of view of the density was first formulated in the Thomas-Fermi
conjecture [24, 25] and was subsequently formalized by Hohenberg and Kohn into the Hohenberg-Kohn
theorem[26]. The essence of the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem can be stated in two parts. Firstly, it shows
that the ground state electronic energy can be written as a unique functional of the density:
E[nGS] = T[nGS] + Vel−el[nGS] +
∫
drvext(r)nGS(r)
(1.10)
Where T[nGS] represents the kinetic energy, Vel−el[nGS] represents the electron-electron repulsion and
∫
drvext(r)nGS(r) captures external factors such as the position of nuclei making up the lattice.
The second insight to come from the Hohenberg-Kohn theorem is that the ground state energy functional
obeys the variational principle with respect to the true ground state density, nGS(r):
E[n] ≥E[nGS]
(1.11)
δE[n]
δn

n=nGS
= 0
(1.12)
Even though the variational principle technically provides a route to solving the problem it remains
impossible to use equation 1.10 directly as the universal form of the functional remains unknown. This
means that at some point approximations of its form has to be made.
1.2.1
Kohn-Shamn equations:
The fact that the ground state energy is a unique functional of the ground state means that if it was
somehow possible to construct an auxiliary system with the same electronic density then that system
would have the same energy. DFT is therefore formulated around the idea that the problem can be recast
in terms of non-interaction electrons moving in an effective potential. For at better understanding of this
construction, it is instructive to rewrite the energy functional of the interacting system from equation
1.10 in the following way:
E[n] = T NI[n] + V H[n] + V ext[n] + Exc[n]
(1.13)
The terms in equation 1.13 are as follows:
• T NI[n] is the kinetic energy functional of a non-interacting system of density n.
Using this
functional is a significant simplification, as the exact kinetic energy functional for an interacting
system is unknown.
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
• V H[n] is the so-called Hartree potential. The Hartree potential described the electrostatic repul-
sion between the charged particles in the system.
• V ext[n] is the external potential containing all the information about the position of the nuclei
and any externally applied perturbations.
• Exc[n] is the exchange-correlation term.
Comparing equations 1.10 and 1.13 it is clear that the definition of the exchange-correlation terms has
to be:
Exc[n] = T[n] −T NI[n] −V H[n] + V el−el[n]
(1.14)
One might fairly ask why the reorganization of equation 1.10 was worth it. However, rewriting equation
1.10 as in equation 1.13 has actually helped quite a lot. Now all of the unknown stuff has been gathered
into one term, Exc[n]. This means that, at least conceptually, this makes the task of approximating
the unknown parts of the functional more approachable in a systematic way.
The final step is then to determine what the effective potential of the electrons should look like. For a
non-interacting electron systems the energy functional should have the following form:
ENI[n] = T NI[n] + V KS[n]
(1.15)
Here V KS[n] is given via the effective potential, or so-called Kohn-Sham potential vKS, in which the
independent particles are moving:
V KS[n] =
∫
dr vKS(r)n(r)
(1.16)
Requiring that the non-interacting system has the same density as the original system leads to the
Kohn-Sham equations for the non-interacting electrons orbitals, ψi(r) and the Kohn-Sham energies, ϵi:
(
−ℏ2∇2
2me
+ vKS(r)
)
ψi(r) = ϵiψi(r)
(1.17)
where the Kohn-Sham potential takes the following form:
vKS(r) = vKS(r) + vext(r) + vEx(r)
(1.18)
vEx(r) = δExc[n]
δn(r)
(1.19)
and the density of the non-interacting can be calculated from the Kohn-Sham orbitals in the following
way:
n(r) =
∑
i
|ψi(r)|2
(1.20)
Note that in general Exc[n] is still unknown and therefore in practice one has to choose an approxima-
tion for this term. There are several different variants and depending on the system in question a choice
perform well or perform poorly. Famous examples include the local density approximation(LDA) and
the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof(PBE) exchange functionals. For a discussion of these and other exchange
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Density functional theory:
9
correlation functionals the reader is directed to the book by Richard M. Martin[23].
One last comment on the Kohn-Sham construction is that one has to be very careful with assigning
any physical meaning the Kohn-Sham energies and orbitals. This is because strictly speaking, they are
constructed solely to give the right ground state energy and one cannot therefore be sure that they
reflect the physics of the interacting systems. It is however now a relatively accepted fact that the
orbitals often provide a good qualitative picture in the case of solid state systems.
==PAGE:18==
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
2D materials: Graphene
and TMD quantum wells:
The usual definition of a 2D material is a material that is a few atoms thick and extends potentially
infinitely far in the 2 other directions. The first of and most famous of such materials is graphene which
was discovered by Geim and Novoselov in 2004[27] but there are now more than 90 experimentally
known 2D materials and they come in all shapes and sizes ranging from metals and semi-metals such
as graphene through semi conductors and insulators such as transition metal dichalcogenides(TMDs)
and hexagonal boron nitride(hBN)[28]. 2D materials provide a very interesting platform to explore
light-matter interactions for many reasons. Of note are their strong optical absorption[28], strong ex-
citonic binding energies in e.g. TMDs and the great flexibility that the relaxation of lattice matching
conditions in van der Waals heterostructure designs brings[18, 12, 27].
The wide range of interesting physical properties has lead to an extensive interest in extending the
library of available 2D materials. This interest is manifested, among other places, in two recent large
computational screening studies aimed at discovering new synthesis candidates to extend the library of
materials[28, 29]. Even though single 2D materials provide a very interesting scientific and technologi-
cal platform for potential future applications, an arguably even more interesting idea is to create new
2D materials by stacking few layers of different materials to create new composits with a wide range
of interesting abilities. As discussed by Geim and Grigorieva[27], the fact that the interlayer bonds
are merely van der Waals bonds means that the lattice matching conditions present in normal crystal
heterostructures are relaxed significantly. This has the consequence that the number of new composite
2D materials that could arises by stacking different monolayers is more or less infinite.
2.1
Intersubband transitions in few layer transition metal
dichalcogenide stacks:
As mentioned, this thesis investigates the coupling between cavity plasmon modes of the structure seen
in figure 1.2 and the intersubband transitions in TMD quantum wells(QWs). This section is therefore
dedicated to a brief review of the general properties of TMDs, with a particular focus on how one can
A)
B)
C)
Figure 2.1: Examples of common 2D materials: A) Graphene, probably the most famous 2D material.
B) A single sheet of MoS2, an example of a transition metal dichalcogenide. C) Hexagonal boron nitride.
==PAGE:20==
12
2 2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
construct quantum wells from few layer stacks of TMDs. A TMD has the empirical formula MX2,
where M is either tungsten, W, or molybdenum, Mo, and X is either sulfur, S, selenium, Se or tel-
lurium, Te. As is also the case for graphene, the crystal structure of TMDs is layered in such a way
that the atoms within each layer are covalently bonded to one another while the interlayer bonding is
due to van der Waals interactions. As visualized in figure 2.2, this results in a layer cake like structure,
where the individual layers can be easily exfoliated[30]. Unlike graphene, most of the TMDs are semi-
conducting. This makes them very interesting for optoelectronic applications where properties such as
a well defined on-off ratio is needed. The band gap of the TMDs also show a very interesting transition
when going from bulk to monolayer. Here the band gap undergoes a change from an indirect to a direct
bandgap[31]. The direct bandgap in the monolayer limit results in strong photoluminescence and this,
along with the large exciton binding energies, makes them promising candidate materials for photo-
voltatic applications[32]. Finally, the large oscillator strength of the excitons in the TMDs actually also
make them interesting for cavity QED applications as discussed by Latini et. al.[19]. In addition to the
potential miniaturization and potential efficiency gains that come with using TMDs for devices such as
transistors, the TMDs also have the great advantage of showing excellent mechanical properties, being
able to survive both stress and strain[31]. This opens the door to flexible electronics which might see a
whole new class of personal electronic devices seeing the light of day.
This thesis is interested in few layer TMDs as a platform for quantum wells. Specifically, what happens
when you stack few layers on top of each-other, is a splitting of the valence band maximum(VBM)
at Γ and of the conduction band minimum(CBM) at Λ into subbands. The intersubband splitting
and the number of subbands depends on the number of layers and the number of subbands equals the
number of layers. This dependence be seen in figure 2.3 showing the band structures of different stack
thicknesses of WSe2. In this work spin-orbit coupling(SOC) has been disregarded. This might seem like
a weird choice, since for the TMDs containing the heavy W atoms SOC might be a significant effect.
However, this work is restricted to the intersubband transitions in p-doped TMDs which happen at
the Γ point. Because the Γ-point is time reversal symmetric SOC has no effect here and neglecting
is therefore safe[13]. This can also be seen in figure 2.4 where the band structures of two and three
layer WSe2 are shown. The figure shows that the subband states near the (VBM) are unaffected by
the spin orbit coupling. Contrastingly, the effect is significant for the subband states of the conduction
band near Λ in the three layer sample but not the two layer sample. As discussed in detail by Ruiz et
al., the reason that the spin orbit effects affect the different layer parities differently is that the even
number stacks show inversion symmetry, wheres the odd number of layers do not. [13]. Because of the
complications related to the spin-splitting of the CBM-subband states states, this thesis only considers
the VBM subband states.
Γ
M
Λ
K′
K
Figure 2.2: (a) In-plane Brillouin zone of a hexagonal lattice typical of the TMDs.(b) Top view of the
2H-stacking, (c) Side view of the 2H-stacking.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Intersubband transitions in few layer transition metal dichalcogenide stacks:
13
Figure 2.3: Band-structure of few-layer WSe2 stacks vs the number of layers, N. One observes a
splitting of the band near the CBM at Λ and near the VBM at Γ. The idea behind the TMD QW design,
is to couple light to transitions between these subbands, exciting so-called intersubband transitions
This idea of using few layer TMD stacks as an alternative to traditional III-V semiconductor quantum
wells(QWs) was recently put forward in a paper by Schmidt et. al. [12]. In that work, they managed to
use scattering scanning near field optical microscopy to probe the intersubband transitions in p-doped
multilayer TMD structures. This indicated that such multilayer stacks might be interesting candidates
for future quantum well designs. Using van der Waals stacks, such as the layered WSe2 configuration
used by Schmidt et. al., has many potential advantages. Because the individual layers are only weakly
bound to one another via the vdWs interaction, the restrictions related to lattice matching are signif-
icantly reduced in these structures. Additionally, depending on the growth procedure, the problem of
thermal diffusion can also potentially be eliminated leading to improved performance.
In the paper by Schmidt et. al.
they also showed at the DFT level that the VBM subband energy
splitting in WSe2 stacks is well described within the infinite QW model seen in equation 2.1.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
Figure 2.4: Band structures for two and three layers of WSe2. As can been seen, the time reversal
symmetry of the Γ-point ensures that the effect of spin orbit coupling is minimal on the hole subband
states. Contrastingly, the effect is near the Λ point is significant in the samples with an odd number of
layers.
E12(N) =
1
(N + 2ν)2
3ℏ2π2
2mzd2
(2.1)
Here E12 is the energy difference between the two lowest subbands, N is the number of layers, mz is
the out of plane effective mass of the holes and d is the width of a single layer. ν is a correction to the
infinite quantum well picture, which for holes was found to be negligible. This suggests that to a large
extent the intersubband transitions can be understood within a simple QW picture. Another indication
that this analogy might be good can be found when looking at the localization of the wave functions
in the cross section of the TMD stack. This can be seen in figure 2.5 where the in-plane averaged
Kohn-Sham subband wave functions of the lowest and next lowest subbands have been plotted for 4Ls
WSe2 to get an idea of the cross sectional localization of the states. Here it can be seen that, as is also
the case for the particle in a box states[33], the states are delocalized across the width of the TMD
stack. Additionally, the lower and upper subband wave functions have opposite parity as is also the
case for the idealized quantum well. This difference in parity also results in relatively large out of plane
dipole transition momment, which as seen in table 2.1 reach significant ratios of e · d where d is the
total thickness of the slab and e is the elementary charge. This large out-of-plane dipole moment means
that the intersubband transition is going to couple strongly to TM or p polarized light which has an
out-of-plane electric field component. For comparison, this places the intersubband transition dipole
moments around 1 Debye, which is similar to the transition dipole moments in molecular transitions
often used in strong coupling CQED experiments[5, 11].
Another interesting feature is that that the transition dipole moment for in-plane polarizations is
completely neglible.
In fact across 2,3 and 4 layers of WSe2 it was found that the in-plane dipole
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Intersubband transitions in few layer transition metal dichalcogenide stacks:
15
Thickness
|d12|/(e · d)
2Ls
0.21
3Ls
0.24
4Ls
0.27
Table 2.1: Out of plane transition dipole moment of the intersubband transition from the first to the
second subband as a function of stack thickness.
The values are normalized to e · d where e is the
elementary charge and d is the width of the TMD stack.
moment is roughly a factor of more than 105 times smaller than the out of plane dipole moment. This
means that absorption by the intersubband transition only ever really occurs for TM polarized light.
2.1.1
Determining the atomic structure of the TMD stacks:
The structure of the TMDs are found using a two step process. First the relaxed monolayers were
downloaded from the C2DB database[28].
The next step is then to stack the layers on top of one
another. This work considers TMD stacks with 2H-stacking order seen in figure 2.2 B and C. The final
thing to determine is thus the interlayer separation. As mentioned above, the layers of a TMD crystal
are bounded together via the vdW-interaction. To properly relax the interlayer distance it is therefore
necessary to use an exchange correlation functional that is able to describe the vdWs-interaction. In
GPAW there as of this writing 6 vdW capable exchange functionals. However, when using them it
was observed that none of them was able to properly describe the intralayer covalent bonds. When
relaxing the interlayer distance was thus kept the intralayer structure fixed and the optimal interlayer
separation was calculated by calculating the potential energy of the structure at different interlayer
distances and finding the minimum. For a comparison of their performance, the interlayer distances
of all of the TMDs, hBN and graphene was relaxed with the different functionals and then compared
Figure 2.5: Visualization of the cross sectional localization of two lowest hole subband states in 4
layers of WSe2. The wave functions here are approximate z-envelopes generated by in-plane averaging
of the Kohn-Sham wave functions within the unit cell.
==PAGE:24==
16
2 2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
to the experimental interlayer separations[34, 35]. The results of this comparison can be seen in table
2.2 where the root mean square deviations(RMSD) in Å for the sample of test materials can be found.
As can be seen the C09 functional performs very well which is consistent with the findings of a related
study[36]. For the materials considered here and this exchange correlation functional is therefore used
to relax the interlayer distances.
XC:
C09
optB88
BEEF
vdW-DF
vdW-DF2
optPBE
RMSD [Å]:
0.08
0.18
0.56
0.50
0.39
0.27
Table 2.2: VdW functional characterization: RMS deviation from experimental interlayer separations
The DFT parameters for the interlayer relaxation was choosen as follows: A plane wave basis was used
with a cutoff of 600 eV. The kpts density was 6 Å−1 and because of the hexagonal symmetry of the
crystals a Γ centered k-point was used instead of the standard Monkhorst-Pack grid. The broadening
parameter was η = 0.2eV. Finally a bulk supercell was used for the relaxation instead padding it with
vacuum.
The reason is that as shown in figure 2.6 the interlayer distances are the same with and
without vacuum in the supercell, but the computation time is reduced significantly for the bulk cell.
2.1.1.1
Ground state calculation
For the actual ground state calculations a (100 × 100 × 1) k-point was used. Because the symmetry of
the k-point mesh should reflect the hexagonal crystal symmetry a Γ-centered k-point grid instead of the
Monkhorst-Pack grid. The calculations are performed in a plane-wave basis with a cutoff energy of 800
eV using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof(PBE) exchange correlation functional. Finally, a Fermi-Dirac
smearing of 0.025 eV. All calculations are performed using GPAW[37, 38].
As an example of the properties table 2.3 shows the intersubband splittings and effective masses at Γ for
the 4 common TMDs for the different thicknesses. The procedure employed in determining the effective
masses is equivalent to the procedure used by Haastrup et. al.[28]. As expected, it is observed that
the splitting of the two lowest subbands decreases fast with the number of layers. Another interesting
observation is that the effective masses decrease as the thickness is increased.
Another interesting
observation can be made by looking at table 2.4. Here the effective masses of both the VBM and
CBM are shown for different thicknesses of WSe2. As can be seen, the effective masses near the VBM
Figure 2.6: Comparison of the calculated potential energy curves as a function of interlayer separation
with and without vacuum. It can be seen that the bulk interlayer distance is the same as the one between
two monolayers, but that the computation time is significantly faster with the bulk unit cell.
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Intersubband transitions in few layer transition metal dichalcogenide stacks:
17
are quite isotropic, which is not the case for the CBM. This suggests that the dispersion of the CBM
subband states is far more complicated to properly describe that the VBM subband states and again
emphasizes why the focus of this thesis is put on the VBM subband states.
Intersubband transition linewidth:
Another ingredient is the line width of the intersubband tran-
sition. As this cannot be reliably calculated with DFT alternative had to be found. Therefore the room
temperature value of Γs = 5.9meV experimentally measured by Schmidt et. al. was used[12].
WSe2
Number of layers:
2
3
4
5
meff(Γ) [me]
1.097
0.851
0.797
0.7214
dE12 [eV]
0.65
0.26
0.14
0.08
WS2
Number of layers:
2
3
4
5
meff(Γ) [me]
0.85
0.68
0.623
0.599
dE12 [eV]
0.67
0.34
0.19
0.13
MoSe2
Number of layers:
2
3
4
5
meff(Γ) [me]
1.224
0.924
0.85
0.815
dE12 [eV]
0.66
0.22
0.12
0.07
MoS2
Number of layers:
2
3
4
5
meff(Γ) [me]
0.995
0.787
0.725
0.698
dE12 [eV]
0.65
0.304
0.17
0.11
Table 2.3: Calculated subband effective masses and intersubband splittings for all of the TMD config-
urations considered in this work.
2Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
1.097 · m0
1.097 · m0
CBM
0.544 · m0
0.673 · m0
3Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
0.851 · m0
0.851 · m0
CBM
0.536 · m0
0.633 · m0
4Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
0.797 · m0
0.797 · m0
CBM
0.544 · m0
0.618 · m0
5Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
0.721 · m0
0.721 · m0
CBM
0.472 · m0
0.561 · m0
Table 2.4: Effective masses in the heavy and light directions for the subband states near the VBM and
CBM. As can be seen, the dispersions of the VBM subbands are fairly isotropic, which isn’t the case for
the CBM.
==PAGE:26==
18
2 2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
2.2
Graphene as a plasmonic material:
2.2.1
Graphene in general:
As mentioned before, graphene was the first experimentally demonstrated 2D material and was originally
isolated by Novoselov and Geim in 2004[39]. The original Science paper is one of the 100 most cited
papers of all time and this emphasizes the enormous effect that graphene in particular and 2D materials
in general has had on the research community over the past two decades.[40]. Graphene itself consists of
a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice as seen in figure 2.7. The bandstructure
of graphene is very interesting since it contains two so called Dirac cones at the K and K′ points in its
Brillouin zone. Near these points the bandstructure is linear and described by:
E(k) = ±ℏvF |k|
(2.2)
where vf ≈c/300 is the fermi velocity at the K point. This linear bandstructure implies that the
excitations near the Dirac points have light like dispersion and are an example of socalled massless
Dirac fermions. More importantly for this thesis, the linear bandstructure of the graphene leads to a
density of states(DOS) that is linear in energy, ρ(E) ∝E near the Fermi level. This linear scaling of the
DOS means that the Fermi level of graphene is easily tunable via electrostatic gating and this makes
graphene an interesting material for applications where tunability is of interest[15].
2.2.2
Graphene plasmons polaritons:
In undoped graphene there are no free charge carriers and therefore no SPP exist in this case. However,
if the graphene is doped via electrostatic gating, there will be a metallic response associated with the
free charge carriers in the layer and these can lead to the appearance of a SPP resonance. Within the
Drude approximation the plasmon dispersion can be written as a function of in plane momentum, q,
and graphene Fermi level, EF, in the following way[16]:
ωp(q, EF ) =
√
4αEF
(ϵar + ϵbr)ℏcq
(2.3)
a1
a2
Figure 2.7: Hexagonal lattice structure of a graphene layer. The two arrows show the lattice vectors
and the blue region indicates the unit cell.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Graphene as a plasmonic material:
19
Figure 2.8: Dispersion relation for the graphene plasmon within the Drude model for different values
of the graphene fermi level. As can be seen, changing the graphene fermi level results in a significant
change in the plasmon dispersion relation, highlighting the great tunability of the graphene plasmon.
where α is the fine structure constant and ϵa,b
r
is the relative dielectric constants of media above and
below the graphene respectively. Looking at equation 2.3 it is seen that it shows the characteristic
ωp ∝√q dispersion relation of SPPs[9]. Interestingly, it can be seen that ωp ∝√EF . Because of the
low density of states near the Dirac point, this means that one actually has quite a lot of control over the
graphene plasmon by tuning graphene fermi level via the gate voltage. The tunability of the plasmon
dispersion is illustrated in figure 2.8. As can be seen, changing the graphene fermi level results in a
significant change in the plasmon dispersion relation, highlighting the great tunability of the graphene
plasmon.
As seen above, using graphene in the cavity design leads to great control over the plasmon dispersion
and thus gives rise to a tunable coupling. However, the Drude picture outlined only works in the long
wave length limit and this presents a big problem. The reason is that there exists other excitations in
the graphene and these carry different combinations of energy and momentum. This opens open many
different decay channels as illustrated in figure 2.9.
All of these effects are captured in the full nonlocal conductivity as discussed in detail by Goncalves et.
al. in [14]. The conductivity can be understood by splitting the (q, ω) plane into the 6 regions seen in
figure 2.10. In each of these 6 regions a certain type of excitation process dominates and we can there-
fore defined separate closed expressions for the graphene conductivity in each of these. The in-plane
translational invariance means that the in-plane momentum q is conserved1, the dispersion relation of
the subband states is going to be critical in describing which regions in figure 2.10 is going to be phase
matched with and thus which decay processes will take place. Properly accounting for the dispersion
of the intersubband transition energy is therefore crucial in any proper description! This fact is also
illustrated in figure 2.10 where it can be observed that neglecting the dispersion of the intersubband
transition energy leads to a complete misrepresentation of which regions the intersubband transitions
is going to couple to.
1Technically the system only displays discrete translational invariance and therefore the in-plane momentum is only
conserved up to a reciprocal lattice vector[41]. However, this fact is not included in this work as shall become clear in the
discussion of the Dyadic Greens function.
==PAGE:28==
20
2 2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
Figure 2.9: Illustration of the different decay processes possible for the transition from the excited
state to a lower lying subband, in the presence of finite momentum carrying optical excitations in the
local optical environment. The figure shows the finite momentum carried by the excitations makes the
intersubband transition energy dispersive.
As a general note, the the A regions are characterized by q/kF > ℏω/EF, where kF = EF /(ℏvF ),
which means that they can be thought of as the areas where intraband excitations take place and the B
regions are characterized by q/kF < ω/EF and therefore represent regions where interband excitations
take place. In the following each region is discussed separately and the respective expressions for the
conductivity are listed.
According to Peres and Goncalves the graphene conductivity can be constructed in 3 layers. First the
conductivity is defined in the following way[14]:
σ(q, ω) = 4iσ0ℏω
q2
χt
( q
kF
, ℏω
EF
)
(2.4)
χt is defined as:
χt(x, y) =
(
1 + i
Γ
yEF
)
χg(x, y + i Γ
EF )
1 + i
Γ
yEF χg(x, y + i Γ
EF )/χg(x, 0)
(2.5)
Where Γ is the graphene dampening parameter. This thesis uses the value of 16 meV which consistent
with choice by Dias et. al.[42]. Finally χg(x, y) is defined according to the regions in figure 2.10 which
will now be discussed in more detail. First the following auxiliary functions are defined as they make
for more readable expressions:
F(x) = x
√
x2 −1 −arccosh(x)
(2.6)
C(x) = x
√
1 −x2 −arccos(x)
(2.7)
In the following x = q/kF and y = ℏω/EF.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Graphene as a plasmonic material:
21
Figure 2.10: Regions in which the different expressions for the graphene conductivity is defined. The
dispersion of the intersubband transition is also included. This highlights the great care that ones has
to take in order to properly describe the phase matching, as neglecting the dispersion of the transition
energy completely misrepresents what regions of the graphene conductivity the intersubband transition
is going to couple to.
2.2.3
Intraband regions:
Region 1A:
Region 1A is defined as the part of the (q, ω) where x > Re[y] and Re[y] + x < 2. This
section represents low energy intraband excitations around the Dirac cone right above the Fermi level.
This region represents the strongest intraband losses as the fast nature of the low ω transitions means
that the rate at which the intersubband transition can couple to them is very large.
The expression for the nonlocal susceptibility is:
χ1A
g (x, y) = −2
π
kF
ℏvF
+ i kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
x2 −y2
[
F
(2 −y
x
)
−F
(2 + y
x
)]
(2.8)
Region 2A:
Region 2A is defined by x −Re[y] < 2, x > Re[y] and x + Re[y] > 2. This region
represents slightly higher energy intraband excitations such as processes that take an electron from one
side of the Dirac cone to the other. As we shall see later, the intersubband transition is also going to
show significant direct coupling to the intraband losses in this region but in general the coupling to
these intraband losses is going to be weaker than in region 1A.
The expression for the susceptibility is:
==PAGE:30==
22
2 2D materials: Graphene and TMD quantum wells:
χ2A
g (x, y) = −2
π
kF
ℏvF
−kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
x2 −y2 C
(y −2
x
)
−i kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
x2 −y2 F
(2 + y
x
)
(2.9)
Region 3A:
Region 3A is defined by x −2 > Re[y]. Looking at the bandstructure near the K point
we can see that there exist no transitions with a combination of q and ω matching the definition of
region 3A. This means that there exist no resonant excitations in this region which is reflected by the
zero imaginary part of the susceptibility.
The expression for the susceptibility is:
χ3A
g (x, y) = −2
π
kF
ℏvF
+ kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
x2 −y2
[
C
(2 + y
x
)
−C
(y −2
x
)]
(2.10)
2.2.4
Interband regions:
Region 1B:
Region 1B is defined by Re[y] > x and Re[y]+ x < 2. In this region we have no resonant
interband transitions which, same as with region 3A, is reflected in the zero imaginary part of the
susceptibility. This property that no transitions exist in this region is interesting for optical devices and
has among other things been proposed as a possible mechanism for optical modulators by using Pauli
blocking to only absorb photons with an energy above a certain threshold[15]. Most importantly, this
is the region of the graphene conductivity where the plasmon resonance lives.
The expression for the susceptibility is:
χ1B
g (x, y) = −2
π
kF
ℏvF
+ kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
y2 −x2
[
F
(2 + y
x
)
−F
(2 −y
x
)]
(2.11)
Region 2B:
Region 2B is defined by Re[y] > x, Re[y]+x > 2 and Re[y]−x < 2. This region contains
a series of different high energy, non-vertical interband excitation processes.
The expression for the susceptibility is:
χ2B
g (x, y) = −2
π
kF
ℏvF
+ kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
y2 −x2 F
(2 + y
x
)
+ kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
y2 −x2 C
(2 −y
x
)
(2.12)
Region 3B:
Region 3B is defined as Re[y] −x > 2 and it captures all of the high energy interband
transitions. The expression for the susceptibility is:
χ3B
g (x, y) = −2
π
kF
ℏvF
+ kF
ℏvF
x2
4π
√
y2 −x2
[
F
(2 + y
x
)
−F
(2 −y
x
)]
−i kF
ℏvF
x2
4
√
y2 −x2
(2.13)
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Developing the theory of
the coupling:
With the discussion of the material platforms out of the way, this chapter develops the theory of the
coupling between the intersubband transitions and the cavity plasmon mode. As mentioned above, the
cavity field is expected to potentially become very large. This means that any model attempting to
describe the coupling should go beyond a first order expression like Fermi’s golden rule and in practice
this means that it should be a time dependent model. As a first guess of a way to achieve a fully
quantum description of both the matter and the electromagnetic field, one might be tempted to using a
quantum electrodynamical DFT(QEDFT) approach as discussed by Ruggenthaler et. al.[43]. QEDFT
is a generalization of time-dependent DFT(TDDFT) that treats the electromagnetic field quantum
mechanically instead of the classical external potential description of normal TDDFT. However, the
complicated nature of this problem makes that a very difficult proposition at present. In particular,
the original article only considers 2 level systems coupled to a single mode of the electromagnetic field
and for it to explored in this context suitable exchange correlation functionals would also have to be
developed.
The approach of this work is therefore a different one.
Instead, macroscopic quantum
electrodynamics(MQED) is used to construct an effective electromagnetic medium like theory, which
accurately described all of the cavity modes. This in hand, the intersubband transition are then modelled
as coupling to these cavity modes.
The following discussion will be rather lengthy and structured in the following way: First a discussion of
the mode expansion and quantization of the electromagnetic field in the presence of a matter background
is presented. Subsequently, a non-perturbative model of the intersubband processes is developed and
a suitable interaction Hamiltonian is stated. Then the mathematical crank is turned in an effort to
develop expressions for the coupling that can be numerically solved.
3.1
Classical electromagnetic fields in matter:
Electromagnetism revolves around trying to describe the spatial and temporal evolution of the electric
field and the magnetic flux density, E and B respectively. In matter, this task is further complicated by
the fact that a matter medium consists of a collection of charged particles. When the electromagnetic
field propagates in it, the medium is therefore going to respond in a way to reduce the field inside of it to
the largest extend. To describe this effect, auxiliary fields called the polarization, P, and magnetization,
M are introduced. If the external fields are small, the material can respond harmonically to the applied
perturbation without experiencing saturation effects etc.
This regime is called the linear response
regime, because the electric and magnetic polarization fields will be linear in the external electric
field and magnetic flux density respectively. In the linear response regime, any material response will
happen at the same frequency as that of the external field. For this reason, it makes sense to work in
the frequency domain. In the frequency domain the most general linear expressions for the polarization
fields are:
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
P(r, ω) = ϵ0
∫
d3r′ χe(r, r′ω)E(r′, ω)
(3.1)
M(r, ω) = 1
µ0
∫
d3r′ χm(r, r′ω)B(r′, ω)
(3.2)
Here ϵ0 denotes the vacuum permittivity and the µ0 the vacuum permeability. χe and χm denote the
dielectric and magnetic susceptibility respectively and in general they have tensorial representations.
Because the total fields inside of the material will be a superposition of the applied fields and the
material response via the polarization fields, two auxiliary fields are usually introduced. Instead of the
electric field the displacement field is introduced:
D = ϵ0E + P
(3.3)
and instead of the magnetic flux density the magnetic field is introduced:
H = 1
µ0
B −M
(3.4)
The equations of motion describing the evolution of the electromagnetic field is Maxwell’s equations.
In the absence of free charges and currents in the material, these reads:
∇· D = 0
(3.5)
∇× E = iωB
(3.6)
∇· B = 0
(3.7)
∇× H = −iωD
(3.8)
With the equations of motion and the constitutive relations in hand, one might simply wish to formulate
the quantum theory of electrodynamics in matter around the D and H fields. However, as shall become
clear later, these fields are not the fundamental quantities in a combined quantum theory of light
and matter. In fact, separating the magnetic and dielectric properties of a lossy quantum system is
impossible and this renders the D and H fields inadequate in the search of quantum theory of the
electromagnetic field in matter[44]. The following therefore keeps the explicit reference to the E and B
fields.
Using the expressions for the displacement and magnetic fields that follow from inserting equations
3.1 and 3.2 into equations 3.3 and 3.4, and then inserting these into Maxwell’s equations, a separate
equation for the electric can be derived:
[
∇× ∇× −ω2
c2
]
E(r, ω) = iµ0ωj(r, ω)
(3.9)
where a current density has been defined:
j(r, ω) = −iωϵ0
∫
d3r′χe(r, r′, ω) · E(r′, ω) + ∇×
∫
d3r′χm(r, r′, ω) · B(r, ω)
(3.10)
Working with the linear response idea that the material should be linear in the applied field, a complex
conductivity tensor, Q, can be defined such that:
j(r, ω) ≡
∫
d3r′Q(r, r′, ω) · E(r′, ω)
(3.11)
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Classical electromagnetic fields in matter:
25
where Q is fixed so as to generate the current response in equation 3.10. With this definition, the
Helmholtz equation of the electric field becomes:
[
∇× ∇× −ω2
c2
]
E(r, ω) −iµ0ω
∫
d3r′ Q(r, r′, ω)E(s, ω) = 0
(3.12)
3.1.1
The Dyadic greens function:
The dyadic greens function(DGF) is defined as the greens function of the Helmholtz equation. That is,
it is defined as having the following equation of motion:
[
∇× ∇× −ω2
c2
]
G(r, r′, ω) −iµ0ω
∫
d3s Q(r, s, ω)G(s, r, ω) = δ(r −r′)
(3.13)
The DGF therefore represents the solution to the Helmholtz equation is the presence of a dipole source
and can be thought of as the electric field at a point r due to a dipole source at some other point r′,
with frequency ω. The DGF comes in handy when the electric field is sought is the presence of some
specific external current density, jext. In that case, a current term should be added on the right hand
side of equation 3.12:
[
∇× ∇× −ω2
c2
]
E(r, ω) −iµ0ω
∫
d3r′ Q(r, r′, ω)E(s, ω) = iµ0ωjext(r, ω)
(3.14)
and this in general makes it very hard to solve. However, given the DGF, a particular solution to
equation 3.14 can be written as:
E(r) = iωµ0
∫
G(r, r′, ω)jext(r′)dr′
(3.15)
and by adding a solution to the homogeneous problem, E0(r) the full solution becomes:
E(r) = E0(r) + iωµ0
∫
G(r, r′, ω)jext(r′)dr′
(3.16)
Given that it is at all realistic to solve the scattering problem in question, it is likely much easier to solve
for the dipole source term in equation 3.13 than a general source term such as in equation 3.14. This
means that solving for the DGF is a simpler task than solving the full scattering problem. Additionally,
the fact that equation 3.15 represents a solution for a general source, the DGF also has the advantage
that one only has to solve the Helmholtz equation for one source term to solve it for all. In addition
to be being a very convenient tool for scattering problems in classical electromagnetism, the DGF also
plays a central role in MQED. As discussed next, the Dyadic greens tensor provides the expansion
coefficients need to perform a mode expansion of the electromagnetic fields in matter.
3.1.2
The vector potential and the choice of gauge:
Electromagnetism can be reformulated in terms of a vector potential A(r) and a scalar potential ϕ(r).
Collectively we can think of the vector potential as a 4-vector Aµ = (ϕ, A). The vector potential is
only uniquely defined up to a U(1)-gauge transformation. This means that we can add or subtract the
4-gradient of any scalar function, Λ, from Aµ and the physics will remain unchanged:
Aµ →Aµ + ∂µΛ
(3.17)
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
Because the physics has to stay the same regardless of the gauge one decides to work in, there is freedom
to choose whatever gauge is best suited for the goal that is being pursued. In this thesis we choose to
work in the Coulomb gauge. This choice of gauge sets:
ϕ = 0 ,
∇· A = 0
(3.18)
The vector potential is discussed in more detail in appendix A.
3.2
Macroscopic quantum electrodynamics:
There are essentially two commutation relations that must be insisted on when quantizing the elec-
tromagnetic field[44].
Firstly, because the photons are bosonic excitations, the creation-, ˆa†
n, and
annihilation, ˆam, operators of two modes m and n must obey the following commutation relation:
[
ˆam, ˆa†
n
]
= δmn
(3.19)
Classically, the Poisson bracket of the E and B fields is[6]:
{E(r), B(r)} = −iℏ
ϵ0
∇× δ⊥(r −r′)
(3.20)
Where δ⊥(r −r′) is the transverse delta function:
δ⊥(r −r′) ≡i
∫
d3p
(2π)3
(
I −p ⊗p
p2
)
eip·(r′−r)
(3.21)
reflecting the transverse nature of electromagnetic fields in free space, as also discussed in appendix
A. The second requirement is therefore given via the correspondence principle, which dictates that the
equal time commutator of the electric field and magnetic flux density should be:
[
ˆE(r), ˆB(r)
]
= −iℏ
ϵ0
∇× δ⊥(r −r′)
(3.22)
This commutation relation is in fact a very fundamental quantity. It embodies a fundamental relation
between the electric and magnetic fields and this relation must hold also in the presence of interactions.
In matter this means that the mode expansion of the electromagnetic field must continue to obey equa-
tion 3.22. The auxiliary fields D and H cannot be expected to obey equation 3.22 in general, but the
E and B fields have to since they still represents degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic field alone[44].
As outlined in appendix B, the vacuum QED construction is build around a mode expansion of the
vector potential, A, and for the construction to obey both equation 3.19 and equation 3.22, the mode
functions, Am, are required to form a complete orthogonal set. Doing so means that they obey the
following orthogonality relations:
∫
d3rA∗
m(r) · A∗
n(r) = Nmδmn
(3.23)
∑
λ
1
Nm
A∗
m(r) ⊗A∗
m(r′) = δ⊥(r −r′)
(3.24)
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Macroscopic quantum electrodynamics:
27
Where Nm is a normalization factor. If equations 3.23 and 3.24 fail, then the quantization scheme
fails. Within vacuum QED, the relations are ensured to hold by the fact that for real wave numbers
the Helmholtz equation represents a Hermitian operator[6]. This alludes to the difficulties that arise
when dealing with electromagnetic fields in matter because in general matter will be dispersive and
therefore also lossy. This is because the fluctuation-dissipation theorem then dictates that the real and
imaginary parts of any response function must be related via the Kramers-Kronig relations. In other
words, if dispersion exist then so must loss. In general, the response functions of the system, including
the refractive index, will therefore be complex functions of the frequency, n(ω) ≡η(ω) + iκ(ω) related
via:
η(ω) = 1 + 1
π P
∫∞
−∞
κ(ω1)
ω1 −ω dω1
(3.25)
κ(ω) = −1
π P
∫∞
−∞
η(ω1) −1
ω1 −ω dω1
(3.26)
At first this might not seem like a problem. After all, why can’t the matter be described by a simple
replacement of the wave numbers km with suitable complex wave numbers k →n(ω)k? The reason
is that this is going to result in the loss the orthogonality relations 3.23 and 3.24 which in turn makes
in impossible to preserve both the equal time commutation relations of the E and B fields, and the
bosonic commutation rules for the annihilation and creation operators. However, because the funda-
mental excitations of the theory are still expected to be bosonic the commutation relations in equation
3.19 must still hold. Additionally it is required that 3.22 continues to hold because the E and B fields
have nothing to do with the material. The conclusion is thus that simply using the complex refractive
index extension of the free space mode expansion will fail in general.
The physical interpretation of the breakdown is actually quite clear. When the electromagnetic fields
propagate in matter it is not only the electric field that oscillates but also the charged particles in the
material. The propagating wave is thus not an excitation of the electromagnetic field alone but instead
an excitation of the combined matter-electromagnetic field system. To make the mode expansion work
one thus needs to find a way to project from the combined system back on to the electromagnetic
degrees of freedom.
3.2.1
Making the mode expansion work: The Langevin noise model:
The trick to making the quantization work in the presence of a magnetoelectric background is to realize
that in the presence of matter one cannot hope to quantize the electromagnetic field alone. Instead
a combined quantization of both the electromagnetic field and matter must be sought. However, ac-
tually solving the fully interacting matter-light problem is also prohibitively complex due to the truly
enormous number of particles participating. To have a realistic shot at making the quantization work
a way to abstract from the microscopic details must therefore be found. The path chosen here is the
Langevin noise model as presented by Raabe et. al.[44] which provides a general framework for MQED
in linear media. The following discussion thus follows Raabe et. al. closely.
The way forward is a phenomenological approach where the microscopic details are left behind, their
place taken by the linear response function of the medium under consideration.
Additionally, it is
assumed that the noise is the fields that arise due to absorption by the medium can be modelled with
stochastic polarization terms. The two key assumptions underlying the Langevin model is thus:
1. The interaction of the light with the material can be fully described via a set of linear response
functions which are assumed to be known.
2. The absorption noise can be modelled as a stochastic Langevin process.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
The stochastic polarizations enter as a noise term in the polarization and magnetization. These terms
designated as PN and MN respectively. These are in turn going to result in a noise charge density:
ρN(r, ω) = −∇· PN(r, ω)
(3.27)
and noise current density:
jN(r, ω) = −iωPN(r, ω) + ∇× MN(r, ω)
(3.28)
Notably, the above definition shows that the noise current mixes the magnetic and dielectric properties
of the materials. In the presence of a magnetoelectric background it is therefore impossible to uniquely
distinguish the magnetic and dielectric properties in general. This suggest that the constitutive rela-
tions that one usually employs for the displacement field, D and H fields are not fundamental. Instead
the fundamental source of the electromagnetic field is the noise current and our efforts to quantize the
field thus revolves around it.
Within the Langevin Noise mode, the total current density will read:
j(r, ω) =
∫
d3r′ Q(r, r′, ω) · E(r′, ω) + j′
N(r, ω)
(3.29)
As usual, the real part of the conductivity is associated with the dissipation of electromagnetic energy
in the material. This real conductivity can be obtained from the complex conductivity tensor in the
following way:
σ(r, r′, ω) = 1
2
(
Q(r, r′, ω) + Q†(r, r′, ω)
)
(3.30)
Importantly, for an absorbing medium this real conductivity represents the integral kernel of a positive
definite operator[6]. For the purposes of this discussion, this means that the matrix square root of the
real conductivity exists and a tensor, K(r, r′, ω), can therefore be postulated such that:
σ(r, r′, ω) =
∫
d3s K(r, s, ω) · K†(s, r′, ω)
(3.31)
In the presence of the noise current, equation 3.14 takes the following form:
[
∇× ∇× −ω2
c2
]
E(r, ω) −iµ0ω
∫
d3s Q(r, s, ω)E(s, ω) = iµ0ωjN(r, ω)
(3.32)
The definition of the DGF therefore becomes:
[
∇× ∇× −ω2
c2
]
G(r, r′, ω) −iµ0ω
∫
d3s Q(r, s, ω)G(s, r, ω) = δ(r −r′)
(3.33)
meaning that the electric field,
E(r, ω) = iµ0ω
∫
d3s G(r, s, ω)jN(s, ω) ,
(3.34)
the vector potential,
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Macroscopic quantum electrodynamics:
29
A(r, ω) = µ0
∫
d3s G(r, s, ω)jN(s, ω)
(3.35)
and magnetic flux density,
B(r, ω) = µ0∇×
∫
d3s G(r, s, ω)jN(s, ω)
(3.36)
can all be determined.
Next the actual quantization begins.
As discussed above, the fundamental
quantity is the noise current. The first step is thus promoting it to an operator. Because the conductivity
represents the current-current correlation function, it follows from the fluctuation dissipation theorem
that a suitable commutation relation would be[45]:
[
ˆjN(r, ω),ˆjN(r′, ω′)
]
= ℏω
π δ(ω −ω′)σ(r, r′, ω)
(3.37)
Incidentally, this also allows for operator versions of the electric field, magnetic flux density and the
vector potential:
ˆE(r, ω) = iµ0ω
∫
d3s G(r, s, ω) ·ˆjN(s, ω)
(3.38)
ˆB(r, ω) = µ0∇×
∫
d3s G(r, s, ω) ·ˆjN(s, ω)
(3.39)
ˆA(r, ω) = µ0
∫
d3s G(r, s, ω) ·ˆjN(s, ω)
(3.40)
The Schrodinger picture operators are:
ˆE(r) =
∫
dω ˆE(r, ω) + h.c.
(3.41)
ˆB(r) =
∫
dω ˆB(r, ω) + h.c.
(3.42)
ˆA(r) =
∫
dω ˆA(r, ω) + h.c.
(3.43)
Using the following identity for the Dyadic greens function[46]:
µ0ω
∫
d3s
∫
d3p G(r, s, ω) · σ(s, p, ω) · G(p, r′, ω) = Im [G(r, r′, ω)]
(3.44)
along with the fact that the DGF has to obey the Schwarz reflection principle, one finds the following
result for the commutator of the E and B fields:
[
ˆE(r), ˆB(r)
]
=
ℏ
πϵ0c2 ∇×
∫
dω ω G(r, r′, ω)
(3.45)
As shown in [6] this integral gives the expected transverse delta function and the equal time commutator
becomes:
[
ˆE(r), ˆB(r)
]
= −iℏ
ϵ0
∇× δ⊥(r −r′)
(3.46)
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
The final step is to examine the nature of the fundamental excitations of the MQED theory. As discussed
above, the fundamental quantity is the noise current and promoting it to an operator allows us to obtain
the properties we expect for our quantized electromagnetic field operators. However, the interpretation
of the fundamental excitations is still a bit unclear. Resolving this the final step of the quantization
procedure is a renomalization of the noise current operators in terms of a bosonic vector field. Utilizing
the fact that in passive media the square root of the real conductivity exists, the noise current can be
redefined in terms of a bosonic vector field ˆf(r, ω):
ˆJN(r, ω) =
(ℏω
π
)1/2 ∫
d3s K(r, s, ω) · ˆf(r, ω)
(3.47)
These polaritonic operators obey the expected bosonic commutation relations:
[
ˆf(r, ω),ˆf(r′, ω′)
]
= δ(ω −ω′)δ(r −r′)
(3.48)
Expanded in terms of the polaritonic operators, the fields and the vector potential becomes:
ˆE(r, ω) = iµ0ω
√
ℏω
π
∫
d3r′
∫
d3s G(r, r′, ω) · K(r′, s, ω) · ˆf(s, ω)
(3.49)
ˆB(r, ω) = µ0
√
ℏω
π ∇×
∫
d3r′
∫
d3s G(r, r′, ω) · K(r′, s, ω) · ˆf(s, ω)
(3.50)
ˆA(r, ω) = µ0
√
ℏω
π
∫
d3r′
∫
d3s G(r, r′, ω) · K(r′, s, ω) · ˆf(s, ω)
(3.51)
At this point it is worthwhile to pause briefly and reflect on the physical interpretation of what we have
just achieved. The first question that comes to mind is the interpretation of the polaritonic excitations
ˆfN(s, ω). The following interpretation can be assigned to the excitations generated by the operators
ˆfN(s, ω); the excitations represent dipole excitations of the combined matter-light system, i.e polaritonic
excitations. These dipole excitations of the material can act as sources of current in the material which
in turns acts as a source for the electromagnetic field. The second question that comes to mind is how
to think of the electric field E and magnetic flux density, B. Based on their commutation relation
in equation 3.22, we are lead to conclude that the electric field and the magnetic flux density indeed
represents degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic field alone and thus have nothing to do with the
material degrees of freedom. However, the solutions for E and B in equations 3.49 and 3.36 seem to
suggest that we have to think about the fields as being somehow medium assisted. To resolve this
apparent paradox, one has to think of the operation of the right hand side of equations 3.49 and 3.36
as projection operations from the full system back on to the degrees of freedom associated with the
electromagnetic field. With this interpretation, the DGF represents the integral kernel of a projection
operator from the full Hilbert space back onto the Hilbert space of the electromagnetic field alone, HEM.
Hamiltonian of the combined light-matter system:
The last step is then to write the Hamilto-
nian of the system. As usual, the Hamiltonian is to be written as the Hamiltonian of a set of uncoupled
harmonic oscillators. The hope is thus to show that the coupled light-matter Hamiltonian is diagonal
in the polaritonic operators. The time dynamics of the operators to be governed by the Heisenberg
equation of motion. In the frequency domain the Heisenberg equation of motion reads:
ℏωˆJN(r, ω) =
[
ˆJN(r, ω), ˆH
]
(3.52)
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Generalized Weisskopf-Wigner model:
31
For equation 3.52 to hold the Hamiltonian must have the following form:
ˆH = π
∫
dω
∫
d3rd3s ˆJN(r, ω) · [σ(r, s, ω)]−1 · ˆJN(s, ω)
(3.53)
which in terms of the renormalized bosonic operators gives:
ˆH =
∫
dω
∫
d3r ℏω ˆfN(r, ω) · ˆfN(r, ω)
(3.54)
Equation 3.54 represents the desired result, namely the combined matter-light Hamiltonian written as
the Hamiltonian for an infinite set of Harmonic oscillators. This completes the quantization.
3.3
Generalized Weisskopf-Wigner model:
Next it is time to develop a model in which to investigate the coupling. Modelling the coupling between
the intersubband transition and the cavity modes is difficult for several reasons. First and foremost
because the in-plane periodicity of the subband states means that the transition energy is going to be
dispersive as illustrated in figure 2.10. Secondly the extreme confinement of the electric field inside the
cavity means that the electric field is going to vary on the same length scale as the subband state wave
functions. These two basic facts immediately disqualifies the dipole approximation for the interaction
Hamiltonian. This is because that within the dipole approximation the emitter is approximated as
a point. This fails to capture the fact that the wave functions vary on the same length scales as the
electric field, but also breaks the momentum conservation because it fails to capture the in-plane discrete
translational invariance of the subband states. The third challenge that has to be addressed is the fact
that the field enhancement inside the cavity can get very high. This in turn means that the coupling
strength can also reach very large values, as noted for similar setups with molecular emitters by f.ex.
Koppens et. al. in [20]. This strong coupling necessitates a non-pertubative treatment of the coupling;
if nothing else then to check that the rates calculated with a 1st order expression actually holds and
doesn’t simply represent a bad case of perturbation theory gone wrong.
3.3.1
Writing down the Hamiltonian:
The Hamiltonian of the system is going to consist of three terms: the Hamiltonian of the subband
states, the Hamiltonian of the background field and an interaction term:
H = HQW + HF + Hint
(3.55)
The hard part is to determine what form these terms have to take. A possible first step is to write
down the background field Hamiltonian, HF . The discussion in the previous chapter showed that this
background field Hamiltonian should be:
HF =
∑
j=x,y,z
∫
drdωℏω ˆf †
j (r, ω) ˆfj(r, ω)
(3.56)
The subband Hamiltonian is taken to be the Hamiltonian of a two level system, with one unique
excited state and several different ground states with momenta and energy defined by the dispersion of
the intersubband transition energy. This means that the Hamiltonian of the subbands is taken to be:
HQW = ℏ
∑
g
ωg ˆb†gˆbg + ℏωe ˆb†eˆbe
(3.57)
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
The sum over ground states can be understood by looking at figure 2.9. As illustrated in the figure,
the dispersive nature of the intersubband transition energy will result in many different decay processes
for an carrier excited to the upper lying subband to decay into the lower subband, mediated by the
momentum carried by the excitations in the graphene. To properly model the decay of a carrier from
the upper to the lower subband, it is therefore necessary to sum over all such processes. In practice
this sum is to be interpreted as an integral over in-plane momentum. This integral should run over all
processes with ∆Eeg(q) ≥0. This is because any processes with ∆Eeg(q) ≤0 would not occur without
pumping. With this in mind we can define the upper limit of the integration as qco such that:
∆Eeg(qco) ≡0
(3.58)
The final ingredient is the interaction Hamiltonian. As discussed by Scheel and Buhmann, the coupling
of an emitter to the background field defined by the MQED discussion of the previous section, is given
by a minimal coupling Hamiltonian to the modes of the background field[6]. This thesis is going to
consider the decay of a single carrier initially in an excited state into one of ground states, to estimate
the decay and coupling rates. Because ∇·A = 0 in the coulomb gauge the minimal coupling Hamiltonian
becomes[6, 47]:
Hint =
e
m0
[A · p] =
∑
g,M
ℏge,gM ˆb†eˆbgaM + h.c.
(3.59)
Here ge,gM denotes the coupling of the transition from the excited state, e, to the ground state g via
emission into mode M. Note that in equation 3.59 the sum is over both all of the modes, M, and differ-
ent ground states, g. The reason for the sum over modes is that for each value of in-plane momentum,
q0, there will exist multitude of modes defined by the line (q0, ω) in the graphene conductivity in figure
2.10. This means that for each q0, the way to think of the coupling is as a cavity with one resonant
mode and several non-resonant modes. For right now this sum is to be understood symbolically and the
actual mathematical interpretation of this sum over modes is defined by the electromagnetic environ-
ment. The sum is thus fixed by the MQED expansion of the vector potential discussed in the previous
section and this will be elaborated further later once it is time to actually mathematically manipulate
of the expressions.
Note that equation 3.59 represents the general Hamiltonian of the interaction between the background
field an the subband states. The theory defined by this interaction Hamiltonian therefore represents a
theory of the coupling that takes all possible linear coupling terms into account.
3.3.2
Weisskopf-Wigner model:
A way to go beyond perturbation theory is to look at the temporal evolution of the excited state
probability. In this thesis a modified version of the two level system model first presented by Weisskopf
and Wigner in 1930[48] is employed to this end. As with any time dependent, non-relativistic quantum
mechanical theory, the starting point for the Weisskopf-Wigner model(WWM) is the time dependent
Schrodinger equation:
iℏ∂t|ψ(t)⟩= ˆH|ψ(t)⟩
(3.60)
Where 3.55 is the full Hamiltonian of the system. To get an idea of the emission rate it makes sense to
consider an emitter initially in the excited state. The initial state of the system is therefore:
|ψ(t = 0)⟩= |e, {0}M⟩
(3.61)
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Generalized Weisskopf-Wigner model:
33
The state in equation 3.61 should be read as a state where the carrier is in the excited state, e, and all
of the modes, M, of the background field are empty. The last thing needed to solve the problem is an
expression for the time dependent wave function. Because the model examines the situation where an
electron in some excited state |e, {0}M⟩decays into one of the many ground states, g, via emission into
one of the electromagnetic modes M, the following basis for the time dependent state of the system can
be stated:
{|e, {0}M⟩, {|g, 1M⟩}}
(3.62)
The state |g, 1M⟩denotes the state of the system where the two level system is in its ground state and
the mode M of the electromagnetic field having one excitation in it. Given the basis in equation 3.62,
the most general state is:
|ψ(t)⟩= Ce(t)e−iωet|e, {0}M⟩+
∑
g,M
Cg,M(t)e−i(ωg+ωM)t|g, 1M⟩
(3.63)
ωg(ωe) denotes the energies of the ground(excited) state of the two level system and ωM is the frequency
of the M mode of the electromagnetic field. A similar wave function ansatz is discussed [10], but here
the interaction Hamiltonian is only the dipole approximation Hamiltonian.
Having established a suitable wave function ansatz and the form of the Hamiltonian, the next step is to
calculate the evolution of the excited state probability. These steps closely follows textbook treatments
of the WWM model, such as the one in [10], and revolves around calculating the following matrix
elements:
⟨e, {0}M | ˆH|ψ(t)⟩= ⟨e, {0}M |iℏ∂t|ψ(t)⟩
(3.64)
⟨g, 1M| ˆH|ψ(t)⟩= ⟨g, 1M|iℏ∂t|ψ(t)⟩
(3.65)
To perform this calculation, the symbolic expression for the Hamiltonian of the electromagnetic field.
Keep in mind that the sum is to be understood symbolically and that the meaning is fixed by the
discussions of MQED.
HEM = ℏ
∑
M
ωMˆnM
(3.66)
where ˆnM is the number operator of the M mode of the electromagnetic field. Using equation 3.66
the matrix elements in 3.64 and 3.65 can be symbolically calculated. The result is a series of coupled
differential equations for the coefficients:
∂tCe(t) = −i
∑
g,M
ge,gMCg(t)e−i(ωg+ωM−ωe)t
(3.67)
∂tCg(t) = −ig∗
e,gMCe(t)ei(ωg+ωM−ωe)t
(3.68)
The next step is to symbolically integrate equation 3.68 and insert the result into equation 3.67 to get
the time evolution of the excited state:
∂tCe(t) = −
∑
g,M
∫
dt1|ge,gM|2e−i(ωM+ωg−ωe)(t−t1)Ce(t1)
(3.69)
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
Equation 3.69 represents a way to calculate the temporal dynamics of the excited state probability given
the coupling coefficients, ge,gM, between the transition from the excited state, e, and a ground state
g(q) via decay into a mode M. As a sanity check, lets see what happens if we turn of the coupling of
the intersubband transition to the modes of the electromagnetic field. This amounts to setting all of the
coupling coefficients ge,gM = 0 and looking at equation 3.69 it can be seen that this makes the excited
state probability stationary. This makes perfect sense, because |e, {0}M⟩is an eigenstate of both HEM
and HQW and therefore a stationary state in the absence of interactions.
3.4
Inserting the MQED mode expansion of the vector potential:
Equation 3.69 represents general way of calculating the decay of a two level system into the surrounding
modes of the electromagnetic field. However, these modes of course depend on materials as well as
geometry.
To be able to employ the model for the heterostructure considered here, it is therefore
necessary to determine how the coupling coefficients, {ge,gM}, reflect the electromagnetic environment.
First equation 3.69 is recast in the following way:
∂tCe(t) = −
∑
g
∫
dt1
∑
M
|ge,gM|2e−i(ωM+ωg−ωe)(t−t1)Ce(t1)
(3.70)
The next step is to insert the interaction Hamiltonian. Before doing so, note that
Using the interaction part of the hamiltonian in equation 3.59 the coupling coefficients to the different
modes can be expressed as:
ℏ2 ∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∑
M
⟨e, 0M

e
m0
p · A
 g, 1M⟩

2
(3.71)
The above can be rewritten as:
∑
M
⟨e, 0M

e
m0
A · p
 g, 1M⟩

2
=
∑
M
⟨e, 0M| e
m0
A · p|g, 1M⟩⟨g, 1M| e
m0
A∗· p∗|e, 0M⟩=
e2
m2
0
⟨e, 0M|A · p
(∑
M
|g, 1M⟩⟨g, 1M|
)
A∗· p∗|e, 0M⟩
(3.72)
Note that the last equality comes about because the sum over modes can be moved past |e, 0M⟩because
all of the modes are empty in this state. Now the sum over modes, ∑
M, needs to be interpreted. The
mode expansion of the MQED vector potential is given in terms of the dipole excitations of the combined
light-matter system:
|rωj⟩= ˆfj(r, ω)|0⟩
(3.73)
This means that the sum over modes should be understood in the following way,
∑
M
→
∫
dω
∫
d3r
∑
j=x,y,z
(3.74)
, where the last sum is over dipole directions. With this equation 3.71 becomes:
==PAGE:43==
3.5 Deriving the Dyadic Greens function:
35
ℏ2 ∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
ℏ2e2
m2
0
⟨e, 0M|A · p


∫
dω
∫
d3r
∑
j
|g, rωj⟩⟨g, rωj|

A∗· p∗|e, 0M⟩
(3.75)
The final ingredient is then the quantized vector potential. Inside the TMD region the response functions
are assumed local. This means that the K(r, r′, ω) becomes K(r, ω)δ(3)(r −r′). Additionally, the TMD
is non-magnetic. Equation 3.10 therefore dictates that the following identification can be made:
σ(r, ω) = ϵ0ωIm [χe(r, ω)]
(3.76)
Defining the local dielectric function in following way:
ϵ(r, ω) = 1 + χe(r, ω)
(3.77)
This means that the quantized vector potential takes on the following form:
ˆAi(r) =
√
ℏ
πϵ0
∫
dω ω
c2
∫
d3s
√
Im [ϵ(s, ω)]Gij(r, s, ω) ˆfj(s, ω) + H.c.
(3.78)
Inserting equation 3.78 into equation 3.71 and using the commutation relation for the polariton opera-
tors, equation 3.48, one arrives at the following result for the coupling coefficients:
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
4α
m2
0c
∫
dωd3rd3sψ∗
e(r)ψe(s)Im [Gi,j(r, s, ω)] (pi · ψg(r)) (pj · ψg(s))∗
(3.79)
Where α is the fine structure constant. To arrive at equation 3.79 the Onsager reciprocity relations,
equation 3.80, as well as the DFG identity in equation 3.81 were used. Note that the DGF identity in
equation 3.81 is simply a special case of equation 3.44.
G∗
ij(r, s, ω) = Gji(s, r, ω)
(3.80)
∑
m
ω2
c2
∫
d3x Im [ϵ(x, ω)] [Gi,m(r, x, ω)Gm,j(x, s, ω)] = Im [Gi,j(r, s, ω)]
(3.81)
3.5
Deriving the Dyadic Greens function:
Equation 3.79 reflects the fact that all information about the electromagnetic environment is captured
in the DGF. This is completely in line with the usual interpretation of the spatial trace of the DGF
as the electromagnetic LDOS[11]. The next step in calculating the coupling coefficients from equation
3.79 is therefore to determine the DGF of the system. Assuming that the 2D materials and the mirror
extends to infinity in both in-plane direction, the plasmonic cavity from figure 1.2 can be thought of as
a layered medium, consisting of a TMD QW squeezed between a single sheet of graphene and a mirror.
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
Vacuum
Graphene
Mirror
TMD
d
z
x
Figure 3.1: Geometry considered for the plasmonic cavity DGF derivation.
The region above the graphene sheet is taken to be vacuum. The configuration is illustrated in figure 3.1.
The first thing to figure out is of course what form the Helmholtz equation is going to take in this case.
In general, the dielectric properties of van der Waals materials show great anisotropy.[49]. For example,
for WSe2 one finds, using DFT, that the static in-plane dielectric constant is around ϵ∥= 16 but the
out of plane dielectric constant is only ϵ⊥= 7.9. To properly describe the system in question here the
Helmholtz equation thus have to be solved for a TMD region dielectric tensor on the form:
ϵ = diag(ϵ∥, ϵ∥, ϵ⊥)
(3.82)
For the simulations the values are extracted via the macroscopic dielectric functions in GPAW and the
values reflect the values presented in [49].
Next a discussion the spatial dependence of the dielectric function is needed. Inside of the perfect
conductor no field can exist. This means that it doesn’t matter to much how the Helmholtz equation
would look in this region, as it would only ever admit the solution E = 0 anyway. In fact this region
only enters the derivations directly via the reflection coefficient of the TMD QW-conductor interface.
Secondly, in both the air region and the TMD QW locality of the material response can be assumed. As
for the graphene it will be modelled as having no thickness. This way, the graphene can be modelled as
a surface current on the TMD QW-air interface, where the surface current response is dictated by the
nonlocal graphene conductivity. This means that the graphene also only ever enters via the boundary
conditions for the fields. In the regions of interest, only local response functions enter the Helmholtz
equation and this means that the equation defining the DGF will be:
[
∇× ∇× −
(ω2
c2
)
ϵ(r, ω)
]
G(r, r′, ω) = δ(r −r′)
(3.83)
As discussed by Chew [46], the TM and TE modes of the electromagnetic field are uncoupled in a
layered geometry. This means that in a layered medium the DGF can be written as a sum of the
spectral responses of the two polarization modes. Denoting the spectral response of the TM mode as
N and the spectral response of the TE mode as M the DGF therefore takes on the following form:
==PAGE:45==
3.5 Deriving the Dyadic Greens function:
37
G(r, r′, ω) =
i
8π2
∫
d2q
1
q2ikz(q) [N(q, r, r′) + M(q, r, r′)]
(3.84)
here q denotes the in-plane momentum and kz is the out-of-plane wave vector defined as:
kz(q) =
( ϵ∥
ϵ⊥
q2 −ϵ∥k2
0
)1/2
(3.85)
Because the spectral responses of the TM and TE modes can be decoupled in layered media, they can
be considered separately. As discussed earlier, only TM polarized light can excite the intersubband
transition. The DGF needed here is therefore:
G(r, r′, ω) =
i
8π2
∫
d2q
1
q2(ikz(q))N(q, r, r′)
(3.86)
As shown by Chew [46], the TM part of spectral response in a layered medium may in general be written
as function of r, r′ and in plane momentum q in the following way:
N(q, r, r′) =
c2
ω2ϵ⊥
(k± × q × ˆz) ⊗(k∓× q × ˆz) eiq·(s−s′)F±(z, z′, q)
(3.87)
Here s and s′ denote in-plane positions and k± = q ± ikzˆz. The ± depends on the relation between z
and z′ with + for z > z′ and vice versa for −. For simplicity, the following two polarization vectors are
defined:
ϵ±(q) ≡qˆz ∓ikz ˆq
(3.88)
meaning that the TM DGF spectral response contribution can be written as:
N(q, r, r′) = c2q2
ω2ϵ⊥
ϵ±(q) ⊗ϵ±(q)∗F±(z, z′, q)
(3.89)
The F±(z, z′, q) are essentially the field from at a point source at z in position z′. As also shown by
Chew, this relations depends on where the emitter is positioned inside the structure. Here the field of
interest is the field inside the TMD stack. In this case, the emitter is placed in between the graphene
sheet and the mirror with vacuum on top over the graphene, see figure 3.1. This means that there needs
to be accounted for the multiple reflection events at the different interfaces. Accounting for all of this
essentially means augmenting the plane wave solutions with contributions from the reflections at the
top and bottom interfaces. Including these, F±(z, z′, q) takes the form[46]:
F±(z, z′, q) =
[
e∓i ˜
kzz′ + e±i ˜
kzzrtc
] [
e±i ˜
kzz + e∓i ˜
kz(z+2d)rg
]
M
(3.90)
Here d is the thickness of the TMD QW, rg is the generalized reflection coefficient(GRC) of the TMD
QW - graphene - air interface, rtc is the GRC of the mirror - TMD QW interface and M is given as:
M =
[
1 −rgrtce2i ˜
kzd]−1
(3.91)
and,
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
˜kz = ikz
(3.92)
has been defined to emphasize the similarities with the original expression but also underline that in
general the wave number in the z-direction is going to be imaginary due to the extreme confinement of
the electric field in the in-plane direction.
The final step to having the full DGF for the configuration is to derive the GRCs of the two interfaces.
Starting with the perfect conductor - TMD QW interface, note that per definition the perfect conductor
must conduct electricity perfectly and therefore have zero impedance. From the standard expressions
for the TM reflection coefficients[2] one therefore finds that for any angle of the incident field:
rtc = −1
(3.93)
Equation 3.93 dictates that any light incident of the perfect conductor - TMD QW interface from the
TMD QW side is totally reflected back into the TMD QW. This is completely in line with the under-
standing of a perfect conductor surface since no field can exist inside of it and thus the light incident
on it must be totally reflected.
Next the GRC of the TMD-graphene-air interface must be derived. To derive the generalized reflection
coefficient of the TMD QW - graphene - air interface, the scattering of a TM wave at such an interface is
be solved. This reflection coefficient is also discussed by Kurman et al.[16], though without derivation.
For this reason, the derivation is given in appendix C instead of the main text. The end result for the
GRC of the interface is:
r =
(ϵ⊥ϵ∥)1/2 −1 −i qσ(q,ω)
ϵ0ω
(ϵ⊥ϵ∥)1/2 + 1 + i qσ(q,ω)
ϵ0ω
(3.94)
Where σ(q, ω) is the conductivity of the graphene, as discussed in the previous chapter.
Inserting
equations 3.93 and 3.94 into equations 3.90 and 3.91 gives:
F+(z, z′, q) =
[
ekzz′ −e−kzz′] [
ekzz + e−kz(z−2d)rg]
M
(3.95)
and:
M =
1
1 + rge−2kzdTMD
(3.96)
The expression for F+ can further be rewritten as:
F+(z, z, q) = 2 (sinh(kzz′) cosh(kzz) + sinh(kzz′) sinh(kzz)) rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 2
(3.97)
The same steps for F−gives:
F−(z, z, q) = 2 (sinh(kzz) cosh(kzz′) + sinh(kzz) sinh(kzz′)) rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 2
(3.98)
The above has the nice property that:
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Inserting the wave functions:
39
Im [F+(z, z′)] = Im [F−(z, z′)]
(3.99)
which is nice because it makes the imaginary part of the DGF simple, which is the part needed in this
work, see equation 3.79. Noting that:
Im [F+(z, z′)] = 2 sinh(kzz) sinh(kzz′)Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 2
]
(3.100)
shows that the imaginary part of the DGF becomes:
Im [G(r, r′, ω)] =
c2
4π2ω2ϵ⊥
∫
d2q 1
kz
ϵ±(q) ⊗ϵ±(q)∗eiq·(r∥−r′
∥) sinh(kzz) sinh(kzz′)Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 2
]
(3.101)
3.6
Inserting the wave functions:
The next step is to insert the wave functions into equation 3.79 and turn the mathematical crank to
extract an expression that can be solved numerically. The wave functions of the subband states can be
written as Bloch states for the TMD lattice:
ψe,g(r) =
1
√
A
ϕe,g(r)eikegr∥
(3.102)
Where A is the area. Note here that the Bloch functions, ϕe,g(r) are only periodic in plane. Because
the Bloch functions have to obey the periodicity of the unit cell, ϕ(r) = ϕ(r + R), the proper way of
normalizing them is such that the integral of the functions over the unit cell, Ωc equals the unit cell
area AΩc:
∫
Ωc
dzdr∥|ϕe,g(r)|2 = AΩc
(3.103)
This is because it means that the full integral of the wave functions gives. To see this, the number
of unit cells is denoted as Nuc. Because of the periodicity of the Bloch functions, the integral of the
squared wave function norm becomes:
∫
dzdr∥|ψe,g(r)|2 = 1
A
Nuc
∑
i
∫
Ωc
dzdr∥|ϕe,g(r)|2 = NucAΩc
A
= 1
(3.104)
Inserting the wave functions from equation 3.102 along with the imaginary part of DGF from equation
3.101 into equation 3.79 one finds:
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∫
dω
αc
m2
0ω2ϵ⊥π2
1
A2
∫
dq 1
kz
Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
] ∫
dzdz′
∫
dr∥r′
∥e−ike(r∥−r′
∥)×
(
ϕ∗
e(r) [(ϵ±(q)) · p ϕg(r)] sinh(kzz)ei(kg+q)r∥
)
×
(
ϕe(r′) [(ϵ±(q)) · p ϕg(r′)]∗sinh(kzz′)e−i(kg+q)r′
∥
)
(3.105)
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
Inserting the polarization operators from equation 3.88 along with the coordinate representation of the
momentum operator:
p = ℏ
i ∇= ℏ
i
( ∂
∂z + ∇∥
)
(3.106)
gives:
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∫
dω
αcℏ2
m2
0ω2ϵ⊥π2
1
A2
∫
dq 1
kz
Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
] ∫
dzdz′
∫
dr∥r′
∥e−i(ke−kg−q)(r∥−r′
∥)
× ϕ∗
e(r)
(
∓ikzˆq · kg ∓kzˆq · ∇∥−iq∂z
)
ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)
× ϕe(r′)
(
±ikzˆq · kg ± kzˆq · ∇∥+ iq∂z′)
ϕ∗
g(r′)sinh(kzz′)
(3.107)
Note here that the definition of the ± is the one from the discussion of the DGF. That means that
any cross term that keeps at ± after the parenthesizes are multiplied out will change sign across the
integration over z and z′. Any such terms is thus going to disappear upon integration.
The periodicity of the Bloch functions means that the integrals over z and r∥can be rewritten in the
following way:
∫
dzdr∥=
Nuc
∑
n=1
∫
dz
∫
Ωc
dr∥
(3.108)
∫
dz′dr′
∥=
Nuc
∑
n=1
∫
dz′
∫
Ωc
dr′
∥
(3.109)
Assuming that the phase factor varies slowly inside the unit cell these may be pulled these outside the
integrals over the unit cell. This means that for any of the wave function integrals, the phase factor
can be put outside the unit cell integrations. For example:
∫
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r) exp
{
−i(ke −ke −q) · r∥
}
≈
Nuc
∑
n=1
exp
{
−i(ke −ke −q)r∥n
} ∫
dz
∫
Ωc
dr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r) =
δke,kg+q
A
AΩc
∫
dz
∫
Ωc
dr′
∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)
(3.110)
Inserting equation 3.110 into 3.107 one finds:
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Inserting the wave functions:
41
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∫
dω
αcℏ2
m2
0ω2ϵ⊥A2
Ωcπ2
∫
dq 1
kz
Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
δke,kg+q×
[
k2
z (ˆq · kg)

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+
k2
z

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)
(
ˆq · ∇∥
)
ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+
q2

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)∂zϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
−2kzˆq · kgIm
{∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz′)
∫
Ω
cdz′dr′
∥ϕe(r′)(ˆq · ∇∥ϕ∗
g(r)sinh(kzz′)
}]
(3.111)
Inserting equation 3.111 into 3.70 gives:
∂tCe(t) = −2π
∫t
0
dt′
∫
dωd2qK(ω, q)e−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′)Ce(t′)
(3.112)
Where the coupling kernel K(q, ω) has been defined to be:
K(q, ω) =
αcℏ2
m2
0ω2ϵ⊥A2
Ωcπ2
1
kz
Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
×
[
k2
z (ˆq · kg)

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+
k2
z

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)
(
ˆq · ∇∥
)
ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+ q2

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)∂zϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
−2kzˆq · kgIm
{∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz′)
∫
Ω
cdz′dr′
∥ϕe(r′)(ˆq · ∇∥)ϕ∗
g(r)sinh(kzz′)
}]
(3.113)
3.6.1
Reflection on the accheived result:
Equation 3.112 represents a major result! The problem of expressing the collective effect of the cou-
pling to ALL of the modes of the background field has been reduced to calculating one kernel function
K(q, ω). This kernel function is the new central object of the theory, as it holds all information about
the background LEE. By calculating K(q, ω) for a given configuration it is therefore possible to extract
enormous amounts of information about the LEE.
The kernel can of course also be used to numerically integrate equation 3.113. This lets one extract the
temporal evolution of the excited state probability which will hold information about how the emitter
and the LEE couples to each other. Equation thus represents a feasible way to non-perturbatively
address the coupling of emitters to many mode LEE of plasmonic cavities, going beyond the dipole
approximation.
3.6.2
Including finite occupation of the subbands:
Equation 3.112 doesn’t take the occupation of the lower subband into account. This means that the
expression is only technically valid at zero temperature. It would of course be interesting to investigate
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
the effect on the temperature on the rates. To accommodate this, one can include finite occupation of
the lower subband in equation 3.112 in the following way:
˙Ce(t) = −2π
∫t
0
dt′
∫
dωd2qK(ω, q) [1 −fFD(ωg(q, ω))] e−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′)Ce(t′)
(3.114)
In equation 3.114 FFD is the occupation function of the carriers in question. Considering n-doped TMD
QWs, the carriers would be electrons and their occupation function would thus be the Fermi-Dirac
distribution. On other hand if p-doped TMDs are considered, the carriers are holes. A hole is basically
a missing electron and the occupation function would thus be 1 minus the Fermi-Dirac distribution
function.
3.7
One dimensional envelope approximations:
The numerical integration of equation 3.112 is very computationally demanding due to the 3D wave
function integrals. The obvious way to try and reduce the computation time needed would thus be
to construct approximate 1D wave functions. In particular, one can again draw inspiration from the
idealized quantum well picture. Here, the in-plane nature of the subbands is the same, with the only
thing distinguishing them being the out of plane envelopes. A good guess for an approximate wave
function could thus be that the subband states are somehow differentiated by an out-of-plane envelope,
ϕn(z). Within this approximation the wave functions of the subband states would be:
ψe,g(r) =
1
√
A
ϕe,g(z)eikegr∥
(3.115)
The derivation here follows the 3D derivation step by step. Using equation 3.115 and the DGF into
equation 3.79 while assuming azimuthal symmetry in plane one finds:
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∫
dω
∫
dq
e2ℏq2
2π2ϵ0m2
0ω2√ϵ∥ϵ⊥
Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
δke,kg+q×
(
q2 ϵ∥
ϵ⊥

∫
dzϕ∗
e(z)ϕg(z)sinh(kzz)

2
+

∫
dzϕ∗
e(z)∂zϕg(z)sinh(kzz)

2)
(3.116)
Next, inserting equation 3.116 into equation 3.69, performing the sum over ground states gives:
∂tCe(t) = −
∫t
0
dt′
∫
dωdqK(ω, q)e−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′)Ce(t′)
(3.117)
With the following definition of the 1D kernel:
K(q, ω) =
e2ℏ
2πϵ0m2
0
q2
ω2√ϵ⊥ϵ∥
Im
[r12e−2kzd −1
r12e−2kzd + 1
]
×
(
q2 ϵ∥
ϵ⊥

∫
dzϕ∗
e(z)ϕg(z)sinh(kzz)

2
+

∫
dzϕ∗
e(z)∂zϕg(z)sinh(kzz)

2)
(3.118)
Equation 3.118 has the huge advantage that no 3D wave function integrals have to be performed in
order to calculate it. If this approximation holds, this therefore represents huge computational gain.
Notice that a wave function such as equation 3.115 is only even conceivable in cases where the in-plane
variations can be neglected. This actually already disqualifies it for the n-doped TMD QWs, where the
effective masses, and thus the dispersions, are far from isotropic.
==PAGE:51==
3.8 Perturbation theory expressions:
43
3.8
Perturbation theory expressions:
In addition to solving equation 3.112 directly it is also interesting to know how the full time dependent
method compares to first order perturbation theory. With this comparison it will be possible to discern
whether perturbation theory accurately describes the coupling of the graphene plasmons to the inter-
subband transitions or whether it is necessary to solve the full time dependent problem to calculate
the decay rates.
To get this expression a Markov approximation is employed.
Within the Markov
approximation it is assumed the excited state probability to varies much slower than the phase factor
in equation 3.112. This means that Ce can be pulled out of the time integral:
˙Ce(t) ≈−2πCe(t)
∫t
0
dt′
∫
dωd2qK(ω, q)e−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′)
(3.119)
Recasting the time integral in terms of the time difference τ = t −t′ one finds:
∫t
0
dt′e−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′) =
∫t
0
dτe−i(ω−ωeg(q))τ
(3.120)
Phrased more quantitatively, the Markov approximation assumes that Ce(t) varies with a rate Γ ≪ωeg.
This means that the time scale of interest t ≫1/ωeg and therefore the upper limit of the time integration
to infinity can therefore safely be extended to infinity. Doing so, the integral in equation 3.120 can be
calculated:
∫∞
0
dτe−i(ω−ωeg(q))τ = πδ(ω −ωeg(q)) + iP
1
ω −ωeg(q)
(3.121)
Where P denotes the principal value. Inserting equation 3.121 into equation 3.119 the following expres-
sion for the 1st order decay rate, Γ, and the Lamb shift, δωeg, can be extracted:
Γ = 2π
∫
d2qK(q, ω = ωeg(q))
(3.122)
δωeg = P
(∫
dωd2q K(q, ω)
ω −ωeg(q)
)
(3.123)
Here the decay rate Γ is defined as the excited state probability decay rate and not the decay rate for
Ce. The definition of the rate is such that in the absence of the Lamb shift the problem would read:
∂tCe(t) = −1
2ΓCe(t)
(3.124)
These expressions thus represent 1st order approximations that can be compared to the full time
dependent results.
3.8.1
Checking that the WWM model provides the proper result within the
dipole approximation:
As has already been discussed, it is very important to go beyond the dipole approximation to properly
describe the coupling between the intersubband transitions and the cavity modes. That being said,
since the dipole approximation represents the method of choice in many works in the literature, it is
interesting to compare the model to the dipole approximation expression. Not only will it emphasize
the importance of going to beyond the dipole approximation but also help explain the new physics
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Developing the theory of the coupling:
that will be encountered. Additionally it will serve as a healthy sanity check because the first order
expression within the dipole approximation can be easily checked against Fermi’s golden rule to see
that it makes sense.
Within the dipole approximation the interaction Hamiltonian would be:
Hint = d · E(r0)
(3.125)
Here d denotes the dipole operator, E denotes the electric field and r0 denotes the position of the emitter.
Analogous to the approach for the full minimal coupling interaction term, the following identification
for the coupling coefficients can be made:
ℏ2 ∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∑
M
|⟨e, 0M |d · E| g, 1M⟩|2
(3.126)
Looking at equation 3.126 it is seen that the MQED mode expansion of the electric field is needed.
Using the relation between the vector potential and the electric field in equation A.4 the mode expansion
of the electric field can be calculated from equation 3.78:
ˆEi(r) =
i
√
ℏ
πϵ0
∫
dω ω2
c2
∫
d3r1
√
Im [ϵ(r1, ω)]Gij(r, r1, ω) ˆfj(r1, ω)e−iωt + H.c.
(3.127)
Inserting equation 3.127 into equation 3.126 and following the same approach as in section 3.4 one
arrives at:
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∫
dω
ω2
πℏϵ0c2
∫
d3rd3r′ ϕ∗
e(r)ϕe(r)Im [Gij(r, r′, ω)] (diϕg(r)) (djϕg(r))∗
(3.128)
Because the dipoles are assumed to be point like this gives:
∑
M
|ge,gM|2 =
∫
dω
ω2
πℏϵ0c2 deg · Im [G(r, r′, ω)] · deg
(3.129)
This means that within the dipole approximation the differential equation dictating the time evolution
of the excited state coefficient is:
˙Ce(t) = −
∫t
0
dt′
∫
dω
ω2
πℏϵ0c2 deg · Im [G(r, r′, ω)] · dege−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′)Ce(t′)
(3.130)
To first order this leads to an excited state probability decay rate of:
Γ = 2ω2
eg
ϵ0ℏc2 deg · Im [G(r, r′, ωeg)] · deg
(3.131)
Noting that the intersubband transition only show a significant transition dipole moment out of plane,
it can be deduced that the dot-products are simply going to pick the zz component of the DGF. The
first order rate is thus:
==PAGE:53==
3.8 Perturbation theory expressions:
45
Γ = 2ω2
0
ϵ0ℏc2 |d|2Im [Gzz(z0, z0; ω)]
(3.132)
Inserting the expression for the dyadic greens function for the plasmonic cavity gives:
Γ =
|dz|2
π√ϵ⊥ϵ∥ϵ0ℏ
∫
dqq2 sinh2(kzz0)Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
(3.133)
3.8.2
Fermi’s golden rule:
Within the dipole approximation the FGR expression is:
Γ = πω0
3ℏϵ0
|d|2ρ(r0, ω0)
(3.134)
Here |d| is the transition dipole moment and ρ(r0, ω0) is the local density of states(ldos) of the elec-
tromagnetic field at position r0 and frequency ω0. To get an expression for the decay rate within the
dipole approximation all that is needed is the lDOS of the electromagnetic field. This can be calculated
from the DGF in the following way[11]:
ρ(r0, ω) =
6ωIm
[
ˆd · G(r0, r0, ω0) · ˆd
]
πc2
(3.135)
The dot products are again just going to pick the zz component of the DGF. Noting this and inserting
equation 3.135 into equation 3.134 the 1st order decay rate within the dipole approximation can be
calculated:
Γ = 2ω2
0
ϵ0ℏc2 |d|2Im [Gzz(z0, z0; ω)]
(3.136)
Comparing equation 3.132 with equation 3.136 shows that the approximations are consistent and this
provides an indication that the construction of the theory of the coupling was successful within the set
of assumptions that was defined.
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation of the
Weisskopf-Wigner
framework:
4.1
Parallelized kernel calculation:
The central task when using the WWM framework is always to calculate the coupling kernel K(q, ω).
The scaling of this task is quite horrible for two reasons. The first is that the computation time is
going to scale with N 2 directly as the number points in the (q, ω)-grid is increased. For the 3D wave
functions there is the added problem though. Here the wave functions must be extracted on some 3D
real space grid, defined by a grid point spacing h. To get converged results, it is necessary to make
sure that the all of the features are well represented with the chosen grid spacing. For each point in
the (q, ω)-grid 4 wave function integrals have to be performed and their computation time is going to
scale as O(1/h3). These two facts combine to make the 3D framework computationally heavy. To
achieve converged results in a realistic amount of time it is therefore essential to make the most of
the available computing resources. Fortunately, it turns out that the calculation of the kernel is an
embarrassingly parallel problem! In particular, the calculation of the kernel at some point, (q0, ω0), is
completely independent of the calculation of the kernel at some other point, (q1, ω1). For a processor
pool of say M processors, it should thus be possible to speed up the calculation up by a factor of M
by splitting the (q, ω)-domain into M pieces of equal size and calculating them separately. The pieces
are then gathered in the end. This argument of course neglects the communication overhead, but for
large problems this overhead should be relatively small if a clever communication scheme is employed.
4.1.1
MPI:
The parallelization was implemented using the open message parsing interface (MPI). MPI is a standard-
ized and portable message passing protocol designed to work on many different parallel computing archi-
tectures. MPI can therefore be thought of as a set of agreed upon rules and standards by which separate
processors on a HPC cluster architecture can exchange information between each other during compu-
tations. This project employed the MPI4PY library to implement the communication needed for the
parallelization scheme. This module lets one use all of the MPI features directly within python without
having to write a separate C or C++ module to handle the inter-processor communication.[50, 51, 52]
4.1.2
Domain decomposition:
The first is step when conceiving any parallelization scheme is to figure out how to divide the domain
among the available processors. For applications requiring repeated communications between the pro-
cessors, the choice of distribution scheme can be crucial for the performance. That is, however, not
the case here, since the only goal is to calculate the kernel. This means that whichever decomposition
scheme is chosen, the implementation should scale the same way with the number of processors, Np.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Implementation of the Weisskopf-Wigner framework:
ω
q
P1
P2
P3
Figure 4.1: Illustration of the 1D block row decomposition used for the parallelized kernel calculation.
Note that the domain doesn’t have to divide neatly on to the available processors. If this isn’t the case,
every processor with rank < N%Size, where Size is the size of the global communicator, is assigned an
extra row. For the 1D case one can simply re-use the index functions along the q-axis.
The choice of domain decomposition thus becomes a matter of convenience. For this reason, a 1D row
block decomposition of the computation domain was used. Here the domain is divided into blocks along
one the axes and have the processors calculate the kernels on their respective domains. This choice has
two major advantages. Firstly, it is very easy to implement. Secondly and more importantly, the same
parallelization scheme can be used for both the kernel calculation and the FGR rate calculation.
The idea behind the row decomposition scheme is very simple; Say the kernel is to be calculated on a
grid with N rows and there are M processors available. Each processors then gets Floor(N/M) rows to
calculate. If the domain doesn’t neatly divide on to the available processors, that is if mod(N, M) ̸= 0
an extra row is added to all processors with a rank < mod(N, M). This scheme makes the distribution
of the extra rows as effective as possible while also making sure that the implementation is going to
work for arbitrary grid sizes.
At the end of the calculation the pieces are gathered together using the MPI_Allgatherv command if
the kernel is needed on all of the processors or using MPI_gatherv on rank 0 if it is only needed on one
processor. In most cases and indeed all cases considered in this thesis, the end result is only stored on
rank 0. The reason is that since the time evolution is completely sequential, it makes no sense to have
more than one processor performing the time steps. The 1D row block decomposition is illustrated in
figure 4.1.
Minimizing the memory footprint:
When dividing the domain among the processors, it would be unwise to store the domain on which
each processor has to compute the domain on as a matrix. Doing so would result in an extra memory
footprint of size O(N 2). A better way is for each processor to hold a copy of the global q and ω arrays
and simply have them calculate which part of the domain that it has to calculate the kernel on. This
way the memory footprint of the domain only scales as O(N) instead of O(N 2).
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Parallelized kernel calculation:
49
Figure 4.2: Parallelization benchmarks for the kernel calculation on Intel Xeon16 nodes.
4.1.3
Speedup evaluation:
To evaluate the performance of the parallelization a benchmark problem is needed. For this purpose,
a kernel calculation on a 4000 × 4000 grid was used. There are several ways to evaluate the success of
the parallelization scheme. On way is to plot the runtime as a function of the number of processors
and calculate the speedup. This of course reflects the raw computation time gain from throwing more
computing resources at the problem.
However, another interesting thing to know is how well the
available resources are used. A good measure of this is the speed up per added processor. This number
is called the parallel efficiency and ideally it should be as close to 1 as possible. Figure 4.2 shows the
performance gains from the parallelization. The times are taken as the average computing time for
all of the processors. From the figure it is clear that the parallelization routine results in a significant
speedup of the calculations. In fact it is seen that as expected, the performance gain is roughly linear
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Implementation of the Weisskopf-Wigner framework:
in the number of processors. This linear speedup with the number of processors reflects the fact that
our parallel efficiency stabilizes at around 0.9 for a larger number of processors. Note that each node
only holds 16 processors. For more than 16 processors the communication thus happens across the
InfiniBand connection between the nodes instead of the fast intra node communication routes. Even
then, it can be seen that this has neglible effect reflecting the efficiency of the chosen communication
scheme. This points the the conclusion that with the 1D block domain decomposition it is possible
to effective share the workload among the available processors and achieve a much needed speedup of
the kernel calculation. As a show of strength, it can be noted that with 32 processors available, it was
possible to make a calculation that used to take 7 days take a mere 6 hours! Additionally, if needed the
calculation can be further sped up by simply adding more processors. This reflects the high degree of
paralellizability of the problem!
4.2
Note on the q-integration for the VBM subband states:
For equation 3.112 to be numerically integrated, the integral over in-plane momenta has to be performed.
To do this, polar coordinates were employed:
∫
d2q =
∫qco
0
q · dq
∫2π
0
dθ
(4.1)
This means that in practice the integration of all q and ω has to done at several different angles, θ.
As seen in the previous section, the integration it self is already a very demanding task and doing it
several times for each calculation would require a lot available processors. Luckily, the subbands near
the VBM of the TMDs has the very nice property that they are have relatively isotropic dispersions
in all directions in q-space. As proof, the effective masses of the subbands was calculated in the heavy
and light directions for all of the different thicknesses for WSe2 and can be seen in table 4.1. This
means that assuming azimutal symmetry for the VBM subbands is reasonable. As is also clear from
table 4.1 this is a property only of the VBM subbands, as the CBM subbands clearly show anisotropic
dispersions. For the model a certain excited state, or ke, has to be chosen. In this work, the excited
state was chosen to be ke = Γ = 0. The delta function from equation 3.107 then dictates:
kg = ke + q = q
(4.2)
Inserting this into equation 3.113 gives:
2Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
1.097 · m0
1.097 · m0
CBM
0.544 · m0
0.673 · m0
3Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
0.851 · m0
0.851 · m0
CBM
0.536 · m0
0.633 · m0
4Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
0.797 · m0
0.797 · m0
CBM
0.544 · m0
0.618 · m0
5Ls WSe2
mL
mL
VBM
0.721 · m0
0.721 · m0
CBM
0.472 · m0
0.561 · m0
Table 4.1: Effective masses in the heavy and light directions for the subband states near the VBM and
CBM. As can be seen, the dispersions of the VBM subbands are extremely isotropic.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Numerical integration scheme:
51
K(q, ω) =
αcℏ2
m2
0ω2ϵ⊥A2
Ωcπ2
1
kz
Im
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
×
[
k2
z|q|

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+
k2
z

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)
(
ˆq · ∇∥
)
ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+ q2

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)∂zϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
−2kz|q|Im
{∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz′)
∫
Ωc
dz′dr′
∥ϕe(r′)(ˆq · ∇∥)ϕ∗
g(r)sinh(kzz′)
}]
(4.3)
Further noting that the in-plane dipole matrix elements also only vary slightly and remains a factor
of 105 or more smaller than the out-of-plane the integrals involving the in-plane derivatives can be
approximated as:
∫
Ωc
dz′dr′
∥ϕe(r′)(ˆq · ∇∥)ϕ∗
g(r)sinh(kzz′) ≈
∫
Ωc
dz′dr′
∥ϕe(r′)∂xϕ∗
g(r)sinh(kzz′)
(4.4)
Within these approximations, the azimuthal integration becomes trivial:
∫
d2q =
∫qco
0
q · dq
∫2π
0
dθ = 2π
∫qco
0
q · dq
(4.5)
It is emphasized that this integration scheme only works due to the relative in-plane isotropy of the
VBM subband state properties and in general the full azimuthal integration should be performed.
4.3
Numerical integration scheme:
Next on the agenda is the numerical integration of equation 3.114. Looking at equation 3.114 it is clear
that the kernel K(q, ω) can be calculated completely independent of the time integration. For this
reason, it makes sense to rewrite the integration problem in the following way:
˙Ce(t) = −
∫t
0
dt′R(t −t′)Ce(t′)
(4.6)
R(t −t′) ≡2π
∫
dωdq · qK(ω, q)e−i(ω−ωeg(q))(t−t′)
(4.7)
With this, the task then becomes calculating the convolution kernel R(t −t′) for all time differences
τ = t −t′. To this end the integrations over frequency, ω, and wave number q have to be performed.
To see how these integrations are performed, first note that by discretizing the (q, ω) space, the kernel,
R(τ) is be approximated by:
R(τ) ≈∆q∆ω
∑
ω
∑
q
eiωeg(q))τK(q, ω)e−iωτ
(4.8)
The next step is realizing that functions can be thought of as vectors of infinite dimension. In the
discretized case, the term in the double sum can thus be thought of as a matrix product. Specifically,
it makes sense to define the following three matrices:
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Implementation of the Weisskopf-Wigner framework:
M1 = exp
{
iτ ⊗ωeg(q)
}
,
Dim
(
M1
)
= Dim (τ) · Dim
(
q
)
(4.9)
M2 = exp {iω ⊗τ} ,
Dim
(
M2
)
= Dim (ω) · Dim (τ)
(4.10)
K =


K(q0, ω0)
K(q0, ω1)
. . .
...
K(q1, ω1)
K(qco, ω0)
...

,
Dim
(
K
)
= Dim
(
q
)
· Dim (ω)
(4.11)
and then express the term in the sum as the following matrix product:
V ≡M1 · K · M2
(4.12)
which obeys:
lim
∆q,∆ω→0 V = eiωeg(q))τK(q, ω)e−iωτ
(4.13)
A vector representation of the kernel R(τ) in equation 4.8 can then be found by taking the diagonal of
the matrix product in equation 4.13 and multiplying by ∆q and ∆ω:
R ≈Diag
[
V
]
(4.14)
In practice the sizes of the matrices grows rapidly with the time domain size and it is thus impossible
to use the above outlined method directly. Instead it is observed that the kernel can be calculated on a
subset of the time differences separately and then stitched together to give the final result. Instead of
constructing the full matrix and taking its diagonal, the implementation therefore constructs subsets of
the matrix around the diagonal and diagonalize those. Obviously this also means that in principle this
part of the calculation could also be parallelized to get a reduction in its runtime. However, compared
to the kernel calculation and the subsequent sequential time integration, the time taken to perform this
task is relatively small and so even a large speed gain here would result in little overall improvement in
runtime.
Next the derivative of the excited state coefficient, Ce, must be calculated. The initial condition is that
Ce(t = 0) = 1. The initial coefficient vector is thus a vector with Ce[0] = 1 and all other elements equal
to zero. When taking a time step, the next element in the coefficient vector can then be calculated in
the following way:
Ce(tn+1) = Ce(tn) + ∂tCe(tn) · ∆t
(4.15)
Where the derivative is calculated in two steps. First the section of R representing the time interval
0 to tn is taking from equation 4.14, denoted as R′. This vector is then flipped so that the last value
corresponding to R(tn) is the first element in the array and the value corresponding to R(0) is the first
value. This is denoted as R′ﬂip. The derivative can then be calculated as:
∂tCe(tn) = −R′
ﬂip · Ce · ∆t
(4.16)
With this, a scheme to numerically integrate equation 3.114 has been established.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Numerical integration scheme:
53
4.3.1
Numerical stability:
Equation 4.6 is a stiff differential equation. For this reason it is very important to check the numerical
stability of the numerical integration scheme. In figure 4.3 the R(τ) kernel is plotted. As can be seen,
it shows rapid variation on time scales well below a ps even though the rate might be on the order of 1
THz and in figure 4.4 it can be seen that this rapid variation also manifest in the time evolution of the
excited state probability in the form of Rabi oscillations. This is very important stability wise because
it becomes necessary to make sure that the time steps is significantly smaller than the period of these
oscillations. At the same time it is also important to minimize the rounding error. After experimenting
with different time steps it was found that a time step of dt = 1 · 10−17s was suitable for all of the
configurations considered in this thesis.
4.3.2
Discretization:
With the framework outlined above, the full Weisskopf-Wigner expression can now be numerically
integrated and solved for the time evolution of the excited state. There is however still one question to
address, namely the problem of choosing cutoffs for the q and ω integrations respectively. In principle
the integration over the wave number, q, and frequency, ω, domains extend from 0 to infinity. As
discussed earlier however, K(q, ω) will be zero for all q > qco. This means that we have natural cutoff
for the q integration. In other words the cutoff for the q integration is defined as the solution to equation
4.17.
ωeg(qco) = 0
(4.17)
The problem is slightly harder when considering the ω integration, as no obvious cutoff exists. Looking
at equation 3.112 it can be seen that there is a dominant contributions coming from the frequencies
on the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy, but there will also be contributions from other
frequencies due to the potentially rapid variation of the excited state probability. These represents
Figure 4.3: Convolution kernel for 2 layers of WSe2 and a graphene fermi level of 0.5 eV. The rapid
variations of the kernel can potentially lead to numeric instability. One therefore has to be careful when
choosing a time step ∆t.
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Implementation of the Weisskopf-Wigner framework:
Figure 4.4: Time evolution of the excited state probability for 2 layers of WSe2 and a graphene fermi
level of 0.5 eV. It is observed that the rapid variations of the kernel also manifests in the time dependence
of the excited state probability. One therefore has to be careful when choosing a time step ∆t.
virtual processes and to get a full, non-pertubative description of their effect it is of course important
to accurately capture these. This makes the choice of ωco very important. In practice, it turns out that
a cutoff of:
ωco = 10 · ωeg(q = 0)
(4.18)
is sufficient for converged results.
4.4
Simulation setup:
In the Weisskopf-Wigner model as described here, the graphene is modelled as having zero thickness.
This presents a small problem, since it means that effectively the graphene is placed directly onto the
TMD quantum well. This is not right, as there will be some interlayer spacing between the outermost
TMD layer and the graphene. To take this into account, the effective width of the TMD quantum well
is modelled as being the width of the number of layers in question with an added distance corresponding
to the best estimate of the distance between the graphene layer and the outermost TMD layer. This
effective distance, dg-TMD was estimated as the average of the thicknesses of the two materials. This
effective thickness we take to be the interlayer distance. For graphene it can be calculated directly via
the discussions of the relaxation of interlayer distance from section 2.1.1 and comes out to 3.35Å. For
the TMDs is it a bit more tricky. Here what is calculated is in fact the transition metal - transition
metal distance and not the chalcogenide-chalcogenide distance. For all of the TMDs it was observed
that the inter-chalcogenide distance was roughly half of the inter-transition metal distance and the
effective addition to the width is therefore calculated as:
dg-TMD = dg + dTMD/2
2
(4.19)
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Simulation setup:
55
The value in equation 4.19 naturally varies from TMD to TMD but comes out to around 3.5 Å in all
cases. As a check on this, the smallest Moire cell of graphene and WSe2 was found using the cell match
software[53] and the interlayer distance was relaxed using the C09-vdW exchange correlation functional
according to the scheme outlined in chapter 2. The 52 atom unit cell and the calculated energy as a
function of interlayer distance can be seen in figure 4.5. Here it can be seen that the result of the proper
relaxation is 3.42 Å which is close to the estimate from equation 4.19. This suggest that equation 4.19
provides a good estimate of the interlayer seperation.
A slightly harder question is how far above the mirror the TMD will be. Because there is no direct way
of calculating this, the same distances as the graphene-TMD distance was used. All in all this means
that the width of the stack in the simulations are:
d = #layers · dTMD + 2dg-TMD
(4.20)
A)
B)
Figure 4.5: A) 52 atom Moire unit cell at 0 degree twist angle found using the cell match tool[53]. B)
The energy as a function of interlayer separation calculated for the Moire supercell.
==PAGE:64==
56
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Investigating the
Weisskopf-Wigner
framework and importance
of the wave function
approximation:
5.1
Interpreting the coupling kernel K(q, ω):
Since the kernel K(q, ω) is the central object in the framework developed here it is natural to start
the discussion of with an in-depth look at the what information it holds. Comparing equations 3.69
and 3.112, it can be seen that the kernel can be interpreted as a heat map in (q, ω)-space of where in
the (q, ω)-space there are modes of the electromagnetic background for the intersubband transition to
couple to.
In the plasmonic cavity consisting of the mirror the TMD and the graphene, one would expect the LEE
to be dominated by the excitations from the graphene. It should therefore be possible to interpret the
why the kernel looks the way it does by overlaying the regions over the graphene conductivity onto
the kernel. This construction is shown in figure 5.1. The first ting of note is that as expected region
1B holds a relatively narrow plasmon resonance. As the mode enters into region 2B the now resonant
interband transitions can be seen to dampen of the plasmon. Interestingly, the plasmon mode seems to
differ from the plasmon mode of free standing graphene, equation 2.3. This is because the mode is not
solely a graphene plasmon mode, but instead a coupled mode between the graphene and the underlying
mirror. This will be discussed further later.
In regions 1A and 2A significant direct coupling of the intersubband transition to the intraband losses
in the graphene can be observed. The decay into these intraband transitions results in nothing but
heat generation in the graphene and is thus a considerable source of quenching. Part of the trick for
efficient coupling to the electromagnetic mode of interest, the graphene plasmon, is thus to choose a
configuration where the phase matching with these intraband loss modes is limited or avoided alto-
gether. Finally, regions 3A and 3B show no coupling as expected, since there are no excitations that
can directly couple to the intersubband transition and they also don’t contribute to the dampening of
the plasmon.
The final comment to make on the kernel is that even though it contains information about where in
the (q, ω) space there are excitations for the intersubband transition to potentially couple, it doesn’t
provide the full picture. This is because it doesn’t take the phase matching into account. That is
instead accounted for by the phase factor in equation 3.112. For a proper understanding of why the
==PAGE:66==
58
5 Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave function approximation:
Figure 5.1: Coupling kernel, K(q, ω), of 4 layers of WSe2 overlayed with the conductivity regions
of the graphene. The 1B region contains a plasmon mode as expected. Note that the plasmon of the
system deviates from the plasmon mode from free standing graphene. The reason is the fact that modes
is coupled mode between graphene and the mirror.
In region 2B the plasmon broadens significantly
due to intraband damping. Additionally, it can be observed that the intersubband transition also show
significant coupling to the intraband losses in region 1A and 2A. Regions 3A and 3B show no significant
coupling.
rates behave the way that they do, it is therefore important to consider what parts of the kernel are
phase matched with the intersubband transition and which ones aren’t. This leads to an interesting
observation: The regions of the graphene conductivity are defined via ratios with the Fermi level of
graphene, while the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy remains unaffected by the gating
within the approximations of this model. This means that as the graphene Fermi level is increased the
bottom edge of region 1A towards is pushed towards larger and larger q. This means that for some
value of the graphene fermi level, Eco
F , the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy is going to
terminate at the right bottom corner of region 1A. When this happens there will exist perfect phase
matching between the horizontal intraband transitions in the graphene and the intersubband transition,
which the heat map in figure 5.1 shows will lead to strong quenching. This effect is very important but
the dipole approximation totally fails to capture it and it is also not included in the Drude picture at
all! This why it is absolutely critical important to both use the full nonlocal graphene conductivity and
to properly include the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy.
5.1.1
Making sense of the acoustic the plasmon mode:
As mentioned, the plasmon mode seen in region 1B of figure 5.1 is not the mode one would expect
from a free standing graphene layer. In particular, the mode here looks acoustic for small q, that is
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Interpreting the coupling kernel K(q, ω):
59
A)
B)
C)
Figure 5.2: A) Charge distribution of the acoustic, ω−, plasmon mode of the bilayer graphene con-
figuration. B) Charge distribution of the optical, ω+, mode of the bilayer graphene configuration. C)
Dispersion relation of the two plasmon modes in bilayer graphene. Dispersion figure from [54]
ωp ∝q, which is unlike the ωp ∝√q behaviour of the plasmon mode in free standing graphene[14]. The
reason for this modification of the plasmon mode is the presence of the mirror. Because the mirror is
approximated by a perfect conductor, no field can exist inside the mirror. This means that the charge
distribution of the graphene plasmon mode is going to be mirrored in the mirror. The plasmon mode
of the system is therefore going to be a coupled mode between the mirror and the graphene, where
the charge distributions are exactly out of phase. That is, a positive charge in the graphene will be
mirrored as a negative charge in the mirror and vice versa for a negative charge in the graphene.
Why the out-of-phase coupling of the charge density in the graphene to the mirror charges in the mirror
results in an acoustic mode can be understood by making a comparison to the plasmon modes of bilayer
graphene systems. Consider two layers of graphene, separated by some dielectric barrier or width d.
That dielectric barrier would be the TMD QW in this case. This configuration is going to support two
plasmon modes, one in which the charge distributions in the two layers are out of phase, figure 5.2 A,
and one in which the charge distributions in the two layers are in phase, figure 5.2 B. As discussed
extensively in the literature[55, 56], the out-of-phase mode is acoustic and the in-phase mode is optical.
To leading order in q, the acoustic mode (AM) and the optical mode (OM) dispersion relations can be
expressed as:
ωAM(q) ∝q
(5.1)
ωOM(q) ∝√q
(5.2)
In the configuration considered here, one of the graphene sheets is replaced with a perfect mirror for
added confinement of the plasmonic mode. In this case, the coupled mode results from the mirror
charge effect where the mirror responds to the charge distribution in the graphene to ensure zero field
inside the conductor. Because the mirror always responds instantaneously to the charge distribution in
==PAGE:68==
60
5 Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave function approximation:
the graphene sheet via the mirror charge effect, a region of positive charge in the graphene will always
be mirrored by a region of negative charge in the mirror. The mirror-TMD QW-graphene configuration
will thus only support the out-of-phase acoustic mode and not the optical mode. This new reality is
illustrated in figure 5.3. Here it is illustrated that when a plasmon is excited in the graphene sheet its
charge density gets mirrored by the perfect conductor. This will effectively look like an out-of-phase
mode at some depth ≲d in the perfect conductor. The charge density in the mirror will only be exactly
the same in the case of vacuum spacing as in practice the presence of the TMD will slightly screen
the charges. However as a qualitative picture figure 5.3 A) holds. The fact that only the acoustic
mode is observed is also consistent with the fact that this work builds on the TM part of the DGF,
since this mode has the out-of-plane electric field characteristic of a TM mode. The above discussion
therefore leads to the conclusion that the plasmon mode of this cavity is acoustic because it ”inherits”
the acoustic nature of the out-of-phase mode in bilayer graphene heterostructures.
5.2
Estimating coupling efficiency:
When placing the TMD QW inside the plasmonic cavity the decay rate is going to increase due to an
increase in the optical LDOS as discussed previously. Via efficient coupling to the plasmon, one could
imagine applications ranging from excitation of graphene plasmon via carrier injection in the TMQ QW
to tunable sources of mid-IR photons as discussed by Kurmann et al.[16]. However, a big takeaway from
the discussion of the kernel in the previous section was that this LDOS represents both the plasmon
mode and intraband losses in the graphene. This is going to results in quenching of the emission into
the plasmon. The dispersion of the intersubband transition energy exacerbates this problem when the
Fermi level of the graphene is such that the qco, at which ∆E(qco) = 0, lies in the 1A region of the
graphene conductivity. This happens when the graphene Fermi levels is large enough that qco ≤2kF.
Here it will be possible for the intersubband transition to couple strongly to the horizontal intraband
transitions in the graphene, see figure 5.4. The consequence of the coupling to these horizontal transi-
tions in the grahene is illustrated in figure 5.5 where the emission rate as a function of graphene fermi
level has been calculated for a 4 layer WSe2 QW. When the dispersion of the intersubband transition
energy terminates in the 1A region there is a significant jump in the excited state decay rate. This
jump is solely associated with direct coupling of the intersubband transition to the horizontal intraband
transitions in the graphene and thus they represents nothing but loss. This again emphasizes the need
to go beyond the dipole approximation. Within the dipole approximation we neglect the momentum
A)
B)
Figure 5.3: A) Plasmonic mode resulting from the coupling of the graphene plasmon to the mirror
via the mirror charge effect. Because of the requirement of zero internal field in the perfect conductor
only the out-of-phase mode survives. Because the mirror is a perfect conductor is the mirror plane is
well defined. Because of the screening of the charges in the graphene by the TMD the actual distance to
the mirror charges isn’t going to be d exactly, but instead some smaller number reflecting the screening.
However, for simplicity we disregard that in this visualization. B) Illustration of the forbidden in-phase
mode.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Estimating coupling efficiency:
61
Figure 5.4: Comparison of the rate derivatives as a function of q. Looking at this quantity, it is
possible identify the q’s at which the intersubband transition couples to different types of excitations in
the graphene. It is observed that whether the dispersion relations terminate in the 1A region is very
important in determining the β factor of the intersubband-plasmon coupling, because the horizontal
intraband transitions result in strong quenching which effectively kills the effective coupling to the
plasmon.
Figure 5.5: The excited state probability decay rate as a function of graphene fermi level calculated
for 4 layers of WSe2. As can be seen, there is a significant jump in the coupling rate associated with
when the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy terminates in the 1A region of the graphene
conductivity.
conservation and so this effect wouldn’t be visible to us. In that case we would therefore never know
that in the regions above Eco
F the quenching becomes dominant limiting our ability to couple effectively
to the graphene plasmon.
To get a more accurate picture of how effectively it is possible couple to the graphene plasmon, it is
therefore very important to estimate the coupling efficiency or β-factor. The β-factor is defined as the
ratio between the decay rate into the plasmon over the total decay rate:
==PAGE:70==
62
5 Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave function approximation:
β = Γpl
Γtot
(5.3)
The rate that calculated with the Weisskopf-Wigner frame is the sum of the contributions from all of
the different decay channels. This is therefore for the total rate Γtot and to get an idea of the coupling
efficiency this alone is therefore not enough. A good estimate of the coupling efficiency can be obtained
by looking at the derivative of the 1st order MQED rate as a function of q. For an isotropic band
structure, such as is the case for the TMDs stacks near the gamma point, this derivative is:
dΓ1st MQED
dq
= 2πq · K(q, ωeg(q))
(5.4)
Since it would never be possible to isolate a single q-mode in the plasmonic cavity, the full rate will
always be a integral over all q. This means that the quantity in equation 5.4 doesn’t represent any actual
physical quantity. However, even though no actual physical significance can be assigned to equation 5.4,
it is still a useful quantity when trying to estimate the coupling efficiency. To see why, the derivative
of the rate as a function of q is plotted in figure 5.4. Looking at the figure, it is possible to identify
the q’s at which the intersubband transition couples to different types of excitations in the graphene.
Specifically comparing the results from figure 5.4 with the regions of the graphene conductivity, it can
be approximately stated that any excitations with,
q
kF
< ℏω
EF
(5.5)
can be understood as emission into the graphene plasmon and any decay at a (q, ω)-pair where equation
5.5 doesn’t hold can be roughly understood as intraband losses. Using equation 5.5 as the condition for
radiative decay, one can consistently isolate the plasmon peak as can be seen in figure 5.6. This leads
to the following definition the beta factor:
β(EF ) ≈
1
Γtot(EF )
∫
Ω
dΓ(EF )
dq
dq ,
with:
Ω=
{
q

q
kF
< ℏω
EF
}
(5.6)
5.2.1
Convergence considerations 1st order expression:
The convergence plot for the 1st order MQED rates can be found in appendix D. Figure D.1 in the
appendix shows the calculated rate as a function of the number of integration points used for 4 layers
of WSe2 is shown. It can be seen that for more than around 1000 samples the rates seem to converge
well. Interestingly, comparing figure D.1 with figure 5.5, the convergence problems can be seen to only
really arises once qco < 2kF . This suggests that the actual plasmonic rate is relatively easy to converge,
but that the direct coupling to the intraband losses proves problematic. This work uses 10000 samples
for the FGR calculations to ensure converged results.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Comparing wave function approximations:
63
Figure 5.6: Isolation of the part of the decay that goes into the graphene plasmon via the condition
that any decay for which
q
kF <
ℏω
EF is radiative. The fact that this can be isolated gives us a way of
estimating the coupling efficiency or β factor.
5.3
Comparing wave function approximations:
The next big question is whether it is possible to use the 1D envelope approximation to calculate the
rates. This would lead to a significant speedup as it would significantly ease the wave function integrals.
In this work three different approximations have been made for the wave functions. The first is of course
to use the full 3D Kohn-Sham wave functions. However, due to the bad scaling of the wave function
integrals for the full 3D problem, it would be advantageous to be able to make an approximation of
the envelopes to use with the 1D framework. To this end, two different ways of getting approximate
envelopes have been explored in this work. The first envelope approximation that was investigated, was
to approximate the out-of-plane envelope with the normal particle in a box states that we know from
an infinite quantum well (Simple QW). For a given QW width, d, the n′th particle in a box state is
given as[33]:
ψn(z) =
(2
d
) 1
2
sin
(nπ
d z
)
(5.7)
The second approximation is to generate envelope functions via an in-plane average of the Kohn-Sham
wave functions (1D DFT):
ϕ(z) =
∫
ψ(x, y, z)
Auc
dxdx
(5.8)
This procedure is chosen because it is exact in the case where the 3D wave function has no in-plane
variance:
ψ(x, y, z) = ϕ(z)
⇒
∫
ψ(x, y, z)
Auc
dxdx = ϕ(z)
∫
dxdy
Auc
= ϕ(z)
(5.9)
In figure 5.7 the decay rates of the excited state probability as a function of the graphene fermi level
for different thicknesses of WSe2 can be seen. It is observed that the rates depend strongly on which
approximation is made for the wave functions. Approximating the subband wave functions with particle
in a box states of an infinite quantum well of the same thickness leads to a substantial underestimation
==PAGE:72==
64
5 Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave function approximation:
Figure 5.7: Comparison of the decay rates calculated when using the different wave function approxi-
mations considered here: Simple particle in a box states (Simple QW), full 3D Kohn Sham orbitals (3D
DFT) and the in-plane average of the Kohn-Sham wave functions (1D DFT).
of the decay rate. Contrastingly, when the subband states are approximated using the envelopes de-
rived from the in-plane averaging of the Kohn-Sham orbitals defined by equation 5.8, the decay rates
are consistently overestimated across the considered thicknesses. These considerations makes it clear
that one has to take great care with approximate wave functions when calculating the rates.
Looking at the results in figure 5.7, the question that immediately comes to mind is of course what the
reason for the profound difference between the different approximations for the subband wave functions
might be. To understand what is going on, the kernels K(q, ω) in both the 1D and 3D cases were
examined:
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Comparing wave function approximations:
65
K1D(ω, q) =
e2ℏ
2πϵ0m2
0
q2
ω2√ϵ⊥ϵ∥
Im
[r12e−2kzd −1
r12e−2kzd + 1
]
×
(
ϵ∥
ϵ⊥
q2
(∫
dzϕe(z)ϕg(z) sinh(kzz)
)2
+
(∫
dzϕe(z)∂zϕg(z) sinh(kzz)
)2)
(5.10)
K3D(q, ω) =
αcℏ2
m2
0ω2ϵ⊥A2ucπ2
1
kz
Im
[r12e−2kzd −1
r12e−2kzd + 1
]
×
[
k2
z (ˆq · kg)

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+
k2
z

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)
(
ˆq · ∇∥
)
ϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
+
q2

∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)∂zϕg(r)sinh(kzz)

2
−2kzˆq · kgIm
{∫
Ωc
dzdr∥ϕ∗
e(r)ϕg(r)sinh(kzz′)
∫
Ω
cdz′dr′
∥ϕe(r′)(ˆq · ∇∥ϕ∗
g(r)sinh(kzz′)
}]
(5.11)
In both cases the dominant contribution is the out-of-plane dipole-like integral. Additionally, as dis-
cussed in the previous chapter, the dispersions of the subband states are very isotropic for the VBM
subbands considered here. It is therefore reasonable to presume that the differences in the rates between
the different approximations might be explainable by the differences between the dipole integrals. To
test this hypothesis, the normal transition dipole matrix element was calculated for all of the transitions
considered here:
I1D
d
=
ℏ2e
m∆Eeg
∫
dz ϕ∗
e(z)∂zϕg(z)
(5.12)
I3D
d
=
ℏ2e
m∆EegAuc
∫
uc
dxdy
∫
dz ϕ∗
e(r)∂zϕg(r)
(5.13)
Calculating the transition dipole integral in equations 5.12 and 5.13 for the different approximations
one finds the values in table 5.1.
In table 5.1 the dipole integrals are normalized by e · d where e
is the fundamental charge and d is the thickness of the QW in question. Noting that the dipole-like
integrals enter the kernel squared, it might be possible to scale the rates with the square of the ratio
WSe2 : Id/(e · d)
Number of layers
Simple QW wfs
3D DFT
1D DFT
2Ls
0.078
0.21
0.4
3Ls
0.123
0.24
0.55
4Ls
0.138
0.27
0.613
Table 5.1: Table of the transition dipole integrals for the intersubband transition between the lowest
and next lowest subband in WSe2 stacks of different thicknesses. The entries are given as the value of
the dipole integral over the product of the well thickness d and the fundamental charge e.
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave function approximation:
of the dipole integrals from the different approximations and thus find that the rates match between
the approximations. In figure 5.8 the rates of the calculated using the 1D approximate DFT envelopes,
the rates using the full 3D wave functions and the rates calculated using the full 3D wave functions,
scaled with the square of the relative ratio of the transition dipole moments calculated within the
two approximations are shwon. It is observed that by scaling the full 3D result with the square of
the transition dipole moment ratio, the two agree very well and this thus suggests that the problems
using the approximate envelopes can be understood as problems in properly estimating the transition
dipole matrix elements properly in this case. Figure 5.9 shows that the same explanation works for the
difference with the simple QW wfs.
Interestingly the above points to the fact that even when the in-plane dipole moment of the transi-
tion is completely negligible, as is the case for intersubband transitions in TMD QWs, one still has
to be VERY careful when defining approximate envelopes as these might not accurately capture the
coupling when in-plane variation exists. This means in general cases where anisotropic dispersion and
significant in dipole moments might exist, one has to use the proper wave functions to get proper results.
Looking at figure 5.7 table 5.1 and figure 5.8, the conclusion therefore becomes that the main problem
with the approximate envelopes is that the provide bad estimates of the transition dipole matrix ele-
ments. Reflecting on the averaging procedure used to generate the approximate Kohn-Sham envelopes,
one is lead to think that perhaps the difference is the dipole moment integrals can be explained by
an overestimation of the direct overlap due to a neglect of the difference in in-plane localization of
the subband states. The values of the overlap integrals can be seen in table 5.2. When calculating
the direct overlap of the subband states a difference can indeed be observed, but that the difference
isn’t quite as large as the difference between the dipole moments. This suggests that the difference in
in-plane localization might be part of the explanation, but that they cannot fully capture the difference
in dipole moments. In conclusion it is therefore very important to use the proper wave functions when
considering these types of systems.
5.3.1
Check that the 3D frame work is implemented properly:
To make sure that the difference between the wave function approximation doesn’t somehow arise due
to disagreement between the 3D and 1D frameworks it is useful to check that the two implementations
gives the same results in a case where they have to. Such a case can be generated by considering the
simple QW wave functions. Here a 3D version where there is no in-plane variation such that at any
point (x, y) in plane, the z-variation is given by equation 5.7 was generated. A comparison of the 1D
and 3D frameworks with the simple QW can be seen in figure 5.10. In the figure it is clearly seen
that the two frameworks gives the same results and this shows that the implementations agree which
underlines the importance of using the full 3D wave functions when in plane variation exists.
WSe2 Overlap integrals:
Number of layers
3D DFT
1D DFT
Overlap ratio
Dipole ratio
2Ls
1.684 · 10−7
3.124 · 10−7
1.72
1.9
3Ls
3.8 · 10−7
7.70 · 10−7
1.86
2.29
4Ls
1.1 · 10−6
1.9 · 10−6
1.86
2.29
Table 5.2: Overlap and transition dipole integrals for WSe2. Arbitrary units.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Comparing wave function approximations:
67
Figure 5.8: Comparison of the 1D DFT envelopes and the full 3D Kohn-Sham orbitals. Both the bare
results and the 3D DFT scaled with the square of the transition dipole integrals are shown. From the
figure we conclude that the difference between the rates obtained using the two different approximations
stem from the difference between the transition dipole moments of the intersubband transition within the
two approximations.
==PAGE:76==
68
5 Investigating the Weisskopf-Wigner framework and importance of the wave function approximation:
Figure 5.9: Comparison of the 1D DFT envelopes and the simple QW wave functions. Both the bare
results and the 1D QW wave functions scaled with the square of the transition dipole integrals is shown.
From the figure we conclude that the difference between the rates obtained using the two different
approximations stem from the difference between the transition dipole moments of the intersubband
transition within the two approximations.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Comparing wave function approximations:
69
Figure 5.10: Verification test for the agreement between the 1D and the 3D frameworks. Here we have
used the simple QW wave functions as envelopes such that the two should give the exact same result.
==PAGE:78==
70
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Comparing the different
approximations:
This chapter is dedicated to comparing emission rates calculated with the different approximations
developed in this thesis. To keep it as realistic as possible, only graphene Fermi levels under 0.7 eV are
considered. This maximum value is chosen because it is both experimentally reachable[15] and within
the range where conductivity expression holds[14].
6.1
Importance of including the dispersion of the intersubband
energy:
As discussed in section 5.2, the character of the coupling to the graphene depends strongly on where in
the (q, ω)-plane the dispersion curve reaches ∆Eeg(qco) = 0. If qco lives in the 1A region, the coupling
is going to be strongly influenced by the direct coupling to the intraband losses in the graphene. To
illustrate the effect of this, figure 6.1 shows the decay rates calculated using the FGR expression both
with and without the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy included for different thicknesses
of WSe2.1 For 2 layers it is observed that the effect of neglecting the dispersion is minimal. This is
because here the combination of a relatively large intersubband splitting, ∆Eeg(q = 0) = 0.65 eV and a
relatively large effective mass, meff = 1.097me ensures that qco never lies in region 1A for realistic values
of the graphene fermi energy. In contrast, for 3 layers a slight deviation at larger graphene fermi levels
can be seen. Here a point where qco lies in region 1A still hasn’t been reached, but because of the lower
intersubband splitting and smaller effective mass the intersubband transition energy intersects with
the lower parts of region 1A for larger fermi levels. This therefore means that the dispersion begins to
become important. Finally for 4 layers we see a deviation of more that 100% for larger graphene fermi
levels, suggesting that here the inclusion of the intersubband dispersion is crucial for a good description
of the coupling. This is especially true since the added rate mostly represents loss in the form of direct
coupling to the intraband losses in the graphene, which is totally missed otherwise leading to a wrong
coupling efficiency estimate.
The TMD QWs considered here are characterized by relatively large effective masses. This means that
in all cases the coupling to the plasmon is going to be relatively well described without the dispersion
of the intersubband transition energy.
This is because the plasmon lives at relatively small q and
therefore the intersection between the plasmon and the intersubband transition dispersion happens
almost at ω = ∆Eeg(q), see the kernel in figure 5.4. For lower effective mass materials, such as III-V
semiconductor QWs, the deviations are going to be even more significant since neither the plasmon nor
the coupling to the intraband losses will be properly described without the dispersion.
1Note that neglecting the dispersion amounts to an assumption of infinite effective mass.
==PAGE:80==
72
6 Comparing the different approximations:
Figure 6.1: This figure shows the importance of including the dispersion of the intersubband transition
energy. The figure shows the calculated 1st order emission rates with and without including the dispersion
of the intersubband transition energy. It is clearly seen that in general the dispersion of the intersubband
transition energy is crucial.
6.2
Comparing with the dipole approximation:
A very important comparison is the comparison of the dipole approximation and the expression devel-
oped here. Doing so is a hard task, as it is hard to define a meaningful dipole approximation for the
configuration considered here. To understand why it is instructive to consider the expression for the
excited state decay rate within the dipole approximation again:
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Comparing with the dipole approximation:
73
Figure 6.2: Emission rates calculated within the dipole approximation for different effective emitter
positions, z0. As can be seen, the rates depend strongly on what value is chosen for the effective position,
making the dipole approximation ill-defined in this case.
A)
B)
Figure 6.3: This figure shows the rates with the 1st order MQED expression with and without disper-
sion, along side the rates calculated within the dipole approximation for 4 layers (A) and 3 layers (B) of
WSe2. As can be seen, the dipole approximation deviates significantly from the proper expression, which
again emphasizes the importance of using the full, non-local description when describing the coupling
of the intersubband transitions to the graphene plasmon inside the plasmonic cavity.
Γ = 2ω2
eg
ϵ0ℏc2 dαGαα(z0, z0, ω)dα = 2ω2
eg|dz|2
ϵ0ℏc2
Gzz(z0, z0, ω)
(6.1)
==PAGE:82==
74
6 Comparing the different approximations:
Where z0 again is the effective position assigned to the intersubband transition within the TMD slab.
This is where the dipole approximation becomes very ill-defined because what value to choose here?
To see just how important the choice of z0 is, figure 6.2 can be considered. Here the excited state
probability decay rate has been calculated for three different positions inside of the slab, z0 = d/4,
z0 = d/2 and z0 = 3d/4. As can be seen in the figure, the rates depend strongly on the choice of z0.
Comparing equation 6.6 with the FGR expression where the dispersion of the intersubband energy is
neglected, it can be seen that the difference lies in that in the 1st order expression without the disper-
sion essentially represents a weighed average of dipole positions z0 weighted sinh(kzz), whereas with
equation 6.6 an effective z0 has to be chosen. Because z0 is so ill-defined, one could be lead to deduce
that a more rigorous definition of the ”dipole approximation” in our case is thus the FGR expression
without the dispersion.
From the above discussion it is clear that any choice of z0 will be rather arbitrary. However, as a first
guess when attacking a problem like this, one would likely take z0 = d/2. Figure 6.3 shows the rates
calculated with z0 = d/2 along side the 1st order MQED and 1st order MQED without the dispersion.
Figure 6.3 A shows that for small Fermi levels the dipole approximation seems to perform well, but
as the Fermi level is increased the dipole approximation suffers from the same problem of neglecting
the coupling to the intraband losses as the 1st order MQED without dispersion. In fact, neglecting the
dispersion leads to an underestimation of the rate by more than 100% for 4 layers, which emphasizes
the importance of including the dispersion. Interestingly, figure 6.3 A seems to indicate that the dipole
approximation at z0 = d/2 does a reasonable job of approximating the rates when the effect of the
dispersion is small. This is in fact confirmed by looking at figure 6.3 B) where the rates as a function
of Fermi level is plotted for a 3 layer stack of WSe2. In this case the role of the dispersion is smaller
because the dispersion relation never terminates in the 1A region for the considered Fermi levels. This
leads to smaller deviations.
The above seems to suggest that the naive dipole approximation actually works well in capturing the
coupling to the plasmon and only fails when the dispersion is such that significant direct coupling to
the intraband losses takes place.
The reason for the latter failure is of course the phase matching
is misrepresented as discussed earlier. To understand the success in describing the coupling to the
plasmon, two things need to be stated.
First, the TMDs all have relatively large effective masses.
Because the plasmon appears at relatively small q, this means that for them the dispersion only weakly
affects the direct coupling to the plasmon. Secondly, looking at the full kernel, we can see that the
dominant out-of-plane dipole term essentially consists of an average of dipole integrals weighted with a
factor of sinh(kzz). If kzz is small then:
sinh(kzz) ≈kzz
(6.2)
Because of the small width of the TMD stacks, this means that the weights across the slab become
more or less linear. Since the wave functions of the subband are quite symmetric around the middle of
the stack, see figure 2.5, this means that the dipole term approximately becomes:
e2ℏ
2π3ϵ0m2
0
q2
ω2√ϵ⊥ϵ∥
Im
[r12e−2kzd −1
r12e−2kzd + 1
]
×

∫
dzϕe(z)∂zϕg(z) sinh(kzz)

2
≈
(6.3)
e2ℏ
2πϵ0m2
0
q2
ω2√ϵ⊥ϵ∥
Im
[r12e−2kzd −1
r12e−2kzd + 1
]
× d2k2
z
4

∫
dzϕe(z)∂zϕg(z)

2
(6.4)
Neglecting the dispersion and the other terms, this leads an approximate rate of:
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Importance of the non-pertubative treatment:
75
Γ ≈
|dz|2 · d2
4π√ϵ⊥ϵ∥ϵ0ℏ
∫
dqq2k2
zIm
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
(6.5)
Similarly, the expression for the rate in the dipole approximation, equation 6.6, in the small kzz limit
is:
Γdipole ≈
d2|dz|2
4π√ϵ⊥ϵ∥ϵ0ℏ
∫
dqq2k2
zIm
[rge−2kzd −1
rge−2kzd + 1
]
(6.6)
Which explains why the two approximations agree when the dispersion can be neglected, in the case of
sufficiently narrow quantum wells. If the wells become wider, or kz becomes larger as is the case for the
intraband region, then the approximation for the sinh(kzz) terms breaks down and with it the dipole
approximation at z0 = d/2 because the weights become exponential in nature.
In conclusion: The need to define an effective position makes the dipole approximation ill-defined for the
systems considered here, performing especially bad when the dispersion of the intersubband transitions
energy terminates in the 1A region of the graphene conductivity. However, for the samples that don’t
see large effects from the nonlocality, it seems to perform decently. The conclusion is thus that the
problems with the dipole approximation in this case stem primarily from neglecting the dispersion of
the intersubband transition energy. It must be said that the presence of the mirror likely exacerbates
the problem with the dipole approximation significantly, as the requirement of zero field inside of the
conductor means that the field variation across the thickness of the slab is faster than it would be for a
real metal. This is because the skin effect doesn’t exist for a perfect conductor, but can be substantial
compared the the thickness of the TMD QW for real metals[9].
6.3
Importance of the non-pertubative treatment:
All of the previous discussions was centered around the proper use of the 1st order MQED expression.
An important question is of course whether the rates calculated with the 1st order expression are
descriptive or whether perturbation theory breaks down at any point. The following section therefore
provides a comparison of the full non-pertubative calculations and the 1st order expression. One clear
way of comparing the two theories is to compare they calculated rates the give. Since the full MQED
expression doesn’t calculate the rate directly, but instead the time dependence of the excited state
coefficient via numerical integration of equation 3.69, a way to extract the rates has to be decided on.
Because the excited state probability can be calculated as ⟨e, 0M|ψ(t)⟩, the wave functions ansatz in
equation 3.63 leads to the following expression for the excited state probability:
Pe(t) = |Ce(t)|2
(6.7)
The emission rate can be thought of the rate at which the probability of finding the carrier in the upper
subband decreases. The rate predicted by the full MQED expression can thus be determined by fitting
a decreasing exponential to the time dependent probabilities:
P ﬁt
e (t) = exp(−Γt)
(6.8)
As proof that the exponential fit is a valid way to extract the emission rate from the full MQED ex-
pression, figure 6.6 shows the fit overlayed on the true time dependence. Even though the fit cannot
==PAGE:84==
76
6 Comparing the different approximations:
Figure 6.4: Comparison of the 1st MQED rates and the rates calculated using the fully time dependent
framework. It can be seen that deviations from the 1st order expression can be observed when 2kF > qco.
capture the short scale Rabi oscillations, the overall life time seems to be well estimated.
Figure 6.4 shows the rates found by fitting equation 6.8 to the excited state probability compared with
the 1st order rates. The figure shows that the 1st order expression performs very well for 2 and 3
layers for all of the Fermi levels considered. This is very interesting because as shown in figure 6.5,
sub-picosecond oscillations of the excited state probabilities can be observed across the different thick-
nesses for a graphene Fermi level of EF = 0.5eV. One would therefore think that there should be some
influence of the excited state probability from the recovery effects. However, as can also be seen, the
amplitudes of the Rabi oscillations are very small. To understand why the Rabi oscillations remain so
small even though the Rabi frequency is very high, it is useful to go back to the analogy of thinking of
the coupling as the coupling to a series of different cavities. In particular, the coupling at each q can
be thought of as the coupling to a multimode cavity, with one resonant mode at ω = ∆Eeg(q) and a
multitude of off-resonant modes. For each q there is therefore going to be a difference in both detuning
energies and coupling constant and each of these ”cavities” are therefore going to have their own Rabi
frequency. This limits the coherence and thus also the ability for the two subsystems to coherently
exchange energy, thereby also limiting the amplitude of the Rabi oscillations.
==PAGE:85==
6.4 Summary of findings:
77
Figure 6.4 also shows that for 4 and 5 layers. Here the Fermi level such that qco > 2kF is less than the
maximum of 0.7 eV considered here and there are clear deviations from the 1st order rates for larger
Fermi levels. The reason for these deviations is that because the low to zero energy transitions into
the intraband transitions becomes possible, the Markov approximation of the integral in equation 3.121
breaks down. This is because it no longer hold that the time scale on which the excited state probability
varies is much smaller the the intersubband transition energy. Very interestingly, this indicates the fact
for some configurations such as the 4 and 5 layer slabs, it is possible to reach the so called ultra strong
coupling regime, where the energy exchange rate becomes larger than the transition frequency itself[57].
It should of course be noted that this represents ultra strong coupling to the intraband losses and not the
plasmon which might limit the applications of such a configuration for ultra strong coupling experiments.
So to what extend can the graphene and the intersubband transitions be said to couple strongly? This
question is surprisingly hard to answer based on the theory of two levels systems coupled to one mode,
since the cavity presents one excited state coupled an infinite number of ground state in the presence
of many different modes. Equation 1.4 therefore cannot be applied as the criterion for strong coupling.
What can be said is the following: the time dependent excited probability shows signs of sub-picosecond
Rabi oscillations. The very rapid frequency of these oscillations suggest that the coupling constant is
very large and easily overcomes the line widths of the graphene and the intersubband transition sep-
arately.
Deviations from the 1st order MQED expression are also clearly visible further indicating
that strong coupling is taken place. For a more rigorous definition of strong coupling, the Lamb shifts
from equation 3.123 could potentially be calculated. The represent a shift of the entire upper subband
relative to the lower subband and it might possible to formulate a good criterion based on these lamb
shifts. Unfortunately, due to time constraints this wont be investigated further here.
More interesting than strong coupling between the graphene and the intersubband transition is of course
the question of whether the plasmon and the intersubband transition can be said to couple strongly.
Again, because this framework calculates the cumulative effect of the coupling to all of the modes, it
is impossible to estimate a single coupling constant to assign to the coupling between the intersubband
transition and the plasmon. To definitively proof the presence of strong coupling between the plas-
mon and the intersubband transition, the proper course of action would be to calculate the excitation
spectrum of the coupled system and look for signs of anti-crossing near the intersection between the
dispersion relations. This would be a way to investigate whether the strong coupling criterion of equa-
tion 1.4 holds for the coupling. Within the current model it isn’t possible to calculate the excitation
spectrum, because the details of the excitation spectrum are lost due to the integration over (q, ω)
space, but is a very interesting prospect for future work to investigate this further.
6.3.1
Convergence of the non-pertubative calculation:
The convergence plot for the full time dependent rates can be found in appendix D. Figure D.2 shows
the emission rates calculated using the full time dependent expression. As can be seen, the emission
rates are first really converged on a 5000×5000 grid. As was also the case for the 1st order MQED rates,
it can be seen that the convergence problems again arise for the larger Fermi levels where the intraband
losses in graphene become resonant. Note that assuming the empirical parallel efficiency of 0.9 that was
found for the parallelization benchmarks, a converged simulation using the full time domain expression
would have taken roughly 10 days on a single processor! This emphasizes the huge importance of the
parallelization scheme developed for the numerical integration.
6.4
Summary of findings:
The discussion of the previous two chapters illustrate the complexity of properly describing the coupling
between the intersubband transitions and the graphene plasmon. The main conclusions to draw from
==PAGE:86==
78
6 Comparing the different approximations:
Figure 6.5:
Evidence of short time scale Rabi oscillations at a graphene Fermi level of 0.5eV for
different thicknesses of WSe2.
As can be seen, the period of the Rabi oscillation increase as the
number of layers decrease, reflecting the stronger coupling in the small thicknesses. However, due to
the incoherent nature of the interaction, the amplitude of the Rabi oscillations remains small.
the discussions are:
1. Using the true 3D wave functions is very important to be able to calculate quantitative decay
rates. This is due to the fact that using approximate wave function risks misestimating the dipole
moment of the intersubband transition and therefore fail to describe the strength of the coupling
properly. This is important for quantitative results, but doesn’t affect the qualitative features
much.
2. Including the dispersion of the intersubband transition energy is important because neglecting it
results in total negligence of the direct coupling to the intraband losses in the graphene. This
results in rates that are both quantitatively and qualitatively wrong!
3. At low graphene fermi levels, qco > 2kF, the full MQED frameworks gives similar rates to the
1st order MQED rates. This is presumably because of the incoherent nature of the interaction
between the intersubband transition and the graphene plasmon due to the large number of off-
resonant modes. For larger graphene Fermi levels, the transition into the ultra strong coupling
==PAGE:87==
6.4 Summary of findings:
79
Figure 6.6: Proof that the exponential fit provides a valid method of obtaining the decay rates from
the full MQED calculations.
regime for the coupling to the low energy intraband excitations means that a non-perturbative
treatment becomes important to get accurate rates.
The combined MQED-DFT framework presented is able to address all of the above challenges and
this allows to perform interesting calculations for systems where both the electromagnetic field and the
material requires a quantum description.
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 7
Comparing the different
TMDs:
This chapter uses the Weisskopf-Wigner framework to investigate the nature of the coupling between the
intersubband transition and the graphene plasmon. In particular, configurations where it is possible to
efficiently out-couple the intersubband transitions as graphene plasmons is sought among the different
thicknesses of the 4 common TMDs. The intersubband transitions of the different TMDs behave more
or less the same with their differences coming only due to different intersubband splittings, different
effective masses of the subbands and slight variations in dielectric constants[49]. This chapter is therefore
going to use WSe2 as an example TMD to illuminate the effects and then in the end scan all of the
TMDs for the best possible configuration.
7.1
Coupling efficiency:
Figure 7.1 shows the β factor calculated using equation 5.6 as a function of graphene Fermi level for
different thicknesses of WSe2. Generally, it is seen that the thinner the TMD QW becomes, the more
efficiently it is possible to couple to the plasmon. In fact, the 4 and 5 layer stacks show relatively small
β factors of less than 0.2 for larger Fermi levels due to the strong quenching of the radiative emission
by the direct coupling to the intraband transitions in graphene. The fact that the thinner stacks show
larger coupling efficiencies is of course nice since they also show higher overall rates, but the question
that remains is why that is the case. To understand this, one can invoke the simple QW analogy to
note that for the transition energy between the lowest two subbands the following holds:
∆Eeg(N) ∝
1
N 2L2 ∝
1
N 2
(7.1)
Equation 7.1 shows that the intersubband splitting is going to be significantly larger for thinner sam-
ples than for thicker samples. This means that not only will the plasmon be more well defined at the
intersection but also that if the effective masses where the same across the thicknesses qco would be
larger for thinner samples meaning that we could go to larger Fermi levels before quenching sets in.
Additionally, the effective masses actually increase as the samples get thinner, making the coupling
even more efficient. Another conclusion that we can draw is that the in samples thicker than 5 layers
it begins to become unlikely that one would be actually observe any kind of coupling at significant
graphene Fermi levels.
Coupling efficiencies for the other 3 TMDs can be found in appendix E.
7.2
Purcell enhancement:
Another interesting thing is the Purcell enhancement. For as plasmonic system, the Purcell enhancement
should be thought of as the increase in the radiative decay rate as a result of the presence of the
==PAGE:90==
82
7 Comparing the different TMDs:
Figure 7.1: Coupling efficiency for different thicknesses of WSe2. Generally, the coupling efficiency
increases with decreasing TMD width, because this minimizes the direct coupling to the intraband losses.
plasmon. This means that it makes sense to define it as the decay rate into the plasmon over the free
space spontaneous emission rate, as discussed in [11].
P = ΓPl
Γ0
(7.2)
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Purcell enhancement:
83
Figure 7.2: Purcell enhancement for different thicknesses of WSe2. It can be seen that the Purcell
enhancement is roughly the same across all thicknesses of the TMD stack.
Figure 7.3: Maximum decay rates into the plasmon as a function of the number of layers. As can
be seen, the radiative rate increases rapidly with decreasing thickness and actually surpasses the room
temperature linewidth of the free standing TMD quantum wells.
==PAGE:92==
84
7 Comparing the different TMDs:
A thing to keep in mind about equation 7.2 is that this doesn’t represent decay into free space and if
the interest was to somehow out-couple this to free space for an LED or similar, the coupling efficiency
of the plasmon into free space should probably be included somehow. However, since that isn’t the
concern of this thesis this won’t be discussed further here.
The spontaneous emission rate in free space is known is known from several textbook such as for-example
the on by Ballentine [47]:
Γ0 = ω3
0|dz|2
3πϵ0ℏc3
(7.3)
Inserting equation 7.3 into equation 7.2 the Purcell factor becomes:
P(EF ) = 3πϵ0ℏc3
ω3
0|dz|2 · ΓP l
(7.4)
Finally, the plasmonic rate can be estimated via the β-factors of the previous section:
ΓP l ≈β(EF ) · Γtot(EF )
(7.5)
This means that the Purcell factor can be calculated as:
P(EF ) = 3πϵ0ℏc3
ω3
0|dz|2 · β(EF ) · Γ(EF )
(7.6)
Figure 7.2 shows the Purcell enhancements as a function of Fermi level for the different thicknesses of
the WSe2. As can be seen in the figures, placing the quantum well inside of the cavity increases the
brightness of the intersubband transition by a factor of around P = 105. This is a very significant
Purcell enhancement emphasizes the large increase in brightness resulting from placing the quantum
well inside of the plasmonic cavity. The same orders of magnitude are found for the other TMDs, see
appendix E.
Increasing the brightness of the intersubband transition is fine and shows the great effect that the
plasmonic cavity has on the emission rates of the intersubband transitions. However, it should be em-
phasized that this treatment fails to account for saturation effects that could potentially lead to lower
overall rates in an actual experiment as discussed in [5]. Another important thing to note, is that even
though comparison with the vacuum rate provides a good measure of how much the brightness can be
increased, the vacuum spontaneous emission rate doesn’t actually represent the rate to beat. This is
because the decay of the intersubband transition in the absence of the cavity isn’t actually dominated
by the spontaneous emission but instead the broadening due to non-radiative decay as is clear from
the results from Schmidt et al. The actual rate that should be beat is thus the room temperature line
width of Γs = 5.9meV = ℏ· 1.49THz. Figure 7.3 shows the radiative rates plotted as a function of
Fermi level. The room temperature line width is also indicated in the figure. As can be seen, the thin
stacks of 2 and 3 layers actually show a coupling rate to the plasmon that is greater than the linewidth,
meaning that the intersubband transition is out-coupled to the plasmon faster than it is damped by
other non-radiative channels inside the TMD. This holds great promise as it might represent a new way
of exciting graphene plasmons electrostatically. Instead of having to use the s-SNOM AFM tips such
as in [12] or having to excite them using sub wave-length grating structures such as done in [58]. Figure
7.3 also shows the phonon-limited line width calculated by Schmidt et. al., which can be understood
as a the line width that one would see in a cold sample. Here it can be seen that in a cryogenic setup,
even the 4 and 5 layer samples could potentially overcome the intrinsic dampening of the intersubband
==PAGE:93==
7.2 Purcell enhancement:
85
transition by non-radiative processes. However, due to the horrible coupling efficiencies at these thick-
nesses they are unlikely to be good candidates regardless of their radiative rate: This is so since most
of their total rates would be into the intraband losses as discussed in the previous section. The best
candidates thus remain the 2 and 3 layer stacks.
All in all this suggests that a setup similar to the one examined here may provide a platform for some-
thing like a graphene plasmon cannon, where the graphene are excited via carriers in the quantum well.
In practice, this might take the form of carrier injection into the subbands. The actual experimental
design is however beyond the scope of this work and thus won’t be discussed further here. A major point
is of course that in reality, a perfect mirror cannot actually be made. Instead a real metal substrate
would likely have to be used, which would open new sources of losses which might render this setup
impossible due to loss. The result presented here should thus be taken with a grain of salt.
==PAGE:94==
86
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion and outlook:
8.1
Limitations of the current model:
A weakness of the generalized Weisskopf-Wigner framework presented here is that it models the in-
tersubband absorption processes as a single particle process. In a real setup there would likely be a
finite doping concentration in the subbands and many body corrections to e.g. the transition energy
might arise as a result. In particular, results from normal III-V epitaxial quantum wells indicate that
the many body effects might result in a blueshift of the intersubband transition energy[59, 60, 61]. As
discussed in appendix F a similar effect can actually be observed when calculating the intersubband
absorption spectrum of the free standing TMD stack within the random phase approximation using
GPAW. Even though these results cannot be directly transferred to the situation considered as it is
quite different because the SPPs now carries finite momentum, it does suggest that renormalization of
the intersubband transition energies might be significant. It should be noted that at the experimental
subband doping concentration of ND = 1012cm−2 realized by Schmidt et al. the effect is quite insignif-
icant. A finite doping concentration in one of the subbands might also result in screening effects that
could reduce the efficiency of the coupling.
A possible way of addressing this would could be to use updated response functions of the material
that accounts for the existence of the free carriers in the subbands, similar to what was done by Liu
[59]. Again taking a queue from Liu’s paper, this would likely somehow involve nonlocal contributions
to the TMD response functions due to the thinness of the films. Noting that equation 3.79 was the
essential relation allowing us to neatly express the coupling coefficients in terms of the imaginary part
of the DGF, any nonlocal generalization relies on this relation holding in the case of nonlocal response
functions. As mentioned in chapter 3, this is in fact the case and takes the form of equation 3.44.
Comparing equations 3.79 and 3.44, it can be seen that the inclusion of the nonlocal response functions
would be possible, but that it would be at the cost of an extra integral. This means that the compu-
tations could quickly become significantly heavier in this case, but it is definitively worth investigating
further in the future.
Another effect that might be important to investigate is the renormalization of the intersubband transi-
tion energy due to the doped graphene. As shown by Raja et. al., mono-layer TMDs show a significant
bandgap renormalization when placed near a doped graphene sheet[62]. A similar effect might affect
the subband states. Especially the thinner samples might experience some renormalization of the in-
tersubband splitting due to this effect. In the future it could therefore also be interesting to investigate
this further. This effect is likely very difficult to include in the current model directly, but it could
potentially be investigated independently.
Finally, the fact that the model here estimates the emission rate based on the excited state probability
of the single carrier means that it fails to account for saturation effects. That is, if one only has a few
carriers in the upper subband, the emission rate might not increase as much. However, this does not
affect the coupling efficiencies and therefore even though the experimentally observed rates might be
smaller than predicted here, the conclusion that the intersubband transitions can be efficiently coupled
to the graphene plasmon should still hold. Because of the large rates there could also potentially be
nonlinear effects that could play role. This is also something to consider in future work.
==PAGE:96==
88
8 Discussion and outlook:
8.1.1
Addressing the approximations of the results presented here:
One major approximation in this treatment of the interaction between the TMD intersubband transi-
tions and the cavity plasmon is the approximation of the substrate as a perfect mirror. In reality, this
mirror would have to be taken by a real metal which would likely result in weaker confinement and
much losses. Investigating this is possible within the current model, as it would only require an update
of the boundary condition between the mirror and the TMD to account for the real metal. This is
therefore definitively worth pursuing further in the future.
Another thing worth taking an extra look at is the free standing intersubband transition linewidth.
In this work the experimental room temperature value found by Schmidt et al. was used. In fact,
in the supplementary material of the paper they deduce the following approximate expression for the
transition linewidth[12]:
Γ ≈
(
1 −m1
m2
)
max (EF , kBTlog(2))
(8.1)
Where m1 and m2 are the effective masses of the two subbands partaking in the absorption process
and EF is this case is the Fermi level of the carriers in doped subband. Based on equation 8.1 it can
be deduced that there will be a connection between the doping concentrations of the subbands and
the linewidth. Looking at figure 2.3 it can be seen that for the 2 layer samples especially, the effective
of the two subbands vary significantly. The actual linewidth of this transition could there potentially
be larger than the measured linewidth for large doping concentrations, which in turn might affect
the effectiveness of the outcoupling of the intersubband transitions to graphene plasmons. Another
thing that equation 8.1 shows is that the relatively large difference between the effective masses of the
subbands might lead to very broad resonances at larger temperatures. This is again especially true
for 2 layers, and the interplay between the linewidth, temperature and doping concentrations might
therefore be very interesting to investigate further. Because equation 3.114 includes the effect of finite
subband occupations, this should be possible to adress within the current model.
This suggests that the interplay between the linewidth and the doping concentration might be a very
important thing to investigate further in order to determine whether the excitation of graphene plasmons
via carrier injection into the subbands is realistic.
8.2
Outlook:
The framework presented here is quite general in that it was formulated around the DGF and the GRCs
of the interfaces in the problem instead of around the materials themselves. This means that it can be
quite straightforwardly applied to systems with the same layered symmetry as the one considered here.
It should also be relatively easily to apply it to other geometries with high levels of symmetry, such
as spherical or cylindrical media where the DGF can be analytically determined[6]. A straightforward
next step could be to simply replace the graphene with some other material that supports a polaritonic
excitation in the mid-IR region like the graphene plasmon. One example could be using the optical
phonon in hBN which also lives in the mid-IR region of the spectrum[63]. Another possibility could
be a hyperbolic meta-material. Using a different field enhancer for the intersubband transitions thus
provides an interesting direction for future work.
One could also imagine using the framework for a different emitter. One very interesting prospect
would be to investigate the coupling of defect centers in 2D materials to plasmonic cavity designs like
the one considered here.
Like the NV-centers in diamond that function as artificial atoms[11], the
defects in 2D materials might also function in the same way. The transition energy of defects might
be significantly larger than the intersubband transitions energy and like NV centers lie in the 1-2 eV
range[64]. For this reason, graphene might not provide the optical field enhancer and there an other
==PAGE:97==
8.2 Outlook:
89
material might have to be sought after. Again, due to the generality of the formulation presented here,
the framework can be easily applied to other materials as well, such as perhaps using a thin metal film
where the SPP frequencies are larger than in graphene[9, 41].
As discussed in chapter 4, the full 3D calculations are very heavy due to the requirement of having to
calculate the kernel. In particular, it only became feasible due to the fact that computation could be
split among a very large number of CPU’s and due to the fact that it was possible to assume azimuthal
symmetry of the subband dispersions near the Γ-point. For the fully non-pertubative framework to
be more generally applicable, it would therefore be interesting to investigate other ways of speeding
the computation up further, apart from simply throwing more processors at it. One way of doing that
could be to combine the splitting of the workload among the processors with multithreading within each
processor. Again, because the kernel calculation is highly parallelizable, the regions assigned to each
processor could be further decomposed into sub-domains which would then be calculated in separate
threads on each processor. A big challenge with this is that unlike the MPI scheme, it would now
be necessary to know exactly how many threads each core on the given processor type can support,
meaning that the implementation would likely take on a more hardware specific nature. Also, unlike
the multiprocessing scheme where the different sections of the domain is essentially handled by differ-
ent hardware, multithreading would see several different regions compete for the same computational
resources within a single CPU. This means that the actual gain from this could be small to non-existent
or even a speed decrease if it isn’t done with great care.
==PAGE:98==
90
==PAGE:99==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion:
The generalized Weisskopf-Wigner framework developed here allows for the description of coupling be-
tween emitters with dispersive energy levels and finite momentum carrying optical excitations such as
SPPs. This theory was formulated around the minimal coupling Hamiltonian instead of the approxi-
mate dipole Hamiltonian, meaning that it includes all possible linear coupling terms between the field
and the emitter. This makes it possible to describe the coupling between light and matter, in the case
where both the electromagnetic field and the wave functions vary on the same length scale. Moreover,
because the theory was formulated around the Dyadic Green’s function and the generalized reflection
coefficients of the problem, it is quite general. This makes a very promising tool for future investigation
of light matter interactions in both the weak and strong coupling limits.
As an example, the coupling between the intersubband transitions in few layer TMD stacks and graphene
plasmons was considered. The importance of properly accounting for the dispersion of the transitions
was shown to arise do to direct coupling to the intraband transitions in graphene for large Fermi lev-
els in some configurations. It was also shown that the choice of wave function approximation is very
important, meaning that the full 3D wave functions had to be employed. To make the problem compu-
tationally feasible, a very efficient parallelization scheme was developed. This implementation showed
parallel efficiencies above 0.9, even when parallelizing across several nodes and it allowed for a very
significant speed up of the computations. Purcell enhancements in excess of 105 was observed and for
the thinner samples emission rates in excess of 5 THz was found. These large emission rates are inter-
esting, as they are larger than the experimentally observed room temperature line widths of 1.28THz
of the intersubband transitions in free standing TMD stacks. This means that it could be possible to
very effective out-couple the intersubband transitions as graphene plasmons. This might represent a
new way forward in graphene plasmonics, as it might prove an easier way of exciting the plasmons that
current methods.
There was also evidence of transition in the non-pertubative regime, with the 1st order expression
breaking down for larger graphene Fermi levels. This was attributed to the breakdown of the Markov
approximation for the direct coupling to the intraband losses in the graphene.
The breakdown of
perturbation theory, along with the observed rapid Rabi oscillations, point towards strong coupling
between the intersubband transitions and the graphene. However, due to the complicated nature of
the energy landscape resulting from the dispersive nature of the subband energy levels, it was hard to
quantify the strong coupling in terms of existing definitions and this therefore needs to be investigated
further in the future.
==PAGE:100==
92
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Amnon Yariv. Optical electronics. Saunders College Publ., 1991.
[2]
Bahaa EA Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich. Fundamentals of photonics. John Wiley & Sons, 2019.
[3]
Govind P Agrawal. Nonlinear fiber optics. In Nonlinear Science at the Dawn of the 21st Century,
pages 195–211. Springer, 2000.
[4]
Mark Fox. Quantum optics: an introduction, volume 15. OUP Oxford, 2006.
[5]
James T Hugall, Anshuman Singh, and Niek F van Hulst.
Plasmonic cavity coupling.
ACS
Photonics, 5(1):43–53, 2018.
[6]
Stefan Scheel and Stefan Buhmann. Macroscopic quantum electrodynamics-concepts and applica-
tions. Acta Physica Slovaca. Reviews and Tutorials, 58(5):675–809, 2008.
[7]
Thaddeus D Ladd, Fedor Jelezko, Raymond Laflamme, Yasunobu Nakamura, Christopher Monroe,
and Jeremy Lloyd O’Brien. Quantum computers. Nature, 464(7285):45, 2010.
[8]
Jean-Michel Raimond, M Brune, and Serge Haroche. Manipulating quantum entanglement with
atoms and photons in a cavity. Reviews of Modern Physics, 73(3):565, 2001.
[9]
Giuseppe Grosso and Giuseppe Parravicini. Solid State Physics, 2nd Edition. Academic Press,
2014.
[10] Lukas Novotny and Bert Hecht. Principles of nano-optics. Cambridge university press, 2012.
[11] Sergey I Bozhevolnyi, Luis Martin-Moreno, and Francisco Garcia-Vidal.
Quantum plasmonics.
Springer, 2017.
[12] Peter Schmidt, Fabien Vialla, Simone Latini, Mathieu Massicotte, Klaas-Jan Tielrooij, Stefan
Mastel, Gabriele Navickaite, Mark Danovich, David A Ruiz-Tijerina, Celal Yelgel, et al. Nano-
imaging of intersubband transitions in van der waals quantum wells.
Nature nanotechnology,
13(11):1035, 2018.
[13] David A Ruiz-Tijerina, Mark Danovich, Celal Yelgel, Viktor Zólyomi, and Vladimir I Fal’ko. Hybrid
k· p tight-binding model for subbands and infrared intersubband optics in few-layer films of
transition-metal dichalcogenides: MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2. Physical Review B, 98(3):035411,
2018.
[14] Paulo André Dias Gonçalves and Nuno MR Peres. An introduction to graphene plasmonics. World
Scientific, 2016.
[15] AN Grigorenko, Marco Polini, and KS Novoselov.
Graphene plasmonics.
Nature photonics,
6(11):749, 2012.
[16] Yaniv Kurman, Nicholas Rivera, Thomas Christensen, Shai Tsesses, Meir Orenstein, Marin Soljačić,
John D Joannopoulos, and Ido Kaminer. Control of semiconductor emitter frequency by increasing
polariton momenta. Nature Photonics, 12(7):423, 2018.
==PAGE:102==
94
Bibliography
[17] Stephen E Harris, JE Field, and A Imamoğlu. Nonlinear optical processes using electromagnetically
induced transparency. Physical Review Letters, 64(10):1107, 1990.
[18] Taylor Fryett, Alan Zhan, and Arka Majumdar. Cavity nonlinear optics with layered materials.
Nanophotonics, 7(2):355–370, 2017.
[19] Simone Latini, Enrico Ronca, Umberto De Giovannini, Hannes Hübener, and Angel Rubio. Cavity
control of excitons in two dimensional materials. Nano letters, 19(6):3473–3479, 2019.
[20] Frank HL Koppens, Darrick E Chang, and F Javier Garcia de Abajo. Graphene plasmonics: a
platform for strong light–matter interactions. Nano letters, 11(8):3370–3377, 2011.
[21] Svetlana V Boriskina, Thomas Alan Cooper, Lingping Zeng, George Ni, Jonathan K Tong, Yoichiro
Tsurimaki, Yi Huang, Laureen Meroueh, Gerald Mahan, and Gang Chen. Losses in plasmonics:
from mitigating energy dissipation to embracing loss-enabled functionalities. Advances in Optics
and Photonics, 9(4):775–827, 2017.
[22] Kotni Santhosh, Ora Bitton, Lev Chuntonov, and Gilad Haran. Vacuum rabi splitting in a plas-
monic cavity at the single quantum emitter limit.
Nature Communications, 7(ncomms11823),
2016.
[23] Richard M Martin and Richard Milton Martin. Electronic structure: basic theory and practical
methods. Cambridge university press, 2004.
[24] Llewellyn H Thomas. The calculation of atomic fields. In Mathematical Proceedings of the Cam-
bridge Philosophical Society, volume 23, pages 542–548. Cambridge University Press, 1927.
[25] Enrico Fermi. Un metodo statistico per la determinazione di alcune priorieta dell’atome. Rend.
Accad. Naz. Lincei, 6(602-607):32, 1927.
[26] Pierre Hohenberg and Walter Kohn. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical review, 136(3B):B864,
1964.
[27] Andre K Geim and Irina V Grigorieva. Van der waals heterostructures. Nature, 499(7459):419,
2013.
[28] Sten Haastrup, Mikkel Strange, Mohnish Pandey, Thorsten Deilmann, Per S Schmidt, Nicki F
Hinsche, Morten N Gjerding, Daniele Torelli, Peter M Larsen, Anders C Riis-Jensen, et al. The
computational 2d materials database: high-throughput modeling and discovery of atomically thin
crystals. 2D Materials, 5(4):042002, 2018.
[29] Nicolas Mounet, Marco Gibertini, Philippe Schwaller, Davide Campi, Andrius Merkys, Antimo
Marrazzo, Thibault Sohier, Ivano Eligio Castelli, Andrea Cepellotti, Giovanni Pizzi, et al. Two-
dimensional materials from high-throughput computational exfoliation of experimentally known
compounds. Nature nanotechnology, 13(3):246, 2018.
[30] Sajedeh Manzeli, Dmitry Ovchinnikov, Diego Pasquier, Oleg V Yazyev, and Andras Kis. 2d tran-
sition metal dichalcogenides. Nature Reviews Materials, 2(8):17033, 2017.
[31] Wonbong Choi, Nitin Choudhary, Gang Hee Han, Juhong Park, Deji Akinwande, and Young Hee
Lee. Recent development of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and their applica-
tions. Materials Today, 20(3):116–130, 2017.
[32] Ruitao Lv, Joshua A Robinson, Raymond E Schaak, Du Sun, Yifan Sun, Thomas E Mallouk,
and Mauricio Terrones. Transition metal dichalcogenides and beyond: synthesis, properties, and
applications of single-and few-layer nanosheets. Accounts of chemical research, 48(1):56–64, 2014.
[33] David J Griffiths. Introduction to quantum mechanics. Pearson international edition (Pearson
Prentice Hall, 2005), 2010.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
95
[34] AA Al-Hilli and BL Evans. The preparation and properties of transition metal dichalcogenide
single crystals. Journal of Crystal Growth, 15(2):93–101, 1972.
[35] Th. Böker, R. Severin, A. Müller, C. Janowitz, R. Manzke, D. Voß, P. Krüger, A. Mazur, and
J. Pollmann. Band structure of mos2, mose2, and α −mote2 : angle-resolved photoelectron spec-
troscopy and ab initio calculations. Phys. Rev. B, 64:235305, Nov 2001.
[36] Valentino R Cooper. Van der waals density functional: An appropriate exchange functional. Phys-
ical Review B, 81(16):161104, 2010.
[37] J e Enkovaara, Carsten Rostgaard, J Jørgen Mortensen, Jingzhe Chen, M Dułak, Lara Ferrighi,
Jeppe Gavnholt, Christian Glinsvad, V Haikola, HA Hansen, et al. Electronic structure calculations
with gpaw: a real-space implementation of the projector augmented-wave method.
Journal of
Physics: Condensed Matter, 22(25):253202, 2010.
[38] Jens Jørgen Mortensen, Lars Bruno Hansen, and Karsten Wedel Jacobsen. Real-space grid imple-
mentation of the projector augmented wave method. Physical Review B, 71(3):035109, 2005.
[39] Kostya S Novoselov, Andre K Geim, Sergei V Morozov, D Jiang, Y_ Zhang, Sergey V Dubonos,
Irina V Grigorieva, and Alexandr A Firsov. Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films.
Science, 306(5696):666–669, 2004.
[40] Richard Van Noorden, Brendan Maher, and Regina Nuzzo. The top 100 papers. Nature News,
514(7524):550, 2014.
[41] Charles Kittel et al. Introduction to solid state physics, volume 8. Wiley New York, 1976.
[42] Eduardo JC Dias, David Alcaraz Iranzo, PAD Gonçalves, Yaser Hajati, Yuliy V Bludov, Antti-
Pekka Jauho, N Asger Mortensen, Frank HL Koppens, and NMR Peres. Probing nonlocal effects
in metals with graphene plasmons. Physical Review B, 97(24):245405, 2018.
[43] Michael Ruggenthaler, Johannes Flick, Camilla Pellegrini, Heiko Appel, Ilya V Tokatly, and An-
gel Rubio. Quantum-electrodynamical density-functional theory: Bridging quantum optics and
electronic-structure theory. Physical Review A, 90(1):012508, 2014.
[44] Christian Raabe, Stefan Scheel, and Dirk-Gunnar Welsch. Unified approach to qed in arbitrary
linear media. Physical Review A, 75(5):053813, 2007.
[45] Rep Kubo. The fluctuation-dissipation theorem. Reports on progress in physics, 29(1):255, 1966.
[46] Weng Cho Chew. Waves and fields in inhomogeneous media. IEEE press, 1995.
[47] Leslie E Ballentine. Quantum mechanics: a modern development. World Scientific Publishing
Company, 1998.
[48] VF Weisskopf and E Wigner. Berechnung der natiirlichen linienbreite auf grund der diracschen
lichttheorie. Z. Physik 63, 54 (1930), 1930.
[49] Akash Laturia, Maarten L Van de Put, and William G Vandenberghe. Dielectric properties of
hexagonal boron nitride and transition metal dichalcogenides: from monolayer to bulk. npj 2D
Materials and Applications, 2(1):6, 2018.
[50] Lisandro D Dalcin, Rodrigo R Paz, Pablo A Kler, and Alejandro Cosimo. Parallel distributed
computing using python. Advances in Water Resources, 34(9):1124–1139, 2011.
[51] Lisandro Dalcín, Rodrigo Paz, Mario Storti, and Jorge D’Elía.
Mpi for python: Performance
improvements and mpi-2 extensions. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 68(5):655–
662, 2008.
==PAGE:104==
96
Bibliography
[52] Lisandro Dalcín, Rodrigo Paz, and Mario Storti. Mpi for python. Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing, 65(9):1108–1115, 2005.
[53] Predrag Lazić. Cellmatch: Combining two unit cells into a common supercell with minimal strain.
Computer Physics Communications, 197:324–334, 2015.
[54] Antonio Politano and Gennaro Chiarello.
Plasmon modes in graphene: status and prospect.
Nanoscale, 6(19):10927–10940, 2014.
[55] EH Hwang and S Das Sarma. Dielectric function, screening, and plasmons in two-dimensional
graphene. Physical Review B, 75(20):205418, 2007.
[56] Rafael Roldán and Luis Brey. Dielectric screening and plasmons in aa-stacked bilayer graphene.
Physical Review B, 88(11):115420, 2013.
[57] P Forn-Díaz, L Lamata, E Rico, J Kono, and E Solano. Ultrastrong coupling regimes of light-matter
interaction. Reviews of Modern Physics, 91(2):025005, 2019.
[58] Xiaolong Zhu, Wei Yan, Peter Uhd Jepsen, Ole Hansen, N Asger Mortensen, and Sanshui Xiao.
Experimental observation of plasmons in a graphene monolayer resting on a two-dimensional sub-
wavelength silicon grating. Applied Physics Letters, 102(13):131101, 2013.
[59] Ansheng Liu. Local-field effect on the linear optical intersubband absorption in multiple quantum
wells. Physical Review B, 50(12):8569, 1994.
[60] MO Manasreh, F Szmulowicz, T Vaughan, KR Evans, CE Stutz, and DW Fischer. Origin of the
blueshift in the intersubband infrared absorption in GaAs/Al 0.3 Ga 0.7 As multiple quantum
wells. Physical Review B, 43(12):9996, 1991.
[61] S Tsujino, M Rüfenacht, H Nakajima, T Noda, C Metzner, and H Sakaki.
Peak position of
the intersubband absorption spectrum of quantum wells with controlled electron concentrations.
Physical Review B, 62(3):1560, 2000.
[62] Archana Raja, Andrey Chaves, Jaeeun Yu, Ghidewon Arefe, Heather M Hill, Albert F Rigosi,
Timothy C Berkelbach, Philipp Nagler, Christian Schüller, Tobias Korn, et al. Coulomb engineering
of the bandgap and excitons in two-dimensional materials. Nature communications, 8:15251, 2017.
[63] Peining Li, Martin Lewin, Andrey V Kretinin, Joshua D Caldwell, Kostya S Novoselov, Takashi
Taniguchi, Kenji Watanabe, Fabian Gaussmann, and Thomas Taubner.
Hyperbolic phonon-
polaritons in boron nitride for near-field optical imaging and focusing. Nature communications,
6:7507, 2015.
[64] Zhong Lin, Bruno R Carvalho, Ethan Kahn, Ruitao Lv, Rahul Rao, Humberto Terrones, Mar-
cos A Pimenta, and Mauricio Terrones. Defect engineering of two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenides. 2D Materials, 3(2):022002, 2016.
[65] Michael E Peskin. An introduction to quantum field theory. CRC Press, 2018.
[66] Ole Keller. Tensor-product structure of a new electromagnetic propagator for nonlocal surface
optics of metals. Physical Review B, 37(18):10588, 1988.
[67] Weijie Zhao, Ricardo Mendes Ribeiro, Minglin Toh, Alexandra Carvalho, Christian Kloc, AH Cas-
tro Neto, and Goki Eda. Origin of indirect optical transitions in few-layer MoS2, WS2, and WSe2.
Nano letters, 13(11):5627–5634, 2013.
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A
The vector potential:
Electromagnetism can be reformulated in terms of a vector potential A(r) and a scalar potential ϕ(r).
Collectively we can think of the vector potential as a 4-vector Aµ = (ϕ, A). The vector potential is
only uniquely defined up to a U(1)-gauge transformation. This means that we can add or subtract the
4-gradient of any scalar function, Λ, from Aµ and the physics will remain unchanged:
Aµ →Aµ + ∂µΛ
(A.1)
Because the physics has to stay the same regardless of the gauge one decides to work in, there is freedom
to choose whatever gauge is best suited for the goal that is being pursued. In this thesis we choose to
work in the Coulomb gauge. This choice of gauge sets1:
ϕ = 0 ,
∇· A = 0
(A.2)
The above highlights an important point about the nature of the electromagnetic field in free space. If
we Fourier transform the condition ∇· A = 0 we get:
k · A(k, ω) = 0
(A.3)
Equation A.3 tells us two important things. Firstly it tells us that the electromagnetic only has two
degrees of freedom. Secondly, it tells that the direction of the electromagnetic field must always be
perpendicular to the direction of travel in free space. In other words, the electromagnetic field has two
degrees of freedom; the two transverse polarizations.
In the coulomb gauge we can define the electric and magnetic fields in terms of the vector potential in
the following way:
E(r, t) = −∂A(r, t)
∂t
(A.4)
B(r, t) = ∇× A(r, t)
(A.5)
This means that we have all of the information that we would otherwise get from E(r, t) and B(r, t) by
simply considering A(r, t).
1One might worry that choosing a gauge lets us circumvent some of the problems associated with the quantization of
the electromagnetic field, namely the apparent divergence of the photon propagator for on shell photons. However, due
to the Ward-Takahashi identities the gauge invariance is build into any QED theory and thus this problem isn’t really a
problem[65]
==PAGE:106==
98
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX B
Canonical quantization of
vacuum quantum
electrodynamics:
Before taking on the challenge of quantizing the electromagnetic field in matter we are first going to
briefly review the quantization of the vacuum field. Not only will this serve as a roadmap for what’s
to come but it also makes it a lot easier to outline the new difficulties one encounters when quantizing
the EM field in the presence of a matter background.
There are essentially two equivalent ways of going about quantizing the electromagnetic field. One way
of going about the problem is to use the fact that electromagnetism can be formulated as a U(1)-gauge
theory and write down a Lagrangian density of the U(1) gauge field and then follow the usual 5 step
canonical quantization procedure [65]:
I: Write down the Lagrangian density of the classical field theory.
II: Evaluate momentum and Hamiltonian densities.
III: Promote fields to operators and enforce equal time commutation relations on the canonical mo-
mentum and field operators.
IV: Perform mode expansion of the fields
V: Evaluate and normal order the Hamiltonian
Though mathematically beautiful, the Lagrangian approach can obscure some of the connections be-
tween classical and quantum electrodynamics. For this reason, I’ve chosen to follow an alternative, but
equivalent procedure, starting from Maxwell’s equations and deriving the Hamiltonian directly without
going through a Lagrangian density. The following mirrors the procedures employed by [6, 47].
B.0.1
Hamiltonian of the electromagnetic field:
An essential step to the quantization procedure is being able to write down a Hamiltonian for the
system. This amounts to asking the question: What is the total energy stored in the two fields of
electromagnetic field theory, E and B? From Poynting’s theorem, we know that the energy density of
the electromagnetic field at any point r is given by:
H = 1
2
(
ϵ0E(r, t)2 + 1
µ0
B(r, t)2
)
(B.1)
==PAGE:108==
100
B Canonical quantization of vacuum quantum electrodynamics:
Because equation B.1 represents the energy stored in the electromagnetic field at point r, it represents
the hamiltonian density of the theory, H. The full Hamiltonian of the system represents the total of
the system. To arrive at the full Hamiltonian we thus integrate equation B.1 over all space:
H =
∫
d3r H = 1
2
∫
d3r
(
ϵ0E(r, t)2 + 1
µ0
B(r, t)2
)
(B.2)
Having established the Hamiltonian of the electromagnetic field the next step towards quantization is
to perform a mode expansion of the fields. There are different ways to reach this goal. One can either
take a field centric view and use the equations of motion for E and B to calculate their mode expansions
separately, as done in [47], or alternatively reformulate the theory in terms of the vector potential A
and perform the mode expansion of A instead, as done in [6]. Because the vector potential is central
to MQED, we are going to take the latter approach here but we emphasize that the two methods are
equivalent and yield the same result!
B.0.2
Mode expansion:
Within the Coulomb gauge the equation of motion for the vector potential reads:
∇2A(r, t) −1
c2
∂2A(r, t)
∂t2
= 0
(B.3)
The goal of canonical quantization of any field theory is to recast the Hamiltonian of the system as
a Hamiltonian a set of uncoupled Harmonic oscillator modes, for which we can define creation and
annihilation operators separately. This amounts to a mode decomposition of the electromagnetic field
and we are therefore lead to search for solutions to Helmholtz equation on the form:
A(r, t) =
∑
m
Am(r)am(t)
(B.4)
With this solution ansatz, the temporal and spatial parts can be separated using separation of variables:
∇2Am(r) = −k2
mAm(r)
(B.5)
∂2
t am(t) = −ω2
mam(t)
(B.6)
With k2
m = ω2
m
c2 . Note that at this point, ωm and km are merely separation constants. However, because
equations B.5 and B.6 represents spatial and temporal wave equations respectively, we can interpret
ωm as the angular frequency of the mode and k2
m as the square norm of the wave number. This means
that we can interpret the solutions to equation B.3 as waves with dispersion relation k2
m = ω2
m
c2 .
The next steps towards a mode expansion relies on what set of coordinates one wishes to use.
In
Cartesian coordinates the solutions would be plane waves, in spherical coordinates the solutions would
be given in terms in Bessel functions etc[6]. We can however say a lot about the properties of the
solutions without actually solving the equations of motion directly. As a first step, lets note that in this
work we are going to work in the Schrodinger picture. This means that in our constructions, the time
dependence is going to be carried by the wave functions and not the operators. In the following we can
thus focus solely on the solution to the spatial equation, equation B.5. Looking at equation B.5 we can
see that we are essentially dealing with an eigenvalue problem. Specifically, an eigenvalue problem of
the Hermitian operator ∇2. This means that the solutions form a complete orthonormal set of basis
functions which thus must obey:
==PAGE:109==
B Canonical quantization of vacuum quantum electrodynamics:
101
∫
d3rA∗
m(r) · A∗
n(r) = Nmδmn
(B.7)
∑
λ
1
Nm
A∗
m(r) ⊗A∗
m(r′) = δ⊥(r −r′)
(B.8)
with normalization factor, Nm.
It turns out that this is essentially all we need to know about the spatial solutions to make the quanti-
zation scheme work.
Solving the temporal equation one obtains harmonic time dependence:
am(t) = ame±iωmt
(B.9)
Simply noting that we have mode solutions Am(r) without explicitly solving for it for now, this means
that we may write the solution to the vector potential in the following form:
A(r, t) =
∑
m
(
Am(r)ameiωt + A∗
m(r)a∗
me−iωt)
(B.10)
The next step towards quantization is to promote the am functions to operators and imposing canonical
commutation relations. We know that the excitations of the theory has to be bosonic and we therefore
want the creation and annihilation operators to follow the usual commutation relations. Simultaneously
we want to impose equal time commutation relations on the fields. We thus promote the classical fields
to operators:
am →ˆam
(B.11)
a∗
m →ˆa†
m
(B.12)
(B.13)
and impose their bosonic commutation relations:
[
ˆam, ˆa†
n
]
= δmn
(B.14)
This means that we can express the vector potential as an operator in the following way:
ˆA(r, t) =
∑
m
[
Am(r)ˆameiωmt + A∗
m(r)ˆa†
me−iωmt]
(B.15)
Equation B.15 can be understood as a Heisenberg picture operator. However, it most of what follows
we are going to use the Schrodinger picture and let the wave functions carry the time dependence. In
the Schrodinger picture the operator is thus only a function of spatial position:
ˆA(r) =
∑
m
[
Am(r)ˆam + A∗
m(r)ˆa†
m
]
(B.16)
Based on equations A.4 and A.5 we can get also the mode expansions of the electric and magnetic fields
respectively. In the Schrodinger picture these take on the following forms:
==PAGE:110==
102
B Canonical quantization of vacuum quantum electrodynamics:
E(r) = i
∑
m
ωm
[
Am(r)ˆam −A∗
m(r)ˆa†
m
]
(B.17)
B(r) = ∇×
∑
m
[
Am(r)ˆam + A∗
m(r)ˆa†
m
]
(B.18)
This in turn leads us to the Hamiltonian operator:
ˆH = ˆN
[
1
2
∑
m
ℏωm
(
ˆa†
mˆam + ˆamˆa†
m
)
]
=
∑
m
ℏωm
(
ˆa†
mˆam + 1
2
)
(B.19)
where ˆN denotes normal ordering. As expected the Hamiltonian now has the form of a set of uncoupled
harmonic oscillators and the only step left to perform is checking the equal time commutation relations.
From the correspondence principle we must require that the mode expansion equals the classical Poisson
bracket of the E and B fields[6]:
{E(r), B(r)} = −iℏ
ϵ0
∇× δ⊥(r −r′)
(B.20)
The next step is thus to calculate the commutator:
[
ˆE(r), ˆB(r)
]
= i
∑
m
(Am(r) ⊗∇× A∗
m(r′) + A∗
m(r) ⊗∇× Am(r′))
(B.21)
Noting that the cross product only hits the r′ argument we note that we can rewrite the terms in the
above as:
Am(r) ⊗∇× A∗
m(r′) = ∇× (Am(r) ⊗A∗
m(r′))
(B.22)
which means that we can write the commutation relation as:
[
ˆE(r), ˆB(r)
]
= i∇×
∑
m
(Am(r) ⊗A∗
m(r′) + A∗
m(r) ⊗Am(r′))
(B.23)
Next because of the orthogonality of the plane wave basis functions we can use the orthogonality relation
in equation B.8 to rewrite the commutator as:
[
ˆE(r), ˆB(r)
]
= −iℏ
ϵ0
∇× δ⊥(r −r′)
(B.24)
This commutation relation tells us that the excitations of the electromagnetic field are bosonic and
the fact that the transverse delta function enters reflects the factor that we only have two degrees of
freedom manifested in the two polarizations. This commutation relation is in fact a very fundamental
quantity! It embodies a fundamental relation between the electric and magnetic fields and this relation
must hold also in the presence of interactions. In matter this means that the mode expansion of the
electromagnetic field must continue to obey equation B.24. The auxiliary fields D and H cannot be
expected to obey equation B.24 in general, but the E and B fields have to since they still represents
degrees of freedom of the electromagnetic field alone.
The essential relation that allowed us to arrive at equation B.24 was the relation B.8. This will be
important when we move to MQED!
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX C
Generalized reflection
coefficient of the
TMD-graphene-vacuum
interface
To derive the generalized reflection coefficient of the TMD QW - graphene - air interface, the scattering
of a TM wave at such an interface is be solved. The solution starts from from a TM field incident on
the interface from the TMD QW side. Noting that this incident field propagates in a medium without
free charges it is known that:
∇·
[
ϵ · E
]
= 0
(C.1)
This leads to the following definition of the incident field:
Ei = E0
(ϵ⊥kz
kN
ˆx −ϵ∥q
kN
ˆz
)
eikzz+iqx
(C.2)
This definition satisfies equation C.1 and k2
N =
(
(ϵ⊥kz)2 + (ϵ∥q)2)
ensures that the dispersion relation
is upheld:
k2
0 = ω2
c2 = q2
ϵ⊥
+ k2
z
ϵ∥
(C.3)
Defining the reflection-, r, and transmission coefficient, t, the expressions for the reflected and trans-
mitted fields become:
Er = rE0
(ϵ⊥kz
kN
ˆx + ϵ∥q
kN
ˆz
)
e−ikzz+iqx
(C.4)
Et = tE0
(kz,t
k0
ˆx −q
k0
ˆz
)
eikz,tz+iqx
(C.5)
Where the z-component of the wave vector for the transmitted field is:
kz,t = (k2
0 −q2)1/2
(C.6)
==PAGE:112==
104
C Generalized reflection coefficient of the TMD-graphene-vacuum interface
Restricting the discussion to non-magnetic materials, the magnetic field, H, and the magnetic flux
density, B are trivially connected:
H = 1
µ0
B
(C.7)
This means that Faraday’s law can be used to calculate the magnetic field from the electric field:
H =
1
iµ0ω ∇× E
(C.8)
This leads to:
Hi = ˆy ϵ⊥ϵ∥k2
0E0
kNωµ0
eikzz+iqz
(C.9)
Hr = −ˆyrϵ⊥ϵ∥k2
0E0
kNωµ0
eiqx−ikzz
(C.10)
Ht = ˆytE0k0
ωµ0
ei(qx−kz,tz)
(C.11)
The next step is to use the electromagnetic boundary conditions. Specifically, the boundary conditions
on the parallel parts of the fields. Noting that the unit normal of the interface is ˆz and that the surface
current can be related to the transmitted field via,
K = σ(q, ω)Et,x(z = 0)ˆx
(C.12)
, the boundary conditions become:
Et,x(z = 0) = Ei,x(z = 0) + Er,x(z = 0)
(C.13)
Ht(z = 0) −Hi(z = 0) −Hr(z = 0) = ˆz × σ(q, ω)Et,x(z = 0)ˆx
(C.14)
Inserting the electric fields into equation C.13 leads to:
t = (1 + r)ϵ⊥kzk0
kNkz,t
(C.15)
and inserting the magnetic fields into equation C.14 gives:
(1 −r)ϵ⊥ϵ∥k2
0
kN
= t
(kz,tωµ0σ(q, ω)
k0
+ k0
)
(C.16)
Equations C.15 and C.16 represent two linear equations with two unknowns and they can thus be solved
for the GRC, r. Doing this one finds:
r =
(ϵ⊥ϵ∥)1/2 −1 −i qσ(q,ω)
ϵ0ω
(ϵ⊥ϵ∥)1/2 + 1 + i qσ(q,ω)
ϵ0ω
(C.17)
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX D
Convergence checks:
Figure D.1: Convergence check for 1st order MQED rates for 4 layers of WSe2. This configuration
is chosen because it shows both coupling to the plasmon and direct coupling to the intraband losses. As
can be seen, the latter proves the hardest to converge.
Figure D.2: Non-pertubative rate as a function for different (q, ω)-grids. As can be seen, the problem-
atic part is converging the large Fermi level rates and the rates only really converge for a (7000 × 7000)
grid.
==PAGE:114==
106
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX E
β-factors and Purcell:
Figure E.1: Coupling efficiency for different thicknesses of WS2.
==PAGE:116==
108
E β-factors and Purcell:
Figure E.2: Coupling efficiency for different thicknesses of MoS2.
==PAGE:117==
E β-factors and Purcell:
109
Figure E.3: Coupling efficiency for different thicknesses of MoSe2.
==PAGE:118==
110
E β-factors and Purcell:
Figure E.4: Purcell enhancement for different thicknesses of MoS2.
Figure E.5: Purcell enhancement for different thicknesses of MoSe2.
==PAGE:119==
E β-factors and Purcell:
111
Figure E.6: Purcell enhancement for different thicknesses of WS2.
==PAGE:120==
112
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX F
Expressing the local field
using the Dyadic greens
tensor:
This appendix sketches the derivation by Ansheng Liu for the blueshift of the intersubband absorption
center frequencies given in a 1994 paper[59]. Specifically, the scattering problem for the geometry seen
in figure F.1 is solved. The general idea is that when the field incident of the sample can do one of
three things:
• Be reflected
• Be absorbed
• Be transmitted
The absorption can thus be calculated in the following way:
E0(z, θ)
ER(z, θ)
Vacuum
Vacuum
· · ·
ϵB
ET(z, θ)
d
θ
θ
θ
Figure F.1:
Geometry considered in the thin-film modelling of the intersubband absorption in the
TMD quantum wells.
==PAGE:122==
114
F Expressing the local field using the Dyadic greens tensor:
ABS(ω) = 1 −|r(ω)|2 −|t(ω)|2
(F.1)
Here r(ω) and t(ω) are the reflection and transmission coefficients respectively. The idea is therefore to
calculate the reflected and transmitted fields. Specifically, this is done by solving equation 3.16 for an
incident p-polarized plane wave:
E0(z) = E0(cos θ, 0, −sin θ)eiq⊥z
(F.2)
Here q⊥is the transverse wave vector given by q⊥=
√
ϵ(ω/c)2 −q∥, where q∥= (ϵ1/2ω/c) sin θ is the in-
plane wave vector. ϵ is the relative dielectric constant. Using the definition of the complex conductivity
tensor from equation 3.11 equation 3.16 becomes:
E(z) = E0(z) + µ0ω
i
∫
dz1dz2G(z, z1)σ(z1, z2)E(z2)
(F.3)
Where the DGF is then long wave length limit of the thin film DGF as also discussed by for example
Keller [66]:
G(z, z′) = eiq⊥|z−z′|
2iq⊥
[ˆey ⊗ˆey + Θ(z −z′)ˆei ⊗ˆei
Θ(z′ −z)er ⊗er] +
c
n(ω)ω δ(z −z′)ˆez ⊗ˆez
(F.4)
Here n(ω) is the refractive index of the slap and the unit vectors in referred to are:
ˆey = (0, 1, 0)
(F.5)
ˆei =
c
n(ω) · ω (q⊥, 0, −q∥)
(F.6)
ˆer =
c
n(ω) · ω (−q⊥, 0, −q∥)
(F.7)
Finally, the conductivity tensors are given in the paper as:
σ∥(z, z′, ω) =
4σ0
iπℏ2ω
∑
nm
EmnE2
nF Θ(EF −En)
E2nm −ℏ2(ω + iΓ)2 ρnm(z)ρnm(z′)
(F.8)
σ⊥(z, z′, ω) =
2σ0
iπℏmeω
∑
nm
EmnEnF Θ(EF −En)
E2nm −ℏ2(ω + iΓ)2 Jnm(z)Jnm(z′)
(F.9)
Jnm(z′) = 1
2 (ψn(z) ˆpzψm(z) −ψm(z) ˆpzψn(z))
(F.10)
Importantly, these expressions for the conductivity neglects the drude reponse from the free carriers.
In the original paper the approximate infinite quantum well wave envelopes were employed:
ψn(z) =
(2
d
) 1
2
sin
(nπ
d z
)
(F.11)
==PAGE:123==
F Expressing the local field using the Dyadic greens tensor:
115
As for the Fermi energy, it can be expressed in the following way within the parabolic band approxi-
mation:
εF = ε1 + πℏ2
m∗
ND
(F.12)
Where ND is the doping concentration.
Inserting the expression for the Dyadic greens function along with the conductivity into equation F.3,
Liu finds that the total field can be expressed as:
Ex(z) = E0x(z) + a(ω)FxxΓx + b(ω)FxzΓz
(F.13)
Ez(z) = E0z(z) + a(ω)FzxΓx + b(ω)FzzΓz
(F.14)
Multiplying by the wave functions and integrating leads:
Γx −a(ω)KxxΓx −b(ω)KxzΓz = Sx
(F.15)
Γz −a(ω)KzxΓx −b(ω)KzzΓz = Sz
(F.16)
Here:
a(ω) = µe2
πℏ2



∆E12
(
πℏ2Ns
m∗
)2
(ℏ(ω + i/τ))2 −∆E2
12



(F.17)
b(ω) =
µe2
2πm∗


∆E12
(
πℏ2Ns
m∗
)
(ℏ(ω + i/τ))2 −∆E2
12


(F.18)
and:
Kxx = −c2q2
⊥d
2ϵω2
(
X+ + 2iq⊥d
(
1 + eiq⊥d)
X2
−
)
(F.19)
Kzz = 5π2c2
ϵd3ω2 +
3π3c2q2
∥
2iϵq⊥d2ω2
(q⊥d
3iπ Y + 6π
(
1 + eiq⊥d)
X2
−
)
(F.20)
Kzx = −Kxz = 3π2c2q∥
2iϵdω2
(
X+ + 2iq⊥d
(
1 + eiq⊥d)
X2
−
)
(F.21)
with:
X± =
1
9π2 −(q⊥d)2 ±
1
π2 −(q⊥d)2
(F.22)
Y =
1
9π2 −(q⊥d)2 +
9
π2 −(q⊥d)2
(F.23)
We can express the reflection- and transmission coefficients of light scattered by the TMD stack in the
following way:
==PAGE:124==
116
F Expressing the local field using the Dyadic greens tensor:
rp = −ER
x (0)
E0cosθ
(F.24)
tp = 1 + ET
x (0)
E0cosθ
(F.25)
Here the reflected and transmitted fields are given as:
ER
x (0) = a(ω)RxxΓx + b(ω)RxzΓz
(F.26)
ET
x (0) = a(ω)TxxΓx + b(ω)TxzΓz
(F.27)
where:
Rxx =
( c
ω
)2 q2
⊥d
2ϵ(ω)
(
1 + eiq⊥d)
X−
(F.28)
Rxz =
( c
ω
)2 3π2q∥
2idϵ(ω) ·
(
1 + eiq⊥d)
X−
(F.29)
Txx = −
( c
ω
)2 q2
⊥d
2ϵ(ω)
(
1 + e−iq⊥d)
X−
(F.30)
Txz = −
( c
ω
)2 3π2q∥
2idϵ(ω) ·
(
1 + e−iq⊥d)
X−
(F.31)
Note that the minus sign in equation F.24 comes from our definition of the Dyadic greens function.
F.0.1
Extracting an analytic expression for the absorption peak shift:
Here we are only interested in optical response around the intersubband splitting, we can safely assume
small q.
Because both Rxx and Txx are proportional to q2, we may express the transmitted- and
reflected fields in following way in the small q limit:
ER
x (0) = b(ω)RxzΓz
(F.32)
ET
x (0) = b(ω)TxzΓz
(F.33)
In the small q limit, we have dq⊥≪1 which in turn gives:
Rxz = −Txz
(F.34)
which means:
ER
x (0) = b(ω)RxzΓz
(F.35)
ET
x (0) = −b(ω)RxzΓz
(F.36)
Additionally we have the following limits for the Ks:
Kxx ≈0
(F.37)
Kzz ≈5π2c2
ϵd3ω2 +
18π4c2q2
∥
iϵq⊥d2ω2 X2
−
(F.38)
Kzx = −Kxz = 3π2c2q∥
2iϵdω2 X+
(F.39)
==PAGE:125==
F.1 Calculating the doping concentration from the Fermi level shift
117
Using the above we can re express equation F.15 and F.16 in the following way:
Γx −b(ω)KxzΓz = Sx
(F.40)
Γz −a(ω)KzxΓx −b(ω)KzzΓz = Sz
(F.41)
Leading us to:
Γz =
Sz
1 −bKzzz −abKxzKzx
≈
Sz
1 −bKzzz
(F.42)
The last equality follows from the fact that Kzx = −Kxz ∝q meaning that KzxKxz ∝q2 ≈0.
Inserting equation F.42 along with equation F.18 into equations F.35 and F.36 under the assumption
that τ −1 ≪ω ones finds:
ER
x (0) = C1 ·
1
ℏ2ω2 −∆E2
12 −K0∆E12∆E1fKzz
(F.43)
ET
x (0) = C2 ·
1
ℏ2ω2 −∆E2
12 −K0∆E12∆E1fKzz
(F.44)
K0 ≡µ0e2
2πm∗
(F.45)
Where C1 and C2 are constants that are irrelevant to what I’m trying to here.
The frequency at which absorption occurs is then given by:
ℏ2ω2 = ∆E2
12 + K0∆E12∆E1F Kzz
(F.46)
for q →0 this gives:
ω4 −∆E2
12
ℏ2
· ω2 −Σ(ND) = 0
(F.47)
Σ(Ns) = 5π3c2K0
ϵBd3m∗
ND
(F.48)
We see that the local field attributes a self-energy like term that blueshifts the resonance. The above
equation can be solved and it is found that the only positive root is:
ω =



( ∆E12
ℏ
)2 +
(( ∆E12
ℏ
)4 + 4 · Σ(ND)
)1/2
2



1/2
(F.49)
F.1
Calculating the doping concentration from the Fermi level shift
Given the density of states(DOS) and the occupation function for the carriers in question, f(E), we
may express the carrier concentration in the following way:
nc =
∫∞
−∞
DOS(E)f(E)dE
(F.50)
==PAGE:126==
118
F Expressing the local field using the Dyadic greens tensor:
Because the experimental reachable carrier concentrations via electrostatic gating probably aren’t much
larger than the ND ∼1012cm−2 accheived by Schmidt et. al.[12], it can be safely assumed that the
doping only leads to a very slight shift in the Fermi level, meaning that the dispersion of the lowest
subband can reliably approximated with a parabolic band:
En(k) = ℏ2|k|2
2m∗
(F.51)
Here m∗is the effective mass of the carrier at the band extrema. This effective mass is found by fitting
equation F.51 to the highest valence band near the Γ point, or the lowest conduction band near the
Λ-point, depending on whether p- or n-doping is considered. The procedure employed in determining
the effective masses is equivalent to the procedure used by Haastrup et. al.[28].
At zero temperature the density of states becomes very similar to the well known expression for a 2
dimensional electron gas:
DOS(E) = Θ(Emin
Γ
−E) m∗
Γ
πℏ2 + Θ(E −Emin
Λ
) m∗
Λ
πℏ2
(F.52)
Where Ei, i = Γ, K is the band edge at Γ or Λ respectively depending on whether n or p doping is
considered. In this work, we confine ourselves to the case of p-doped TMD stacks and we can thus
write:
DOS(E) = Θ(Emin
Γ
−E) m∗
Γ
πℏ2
(F.53)
Using equation F.53 we can calculate the Fermi level shift corresponding to a given carrier concentration
using equation F.54.
ND = m∗
Γ
πℏ2 ·
[
∆−(EF −Emin
Γ
)
]
(F.54)
F.2
Comparing the simple model with the absorption calculated
with GPAW
Figure F.2 shows the RPA intersubband spectrum of a 2 layer sample of WSe2 as a function of shift
of the Fermi level. Here it can be observed that the intersubband peak blueshifts as a function of the
Fermi level shift, indicating that one might encounter some renormalization of the transition energy by
many body effects.
An interesting question is of course if the blueshifts of the intersubband resonances observed here can
be understood as having the same origin as in epitaxial quantum wells. In 1994, A. Liu developed a
semi-classical model for the intersubband absorption in multiple quantum well structures[59]. As shown
above, the center frequency should obey:
ω0(ND) =



( ∆E12
ℏ
)2 +
(( ∆E12
ℏ
)4 + 4 · Σ(ND)
)1/2
2



1/2
(F.55)
with:
==PAGE:127==
F.2 Comparing the simple model with the absorption calculated with GPAW
119
Figure F.2: Intersubband absorption spectrum as a function of Fermi level shift past the VBM at Γ
for 2 layers of WSe2
Σ(Ns) = 5π3c2K0
ϵBd3m∗
ND
(F.56)
K0 ≡µ0e2
2πm∗
(F.57)
Here ϵB = √ϵ⊥· ϵ∥is the effective dielectric constant of the material, m∗is the bulk effective mass, which
for WSe2 is 0.71m0[67]. ND is the 2 dimensional doping concentration, that is the doping concentration
in units of m−2. To see if the model in equation F.55 works for the intersubband transitions in the
TMD QWs, a way to translate from Fermi level shift to doping concentration is needed. As shown
above, this is given as:
ND = m∗
Γ
πℏ2 ·
[
∆−(EF −Emin
Γ
)
]
(F.58)
Where EΓ is the band edge and Γ. Using equation F.58 to calculate the doping concentration corre-
sponding to a given Fermi level, the RPA calculations from GPAW can be compared with equation
F.55. Figures F.3 and F.4 shows the comparison of the center frequencies calculated with the RPA
and equation F.55 for 2- and 4 layers of WSe2. As can be seen in the figure, the behaviour of the
intersubband center frequency is very similar to that which can be observed in epitaxial quantum wells,
indicating that an effect like this one might be important. One thing to take from figures is that it is
only ever possible to observe significant blue shifts at large carrier concentrations. This effect would
thus likely play a role in heavily doped TMD QWs and that case excitonic effects would also likely
begin to play a role. The above is meant to serve as an indication that there might be important many
body effects that the Weisskopf-Wigner construction misses.
==PAGE:128==
120
F Expressing the local field using the Dyadic greens tensor:
Figure F.3: Comparison of the center frequency of the intersubband absorption peak for 2 layers of
WSe2, calculated at the RPA level and based on the model for epitaxial quantum wells by Liu [59]. As
can be seen, the two agree very well.
Figure F.4: Comparison of the center frequency of the intersubband absorption peak for 4 layers of
WSe2, calculated at the RPA level and based on the model for epitaxial quantum wells by Liu [59]. As
can be seen, the two agree very well.
==PAGE:129==
==PAGE:130==
