==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Validation of urban sewage for disease surveil-
lane using metagenomics
Frederik Duus Møller (s101577)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Food
National Food Institute, Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Bygning 202
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
food@food.dtu.dk
www.food.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The rapid spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) threatens to rewind decades of medical ad-
vancements, sending the world toward a post-antibiotic era. There is need for a comprehensive
international response wherein surveillance of bacterial disease agents and AMR is a top priority.
In alignment with the Global Sewage Surveillance project (GSS), this project aims to investigate
the principle of using urban sewage for disease tracking and characterization of the AMR burden
in China.
With outset in Shantou, China, DNA from 40 hospital strains was extracted and sequenced by
shotgun sequencing. The resulting data was compared against metagenomic sequence data
from 12 sewage samples collected in Shantou. An additional 24 sewage samples was included
in a temporal and geographical analysis.
By mapping metagenomic sequence data against reference databases, it was possible to ob-
tain relative abundace profiles of bacteria and AMR determinants. Increases was observed in the
abundances of pathogenic hospital species, however detection of specific hospital strains was
not achieved. The results obtained suggests that outbreaks in the population causing changes in
the sewage could be detected and traced using metagenomics. This demonstrates the feasibility
of using metagenomics of sewage as a surveillance tool, potentially capable of detecting out-
breaks in human populations. Geographical analysis of sewage revealed regional differences,
however the magnitude of variations was smaller than observed between countries by the GSS.
Temporal characterization suggested systematic variation according to season, and showed that
fluctuations can be detected even on short time scales. The apparent small variation observed
between regions and seasons is a positive indicator for using a single sample as a proxy for Chi-
nese sewage as a whole. It is important to note however that more diversity in the sample set
would be necessary to obtain a comprehensive picture of the AMR burden in China.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all, i would like to sincerely thank my friends and colleagues in China, without whom this
study would not have been possible. Their hospitality and accomodation during my stay in China,
and their helpfulness with the project in general, was invaluable. Thank you Prof. Xiaoyang Jiao,
Dr. Cai Leshan, Fan Zhiqiang (Leslie) and Sun Jiayu (Monica) at SUMC, as well as Xin Lu, and Biao
Kan at Beijing CDC.
Secondly, i would like to thank my supervisors Rene Henriksen and Jette Sejer Kjeldgaard for al-
lowing me to pursue this project, as well for guidance during the course of the thesis.
A warm thank you to Pimlapas Leekitcharoenphon for everything related to bioinformatics, and
for answering countless questions during the project. You rock!
A special thanks goes to Ana Rita Bastos Rebelo for patience and helpfulness in the laboratory.
Without your training my work in China would likely have been markedly less successful :-) Also
thanks to Saria Otani for providing valuable help during my stay in China, to Vibeke Dybdahl
Hammer for practical help with my visit to China, and to Jacob Dyring Jensen for assistance with
shipping reagents to China.
Finally, thanks to my parents, my family, my girlfriend, my friends and my bandmates for their
support and understanding.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
When this study was initially conceived in the end of 2018, a core goal was to be able to work
Chinese representatives at the Guangdong Center of Disease Control (GDCDC) and Shantou
University Medical College (SUMC). The aim of this collaboration was twofold; it would allow me
to obtain data from outbreak of bacterial strains from SUMC as well as train Chinese students and
scientists at SUMC in DNA extraction procedures and the usage of sequencing platforms such as
the Illumina NextSeq.
It was initially planned that i would visit SUMC in February 2019 in order to conduct these ac-
tivities. Both SUMC and GDCDC were extremely accommodating and eager to help with my
study. However, the collaboration – and in particular, the experimental work - would be more
challenging than what we had anticipated.
To start out, the logistics of a collaboration with China requires a fair bit of work in itself – such
as applying for a Chinese visa, receiving proper invitation letters and documents with official
red stamps, navigating laws regarding import and export of biological samples etc.. Then there
was the matter of performing sequencing at SUMC. Although SUMC had access to an Illumina
NextSeq, the machine was not in use. This meant that none of the necessary reagents or equip-
ment required for library preparation were available at SUMC, and in addition, the laboratory at
SUMC lacked most reagents used in the DNA extraction and purification protocols used specifi-
cally by DTU to ensure optimal DNA extraction.
Although shipping the necessary reagents for DNA extraction was feasible, purchasing the reagents
for sequencing is prohibitively expensive in China due to import taxes. In addition, importing these
things can take several months to get through customs - time that i didn’t have. Sending the mate-
rials from DTU, where they were available, was also out of the question - in a best-case scenario, it
would take weeks or months to get through customs, simultaneously incurring heavy import taxes,
and in a worst case scenario the attempt would culminate in the confiscation and destruction of
the shipment, leading to the loss of equipment and reagents worth many thousands of kroner.
Thus, the plan became that I would exclusively be performing DNA extraction and purification at
Shantou University Medical College in Shantou China, and then bring the DNA home to Denmark
for sequencing. In practice however, even this objective also turned out more complicated than
expected. The issues I experienced deserves mention, not just because the time spent on it con-
stitutes a significant part of my project (spanning almost two months of work in total with planning,
preparing, and the trip to China), but also because it conveys a general sense of the difficulties
==PAGE:8==
vi
Preface
that may arise out of international collaborations due to differences both in culture, professional
conduct and policy.
Initially, the DNA extraction was to be carried out using the Invitrogen Easy-DNA gDNA Purifica-
tion Kit (cat no K.) which is standard at DTU and used for DNA extraction for sequencing purposes.
Since this kit was not available in Shantou, the required reagents were shipped to China a month
in advance, arriving at a Guangzhou (approx. 200 km from Shantou) 3 weeks ahead of my arrival.
Yet, in spite of this, reagents didn’t show up in Shantou until 4 days after I arrived, and in addition,
three out of seven reagents had disappeared in transit. No substitutions could be found at local
laboratories for these reagents, temporarily dooming the entire endeavour.
Fortunately, it was discovered that the local laboratory had 3 spare QIAamp DNA Blood Mini pu-
rification kits available, although they were approximately 2 years beyond their supposed use-by
date. However, by substituting certain reagents and modifying the protocol to better suit bacte-
rial DNA extraction it was possible to carry out the DNA extractions.
The next matter to contend with was the export of the DNA to Denmark. While the rules of export
on DNA isolates seem opaque according to Chinese government customs restrictions and reg-
ulations, the DNA could – according to staff at Guangdong CDC - be considered a product of
pathogenic bacteria, and might thus fall under Biological Substances Cat. B (UN3373) of items
that are illegal to import and export to and from China [1], [2]. Consequently, I would not be
able to transport the DNA out myself. Neither was it possible to obtain proper documentation
that would allow transport to Denmark within the timeframe of my project. The last-ditch effort
to obtain data comprised of sending the isolated DNA to Kan Biao and Xin Lu at the National
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC) in Beijing, China, where
an Illumina NextSeq was accessible for sequencing. Fortunately, Kan Biao and Xin Lu offered to
sequence the isolates, effectively saving the entire project.
As such, it was only due to the immensely valuable help of my Chinese collaborators that this
project was even doable. This also extends to all the help that i was given, both personally, profes-
sionally and practically, during my stay at Shantou University Medical College, by Prof. Xiaoyang,
Dr. Cai, and students Fan Zhiqiang and Sun Jiayu. Although the Chinese policies made certain
parts of the collaboration difficult, there is no doubt that these people wanted to do everything
in their power to further the scientific cause, and to facilitate good collaborations between China
and other countries. A heartfelt thank you goes out to these people.
However, to frame my opinion on the international collaborations in general, in many cases the
obstacles involve personal risks in order to ensure the acquisition of samples, data, reagents e.g.
due to country-specific policies. These policies may have little or nothing to do with science; how-
ever, they still manage to make the exchange of samples, information and equipment between
countries extremely challenging, posing a great issue in the momentum of organizing collabora-
tions, implying a loss for both parties. When it comes to of AMR, this points to non-trivial issues that
still need to be resolved in order to meet our ambitions regarding global monitoring.
==PAGE:9==
Preface
vii
Declaration of Authorship
This dissertation, entitled “Validation of the principle of using urban sewage for disease surveil-
lance using metagenomics”, was created at the National Institute of Food, Research Group for
Genomic Epidemiology, at the Technical University of Denmark, in fulfillment of the graduation
requirements for my Masters degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, covering 30 ECTS. It
was carried out from February 2019 to July 2019.
I, Frederik Duus Møller, declare that the work represented in this document is my own.
Kongens Lyngby, July 19, 2019
Frederik Duus Møller (s101577)
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Preface
v
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
AMR surveillance and the Global Sewage Surveillance project . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis aim and scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Acronyms and glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
5
2.1
The biology of AMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
The developing AMR crisis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
The path forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Antibiotic resistance in China
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Tracking pathogens via sewage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Reference mapping with MGmapper and BWA-MEM
. . . . . . . . .
18
3
Methods
19
3.1
Study setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Sample processing - bacterial isolates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Sample processing - waste water samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Single isolate data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Wastewater sample data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Data analysis and visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Results
31
4.1
Sample overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Analysis of wastewater samples and bacterial isolates from Shantou . .
33
4.3
Analysis of all wastewater samples from China
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
5
Discussion
45
6
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
Supplementary figures
71
Appendix
87
1. BWA-MEM alignment procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
2. DNA extraction protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3. Rainfall in Guangzhou
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR)
In 1928, the discovery of penicillin [3] heralded the dawn of the antibiotic age. Within 12 years, the
finding had been turned into a wonder drug, capable of curing patients of infections and also
supporting many modern medical procedures from organ transplants to chemotherapy. Peni-
cillin and other antibiotics thus went on to revolutionize healthcare, becoming one of the great-
est medical advances in the 20th century[4].
This status of antibiotics makes the prospect of a world without it seem unfathomable. However,
more than a few billion years of evolution[5] has gifted bacteria and other microorganisms with a
remarkable ability to resist new drugs used to combat them. Increasingly, the persistent use -and
misuse – of antibiotics in treatment of patients and livestock is leading to rising levels of resistance
in bacteria, by encouraging them to adapt. In addition, the pace at which novel antibiotics are
being discovered has slowed drastically. As such, antimicrobial resistance is a growing public
health threat of broad concern to countries, threatening the achievements of modern medicine,
with far-reaching health, social, and economic ramifications. Far from being an apocalyptic fan-
tasy, the post-antibiotic era – where minor injuries and common infections could kill – is becoming
a real threat of the 21st century[6].
1.2
AMR surveillance and the Global Sewage
Surveillance project
As AMR is becoming recognized as a major threat to global health, a reliable stream of infor-
mation that accurately characterizes the global state of AMR and its transmission is essential to
overcome the challenge it poses. Being one of the five strategic priorities of the Global Action
Plan on AMR[7], the need for a global AMR surveillance program is apparent.
Instead of basing surveillance on passive reporting of clinical diagnoses and phenotypic labo-
ratory results, which usually incurs delays and only allows for a narrow window of pathogenic
detection, utilizing metagenomic sequencing techniques is preferred. This aligns with the ambi-
tions of the Global Sewage Surveillance project (GSS), the aims of which are clear: being “the
first global real-time, large-scale AMR surveillance of human populations, facilitating better and
faster detection of AMR, and leading to a paradigm shift in the way AMR surveillance is con-
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
ducted and the real-time results are shared and analyzed”[8]. The work of GSS is undertaken
from a metagenomic sequencing standpoint, working from the hypothesis that detection and
explaining and prediction of trends of AMR can be done by sequencing of human sewage in
combination with epidemiological and ecological modeling[8].
1.3
Thesis aim and scope
In alignment with the ambitions of the GSS, the purpose of this study is to investigate the principle
of using urban sewage for surveillance of diseases and AMR genes. The study takes outset in
China, a country that is known as one of the world’s largest producers and consumers of antibi-
otics and for which the AMR crisis is particularly dire. By using metagenomic analysis, the study
will characterize the bacterial communities and resistomes of untreated sewage samples, in the
attempt to provide evidence for key points related to surveillance.
The first part attempts to evaluate the possibility of detecting and tracking pathogenic bacte-
ria from hospitals through sewage, and additionally if outbreaks of bacteria responsible for AMR
dissemination could be detected via sewage in general. Clinical hospital strains isolated at the
Shantou University Medical College (SUMC) in China will be compared to both hospital wastew-
ater and urban sewage samples collected in Shantou, using a metagenomics approach. Single
isolates are whole genome sequenced in China, and wastewater and sewage samples are whole
community sequenced by DTU. Subsequently, the genomes of single isolates will serve as scaf-
fold for the metagenomics analysis of the wastewater and sewage samples to validate if these
pathogens can be tracked and traced through the sewage system.
The second part will use metagenomics analysis to obtain both taxonomical and functional pro-
files of the sewage samples. With this, it is aimed to characterize the effects of seasonal variation,
and temporal variation in general. This is done by mapping paired-end sequence reads from
sewage samples against reference databases, including the ResFinder database, using MGmap-
per.
Finally, the third part will attempt to assess is a single sewage sample can be used as a proxy
for China. Urban sewage composition is likely to depend on region and differences in the popu-
lation. As such it is necessary to examine the variation and to determine any systematical differ-
ences according to geography, in order to evaluate the representativeness of a single sample
for a country as a whole.
1.4
Acronyms and glossary
ABR Antibiotic Resistance
AMR Antimicrobial Resistance
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Acronyms and glossary
3
ARG Antimicrobial Resistance Genes
AST Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing
BC Bray-Curtis
BRIC-countries Brazil, Russia, India and China. Deemed to be at a similar stage of advanced
economic development
BWA Burrows-Wheeler Alignment
CDC Center for Disease Control
EFFORT Ecology from Farm to Fork Of microbial drug Resistance and Transmission
FMM Fraction of Matches + Mismatches
FPKM Fragments per Kilobase Million
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GLASS Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System
GSS Global Sewage Surveillance
HAI Hospital Aquired Infection
HGT Horizontal Gene Transfer
IACG Interagency Coordination Group on Antimicrobial Resistance
MAS Minimum Alignment Score
MIC Minimum Inhibitory Concentration
MDR Multi-drug resistant
MGE Mobile Genetic Element
NGS Next-Generation Sequencing
OTU Operational Taxonomic Unit
PCA Principal Component Analysis
SAM Sequence Alignment Map
SNP Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
SUMC Shantou University Medical College
TPM Transcripts Per kilobase Million
WGS Whole-genome sequencing
WCS Whole-community sequencing
WHO World Health Organization
WWTP Wastewater Treatment Plant
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
The biology of AMR
Antimicrobial resistance denotes the ability of microorganisms to resist the effects of medications
that previously have been successful in treating the microorganism. AMR as an umbrella term
can refer to resistance towards antibiotics, antivirals, antiparasitics or antifungals. This thesis will
mainly be dealing with AMR found in bacteria - i.e. antibiotic resistance - towards which most of
the public focus has been directed[4], [8], [9].
The emergence of AMR in microorganisms has up until modern times been caused by millions
of years of Darwinian selection, i.e. natural competition leading to evolution of mechanisms
that allowed them to evade death from toxic substances produced by other microorganisms.
Hence, most antimicrobial agents in use by humans today are natural or modified natural com-
pounds, with only a few synthetic exceptions (namely sulphonamides, fluoroquinolones and oxa-
zolidinones). Evolution of resistance mechanisms can in some cases be traced back well before
modern usage of antibiotics. For example, studies have found that evolution of the production of
enzymes that confer resistance to β-lactam drugs (penicillin, cephalosporins, carbapenems e.g.)
occurred millions of years ago[10].
2.1.1
Antibiotics modes of action
Antibiotics can target several different places in the bacterial cell.
Inhibition of cell-wall synthesis
(β-lactams, Glycopeptides, Fosfomycin) The β-lactams
are a bactericidal class of antibiotics that include penicillin, cephalosporins and carbapenems
and others. This class of antibiotics is the most frequently prescribed antibiotics, accounting for
upwards of 65% of the total antibiotics market in 2013[11]. These interfere with proteins that are
essential for the synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer, leading to irregularities in cell wall struc-
ture, causing cell lysis. Glycopeptide antibiotics such as vancomycin and teicoplanin also inhibit
peptidoglycan synthesis by preventing cross-linking of the peptidoglycan chains.
Inhibition of protein synthesis
(Aminoglycosides, Macrolides, Phenicols, Tetracyclines,
Oxazolidinones) In general, protein synthesis inhibitors work at different stages of mRNA translation
into proteins such as initiation, elongation and termination. Macrolides binds to the 50S ribosomal
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
subunit, blocking elongation of the nascent polypeptide chain. Aminoglycosides target the 30S
ribosomal subunit, causing RNA codon misreading, leading to increased rate of error in synthesis
and premature chain termination. Tetracyclines and derivatives (glycylcyclines) also target the
30S ribosomal subunit, weakening the ribosome-tRNA interaction. Chloramphenicol binds to the
50S ribosomal subunit, blocking the peptidyl transfer step of elongation. Oxazolidinones interfere
with protein synthesis at several stages[12].
Inhibition of DNA and RNA synthesis
(Nitroimidazoles, Quinolones, Rifampicin) Flu-
oroquinolones interact with DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV enzymes, causing double stranded
breaks, preventing DNA replication and transcription. Rifampicin inhibits RNA synthesis by interfer-
ing with RNA polymerase.
Inhibition of metabolic pathways
(Sulfonamides, trimethoprim) Sulfonamides and
trimethoprim are bacteriostatic, each inhibiting distinct steps in folic acid metabolism. Folic acid
derivatives participate in the biosynthesis of both purines and pyrimidines found in nucleic acids,
and in its absence, cells are unable to divide due to the cell’s inability to synthesize these nucleic
acids.
2.1.2
Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance
For an antibiotic to be effective, it must meet three conditions: First, the bacterial cell must con-
tain a susceptible antibiotic target, secondly the antibiotic drug must reach this target in sufficient
quantities, and finally the antibiotic must reach the target intact and without modification. By cir-
cumventing either of these three conditions, bacteria can become resistant. Resistance can
either be intrinsic or acquired. Intrinsic resistance refers to microorganisms that naturally do not
possess target sites for drugs, or naturally have a low permeability to these agents, thus being
unaffected by them. Intrinsic resistance is associated with the identity of the microorganism, and
is not the type of resistance that is the main point of concern in terms of the growing AMR burden.
The problematic type of resistance is acquired resistance, which refers occurs when microorgan-
isms obtain the ability to resist the activity of a drug to which they were previously susceptible.
In contrast to intrinsic resistance, it is only found in certain strains or subpopulations of bacterial
species.
Although the modes of resistance vary among bacterial species, resistance itself is caused by
only a few mechanisms[13]:
1. Outer membrane permeability changes - prevention of the antimicrobial from reaching
its target by reducing its ability to penetrate into the cell, for example decreasing the
number of porin channels that normally allow diffusion of drug molecules. β-lactams and
quinolones are examples of antibiotics that cross the outer membrane of Gram-negatives
only through porins; resistance to these classes can thus be acquired by increasing porin
copy number, size or selectivity[12], [14].
2. Expulsion of the antimicrobial agent from the cell via efflux pumps that pump out antibiotic
compounds, without modification of the compound itself. This mechanism of drug evasion
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The biology of AMR
7
is a significant contributor to multidrug resistant organisms, since efflux pumps are capable
of transporting almost all classes of antibiotics, in particular macrolides, tetracyclines, and
fluoroquinolones. Both Gram-positives and -negatives can possess drug efflux pumps[12],
[14]
3. Inactivation of the active antibiotic molecule via modification or degradation. This mode
of resistance involves enzymes that degrade or modify the antibiotic compound itself,
for example by hydrolysis, group transfer, or redox mechanisms.
The main example is
β-lactamases that hydrolyze the β-lactam ring in the antibiotic molecular structure of β-
lactam antibiotics.
4. Modification of the antimicrobial target within the cells, altering the sensitivity of the target-
antibiotic interaction thus making the antibiotic unable to bind properly. Although it is
normally impossible for organisms to directly dispense with antibiotic targets completely, it
is possible for changes to occur in the target that reduce susceptibility to antibiotic com-
pounds. This resistance can result from spontaneous mutation of a gene on the bacterial
chromosome.
2.1.3
Genetics of acquired resistance
There are two main ways that causes aquired antibiotic resistance: mutation of genes on the
bacterial chromosome, or acquisition of foreign resistance genes via horizontal gene transfer.
Mutations
Spontaneous mutation events happen randomly, even in the absence of selec-
tive pressure, and can cause changes that lead to resistant phenotypes. These mutations give
rise to a substantial number of biochemical mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. For example,
point mutations can alter the binding target of an antimicrobial, causing decreased binding
affinity. This is the case with quinolone resistance, which arises as a result of changes in the DNA
gyrase-encoding genes gyrA, gyrB and parC, causing higher MICs[14], [15]. Mutations can also
lead to increased expression of efflux systems that yield resistance to multiple antibiotics. This is
usually found in Gram-negative bacteria, and can be exemplified in P. aeruginosa, where mu-
tations in the MexAB-OprM gene complex can cause upregulation of efflux pumps that pump
β-lactams, fluoroquinolones, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and macrolides, yielding multidrug
resistance.[14], [15]
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT)
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the principal mode
of resistance emergence and spreading of genetic material. When bacteria are exposed to
strong selective pressure – such as in the presence of antibiotics – HGT can cause resistance
genes to be transferred between bacterial populations, and subsequently to be incorporated
into the bacterial chromosomes via recombination. These genes are then passed on via vertical
gene transfer to new bacterial generations. HGT can also intensify infections and outbreaks by
transferring virulence genes and the ability to form biofilms[16]. HGT occurs through the mech-
anisms of conjugation, transduction and transformation. Bacterial conjugation is a process that
involves transfer of genetic material plasmids from a donor cell to a recombinant recipient cell,
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
either by direct cell-to-cell transfer or by transfer via a pilus. Transduction is the process by which
foreign DNA is transferred from one cell to a recipient cell via bacteriophages. This occurs when
pieces of bacterial DNA become packaged with the bacteriophage due to the low fidelity of
the bacteriophage genome packing process. Finally, transformation refers to genetic altering of
a cell resulting from the uptake, incorporation and expression of exogenous genetic material; for
example, free-floating DNA from dead cells.
The existence of integrons and plasmids containing multiple resistance determinants coupled
with their ability to move, enables the spread of multidrug resistance via single MGEs. Here, the
concept of co-selection also becomes vital. Co-selection can happen when a less crucial antimi-
crobial - such as tetracycline - is used, causing selective pressure on the bacteria. This may lead to
HGT of plasmids or transposons carrying integrons that confer resistance not only to towards tetra-
cyclines, but also to other, more important, antibiotics. As such resistance to vital antibiotics can
develop even from usage of less-important anbitiotics. When resistance mechanisms of crucial
antibiotics are tied to usage of other antibiotics, then reversing resistance becomes difficult.
2.2
The developing AMR crisis
2.2.1
A historical perspective
Surprisingly, the earliest examples of the medical usage of antibiotics for infection treatment go
back several millennia[17], however the modern era of antibiotics however started with the dis-
covery of penicillin by Sir Alexander Fleming in 1928. Penicillin was first used to control bacterial
infections in World War II soldiers in the 1940s, yet even as early as 1945, Fleming himself warned
about the potential for abuse and the subsequent rise of resistance[18]. This prediction became
true less than 10 years later in the 1950’s, where presence of penicillin-resistant strains became
widespread in hospitals[19], [20]. Since then, several cycles of new antibiotic discoveries, over-
confidence and overuse of the new antibiotic, and subsequent re-emergence of resistance have
occured. In recent years however, the consequences of these cycles have become much more
consequential since fewer new antibiotics are being developed. As a result, the struggle with
bacterial infections are becoming a serious threat once again [20].
Far from just saving lives of infected patients, antibiotics have played a central role in the ac-
complishment of major medical achievements. It is likely that a significant part of the extended
life span (going from 56.4 years to 80 years in the US between 1920 and 2018)[21] can be con-
tributed to antibiotics, and they are crucial in preventing or treating infections that could occur
in patients receiving treatment for cancer in the form of chemotherapy, or who have chronic
diseases such as diabetes or rheumatoid arthritis. Antibiotics are indispensable when performing
complex surgery, such as organ transplants, cardiac surgery, or joint replacements. In addition,
they have decreased neonatal mortality by relieving serious complications associated with in-
fection of preterm infants. Many medical interventions which we take for granted in modern
medicine would not be feasible without access to effective treatment for bacterial infections,
==PAGE:21==
2.2 The developing AMR crisis
9
and in developing parts of the world, antibiotics are now paving the way for the same medical
and societal developments that we now see as a matter of course[22].
2.2.2
Addressing the scope of the developing AMR crisis
As antimicrobial resistance is rising to dangerously high levels across the globe, it is becoming
an increasingly larger clinical and economic burden, with serious consequences in many facets
of society. Beyond the obvious threat to the health of the global population[4], [23], AMR is a
threat to the sustainability of global development[24] and according to The World Bank, even
the future of the world economy[25]. In 2014, AMR was named one of the three most important
health threats of the 21st century by WHO[26]. In the US, more than two million infections a year
are caused by resistant bacteria[27], costing US health systems upwards of 20 billion USD[28]. In
the EU, it was estimated that 671.689 infections with AMR occurred in 2015, of which 63.5% were
associated with health care. The associated deaths per year is estimated at 25.000-33.000[23],
[29], costing more than 1.5 billion EUR per year in healthcare costs and productivity losses.
In poorer countries, the effect is no less severe, with emerging resistance to diseases such as TB,
malaria and HIV having a large impact. In India, over 58.000 neonatal sepsis deaths occur annu-
ally due to resistant infections[22], and in 2017, WHO estimates that approximately 558.000 people
developed TB that was resistant to first-line drugs, with 82% of these infections being multidrug-
resistant[30]. In the high-profile report The AMR Review published in 2014[4], the annual world-
Figure 2.1: Two figures showing the potential future of the AMR burden in 2050, according
to the AMR Review from 2014[4]. A) Death statistics are based on numbers from
WHO[31]–[36]. B) Global GDP loss estimates brought by the AMR Review[4].
wide mortality was put at 700.000 and it was estimated that in 2050, over 10 million people will
die annually due to antimicrobial resistance unless a global response to the problem is mounted.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background
If accurate, this would place AMR among the leading causes of death on a global scale (see
figure 2.1), killing more people annually than cancer[33], [37]. With regards to global economic
costs, Jim O’Neill et. al estimates a reduction in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 2% to 3.5% by 2050,
leading to cumulative losses in excess of 100 trillion USD (figure 2.1 B)). The World Bank Group’s final
report on AMR also paints a similar picture, outlining the threat to our economic future, stating
that AMR could possibly lead to losses in GDP worse than the financial crisis of 2008[6], [25].
There is no doubt that these numbers convey the general scale of the problem. However, it is
still important to acknowledge that future approximations are modeled on assumptions based
on contemporary estimates, and that they are stated unaccompanied by confidence intervals.
The actual long-term impact on society is hard to predict, especially considering the less-than-
optimal current global estimates of the AMR burden[38]. This is due - for one - to the missing global
consensus on surveillance methodology and data collection. Mostly, surveillance is based on
infections reported by physicians or other professionals associated with health care, and the in-
fections are typically only reported in severe cases, such as when first-line treatments have failed.
Many low- and middle income countries currently do not have the resources or trained experts
necessary to uphold systems for collecting and analyzing data on AMR, making surveillance in
these countries are challenging[39]. In general, when considering surveillance data, it must be
assumed that only a fraction of the total cases in the community are reported to authorities due to
general challenges that occur with illness reporting ( figure 2.2), leading to under-ascertainment
and other biases[40]. In agriculture as well, there are large gaps in the data with regards to mon-
itoring the spread of AMR[28]. The scarcity of data means that the overall health and economic
burden resulting from AMR is hard to assess; new methodologies are needed to evaluate the
burden[26].
Figure 2.2: The surveillance pyramid is a model for understanding infectious disease reporting.
Only a small fraction of the total exposures in the population is recognized by
authorities and thus included in surveillance statistics..
==PAGE:23==
2.2 The developing AMR crisis
11
2.2.3
Global spread of AMR
The worldwide dissemination of resistance genes is rapid and effective, and a strong correlation
has been observed between antibiotic use and the development of antibiotic resistance. Selec-
tion pressure means that commonly used antibiotics are rendered ineffective, especially appar-
ent with the β-lactam class of antibiotics. For this class of antibiotics, up towards 1.000 resistance-
related β-lactamases that inactivate β-lactams had been identified in 2010, comprising several
groups and classes[41]. NDM-enzymes (β-lactamase conveying resistance to a broad range of β-
lactam antibiotics) were first reported in 2008, but are now found worldwide, indicating the ease
with which these genes can spread. Another example is the emergence of resistance towards
quinolones; being a synthetic drug, quinolones are not found in nature. However, 30 years after
quinolones were introduced, resistance is widespread. In general, trends like these are globally
consistent, and are especially recognized in LMICs, showing that prevalence of health-care as-
sociated infections in developing countries was twice as high as average prevalence in Europe.
Especially in health-care settings, spread is be rapid, as was the case of the spread of resistance
towards broad-spectrum carbapenems (β-lactams) in Enterobacteriaceae. This family of bacte-
ria is a common cause of nosocomial infections as well as community infections, and includes
several of the pathogenic hospital species analyzed in this study. From 2001 to 2011, the pro-
portion of Enterobacteriaceae that were resistant towards carbapenems rose from 1,2% to 4,2%
in nosocomial settings, and from 0% to 1,4% on a national level as reported by the CDC in the
U.S.[42]. Infections with carbapenem resistant Enterobacteriaceae strains are important for sev-
eral reasons; first of all, they have higher mortality rates. Secondly, they often carry genetic mech-
anisms that render them immune to most available antimicrobials. Thirdly, since infections with
Enterobacteriaceae are a common community infection, they have to potential to move from
the nosocomial niche into the general public, for example via sewage[42].
2.2.4
Factors fueling the spread
Overuse and misuse of antibiotics
Until recent years, there have been more incentives to overuse and misuse antibiotics than to
conserve them. Competition among pharmaceutical producers kept prices low; yet leads to
stronger incentives of overuse both in livestock and humans. For patients, health-care workers
and physicians, the short-term advantages of using antibiotics seem to overshadow concerns
about future consequences. Usage of antibiotics has increased significantly in poorer countries
in recent years,which is a fortuitous development, although the resulting increased availability
of antimicrobials inevitably means a heightened risk of AMR. A global surge in antibiotic com-
sumption of nearly 40% was witnessed between 2000 and 2010, of which three-fourths could be
accounted for by BRIC-countries and South Africa. Accordingly, annual per-person consumption
varies considerable across middle- and high-income countries, with more than a factor of 10[4],
[43].
Lack of awareness and antibiotics without prescription
Trying to solve the issue, WHO and many other organizations are running public awareness cam-
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background
paigns[44]. However, in spite of these and other efforts, there are still widespread public misun-
derstandings about antibiotic resistance, revealing common misconceptions such as believing
antibiotics can be used to treat colds and the flu[45]. The lack of proper knowledge can lead
individuals to misuse and overuse antibiotic treatments, especially in countries where the pur-
chasing of antibiotics without prescription is an option. It has previously been estimated that over
50% of antibiotics worldwide were purchased without prescriptions[46], and a recent study found
that the overall proportion of non-prescription supply of antibiotics in 24 different countries were
62%[47] (see figure 2.3). As seen on figure 2.3, the estimated levels of non-prescription antibiotic
supply is high in China (between 51-60%).
Figure 2.3: Estimates of country levels of non-prescription antibiotic supply. Image is adapted
from the study Global access to antibiotics without prescription in community phar-
macies: A systematic review and meta-analysis[47].
Complications of general usage of non-prescription antibiotics include incomplete treatment, in-
appropriate drug choice, and incorrect dosage choices, all of which can aid the spread of resis-
tance by causing wrong diagnosis, delayed hospital admissions and prolonged hospital stays. For
example, symptoms caused by an infection could be temporarily suppressed by using improper
antibiotics, leading to an incorrect diagnosis and patients receiving antibiotic courses for the
wrong diagnosis[47]. Furthermore, the usage of sub-inhibitory or sub-therapeutic concentrations
of antibiotics in treatment can – even if treatment used is correct – directly promote the develop-
ment of resistance by creating circumstances that favors changes in the genome. Changes in
gene expression can cause increased virulence, and increased mutagenesis or horizontal gene
==PAGE:25==
2.3 The path forward
13
transfer can cause resistance and spread[48].
Counterfeit drugs
Apart from overusing antimicrobials facilitated by the non-prescription purchases of antibiotics,
the use of counterfeit and substandard antimicrobials also contributes to development of resis-
tance, in addition to harming patients directly. WHO estimates that some 10 percent of all drugs
sold worldwide may be counterfeits[49], with a majority being reported in less-developed coun-
tries[50]–[52].
Antibiotics in agriculture
In most parts of the world, the usage of antibiotics in agriculture is common practice in keeping
livestock, promoting growth, and improving yield and quality of products. In the U.S., agricultural
use of antibiotics constitutes no less than 80% of all antibiotics sold. Unfortunately, the transfer of
resistant bacteria to farmers by farm animals is well-documented, and more recently it has been
demonstrated that resistant bacteria in farm animals can reach consumers in products sold on
the market[53]. Moreover, the practice of using antibiotics in agriculture can cause alterations
in the environmental ecology as well. This is clear when considering that up to 90% of antibiotics
administered to animals are excreted in stool and urine, which is subsequently spread throughout
the environment via fertilizer, groundwater, and surface runoff. All of these examples may lead
to adverse health consequences[17].
Globalization, demographics and changes in disease dynamics
Ever increasing volumes of intercontinental travel, in addition to globalized trade and food supply
chains, means that the impact of infections with AMR broadens to include global populations[54].
Simultaneously, it creates favorable circumstances for new resistant strains, by allowing bacteria
to spread and share resistance genes with each other[55]. An example of globalization fueling
spread of AMR is seen in the case of colistin, an important antibiotic considered a last-resort an-
tibiotic for treating multi-resistant strains. While colistin is rarely employed in human medicine due
to its toxicity, it is widely used in Chinese livestock to promote growth[56]. This widespread usage
likely favored the evolution of resistance the colistin resistance gene mcr-1 in China, which then
could be transmitted from livestock to humans, and subsequently disseminated in other countries
– being reported found in the US and Europe around 2015-2016[57], [58]. Demographics are also
changing, further aggravating the issue – for example, urbanization, i.e. the gradual increase
of people living in urban areas, not only increases the exposure of susceptible populations to
resistant infections, but also leads to overcrowding and poorer sanitation[59].
2.3
The path forward
2.3.1
Development of new antibiotics
Development of new antibiotics – a strategy that previously has been effective – has slow down
significantly, due in part to a lack of return on investment (ROI) [17]. ROI is low in large part
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Background
due to the short-term courses of treatment, rarely longer than a week. In addition, public health
organizations, physicians are advising against using antibiotics unless it is necessary, and even
when sold, antibiotics are cheap compared to other types of medical therapy. When resistance
emerges towards a newly developed antibiotic, profits of manufacturers decrease even further
as usage becomes even more limited, thus further curtailing the incentive to invent new treat-
ments. However, issues with low ROI is not the only problem for companies pursuing the discovery
of new antibiotics – regulatory barriers when turning candidate drugs into drugs approved for
use in patients are also a significant hurdle[60]. Other difficulties lie in extensive bureaucracy, ab-
sence of clarity within regulatory framework, absence of international harmonization, changes
and differences in licensing between countries and more[61].
2.3.2
Actions to manage the AMR crisis
In addition to developing new drugs, it is vital that many other strategies are mounted to manage
the crisis. Awareness needs to be improved via training and education to promote behavioral
change in the public, which could reduce antimicrobial selection pressure via reduced antibi-
otic use in general. The effects of poor sanitation need to be remedied to prevent infections
spreading in health care facilities, where many serious resistant infections are present and where
the biggest selection pressure exists. Better hygiene, as well as other prevention measures such as
sanitation, food and water safety, hand washing, and vaccination may also contribute to reduc-
ing spread. The utilization of antimicrobial medicines in human and animal health settings needs
optimization, for example by selecting the most effective therapy regimens and drug dosages,
as well as reducing usage in agriculture and establishing regulations of the use of antimicrobial
agents. The development of new antibiotics must become a sustainable investment, perhaps
by changing regulations or providing tax incentives or by other means, and investments must
be increased in new medicines, diagnostic tools, vaccines and other interventions. Finally – and
mostly related to this particular study - better and broader surveillance- and research programs
are needed[7].
2.3.3
Surveillance of AMR
One of the first steps to tackling AMR is to understand the true burden of crisis as well as its determi-
nants, in order to guide the implementation of health policies to deal with it. The need for more
effective and standardized surveillance is widely recognized as an important part of a global
action plan, as laid out in action plans made by the WHO, European Commission and the US
CDC [7], [23], [62]. Despite growing worldwide attention and existing surveillance systems such
as GLASS[63], there are still substantial knowledge gaps about the AMR burden, which highlights
the need for more epidemiological evidence and surveillance in general.
Broader surveillance for AMR would, in general, yield many benefits. By having timely informa-
tion on the incidence and prevalence of pathogens and AMR relating to geographical patterns,
it could guide treatment of patients as well as national and regional actions and the effective-
ness of the interventions being undertaken. Obtaining information on development and spread
==PAGE:27==
2.3 The path forward
15
of AMR – including the interactions between humans and animals, food, water, sewage, ecology
and environment – will allow for new policies, tools and regulations that can counter the spread
of resistance. Due to the efficiency of the evolution of resistance mechanisms in microorganisms,
surveillance is also needed to ensure that surveillance and diagnostic tools stay effective.
2.3.4
AMR detection methods
A broad range of antimicrobial resistance detection methods are available today, broadly di-
vided into phenotypic and genotypic based methods[64]. The most commonly found methods
in diagnostic laboratories are phenotypic and consist of culture-based methods involving isolat-
ing the bacteria on general or selective media, followed by growth assessment in the presence
of antimicrobials, as performed in the traditional antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST). These
types of tests are generally labor-intensive, expensive, and actionable results take a long time to
produce. In addition, they typically require cultivation of the microorganisms of interest, limiting
detection and genomic analysis to the 0,2% - 2% of existing bacteria that can be cultured in the
laboratory[65], [66]. As such, basing surveillance of AMR and infectious diseases on these meth-
ods seems highly ineffective, since it would eschew the remaining 98% of bacterial diversity.
Classic phenotypic AST still holds several advantages, however, such as predicting not only re-
sistance but also susceptibility, as well as allowing for the quantification of levels of susceptibility
of bacteria to specific antimicrobials. Furthermore, AMR conferred by currently unknown genes
might not be detected using genotypic methods[67]. As such, the genotypic AST still needs to
be validated with phenotypic tests, even though the general validity of the sequence-based
method has shown very high concordance (>99%) between phenotypic AST and predicted an-
timicrobial susceptibility based on WGS data[68].
2.3.5
Metagenomics and AMR surveillance
On a grander scale – specifically in the context of implementing global AMR surveillance – molec-
ular methods of AST are preferable due to greater speed, higher accuracy and broader reso-
lution they provide. One such approach is metagenomics, i.e. the study of genetic material
recovered directly from environmental sample using high-throughput DNA sequencing technol-
ogy. Metagenomics allows us not only to provide taxonomical profiles, but also functional profiles
of all genomes contained in a sample, without the need for prior isolation or cultivation. This fur-
ther enables characterization of the AMR distribution as well as for uncovering AMR mechanisms
and the potential manners by which genes can disseminate across habitats. This is an important
step into identifying the factors and AMR genes that pose the greatest threat to global human
health.
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Background
2.4
Antibiotic resistance in China
Being one of the world’s largest producers and consumers of antibiotics, China might be exposed
to some of the worst consequences of the AMR crisis. A comprehensive Chinese study showed
that for a selected 36 different antibiotics (which are frequently detected in the environment),
almost 93.000 tons of antibiotics were consumed in 2013, of which over half was consumed by
animals[69]. When taking all different types antibiotics into consideration, the estimate of was
over 160.000 tons[69]. The total emission of the selected 36 antibiotics to the environment was
estimated to be 53.800 tons, of which 46% was received by water such as rivers through sewage
effluent, and the rest by soil[69]. According to estimates, in 2013, China consumed more than 150
times more antibiotics than the UK. The emissions of antibiotics into aquatic environments such
as rivers have been shown to be particularly high in the east and south of China, with six times
higher emissions than in the West. The Pearl River basin, located in the south of China, has the
highest emission densities, and contains the megacities of Shenzhen and Guangzhou[70]. The
latter are of particular interest, since many wastewater samples analyzed in the present study
were collected in a wastewater treatment plant in Guangzhou.
In 2014, the China Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (CARSS) became the first govern-
ment lead surveillance network in China. In its 2015 report CARSS demonstrated the widespread
bacterial resistance in China. Featuring surveillance data from 1412 member hospitals from 31
provincial level administrative units, over 2.400.000 strains of bacteria from patients were had been
detected between October 2014 to September 2015, encompassing 695.066 Gram-positive bac-
terial strains and 1.705.720 Gram-negative strains[70].
The top five Gram-positive bacteria were: Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis,
Enterococcus faecalis, and Streptococcus pneumoniae . The top five Gram-negative bacteria
were Enterococcus faecium, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Acinetobacter baumannii and Enterobacter cloacae[70]. Resistance towards last-resort antibi-
otics for many Gram-negative bacteria such as carbapenems was found to be rising significantly
in K. pneumoniae as well as in A. baumannii, as reported by both the CARSS report as well as
another study from 2016 based on the CHINET surveillance system that was organized in 2005[71].
In the 2015 CARSS report, more than 50% of the A. baumannii strains were resistant towards car-
bapenems[70]. In the 2016 CHINET study, the carbapenem resistance was found to have risen
from 31 to 66,7% from 2005 to 2014. The same type of resistance in K. pneumoniae was found to
have risen from 2.4 to 13,4% in the same time span[71]. Being a last-resort drug, these infections
are a serious threat to patients in clinics.
These trends clearly indicate the importance of surveillance studies, and highlights in particular
why monitoring for diseases in China is a particularly interesting prospect.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Tracking pathogens via sewage
17
2.5
Tracking pathogens via sewage
Median fecal output in healthy individuals is estimated to be around 128 grams of wet fecal mat-
ter[72], and estimates put the number of bacteria per gram of wet stool at approx. 100 billion
cells[73]. This means that one person may potentially excrete trillions of bacterial cells on a daily
basis through stool alone. These numbers may rise even further in patients with gastrointestinal
infections since diarrhea would increase the amount of stool per day.
The diagnosis of urinary tract infections was once based on quantitative urine cultures yielding
greater than 100,000 colony-forming units (CFUs) of bacteria per milliliter of urine[74], with mean
values of urine excreted ranging from 0,6 liters per day to 2,6 liters per day[72]. This puts a low
estimate of CFUs passed per person per day at around 60 million CFUs, however, since the count-
ing of CFUs only take into consideration the viable cells, the total number of cells passed into the
sewage via urine is likely significantly higher.
Many persons infected with diseases would thus shed large amounts of bacterial cells via the
feces into the sewage for days or weeks during the illness. As such, it is not likely that outbreaks of
gastrointestinal diseases could be detected in wastewater using the metagenomic approach.
Many other factors come into play when evaluating the likelihood of detecting specific pathogens
in sewage however. First and foremost, the nature of the pathogen in question. Only certain
types of pathogens (such as those that are enteric in origin) are likely to be disseminated through
the sewage in amounts that are large enough to be detectable, even when taking the high
sensitivity of modern sequencing platforms into account. The pathogenic organisms most likely
to be detected come from people suffering from diseases of the intestines or urine tract, such
as dysentery, cholera, typhoid fever, gastroenteritis, urinary tract infections e.g.. These diseases
are mostly caused by Gram-negative species from the Enterobacteriaceae family, such as E. coli,
Salmonella spp., Klebsiella spp., and Shigella spp., in addition to viral pathogens such as Norovirus
and Rotavirus. Other causes of human enteritis are attributed to Campylobacter spp., Serratia
spp., Legionella spp., Clostridium spp., and Staphylococcus aureus. In a report from 2014 based
on surveys conducted in 183 hospitals of 11.282 patients, the most common bacteria associated
with infections were C. difficile, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella, E. coli, En-
terococcus and Pseudomonas[75]. Gastrointestinal and urinary tract infections were the second
and third most common infections, respectively.
Other factors that may traceability can be mentioned. First, the number of individuals that are
infected with this pathogen, and whether or not these people are hospitalized or not (larger ex-
posures equaling higher concentrations in the sewage). Secondly, when the sewage samples
were taken during the day; when the infected individuals used the toilet. It may be that there
is an optimal time for taking sewage samples for monitoring; such as in the morning when more
people are more likely to use the toilet than during the rest of the day. Thirdly, the average time a
pathogen of interest stays in the sewage water at a detectable level after toilet use or in general
leading up to/during outbreaks. If the sample is taken hours after the pathogen passed through
the sewage, it may have washed through the system and thus de undetectable.
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Background
2.6
Reference mapping with MGmapper and
BWA-MEM
MGmapper[76] is the reference-based mapping tool used for taxonomic and functional assign-
ment of metagenomic reads in this study. The alignment step of MGmapper is based on the
BWA-mem[90] algorithm. This algorithm is commonly used for aligning small reads against refer-
ence databases, while allowing for mismatches and gaps. Recent results however have shown
that application of BWA-MEM (and MGmapper) can lead to biases in situations where reads
are mapped against databases with high levels of redundancy (such as ResFinder), or against
databases containing genomes with high copy numbers. In these scenarios, multiple variants of
the same genes can cause issues in the part of the algorithm that relates to the chaining proce-
dure, referring to a step in the seed-chain-align procedure used by many full-genome aligners,
BWA-MEM[77] included.
A more technical explanation of the problematic part of the alignment procedure is brought
in appendix 1. BWA-MEM alignment procedure in order to guide reader understanding of the
issue[77]–[79]. The final consequence of the issue is that read counts may be skewed when map-
ping against redundant databases, due to the way BWA-mem resolves ambiguously mapping
reads. Depending on the levels of redundancy on the database, it may cause an amount of
false negatives (i.e. genes or organisms not reported to be present, even though they are). It
is not thought to have a big effect when reference mapping to smaller databases (such as the
custom databases Shantou_pangenomes and Shantou_isolates) due to the low levels of redun-
dancy of these compared to larger databases such as ResFinder.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
3.1
Study setting
The study takes outset in the provinces of Guangdong and Jiangsu (figure 3.1). The Guangdong
province is part of the Pearl River Basin, an area of China which has been shown to have the high-
est antibiotic emission densities of China[70]. Guangdong contains the megacity Guangzhou as
well as the prefecture-level city of Shantou, as seen on figure 3.2. It is from these two cities that
the majority of the wastewater samples analyzed in this study originate.
Figure 3.1: Provincial-level map of China. Highlighted are the two provinces where wastewater
samples was obtained from in this study..
Guangzhou is the capital of Guangdong and is one of the three largest cities of China, with a
population of almost 15 mio. people[80]. Waste water samples were collected at Guangzhou’s
second largest sewage treatment plant located in the subdistrict Liede of Tianhe. The Liede
sewage treatment plant was designed to deal with sludge on a scale of 1,200,000 tons per day
as well as 600,00 tons of primary rainwater per day[81]. The inlet of Liede sewage treatment plant
receives wastewater from an area of 150-200 square kilometers with a total of 2.15 million residents
according a source from 2008[82]. 22 samples from Liede sewage treatment plant are included
in this study
The central area of Shantou contained between the Meixi and the Xinxi rivers has a population
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Methods
Figure 3.2: Map over the Guangdong province. Shown here are the two cities key to this study
- Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong, and Shantou..
of approx. 1,2 mio. people (source: private correspondence with local representatives citing
population consensus from 2017) and covers approximately 119 km2 with a population density
of around 10.000 people per km2. The wastewater of the population within this area, as well as
wastewater from several hospitals including the SUMC First Affiliate Hospital, goes to the inlet of
the WWTP seen on figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Map over the center of Shantou. Shown here are the locations of three key sites
in relation to this study. SUMC is where DNA extraction of bacterial isolates was
conducted. At SUMC First Affiliate Hospital, 40 bacterial isolates as well as eight
hospital wastewater samples were collected. At the inlet of the WWTP, four addi-
tional wastewater samples were collected.
All forty bacterial strains analyzed in this study were isolated at the Shantou University Medical
College First Affiliate hospital in September 2018. With the aim of tracking these diseases in the
sewage, wastewater samples from the outlet of the hospital and the inlet of the WWTP were
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Sample processing - bacterial isolates
21
collected.
3.2
Sample processing - bacterial isolates
3.2.1
Sampling and sample handling
40 strains of pathogenic bacterial species were isolated from hospital patients at SUMC First Affili-
ate Hospital in Shantou, China, by local representatives. Metadata was collected for each isolate,
including the city of the patients, patient age, patient sex, onset of illness, source of bacteria, di-
agnosis from the lab, species of bacteria, as well symptoms displayed by the patients from which
the bacteria was collected. Identification of species was performed by conventional microbi-
ological testing, and resistance profiles were determined at SUMC by phenotypic susceptibility
testing. The isolates were stored at -80 °C for a maximum period of 4 months before DNA extrac-
tion. For a full overview of all samples, including the metadata and resistance profiles reported
by the lab, see suppl. table S1.
3.2.2
DNA extraction
The bacterial samples in solution were thawed for 24 hours at 4°C before processing. They were
then subcultured on blood agar plates, growing for approx. 24 hours at 37°C in an incubator.
The bacteria were then processed using a custom procotol (see Appendix 2. DNA extraction pro-
tocol) adapted from the QIAamp DNA Mini and Blood Mini Handbook by Qiagen (Fifth Edition,
May 2016) for use on bacteria. Using a disposable inoculation loop, approximately 3 µl of cells
was harvested (corresponding to a quarter loop) from the blood agar cultures and suspended
in 230 μl of Buffer ATL by vigorous vortexing. At this point, the extraction protocol diverged for
several steps based on gram positive/gram negative characteristics of the cells. For gram pos-
itive cells, an extra step of cell wall breakdown was performed with the addition of either 15 µl
lysostaphin (for staphylococcus) or 30 µl lysozyme (for other gram positive species), followed by
incubation at 37°C for 45 mins. Subsequently, 20 μl proteinase K and 200 μl Buffer AL was added,
followed by vortexing and incubation at 56°C for 45 min and further incubation at 95°C for 15 min.
For the gram negative cells, following the suspension of cells in Buffer ATL, 20 μl proteinase K was
added and the cells were incubated at 56°C for one hour, with inversion of tubes every 10-15
minutes. A visual inspection was made to ensure that all cells were dissolved and that no clumps
could be observed. 2 μl RNase (2 mg/ml) was added to the tubes, and the tubes were vortexed
and incubated at room temperature for 2 mins. After a brief centrifugation to remove drops from
the lid, 200 μl Buffer AL was added, the samples were vortexed, and incubated at 70°C for 10 min.
At this point, the preparation of gram positive and gram negative cells converged again. 200
μl ethanol (>99,7%) was added to all samples followed by vortexing for 15s and centrifugation
to remove drops from the lid. The combined mixture (including precipitate) from each sample
was then transferred to QIAamp Mini spin columns (in 2 ml collection tubes), in which it was cen-
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Methods
trifuged at 6000 x g (8000 rpm) for 1 min. The QIAamp Mini spin column in a clean 2 ml collection
tube (provided), washed with 500 μl Buffer AW2, and centrifuged at full speed (20.000 x g; 14.000
rpm) for 3 min. Finally, the DNA was eluted into 1,5 ml eppendorf tubes by two cycles of 100 μl
Buffer AE addition to the spin columns with centrifugation at 6000 x g (8000 rpm) for 1 min. The
final volume of the DNA in solution was 200 μl. In total, two separate extractions for all 40 samples
were carried out in accordance with the method described above. The DNA was subsequently
stored at -80°C for approximately 1 week before being shipped on dry ice to the Chinese Center
for Disease Control and Prevention in Beijing, China.
3.2.3
Library preparation and whole-genome sequencing
Library preparation of bacterial isolates was performed by Xin Lu and her team at the Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention in Beijing, China. A total amount of 1μg DNA from
each sample was used as input material for the DNA sample preparations. Sequencing libraries
were generated by using the NEBNext® Ultra™DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, USA) follow-
ing manufacturer’s recommendations. Index codes were added in order to attribute reads to
the correct samples. Briefly, the DNA was fragmented by sonication to a size of 350bp. DNA frag-
ments were end-polished, A-tailed and ligated with the full-length adaptor for Illumina sequenc-
ing with a subsequent PCR amplification step. Finally, the PCR products were purified using the
AMPure XP system and libraries were analyzed for size distribution by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and
quantified using real-time PCR.
Two bacterial samples were deemed unqualified for sequencing. Sequencing of the remain-
ing 38 strains was performed at the at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
in Beijing using a Illumina HiSeq X Ten instrument by 150 cycles paired-end. Two bacterial The
output FastQ files were cleaned and uploaded to an FTP from where it was downloaded to the
Danish National Supercomputer for Life Sciences - supercomputer Computerome[83] in Roskilde,
Denmark.
3.2.4
Trimming and QC
Raw sequence data of the bacterial isolates generated at CDC Beijing was cleaned prior to
being received. The cleaning of the raw data consisted of two steps: for each read, if the number
of base calls with a Phred quality score ≤5 represented more than 50% of the total number of
bases, then the read and its mate-pair was removed together. Alternatively, if the number of base
calls which had received no call (i.e. a phred-score of “N”) equaled over 10% of the total base
number, the read and its mate-pair would be removed as well. Quality control of the cleaned
reads was performed by producing and inspecting FastQC reports for all 38 samples, and in all
cases it was found that quality was satisfactory and no more trimming was needed.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Sample processing - waste water samples
23
3.3
Sample processing - waste water samples
3.3.1
Sampling
As a part of the ongoing Global Sewage Surveillance project, metagenomic samples of have
been collected globally in many different countries including China. Participants in this study
received materials for sampling including containers for the wastewater, as well as documents
that would allow for capturing all relevant background information and data. The Global Sewage
Surveillance project has collected hundreds of samples from locations all over the world. For
this particular study, a subset consisting of 36 samples taken in China were made, including 12
samples from the city of Shantou and 22 from the city of Guangzhou. An additional two samples
were included from the province of Jiangsu. The samples were collected in accordance with
GSS guidelines by local representatives[84]. The collective set of samples includes several subsets
of longitudinal character, allowing for comparison of sewage composition at different points in
time. An overview of these subsets can be found below in table 3.1.
3.3.2
DNA extraction, library preparation and whole-community
sequencing
The processing of metagenomic samples from China was carried out at The National Food Insti-
tute at the Technical University of Denmark by employees of the institute. The DNA was extracted
using a protocol based on the QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit[85], and the extracted purified
DNA was diluted to concentrations needed according to Illumina specifications for the Illumina
NovaSeq 6000. The extracted DNA was then shipped on dry ice to Genohub in Austin, Texas for
library preparation and sequencing. Library preparation and sequencing of all sewage samples
was prepared by Genohub[86]. Library preparation was done using the KAPA HyperPrep Kit PCR-
free[87], and sequencing was performed on a NovaSeq 600 using 150 cycles paired-end. The
raw sequencing data was then deposited on Computerome.
Subset
timescale
Location
Description
Number
of samples
Sample
name suffix
Daily samples
Guangzhou WWTP
One sample taken daily for 5
consecutive days in June 2018
5
D1 – D5
Weekly samples
SUMC Hospital
Two samples taken weekly for four
consecutive weeks in September 2018
8
HO_1 – HO_8
Weekly samples
Shantou WWTP
One sample taken weekly for four
consecutive weeks in September 2018
4
TP_1 – TP_4
Monthly samples
Guangzhou WWTP
One sample taken monthly for 17 months
spread out between January 2016 and October 2018.
17
M1 – M17
Table 3.1: Longidutinal subsets of wastewater samples from China.
A detailed list of these
samples can be seen in the suppl. data table S3.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Methods
3.3.3
Trimming and QC
Quality control of raw reads from metagenomic samples pre-trim was performed by generating
and inspecting FastQC[88] reports. Trimming of raw reads was then performed using BBduk[89],
removing low-quality (Phred score < 20) bases from the 3’-ends and short reads (length of read
< 50 bp), as well as filtering away adapters based on a database containing Illumina adapters
that DTU food creates and maintains. Quality of the trimmed reads was subsequently reviewed
once again by generating and inspecting reports made with FastQC.
3.4
Single isolate data processing
3.4.1
Selecting pathogens for study
The initial set of hospital pathogens was reported by the lab to consist of 40 strains encompass-
ing 14 species. The determination of which should be chosen for inclusion in the current study
was based on several factors. More weight was put on gram negative species due to increased
resistance in gram negative species[90], higher prevalence of healthcare-associated infections
caused by gram negative species[91], [92], and the fact that gram negative bacteria often
cause diseases such as UTI or diarrhea which may increase the likelihood of finding them in
waste water samples. Secondly, clinically significant species that were commonly associated
with hospital-acquired infections were prioritized. Finally, the source of the isolated bacteria, the
symptoms displayed by the patient and the laboratory diagnosis were all taken into account.
Based on these factors, seven out of 14 species were selected for inclusion. These species were
Acinetobacter baumannii, Enterobacter cloacae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella Pneumoniae, Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis.
3.4.2
Genomic assembly, QC and species identification
Genomic assembly of bacterial strains performed on the Illumina sequence data was achieved
using the de Bruijn graph-based tool SPAdes[93]. For all assembled genomes, quality was as-
sessed using QUAST[94] to compute assembly metrics and CheckM[95], [96] to compute assem-
bly completeness and contamination. Completeness is an estimate of the fraction of genes that
are expected to be there which are actually found, and the contamination measure is based on
identifying the number of single-copy genes that should only be there once, indicating whether
or not data from more than one organism is contained within the assembly.
Species identification of bacterial isolates was performed using the public CGE webtool KmerFinder
3.1[97].
KmerFinder was run with the assembled genomes using default settings.
Additional
species verification was obtained for a selected number of ambiguous species using nucleotide
Blast[98] with default parameters. An overview of data regarding the single isolates, including
results from both QUAST, CheckM, KmerFinder and Blast can be seen in suppl. data S2. Determi-
nation of inclusion of individual strains was performed based on these measures.
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Wastewater sample data processing
25
3.4.3
Construction of pangenome and single isolates database
The command line tool Prokka[99] running on Computerome was employed to annotate the as-
sembled genomes, running the tool as prokka <assembled_genome> –kingdom Bacteria –genus
<genus> –locustag <species>. The annotated genomes created (.gff files) were used for the cal-
culation of pangenomes using Roary[100], [101] running on Computerome, running roary as roary
-e -n -v -z -o clustered_proteins *.gff. The resulting pan-genomes were used in their entirety (includ-
ing both the core gene set and accessory genes) for the construction of a custom database
for MGmapper, the Shantou_pangenomes database. The final database file was indexed using
SAMtools[102] and BWA[103] before reference mapping with MGmapper.
The Shantou_isolates database was created using the 30 assembled genomes that had passed
quality control. The database file was indexed using SAMtools and bwa before reference map-
ping with MGmapper.
3.5
Wastewater sample data processing
3.5.1
Reference mapping of sequencing reads
The trimmed reads of waste water samples were used as an input to the reference-based map-
ping and taxonomy-assignment tool MGmapper[76] running on Computerome, employing one
node per sample with each node using 8 processor cores and 120 GB memory (each proces-
sor using approximately 15 GB memory). Several runs were conducted with various databases,
with each run taking approximately 5-6 days depending on the number and size of reference
databases.
MGmapper processes fastq files in a pipeline comprising four steps[76]:
1. Pre-processing of reads: Illumina adapter sequences are filtered away, and trimmed reads
are paired up and singleton reads removed. This is followed by another cleaning process
where reads are mapped against a PhiX database using BWA-MEM[77] and SAMtools, ef-
fectively removing any reads potentially originating from the Illumina control libraries used
to calibrate the instruments.
2. Reference mapping: The cleaned set of reads are mapped to selected reference databases
using BWA-MEM (using default settings: minimum alignment score MAS = 30; fraction of
matches+mismatches FMM = 0.80) and piped to SAMtools (using samtools view –F 256 –
Sb –f2), keeping only properly paired reads (i.e. both ends of the read map to the same
reference within reasonable distance from each other) and discarding reads that are not
primary (in case of multiple alignment records). The proper alignment criteria MAS=30 or
FMM=0.8 means that the read alignment score must be at least 30 and that at least 80%
of a read’s bases must be aligned to the reference sequence in order for the alignment
to be accepted.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Methods
3. Identification of best hit(s): having paired-end sequences, the sum of alignment scores
SAS for forward- and reverse reads is used to identify the best hit for a read-pair. When
read-pairs map to multiple reference sequences from different databases, either the best
hit from each database is kept (MGmapper fullmode) or the taxonomic annotation is
assigned to the single best hit between all databases (MGmapper bestmode). If iden-
tical top alignment scores are observed across different databases, priority goes to the
database specified first in the MGmapper run.
4. Post-processing and filtering of results: four criteria are used to identify positive taxonomic
annotations – read count, size normalized abundance, unique reads and mismatch ratio.
For a proper taxonomic hit, there must be at least 10 read aligning to the reference, the size
normalized abundance (number of reads divided by size of reference sequence) must be
at least 0.01%, the proportion of unique reads (i.e. read pairs where the alignment score is
higher than any other substandard alignment of the same pair) must be at least 0.5%, and
at most 15% of bases can be mismatched in the alignments (i.e. edit distance).
MGmapper maps sequences against reference databases in bestmode or fullmode. A num-
ber of databases were run in each mode in order to gain insight into both genomic bacterial
composition as well as anti-microbial resistance genes. For resistance gene databases, fullmode
was employed due to the fact that the resistance genes are considered a subset of bacterial
genomic sequences, meaning that a read matching a resistance gene would also count as a
hit to the bacterial genome containing the resistance gene. Table 3.2 lists the databases used in
bestmode.
Table 3.2: Reference databases used in Best-mode.
Includes both databases available on the
public MGmapper[104] as well as custom databases created specifically for this study.
The order of the databases specified varied depending on the different runs.
Database
Database version
Size
Number of genomes
Shantou_isolates
n/a
132 MB
30
Shantou_pangenomes
n/a
36 MB
7
Bacteria
20190205
60.5 GB
3493
Bacteria_draft
20180226
16 GB
3717
HumanMicrobiome
20140409
2.8 GB
456
Virus
20181105
0.3 GB
3448
Table 3.3 lists the databases used in bestmode.
3.5.2
TPM and FPKM relative abundance
Transcripts per million or TPM normalization was performed on base read counts mapping to re-
sistance genes in database ResFinder, as well as for reads mapping to custom databases Shan-
tou_isolates and Shantou_pangenomes. This was done in order to account for the differences in
sequencing depth between the samples as well as for differences in gene or genome sizes. TPM
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Wastewater sample data processing
27
Table 3.3: Reference databases used in fullmode.
All databases can be used on the publicly
available MGmapper[104].
Database
Database version
Size
ResFinder
20190213
3MB
functionalResistance
20181101
2MB
metalResistance
20181101
1MB
normalization (or transcripts per million) for reads mapping to any gene is calculated by first divid-
ing the number of (raw count) reads mapped to a given gene with the gene’s length expressed
in kilobases – thus yielding RPK values (reads per kilobase). For each sample, all RPK values are
then added up and divided by a million to obtain the “million” scaling factor, and each RPK
value is then divided by the sample’s scaling factor in order to obtain TPM. The TPM values was
computed as:
TPM = A ·
1
∑(A) · 106
Where
A = total reads mapped to a gene
gene length in kilobases
For any given sample, TPM will scale with FPKM values, but while the sum of FPKM for any given
sample will be an arbitrary number, the sum of FPMs for a sample will always add up to one mil-
lion – thus making it possible to more easily estimate relative abundances across samples. The
scalability of TPM with FPKM can be seen in the example provided in suppl. data table S4. Frag-
ments per kilobase million or FPKM normalization was also performed on reads mapping to AMR
genes in certain parts of the analysis, in order to be able to compare with results from the Global
Sewage Surveillance project[84]. This is done to adjust for differences in sequence length as well
as sample-wise sequencing depth differences. FPKM values were calculated as follows:
FPKM =
total reads mapped to a gene · 106 · 106
gene length in bp · total number of reads from a given sample
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Methods
3.5.3
Aggregation of resistance genes
The relative abundances of AMR (TPM and FPKM) were summed up across highly homologous
AMR gene groups, in order to avoid sensitivity loss associated with mapping to many different
alleles of the same genes contained within ResFinder. Abundances were such aggregated to
clusters corresponding to 90% gene identity using a list that had been compiled in a previous
study[105] using CD-HIT-EST[106]. A selection of genes detected in this study was not found in this
compiled list, and unfortunately it was not possible within the timeframe of the project to manually
curate and update it with new genes. As such a number of genes were not aggregated into
clusters even if they had a 90% identity match. The list of clusters obtained from EFFORT[105] can
be found in suppl. data table S5, and a list of all unclustered genes can be found in suppl. data
table S6. In addition to aggregating into gene clusters, AMR genes were also summed up across
drug class categories.
3.6
Data analysis and visualization
3.6.1
Identification of bacterial upsurges
With the aim of identifying significant increases in abundance of individual pathogens during the
four-week study period of the samples taken in Shantou, upper- and lower threshold was calcu-
lated as the mean read abundance for a particular species plus/minus 1.96 times the standard
deviation (suppl. table S7). As such it was possible to identify cases where the abundance would
put observations outside the 95% confidence interval. Instances of this were labeled either as
down- or upsurges. These were subsequently excluded from a recalculation of the sample mean
as well as the upper- and lower thresholds, which were then used for identification of significant
upsurges.
3.6.2
Rarefaction curves and boxplots
Rarefaction curves were made based on bacterial abundance as well as AMR gene abundance.
OTU tables of mapped reads were extracted from MGmapper output files. Rarefaction was per-
formed on these tables using the R function rarecurve from the R package vegan[107]. Visualiza-
tions were made in R using the plot function.
3.6.3
Abundance distributions
Abundance distribution barplots of bacterial- and AMR gene abundance on various levels were
produced with the R package ggplot. Boxplots were made on both alpha diversity indexes as
well as relative abundance of AMR genes (FPKM) using ggplot.
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Data analysis and visualization
29
3.6.4
Heatmaps
Heatmaps was produced visualizing the most abundant AMR drug classes and bacterial genera.
Taxonomical heatmaps of bacterial genera was made on Hellinger-standardized read counts to
account for differences in sequencing depth, using the R function decostand from vegan. Bray-
Curtis dissimilarities were then calculated using the vegdist function of vegan. Clustering dendro-
gram of both samples and bacterial genera was performed using complete-linkage clustering
with the R package pheatmap[108]. The sample-wise dendrogram was based on the afore-
mentioned Bray-Curtis dissimilarities, while the genera-wise dendrograms are based on Pearson
correlation coefficients.
For AMR genes, relative abundances (FPKM) were summed to a class-level and were log-transformed.
The AMR class heatmaps were then produced in the same was as the bacterial genera heat
map. Visualization of both was done using pheatmap, and various information was included as
metadata for the heatmaps, including association to season, city, week, month and year of the
samples.
3.6.5
Principal component analysis (PCA) of bacterial isolates
PCA analysis was made in order to identify the presence of hospital pathogens in sewage, by
visualizing differences in the k-meric content of metagenomic samples and bacterial isolate as-
semblies. Using SAMtools, all reads that had mapped to database SUMC_isolates were extracted
from MGmapper output files for each individual metagenomic sample originating from Shantou.
Distances between the extracted reads and the bacterial isolates was then calculated using
mash[109], a metagenomic distance-calculation tool which uses MinHashing to estimate dis-
tances. Using the mash functions sketch and dist, representative sketches with a size of 1000000
and a k-mer size of 16 were made and distances were calculated. The R package prcomp was
then used to perform principal components analysis on the resulting distance matrix, which was
then visualized in R using plot.
3.6.6
PCA of metagenomic samples
PCA were created to visualize dissimilarities of metagenomic samples in terms of bacterial abun-
dance and AMR gene abundance. For PCA of bacterial abundance, raw read counts were
Hellinger-transformed using the function decostand in vegan. For analysis of AMR genes, TPM-
values or FPKM values of 90% clustered AMR genes were used directly. Bray-Curtis distances was
then calculated on the data using the vegdist function of vegan. Multidimentional scaling of
the Bray-Curtis distances was then performed using the R command cmdscale, and the PCA
visualisations were made using ggplot2.
3.6.7
Hierarchical clustering analysis
Hierarchical clustering dendrograms were produced to visualize differences between metage-
nomic samples based on bacterial and AMR gene abundance. For dendrograms based on
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Methods
bacterial abundance, raw read counts were Hellinger-transformed using the function decostand
from vegan. For dendrograms based on AMR genes, TPM-values or FPKM values of 90% clustered
AMR genes were used directly. Bray-Curtis distances was then calculated on the data using the
vegdist function of vegan. Hierarchical clustering was then performed using complete linkage
clustering with the R command hclust[110]. Dendrograms were created using R function dendro-
gram[111] and visualized using ggplot.
3.6.8
Alpha diversity
Alpha diversity indices were calculated on rarefied resistance and bacterial count matrices. One
sample with fewer than 2,000 read pairs assigned to the AMR database was excluded from this
analysis. Subsequently, count matrices were subsampled to the lowest sample’s depth using the
vegan function rarefy. Shannon and Simpson indices were calculated using the vegan function
diversity[112]. Chao1 indexes were calculated using the R function EstimateR[113]. See suppl.
table S8 for alpha diversities.
3.6.9
Phylogenetic analysis
Phylogenetic analysis was performed on bacterial isolates and bacterial reads extracted from
metagenomic samples. Using SAMtools, subsets of reads that had mapped to specific species in
the Shantou_isolates database were extracted from MGmapper output files of all metagenomic
samples from Shantou. Nucleotide difference trees were then constructed using the program
NDtree[114], [115] based on the extracted metagenomics reads in combination with assembled
genomes of hospital strains. The resulting tree was visualized in FigTree[116].
3.6.10
Evaluating sample difference
To assess the significance of the difference between samples at different sites (hospital vs. WWTP)
or in different seasons (summer vs. winter), the relative abundances of both AMR and bacterial
abundance was compared. Significance was determined using T-tests on the two groups within
the individual analyses. The resulting p-values were considered significant below a value of 0,05.
See suppl. table S8 and S9.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Results
The results obtained in this study will be presented in three main sections. First, an overview of the
samples analyzed within the project. Secondly, the results pertaining to sewage from Shantou in
Guangdong will be presented, including detection and tracking of pathogenic hospital strains.
Finally, the third section demonstrates observed effects of geography and time on all sewage
samples from China. The outline of this master’s thesis is seen in figure 4.1 below, showing the
main steps of the analysis that lead to the generation of these results.
Figure 4.1: Flowdiagram of study. Shows the general steps taken in the acquisition and process-
ing of data for all samples.
4.1
Sample overview
4.1.1
Waste water samples
In total, 28 domestic sewage samples and 8 hospital sewage samples were analyzed as a part of
this thesis. The sewage samples covered 4 different Chinese cities from 2 provinces, with the ma-
jority from the cities of Guangzhou and Shantou in the Guangdong province. A simple overview
can be seen below in table 4.1, and a detailed overview can be found in suppl. data table S3.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Results
The samples were sequenced using Illumina HiSeq and NovaSeq, yielding an average of 95 mio.
per sample (range: 51 mio – 188 mio). Quality of the sequence data was evaluated with FastQC
and was deemed good.
Table 4.1: Waste water sample overview.
A more detailed overview of these samples can be
found in suppl. data table S3. *The sample that was included in the GSS study[84]
is marked with a single asterisk.
City
Sample site
Sample names
Guangdong
WWTP
GZ_0116_TP_M1*, GZ_0617_TP_M2, GZ_0717_TP_M3, GZ_0817_TP_M4,
GZ_0917_TP_M5, GZ_1017_TP_M6, GZ_1117_TP_M7, GZ_1217_TP_M8, GZ_0118_TP_M9,
GZ_0218_TP_M10, GZ_0318_TP_M11, GZ_0418_TP_M12, GZ_0518_TP_M13,
GZ_0618_TP_M14, GZ_0818_TP_M15, GZ_0918_TP_M16, GZ_1018_TP_M17
Shantou
Hospital
SH_0918_HO_1, SH_0918_HO_2, SH_0918_HO_3, SH_0918_HO_4, SH_0918_HO_5,
SH_0918_HO_6, SH_0918_HO_7, SH_0918_HO_8
Shantou
WWTP
SH_0918_TP_1, SH_0918_TP_2, SH_0918_TP_3, SH_0918_TP_4
Jiangning Chengbei
WWTP
JC_0618_TP_JI1
Suzhou Qidu
WWTP
SQ_0618_TP_JI2
4.1.2
Bacterial isolates
40 pathogenic strains of bacteria were isolated from hospitalized patients at the Shantou Univer-
sity First Affiliated Hospital around September/October 2018. DNA from these pathogens was ex-
tracted and purified on a visit to Shantou university, conducted as a part of the thesis. Two strains
were deemed unfit for sequencing (source: private correspondence with Xin Lu at the China
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing). The remaining 38 isolates were sequenced
on a Illumina HiSeq X Ten, generating an average of 10,5 mio. reads per sample (Range: 8,2 mio.
- 17 mio.). Quality of cleaned reads were evaluated with FastQC and was found satisfactory.
Whole genome assembly of the 38 isolates was performed and quality of the assemblies was
assessed by evaluation assembly quality parameters as well as contamination statistics (see meth-
ods section 3.4.2). Two samples were found to be contaminated with different species, while three
others showed only minor signs of contamination (see suppl. data table S2). Two of these sam-
ples (ID-7 and ID-8) were found to be within reasonable limits and thus conserved in the study.
Species identification was done with KmerFinder[97], [117] revealing ten strains that had been
misidentified in the lab. Evaluation of these results led an additional 6 samples to be discarded,
bringing the total amount of samples that were included to 30. A simple overview of these can
be seen in table 4.2, and a more detailed overview can be seen in suppl. data tables S1 and S2.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Analysis of wastewater samples and bacterial isolates from Shantou
33
Table 4.2: Overview of the bacterial isolates kept in the study. Out of 40 isolates, 10 were omitted
from the analysis based on various parameters. Species reported here were identified
using KmerFinder, and did in some cases contradict the species that was originally
reported by the laboratory. *Samples that were reported as different species by the
lab are identified here with a single asterisk. **Samples that showed minor signs of
contamination but were conserved are marked with double asterisk. For more details,
see suppl. data tables S1 and S2..
Species
Sample name
Acinetobacter baumannii
ID-5*, ID-6, ID-17, ID-23*, ID-26,
ID-30, ID-36
Enterobacter cloacae
ID-39
Escherichia coli
ID-15, ID-16, ID-19, ID-22, ID-27*,
ID-31, ID-32*, ID-33*, ID-34*, ID-37, ID-40
Klebsiella pneumoniae
ID-25*, ID-38
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
ID-18, ID-20, ID-21, ID-29
Staphylococcus aureus
ID-8**, ID-13, ID-28
Staphylococcus epidermidis
ID-7**, ID-9
All 30 samples seen in table 4.2 were mapped to the AMR gene database ResFinder for further
characterization.
An average amount of 30.723 reads (range: 3874 reads to 126 320 reads)
mapped per sample (see suppl. data table S15). Resistance genes aggregated to class-level can
be seen in suppl. figure 2. Resistance genes conferring resistance to carbapenems (blaOXA, blaNDM )
were found in all strains of A. baumannii and P. aeruginosa, as well in a few strains of E. coli. Genes
conferring resistance to third- and fourth-generation cephalosporins (blaT EM, blaCT X, blaSHV
and others) was detected in all E. coli, K. pneumoniae and E. cloacae strains. E. coli strains ID-19
and ID-33 to have some abundance of both carbanem-resistance genes and ESBL-genes (suppl.
data table S15).
4.2
Analysis of wastewater samples and bacterial
isolates from Shantou
4.2.1
Read distributions
On average, the proportions of reads that mapped were 38.45% (range: 26.1% to 72.83%) for the
hospital samples and 10.06% (range: 4.08% to 25.46%) for WWTP samples (figure 4.2 ). Most of
these were assigned to the bacteria databases (bacteria, bacteria_draft, SUMC_pangenomes
and HumanMicrobiome), taking on average 38,12% and 10,01% of all reads for hospital and WWTP
samples, respectively. 0,17% of hospital sample reads were assigned to AMR genes, while only
0,03% of mapped to these for the WWTP samples. In total, 61,72% of reads for hospital samples and
89,97% for WWTP samples were not assigned to any reference sequence at all, resembling levels
of around 68% found in the GSS study[84]. Rarefaction curves based on OTU counts of bacteria on
a species level (suppl. figure 1) showed an acceptable degree of saturation, suggesting sufficient
sequencing depth even for samples with lower sequencing depth.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Results
Figure 4.2: Mapped read summary of Shantou sewage samples. (A) The bars illustrate the relative
abundance of reads mapped to the different reference databases (y-axis) for the Shan-
tou hospital- and WWTP sewage samples (x-axis).
(B) The bars illustrate number of
reads mapping to different databases. SUMC_pangenomes refers to the custom database
that was made containing pangenomes constructed from the assemblies of bacterial iso-
lates. Resistance_genes captures all reads mapping in full-mode to the resistance gene
databases, i.e. ResFinder, functionalResistance, and metalResistance. Legend ranking
order goes from least abundant (virus) to most abundant (Unmapped).
Considerable difference in read abundance distributions between hospital and WWTP samples
were observed (figure 4.2), with increased abundances in general for the hospital samples. T-tests
uncovered statistical differences between the abundances of these groups (p < 0.05, see suppl.
data table S9). Within the two groups, relative read distributions were similar for most samples,
and comparisons of hospital samples taken within the same week showed more homogeneity
than samples taken in different weeks.
Sample HO_1 and TP_1, both taken in the first week of sampling, clearly stood out from their
respective groups. Especially HO_1 had a remarkably low percentage of unmapped reads with
only 27,6%, compared to an average of 66,8% (range: 61,3% to 74,1%) for the hospital samples in
general. The same is seen for TP_1; for this sample the magnitude of reads mapped was more
comparable to hospital sewage than WWTP sewage with 74,7% unmapped reads compared to
the 95,1% average (range: 94,4% to 95,9%) of other WWTP samples.
4.2.2
Bacterial composition of Shantou sewage samples
757 genera (range: 536 to 893) with at least 200 reads were detected on average for the each of
the 12 samples (see suppl. data table S10). The taxonomical distribution was in large part domi-
nated by relatively few genera that took up the majority of the reads, in concordance with results
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Analysis of wastewater samples and bacterial isolates from Shantou
35
of the GSS study[84]. This pattern was in particular seen for the hospital samples (suppl. figure 3).
These dominating genera included several environmental genera, such as Acidovorax, Desul-
fovibrio, Acinetobacter, Comamonas and Leclercia. Other highly abundant genera, such as Es-
cherichia, Faecalibacterium, Bacteroides and Enterobacter were likely fecal in origin. Klebsiella,
a genus that is found widespread in nature including normal human flora was detected in rela-
tively high amounts. Many of these genera (in particular Acinetobacter, Escherichia, Enterobac-
ter, Klebsiella) contain species of considerable medical importance associated with advanced
AMR and hospital-acquired infections. In general it is noted that many environmental strains are
featured amongst the most highly abundant, meaning that the composition of these samples
not only represent human waste but also general environmental factors present in sewage. In
addition, many of the most abundant organisms were seen to be shared with the human gut
microbiome[118], [119].
Further investigation into the taxonomical profile was carried out using heatmaps and hierarchi-
cal clustering of the bacterial composition on a genus level. A high degree of clustering with
association to sample type was detected (suppl. figure 4), but no apparent clustering with asso-
ciation to time. Of samples taken within the same week, only HO_3 and HO_4 clustered together,
and in no case were all samples from the same week across groups seen in the same cluster. The
outlier of the WWTP group, TP_1, was seen to cluster between the hospital and the WWTP samples,
indicating that the bacterial community of this sample resembled the one seen for the hospital
group. HO_1 on the other hand did not cluster around any other samples, which underlines the
noticeable difference in bacterial composition of this sample compared to other hospital sam-
ples.
Clustering analysis was also performed on bacterial species abundancies, and additionally on
the AMR gene distribution as seen on figure 3. The hierarchical clustering analysis was executed
on Bray-Curtis dissimilarity indices, seen as the heights of the dendrograms on figure 4.3. The
Bray-Curtis indices convey the compositional dissimilarity between the samples, with 0 meaning
that two samples share the same composition and 1 meaning that the composition of the two
samples is completely different. Both dendrograms show similar clustering patterns, with samples
clustering mainly according to type (suppl. figure 4). No clusters were clear according to time.
The relatively high BC values seen in 4.3 A) suggest large differences in bacterial composition be-
tween the hospital samples and the WWTP, with an overall dissimilarity of between 0.37 and 0.65.
The complete separation of sample HO_1 into its own cluster as witnessed on both dendrograms
further highlights this samples different nature.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Results
Figure 4.3: Clustering dendrograms of the sewage samples from Shantou.
A) Hierarchical cluster-
ing was performed on a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix of Hellinger-standardized reads
mapping to bacteria on a species level. B) Hierarchical clustering was performed on a
Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix of AMR gene (TPM) abundance. Hierarchical clustering
were performed using complete-linkage for both dendrograms. The numbers on the tree
signify BC-dissimilarity indices between daughters of each subtree.
4.2.3
Detecion of hospital strains in sewage
Pangenomes of the bacterial isolates from SUMC First Affiliated Hospital were detected in all
sewage samples, although with a clear difference in abundance between groups. For hospi-
tal sewage, an average of 1,7% (range: 0,6% to 2,7%) of all reads map and 0,27% (range: 0,05%
to 0,85%) for urban sewage (figure 4.2). Closer inspection revealed that four out of seven species
(E. coli, K. pneumoniae, E. cloacae and A. baumannii) dominated the distribution (suppl. figure
5). Over 98% of all reads assigned to the Shantou_pangenomes database mapped to these four
species. Relative abundances were similar for most samples, except for HO_1 noted to feature
higher levels of E. coli (81% vs. a group average of 61%) and E. cloacae (8% vs. a group average
of 3,4%).
Further ivestigation into the presence of hospital strains was done by mapping metagenomic
reads against a database containing assembled genomes of the hospital isolates. Analysis of
the relative abundances of individual strains (figure 4.4) showed consistency across all samples.
Certain strains were observed to be systematically more abundant than other strains, for exam-
ple strain ID-37, which on average constituted 33% of all reads mapping to E. coli strains. Peaks
of abundance of certain strains was discovered, especially for samples taken around week 1.
High read abundances of A. baumannii was observed for HO_1, with six out of seven isolates sur-
passing their respective calculated upper threshold (see methods section 3.6.1, and suppl. data
table S7). This upsurge of A. baumannii is also clearly visible on suppl. figure 6, showing a clear
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Analysis of wastewater samples and bacterial isolates from Shantou
37
spike for HO_1. Single strains of E. cloacae and S. Aureus were also determined to exceed their
respective calculated threshold limits for sample HO_1, though this change was less pronounced.
Dissimilarity between bacterial isolates and sewage bacteria was performed with PCA analysis
(suppl. figure 7). Only one bacterial isolate strain, the Enterobacter cloacae strain ID-39, seen to
cluster together with the sewage samples from the hospital. The rest of the bacterial isolates were
observed to group separately from the sewage samples, and the sewage samples themselves
were mostly split into two clusters according to group (hospital vs. WWTP).
Phylogenetic analysis performed by creating SNP-trees based on bacterial isolates and sewage
bacteria, using a reference genome based on the results of KmerFinder. No clear results were
obtained from this however, mainly due to the fact that the phylogeny of most species was cre-
ated using only an average of 11,89% (range: 0.21% to 61.70%) of positions within the reference
genome. The only exception to this was the E. coli strains, for which 61,70% positions of the refer-
ence genome were used to calculate phylogeny (suppl. figure 8), and the coverage of each
sample by the reference was high (85% coverage with a depth of 235 on average for hospital
strains, 95% coverage with a depth of 184 on average for metagenomic samples, see suppl. data
table S14). For this tree, it was observed that all metagenomic samples clustered separately from
hospital strains, and that several of the E. coli hospital strains were clearly not clonally related. Cer-
tain strains were seen to cluster together with a relatively few SNPs (< 200), and the serotype of
these strains were all determined to be O25:H4. Compared to the few SNPs found between these
strains, a large number of SNPs (range: 1053 to 20488) was discovered between the metagenomic
samples and hospital strains in general. Due to the complexity of the metagenomic samples, it is
likely that the E. coli from the metagenomic samples that mapped to the refernce genome was
an aggregate of different environmental E. coli strains rather than the hospital strains. As such,
no apparent conclusions could be drawn from these results, except that sewage may be too
diverse in terms of related strains of these species for proper phylogenetic analysis.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Results
Figure 4.4: Overview of SUMC_isolates abundance and composition pertaining to sewage samples
from Shantou, showing relative abundance of the individual assemblies from 6 out of 7
species isolated at SUMC First Affiliated Hospital. Since only a single reference assembly
was created for E. Cloacae, the distribution plot for this particular species has been
omitted. ID numbers refer to the bacterial isolates (suppl. data table S1 and S2).
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Analysis of all wastewater samples from China
39
4.3
Analysis of all wastewater samples from China
4.3.1
Distribution of AMR genes
All 36 samples from Shantou were reference mapped against resistance gene database Res-
Finder. The average amount of reads that mapped to resistance genes was found to differ greatly
between samples. The overall average number of reads that mapped was 2900, however the
highest AMR gene levels were observed in hospital sewage in Shantou with an average of 88.071
reads (range: 44.076 reads to 120.244 reads, suppl. data table S11). WWTP sewage on the other
hand received less in general with 12.034 reads (range: 1376 reads to 54.804 reads), significantly
fewer than hospital sewage (p « 0.01) . Rarefaction of reads mapping to both bacterial genomes
as well as AMR genes show tendency towards saturation (suppl. figure 9).
A total of 1918 AMR genes were identified in all samples included in this study, however more
than 1000 of these had less than 50 reads assigned to them (suppl. data table S12). Abundan-
cies of AMR genes were aggregated into clusters corresponding to 90% gene identity, using a list
of gene clusters originally produced as a part of a study from the EFFORT project[105](see meth-
ods section 3.5.3). A resulting list of 1101 resistance determinants were obtained, of which 132
were found to be shared among all samples. This core resistome contributed on average 74,7%
(range: 64,8% to 79,4%) of all reads that mapped to AMR genes. As such, the majority of the 1101
genes detected were very low-abundant (see suppl. data table S12 and S13).
Abundance distributions were shown to heavily feature genes conferring resistance to sulfon-
amides (sul), macrolides (msrE, ereA, msrD, mphA, mphE, ermF) and tetracyclines (tetC, tet39,
tetX, tetA and tetQ), with these genes constituting 16 of the 22 most abundant genes (figure
4.5). Certain genes that have emerged rather recently, such as previously mentioned colistin-
conferring resistance gene mcr and the carbapenem resistance gene NDM were identified (suppl.
data table S13). The finding of mcr is not surprising, since it was first discovered in China and has
been found in patients at Chinese hospitals[58]. NDM is of particular interest, since carbapenem-
resistant hospital strains of A. baumannii, P. aeruginosa and other pathogens from the Enterobac-
teriaceae family are among the bacteria that pose the greatest threat to human health ac-
cording to WHO[45], and since these genes have previously been determined to be widespread
among K. pneumoniae and A. baumannii in China [70], [71]. Other genes associated with car-
bapenem resistance in Acinetobacter species such as blaOXA-genes were also identified. Al-
though the most abundant genes found are not thought to be restricted to specific bacteria,
many genes found are typically associated with Gram-negative species.
The AMR profiles of all samples were discovered to be comparable, although some consistent
variation was seen both across- and within groups. In the Guangdong Liede WWTP group, cer-
tain tetracycline genes such as tet(39) is seen to more prominently appear in certain samples
(M7 and M10-M17). In addition, certain samples such as M1, M2, D4, D5, M8 and M9 stand out
with high abundance of certain genes with general low abundance. In the hospital group, it is
noted that HO_1 has a somewhat different gene profile than the other hospital samples. Com-
paring the different groups, there are some consistent variation between samples from Shantou
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Results
and samples from Guangzhou, and a certain sample from Jiangsu differs quite significantly from
other WWTP AMR profiles in general.
Figure 4.5: Stacked
bar
chart
showing
relative
abundance
of
the
5
most
common
AMR
genes
for
each
sample
(top
22
in
total).
All
AMR
gene
entities
shown
here
represent
clusters
of
genes
with
90%
sequence
identity,
except
the
fol-
lowing:
msr(E)_1_FR751518,
tet(C)_2_AY046276,
tet(C)_3_AF055345,
mph(E)_1_DQ839391,
ere(A)_6_DQ157752
and
tet(A)_6_AF534183.
The
legend list genes in the same order as seen on individual bars of each sample chart with
least abundant (blaOXA_clust15) at the top and most abundant (Other) on the bottom.
Since many different genes can confer resistance towards the same antimicrobial class, gene
abundance was aggregated into corresponding antimicrobial classes for all samples (see figure
4.2 and methods section 3.5.3). On a class level, the AMR gene abundance distribution was found
to be dominated by a relatively small number of classes. These were (from most abundant to least
abundant) aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines, sulphonamides and beta-lactams.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Analysis of all wastewater samples from China
41
Figure 4.6: Stacked bar chart of relative abundance of antimicrobial classes. Samples are grouped
according to sampling site, with all samples within each group collected at the same site,
except for the samples from Jiangsu that were collected at two separate WWTPs. Mac
macrolide, Oxa oxazolidinone, Phen phenicol, AmGlyc aminoglycoside, Quin quinolone.
4.3.2
Seasonal variation in sewage microbiome and resistome
Stacked bar charts (suppl. figure 10) were made over antimicrobial resistance stratified accord-
ing to the different longitudinal datasets (see methods table 3.1) included in the study, in order to
uncover any potential seasonal trends. However, the limited sample size (covering only a single
year), made determination of significant systematic seasonal trends in Guangzhou difficult. An
increase in tet(39) was seen for all Guangzhou samples taken in the summer months (april – sep),
and an increase in blaOXA and aadA was also seen for two consecutive months from december
2017 to jan 2018. For samples taken within the same week, a relatively notable variance was seen
for several genes, mainly tet(A), tet(X) and oqxB. With regards to samples from Shantou, the only
clear trend was that two samples taken within the first week (HO_1 and TP_1) showed an overall
dissimilar profile in comparison to the other samples within their respective groups.
When aggregating genes to an AMR class level (suppl. figure 11), no clear trends in terms of
seasonal variation in Guangzhou samples were observed, except slightly increased amounts of
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Results
quinolone in the late summer months (jul 2017 – oct 2017, and jun 2018 to oct 2018). The variation
that was observed for samples taken within the same week (GZ daily may 18) was noted to be
relatively large taking the short time between samples into consideration. In fact, daily, weekly
and monthly variation were observed to roughly be on the same magnitude.
Additional analysis into variation over time was performed by creating heatmaps of the bacte-
rial communities on a genus level (suppl. figure 12). Overall, sewage microbiomes did not seem
in general to be more heterogenous between seasons than within either season. Some cluster-
ing was observed according to time, with samples seen to cluster both on a seasonal level as
well as on a monthly level, with samples from the same months or consecutive months seen to
group together. Geographical clustering of samples was also seen, although mostly associated
with sample type (hospital vs. WWTP). Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Acidovorax, Escherichia
and Klebsiella were found to be the dominating genera, accounting on average for 43.7% of
all reads (range: 19% to 9% of all reads). The difference between summer and winter in bacte-
rial abundance seemed to indicate that Klebsiella, Enterobacter, Escherichia, Desulfovibrio, and
Brachymonas were present in larger quantities during summer, although a more exhaustive sam-
ple base stretching over more than a single year would be needed to say anything conclusive.
Analysis of alpha diversity indexes (suppl. figure 13 and 14) showed less variance for samples
taken in winter compared to samples taken in summer. In general, the median richness and di-
versity of both AMR profiles and bacterial communities are seen to be lower for winter samples,
however the limited number of winter samples available makes these conclusive statements dif-
ficult.
4.3.3
Clustering of AMR genes and bacterial communities
Abundances of AMR genes and bacterial communities on a genus level was analyzed using
principal coordinate analysis and hierarchical clustering (figure 4.7). With regards to sample dis-
similarities of bacterial communities, separation based on sample type is most clearly observable.
Looking at relative abundances of bacterial taxa (suppl. figure 12), it is seen that hospital sam-
ples are abundant in genera associated with human disease as well as the flora of the gastroin-
testinal tract (Escherichia, Klebsiella, Streptococcus, Faecalibacterium, Bacteroides, Aeromonas)
whereas WWTP samples are abundant in many environmental genera (Pseudomonas, Acineto-
bacter, Psychrobacter, Cloacibacterium, Brachymonas).
For both resistance gene profiles and bacterial community profiles, some clustering according
to geography is indicated with separation of samples from Shantou and Guangdong (figure 4.7
and suppl. figure 15). It is observed that resistance gene profiles of WWTP samples from Shantou
cluster in between WWTP samples from Guangdong and Hospital samples from Shantou, indicat-
ing that resistomes from Shantou WWTP are related to both. Only minor signs of WWTP sample
clustering according to season is noted. On an AMR class level (suppl. figure 16), separation into
groups are driven by higher levels of the previously noted top abundant AMR classes (Macrolides,
Beta-lactams, Sulphonamides, Tetracyclines, Aminoglycoside).
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Analysis of all wastewater samples from China
43
Figure 4.7: Principal component analysis (PCA) of bacterial communities and the resistomes of all
sewage samples from China.
A) PCA of bacterial genera performed on a Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity matrix calculated on standardized counts of mapped reads. B) PCA of AMR
genes performed on a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix calculated on relative abundances
(TPM). The amount of variation for both graphs are included in the axis labels.
Three alpha diversity indices were calculated for samples based on both bacterial taxonomical
composition (suppl. figure 17) and resistomes composition (suppl. figure 18). Analyses of indices
calculated on AMR abundance showed differences related to geography, with separation of
WWTP samples from Shantou and Guangzhou. The resistome of Shantou was more diverse with a
higher median Shannon and Simpson (1-D) index. Samples from Jiangsu ranked generally lower
on many indices, however the limited sample size makes generalization impossible. Significant
difference (p < 0.01) of Chao 1 richness was found when comparing hospital samples to WWTP
samples both in relation to sample resistome and bacterial composition (see suppl. data table S8).
In addition, the hospital samples had higher a median Shannon and Simpson index in general,
thus featuring not only increased richness of resistance genes, but also a more diverse compo-
sition. Diversity indices were compared from samples taken in the summer to samples taken in
winter, however no significant difference between these two was found.
4.3.4
Comparative analysis with the Global Sewage Surveillance
project
The results of the Global Sewage Surveillance study published recently[84] suggested a strong sys-
tematic separation of regions of the world according to both AMR gene abundance and diversity,
with a generally higher abundance of several AMR genes from different classes in Africa/Asia/South-
America. In the GSS study, one of the samples from China was included – sample GZ_0116_TP_M1.To
allow for a more direct comparison to the values obtained by GSS, the AMR gene read counts
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Results
were recalculated into fragments per kilo base million (FPKM).
Boxplots of relative abundance (FPKM) of AMR genes showed variation both according to sam-
ple type, geography, and time (figure 4.8). The clearest variation was seen in terms of sample
type, with significantly higher AMR gene levels in hospital samples compared to WWTP samples.
In terms of geography, some variation was also seen, with higher levels of AMR genes in Shantou
compared to Guangzhou, and potentially also higher levels of AMR in the province of Jiangsu
compared to the province of Guangdong. In terms of variation according to time, it is seen that
variation is found both within the same week, within the same month, and within the same year.
None of the longitudinal datasets seem to vary significantly more than the other when looking
at the range of values within each dataset (figure 4.8 C)). Looking at observations stratified by
month (suppl. figure 19) variation is also seen, however the limited samples collected for several
months makes systematic variation in terms of AMR gene abundancy harder to detect.
Figure 4.8: Boxplots of the total AMR FPKM values per sample, stratified by different factors. Sam-
ples are represented with dots that have been jittered horizontally for visibility. Horizontal
boxes represent the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile. Whiskers go from
the lowest data point within 1,5 · the interquartile range of the lower quartile, and the
highest datapoint within 1,5 · the interquartile of the upper quartile. A) sample stratifi-
cation according to sample type (hospital vs. WWTP). (B) Samples stratified according
to geography. Samples from the Guangdong province include: Guangzhou, Shantou hos-
pital, Shantou WWTP. Samples from the Jiangsu are collectively shown as one bar. (C)
Samples stratified according to the different longitudinal datasets included in the study.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
One of the most important steps of tackling the growing AMR threat is obtaining a thorough
understanding of the true burden of the crisis, as well as the drivers and determinants of it. As
such, the surveillance of AMR is a prime global objective, and as previously shown the usage of
metagenomics analysis of sewage could be an effective way of obtaining representative data
for entire populations of healthy individuals[84].
Establishing international surveillance networks
One of the challenges of this project was the simple acquisition of NGS sequence data of the
DNA from hospital pathogens isolated in Shantou. This struggle highlighted the general difficulties
associated with the prospect of establishing a standardized global surveillance program. Differ-
ences in policies, regulations, culture, laboratory facilities e.g. mean that not only can the gen-
eration of actionable data be difficult, but the relatively simple act of sharing vital information,
data or samples can be significantly hampered. This is particularly problematic when addressing
the AMR crisis, as the extremely long timeframes associated with the sharing of data is nonviable
due to the urgency of the crisis. It is hard to suggest any action plan to remedy this, as differ-
ences between countries and policies are unlikely to disappear. The only obvious plan of action
is to increase the number of international projects like the current study in general, in the hope
that more experience and familiarity with these collaborations may accelerate the pace and
improve the efficacy of international cooperation.
Bacterial pathogens from Shantou
DNA was successfully extracted and sequenced from 38 out of 40 hospital strains isolated at
SUMC First Affiliate Hospital in China. 30 of these strains, covering seven species that were all on
the WHO list of most critical pathogens[120], were conserved in the study as part of the analysis.
AMR profiles were determined, and Carbapenemase-encoding genes were detected in all strains
of A. baumannii and P. aeruginosa. Likewise, extended-spectrum beta-lactamase genes were
identified in all strains of Enterobacteriaceae (E. coli, K. Pneumonia, E. cloacae). These findings
are in concordance with previous studies, finding that multi-drug resistant species are common
and thriving in hospital environments in China[70], [71], [121], [122]. They demonstrate the severity
of the AMR burden in China, making the prospect of disease surveillance through metagenomics
analysis of sewage highly desirable.
Using metagenomics to characterize urban sewage
The metagenomic analysis of sewage revealed a diverse distribution of both bacterial species
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Discussion
as well as AMR genes. AMR genes coding for resistance towards almost all classes of antibiotics
were detected, implying that sewage plays a considerable role in the dissemination of antibiotic
resistance. The total proportion of reads that mapped to bacteria and AMR genes, as well as the
most abundant bacterial taxa identified, was found generally to be in concordance with pre-
vious metagenomic analyses of sewage[84]. The taxonomical profiles were mainly dominated
by relatively few genera including both species found ubiquitously in nature, as well as species
commonly associated with human waste and pathology.
Among the most abundant species identified, many opportunistic pathogens commonly associ-
ated with nosocomial infections were included. In addition, over half of the 200 most abundant
genera are shared with the human gut microbiota[118], [119], indicating the significant contribu-
tion of the human gut to the sewage composition in general. These results suggest that a large
part of the resistome of urban sewage may be representative of resistant bacteria emitted from
citizens in the population. However, given that large amounts of antibiotics have previously been
found to be excreted into sewage by humans and animals in China[69], it is also likely that many
resistant strains have evolved in these environments due to the selective pressure caused by an-
tibiotic emissions into the environment. The final AMR profile of the sewage is thus likely shaped
by contributions from both of these sources.
It is clear from both the bacterial composition and AMR gene distribution that the overall nature
of the sewage samples is highly complex, reflecting not only human waste, but also the environ-
ment. This complexity also contributes significantly to the difficulties of attempting to detect spe-
cific pathogenic strains and outbreaks via sewage. It is estimated that median daily fecal output
in healthy individuals lies at around 128 grams of wet fecal matter[72], and that there could be
several billions of bacterial cells per gram of wet stool[73]. Thus, if sampling was performed at the
right time, it is likely that metagenomic datasets obtained would capture pathogens discharged
this way. It is doubtful however that they would be abundant on the level of environmental strains,
unless a larger outbreak was occurring at the hospital or in the population. Consequently, the dif-
ferentiation between pathogens originating from humans and microorganisms found as a normal
part of the sewage microbiome is highly challenging.
Identification of hospital strains in sewage samples
Detection of specific pathogens and outbreaks in environmental samples such as sewage is an in-
teresting prospect and an important step for surveillance. Currently however, accurate detection
remains limited. One of the barriers is that there is no established minimum amount of sequencing
depth required for accurate detection on a strain level against a background of complex micro-
bial communities[123]. In addition, the detection limits of the applied methods remain opaque,
due to the lack of a priori knowledge about diversity and abundance of species contained within
the samples, as well as how related strains are to each other. Finally, the number of false posi-
tives generated by incorrectly identifying regions (due for example to highly conserved regions
between species, or regions that move due to horizontal gene transfer) are unknown.
In spite of these challenges, this study attempted to determine whether strains isolated from pa-
==PAGE:59==
5 Discussion
47
tients at a hospital could be identified and tracked via sewage. Abundance distributions showed
both the presence of pangenomes constructed from hospital strains, as well as presence of indi-
vidual strain genomes. However, due to the complex nature of the metagenomic samples, it is
impossible to say from these detections alone that the hospital pathogens were being tracked.
Looking at abundances of individual hospital strain genomes, the relative abundance profiles of
sewage samples from Shantou were determined to be very similar. This homogeneity over time
indicates a continuous presence of environmental strains, rather than the presence of particular
hospital strains, since any outbreak of these likely would result in just a brief abundance peak
pertaining to a few related strains.
Increases beyond the calculated limit in the abundances of isolates of A. baumannii, E. cloa-
cae and S. aureus were detected in a hospital sample from week 1. Unfortunately, no contem-
porary disease outbreak records were available for the area (source: private correspondence
with local representative), meaning that these peaks can only be linked to the few verified cases
from the hospital. As such, these observations should not be taken as direct evidence of out-
breaks of the strains in question. The detection does suggest however that outbreaks leading to
higher abundances of pathogens in sewage in general could be uncovered using metagenomic
surveillance. In addition, all three bacteria are important nosocomial infections often associated
with high levels of resistance. The concurrent detection of genes coding for resistance towards
extended-spectrum beta lactamases and carbapenems in both sewage and hospital strains may
indicate that related strains were, or still is, present in the sewage.
If the target pathogens are present only in low abundancies in complex sewage samples, the
prospect of applying SNP-based analysis becomes problematic. Taking the phylogenetic anal-
ysis of E. coli strains as an example, the high coverage of sewage E. coli when compared with
the reference might seem to suggest presence of a related strain in the sewage. However, due
to the abundancy of environmental E. coli likely contained within sewage, it is reasonable that
the sewage E. coli reflects an aggregate of genomes that may have a relatively high sequence
identity with the reference strain due to the number of shared genes between strains of E. coli in
general. The large number of SNPs detected thus likely says more about the distance between
this environmental pangenome and the hospital strains, rather than the distance between the
hospital strain found both in the sewage and at the hospital. If, conversely, the metagenomic
samples had been enriched in the target pathogen (for example if the metagenomic samples
consisted of feces from patients rather than sewage), the phylogenetic analysis would have been
more valid, as it would be possible to say more certainty that the organisms being compared were
in fact the same.
Although it was not possible within this study to clearly demonstrate the presence of hospital
strains within the sewage, the results obtained did indicate that outbreaks leading to structural
change in the sewage would be detectable. As such, surveillance of sewage systems could
provide real-time data on potential outbreaks as well as the antimicrobial resistance burden of
specific areas, which in turn could be used to inform treatments, and promote stewardship in
the usage of antibiotics. Certain potential bioinformatics tools available may be able to provide
additional clarity, such as PathoScope[124] or MetaMLST[125]. Even with these tools it is still not
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Discussion
clear how the detection ability at a strain-level resolution would be affected by the co-presence
of closely related organisms to the target organism in the sample, however the application of
these tools show potential for further analysis.
Differences between hospital and WWTP wastewater in Shantou
The characterization of sewage samples from Shantou, including both samples from Shantou Uni-
versity First Affiliate Hospital as well as WWTP samples, uncovered large differences between these
two locations. Hospital samples were discerned to contain a significantly higher abundance of
both bacteria and ARGs (p < 0,01) overall, with an overall mapping percentage that was 16%
higher than compared to WWTPs. Given the intake of the WWTP effluent from an area with a
population of approx. 1,2 mio., it would be expected that the nature of the WWTP samples were
more diverse, containing not only domestic household waste, but also wastewater from indus-
try and healthcare facilities, as well as stormwater. Depending on WWTP location, effluent from
agriculture may also come into play. Factors like these are anticipated to cause variations and
dilution of the concentration of bacteria and ARGs in a much higher degree than in wastewater
from a hospital.
Although a wide variety of potential bacterial pathogens were observed in the bacterial com-
munity of the hospital samples, it is hard to connect these pathogens to diseases, since many of
these taxa can be found as a part of the normal bacterial flora of humans. However, the general
high presence of resistance genes and pathogens detected in this study particularly in hospital
waste water implies a clear pathway for dissemination of resistance genes and pathogens. This
difference between hospital and WWTP wastewater also conveys the importance of obtaining
information about what enters the inlets of WWTPs if sewage from these are used for surveillance.
It is likely that the increased concentrations found at the hospital show a distance-decay effect,
with concentrations lowering the further from the hospital the WWTP is located. One way to test for
the levels of dependency between the two could be to spike wastewater with a non-pathogenic
microorganism, and then sampling sewage water at various distance intervals. This might make
it possible to construct a map over dissemination routes, and could be useful in uncovering the
general detectability of outbreaks as they occur, given that the origin of the outbreak is relatively
well-defined. Additionally, it may shed light on how far on average a given disease could spread
via sewage, which could further aid healthcare agencies in how to prevent spread.
A few clear outliers (HO_1 and TP_1) were detected among the sewage samples from Shan-
tou. These were seen to have a marked increase in relative abundance of bacteria and ARGs
in general compared to the mean within their respective groups. It was not possible to uncover
the factors leading to this disparity, and the lack of regular samples from a longer period of time
means that the baseline detected at the two different locations may change. The the higher
concentrations seen in HO_1 and TP_1 could be caused by a number of factors; decreases in
precipitation, increases in temperature, changes in domestic discharges, differences in the sam-
pling procedure, differences in the DNA extraction methods, or a combination of all of these. In
general, the presence of these outliers underlines the fact that the surveillance strategy of using
sewage is susceptible to stochastic events that cannot be readily taken into account.
==PAGE:61==
5 Discussion
49
Seasonal variation in sewage
Recent studies published have found that higher concentrations of ARGs were encountered in
sewage during colder periods of the year[119], [126]. In a study from China in 2017, Jian-Qiang
et al[119] found a significant difference in the antibiotic resistome between summer and winter,
with winter concentrations approximately one order of magnitude higher than those of summer.
Similar observations have been made with bacterial communities, with seasonal variation being
well-documented in general not only for natural environments such as coastal water bodies in
China[127], soil in China[128], [129], lakes[130], the human gut[131], but also manmade environ-
ments such as WWTPs[132].
In this study characterization of seasonal variation based on metagenomic analysis of urban
sewage was performed but did not reveal any substantial differences between winter and sum-
mer. Some part of the lack of clarity of these may be explained by the limited number of winter
samples available, making it difficult to generalize and obtain results with statistical significance.
An indication of overall higher relative abundance (FPKM) of bacterial communities was discov-
ered for certain summer months, although several of these months had only a single sample
meaning that no baseline levels of abundance could be determined. Certain genera among
the top 22 most abundant were likewise detected in higher quantities during summer, and cor-
responding alpha diversity indexes showed slightly higher median richness and diversity for these
samples. These results do point towards potential differences between seasons, however clus-
tering analysis of resistomes and bacterial communities showed only minor signs of grouping ac-
cording to season.
The effect of season on sewage composition contains a large number of unknown variables and
drivers of change. Shifts in temperatures during seasons has been found to cause changes in the
substrate utilization profiles of communities[133]. This may play a role in fostering or limiting the
proliferation of certain ARG-carrying microbial taxa, or conversely causing increased growth of
non-resistant environmental strains in sewage. Differing levels of dilution are also likely to change
the contents of the sewage; high amounts of precipitation in rainy seasons would cause dilution
of the wastewater. Additionally, variation in domestic daily water discharges, as well as the con-
tents of these may occur during specific times of year, which would also cause the microbial
community to change.
Additional factors that can explain variations pertaining to the sewage resistome include dif-
ferences in the amounts and selection of antibiotics being prescribed. Depending on which
pathogens are most commonly disseminated in local communities, certain times of the year may
result in a population more vulnerable to seasonal epidemic diseases. Higher rates of disease
could in turn mean more antibiotics prescribed, leading to an increased selective pressure on or-
ganisms both in hospitals and in sewage. As such, increases in ARGs might be seen during these
months, where larger amounts of antibiotics administered would cause changes in the bacterial
population and their resistomes.
Some hint of variation is seen when stratifying samples from Guangzhou into monthly strata. A
tendency towards more AMR is seen in the summer months of Guangdong (June - Oct). Since this
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Discussion
is also the time of the year with the most rainfall (see appendix section 3. Rainfall in Guangzhou),
the decrease in AMR gene levels in other months can’t be explained by rain diluting the sewage
water, or by waste accumulating in the sewers in the summer which would likely drain away.
Interestingly, the analysis of longitudinal subsets of metagenomic samples showed that the magni-
tude of variation not noticeably larger for samples taken months between each other compared
to samples taken within a single weak. This suggests that variation of sewage composition also
occurs on the short term, and that these fluctuations may appear quite large.
One sample as a proxy for China
The geographical distribution of AMR gene levels and bacterial communities was characterized
for sewage coming from four different cities in two provinces of China. AMR gene profiles, as
well as bacterial taxonomical distributions indicated the existence of some systematic variation
to geography. Differences were found both between samples taken from different cities, as well
as taken from different provinces. Clustering analysis showed some clustering according to geog-
raphy, but mainly according to the characteristics of the sampling site (hospital vs. WWTPs). It is
difficult to determine whether or not these differences demonstrate systematic regional patterns
with the limited number of samples analyzed from other provinces. As only two samples were
included from the region of Jiangsu, it is also unknown if the differences in composition seen is
a true reflection of the sewage from this province or a coincidence caused by other variables.
The fact that the core antibiotic resistome of all sewage samples was quite consistent (132 shared
genes taking up 74,7% of all reads) suggests that the main constituents of sewage may be similar
across regions. Unfortunately, this study didn’t manage to determine whether the antibiotic resis-
tome was correlated with a core bacterial taxonomy in all sewage samples. If it was discovered
that a shared core of bacterial genera was present, it might be possible to determine if this core
played a vital part in causing the shared resistome of all sewage samples, and thus to quantify
the extent to which this core shapes the overall urban sewage profile.
Results from the Global Sewage Surveillance study showed systematic variation across different
zones of the world. As such, the results obtained here are in concordance with the general no-
tion that systematic differences based on regions may be present. However, a different study of
116 sewage samples from 17 major Chinese cities during 2014 found that although geographical
profiles varied from city to city, no obvious regional clustering according to geography could be
identified[119]. As such, although there may be clear systematic differences between different
countries, it is not unlikely that systematic variation within a single country – even a country as
diverse as China - may be hard to define. It is also very obvious that in order to paint a clearer
picture, more samples from different provinces and cities of China would be necessary. This point
is further emphasized by looking at Chinese population statistics in relation to the general geog-
raphy of China. In 2015, population statistics showed that 96% of the Chinese population lived to
the east of what is known as the “Heihe-Tengchong Line”[134] (see suppl. figure 20), in spite of this
area only making up 43% of the total area of China. It is possible that more significant differences
would be found when comparing provinces east and west of this line, especially since the area
to the west remains more rural than the east. In addition, 34 out of 36 samples analyzed in this
==PAGE:63==
5 Discussion
51
study comes from the area around the Pearl River Basin, which has been found to be the area of
China with the highest antibiotic emission densities[70]. As such it is likely that samples from this
area may feature a higher concentration of ARGs in general compared to other regions of China.
Seen in a broad perspective, it is clear that samples analyzed in this study are more homoge-
nous than the samples studied from different regions of the world in the Global Sewage study. Al-
though a larger and more diverse sample base from different places in China would be needed
to say anything more specific, these results suggests that although a single sample may not be
able to represent the entirety of the AMR diversity within a country as large as China, it may serve
as a basic proxy for the general abundance levels. A more general proxy may be obtained
by collecting multiple samples from different parts of the country, and then averaging across
the samples or by some other means including the diversity from these regions into the general
characterization of the country.
Limitations and future perspectives
A number of limitations should be noted for the current study.
As previously mentioned, it is clear that the nature of the sewage samples is highly complex, and
that they are susceptible to stochastic events that cannot be fully accounted for in this study. In-
dividual samples might not yield an accurate representation of sewage from a specific region as
a whole, and it is therefore recommended that multiple samples are taken from each location
in order to minimize the vulnerability of the surveillance approach to these events. In general,
there are many ways that biases could be introduced, especially when comparing samples pro-
cessed or sampled by different means. One example is the effect of DNA extraction protocols
on the final results; depending on the methods used, different types of organisms may appear
more abundant than they really are. For example, cells that are more easily lysed by chemical
means may overshadow other organisms if DNA extraction protocols depend on chemical lysis
rather than mechanical mechanisms.
With regards to AMR distributions, not all genes were aggregated to 90% sequence identity clus-
ters, since many genes identified in current study were not present in list of clusters was obtained
from EFFORT. Unfortunately, due to time constraints, it wasn’t possible to manually curate the
clusters. This may have skewed gene cluster counts of the AMR distributions presented herein.
Moreover, although some of the focus of this study has been on antimicrobial classes, not all
classes of antibiotics are equally important. Studies that are more focused on genes conferring
resistance to last-resort antibiotics in sewage could thus be of value.
Biases in the detection of AMR genes may also have been introduced by the mapping proce-
dure of BWA-MEM in MGmapper (appendix section 1. BWA-MEM alignment procedure). In a
paper from 2018, Clausen et. al showed low prediction performance of AMR genes when refer-
ence mapping with BWA-MEM and MGmapper [79]. In general, MGmapper underestimated the
presence of template genes and genomes, however did not assign many false positives when
using a threshold of 90% coverage and 90% identity. As such AMR phenotypes may be missing or
underestimated in the results produced, however the ones that are actually reported are likely to
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Discussion
be true positives and thus an accurate reflection of the query data. The resolving of ambiguous
reads are in general a problem when mapping short sequence reads against a set of sequences
that create multiple hits with identical alignment scores, and is also mentioned in the original
MGmapper paper[76]. In the context of mapping against redundant databases, such as those
used in this paper, a more specialized solution such as KMA[79] might yield more accurate results.
It highlights another limitation of metagenomics in general, which is that current sequencing tech-
nologies produce mainly short reads. The advent of third-generation sequencing technologies,
which has the capability to produce substantially longer reads than second generation sequenc-
ing (NGS) technologies, may alleviate this particular issue[135].
It is clear that the utilization of metagenomics on sewage for surveillance has many advantages.
However, it must also be noted that the metagenomic method currently does not have the same
sensitivity when used on complex samples such as sewage compared to phenotypic methods
applied to bacterial isolates. In clinical settings, the results of metagenomics should preferably
be accompanied by phenotypic tests if it is used to guide treatment. With regards to disease
surveillance, strain diagnosis limits are currently unknown and will depend both on the number
and relative abundances of species present in the sewage, as well as the relatedness of these
species to the target strains. One way of potentially obtaining some information about detection
levels would be to spike metagenomic datasets with different concentrations of a target organ-
ism to test the specificity of species detection against the bacterial community of a sewage.
From a surveillance point of view, it is also clear that the application of metagenomics and NGS is
still very challenging in many parts of the world. Not only is equipment and reagents prohibitively
expensive, they may not always be available for purchase in certain countries. Even when re-
sources and equipment is available, DNA extraction and sequencing protocols are complicated
and requires dedicated facilities and trained personnel. When sequencing has been successfully
performed, the analysis of data requires deep knowledge of both bioinformatics and biology in
order to navigate sophisticated analysis programs and extract pertinent observations.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
The increase of antimicrobial resistance constitutes a major global crisis, threatening not only
modern medicine[4], [26] but also the sustainability of global development[24] and world econ-
omy[25]. While long-term effects are still uncertain[38], it is clear that new surveillance approaches
to monitor for infectious diseases and AMR genes are needed in order to obtain representative
data for human populations.
Working from a metagenomic surveillance approach, this study analyzed 36 untreated sewage
samples and 40 bacterial pathogens originating from China. By characterizing bacterial com-
munities and resistomes of the sewage, the feasibility of metagenomic surveillance of a large hu-
man population was demonstrated by identification of human pathogens and resistance genes
across all samples. A shared core resistome was identified, accounting for the majority of the to-
tal AMR abundance. In addition, it was shown that many of the most abundant bacteria within
sewage are associated with the human gut microbiota. Although a link between these two were
not investigated, it might imply that the human gut plays an active role in the dissemination of
resistance genes through sewage.
Accurate detection and tracking of pathogenic hospital strains through sewage was not ob-
tained, even though peaks of abundance of particular species in certain weeks were discovered.
It is clear that the success of this endeavor is highly contingent upon factors that are impossible to
know a priori. Detection of single strains from individual patients may even be beyond the limits
of current technology when performed on samples as complex as sewage. The results obtained
however did suggest that if outbreaks in the population leads to changes in the taxonomic and
functional structure of sewage, then these changes would be detectable and traceable. As
such, metagenomic monitoring of sewage shows potential in future disease surveillance.
Comparison between hospital- and WWTP effluent showed significant increases in abundancy
of both bacteria and AMR genes in hospital waste water, as well as significant differences in al-
pha diversity measures. Since hospitals often serve as a hub for the evolution of resistance and
spread of pathogens, surveillance of hospital waste water could potentially serve as predictor of
new resistant strains that may cause outbreaks in the population.
While the limited sample size made generalization difficult, analysis of sewage samples showed
signs of systematic seasonal variation, with increased abundancies of certain bacterial genera
and AMR genes during summer. Other time-based trends were observed, and variation within
a single week was found to be of similar magnitude as variation within a year. This result clearly
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Conclusion
demonstrates that the metagenomic approach is capable of detecting changes even on small
time scales, further proving the effectiveness of metagenomics as a surveillance tool.
Finally, sewage variation according to geography was characterized. Results obtained showed
differences in regional profiles and some clustering based on geography, however the variation
observed was of a smaller scale than what was discovered between countries in the Global
Sewage Surveillance project[84]. This relative homogeneity both according to time and geogra-
phy does serve as a positive indication of using a single sample as a proxy for the country as a
whole. It must be mentioned however that only sewage from two provinces was analyzed. To
obtain a more representative picture of the full diversity found in China, samples from additional
Chinese provinces would be needed, for example from the lesser populated areas to the west
of the Heihe-Tengchong[134] line.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
China Prohibited and Restricted Items | FedEx Cross Border. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://crossborder.fedex.com/us/assets/prohibited-restricted/
china/index.shtml (visited on 02/20/2019).
[2]
Regulations of the People’s Republic of China on Import and Export Duties.
[Online]. Available: http://english.customs.gov.cn/Statics/d30338b4-
2f6a-47ea-a008-cff20ec0a6d2.html (visited on 02/20/2019).
[3]
Alexander Fleming Discovery and Development of Penicillin - Landmark, en.
[Online]. Available: https://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/education/
whatischemistry/landmarks/flemingpenicillin.html (visited on 01/19/2019).
[4]
O. J., AMR Review Paper - Tackling a crisis for the health and wealth of
nations, en. [Online]. Available: https://amr-review.org/sites/default/
files/AMR%20Review%20Paper%20- %20Tackling%20a%20crisis%20for%
20the % 20health % 20and % 20wealth % 20of % 20nations _ 1 . pdf (visited on
01/19/2019).
[5]
G. M. Cooper, “The Origin and Evolution of Cells,” en, The Cell: A Molecular
Approach. 2nd edition, 2000. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/books/NBK9841/ (visited on 01/19/2019).
[6]
P. Padiyara, H. Inoue, and M. Sprenger, “Global Governance Mechanisms
to Address Antimicrobial Resistance,” en, Infectious Diseases: Research and
Treatment, vol. 11, p. 117 863 371 876 788, Jan. 2018, issn: 1178-6337, 1178-
6337. doi: 10.1177/1178633718767887. [Online]. Available: http://journals.
sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1178633718767887 (visited on 01/19/2019).
[7]
WHO | Food safety. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs399/en/ (visited on 06/01/2016).
[8]
Global Surveillance of Antimicrobial Resistance - Global Surveillance, en. [On-
line]. Available: http://www.globalsurveillance.eu/Projects/Global-
Surveillance-of-Antimicrobial-Resistance (visited on 01/20/2019).
[9]
Antimicrobial resistance in Danish pigs: A cross sectional study of the associa-
tion between antimicrobial resistance and geography, exposure to antimicrobials,
and trade - DTU Findit. [Online]. Available: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/2394163945 (visited on 01/21/2019).
==PAGE:68==
56
Bibliography
[10]
R. I. Aminov, “The role of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance in nature,” eng,
Environmental Microbiology, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2970–2988, Dec. 2009, issn:
1462-2920. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.01972.x.
[11]
B. Thakuria and K. Lahon, “The Beta Lactam Antibiotics as an Empirical
Therapy in a Developing Country: An Update on Their Current Status and
Recommendations to Counter the Resistance against Them,” Journal of Clin-
ical and Diagnostic Research : JCDR, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1207–1214, Jun. 2013,
issn: 2249-782X. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2013/5239.3052. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3708238/ (visited on
06/11/2019).
[12]
G. Kapoor, S. Saigal, and A. Elongavan, “Action and resistance mechanisms
of antibiotics: A guide for clinicians,” Journal of Anaesthesiology, Clinical
Pharmacology, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 300–305, 2017, issn: 0970-9185. doi: 10.
4103/joacp.JOACP_349_15. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5672523/ (visited on 06/11/2019).
[13]
J. M. Munita and C. A. Arias, “Mechanisms of Antibiotic Resistance,” Mi-
crobiology spectrum, vol. 4, no. 2, Apr. 2016, issn: 2165-0497. doi: 10.1128/
microbiolspec.VMBF-0016-2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4888801/ (visited on 06/11/2019).
[14]
S. Džidić, J. Šušković, and B. Kos, “Antibiotic resistance mechanisms in bac-
teria: Biochemical and genetic aspects,” Food Technology and Biotechnology,
vol. 46, pp. 11–21, Jan. 2008.
[15]
H. Harbottle, S. Thakur, S. Zhao, and D. G. White, “Genetics of Antimicrobial
Resistance,” Animal Biotechnology, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 111–124, Dec. 2006, issn:
1049-5398. doi: 10 . 1080 / 10495390600957092. [Online]. Available: https :
//doi.org/10.1080/10495390600957092 (visited on 06/11/2019).
[16]
N. A. Lerminiaux, “Horizontal transfer of antibiotic resistance genes in clinical
environments,” Canadian Journal of Microbiology, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 34–44,
2019, issn: 00084166. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2018-0275.
[17]
C. L. Ventola, “The Antibiotic Resistance Crisis,” Pharmacy and Therapeutics,
vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 277–283, Apr. 2015, issn: 1052-1372. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4378521/ (visited on
03/06/2019).
[18]
N. Rosenblatt-Farrell, “The Landscape of Antibiotic Resistance,” en, Environ-
mental Health Perspectives, vol. 117, no. 6, A244, Jun. 2009. doi: 10.1289/
ehp.117-a244. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC2702430/ (visited on 03/06/2019).
[19]
H. F. Chambers, “The changing epidemiology of Staphylococcus aureus?”
Emerging Infectious Diseases, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 178–182, 2001, issn: 1080-
6040. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC2631711/ (visited on 03/06/2019).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
57
[20]
B. Spellberg and D. N. Gilbert, “The Future of Antibiotics and Resistance:
A Tribute to a Career of Leadership by John Bartlett,” Clinical Infectious
Diseases: An Official Publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America,
vol. 59, no. Suppl 2, S71–S75, Sep. 2014, issn: 1058-4838. doi: 10.1093/
cid/ciu392. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4176319/ (visited on 03/06/2019).
[21]
B. Aslam, W. Wang, M. I. Arshad, M. Khurshid, S. Muzammil, M. H. Rasool,
M. A. Nisar, R. F. Alvi, M. A. Aslam, M. U. Qamar, M. K. F. Salamat,
and Z. Baloch, “Antibiotic resistance: A rundown of a global crisis,” Infection
and Drug Resistance, vol. 11, pp. 1645–1658, Oct. 2018, issn: 1178-6973. doi:
10.2147/IDR.S173867. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC6188119/ (visited on 06/13/2019).
[22]
R. Laxminarayan, A. Duse, C. Wattal, A. K. M. Zaidi, H. F. L. Wertheim,
N. Sumpradit, E. Vlieghe, G. L. Hara, I. M. Gould, H. Goossens, C. Greko,
A. D. So, M. Bigdeli, G. Tomson, W. Woodhouse, E. Ombaka, A. Q. Peralta,
F. N. Qamar, F. Mir, S. Kariuki, Z. A. Bhutta, A. Coates, R. Bergstrom, G. D.
Wright, E. D. Brown, and O. Cars, “Antibiotic resistance-the need for global
solutions,” eng, The Lancet. Infectious Diseases, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 1057–1098,
Dec. 2013, issn: 1474-4457. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70318-9.
[23]
EU Action on Antimicrobial Resistance - Antimicrobial Resistance - Euro-
pean Commission, en. [Online]. Available: /health / amr / antimicrobial -
resistance_en (visited on 01/22/2019).
[24]
D. Jasovský, J. Littmann, A. Zorzet, and O. Cars, “Antimicrobial resistance—
a threat to the world’s sustainable development,” Upsala Journal of Medical
Sciences, vol. 121, no. 3, pp. 159–164, Aug. 2016, issn: 0300-9734. doi: 10.
1080/03009734.2016.1195900. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4967260/ (visited on 01/22/2019).
[25]
Drug-Resistant Infections: A Threat to Our Economic Future, en, Text/HTML.
[Online]. Available: http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/health/publication/
drug-resistant-infections-a-threat-to-our-economic-future (visited
on 01/22/2019).
[26]
WHO | Guidelines for the development of measures to combat counterfeit
medicines. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/medicines/publications/
counterfeitguidelines/en/ (visited on 01/24/2019).
[27]
CDC, Antibiotic Resistance Threats in the United States, 2013, en. [Online].
Available: https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/threat-report-2013/
pdf/ar-threats-2013-508.pdf (visited on 01/19/2019).
[28]
R. o. A. Resistance, Tackling Drug-resistant Infections Globally: Final Report
and Recommendations, en. 2016, Google-Books-ID: aa6lAQAACAAJ.
==PAGE:70==
58
Bibliography
[29]
ECDC/EMEA Joint Technical Report: The bacterial challenge: Time to react,
en, Sep. 2009. [Online]. Available: http://ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-
data/ecdcemea-joint-technical-report-bacterial-challenge-time-
react (visited on 01/22/2019).
[30]
W. H. Organization, Global tuberculosis report 2014, en. World Health Organi-
zation, 2014, isbn: 978-92-4-156480-9. [Online]. Available: http://apps.who.
int/iris/handle/10665/137094 (visited on 01/23/2019).
[31]
Diabetes, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/diabetes (visited on 07/19/2019).
[32]
Diarrhoeal disease, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/diarrhoeal-disease (visited on 07/19/2019).
[33]
Cancer, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/cancer (visited on 05/14/2019).
[34]
Road traffic injuries, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/road-traffic-injuries (visited on 07/19/2019).
[35]
Cholera, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/cholera (visited on 07/19/2019).
[36]
Measles, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/measles (visited on 07/19/2019).
[37]
The top 10 causes of death, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.int/
news-room/fact-sheets/detail/the-top-10-causes-of-death (visited
on 01/27/2019).
[38]
M. E. A. de Kraker, A. J. Stewardson, and S. Harbarth, “Will 10 Million People
Die a Year due to Antimicrobial Resistance by 2050?” PLoS Medicine, vol. 13,
no. 11, Nov. 2016, issn: 1549-1277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002184.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC5127510/ (visited on 01/27/2019).
[39]
J. A. Opintan, M. J. Newman, R. E. Arhin, E. S. Donkor, M. Gyansa-Lutterodt,
and W. Mills-Pappoe, “Laboratory-based nationwide surveillance of antimicro-
bial resistance in Ghana,” eng, Infection and Drug Resistance, vol. 8, pp. 379–
389, 2015, issn: 1178-6973. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S88725.
[40]
(PDF) Using infectious intestinal disease surveillance data to explore illness
aetiology; a cryptosporidiosis case study, en. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016 / j . healthplace . 2008 . 06 . 005. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
researchgate.net/publication/23174400_Using_infectious_intestinal_
disease_surveillance_data_to_explore_illness_aetiology_a_cryptosporidiosis_
case_study (visited on 03/06/2019).
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
59
[41]
J. Davies and D. Davies, “Origins and Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance,”
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews : MMBR, vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 417–
433, Sep. 2010, issn: 1092-2172. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00016- 10. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2937522/
(visited on 06/12/2019).
[42]
Vital Signs: Carbapenem-Resistant Enterobacteriaceae, eng. [Online]. Available:
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6209a3.htm (visited on
03/07/2019).
[43]
T. P. Van Boeckel, “Global antibiotic consumption 2000 to 2010: An analysis
of Cross Mark 742 national pharmaceutical sales data,” Lancet Infectious Dis-
eases, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 742–750, 2014, issn: 14733099. doi: 10.1016/S1473-
3099(14)70780-7.
[44]
World Antibiotic Awareness Week, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.who.
int/campaigns/world-antibiotic-awareness-week (visited on 01/24/2019).
[45]
WHO | ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS IN CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT. [On-
line]. Available: http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/rational_use/
antibacterial_agents_clinical_development/en/ (visited on 06/13/2019).
[46]
(PDF) Antibiotic resistance-The faceless threat, en. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/228636583_Antibiotic_resistance-
The_faceless_threat (visited on 03/06/2019).
[47]
A. Auta, M. A. Hadi, E. Oga, E. O. Adewuyi, S. N. Abdu-Aguye, D. Adeloye, B.
Strickland-Hodge, and D. J. Morgan, “Global access to antibiotics without pre-
scription in community pharmacies: A systematic review and meta-analysis,”
English, Journal of Infection, vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 8–18, Jan. 2019, issn: 0163-
4453, 1532-2742. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2018.07.001. [Online]. Available:
https://www.journalofinfection.com/article/S0163-4453(18)30212-
3/abstract (visited on 03/06/2019).
[48]
V. Viswanathan, “Off-label abuse of antibiotics by bacteria,” Gut Microbes,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 3–4, Jan. 2014, issn: 1949-0976. doi: 10.4161/gmic.28027.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC4049933/ (visited on 03/07/2019).
[49]
T. Kelesidis and M. E. Falagas, “Substandard/Counterfeit Antimicrobial Drugs,”
en, Clinical Microbiology Reviews, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 443–464, Apr. 2015,
issn: 0893-8512, 1098-6618. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00072-14. [Online]. Available:
https://cmr.asm.org/content/28/2/443 (visited on 01/24/2019).
[50]
Counterfeit and Substandard Drugs in Myanmar and Viet Nam - Report of a
Study Carried out in Cooperation with the Governments of Myanmar and Viet
Nam - EDM Research Series N0. 029. [Online]. Available: http://apps.who.
int/medicinedocs/en/d/Js2276e/ (visited on 01/24/2019).
==PAGE:72==
60
Bibliography
[51]
S. Pincock, “WHO tries to tackle problem of counterfeit medicines in Asia,”
BMJ : British Medical Journal, vol. 327, no. 7424, p. 1126, Nov. 2003, issn:
0959-8138. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc /
articles/PMC1126859/ (visited on 01/24/2019).
[52]
K. Ahmad, “Antidepressants are sold as antiretrovirals in DR Congo,” eng,
Lancet (London, England), vol. 363, no. 9410, p. 713, Feb. 2004, issn: 1474-
547X. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)15670-5.
[53]
J. G. Bartlett, D. N. Gilbert, and B. Spellberg, “Seven Ways to Preserve
the Miracle of Antibiotics,” en, Clinical Infectious Diseases, vol. 56, no. 10,
pp. 1445–1450, May 2013, issn: 1058-4838. doi: 10.1093/cid/cit070. [On-
line]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/56/10/1445/
405531 (visited on 03/07/2019).
[54]
A. C. Senok, G. A. Botta, and O. O. Soge, Emergence and Spread of Antimicrobial-
Resistant Pathogens in an Era of Globalization, en, Research article, 2012. doi:
10.1155/2012/286703. [Online]. Available: https://www.hindawi.com/
journals/ipid/2012/286703/ (visited on 01/20/2019).
[55]
P. M. da Costa, L. Loureiro, and A. J. F. Matos, “Transfer of Multidrug-
Resistant Bacteria between Intermingled Ecological Niches: The Interface be-
tween Humans, Animals and the Environment,” International Journal of En-
vironmental Research and Public Health, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 278–294, Jan.
2013, issn: 1661-7827. doi: 10.3390/ijerph10010278. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3564142/ (visited on
01/24/2019).
[56]
Antimicrobial resistance – a global epidemic, English, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news16_e/heal_29aug16_e.pdf
(visited on 05/14/2019).
[57]
First discovery in United States of colistin resistance in a human E. coli in-
fection, en. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/
2016/05/160526152033.htm (visited on 01/24/2019).
[58]
Y.-Y. Liu, Y. Wang, T. R. Walsh, L.-X. Yi, R. Zhang, J. Spencer, Y. Doi, G.
Tian, B. Dong, X. Huang, L.-F. Yu, D. Gu, H. Ren, X. Chen, L. Lv, D. He,
H. Zhou, Z. Liang, J.-H. Liu, and J. Shen, “Emergence of plasmid-mediated
colistin resistance mechanism MCR-1 in animals and human beings in China: A
microbiological and molecular biological study,” English, The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 161–168, Feb. 2016, issn: 1473-3099, 1474-4457.
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)00424-7. [Online]. Available: https://www.
thelancet.com/journals/laninf/article/PIIS1473- 3099(15)00424-
7/abstract (visited on 05/14/2019).
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
61
[59]
S. Allcock, E. H. Young, M. Holmes, D. Gurdasani, G. Dougan, M. S. Sandhu,
L. Solomon, and M. E. Török, “Antimicrobial resistance in human populations:
Challenges and opportunities,” Global Health, Epidemiology and Genomics,
vol. 2, May 2017, issn: 2054-4200. doi: 10.1017/gheg.2017.4. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5732576/
(visited on 06/13/2019).
[60]
R. Finch and BSAC Working Party on The Urgent Need: Regenerating An-
tibacterial Drug Discovery and Development, “Regulatory opportunities to en-
courage technology solutions to antibacterial drug resistance,” eng, The Jour-
nal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 1945–1947, Sep. 2011,
issn: 1460-2091. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkr259.
[61]
L. J. Piddock, “The crisis of no new antibiotics—what is the way forward?”
en, The Lancet Infectious Diseases, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 249–253, Mar. 2012,
issn: 14733099. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(11)70316-4. [Online]. Available:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1473309911703164
(visited on 06/13/2019).
[62]
CDC, The Nation’s Plan to Combat Antibiotic Resistance, en-us, Sep. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/us-activities/
national-action-plan.html (visited on 06/13/2019).
[63]
GLASS | Global Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (GLASS). [On-
line]. Available: http://www.who.int/glass/en/ (visited on 06/13/2019).
[64]
A. v. Belkum, T. T. Bachmann, G. Lüdke, J. G. Lisby, G. Kahlmeter, A.
Mohess, K. Becker, J. P. Hays, N. Woodford, K. Mitsakakis, J. Moran-Gilad,
J. Vila, H. Peter, J. H. Rex, and W. M. Dunne, “Developmental roadmap for
antimicrobial susceptibility testing systems,” En, Nature Reviews Microbiology,
vol. 17, no. 1, p. 51, Jan. 2019, issn: 1740-1534. doi: 10.1038/s41579-018-
0098-9. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41579-
018-0098-9 (visited on 06/27/2019).
[65]
W. Wade, “Unculturable bacteria—the uncharacterized organisms that cause
oral infections,” Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 81–
83, Feb. 2002, issn: 0141-0768. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1279316/ (visited on 06/13/2019).
[66]
W. R. Streit and R. A. Schmitz, “Metagenomics–the key to the uncultured
microbes,” eng, Current Opinion in Microbiology, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 492–498,
Oct. 2004, issn: 1369-5274. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2004.08.002.
[67]
F. P. Maurer, M. Christner, M. Hentschke, and H. Rohde, “Advances in Rapid
Identification and Susceptibility Testing of Bacteria in the Clinical Microbiol-
ogy Laboratory: Implications for Patient Care and Antimicrobial Stewardship
Programs,” Infectious Disease Reports, vol. 9, no. 1, Mar. 2017, issn: 2036-
7430. doi: 10.4081/idr.2017.6839. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5391540/ (visited on 01/28/2019).
==PAGE:74==
62
Bibliography
[68]
“DNA purification and isolation using magnetic particles.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.google.com/patents/US5705628 (visited on 01/10/2016).
[69]
Comprehensive evaluation of antibiotics emission and fate in the river basins of
China: Source analysis, multimedia modeling, and linkage to bacter... - PubMed
- NCBI. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
25961663 (visited on 07/02/2019).
[70]
Review of antibiotic resistance in China and its environment. - PubMed - NCBI.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29107352
(visited on 07/02/2019).
[71]
F.-P. Hu, Y. Guo, D.-M. Zhu, F. Wang, X.-F. Jiang, Y.-C. Xu, X.-J. Zhang,
C.-X. Zhang, P. Ji, Y. Xie, M. Kang, C.-Q. Wang, A.-M. Wang, Y.-H. Xu, J.-L.
Shen, Z.-Y. Sun, Z.-J. Chen, Y.-X. Ni, J.-Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Chu, S.-F. Tian, Z.-D.
Hu, J. Li, Y.-S. Yu, J. Lin, B. Shan, Y. Du, Y. Han, S. Guo, L.-H. Wei, L. Wu,
H. Zhang, J. Kong, Y.-J. Hu, X.-M. Ai, C. Zhuo, D.-H. Su, Q. Yang, B. Jia,
and W. Huang, “Resistance trends among clinical isolates in China reported
from CHINET surveillance of bacterial resistance, 2005-2014,” eng, Clinical
Microbiology and Infection: The Official Publication of the European Society
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, vol. 22 Suppl 1, S9–14, Mar.
2016, issn: 1469-0691. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2016.01.001.
[72]
C. Rose, “The characterization of feces and urine: A review of the literature
to inform advanced treatment technology,” Critical Reviews in Environmental
Science and Technology, vol. 45, no. 17, pp. 1827–1879, 2015, issn: 10643389.
doi: 10.1080/10643389.2014.1000761.
[73]
R. Sender, S. Fuchs, and R. Milo, “Revised Estimates for the Number of Hu-
man and Bacteria Cells in the Body,” PLoS Biology, vol. 14, no. 8, Aug. 2016,
issn: 1544-9173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002533. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4991899/ (visited on
06/14/2019).
[74]
R. Orenstein and E. S. Wong, “Urinary Tract Infections in Adults,” en, Amer-
ican Family Physician, vol. 59, no. 5, p. 1225, Mar. 1999, issn: 0002-838X,
1532-0650. [Online]. Available: https://www.aafp.org/afp/1999/0301/
p1225.html (visited on 06/14/2019).
[75]
S. S. Magill, J. R. Edwards, W. Bamberg, Z. G. Beldavs, G. Dumyati, M. A.
Kainer, R. Lynfield, M. Maloney, L. McAllister-Hollod, J. Nadle, S. M. Ray,
D. L. Thompson, L. E. Wilson, and S. K. Fridkin, “Multistate Point-Prevalence
Survey of Health Care–Associated Infections,” New England Journal of Medicine,
vol. 370, no. 13, pp. 1198–1208, Mar. 2014, issn: 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1306801. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1306801
(visited on 06/14/2019).
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
63
[76]
T. N. Petersen, O. Lukjancenko, M. C. F. Thomsen, M. Maddalena Sperotto, O.
Lund, F. Møller Aarestrup, and T. Sicheritz-Pontén, “MGmapper: Reference
based mapping and taxonomy annotation of metagenomics sequence reads,”
PLoS ONE, vol. 12, no. 5, May 2017, issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0176469. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC5415185/ (visited on 03/22/2019).
[77]
H. Li, “Aligning sequence reads, clone sequences and assembly contigs with
BWA-MEM,” arXiv:1303.3997 [q-bio], Mar. 2013. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1303.3997 (visited on 04/10/2016).
[78]
M. Roberts, W. Hayes, B. R. Hunt, S. M. Mount, and J. A. Yorke, “Reduc-
ing storage requirements for biological sequence comparison,” Bioinformatics,
vol. 20, no. 18, pp. 3363–3369, 2004. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bth408.
[79]
P. T. L. C. Clausen, F. M. Aarestrup, and O. Lund, “Rapid and precise align-
ment of raw reads against redundant databases with KMA,” en, BMC Bioinfor-
matics, vol. 19, no. 1, Dec. 2018, issn: 1471-2105. doi: 10.1186/s12859-018-
2336-6. [Online]. Available: https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/s12859-018-2336-6 (visited on 06/19/2019).
[80]
Guangzhou, en, Page Version ID: 902241287, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guangzhou&oldid=
902241287 (visited on 07/02/2019).
[81]
Liede Sewage Treatment Plant Onsite Sludge Drying And Weight Reduction
Project - ￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿￿. [Online]. Available: http://www.gzutaly.com/goods_d_
en-23.html (visited on 07/02/2019).
[82]
Guangzhou City- China - News Brief - Newsgd, Oct. 2008. [Online]. Available:
https://web.archive.org/web/20081015170313/http://www.newsgd.
com/specials/touchchina/content/2008-01/28/content_4317004.htm
(visited on 07/02/2019).
[83]
Computerome - The Danish National Supercomputer for Life Sciences - Com-
puterome English, en. [Online]. Available: http://www.computerome.dtu.dk/
about (visited on 03/22/2019).
[84]
R. S. Hendriksen, P. Munk, P. Njage, B. v. Bunnik, L. McNally, O. Luk-
jancenko, T. Röder, D. Nieuwenhuijse, S. K. Pedersen, J. Kjeldgaard, R. S.
Kaas, P. T. L. C. Clausen, J. K. Vogt, P. Leekitcharoenphon, M. G. M. v. d.
Schans, T. Zuidema, A. M. d. R. Husman, S. Rasmussen, B. Petersen, C. Amid,
G. Cochrane, T. Sicheritz-Ponten, H. Schmitt, J. R. M. Alvarez, A. Aidara-
Kane, S. J. Pamp, O. Lund, T. Hald, M. Woolhouse, M. P. Koopmans, H.
Vigre, T. N. Petersen, and F. M. Aarestrup, “Global monitoring of antimicro-
bial resistance based on metagenomics analyses of urban sewage,” En, Nature
Communications, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 1124, Mar. 2019, issn: 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-019-08853-3. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41467-019-08853-3 (visited on 06/14/2019).
==PAGE:76==
64
Bibliography
[85]
Stool DNA Extraction Kit: QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit - QIAGEN On-
line Shop. [Online]. Available: https://www.qiagen.com/dk/shop/sample-
technologies/dna/dna- preparation/qiaamp- fast- dna- stool- mini-
kit#productdetails (visited on 04/17/2016).
[86]
Genohub - Find and Order Next Generation Sequencing Services. [Online].
Available: https://genohub.com/ (visited on 06/21/2019).
[87]
KAPA Hyperprep, en. [Online]. Available: /content / rochesequence / en /
products-solutions/by-category/library-preparation/dna-library-
preparation/kapa-hyperprep.html (visited on 06/21/2019).
[88]
Babraham Bioinformatics - FastQC A Quality Control tool for High Through-
put Sequence Data. [Online]. Available: https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.
ac.uk/projects/fastqc/ (visited on 03/18/2019).
[89]
BBTools - DOE Joint Genome Institute. [Online]. Available: https://jgi.
doe.gov/data-and-tools/bbtools/ (visited on 03/18/2019).
[90]
A. H. Delcour, “Outer Membrane Permeability and Antibiotic Resistance,”
Biochimica et biophysica acta, vol. 1794, no. 5, pp. 808–816, May 2009, issn:
0006-3002. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . bbapap . 2008 . 11 . 005. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2696358/ (visited
on 03/17/2019).
[91]
D. J. Morgan, L. L. Lomotan, K. Agnes, L. McGrail, and M.-C. Roghmann,
“Characteristics of Healthcare-Associated Infections Contributing to Unex-
pected In-Hospital Deaths,” Infection control and hospital epidemiology : the
official journal of the Society of Hospital Epidemiologists of America, vol. 31,
no. 8, pp. 864–866, Aug. 2010, issn: 0899-823X. doi: 10.1086/655018. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3528178/
(visited on 03/17/2019).
[92]
Gram-negative Bacteria Infections in Healthcare Settings | HAI | CDC. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.cdc.gov/hai/organisms/gram-negative-
bacteria.html (visited on 03/16/2019).
[93]
SPAdes, en-US, Apr. 2016. [Online]. Available: http://cab.spbu.ru/software/
spades/ (visited on 04/27/2019).
[94]
A. Gurevich, V. Saveliev, N. Vyahhi, and G. Tesler, “QUAST: Quality assess-
ment tool for genome assemblies,” en, Bioinformatics, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1072–
1075, Apr. 2013, issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt086.
[Online]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/
29/8/1072/228832 (visited on 05/07/2019).
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
65
[95]
D. H. Parks, M. Imelfort, C. T. Skennerton, P. Hugenholtz, and G. W. Tyson,
“CheckM: Assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates,
single cells, and metagenomes,” en, Genome Research, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1043–
1055, Jan. 2015, issn: 1088-9051, 1549-5469. doi: 10.1101/gr.186072.114.
[Online]. Available: http://genome.cshlp.org/content/25/7/1043 (visited
on 05/07/2019).
[96]
Assess the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and
metagenomes: Ecogenomics/CheckM, original-date: 2013-02-20T00:43:38Z, May
2019. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Ecogenomics/CheckM (visited
on 05/07/2019).
[97]
CGE Server. [Online]. Available: https : / / cge . cbs . dtu . dk / services /
KmerFinder/ (visited on 07/17/2019).
[98]
Nucleotide BLAST: Search nucleotide databases using a nucleotide query. [On-
line]. Available: https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE_TYPE=
BlastSearch (visited on 05/07/2019).
[99]
T. Seemann, “Prokka: Rapid prokaryotic genome annotation,” en, Bioinfor-
matics, vol. 30, no. 14, pp. 2068–2069, Jul. 2014, issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.
1093 / bioinformatics / btu153. [Online]. Available: https : / / academic .
oup . com / bioinformatics / article / 30 / 14 / 2068 / 2390517 (visited on
03/15/2019).
[100]
A. J. Page, C. A. Cummins, M. Hunt, V. K. Wong, S. Reuter, M. T. Holden,
M. Fookes, D. Falush, J. A. Keane, and J. Parkhill, “Roary: Rapid large-scale
prokaryote pan genome analysis,” en, Bioinformatics, vol. 31, no. 22, pp. 3691–
3693, Nov. 2015, issn: 1367-4803, 1460-2059. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btv421. [Online]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article-lookup/doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv421 (visited on 03/18/2019).
[101]
Roary: Rapid large-scale prokaryote pan genome analysis | Bioinformatics | Ox-
ford Academic. [Online]. Available: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article/31/22/3691/240757 (visited on 03/18/2019).
[102]
SAMtools. [Online]. Available: http://samtools.sourceforge.net/ (visited
on 03/18/2019).
[103]
Bwa.1. [Online]. Available: http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/bwa.shtml
(visited on 03/18/2019).
[104]
“Https://cge.cbs.dtu.dk/services/MGmapper/,” in.
[105]
P. Munk, B. E. Knudsen, O. Lukjancenko, A. S. R. Duarte, L. V. Gompel,
R. E. C. Luiken, L. A. M. Smit, H. Schmitt, A. D. Garcia, R. B. Hansen, T. N.
Petersen, A. Bossers, E. Ruppé, O. Lund, T. Hald, S. J. Pamp, H. Vigre, D.
Heederik, J. A. Wagenaar, D. Mevius, and F. M. Aarestrup, “Abundance and
diversity of the faecal resistome in slaughter pigs and broilers in nine European
countries,” En, Nature Microbiology, vol. 3, no. 8, p. 898, Aug. 2018, issn: 2058-
5276. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0192-9. [Online]. Available: https://www-
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
nature-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/articles/s41564-018-0192-9 (visited
on 07/03/2019).
[106]
L. Fu, B. Niu, Z. Zhu, S. Wu, and W. Li, “CD-HIT: Accelerated for cluster-
ing the next-generation sequencing data,” en, Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 23,
pp. 3150–3152, Dec. 2012, issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
bts565. [Online]. Available: https://academic-oup-com.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/bioinformatics/article/28/23/3150/192160 (visited on 07/04/2019).
[107]
J. Oksanen, F. G. Blanchet, M. Friendly, R. Kindt, P. Legendre, D. McGlinn,
P. R. Minchin, R. B. O’Hara, G. L. Simpson, P. Solymos, M. H. H. Stevens,
E. Szoecs, and H. Wagner, Vegan: Community Ecology Package, May 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=vegan (visited
on 07/16/2019).
[108]
R. Kolde, Pheatmap: Pretty Heatmaps, Dec. 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
//cran.r-project.org/web/packages/pheatmap/index.html (visited on
06/02/2016).
[109]
B. D. Ondov, T. J. Treangen, P. Melsted, A. B. Mallonee, N. H. Bergman, S.
Koren, and A. M. Phillippy, “Mash: Fast genome and metagenome distance
estimation using MinHash,” Genome Biology, vol. 17, no. 1, p. 132, Jun. 2016,
issn: 1474-760X. doi: 10.1186/s13059- 016- 0997- x. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x (visited on 04/04/2019).
[110]
Hclust function | R Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://www.rdocumentation.
org/packages/fastcluster/versions/1.1.25/topics/hclust (visited on
07/16/2019).
[111]
Dendrogram function | R Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://www.
rdocumentation.org/packages/stats/versions/3.6.1/topics/dendrogram
(visited on 07/16/2019).
[112]
Diversity function | R Documentation. [Online]. Available: https : / / www .
rdocumentation.org/packages/vegan/versions/2.4-2/topics/diversity
(visited on 07/16/2019).
[113]
EstimateR function | R Documentation. [Online]. Available: https://www.
rdocumentation . org / packages / EpiEstim / versions / 1 . 1 - 2 / topics /
EstimateR (visited on 07/16/2019).
[114]
CGE Server. [Online]. Available: https : / / cge . cbs . dtu . dk / services /
NDtree/ (visited on 07/17/2019).
[115]
P. Leekitcharoenphon, E. M. Nielsen, R. S. Kaas, O. Lund, and F. M. Aare-
strup, “Evaluation of Whole Genome Sequencing for Outbreak Detection of
Salmonella enterica,” PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 2, Feb. 2014, issn: 1932-6203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0087991. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3913712/ (visited on 07/16/2019).
[116]
FigTree. [Online]. Available: http : / / tree . bio . ed . ac . uk / software /
figtree/ (visited on 07/16/2019).
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
67
[117]
M. V. Larsen, S. Cosentino, O. Lukjancenko, D. Saputra, S. Rasmussen, H.
Hasman, T. Sicheritz-Pontén, F. M. Aarestrup, D. W. Ussery, and O. Lund,
“Benchmarking of methods for genomic taxonomy,” eng, Journal of Clinical
Microbiology, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1529–1539, May 2014, issn: 1098-660X. doi:
10.1128/JCM.02981-13.
[118]
J. Qin, R. Li, J. Raes, M. Arumugam, K. S. Burgdorf, C. Manichanh, T.
Nielsen, N. Pons, F. Levenez, T. Yamada, D. R. Mende, J. Li, J. Xu, S. Li,
D. Li, J. Cao, B. Wang, H. Liang, H. Zheng, Y. Xie, J. Tap, P. Lepage, M.
Bertalan, J.-M. Batto, T. Hansen, D. Le Paslier, A. Linneberg, H. B. Nielsen,
E. Pelletier, P. Renault, T. Sicheritz-Ponten, K. Turner, H. Zhu, C. Yu, S.
Li, M. Jian, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, X. Zhang, S. Li, N. Qin, H. Yang, J. Wang,
S. Brunak, J. Doré, F. Guarner, K. Kristiansen, O. Pedersen, J. Parkhill, J.
Weissenbach, MetaHIT Consortium, M. Antolin, F. Artiguenave, H. Blottiere,
N. Borruel, T. Bruls, F. Casellas, C. Chervaux, A. Cultrone, C. Delorme, G.
Denariaz, R. Dervyn, M. Forte, C. Friss, M. van de Guchte, E. Guedon, F.
Haimet, A. Jamet, C. Juste, G. Kaci, M. Kleerebezem, J. Knol, M. Kristensen,
S. Layec, K. Le Roux, M. Leclerc, E. Maguin, R. Melo Minardi, R. Oozeer,
M. Rescigno, N. Sanchez, S. Tims, T. Torrejon, E. Varela, W. de Vos, Y.
Winogradsky, E. Zoetendal, P. Bork, S. D. Ehrlich, and J. Wang, “A human gut
microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing,” en, Nature,
vol. 464, no. 7285, pp. 59–65, Mar. 2010, issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/
nature08821. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . nature . com / articles /
nature08821 (visited on 07/18/2019).
[119]
J.-Q. Su, X.-L. An, B. Li, Q.-L. Chen, M. R. Gillings, H. Chen, T. Zhang, and
Y.-G. Zhu, “Metagenomics of urban sewage identifies an extensively shared
antibiotic resistome in China,” Microbiome, vol. 5, Jul. 2017, issn: 2049-2618.
doi: 10.1186/s40168-017-0298-y. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5517792/ (visited on 07/09/2019).
[120]
E. Tacconelli, “GLOBAL PRIORITY LIST OF ANTIBIOTIC-RESISTANT
BACTERIA TO GUIDE RESEARCH, DISCOVERY, AND DEVELOPMENT
OF NEW ANTIBIOTICS,” en, p. 7,
[121]
Y. Zhi-Wen, Z. Yan-Li, Y. Man, and F. Wei-Jun, “Clinical treatment of pandrug-
resistant bacterial infection consulted by clinical pharmacist,” Saudi Pharma-
ceutical Journal : SPJ, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 377–380, Sep. 2015, issn: 1319-0164.
doi: 10.1016/j.jsps.2015.01.001. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4834688/ (visited on 07/02/2019).
[122]
M. Wang, H. Wei, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, L. Di, C. Lyu, and J. Liu, “Analysis of
multidrug-resistant bacteria in 3223 patients with hospital-acquired infections
(HAI) from a tertiary general hospital in China,” eng, Bosnian Journal of
Basic Medical Sciences, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 86–93, Feb. 2019, issn: 1840-4812.
doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2018.3826.
==PAGE:80==
68
Bibliography
[123]
J. C. Castro, L. M. Rodriguez-R, W. T. Harvey, M. R. Weigand, J. K. Hatt,
M. Q. Carter, and K. T. Konstantinidis, “imGLAD: Accurate detection and
quantification of target organisms in metagenomes,” PeerJ, vol. 6, Nov. 2018,
issn: 2167-8359. doi: 10.7717/peerj.5882. [Online]. Available: https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6216955/ (visited on 07/15/2019).
[124]
C. Hong, S. Manimaran, Y. Shen, J. F. Perez-Rogers, A. L. Byrd, E. Castro-
Nallar, K. A. Crandall, and W. E. Johnson, “PathoScope 2.0: A complete
computational framework for strain identification in environmental or clinical
sequencing samples,” Microbiome, vol. 2, p. 33, Sep. 2014, issn: 2049-2618.
doi: 10.1186/2049-2618-2-33. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4164323/ (visited on 07/14/2019).
[125]
M. Zolfo, A. Tett, O. Jousson, C. Donati, and N. Segata, “MetaMLST: Multi-
locus strain-level bacterial typing from metagenomic samples,” Nucleic Acids
Research, vol. 45, no. 2, e7, Jan. 2017, issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/
gkw837. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5314789/ (visited on 07/14/2019).
[126]
Seasonality of antibiotic prescriptions for outpatients and resistance genes in
sewers and wastewater treatment plant outflow. - PubMed - NCBI. [Online].
Available: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27073234/ (visited on
07/10/2019).
[127]
Z. Xu, J. N. Woodhouse, S. H. Te, K. Yew-Hoong Gin, Y. He, C. Xu, and
L. Chen, “Seasonal variation in the bacterial community composition of a
large estuarine reservoir and response to cyanobacterial proliferation,” eng,
Chemosphere, vol. 202, pp. 576–585, Jul. 2018, issn: 1879-1298. doi: 10.1016/
j.chemosphere.2018.03.037.
[128]
Z.-y. Wu, W.-x. Lin, J.-j. Li, J.-f. Liu, B.-l. Li, L.-k. Wu, C.-x. Fang, and Z.-x.
Zhang, “Effects of seasonal variations on soil microbial community composition
of two typical zonal vegetation types in the Wuyi Mountains,” en, Journal of
Mountain Science, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1056–1065, Jun. 2016, issn: 1993-0321.
doi: 10.1007/s11629-015-3599-2. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11629-015-3599-2 (visited on 07/10/2019).
[129]
W. Li, X. Lv, J. Ruan, M. Yu, Y.-B. Song, J. Yu, and M. Dong, “Variations in
Soil Bacterial Composition and Diversity in Newly Formed Coastal Wetlands,”
English, Frontiers in Microbiology, vol. 9, 2019, issn: 1664-302X. doi: 10 .
3389/fmicb.2018.03256. [Online]. Available: https://www.frontiersin.
org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2018.03256/full (visited on 07/10/2019).
[130]
B. C. Crump, G. W. Kling, M. Bahr, and J. E. Hobbie, “Bacterioplankton
community shifts in an arctic lake correlate with seasonal changes in organic
matter source,” eng, Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 2253–2268, Apr. 2003, issn: 0099-2240. doi: 10.1128/aem.69.4.2253-
2268.2003.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
69
[131]
E. R. Davenport, O. Mizrahi-Man, K. Michelini, L. B. Barreiro, C. Ober,
and Y. Gilad, “Seasonal Variation in Human Gut Microbiome Composition,”
en, PLOS ONE, vol. 9, no. 3, e90731, Mar. 2014, issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0090731. [Online]. Available: https://journals.plos.
org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0090731 (visited on
07/10/2019).
[132]
B. Zhang, Q. Yu, G. Yan, H. Zhu, X. y. Xu, and L. Zhu, “Seasonal bacte-
rial community succession in four typical wastewater treatment plants: Cor-
relations between core microbes and process performance,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 8, Mar. 2018, issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598- 018- 22683- 1.
[Online]. Available: https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pmc / articles /
PMC5854665/ (visited on 07/10/2019).
[133]
C. A. Biggs, O. I. Olaleye, L. F. C. Jeanmeure, P. Deines, H. S. Jensen, S. J.
Tait, and P. C. Wright, “Effect of temperature on the substrate utilization
profiles of microbial communities in different sewer sediments,” eng, Environ-
mental Technology, vol. 32, no. 1-2, pp. 133–144, Jan. 2011, issn: 0959-3330.
doi: 10.1080/09593330.2010.490852.
[134]
Heihe–Tengchong Line, en, Page Version ID: 863317916, Oct. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heihe%E2%80%
93Tengchong_Line&oldid=863317916 (visited on 07/10/2019).
[135]
C. Bleidorn, “Third generation sequencing: Technology and its potential im-
pact on evolutionary biodiversity research,” Systematics and Biodiversity, vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2016, issn: 1477-2000. doi: 10.1080/14772000.2015.
1099575. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2015.
1099575 (visited on 07/19/2019).
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
Supplementary figures
Figure 1: Rarefaction curves for samples from Shantou. Rarefaction curve was made on OTU counts
of bacterial species.
Both rarefaction curves are identical, however A) is zoomed in on
the x-axis to more clearly illustrate the rarefaction curves for the TP samples (wastewater
treatment plant samples from Shantou) whereas B) is completely zoomed out.
==PAGE:84==
72
Supplementary figures
Figure 2: Stacked bar chart of the relative abundance of AMR genes on a class-level for 30 bacterial
isolates from Shantou University First Affiliated Hospital.
Relative abundances of genes
(transcripts per kilobase million(TPM)) were summed up to drug classes. The seven group-
ings represent isolates from the following different species: A) Escherichia coli, B) Acineto-
bacter baumannii, C) Pseudomonas aeruginosa, D) Staphylococcus aureus, E) Klebsiella
Pneumoniae, F) Staphylococcus epidermidis, and G)
Enterobacter cloacae.
==PAGE:85==
Supplementary figures
73
Figure 3: Taxonomic composition at genus level for sewage samples taken in Shantou, showing the
relative abundance of read pairs mapping to the top 15 most abundant genera. All genera
that were not in the top 15 have been binned together into the “Other” category.
The
MGmapper databases that were used in the mapping step here were bacteria, bacteria_draft,
and HumanMicrobiome. Legend ranking order goes from least abundant (Enterobacter) to
most abundant (Other).
==PAGE:86==
74
Supplementary figures
Figure 4: Heat map of the bacterial composition of the sewage samples from Shantou, showing the top
40 on a genus level. Week numbers indicate approximately at which time the samples were
taken in September 2018, and the specific date can be seen in the sample name itself. Color
represents log (ln) transformed counts of read pairs. Clustering of both genera and samples
was done using complete-linkage clustering in R using pheatmap.
Clustering of samples
was performed on a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix that was calculated on standardized
read abundance (using Hellinger standardization to account for differences in sequencing
depth) of all genera (not just the ones shown on this heatmap). For genera, clustering was
performed on Pearson correlation coefficients.
==PAGE:87==
Supplementary figures
75
Figure 5: Mapping summaries of the reads mapping to the Shantou_pangenomes database for all
samples from Shantou.
A) shows relative abundance of the pangenomes, while B) shows
number of reads mapped. Legend ranking order goes from least abundant (S. epidermidis)
to most abundant (E. coli).
==PAGE:88==
76
Supplementary figures
Figure 6: Overview of Shantou_isolates abundance and composition pertaining to sewage samples
from Shantou, showing TPM abundance of individual assemblies from 6 out of 7 pathogenic
species isolated at SUMC First Affiliated Hospital. Since only a single reference assembly
was created for E. Cloacae, the distribution plot for this particular species has been omitted.
ID numbers refer to the bacterial isolates (supplementary data table S1 and S2).
==PAGE:89==
Supplementary figures
77
Figure 7: PCA of bacterial isolates and wastewater samples. PCoA was performed on a k-mer based
MinHash pairwise distance matrix. Reads that had mapped in proper pairs to the Shan-
tou_isolates database were extracted from MGmapper outputfiles, and Mash was then used
to calculate pairwise distances between the extracted reads and the bacterial isolate assem-
blies. The amount of variation explained by the principal components are included as axis
labels. On all plots, the 12 metagenomic samples from Shantou are displayed along with
bacterial isolates of individual species (marked with inverted triangle with no fill). (A) E.
coli, (B) A. Baumannii, (C) P. aeruginosa, (D) S. aureus, (E) K. pneumoniae, (F) S.
epidermidis, and (E) E. cloacae.
==PAGE:90==
78
Supplementary figures
Figure 8: SNP-based tree of E. coli genomes and metagenomic samples. 20488 SNPs were identified
on the basis of whole-genome alignment of 11 E. coli strains together with 9 metagenomic
samples and one reference E. coli sample.
Reference E. coli (E_coli_CP018991) was
chosen based on most common reference assembly suggested by KmerFinder during the
species verification procedure. 3353245 positions out of 5434745 (61.7%) positions of the
reference was used in for phylogeny.
==PAGE:91==
Supplementary figures
79
Figure 9: Rarefaction curves for all samples from China. A) Rarefaction curve for all samples made
on counts of reads mapping to the ResFinder database. B) Rarefaction curve for all samples
made on OTU counts of reads mapping to bacteria.
==PAGE:92==
80
Supplementary figures
Figure 10: Stacked bar chart of relative abundance of most abundant AMR genes stratified into
groups of longitudinal datasets. Sample names have been changed for clarity. All AMR
gene entities shown here represent clusters of genes with 90% sequence identity, ex-
cept the following: msr(E)_1_FR751518, tet(C)_2_AY046276, tet(C)_3_AF055345,
mph(E)_1_DQ839391, ere(A)_6_DQ157752 and tet(A)_6_AF534183. The legend list
genes in the same order as seen on individual bars of each sample chart with least abundant
(blaOXA_clust15) at the top and most abundant (Other) on the bottom.
==PAGE:93==
Supplementary figures
81
Figure 11: Stacked bar chart of relative abundance of antimicrobial classes stratified into groups of
longitudinal datasets. Sample names have been changed for clarity. Mac macrolide, Oxa
oxazolidinone, Phen phenicol, AmGlyc aminoglycoside, Quin quinolone.
==PAGE:94==
82
Supplementary figures
Figure 12: Heatmap of the bacterial communities of all sewage samples from Shantou, showing top 40
on a genus level. Color represents log (ln) transformed counts of read pairs. Clustering of
both genera and samples was done using complete-linkage clustering in R using pheatmap.
Clustering of samples was performed on a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix that was cal-
culated on standardized read abundance (using Hellinger standardization to account for
differences in sequencing depth) of all genera (not just the ones shown on this heatmap).
For genera, clustering was performed on Pearson correlation coefficients.
Figure 13: Alpha diversity indexes of bacterial communities on a species level split into season. Shan-
non entropy, Simpson (1-D) diversity and Chao1 richness were calculated on rarified counts
of reads mapping to bacterial species, excluding one sample with the least bacterial hits
(sample GZ_0118_TP_M9). As such, the sampling depth was set to the 2nd lowest sam-
ple’s level. Horizontal boxes represent the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile.
Whiskers go from the first quartile minus 1,5 · the interquartile range to the third quartile
plus 1,5 · the interquartile range.
==PAGE:95==
Supplementary figures
83
Figure 14: Alpha diversity indexes of bacterial communities on a species level split into season. Shan-
non entropy, Simpson (1-D) diversity and Chao1 richness were calculated on rarified counts
of reads mapping to bacterial species, excluding one sample with the least bacterial hits
(sample GZ_0118_TP_M9). As such, the sampling depth was set to the 2nd lowest sam-
ple’s level. Horizontal boxes represent the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile.
Whiskers go from the first quartile minus 1,5 · the interquartile range to the third quartile
plus 1,5 · the interquartile range.
Figure 15: Hierarchical clustering of all wastewater samples from China based on bacterial abundance
and AMR genes. A) Hierarchical clustering performed on a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity ma-
trix calculated on standardized counts of reads mapping to bacterial genera. B) Hierar-
chical clustering performed on a Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix calculated on relative
abundances (TPM) of AMR genes. Hierarchical clustering were performed using complete-
linkage for both dendrograms.
==PAGE:96==
84
Supplementary figures
Figure 16: Class-level heatmap of the resistomes of all wastewater samples from China.. Color rep-
resents log (ln) transformed relative abundances (FPKM). Relative abundances of AMR
genes were summed into clusters on a class-level.
Clustering of both samples and drug
classes was performed using complete-linkage clustering in R using pheatmap.
Sample
clustering was performed on Bray-Curtis dissimilarities that was calculated relative abun-
dances (FPKM). For genera, clustering was performed on Pearson correlation coefficients.
Figure 17: Alpha diversity indexes of bacterial community on a species level.
Shannon entropy,
Simpson (1-D) diversity and Chao1 richness were calculated on rarified counts of reads
mapping to bacterial species, excluding one sample with the least bacterial hits (sample
GZ_0118_TP_M9). As such, the sampling depth was set to the 2nd lowest sample’s level.
Horizontal boxes represent the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile. Whiskers
go from the first quartile minus 1,5 · the interquartile range to the third quartile plus 1,5
· the interquartile range.
==PAGE:97==
Supplementary figures
85
Figure 18: Alpha diversity indexes of AMR on a gene level. Shannon entropy, Simpson (1-D) diversity
and Chao1 richness were calculated on rarified counts of reads mapping to resistance genes,
excluding one sample with the least AMR hits ( 1300 reads, sample GZ_0118_TP_M9).
As such, the sampling depth was set to the 2nd lowest sample’s level. Horizontal boxes
represent the first quartile, the median, and the third quartile. Whiskers go from the first
quartile minus 1,5 · the interquartile range to the third quartile plus 1,5 · the interquartile
range.
Figure 19: Scatterplot showing AMR average gene abundance in FPKM per month. Dots represent
the average FPKM value for all samples taken within each month at Guangzhou WWTP.
Whiskers on points denote the range of sample FPKM values within the mean minus one
standard deviation and the mean plus one standard deviation. No whiskers signify that
only a single sample was taken for the given month.
==PAGE:98==
86
Supplementary figures
Figure 20: Map over China showing the Heihe-Tengchong line. Picture is borrowed from Wikipedia
(https:en.wikipedia.orgwikiHeihe%E2%80%93Tengchong_Line#mediaFile:Heihe-
tengchong-line.svg) East of the line:
43% of the total area, but 96% of the total
population. West of the line: 57% of the area, but only 4% of the total population.
==PAGE:99==
Appendix
1. BWA-MEM alignment procedure
This section highlights the part of the chaining-procedure of the BWA-MEM alignment algorithm
that causes biases in the results produced by MGmapper[77]–[79].
The alignment procedure begins with extraction of so-called minimizers. In the context of refer-
ence mapping, the term minimizer refers to method of substantially reducing the storage require-
ments for sequence comparison by only storing essential seeds (i.e. k-mers, contiguous substrings
of length k) needed to represent the original reference sequence. As such in the first step of
alignment, the extraction of minimizers or seeds from reference sequences ultimately produces
a set of subsequences that represent the original reference sequences.
In addition to performing this for reference sequences, it is repeated for each query sequence
(i.e. read) that we are mapping. Then, the next step of alignment comprises of comparing the
seeds from the query reference with the seeds from the reference sequence. By doing this, it is
possible to find matches and thus to align the query sequence to the reference sequence. When
matches are found, they are referred to as anchors, and if there are multiple anchors placed in
succession (in a colinear fashion), they are greedily grouped together to produce chains.
For most reads, this ends up with a final match with a high alignment score allowing for the assign-
ment of a read to the reference. However, in cases where we have high levels of redundancy
within the database, or for genomes with high copy-number, each read may be mapped to
two places in the same reference or database, thus yielding multiple chains for the same query
sequence. In this case, it is needed to calculate which of these chains is the primary chain, i.e.
which chain has the higher mapping quality and thus should be kept. This is done by calculating
a mapQ score, and it is in this step that issues may arise. The formula to calculate this mapping
score when faced with two (or more) chains is as such[77]:
mapQ = 40 · f2
f1
· min1, m
10 · log(f1)
where f1 and f2 are chaining scores, m is the number of anchors, and log is the natural logarithm.
Intuitively, longer chains will get higher mapping scores than shorter. However, if the two chains
have equal chaining scores, i.e. if f1 = f2, then the first part of the formula will be multiplying
with zero thus yielding a total mapping score of zero. This result is problematic: with a mapping
==PAGE:100==
88
Appendix
scores of zero, BWA-MEM has no way of resolving the ambiguity between the chains, and thus
one of the chains will be picked at random and labeled as primary. This essentially means that
the read becomes assigned to a random location (within the space of locations that had equal
mapping quality) in the database.
Since all samples of this study were sequenced in paired-end mode, the entire process described
above will be repeated separately for each read pair. As such, after the first read has been ran-
domly assigned due to ambiguous mapping, its mate pair goes through the same process and
is likewise randomly assigned. However due to the random assignment it is unlikely that the two
reads will be assigned to the same location, and thus the alignments will be flagged as improp-
erly paired by BWA-MEM in the SAM-files.
In the MGmapper post-processing step, which is conducted after BWA-mem has aligned query
reads, all reads flagged as improperly paired are filtered away[76]. As such, the way BWA-MEM
resolves ambiguous read mappings ultimately means that a certain amount of alignments will be
discarded in this step. Many of the discarded reads may be true positives, and conversely some
of the accepted randomly placed read pairs may be false positives. As such the read counts
produced by MGmapper may be skewed, and might not represent the true abundancy of all
organisms or genes in the metagenomic dataset.
2. DNA extraction protocol
Important points before starting:
• All centrifugation steps are carried out at room temperature (15–25°C)
• Avoid repeated freezing and thawing of stored samples, since this leads to reduced DNA
size.
Things to do before starting
• Equilibrate the sample to room temperature (15–25°C)
• Heat 2 water baths or heating blocks: one to 56°C and one to 70°C (95°C for G+)
• Equilibrate Buffer AE or distilled water to room temperature for elution.
• Ensure that Buffers AW1 and AW2 have been prepared according to the instructions
• If a precipitate has formed in Buffer ATL or Buffer AL, dissolve by incubating at 56°C.
• Thaw RNAse, and keep it on ice
• Thaw lysozyme, lysostaphin, Proteinase K and keep on ice.
• Prepare set of lo-bind Eppendorf tubes
==PAGE:101==
2. DNA extraction protocol
89
Preparation G+:
• Mark set of eppendorf tubes according to samples
• Add 230 μl of Buffer ATL to eppendorf tubes
• Remove bacteria from culture plate and suspend in Buffer ATL by vigorous stirring
• Add 30μl Lysozyme or 15 μl Lysostaphin
• Incubate for 45 mins at 37ºC
• Add 20 μl proteinase K and 200 μl Buffer AL. Mix by vortexing.
• Incubate at 56°C for 45 min and then for a further 15 min at 95°C. Do not increase the 95*C
incubation.
COOL THE 95°C HEATBLOCK TO 70°C
• Centrifuge for a few seconds.
• Follow the protocol from step 3
Preparation G-:
• Mark set of eppendorf tubes according to samples
• Add 230 μl of Buffer ATL to eppendorf tubes
• Remove bacteria from culture plate and suspend in buffer by vigorous stirring
• Follow the protocol from step 1
DNA Extraction: 1. Add 20 μl proteinase K, mix by vortexing, and incubate at 56°C for 1 hour. Vor-
tex/invert the tube now and again, every 10-15 minutes. Verify visually that cells are dissolved.
No clumps/all liquid and cloudy.
2. Briefly centrifuge the 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube to remove drops from the inside of the lid.
3. First add 4 μl RNase A (100 mg/ml), mix by pulse-vortexing for 15 s, and incubate for 2 min at
room temperature (15–25°C). Briefly centrifuge the 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube to remove drops
from inside the lid before adding 200 μl Buffer AL to the sample. Mix again by pulsevortexing for
15 s, and incubate at 70°C for 10 min. Briefly centrifuge the 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube to remove
drops from inside the lid. It is essential that the sample and Buffer AL are mixed thoroughly to yield
a homogeneous solution. A white precipitate may form on addition of Buffer AL. In most cases it
will dissolve during incubation at 70°C. The precipitate does not interfere with the QIAamp proce-
dure or with any subsequent application.
4. Add 200 μl ethanol (96–100%) to the sample, and mix by pulse-vortexing for 15 s. After mixing,
briefly centrifuge the 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube to remove drops from inside the lid. It is essen-
tial that the sample, Buffer AL, and the ethanol are mixed thoroughly to yield a homogeneous
solution. A white precipitate may form on addition of ethanol. It is essential to apply all of the
==PAGE:102==
90
Appendix
precipitate to the QIAamp Mini spin column. This precipitate does not interfere with the QIAamp
procedure or with any subsequent application.
5. Carefully apply the mixture from step 4 (including the precipitate) to the QIAamp Mini spin
column (in a 2 ml collection tube) without wetting the rim. Close the cap, and centrifuge at
6000 x g (8000 rpm) for 1 min. Place the QIAamp Mini spin column in a clean 2 ml collection
tube (provided), and discard the tube containing the filtrate.* Close each spin column to avoid
aerosol formation during centrifugation. It is essential to apply all of the precipitate to the QI-
Aamp Mini spin column. Centrifugation is performed at 6000 x g (8000 rpm) to reduce noise.
Centrifugation at full speed will not affect the yield or purity of the DNA. If the solution has not
completely passed through the membrane, centrifuge again at a higher speed until all the solu-
tion has passed through.
6. Carefully open the QIAamp Mini spin column and add 500 μl Buffer AW2 without wetting the
rim. Close the cap and centrifuge at full speed (20,000 x g; 14,000 rpm) for 3 min.
7. Recommended: Place the QIAamp Mini spin column in a new 2 ml collection tube (not pro-
vided) and discard the old collection tube with the filtrate. Centrifuge at full speed for 1 min. This
step helps to eliminate the chance of possible Buffer AW2 carryover.
8. Place the QIAamp Mini spin column in a clean 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube (not provided), and
discard the collection tube containing the filtrate. Carefully open the QIAamp Mini spin column
and add 50 μl Buffer AE or distilled water. Incubate at room temperature for 1 min, and then cen-
trifuge at 6000 x g (8000 rpm) for 1 min.
9. Repeat step 9.
Store DNA at -80°C.
3. Rainfall in Guangzhou
==PAGE:103==
3. Rainfall in Guangzhou
91
Figure 21: Plot
showing
rainfall
in
Guangzhou.
Source:
https:www.travelchinaguide.comclimateguangzhou.html.
