==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Modelling of Vortex Generator 
 
 
Lorenzo Maria Catalani 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0312 
July 2019 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Lorenzo Maria Catalani 
Title: Modelling of Vortex Generator 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-031212 
July 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project period:  
February 2019 – July 2019 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Martin Otto Laver Hansen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Giuseppe Tescione 
Suzlon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Modelling of Vortex Generator
Lorenzo
Maria
Catalani
(s162415)
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:4==
DTU Wind Energy
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Alle
Building 403
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone + 45 4525 2525
reception@windenergy.dtu.dk
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The wind energy production ranked second in 2018 among the others renewable ener-
gies with capacity of 564 GW [25]. The wind energy market is spread worldwide and,
especially in the last decade, wind energy captured the attention of the investors who
want to design the next energy market. In this context, the global power production has
to grow and nowadays the industries are facing the challenge of having the rotor size
increased.
The power production is often reduced by a poor aerodynamic performance of the blades
that suffer separated flow or leading edge erosion.
Vortex generators are used currently in the industry to overcome the performance degra-
dation and recover the power production.
These devices are able to capture the high energy flow-stream above the boundary layer
and mix it with the wall-bounded flow, increase the stream-wise shear stress and post-
pone the flow separation. The delay of the aerodynamic stall enhances the performance
of various blade design.
Today the propriety of re-energizing the loss momentum in the boundary layer is cal-
culated mainly with high fidelity methods such as fully resolved CFD, wind tunnel
measurements or field experiments that require high computational cost or time.
The need of fast and reliable prediction models led the research to new middle fidelity
approaches such as XFOILVG [14] and BAY model [5]. However, despite the good ac-
curacy that these models can achieve, they require a different shape function for each
geometry and inflow condition to simulate the effect of the VG.
The aim of this master thesis is to present a new numerical model to estimate the circu-
lation released in the flow by a vane type vortex generator. The advantage of this code
is to have an extremely fast computation time compared to the middle fidelity models
now in use, thus it can be used to decrease the downtime needed to tuning the source
term.
The proposed model is based on a lifting line approach and it is enhanced by including
the leading edge suction analogy and the effect of a sheared velocity.
The results obtained from the model are compared to available database in the literature
and an LDA experiment is performed to test two Vortex Generator models. In conclu-
sion, it is demonstrated that the model proposed in this thesis is able to well predict the
circulation released in the flow by a single vortex generator.
Lastly, the model allows to input six different vane geometries and compare the results.
Three promising shapes are qualitatively discussed in terms of form drag and non di-
mensional circulation.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master degree
in Wind Energy.
Kongens Lyngby, July 11, 2019
Lorenzo Maria Catalani (s162415)
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Finally here we are. I am writing the acknowledgement of my Master Thesis. I am so
proud of myself to having achieved the goal that I have always wanted to achieve: obtain
a scientific mindset.
Besides obtaining a Master of Science in Engineering, I am proud that I dedicate most
of my life to acquire more knowledge. I started to observe the Nature in a different way.
I started to actually see the balance of forces that rule our day-life.
If I were strong enough to become what I am today, I must to thank my family to whom I
owe most of my accomplishments. Doriana, Enrico, Janique, Massimo, le Nonne e le Zie.
I’d like to thank who made all this possible.
My Supervisor in DTU Martin Otto
Laver Hansen. You gave to me the space to make my ideas diverge and the experience
to make them converge again. I learnt a lot during this project, and I thank you for that.
I also thank my Co-Supervisor in Suzlon, Giuseppe Tescione. You gave to me precious
knowledge in pills. I also had the chance to directly see what does the Energy Industry
need and what I can bring with my technical skills. I really thank you for all the feed-
back that you gave to me. Your meticulousness helped me to maintain the focus on the
big picture of the thesis.
A big support during my routine was given by Lisa. I really thank you Lilli, for all the
hugs and ”coraggio!” that you gave to me. No more words are needed here.
And finally I thank all the other persons that made my danish experience worth to be
done.
The Matgiulol house -Mati, Sandrino, Olly, and Peppe-, the Roma Nord crew -Chicco,
Teo, and Peppe deNovo-, the Dream Team United... thank you a lot guys.
I’ll see you around!
Lorenzo
July 11, 2019
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
Acronyms
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
State of Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Structure of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Vortex Generators
13
2.1
Flow separation over an airfoil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
The effect of the VG on the flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Background Theory
21
3.1
From Potential flow theory to Lifting Line Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
The Vortex Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
The Aerodynamic Model
35
4.1
Structure of the main code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
Validation of the code for high AR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Results from Inviscid Lift Slope theories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4
Comparison of the aeromodel with the result proposed by Wendt . . . . .
46
4.5
Vortex generator shape proposed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Experiment
57
5.1
Goal of the test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.2
Clean case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.3
LDA on Vortex Generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
==PAGE:12==
viii
Contents
6
Discussion of results
65
7
Conclusion
69
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A
74
A.1 Database created by Wendt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.2 Glauert and Prandtl Algorithms coded in the aeromodel
. . . . . . . . .
76
A.3 Type of stall on airfoils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
A.4 Kuchemann Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:13==
Acronyms
AR Aspect Ratio
BO Boundary Offset
CFD Computational Fluid Dynamics
FVM Finite Volume Method
LCoE Levelized Cost of Energy
LDA Laser Doppler Anemometer
LESA Leading Edge Suction Analogy
LLT Lifting Line Theory
LST Lifting Surface Theory
SPIV Stereoscopic Particle Image Velocimetry
RoC Rate of Convergence
sod Span over Boundary layer thickness
TBL Turbulent Boundary Layer
VCD Vane Criteria Design
==PAGE:14==
x
==PAGE:15==
Nomenclature
α = angle of attack, general meaning
β = angle of incidence of a Vg respect to the incoming flow [deg]
Γ = circulation distribution [m2/s]
δ = boundary layer thickness [m]
ϵ = error committed
Λ = swept angle [deg]
ϵ = mean error committed
µ = dynamic viscosity [Pa s]
ν = kinematic viscosity = µ
ρ[m2/s]
σ = standard deviation
ρ = density [m2/s]
Φ = Scalar Potential = ⃗u = ∇ϕ [m2/s]
Ψ = Swept Angle complementary = 90 −Λ [deg]
θ = Radial coordinate [1/rad]
τ = shear stress [Pa]
χ = relaxation factor [/]
a0 = local lift slope [/]
a3D = global lift slope [/]
b = wing span [m]
c = chord span [m]
CL = global lift coefficient [/] =
L
1
2ρV 2
∞S
Cl = local lift coefficient [/]
h = height of a Vg, equal to a wing span [m]
l = length of a Vg, equal to a wing chord [m]
Kp = global lift slope [/]
Kv = vortex lift factor [/]
Q∞= Inlet constant velocity [m/s]
S = Surface [m2]
⃗U = Velocity vector field [m/s]
Influence Parameters: β, AR, sod, l, h, Q∞
==PAGE:16==
xii
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The efficiency of a machine is defined as the ratio of the useful work performed by the
machine to the total energy expended to produce that work.
If a machine designer aims to improve its efficiency, he/she has to extrapolate more work
from the machine or decrease the energy needed to perform that work.
Focusing on wind turbine sector, the efficiency of a wind turbine is quantified by the
amount of kinetic energy in the wind that is converted to mechanical energy and elec-
tricity. Another key performance indicator of a wind turbine is the Capacity Factor,
namely the amount of energy produced by a generator respect to what it could produce
if it functioned all the time at peak capacity.
The reader will understand that if the wind energy sector targets to increase the world-
wide power production, the research must focus on 1) wind farm site evaluation, to
increase the capacity factor, 2) on transformation from kinetic energy to mechanic en-
ergy, to improve the rotor aerodynamic and control and 3) on transformation from
mechanic energy to electric energy, to improve the generator efficiency.
Although the wind turbines must produce more energy to match the growing energy
demand and the scarcity of conventional resources, the most interesting parameter that
the industries want to improve is the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCoE). The lower the
LCoE, the more convenient for the industries and investors to invest in wind turbines
and wind farms, and thus promoting even further the wind energy resource.
In the big picture of the wind energy market, the Vortex Generators improve the aerody-
namic performance of the rotor, thus they help to increase the extracted kinetic energy
from the wind.
The Vortex Generator is able to overcome two detriments that occur on wind turbines.
1) The wind turbines have a design lifetime of 20 years in which they are exposed to
continuous impacts with solid and liquid particles. The blade erosion has a terrible
effect on the LCoE, because on one side the cost of maintenance increases, that implies
to stop the wind turbines and cease the power production, and on the other side the
blade roughness decrease the pressure jump across the blade especially at high Reynolds
number [1] causing a reduction of blade load and thus a loss of Annual Energy Produc-
tion (AEP) [45].
As a result, the LCoE increased. 2) The cross-section of a blade toward the root has to
be thick enough to hold the bending moment of the blade, thus the chosen blade profile
has a structural function rather than being aerodynamic. Moreover, close to the root
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
the flow is 3D due to the high interference of the rotor and root separation is likely to
occur. The global lift is then reduces and as a result the wind turbine face a loss in
AEP.
1.1
Motivation
Vortex generator are tempting devices for flow control applications. They are relatively
small and they can be applied on different machines: race cars, boats, wind turbines,
pipes, supersonic jets, civil aircraft, and in each case the vortex generator give a different
performance benefit.
Despite the commercial use of vortex generators and their wide range of applications,
the fluid dynamic behaviour is still under investigation. The flow of over vortex gener-
ator is affected by several parameters and often only wind tunnel experiments or field
test can provide reliable data of the performance achieved; this is why new and better
aerodynamic models have been under developing for more than 50 years.
The latest effort to provide reliable model for small computational work has led to the e.g.
BAY model [5]. The BAY model simulates the effect of the Vortex Generator through a
Finite Volume Methods (FVM) without inserting the actual shape in the meshing. The
effect is mimicked by the introduction of an added lift term that depends on a coefficient
CV G. The convergence of the model depends on various factors that are chosen by the
designer. This implies that there is not a single approach to the problem and the result
might come after more than one attempt on selecting CV G.
The BAY model thus does not link the coefficient to the any actual size, thickness and
cross-section profile of the vortex generator[33].
Time managing and result accuracy of the BAY model may benefit if the lift source
term input in the BAY model would be the output of the presented thesis, that links
the circulation to the geometry of a given vortex generator.
Although the Vortex Generators (VGs) have being used since 1940 [49], the research
has still many gaps to fill; among the whole gamma of different geometries and sizes,
a particular configuration that stand out are not found yet. It means that a new VG
configuration must be optimized for each flow type and boundary condition.
1.2
State of Art
Some relevant studies will be highlighted in this section, in order to give an overview of
experiment, numerical model, an application about vortex generators.
A deep introduction on Vortex Generator will be given in chapter 2. Figure 1.1b and
Figure 1.1a give an insight of what a vortex generator look like and the concept of pair
==PAGE:19==
1.2 State of Art
3
-two vane type mounted near each other- and array -more VG pairs mounted on a row-.
(a) Example of VG pairs. (Source Ya-Ling He)
(b) Example of VG pairs and arrays (Source
Reynald Bur)
Figure 1.1
1.2.1
Experiments
This subsection will show previous research on experimental measurement of VGs. Most
of them were carried on VGs arrays, that is the most frequent layout. The most used
configuration are named respectively Co-Rotating and Counter-Rotating.
Some of the presented research is focused on measuring the circulation generated by a
vortex generator and confirm that the stall, either on a flat plate or on a bump, is delayed.
In Velte et al. [55], a SPIV is conducted on a row of Vortex Generators mounted up a
bump shape.
The VG-array was made of 3 VG-pairs in the configuration of triangular fin common-
down (CMD), while the bump was needed to model the adverse pressure gradient that
a wing creates over the suction surface.
The results clearly show the effect of mounting VGs to delay the separation point be-
hind the bump, due to the strengthen high momentum flux that tip longitudinal vortices
convect toward the wall.
Lastly, a Large Eddy Simulation was conducted, giving a good agreement with the ex-
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
perimental data.
In another research from Hansen et al. [24], it is observed in a wind tunnel test the
effect of a row of aerodynamically shaped vortex generators (aVG), triangular fin like,
mounted on a extruded wing section. A comparison between aerodynamically shaped
VGs and rectangular cross section VGs (rVG) compared to the clean case has shown
the difference in terms of force coefficients.
The aVG reaches the same performance of a conventional one for a lower angle of inci-
dence, as well as an increment of lift-to-drag ratio of the wing respect to the rVG case.
The research presented in [32] by Lin is one of the most cited in the applied aerodynamic
research about Vortex Generator. The idea behind the study of Lin et al. is to ensure
the minimum required wallward momentum transfer and avoid counterproductive VG
dimension that would increase the drag. The experiments show that counter rotating
VG pairs better counter the effect of adverse pressure gradient on boundary layer sepa-
ration, as well as greater eliminate the laminar separation bubble when occurs.
Lastly it is then demonstrated and advised to select low profile VGs (0.1 < hV G
δ
< 0.5)
when the separation point along the wing chord line is approximately known.
Godard et al. [10] run both a wind tunnel experiment and a SPIV to test a VG array in
both co-rotating and counter-rotating submerged in an adverse pressure gradient. The
study was aimed to detect the vortex centres. Some optimal value were found, such as
incidence angle and VG pairs spacing, although it is highlighted that the different nature
of the influence parameters make an optimal configuration arduous to be detected.
It is found that the influence of the adverse pressure gradient reduces the benefit of the
VGs array. As a conclusion, it is found that counter rotating VGs has more stable vor-
tices, in terms of vortex center, and has a long lasting effect, in terms of vortex intensity
and skin friction at the wall.
Velte, in [54], run both SPIV and LDA experiment in order to characterise and model
vortex generator induced vortices. The main result of the paper is to define the helical
symmetry of vortices.
Again Godard & Stanislas in [22] conducted a parametric study of VG array of tri-
angular fin both co-rotating and counter-rotating, mounted on a bump shape by using
both a PIV experiment and a hot wire anemometer.
Optimal influence parameter are selected in terms of skin friction improvement along
the downstream direction where the onset of stall appears.
The paper as a final remark, underlines that triangular VG shaped produce a better im-
provement than the rectangular ones, as well as provoking less penalty drag. Moreover,
they have found that counter-rotating array layout is more effective than co-rotating
layout.
==PAGE:21==
1.2 State of Art
5
Another parametric study was recently conducted by Baldacchino et al. in [3]. In
this paper, an oil visualisation experiment has been conducted on a triangular fin VG
array in counter-rotating configuration, varying all the influence parameters. Important
in this research is the linearity relation between the circulation and the product between
vane height and free stream velocity (), as well as the opportunity to restore the loss of
performance due to leading edge wing degradation.
One of the output parameter checked is the max circulation, that will be deeply analysed
in this present thesis.
Lastly the better performance of a counter-rotating configuration is confirmed.
A parametric study was also conducted by Wendt [56] on rectangular vane type VGs.
The importance of teh research is to have presented a matrix database where comparing
single vane VG to VG-pairs with the same geometry and to compare the circulation
released downstream.
It has been faced the challenge to find an experiment database made on single vortex
generators for different geometry or influence parameters, that can be useful to validate
the model of the present thesis. Wendt database will be taken into consideration in this
work.
1.2.2
Numerical models
Here in this section will be outlines some numerical models that calculate either the
forces or the circulation acting on a VG.
In the paper of Poole et al. [42], 3 level of fidelity are summarised and here reported.
They are worth to be remembered:
• High fidelity physics: Full iterative CFD simulation with fine computational meshes.
• Medium fidelity physics: Iterative simulation with a term to mimic the effect of
the VG.
• Low fidelity physics: Analytical model without the need for iterative solutions.
Concurrently to the database, Wendt as in [56] had developed a circulation model,
starting from the lifting line of Prandtl [43] and correcting with an hyperbolic tangent
function to model the influence of the boundary layer. The results are good, consider-
ing the low fidelity physics model. The percentage error between the model proposed
by Wendt and the experiment run is on average −14%, thus on average the numerical
model found by Wendt underestimate the experiment results.
Lastly, the research of Polhamus [41] and Lamar [31] on the so-called leading-edge
suction analogy, focused on the pressure suction peak released from the reattachment of
the the vortex. By a practical point of view, both leading edge vortex and tip vortex
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
can reattach to the surface and thus creating a surplus of lift.
The research piloted by Poole [42] was to include the Polhamus suction analogy in the
lifting line theory, in order to take into count the added lift created by the edge vortex.
Poole used the database created by Wendt [56] to validate his model. The model intro-
duced by Poole differs from the experimental results of approx. −4%. That model has
been used in this thesis as a starting point.
The BAY model, coded by Bender, Anderson and Yagle [5], takes into count the
effect of VG as a lift-source term in the Navier Stokes equation without meshing the
VG surface; this allows a lower required amount of computational effort, although the
source term function must be tuned for each study case.
Florentie [20] has shown that a BAY model is a good trade off between computational
effort and accuracy, because while not all the flow patterns, such as secondary vortices,
are solved, the initial circulation is well predicted
Dudek [16] from NASA Research Center in Ohio implemented into Wind-US Navier–
Stokes code the effect of a vane type VG as a source term, similarly to the BAY model.
Furthermore he included in the code the pressure gradient effect by simulating a micro
ramp.
Recently Stam [48] has further validated the BAY model on wind turbine airfoil, and
examined both rectangular and triangular VGs. The research has found that the model
has more accurate result as the Reynolds number increase, due to the assumption made
to model the turbulence.
About high fidelity model, Gamiz et al. [18] have utilized the RANS method to sim-
ulate four different vane-type of VG, in order to capture the primary vortex shed by
rectangular VGs. The results obtained were remarkable, and some optimal geometry
are advised.
1.2.3
Application and performance enhancement
due to VG
The goal of this paragraph is to outline the potential of installing VGs and especially
installing them on wind turbine blades; the most relevant achievement is the increase of
power output or AEP in wind turbine application.
Griffin [23] in 1996 has investigated on mounting CoR VG array on a stall regulated
wind turbine AWT-26, finding out that no AEP improvement has been achieved. The
==PAGE:23==
1.2 State of Art
7
research exposed that the wind site heavily affects the benefit gained from including VG
on the blade. The VG layout depends of the inflow conditions that are likely to change
during the whole year, hence it can be said that the CL/CD parameters is depending on
the wind speed.
On the other side, Øye [38] found that an increase of 4% is achieved on a Variable Speed
Pitch Regulated wind turbine, mounting a CoR VG array toward the blade root.
Similarly, Sullivan studied the effect of applying a VG array along all the blade. He
found that applying the VG along the root increased the AEP of +20%, whereas a
smaller increase is achieved if moving the VG array toward the tip.
Bak et al. [47] has found out the beneficial effect that a VG array can have on a DTU
10MW Wind Turbine when the leading edge erodes due to aggressive weather conditions.
The increase of surface roughness at the inset of the boundary layer produce loss effects,
such as the premature stall, that are recovered by the vorticity introduced downstream
by the passive controller. In the worst condition the AEP loss due to leading edge ero-
sion is found to be about −5%, while the re-gain due to VG installation is up to +3%.
Bak advises to mount the VGs as a retrofitting solution in wind turbine site with ag-
gressive blade erosion.
A similar study was always conducted by Bak et al [2] on a Vestas V52 850kW pitch
regulated wind turbine.
The study focused on quantifying the aggressiveness of weather condition and thus the
amount of erosion. It is found that the re-gain of AEP and the blade surface roughness
are proportional and in the present study the AEP increased of +4.8% for the most
severe roughness.
It is also highlighted the counter productive effect of mounting the VGs in a wrong
position, that would lead to heavier loads and increase the drag penalty.
Several official company website ([13],[39],[9], [7]) promote the use of VGs to enhance
AEP production; promoting the vortex generator today seems to be the correct invest-
ment for the next energy market.
1.2.4
Previous research on low AR wing
The present thesis is focused on Vortex Generators, that are half-wings with aspect ratio
typically lower than one. This section illustrates some relevant studies conducted on low
AR wing. The knowledge obtained by the following papers were extremely useful for
the understanding and the writing of the model.
Most of the research presented are corrections to the lifting line presented by Prandtl[43].
The lifting line theory is given as known and it is not presented in this chapter.
==PAGE:24==
8
1 Introduction
The work of Jones [26] focused on very low aspect ratio slender delta wing. He found
that only the upstream span distribution affect the circulation, and furthermore, that
the center of pressure moves upstream if the aspect ratio decreases. Furthermore, he
proposed a formula to connect the lift coefficient and the angle of attack.
Some years later, Multhopp in 1950 [36] proposed a lifting surface approach to determi-
nate the spanwise and chordwise loading distribution. For a general wing, with arbitrary
AR and sweep, he proposed to find a lifting line on 2 pivot points along the chord. The
general approach is anyway similar to what Glauert proposed [21], thus assuming a
trigonometrical unknown loading that can satisfy the pivot points, and finally find the
Fourier coefficients. Moreover, the author limit his derivation for 1 < AR < 6.
The theory of Multhopp were not directly used in this thesis, but instead it were widely
used by other authors as a starting point to outline new theories on low AR wings.
Kuchemann [28] in 1952, used the lifting surface approach to modify to the sectional
lift slope a3D for AR →0. The author also confirmed that the center of pressure moves
toward the leading edge for smaller aspect ratio, as well as find how to estimate the drag
added by the heavy tip vortices.
Polhamus [41] in 1966 described the leading edge suction analogy. The elegance of
Polhamus solution, as stated in the paper of Kulfan, is to have found a way to predict a
non-linear lift by using a linear theory. This theory will be more elaborated in section 3.2
Years later Lamar [31] investigated more in what Polhamus did. Lamar detected that
the suction-pressure due to the vortex reattachment can be produced independently by
the side-edge or by the leading-edge; in this way the suction analogy has acquired also
the information about the wing planform. The research were more deeply investigated,
thus some reference value are presented in the paper about how much the AR influences
the side-edge-vortex and the leading-edge-vortex.
Particular attention will be given to the non-linear lift produced by a rectangular straight
wing or by a swept/tapered/cropped/delta wing.
Kulfan in [29] performed an intense study on leading edge vortex development. Great
explanations are given about how the leading edge vortex is created and how geometry
affects the vortex development. He discovered that suppressing the leading edge vortex
in the inboard part of a wing can reduced the drag-due-to-lift produced.
Furthermore, the paper links the wing geometry, such as sweep angle or notch angle, to
the production of the vortex-lift.
This paper is useful to sketch new VG geometry.
Similarly, the Master thesis of Van Jaarsveld [51] gives some theoretical background
to understand the decay of the vortex, the wandering of the vortex when is single and
when is in-pair, as can be in a small AR wing. Nevertheless, it gives some explanations
of how much external turbulence does affect the vortex destruction.
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Objective
9
Velte et al [52], [53] conducted a research on multiple structures of tip vortices and
confirmed the helical symmetry of these. She found that two distinct vortex structure
are present, the first one composed by tip vortex and horseshoe root vortices and the
second on by the secondary smaller vortices. The presence of secondary structures af-
fect the symmetry and the stability of the primary vortex system. The vortex structures
detected in the papers were also found during the LDA experiment of this thesis.
Sathaye [46] measured in a wind tunnel the pressure distribution over a rectangular
wing with AR = 1, for two different angle of attack α = 6◦and α = 15◦and three
Reynolds number Re = 30k, Re = 36k and Re = 84k, putting the pressure port on
different span-wise location and chord-wise location. A good database was found in
order to detect some typical feature of pressure distribution for small aspect ratio wing
and confirm that actually a suction pressure peak is present when a leading edge vortex
develops.
1.3
Objective
The objective of this thesis is to create a simple aerodynamic model, here referred as
aeromodel, that can calculate the initial circulation released by a single vortex generator.
More accurate models today, referred as middle fidelity models, require a specific tuning
for each geometry and inflow condition to simulate the effect of the VG. The advantage of
this code is to have an extremely fast computation time compared to the middle fidelity
models now in use, thus it can be used to decrease the downtime needed to tuning the
source term.
1.4
Scope
The steps to achieve this Objective are here listed, and a flowchart is sketched in Fig-
ure 1.2.
1 The solver will firstly import the geometry of the VG, and all the influence param-
eters (listed in Nomenclature, chapter ).
2 Then a 1D grid mesh is created, in order to calculate the circulation on the VG for
each span-station. This approach is here referred as strip interpolation. A sketch
of the interpolation is given in Figure 4.6.
3 A lifting line approach is used in order to find the circulation (Γ) distribution
through two different algorithms, labelled as solver. The pros and cons of these
two ways to obtain Γ will be discussed in detail in chapter 4, while the background
theory needed to develop the solver is presented in chapter 3.
==PAGE:26==
10
1 Introduction
4 The initial circulation obtained by computing the lifting line is then compared to
the circulation found in the experiments performed by Wendt [56] with the same
set up of geometry and inflow condition.
5 A comparison for all the dataset taken into count is shown as final result.
In conclusion, among all the models and methods currently used to predict the initial
circulation of a vortex generator, the candidate chose to develop and use a simple, fast,
and reliable model which can calculate the circulation of several different geometries and
configuration and be used as a first estimation for higher fidelity models.
1.5
Structure of the thesis
Chapter 1 presented the introduction to the thesis, the gap to fill in the research, some
previous studies conducted on vortex generators and low AR wing.
Chapter 2 presents an introduction to the vortex generators, where they find the most
suitable applications and what are the challenges linked to them.
Chapter 3 highlights the theoretical background need to develop the phenomenology
of the problem, mainly focusing on the lifting line and on the vortex model. Moreover,
the suction leading edge analogy will be presented.
Chapter 4 focuses on the proposed model of this thesis. The chapter first present the
structure of the code, then validate the robustness of the finally compare to a specific
database taken into consideration. Lastly, some vortex generator shapes are presented
as promising to be further investigated.
Chapter 5 is dedicated to the experiment performed at DTU on two design vortex
generators.
Chapter 6 recap results obtained and remarks the highlight the thesis
Future work improvement and conclusion close the thesis, in Chapter 7.
The Appendix gives a side-knowledge that might be enlightening for the curious reader.
==PAGE:27==
1.5 Structure of the thesis
11
Figure 1.2: Flow chart of the Model
==PAGE:28==
12
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2
Vortex Generators
Although a background knowledge has been given in the State Of Art (section 1.2) and
in the Introduction (chapter 1), this chapter will explain what is a Vortex Generator,
why is broadly used in the industry and compare the advantages and disadvantages of
mounting a VG over a wind turbine’s blade .
Figure 2.1: Sketch of a triangular Vortex Generator (Source Nestor Garcia )
Figure 2.2: CFD simulation of a VG pair (Source Gamiz [19])
A vortex generator is a device of various shapes that is assembled over a relatively bigger
surface. The simplest geometry, one of the most used in the wind energy industry, is a
vertical flat plate tilted respect to the incoming flow.
Figure 2.1 and Figure 2.2 show the form and the effect of a VG on the down stream flow.
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Vortex Generators
The former shows clearly that the vortex, sketched by a red dotted-line, increases the
velocity in the close wall-region; as a consequence the shear stress enhances, as will be
presented in the following paragraph. The vortex generator is sketched by a triangular
black figure.
The latter shows a CFD analysis performed by Gamiz [19], where the fluid filaments
collide on the vertical plat, roll-up at the edge in a vortex and course downstream. The
vortex generator has a rectangular-plate shape
The roll-up of the vortex clearly depends on the angle of incidence, or equally meaning
the angle of attack; the angle of incidence β creates a pressure difference between the
two sides of the vane, that turns into circulation and lift. The flow moving in each side
tends to meet at the edge (or tip) where curls. The phenomenology of producing lift
from a flow past a flat plate will be clarified in chapter 3.
2.1
Flow separation over an airfoil
Let us here introduce the concept of shear stress and how it is linked to the separation
over an airfoil.
The shear stress is the viscous force that locally shears the horizontal velocity along the
normal direction of the surface, as seen in Figure 2.4. It is the force that causes the
velocity profile, highlight in red, to varies from zero, where no-slip condition is verified,
to the top of the boundary layer where the horizontal velocity is equal to the uniform
speed.
The formula that relate the force to the velocity profile is
τ = µ∂u
∂y
(2.1)
Hence the magnitude of the shear force and the shape of the velocity profile, described
by the gradient ∂u
∂y , are linked.
The velocity profile evolves while proceeding along the airfoil from the leading edge to
the trailing edge.
Figure 2.3 shows the relative pressure coefficient distribution over an airfoil NACA4412.
This analysis gives a qualitative understanding of how the pressure and the velocity
change along the chord of an airfoil. Recalling the Bernoulli law [30] in the most sim-
plified version, pressure and velocity are related by p
ρ + u2
2 = const, so that when the
velocity increases the pressure must decrease and vice versa.
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Flow separation over an airfoil
15
Figure 2.3: Pressure coefficient of NACA4412, α = 14◦, Re = 105 (Source NASA)
Figure 2.4: Backflow and onset of separation
It can be seen in Figure 2.3 that close to the trailing edge of the airfoil, at a certain
chordwise location Xloc behind the point of maximum thickness, the pressure coefficient
gets steady and reaches a plateau region. The plateau region, where the pressure sta-
bilise, indicates that the trailing edge region (Xloc−Xtrail.edge) has stalled. The flow over
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Vortex Generators
the airfoil feels a so-called adverse pressure gradient, meaning that the flow is slowed
down by the pressure gradient.
A so-called backflow is likely to occur, meaning that the flow moving on the lower side of
the airfoil (pressure side) turns the corner at the trailing edge and moves on the upper
side toward the leading edge, from right to left. The flow that was originally moving
on the upper side, from left to right, collides with the backflow and detached from the
surface. This phenomena is called separation.
The separation is unwanted and dangerous, especially for lifting surfaces such as aircraft
wings. If the fluid separates the total lift of the wing would abruptly decreases and a
particular form of the drag, called pressure drag that mostly depends on the size of the
wake downstream the airfoil, suddenly increases.
This is why flow control application are born. The aim is to avoid the rise of such adverse
pressure gradient that slows down the flow and avoid, or at least delay, the separation
process.
It worth to say that the separation point varies with the airfoil camber and thickness,
angle of attack and Reynolds number.
Lin [32] shows that if the location of separation is known, small VGs are more efficient.
This is because, as better explained in the following paragraph, the circulation released
by the vortex generator must ensure separation delay without affecting the flow too
much downstream. Indeed, the vortex released by a VG collapses after a certain dis-
tance from the VG location [35],[51] and as a result the turbulence increases downstream
in the flow. If other wing component locates in this new turbulent region, the overall
performance decreases.
Same research points out that the benefit of a VG enhances on a multi-wing system. The
pressure distribution changes both upstream and downstream the VG location. This is
why often the VGs are placed on the most downstream flap over multi-wing of civil
aircraft.
The separation can be quantified by the shear stress at the wall τw. The fluid detaches
at the separation point Xloc, so that the vertical gradient of the velocity at that point
vanishes.
If ∂u
∂y Xloc
= 0, then also the wall shear stress at that point vanishes.
2.2
The effect of the VG on the flow
To recap, the separation process is linked to the shear stress.
When the adverse pressure gradient slows the fluid down, then the wall shear stress
tends to vanishes and the fluid is more likely to detach form the surface.
A vortex generator delays the separation because it introduces a near-wall flow that
==PAGE:33==
2.2 The effect of the VG on the flow
17
enhance the near-wall velocity (so that ∂u
∂y Xloc
> 0) and re-enhances the momentum loss
by the averse pressure gradient.
This is done by the tip vortex released, that capture the high momentum flow from the
top and transfer it down toward the wall.
The results is that the boundary layer is re-energized.
The boundary layer downstream the VG becomes turbulent, in the sense that in a tur-
bulent flow there is a significant exchange of fluid perpendicular to the free-stream
direction due to vortex influence. The shear profile ∂u
∂y is greater in a TBL than in a
laminar boundary layer, where rather the fluid particles are aligned along the streamwise
direction.
The increase in pressure drag due to the fluid detachment is prevented by the separation
delay. For instance, when separation occurs, the ratio CL/CD drops down; the reduction
of pressure drag due to the VG presence recovers it.
In conclusion, the vortex released by the VG switches the boundary layer to be from
laminar to turbulent, and for the reasons explained before a turbulent boundary later is
more resistant to adverse pressure gradient that is responsible to promote separation.
Passive flow control in wind energy such as the introduction of Vortex Generators has
born with two main objectives: 1) to recover the premature stall due to leading edge
erosion and 2) to delay the stall in the inboard region of a rotor where the flow is highly
3D.
Let us separate the two cases:
1. The wind turbines have a design lifetime of 20 years in which they are exposed
to continuous impacts with solid and liquid particles, thus the blade accumulate
damage on each heavy weather situation. The blade erosion has a terrible effect
on the AEP [17], because the rugged surface accelerates the separation phenomena
especially at the leading edge where the erosion is higher due to the more frequent
impact with airborne particles.
The introduction of the vortex released by the vortex generator forces the boundary
layer to become turbulent, so that the transition to turbulent boundary layer due
to the augmented roughness is avoided.
The erosion is higher when the speed impact is higher, thus often these VGs are
places from the mid-span toward the root. Often are referred as tip-VGs.
2. The cross-section of a blade toward the root has to be thick enough to hold the
bending moment of the blade, thus the airfoil chosen has a structural function
rather than being aerodynamic. In the inner region the flow is 3D due to the high
interference of the rotor and root separation is likely to occur. The introduction
of Vortex Generators close to the root, called often root-VGs has demonstrated
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Vortex Generators
to delay or avoid separation and thus avoid reduction of performance in terms of
CL/CD.
In addiction, Vortex Generators are attractive because they are lightweight, easy to
print by fast prototyping and the don’t require any power supply. In the present thesis,
the cost of a single vortex generator, manufactured in DTU, cost about 1DKK per VG
printed. [6].
However, the wind energy industry generally uses another approach. A Vortex Genera-
tor must keep the adhesion property and robustness for a lifespan of 20 years at least,
like a wind turbine. In order to give these long-lasting proprieties to the device, the
manufacturing process today is made through molding injection, [12], [34], that however
makes the cost of a single VG more expensive.
The VG effect is local, in the sense that the released vortex affects the boundary layer
locally; but extending the local effect to a global region, such as several meters along
a blade, is done by placing multiple and equal VG in array layout, as seen in Figure 1.1b.
On the other side, the main disadvantage of mounting a vertical plate over the blade
is that the overall form drag increases. That added drag due to the presence of VGs is
called drag penalty.
To minimise the drag penalty, Lin [32] has introduced the submerged VGs; these devices
are on a smaller scale (h
δ < 0.5). The minimum drag is reached when it is ensured that
the VG will produce the minimum added shear stress to avoid the separation at a certain
downstream location.
Another disadvantage is the action of mounting the VGs on the blades. The turbine
must be arrested and the downtime decreases the turbine’s availability, while the cost
of maintenance and operation increase. However, the ordinary maintenance occurs each
periodic time and in that scheduled downtime the VGs can be mounted.
Lastly, it worth to say that a VG layout can be optimal for a specific inflow condition
during the year [23], and be disadvantage the rest of the year, so a substantial increase
of AEP can be partially reached.
Although the potential performance of including VGs along a wind turbine blade is ben-
eficial, it is clear that a careful design must be ensured.
Despite the easy geometry of a vane Vortex Generator, the fluid dynamics that govern
the causes and the effect are complicated to model and to predict.
Listed-points show the variables that affect the decision-making of mounting the VGs
on a wind turbine.
1. Optimise the circulation respect to the drag penalty. Bray [8] proposed a non
dimensional parameter Γ∗
CD
, here referred as λ, as a Vane Criteria Design (VCD).
==PAGE:35==
2.2 The effect of the VG on the flow
19
Optimising VCD requires that the boundary layer and the transition region are
both known.
2. Optimise the VG location along the chordwise direction of the blade. This implies
that the transition region is known
3. Optimise the VG location along the spanwise direction of the blade. This distin-
guish the root-VGs from the tip-VGs so the spanwise position depends on what
kind of source of separation the designer is dealing with.
4. Optimise the VG-layout that can generate benefit during the whole year in a
specific site. The wind speed changes during the year and it has been found that
the Weibull distribution often fits well the wind speed distribution. A trade-off on
the VG-layout must be found.
5. Finding the best simulation tool. Often a simulation approach is preferred to a field
test, in order to reduce the cost. However, a single CFD simulation to detect the
flow behaviour over a VG-array mounted on a blade can last for days. Moreover,
more than one case scenario must be taken into count and several simulation
must be run. Each kind of simulation (fully CFD, BAY model, or the presented
aeromodel) are a trade-off between computational effort and accuracy.
The model presented in this thesis tackles the first and the fifth points.
==PAGE:36==
20
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3
Background Theory
This chapter presents the theory needed to understand why a Vortex Generator can
produce lift and vortices.
Furthermore will be analysed both the assumptions needed to build the aeromodel (based
on a lifting line approach) and the assumptions of the lifting line theory that become
weak in VG application.
3.1
From Potential flow theory to Lifting Line
Theory
As a starting point, the potential flow solutions will be briefly explained, that will work
as a foundation of all the assumptions described hereafter.
When considering an irrotational and frictionless fluid, moving at subsonic speed, the
set of Navier Stokes equations reduce to a single equation, referred as Laplace equation.
From the mass conservation, expressed through the divergence of the velocity
∇· ⃗u = 0
and substituting the velocity vector ⃗u by its scalar potential Φ, it is obtained the Laplace
equation of the velocity vector field.
∇2Φ = 0
The advantage of dealing with the Laplace equation to describe a potential flow, is that
analytical closed form solutions actually exist. Moreover, a general potential solution
can be easily written by a super-position of linear known terms such as a doublet, a
source or a uniform flow [27].
It is worth to remark how the Mathematics and the Physics get closer in certain situa-
tions; the Laplace equation is part of the ”elliptical partial differential equations”, and,
as a general rule, these ones describe systems in a stationary state. Their solutions are
affected by the full domain and boundary conditions and the effects from everywhere
are already propagated everywhere.
This is why the effect of a Vortex Generator, although the assumption of steady state
==PAGE:38==
22
3 Background Theory
is not always true, can affect the pressure upstream the VG itself. (Fig 14 in [32]).
In real life, aerodynamic forces are created by the interaction of body and flow in relative
movement, where viscosity plays a fundamental role.
How can a potential theory (inviscid and irrotational flow) ensure a lifting force and a
drag force, how to treat the viscosity?
One of the simplest models to account for the lift is the thin airfoil theory [21], where
a zero-thickness flat plate is modelled as a vortex sheet along the edge, as sketched in
Figure 3.1a.
The lift coefficient of a flat plate is approximated by :
Cl = a0(α −αL0)
(3.1)
where
a0 = 2π
(3.2)
is the inviscid lift slope, valid also for a good range of real airfoil for small angle of
attack (typically smaller than 8◦−10◦), and αL0 is the angle so that the lift coefficient
is zero. The latter parameter is mainly depending on the plate’s camber and the bigger
the camber, the greater the Cl.
The inviscid sectional lift slope a0 will be further discussed in the chapter, mainly re-
garding the assumptions made and the limitations of its application.
Referring to Figure 3.1a, each vortex, acting on a small piece of flat plate dx has a vortex
strength per unit length equal to γ [m/s], while the incoming flow is moving along the
positive ˆx−axis. The technique of concentrating all the vorticity into a infinitely thin
layer around the body contour is often referred as lumping vortex procedure. As can be
detected from the sketch, the vortex sheet is properly the difference of velocity across a
infinity-thin layer.
The circulation around the body is found by
Γ =
∫c
0 γ(x)dx
[m2/s]
(3.3)
Besides the lumping vortex approach, another way to model the lift on an airfoil is by
introducing the bound circulation.
Lift requires a pressure gradient between the upper and the lower sides of the airfoil to
exists. The Bernoulli equation [30] states that the faster the flow moves the lower is the
acting pressure on the surface, thus on the lower side (pressure side) the speed is lower
with respect to the upper side (suction side) where the flow runs faster.
The airfoil can be modelled as a bound vortex ΓB as in Figure 3.1b:
ΓB =
I
C ⃗u · ⃗dl
(3.4)
where C is an arbitrary closed path around the airfoil.
==PAGE:39==
3.1 From Potential flow theory to Lifting Line Theory
23
(a) Vortex sheet of a flat plate (Source [27])
(b) Bound Vortex
Figure 3.1: Two ways to model an airfoil
The Kutta-Joukowsky theorem links the circulation to the lift force by the relation
⃗L′ = ρ⃗u ∧⃗Γ
[N/m]
(3.5)
Equation 3.5 shows that the Lift vector is always perpendicular to the incoming velocity.
This formula has a limited realistic application because it links the 2D lift with the 2D
circulation on a 3D space; the relation is accurate only for plane straight slender wing .
The point of application of the lift force, as well as the point where the bound circula-
tion is concentrated, is the center of pressure c.p. located at 1/4 of the chord; this result
derived for a symmetric thin airfoil, but it is in a good agreement with a wide range of
airfoil.
Looking at the force-vectors in Figure 3.2b, one can notice a paradox in the force bal-
ance. Indeed if the flow is inviscid, the flat plate can not experience any shear force,
thus all the forces acting on the body must be perpendicular to the body itself, as Fz:
this is not consistent with the lift always perpendicular to the incoming flow. The force
missing is Fx. The paradox is solved once introducing a non-zero value of the leading
edge radius, such an airfoil has. The pressure force acting around the rounded leading
edge can contribute with a force acting along the ˆx−axis.
Due to the absence of the shear forces, the production of circulation is not ensured; in
order to ensure the circulation and thus the lift, the pressure at the trailing edge must be
constant across the surface, or similarly the flow must leave the trailing edge smoothly.
This is called Kutta condition and it successfully resolves the production of lift from a
non-viscid flow.
In Figure 3.2a the trailing edge is circled, where the flow passes smoothly. The Kutta
condition pitches the flow downward and as a reaction it creates lift.
The creation of the bound vortex as the circulation around a closed path, produces a
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Background Theory
(a) Kutta condition
(b) Force balance
Figure 3.2: Kutta condition ensures the production of circulation
vortex released downstream. Thus here is introduced the concept of wake.
In real life the wake is due to a moving object in a viscous flow. On the contrary, an
inviscid flow, as in the potential theory, does not allow the presence of a wake.
The wake is ensured in potential theory by the Kelvin’s circulation theorem, who stated
that
” In a barotropic ideal fluid with conservative body forces, the circulation
around a closed curve (which encloses the same fluid elements) moving with
the fluid remains constant with time.[27]”
or stated mathematically:
DΓ
Dt = 0
Hence Kelvin theorem ensures the existence of the wake although the flow is inviscid;
whenever a circulation is created, for example when a wing starts to move, a starting
vortex of equal magnitude of circulation is released downstream.
Once the concepts of potential flow, bound circulation and wake are know, hereafter
will be presented the Lifting Line Theory, developed by Ludwing Prandtl in be early
1900 [43]. This theory provides an elegant solution to calculate the force coefficients and
circulation of a straight wing with high aspect ratio AR, based on its geometry.
Assume that the planform of the wing is given and assume that the wing is thin and the
angle of attack is small; this assumptions allow to treat the problem by assuming small-
disturbance on the potential Φ, and thus further simplify the only boundary condition
∇Φ · ˆn = 0. The small disturbance approach allows to model the wind-speed as flowing
only toward the flight direction, or equally that the flow acts only along the wing-chord.
Let us think to extrude the airfoil sketched in Figure 3.1b of a finite length b called span.
The Lifting Line is properly the bound vortex ΓB extruded along the span.
==PAGE:41==
3.1 From Potential flow theory to Lifting Line Theory
25
The wake produces by a 3D finite wing is modelled through the horseshoe vortex system.
The explanation begins with stating the Helmholtz theorem:
”A vortex tube cannot end within the fluid. It must either end at a solid
boundary or form a closed loop.” [30]
The vortex tube is the lifting line and the closed loop is the horseshoe. A horseshoe
vortex system, found experimentally by flow visualisation, is shown in Figure 3.4; this
helps the reader to have a realistic idea of how the wake of a wing looks like.
It is important to notice that with a single horseshoe vortex, the circulation along the
wing span cannot be anything but constant, similarly to a flat distribution. This would
be impossible since the tip does not produce lift. Thus the model to be realistic needs
to have a circulation distribution that changes along the span. Recalling the Kelvin’s
theorem (Figure 3.1), any rate of change in the circulation must produce a counter cir-
culation inner a material volume.
The solution described by Prandtl provides a superposition of horseshoes vortices with
different circulation each, as seen in Figure 3.3; the superposition of multiple horseshoe
vortices create the elliptic-shaped Γ-distribution seen in the sketch.
The relations in Equation 3.6 show that the spacial rate of change of Γ along the y−axis
is counter-acted by the vorticity released by the wing downstream, following the idea of
the free vortices, as in Figure 3.3; thus the vortex closer to the tip is stronger, γ1 > γ2.
The weaker vortices (such as γ3,γ4 not shown in Figure 3.3 ) roll-up onto the stronger
ones, giving to the vortex sheet the shape of a horse shoe. The vortex model provided
by the lifting line theory, in the assumption aforementioned, is extremely close to the
reality, as shown again in Figure 3.4.
γ1 = Γ2 −Γ1
∆y
γ2 = Γ3 −Γ2
∆y
(3.6)
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Background Theory
Figure 3.3: Bound circulation and horseshoe vortices
For the present research, the vortex roll-up is fundamental to understand the effect of
the Vortex Generator. The vortex generated, namely, is the one released at the wing tip
that for low AR wing becomes detrimental.
To understand why the tip vortex’s influence is enhanced by a low AR wing, it is needed
to introduce the induced velocity.
Figure 3.4: Tip vortex roll up
Let us divide a vortex filament shed in the wake in segment of length dx and strength
dΓ = γdx, as represented in Figure 3.3. Each segment of the vortex filaments will induce
a velocity dw on the control point y0 as
dw =
γ dx
4πr cos θ
(3.7)
==PAGE:43==
3.1 From Potential flow theory to Lifting Line Theory
27
The velocity induced by a vortex filament is found by the Biot-Savart law, reported in
Equation 3.8. The demonstration is skipped.
wi(y) = −1
4π
∫b/2
−b/2
dΓ(y0)
dy
dy0
y −y0
(3.8)
Equation 3.8 expresses the local induction velocity produced by the semi-infinite vortex
filament of strength γ on each spanwise wing element y0. It is clear that the more the
distance between 2 given points y −y0 increase, the weaker is the effect of the induced
velocity.
Hence it is explained the behaviour of the tip vortex for low AR: the smaller the wing
span, the smaller the distances between control points and thus the greater the contri-
bution of dw. In other words, on small AR wings more vortex filaments participate to
affect the total induction at near the wing tip.
Let us considered again Figure 3.2b, where is shown the geometrical angle of attack and
the income velocity Q∞. The induced velocity points toward the negative z−axis and is
found by
αi = −wi
Q∞
(3.9)
The induced angle of attack reduce locally the geometrical angle of attack, reducing thus
the local lift. The lifting line theory gives an insight of how much the geometrical angle
of attack locally changes due to the presence of the induced velocity, that affects mainly
the tips of the wing.
It can be written as an algebraic sum of angles:
αeff = (αgeom −αL0) −αi
(3.10)
Let us now express the Equation 3.10 in terms of Γ(y).
After applying the definition of Cl1 and the Kutta-Joukowsky theorem (Equation 3.5),
it is find a new form to express αgeom:
−
2Γ(y)
a0 c(y) Q∞
−
1
4π Q∞
∫b/2
−b/2
−dΓ(y0)
dy
dy0
y −y0
+ αgeom(y) −αL0(y) = 0
(3.11)
The final outcome is the integro-differential equation for the spanwise loading, developed
by Prandtl; the main result of the Lifting Line theory is in Equation 3.11.
The only unknown is Γ(y), assuming the planform established.
1Cl =
L′
1
2ρQ2∞c
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Background Theory
Another force term acts on any real wing: the induced drag.
Figure 3.5a shows the effect of the induced angle αi and the effect of the induced drag
or also called drag due-to-lift Di, while in Figure 3.5b is shown the vortex strength γ
along the wing span.
(a) Lift and Induced Drag
(b) Vortex strength along the span
Figure 3.5
The induced angle of attack is proportional to the rate of change of the circulation along
the span, thus the induced angle of attack is max at the wing tips. The induced velocity
tilts the local incoming velocity from ⃗
Q∞to ⃗q in the whole velocity vector field and as αi,
is max at the tips. The new force vector ⃗F is tilted of the same angle αi; decomposing
the force vector along the direction
⃗L
|L| and
⃗D
|D|, two components come out; the lift
and the induced drag. It is clear that with no induced velocity, no drag due-to-lift is
produced.
This chapter will end with a method to find a solution to Equation 3.11.
The coordinate system changes such as y = b
2 cos θ, θ ∈[0, π], so that the unknown
Γ−distribution is re-written in a Fourier series, so
Γ(θ) = 2bQ∞
∞
∑
n=1
An sin nθ
(3.12)
How to find the Fourier coefficient An will be explained in chapter 4, in Algorithm 2.
3.1.1
Limitations
The aeromodel proposed in this thesis uses a lifting line approach to evaluate the maxi-
mum circulation over a given Vortex Generator embedded in a wall-bounded flow.
==PAGE:45==
3.1 From Potential flow theory to Lifting Line Theory
29
This section summarises the limitations of the lifting line theory when is applied to a
wing shape typical of vortex generators.
• The assumption of small-disturbance is true when the wing is straight (e.g. rectan-
gular wing) and the aspect ratio is high (typically AR > 6). When these assump-
tions fall, the simplifications made on the boundary condition ∇Φ · ˆn = 0 is not
valid anymore. Moreover, on highly swept wing, the assumption that the lifting
line is placed along the one-fourth of the chord becomes unrealistic. A study on low
AR wing highlighted that the center of pressure for low AR wing moves further
upstream [26]. Lastly, when the AR is small the effect of the vortices becomes
predominant, since the vortices occupy a larger region of the wing-span respect to
a high-AR wing case.
• The LLT does not include any information about the separation, thus it assumes
that the flow stays attached for any angle of attack. In real life, this is true only
for small angle of attack, up to ∼10◦−15◦. In VG application the small angle of
attack limitation might not be true. For instance, the optimal angle of incidence
of a triangular VG for a given layout is found to be 18◦[3].
When the angle of attack is high enough to have separated flow zones, the linearity
models is not anymore applicable.
• The flow in the potential theory is inviscid. In order to account for the viscous
effects, the lifting line model predict the vortices as a singularity of the problem
(as the free vortices).
The trailed circulation is calculated as a single vortex which strength equal to the
maximum of the circulation distribution
In a realistic scenario, especially on vortex generators, the vortices developed by
the wing might be more than one, [53], [29]. Furthermore, the lifting line does not
provide any information about the decay of the vortex released.
• The LLT assumes steady and uncompressible flow. These two information such as
time-dependency and Mach number are not included in the aeromodel.
• The flow is assumed to be uniform, although vortex generator are places on surface
where a shear velocity acts.
3.1.2
Corrections
Two correction are proposed to partially overcome the limitations of the LLT.
The low AR wing affects the induced angle of attack, in the sense that a greater region of
wing feels the effect of the induction velocity wi. Hence, the local effective angle of attack
is averagely lower than the effective angle of attack of a high-AR wing. Mathematically:
α(y)effhighAR > α(y)efflowAR
(3.13)
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Background Theory
Similarly the local lift coefficient is on average greater when the AR is high.
The introduction of the suction analogy in subsection 3.2.1 will explain how to overcome
this lift loss.
Secondly, the wall-bounded flow is not included in the lifting line formulation. This
restriction is overcame by introducing the strip-interpolation, as will be discussed in
chapter 4.
3.2
The Vortex Model
In this chapter will be analysed the method to model a vortex and how it can be used
for VG application.
This analysis will be useful once will be presented the results of the LDA experiments
in chapter 5.
Vorticity and viscosity play the major role in mainly all the real life application.
Navier Stokes equations expressed in terms of vorticity for a non rotating frame state
that
D⃗ω
Dt = (⃗ω · ∇)⃗u + ν∇2⃗ω
(3.14)
thus viscosity diffuses vorticity while the inertia term (first term of RHS) produced the
stretching and tilting of the vortex.
Many vortex model were developed so far. From the most simple, as the Rankine Vortex
[27], to the ones counting viscous term such the Lamb-Oseen vortex. The Lam-Oseen
vortex model suits when is matched with experiments that analyse the flow field, such
LDA or SPIV; in that case, the vortex core ϵ and the circulation Γ are extrapolated
from the experiments and input in the model [52] to find the best fit.
The Lamb Oseen vortex is expressed by the set of equations in Equation 3.15 and it is
sketched in Figure 3.6
uθ =
Γ
2πr(1 −exp
(
−r
ϵ
)2
)
uz = const.
(3.15)
==PAGE:47==
3.2 The Vortex Model
31
Figure 3.6: Lamb-Oseen Vortex Model (Source Velte 2008)
Vortex dynamics is the base to understand the leading edge suction analogy proposed by
Polhamus [40] and discussed by many other authors, such as Kufan [29] and Lamar [31].
The suction analogy is related to the vortex lift produced by the interaction between the
leading edge vortices and the wing surface.
3.2.1
The Leading Edge Suction analogy
During the second World War, the military oriented research driven by the USA, discov-
ered the so called leading edge separation, typically occurred on delta shaped planform
as in Figure 3.7a and generally on thin airfoils. The LESA was formulated by Polhamus
in order to describes these typical vortices.
(a) Convair F-106 Delta Dart
(b) Triangular VGs on a wind turbine blade
Figure 3.7: Example of Delta wing
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Background Theory
Figure 3.8: Primary and Secondary vortex structures on a Delta wing
In Figure 3.8, two distinct cone shaped vortex are released from the apex of the delta
wing, developing along the leading edges. For a certain range of angle of attack and
sweep angle, the vortex sheet reattaches to the wing surface into two reattachment lines.
These vortices mainly modify the pressure distribution and make it different from what
predicted by the potential flow theory; two pressure peaks are developed inboard of the
leading edge, as in Figure 3.9a.
The same pressure distribution (Figure 3.9a) is found in the work of Sathaye [46], where
is shown that for a angle of attack set to 15◦, a pressure peak appears on the suction side
of the wing near the tip. The pressure peak does not emerge when the angle of attack
is set to 6◦. That consideration is needed to understand that the angle of attack highly
affects the vortex-performance released by a VG, as it will be explain later in this section.
The total lift originates from two different contribution: 1) a potential lift, given by the
(a) Pressure coefficient measured and predicted
(b) Suction due to spiral vortex
Figure 3.9: (Source [40])
==PAGE:49==
3.2 The Vortex Model
33
bound circulation (as explained in chapter 3), and 2) a vortex lift, given by the suction
pressure on the upper surface where the cone-vortex reattaches.
It is not straightforward to determine the shape, the strength and the position of the
spiral vortex sheet, and so the vortex lift.
The idea introduced by Polhamus is to
”relate the force required to maintain the equilibrium of the flow over the
separated spiral vortex (provided that the flow reattaches on the upper sur-
face), with the force associated with the theoretical leading edge singularity
for thin wings in potential flow.” [40]
From this statement it is deduced that no adding suction pressure is gained if the vortex
does not reattach to the wing surface.
The total lift coefficient, potential plus vortex, is then:
CL = Kp sin α cos2 α + Kv sin2 α cos α
(3.16)
The coefficient Kp acquires the meaning of the sectional lift slope, referred also as a3D,
while KV is the contribution of the vortex lift. The values of Kv are tabulated both in
[40] and [31].
At this point it useful to give an estimation of global lift slope:
Several authors tried to estimate a3D for low aspect ratio. In Figure 3.10 are presented
the results given by Kuchemann [28], Helmbold [28], Prandtl [43], Polhamus [40] and
Jones [26]. The expressions to find a3D as formulated by Kuchemann is given in sec-
tion A.4.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Aspect Ratio
0
π
2π
a3D
Global Lift Slope VS AR
Kuchemann
Helmbold
Prandtl
Polhamus
Jones
2π
Figure 3.10: Lift slopes for small AR
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Background Theory
The difference in estimating a3D, is that Polhamus2 and Kuchemann has used a lifting-
surface approach, extrapolated from the work of Multhopp [36], while Helmbold has
followed the lifting-line approach, the same of Prandtl.
It is evident from the plot in Figure 3.10 that the global lift slope found by Kuchemann
is much greater than the other ones.
This is a fundamental difference in the research conducted by the aforementioned au-
thors: Kuchemann did not distinguished the vortex lift from the potential lift (a3D ∼
Kp + Kv), while Helmbold, Prandtl, Polhamus and Jones found a global lift slope that
does not include any vortex reattachment (a3D ∼Kp).
This latter consideration becomes clear looking at Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13. These
figures reveal that Kuchemann’s theory can predict the lift obtained by the aeromodel
on vortex generators.
An estimation of Kv is given by Polhamus[40] and Lamar[31].
For Polhamus Kv =
π
cos Λ where Λ is the swept angle (Λ = 0◦for rectangular wings).
Lamar, instead, extended the meaning of the vortex lift to count also for the suction
produced at the side edge
Kv,TOT = Kv,LE + Kv,SE
(3.17)
The research of Lamar is used in this thesis because it allows to distinguish when the
vortex generator has a rectangular shape or a similar triangular shape (or namely, to
separate when the swept angle is either null or non-null).
Although both Lamar and Polhamus found that generally for a rectangular small AR
wing the Kv value oscillates around π as Kv,TOT = [0.90, 1.1] · π, the meaning of their
research is different. According to Lamar’s research, the vortex lift highly depends on
the planform, and while the leading-edge vortex might be not experience any reattach-
ment, independently the side-edge vortex can stick to the surface. In that sense, on a
rectangular wing, only the contribution of Kv,SE is non null.
As a final remark, Polhamus states that his theory is valid for delta wing with an angle
of attack up to 25◦and for AR < 4; exceeding one of these thresholds may trigger to
trailing-edge separation and steeper adverse pressure gradient that can affect the vortex
lift behaviour. The VG-configuration used in aeromodel never exceed this threshold.
Moreover Polhamus also gives an information about the leading edge radius of the airfoil:
the suctions peak can be reached only by ”sharp” leading edge. The aeromodel uses the
lifting line theory and thus does not include any information about the leading edge
radius.
2The data for Kp are extrapolated from a table reported in [40]
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 4
The Aerodynamic Model
This section illustrates the structure of the aeromodel and the results obtained.
In order to show the robustness of the code, the aeromodel is firstly compared to a set
of benchmarks, then is compared to the database presented by Wendt [56].
Lastly, a selection of 6 Vortex Generator shapes are proposed and discussed
Figure 4.1: Block Chart of the AeroModel
==PAGE:52==
36
4 The Aerodynamic Model
4.1
Structure of the main code
The block chart shown in Figure 4.1 sketches the structure of the code. The target is
to evaluate the trailed circulation Γmodel for a given input geometry and compare it to
experimental data collected by Wendt [56] and from the LDA measurement run at DTU.
This section follows the flow-chart in Figure 4.1 and the contents of each block are
explained.
4.1.1
Input
The input in the AeroModel are the geometry of the Vortex Generator and the incoming
flow.
Generally the flow over a wind turbine blade can be assumed turbulent, mainly because
of the Reynolds number and the blade roughness, thus the velocity profile is modelled
by the 7th-power-law [27] as
V (y) = V∞
(y
δ
)1/7
(4.1)
Wendt [56] performed a parametric study on single vane rectangular VGs, changing
Figure 4.2: Example of input and output of the AeroModel
these influence parameter: β,l, h, h/δ ,V∞, for a total of 54 configurations, referred here
as tables.
The whole dataset can be found in Appendix A, Figure A.1.
Only the cases with h/δ < 1 and AR < 1 has been considered in this paperwork amid
all the conducted experiments.
Figure 4.3 shows these parameters; the most common values are sod = 0.29, sod = 0.57
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Structure of the main code
37
and AR = 0.64. The input value in the LDA test are the ones shown by the red square
box.
Figure 4.3: Experiment Matrix
4.1.2
My Model
The theory explained in chapter 3 showed that the Lifting Line can be solved by two
different method, that output the same theoretical circulation.
In section 1.3 two solvers have been mentioned, namely Glauert and Prandtl.
The
difference in terms of computational effort and accuracy results are here described.
1st, Glauert approach
This first approach is coded in the Matlab script LLTglauert.m.
The algorithm is described in Algorithm-2.
This algorithm is fast (∼1 seconds for 150 grid-points to run all the database-cases)
and converges faster to the thin airfoil theory (for AR →∞, see Figure 4.11b). On the
other side, for certain particular geometry, the algorithm presents numerical instability
that miscalculates the max-value of the Γ−distribution.
Figure 4.7 shows an example of numerical instability.
2nd, Prandtl approach
The second approach is coded in the Matlab script LLT-
prandtl.m and described in Algorithm-1. The computational time is bigger than the
first Glauert’s algorithm (∼350 seconds for 71 grid-points to run all the database-cases)
although is still ”fast”.
Figure 4.4 shows the grid point in which the induced velocity is calculated, similar to
Figure 3.3.
The wing is sketched by a grey rectangle, the red spot YP k represent the spanwise sta-
tions, whereas the black dots ypivk,i are the points where the trailed vortices are released.
==PAGE:54==
38
4 The Aerodynamic Model
Each ypivk,i feel the induction from the near horseshoe vortex system, represented by the
green lines.
The influence matrix I represents the effect of a unitary circulation Γ = 1 on the stream-
wise grid points ypivk,i in which the effect of the induction is felt.
Figure 4.4: Rectangular VG and Influence Matrix for Prandtl Algorithm. YP k (red):
spanwise station ypivk,i (black): pivot points where the induced velocity is computed.
4.1.3
Comparison
Once the Γ is calculated through each solver, five different kind of comparisons are here
listed in order to proof the accuracy and robustness of the aeromodel.
1. The different results obtained by the Glauert-solver and the Prandtl-solver are
quantified by a percentage error for varying AR, in subsubsection 4.1.3.1, subsub-
section 4.1.3.2 and subsubsection 4.1.3.3.
2. Then, in order to validate the solver for classical Lifting Line application (constant
inflow and high AR), it has been used a bench-mark example extrapolated by a
research of Nestor Garcia [44]. Similarly another comparison has been done to the
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Structure of the main code
39
circulation obtained by the thin airfoil theory. These analyses are presented in
section 4.2
3. In section 4.3 the trend of the global lift slope a3D extrapolated from the aeromodel
while increasing the aspect ratio will be presented.
4. The trailed circulation calculated from the model and the trailed circulation mea-
sured by Wendt are compared. It is worth to underline that the database (as in
Figure A.1) has a range of uncertainty of ±5%.
5. Lastly, the last section section 4.4 compares the trailed circulation computed by
the aeromodel and the ones presented by the tables, the aerodynamic model of
Wendt [56] and the aerodynamic model of Poole [42].
4.1.3.1
Sensitivity analysis in Glauert
A sensitive analysis has been performed on the Glauert-solver. The input geometry is
the one presented in table #1, where the influence parameter are:
- α = 8 deg
- span (h) = 10.200 mm
- chord (l) = 40.600 mm
- h/δ = 0.570
- Q∞= 85.00 m/s
- AR = 0.64
Grid Independency
Figure 4.5 shows a grid independence study on N−grid point
along the spanwise direction for N = 11, 41, 81, 101, 121, 141, 161. A weak point of the
Glauert-solver is that the grid independence is unstable. The max-circulation changes
(more than 5% offset) also for N > 161; this is noticed by observing Figure 4.5b, where
the results got for N = 101 and N = 141 are not in trend with the others.
No slip Velocity
The algorithm respects the no-slip condition. This is demonstrated
by looking at Figure 4.5a, where the circulation vanishes at the ground. It is important
to say that physical circulation released by the vortex generator lies on the positive
spanwise direction only.
Boundary Offset
The Boundary Offset has been found to be an important parameter
to reduce the numerical instabilities for a given table. The BO is defined as the offset
between the span length of the VG and the strip interpolation length. Figure 4.6 shows
an example of a triangular VG submerged in a velocity profile. The strip interpolation
has been done along the interpolation length, divided in N−grid points; in this way null
chord value or null velocity value are avoided.
In order to bypass numerical instabilities, such as in Figure 4.7, it has been implemented
==PAGE:56==
40
4 The Aerodynamic Model
(a) Γ−distribution
(b) ϵ% trend on grid point
Figure 4.5: Grid independence study on Glauert Algorithm on table #1
a skip-condition in the Algorithm 1 Glauert (see step 15); each time the input geometry
from a table triggers a bad grid, the Algorithm-1 skip that table and moves further.
Figure 4.6: The meaning of the BO parameter. A triangular VG fin is submerged in a
velocity profile.
Numerical instabilities
Figure 4.7 shows an example of ”bad grid”.
The reason
might be due to the weak damping of the Fourier Coefficient as in Figure 4.7b. The
reason of this behaviour were not investigated.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Structure of the main code
41
(a) Γ−distribution on a ”bad grid”
(b) Fourier coefficients convergence
Figure 4.7: Numerical instability in Glauert-algorithm
4.1.3.2
Sensitivity analysis in Prandtl
Grid Independency
As previously mentioned, this solver is slower than the Glauert
algorithm, thus the number of grid point to use are limited, especially when the high
value of inflow velocity or angle of incidence are input.
When the number of grid points increases, the distance between two control points to
obtain the induced velocity (Equation 3.8) tends to reduce to zero, creating NaN values
in the influence matrix I. In order to avoid peak values one can decrease the relaxation
factor χ, although the code would further slows down.
The best trade off found is
χ = 10−6.
An advantage of using the Prandtl algorithm is that the lack of ”bad grid”; comparing
Figure 4.5b to Figure 4.8b reveals the robustness of Prandtl-algorithm in terms of grid
convergence.
To compensate between fast computational time and accuracy, it has been chosen to set
Ngrid = 101 on all future analysis and calculation.
No slip Velocity
In LLTprandtl.m the induced angle of attack is calculated by αi =
w/V , where V is the array representative for the velocity profile, build by N−points.
Thus null-velocity, such as a no-slip condition requires, cannot be input in the function.
It has been chosen a fixed V0 = 10−5 [m/s] close to the wall, where the interpolation
starts. This explains why on Figure 4.2 the circulation at the wall does not vanished.
Boundary Offset
Without going into details, the results are unchanged while tuning
the BO parameter. It has been then selected BO = 0.
==PAGE:58==
42
4 The Aerodynamic Model
(a) Γ−distribution
(b) ϵ% trend on grid point
Figure 4.8: Grid independence study on Prandtl Algorithm on table #1
Numerical instabilities
The main disadvantage of this algorithm is the non-null cir-
culation at the ground. However, the important output is the Γmax, thus it is important
to evaluate which solver gives the most accurate prediction.
4.1.3.3
Algorithm comparison: Glauert and Prandtl
The algorithms behave slightly differently. This is mainly due to two reasons: 1) the
non-slip condition affects the circulation at the ground (compare Figure 4.5a and Fig-
ure 4.8a) causing the Prandtl algorithm to be less reliable and 2) the ”bad grid” in the
Glauert algorithm make it less reliable.
The results are here discussed.
1 The red plot that represents a uniform flow are higher compared to the blue ones;
it is correct since a uniform flow produce averagely more circulation with respect
to a sheared inflow.
2 The trends are equal, as expected. That means that only the inflow-type changes
the max value of the circulation.
For a sheared inflow, the Glauert solver deviates from the Prandtl solver of about +7%
on average. On the other case, for a constant incoming flow the percentage difference is
below 0.5%.
It is visible that the offset increase as the magnitude of the circulation increases.
Figure 4.10a shows the difference percentage ∆Γ = ΓGLA −ΓPRA
ΓPRA
· 100. The values of
h/δ and AR reported in the plot does not increase the relative circulation, keeping the
difference quite stable at +7%. An outlier is present at table 30. The circulation from
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Structure of the main code
43
both the solvers and inflow condition for this configuration is shown in Figure 4.10b; a
”bad grid” occurred in Glauert-algorithm.
This analysis demonstrated that the solvers are consistent and the influence parameters
on each algorithm have the same influence on the trailed circulation. In other word,
the Γmax obtained by the Glauert-algorithm is 1.07 higher than the one obtained by the
Prandtl-algorithm for each configuration examined in this thesis.
Figure 4.9: Γmax for each table
(a) Difference percentage depending on h/δ and
AR in each table
(b) Γ-distribution of Table54
Figure 4.10: Comparison between solvers
==PAGE:60==
44
4 The Aerodynamic Model
4.2
Validation of the code for high AR
Three considerations will be given in order to prove the robustness of the solvers for high
AR wing.
The first one is a benchmark to the Panel Method used in [44]; a comparison is given
between an inviscid panel method (PM) and the proposed Lifting Line (LLT) over a
straight rectangular wing of AR = 10 and α = 5◦, subjected to a constant inflow.
Figure 4.11a shows the comparison. The plots shows that the Lifting Line approach
tends to overestimate the results, as discussed in subsection 3.1.1.
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
Wing span [m]
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
Lift [N.m]
Comparison of Lift
PM BC1 INV
PM BC2 INV
LL INV (2DPM) polars
myLLT, a0-real
myLLT, a0-inv
(a) Panel Method and Inviscid LLT
0
20
40
60
80
AR
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Γ-Circulation
Comparison Flat Plate Airfoil Circulation
Computed
Theoretical
(b) Thin airfoil theory
Figure 4.11: Comparison at high AR
Indeed it has been used the inviscid lift slope value a0 = 2π in order to compute the
curve labelled ”myLLT,a0-inv”. On the other side, both the panel method, the lifting
line computed by Nestor ”LL INV (2DPM) polars” and the proposed ”myLLT,a0-real”
uses a0 = 2.20 ∗pi, extrapolated by the experiments on a thick airfoil.
The pink curve ””LL INV (2DPM) polars” and the blue square-dotted curve ”myLLT,
a0-real” give the same Lift.
Figure 4.11b shows a comparison to the thin airfoil theory [30] that calculates the circu-
lation over a flat plate by
Γ = Q∞πcα
(4.2)
Results are shown in Figure 4.11b.
It can be noticed that for high AR the initial
circulation obtained by thin airfoil theory and the one found by the solver converge to
the same result.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Results from Inviscid Lift Slope theories
45
4.3
Results from Inviscid Lift Slope theories
The four plots (Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13) show a comparison between the global lift
coefficient CL extrapolated from different models in literature and the CL obtained from
the proposed aeromodel for each table-configuration. The global lift coefficient has been
obtained from the circulation by using the Kutta-Joukoswky theorem and then making
the global lift
L =
∫
wingspan L′(y)dy
non dimensional.
The incoming flow is here assumed uniform along the span.
The blue circles represents the potential lift coefficient while the upward-pointing trian-
gles stand for the total lift coefficient, as discussed in subsection 3.2.1.
These results further confirm the robustness of the aeromodel, or here briefly AE to
calculate the potential Γ−distribution.
Indeed, the circles plot, labelled AE: Pot is the most close to the Prandtl theory, that
indeed does not consider any suction pressure bonus.
On the other side, the total lift contribution (CL,pot + CL,vort) is well forecast by the
theory of Kuchemann, as can be seen by the triangle-plot.
The trend seems correct by observing the angle of incidence; when β is high the vortex
lift contribution increases, and the data matches Kuchemann’s theory (Figure 4.13b).
As a recall, Kuchemann theory is found at page 33.
The total lift coefficient AE: Pot+Vort in Figure 4.13a grows at a lower rate while
increasing the aspect ratio AR = b/c, b = const respect to Kuchemann; this is coherent
with the model, since CL,vort depends on the wing-chord and not on the wing-span
instead; the relation between the vortex-circulation and the aspect ratio is also confirmed
in [56].
Thus the deviation seen in Figure 4.13 is due to a over-estimation of Kuchemann theory
instead of a underestimation of the aeromodel. Figure A.3 shows that the circulation
found by the Kuchemann theory deviates from the experimental value as increasing the
aspect ratio.
==PAGE:62==
46
4 The Aerodynamic Model
(a) α = 8◦
(b) α = 12◦
Figure 4.12: Lift Coefficient for Table Experiment as in Ref.[56] Pt.1
(a) α = 16◦
(b) α = 20◦
Figure 4.13: Lift Coefficient for Table Experiment as in Ref.[56] Pt.2
4.4
Comparison of the aeromodel with the
result proposed by Wendt
In this section the trailed circulation output from the aeromodel is compared to the
trailed circulation (referred as initial circulation in [56]) found by Wendt.
The input data in the aeromodel are listed in Figure A.1 and the initial circulation is
referred as Γexp. The input data were filtered to compute only the cases where AR < 1,
h/δ < 1, V∞= 85 m/s and β = 16◦. Thus 16 experiments were considered over the 59
experiments proposed by Wendt.
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Comparison of the aeromodel with the result proposed by Wendt
47
The total trailed circulation Γtot, namely the scalar value representative of the circulation
released by the VG is
Γtrail = max(Γbound + Γvortex)
(4.3)
where Γbound is the solution of Equation 3.11, and
Γvortex = 1
2 Kv,SE sin2(αgeom) cos (αgeom) u c
(4.4)
The spacial-average velocity is:
u = V∞
1
m + 1
(h
δ
)m
m = 1/7
(4.5)
Demonstrating Equation 4.3 is straightforward; looking at Figure 3.3 it can be noticed
that performing the sum of vortex filaments intensity γi along half wing-span as in
Equation 3.6, the only term that does not vanish is Γ0 ≡Γmax. In other words, the
vortex roll-up intensity can be estimated by the maximum of the total circulation.
Figure 4.14: Bound circulation and vortex circulation compared to the experiments
Figure 4.14 shows the trailed circulation value for each table, both from the aeromodel
and the experiment.
The aeromodel is capable to follow the trend of the experimental data. Moreover, it is
clear that including the lift circulation in the model will reduce the difference between
the model and the experiments.
==PAGE:64==
48
4 The Aerodynamic Model
The blue line is more smooth then the black curve, it seems that the model is less sen-
sitive to capture the peaks displayed by crossed-black line. Besides the accuracy of the
model, the incapability of following the exact trend might be due to the experiments’
accuracy itself.
The model on average have a good agreement to the experimental values. Only 6 cases
over 16 are out of the ±5% range. The reason might be partially addressed to the invis-
cid theory used in this thesis, although a solid demonstration was not found.
It is worth to go through the Wendt’s research [56] to find inconsistencies between the
model and the experiments that might affect the present analysis.
The initial circulation values were measured by a hole-probe mounted in a pipe duct,
1hV G downstream the VGs array. Lastly, the cross section of the VGs tested is a sym-
metric airfoil NACA0012.
Among the inaccurate approximations, the sheared velocity used in the aeromodel can
be different from the original boundary layer profile in the experiments.
Furthermore, the aeromodel predicts the circulation over a vortex generator with a
rectangular cross section instead of a NACA0012 profile. However this condition seems
not to increase the error in the comparison, since:
1 the NACA0012 is not considered ”thick”, thus the lift coefficient is well predicted
in the linear region by the inviscid lift slope
2 the flat plate have a stall angle slightly smaller respect to a symmetric airfoil, but
both the profile have a stall angle smaller than the design case β = 16◦. Thus the
overestimation of Cl persists in both the flat plate profile and the NACA0012.
3 all the simulation import an angle of incidence equal to β = 16◦, and Γtot has
found to be either greater or lower than Γexp.
Lastly, the model does not consider the evolution of the trailed vortex in time and space,
but instead it finds a scalar value to represent the circulation distribution along the
span, as expressed by Equation 4.3. It is assumed, although not explicitly specified in
the research, that the vortex is fully developed after 1hV G.
More uncertainty in the measurement are listed in [56]; amid all, the author states that
for low aspect ratio the multiple vortex structures interact with each other and thus it
decreases the accuracy of the measurement. The accuracy degradation for low AR VGs
was found also in [53].
Lastly, Figure 4.15 shows the geometry input and the obtained non dimensional param-
eter of the tables as in Wendt. A common trend to forecast the error is not clear to
detect. However, the highest over-estimations occur when both the h/δ and the VG
length l are the highest among the configurations under exam.
In conclusion, the aeromodel is able to predict the trailed circulation of a Vortex Genera-
tor for the VG configurations proposed by Wendt. Moreover, the inclusion of the vortex
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Comparison of the aeromodel with the result proposed by Wendt
49
(a) sod for each configuration
(b) Length for each configuration
Figure 4.15: Geometry the of VG tested
lift analysed in [40] has been demonstrated to be the correct approach.
It has not been found any error-trend that could improve the forecast model, especially
depending on AR and sod. The research needs more database to further validate the
model.
4.4.1
Comparison with Poole and Wendt models
The database created by Wendt has been used to validate two numerical models, here
referred as Wendt’s model [56] and Poole’s model [42].
Poole has conducted a similar research, thus it seemed adequate to show the results of
his model.
==PAGE:66==
50
4 The Aerodynamic Model
The comparison is shown in Figure 4.16
Figure 4.16: Comparison between experimental results and the model proposed by
Wendt, Poole and aeromodel
The results found in this thesis are similar to the ones found by Poole, although the
latter has a better agreement with respect to the experiment run by Wendt.
Table 4.1 presents the standard deviation and mean error1.
Mean ϵ [%]
StdDev σ [%]
Wendt
-37.7
23.3
Poole
-2.6
11.5
aeromodel
5.0
12.4
Table 4.1: Mean error and standard deviation between Poole’s model and aeromodel
As seen from the Table, the mean error and the standard deviation in Poole’s model are
the lowest among the three models.
However, the worst predictions discussed in the previous chapter, namely at table-3 and
table-54 when the results diverge of about +20%, does not occure in Poole’s model,
where on the contrary he found a good agreement.
It is worth to say that the aeromodel is highly sensitive to the spacial-average value
of the inflow velocity u.
If u is calculated e.g.
at the 3/4 of the height, namely
1The error is obtained as a percentage value compared to the Γexp presented by Wendt, as:
ϵ = Γmodel −Γexp
Γexp
· 100
(4.6)
==PAGE:67==
4.5 Vortex generator shape proposed
51
u = V (y = 3/4 h), the mean error between the aeromodel and the experiment re-
duces to ϵ = 0.1%, similarly the standard deviation reduces to σ = 11.7%.
Moreover, the spaced-average value u expressed in [42] is not explicitly specified, thus it
is not possible to match the results for the same average velocity expression and have a
robust comparison.
The value of u chosen in all the calculations is shown in the one described in Equa-
tion 4.5 in order to respect the physical meaning of average velocity and avoid unwanted
over-fitting.
4.5
Vortex generator shape proposed
In this section it is evaluated the trailed circulation Γ∗of a vane type vortex generator
embedded in a wall-bounded flow. The aeromodel tests five different vane-shapes, as in
Figure 4.17, while changing three parameters: h/δ, β, Ψ2.
Figure 4.17: VGs shape proposed
The aeromodel is based on inviscid flow assumption, thus the form drag is not concerned.
In order to account the wet surface and thus drag penalty the trailed circulation is divided
by the total drag coefficient. The new variable is here called λ.
2The complementary swept angle Ψ, similar to the swept angle, affects the VG’s aspect ratio.
==PAGE:68==
52
4 The Aerodynamic Model
The objective variable λ is:
Γ∗= ΓBound + ΓV ortex
hV∞
CD,tot = CD,ind + CD,flatplate
(AreaV G
h ∗l
)n
λ =
Γ∗
CD,tot
The total drag coefficient CD,tot is the sum of the induced drag plus the form drag.
The form drag is the product of the coefficient CD,flatplate, found experimentally, multi-
plied by the ratio r =
(AreaV G
h ∗l
)n
that represents the influence of the wet area AreaV G
respect to the wet area h ∗l of a rectangular vortex generator; the ratio is always r ≤1.
The exponent is set n = 1, in order to maximise the weight of the form drag.
The drag coefficient for a flat plate perpendicular to the incoming flow has been set to
CD,flatplate = 1.28 [37].
It is found that λ is greatest for high value of h/δ, low value of AR and high value of
β. Namely, as confirmed by the previous research on vortex generators ([3],[55]) and
the results gathered from the aeromodel, the circulation grows linearly with free-stream
velocity, VG height and angle of incidence.
Figure 4.18: Vortex lift and potential lift contribution
The maximum angle of incidence to ensure leading edge vortex reattachment,βmax, de-
pends on aspect ratio and Reynolds regime and the aeromodel does not include a pre-
diction of βmax. The aeromodel is limited in the sense that it does not allow the user to
input the information about whether the leading edge vortex has reattached or not for a
==PAGE:69==
4.5 Vortex generator shape proposed
53
given angle of incidence. The vortex lift is in the form of an added term (Equation 3.16)
and the vortex-reattachment always is ensured, to the limit that β = 0 →ΓV = 0.
Look at Figure 4.18. The more the angle of attack β increases, the more the contribution
of both the vortex lift Lv and the potential lift LP increase. In conclusion, the aeromodel
does not allow to find the optimal angle of incidence.
Thus what heavily affect λ is the aspect ratio and the Kv factor.
Lamar [31] evaluated bounded in a small range for several planform wing geometry,
namely Kv = [0.90, 1.10]π.
The research reports that the double delta wing produces Kv = 1.10π, while the notch
does not affect the leading edge vortex development.
By a coding point of view, λ is a scalar value that is stored an a cubic array, dependent
on three parameters h/δ, β, Ψ. The array has been reshaped to a mono-dimensional
vector, so that it can be plotted on a plane, along the vertical axis. In a similar way, the
three parameters are reshaped and placed along the horizontal.
Figure 4.19 shows the influence of the aforementioned three parameters and how they
are reshaped.
It can be seen that
1) in green, λ increases as h/δ increases, because the velocity is averagely greater.
2) in red, λ decreases as AR increases, because of the weaker contribution of ΓV , as
seen in Figure 4.13a.
3) in black, Γtot increases as β increases and thus λ.
Figure 4.19: Effect of the influence parameters. From left to right, h/δ, AR and β
increase.
==PAGE:70==
54
4 The Aerodynamic Model
Figure 4.20: Optimal configuration for Triangular Vortex Generator
Figure 4.20 shows an example of optimisation. Again it is found that the highest value
Γ
CD max
is reached for h/δmax, ARmin and βmax. In the research conducted by De Voria
[15], he states that low AR wing are able to avoid the static lift stall for high angle
of attack. This is coherent with the results, since low AR and high angle of incidence
produce the greatest λ.
However the lack of a more accurate numerical model has reduced the optimisation pro-
cess to a straightforward analysis that may trigger to unreliable results.
Although it would be meaningful to tune the geometry of each Vortex Generator, vary-
ing e.g.
the reduced area from the notch in NotchedTriang, or the swept angle in
DoubleTriang, to measure how the geometry affects the circulation, it has been decided
to not proceed further due to the amount of uncertainties.
A qualitative analysis is worth to be presented
1) NotchedTriang is promising. The vortex lift contribution is not affected by the
reduced wet surface, namely penalty drag. A private research of Bille [6] has shown
the promising features of the trailing edge notch through a parametric study in
the DTU wind tunnel.
2) DoubleTriang produces two distinct leading edge vortex that increase the overall
Lv contribution while the wet surface is slightly lower than Triang.
3) RectaTriang is a middle point between Rectang and Triang.
The chord dis-
tribution is averagely greater than in Triang, corresponding to a greater bound
circulation, and the suction pressure peaks develop on two leading edges instead
of just one. In opposite, the drag penalty is greater than the triangular case.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Vortex generator shape proposed
55
This qualitative discussion on vortex generators’ shapes and the theoretical knowledge
gathered from the work of Lamar et alter, can lead to new ideas to sketch the next
generation VGs. For instance, the drag coefficient CD increases when leading edge or
side edge vortices reattaches; at the same time, taking advantage of the non-linear lift
can be useful to reduce the size of the VG, thus reduce the form-drag penalty.
Lastly, it worth to recall the research of Lin [32]. The optimal circulation is the minimum
circulation that ensures the delay of stall at a certain downstream location.
Thus this analysis can be useful to the inverse process, such finding the height of the
VG once the input circulation to achieve is known.
==PAGE:72==
56
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Experiment
Two LDA experiments was performed to validate the aeromodel.
The LDA setup is sketched in Figure 5.1; it shows a rectangular VG past by an inflow
velocity along the y−direction; the vortex is sketched in red, while the blue and the
green lines represent the laser beams. The vortex strength is linked to the circulation
by Equation 3.3. The sketch also show the LDA reference system: the y is parallel to
the incoming flow, the z is pointing vertically the wall and the x follows the right hand
rule.
It is important to well understand that on the LDA system the green laser beam can
measure the stream-wise velocity Vy, while the blue laser capture the cross-wise compo-
nent of the velocity along the vertical axis, thus Vz.
Figure 5.1: Reference System used in the experiment
The LDA system from Dantec Dynamics runs the software BSAflow, a set of lasers with
wavelengths of 514 nm and 488 nm, respectively. The maximum power is 1 W for each
colour. The optical probe is fitted with a lens with focal length 310 mm and a beam
expander with expansion ratio of 1.98. The beam diameter before the expander is 1.35
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Experiment
mm. The air is seeding with Di-Ethyl-Hexyl-Sebacat (DEHS) particles with a diameter
of about 1 µm.
5.1
Goal of the test
The aim of testing the Vortex Generator with LDA technology is to precisely evaluate lo-
cally the velocity field, extrapolate the initial circulation and compare the data obtained
to the initial circulation calculated through the aeromodel.
5.2
Clean case
At first it has been measured the boundary layer height in the wind tunnel.
The boundary layer has been measured by choosing 34 point odd-distributed along the
z−axis, between the ground and the center-line of the tunnel.
Figure 5.2 shows the captured boundary layer. It has been compared the measured
boundary layer profile to the power law as in Equation 4.1; it seems reasonable to state
that the boundary layer measured is turbulent.
14
16
18
20
Wind Speed [m/s]
Ground, z=0 mm
z=75 mm
z=150 mm
z=225 mm
Centerline z=300 mm
Boundary Layer - Clean
Measured data
7th-power-law
δ= 60 mm
Figure 5.2: Boundary Layer detected by LDA
The measurement is affected by noise at the center-line location of the wind tunnel;
that might be due to a instability behaviour due to the co-effect of the walls. At this
==PAGE:75==
5.3 LDA on Vortex Generators
59
location, it has been found a very low Data Rate, meaning that only few glycol-particles
were detected by the laser beams.
The boundary layer height δ was chosen by using the thumb rule of the δ99 [30].
The data extrapolated from this experiment are:
δ = 60 mm
Vedge = 20m/s
(5.1)
After having measured the boundary layer height, the relevant Vortex Generator has
been printed at the DTU Lab, using the available 3D printer [50].
5.3
LDA on Vortex Generators
5.3.1
First case
Due to the material softness of the printer, the max height of the printed VGs was set to
6 cm, in order to avoid unwanted failure during the test. The evaluation has been done
by direct looking at the mock-up and verifying the maximum stress that could lead to
a unwanted failure.
Also the span over thickness ratio, h/δ, has limited the size of the printed VG; indeed it
has been realised that the laser beams (sketched in Figure 5.1 and visible in Figure 5.3)
would experience a wall-reflection when placed too close to the wall, affecting the accu-
racy of the measurement. Because of that the parameter h/δ were chosen as high as
possible.
For these reasons, the Table-54 is tested, referred here as VG4.
The VG4 layout is:
l = 13.94 cm
h = 5.16 cm
AR = 0.37
sod = 0.86
β = 16◦
In order to detect the cross-wise component of the velocity, namely the one captured
by the blue laser beams, it has been located the reference system ⃗X = (x, y, z) =
(0, 0, 0) [mm] at the trailing upper vertex, as in Figure 5.3. The measurement line was
set varying the x−coordinate in 40 points at the downstream location y = 3h. The
measurement grid points were finer when closer to the tip location y = 0, in order to
better capture the vortex core.
It is important to say that initially the measurement line was at the downstream location
y = 1h, similar to the experiments run by Wendt, but due to the ”shadow” caused by
==PAGE:76==
60
5 Experiment
Figure 5.3: Vortex Generator inside the wind tunnel and laser beams
the presence of the VG, the Data Rate was too poor to perform a successful measurement.
Figure 5.4 shows the data obtained by the LDA test on the VG4; the upper plot shows
the stream-wise velocity, while the bottom one shows the cross-wise velocity.
The stream-wise velocity Vy has an expected trend; the flow is uniform along the
x−coordinate and the maximum speed is lower than Vedge It is then detected a sec-
ondary deficit velocity, shown in the plot in (x, Vy) = (+27mm, 18.4m/s). Most likely
the LDA system have detected the basic vortex system, described in [53] and sketched
in Fig.3 and Fig.5 of the related paper. The basic vortex system is composed by a single
primary vortex and horseshoe vortex.
The cross-wise velocity is symmetric with respect to the x−axis. The laser beam setup
does not allow any measurement to detect Vz, thus in the following analysis it will be
assumed also a helical symmetric along the z−axis, as justified in [52].
At the boundaries of the measurement line, the velocity approaches to zero. In that
sense, the effect of the vortex spans over 16 cm along the x−axis.
It is hard to quantify the influence of secondary structures on the primary vortex by a
single measurement at z = h. More measurements at different height would be needed
to isolate the primary vortex and give a more accurate estimation of Γ∗.
The Lamb-Oseen vortex model is here used to extrapolate the circulation from the ve-
locity vector field. The equation is expressed in Equation 3.15.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 LDA on Vortex Generators
61
The fitting was performed by using in input 2 parameters, namely the vortex core radius
ϵ and the circulation Γ.
As a results, the vortex model fits well the data if
ϵ = 8 mm
Γ = 0.810 m2/s
(5.2)
The successful fitting is in Figure 5.5.
The resulted non dimensional circulation, is Γ∗
exp ≡
Γ
h Vedge
= 0.81
Figure 5.4: Experimental data at y = 3h downstream- VG4
The result of the LDA experiment is then compared to the result output from the aero-
model.
The procedure to obtain the trailed circulation is the same as seen in chapter 4, thus:
Γ∗
model = 0.837 In this configuration the aeromodel predicts the circulation very well.
Table 5.1 summarize the comparison between the experiment run by Wendt, the exper-
iment run in LDA and the result from the aeromodel:
The edge velocity in the LDA measurement was set to 20 m/s, while Wendt selected an
edge velocity equal to 85 m/s. The available wind tunnel could not reach that speed,
thus it has been scaled down the VGs geometry in order to respect the AR and the sod
stated by Wendt. Figure 4.3 highlights the tested VG.
==PAGE:78==
62
5 Experiment
*=0.81
Figure 5.5: Lamb-Oseen Vortex interpolation- VG4
VG-4
Vedge [m/s]
h/δ
h [cm]
AR
Γ [ms/s]
Γ∗
Wendt
85 m/s
0.86
1.52
0.37
0.824
0.638
LDA
20 m/s
0.86
5.16
0.37
0.81
0.81
aeromodel
20 m/s
0.86
5.16
0.37
0.863
0.837
Table 5.1: VG-4 highlight
5.3.2
Second case
It has been performed the same experiment on a triangular VG, with the following
geometry:
l = 10.0 cm
h = 5.0 cm
AR = 1.00
sod = 0.83
β = 16◦
The VG configuration is the same used in [55].
Figure 5.6 shows the velocity components, similarly to Figure 5.4. The effect of multiple
structures disturbs the stream-wise velocity Vy, identified by 3 peaks of deficit velocity.
In this latter case, the horseshoe vortex system is more evident.
Despite of this, similarly to the VG4 case, the multiple structures that affect Vy are
just slightly noted in Vx. The fitting is worse, in the sense that the fitting polynomial
==PAGE:79==
5.3 LDA on Vortex Generators
63
hardly follow the data in each measured point and it might be due because of the latter
consideration.
The result from the experiment and the aeromodel are Γ∗
exp = 0.447 and Γ∗
model = 0.645 .
The difference between the result from the LDA experiment and the aeromodel has no-
tably increased.
The reason might be addressed to the heavy influence of multiple structures that affect
the magnitude of the primary vortex. In addition, the results might be disturbed by a
poor seeding in the wind tunnel, that caused a lower Data Rate.
Figure 5.6: Experimental data at y = 3h downstream- VG3
5.3.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, the aeromodel predict very well Γ∗
model,4
Γ∗
exp,4
= 1.04 the circulation for a rect-
angular VG. The same experiment setup was used to predict the circulation on triangular
a VG, of same length and height. For the latter case, the aeromodel has over-predicted
the circulation as Γ∗
model,3
Γ∗
exp,3
= 1.44.
Further experiments would be needed to validate both the result. Indeed the aeromodel,
that is based on a inviscid model, is able to predict the primary vortex as a singularity
in the problem. Thus other vortex structures are not accounted in the calculation [53].
It is not clear how the geometry, either rectangular or triangular, affects the vortex
system by only looking at the velocity distribution (Figure 5.4 and Figure 5.6). The
==PAGE:80==
64
5 Experiment
*=0.447
Figure 5.7: Lamb-Oseen Vortex interpolation- VG3
research of Baldacchino in [3] states that a triangular VG produces a more stable vortex
in term of oscillation around the core center and decay, although consideration about
secondary flows are not considered in the study. The same results were detected years
before by Godard [22]. Furthermore, on a triangular VG the vortex line detaches from
the leading edge at different time and space, while on a rectangular VG the leading edge
is perpendicular to the flow and the vortex detaches equally. The latter considerations
might be the start of new test bed.
The experiment could have been improved by measuring on 3 different height, e.g. in-
cluding z = 0.80h, z = 1.20h and repeat the measurement for y = 10h.
In any case the experiment has highlighted that the primary vortex can be roughly
estimated by a lifting line method.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion of results
The present master thesis titled ”Modelling of Vortex Generator” proposes a numerical
model (referred as aeromodel) based on a lifting line. The aeromodel predicts the trailed
circulation Γ of a vane type vortex generator embedded in a sheared velocity.
The aeromodel was validated by 1) a set of Laser Doppler Anemometer (LDA) exper-
iments conducted by the candidate at DTU and 2) the database performed by Wendt
[56], presented in Figure A.1 and here referred as tables.
The flow patterns around a vortex generator are dominated by viscous effects; high
fidelity models, such as fully resolved CFD simulations are expensive in term of compu-
tational cost.
Middle fidelity models, such as BAY model [5], simulate the effect of a VG by introducing
in the Navier Stokes equations a source term that produces the increase of momentum
in the near-wall region. The advantage of these models is that the number of grid cells
needed to mesh the geometry are highly reduced, although as a drawback the actual
shape of the VGs is ignored.
The source term has to be tuned for each specific case, mainly by comparing to previous
experiments performed on similar VGs-configurations.
The aeromodel proposes to link the size for vane type VG and the inflow condition to
the circulation released, in order to reduce the time to tune the source term in middle
fidelity model.
It has been found promising to add the bound circulation, namely the solution of the
integro-differential equation describing the lifting line, and the vortex circulation pro-
posed by Polhamus[40] in order to predict the circulation of a high angle of attack and
low aspect ratio wing, such this is the configuration of a vortex generator.
This section presents the highlight of the results obtained through the present thesis.
The results of the aeromodel had a good agreement to the database proposed by Wendt
as seen in Figure 6.1.
The trailed circulation falls in the range given by the Wendt’s experiment 10 times over
16 configurations.
==PAGE:82==
66
6 Discussion of results
Figure 6.1: Circulation output from the aeromodel compared to the one found in Wendt’s
database.
Among the 6 configurations in which the model did not predict the experiment, only 2
were greatly wrong. In table 3 and table 54 the aeromodel overestimated the experiment
of about 20%.
It has been tried to explain why the missing 6 configurations (table:3,40,47,52,53 and54)
did not match the experiments (with a difference lower than 5%), evaluating the size of
the VG and the non dimensional parameter such as h/δ and AR.
Although a robust and clear explanation were not found, Figure 4.15 shows that the
difference between the model and the experiments increases when the VG length and
the sod ratio are big.
The LDA experiment was performed on a VG with different size respect to the original
size proposed by Wendt. This inconsistency is due to the impossibility to reach the
designed speed in the wind tunnel designed for the LDA experiment. In order to match
the original experiment, the non-dimensional parameters were respected.
Figure 6.2 shows the vortex generator inner the wind tunnel hit by the laser beams. The
white-dashed line represents the downstream distance were the vortex has been measured,
while the red-dashed line represents the measurement line, made by 40 measurements,
where the cross-wise velocity of the vortex was detected.
Table 6.1 sum up the result of the experiment.
VG-4
Vedge [m/s]
h/δ
h [cm]
AR
Γ [ms/s]
Γ∗
Wendt
85 m/s
0.86
1.52
0.37
0.824
0.638
LDA
20 m/s
0.86
5.16
0.37
0.81
0.81
aeromodel
20 m/s
0.86
5.16
0.37
0.863
0.837
Table 6.1: VG-4 highlight
==PAGE:83==
6 Discussion of results
67
Figure 6.2: Vortex Generator inside the wind tunnel and laser beams
The circulation found by Wendt Γ = 0.824m2/s seems to be close to the one found
in the LDA experiment because of a singular case; indeed the greater speed velocity,
Vedge = 85[m/s], that produces higher circulation, is countered by a smaller height of
the VG, h = 1.52cm, that tends to reduce the circulation. The two effects balance out.
This is confirmed by looking at the non-dimensional circulation, found by Γ∗=
Γ
hV .
The non-dimensional circulation in Wendt is much lower than the other 2 cases, where
the geometry is equal.
The research of Velte [55] and Baldacchino [3] showed the linear dependency between
the circulation and both the inflow velocity and the height of the VG. Thus other non-
linearity effects have affected the measurements.
The low computational effort of the aeromodel and the vortex lift knowledge acquired
by e.g. the work of Polhamus [40], Lamar [31] and Kulfan [29], allow the user to input
any VG geometry and qualitatively compare the performance.
The shapes of new vortex generator are proposed in Figure 6.3.
==PAGE:84==
68
6 Discussion of results
Figure 6.3: VGs shape proposed
The most promising shapes that are worth to be further tested are, NotchedTriang,
DoubleTriang and RectaTriang.
This conclusion has been done by evaluating the wet surface, reduced by the notch in
NotchedTriang, and by the multiple leading edge vortices that develop on DoubleTriang
and RectaTriang.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In conclusion, the aeromodel is a reliable numerical tool that allows the user to have a
good prediction of the trailing circulation released by a vortex generator.
Furthermore, the aeromodel is sensitive to the shape in the sense that the circulation
directly depends on the chord distribution obtained from the strip interpolation. This
allows to extend the calculation to any shape of vortex generator, thus increasing the
number of possible configurations that the designer might need to seek.
The comparison made onto the database of Wendt [56] has shown that the results are
bounded in a small range (±5%), despite two exceptions in which the error jumped up
to +20%.
The comparison made between the aeromodel and the LDA experiments shown diver-
gent results that cannot be extended to a general trend; the effect of multiple structures,
more preponderant on the triangular VG, might have affected the measurement.
Lastly, this thesis gathers an abundant literature review that links the leading edge vor-
tex development to the shape of low aspect ratio wings, that was found to be useful
when idealising new VG geometries.
However, the assumption of the lifting line theory does not allow the model to optimise
the objective function λ = Γ∗/CD while changing the angle of incidence β, the aspect
ratio AR and the span-over-thickness h/δ.
7.1
Future work
Simplified theoretical models give a practical use to obtain a prediction, as low as is the
fidelity of the model.
Some future work would improve the aeromodel and increase both the confidence and
the reliability of the results.
The future work improvement is divided in three parts:
==PAGE:86==
70
7 Conclusion
7.1.1
Advanced modelling
The lifting line theory is widely used thanks to the simplicity of formulation and accu-
racy to reality when the assumption are respected.
A limitation of the lifting line is to assume a constant inviscid lift slope so that the local
lift coefficient follows the linear trend, Cl = 2πα for every angle of attack. This is not
always true, as discussed in chapter 2 and chapter 3 .
• As a future improvement, the aeromodel could benefit from the research conducted
by Chattot [11]. The research proposes a correction to the lifting line by including
the non-linearity associated with a 2-D lift curve for angle of attack greater than
αCLmax.
• The vortex decay process was not included in the code. Hence, a more realistic
vortex behaviour, such the one described by the Batchelor Vortex [4] might ensure
a reliable fitting to the experiments, and thus enhance the quality of the aeromodel.
7.1.2
Increase the number of database
The experiments validate the models. The number of experiment needed to validate a
model must be reduced to the minimum. The aeromodel would need more database to
have its accuracy confirmed.
• The first improvement that can be addressed in the future is to further increase the
number of available database. Besides the Laser Doppler Anemometer experiment,
that gives a punctual and high precise measurement of the velocity, Stereoscopic
Particle Image Velocimetry and Wind Tunnel test allow to calculate respectively
the trailing circulation of the lift produced by the VG.
In particular the wind tunnel, through a cross-wise moving wake- rack is tailored
to extrapolate the total drag produced by the VG.
• In order to increase the fidelity of the aeromodel, the vortex reattachment must
further studied. Indeed, the vortex reattachment depends on angle of incidence
and especially from the leading edge radius or equally called the nose-shape.
The leading-edge-suction-analogy would greatly benefit from a parametric study
on various nose-shapes. Lamar [31] partially covers this gap.
The angle of incidence must bounded in the range where the vortex reattachment
is ensured. If the angle of attack is too low, the fluid would remain attached to
the surface, while if it is too big the fluid would separate and the vortex would
suddenly decays in turbulence.
In this thesis, the angle of incidence was set to 16◦for all the configurations
accordingly to previous studies.
==PAGE:87==
7.1 Future work
71
7.1.3
Objective not addressed
Due to the limited amount of time, some objectives were left from the thesis. These
additional investigations can be implemented without further studies.
• The drag penalty can be extrapolated from the deficit velocity found in the stream-
wise direction from the LDA experiment.
• Recently, the candidate manufactured by fast prototyping the same VG4 layout
with an angle of incidence β = 5◦, in order to detect the effect of vortex devel-
opment depending on the angle of attack by the LDA. The experiment is not yet
performed.
• A single experiment on a delta wing was performed by Bille [6] with the collabo-
ration of the master thesis candidate. Modelling the delta wings do not require
a strip interpolation and do not require to model the inflow by a sheared profile.
Furthermore, the literature review is more abundant of experiments run on delta
wing than vane type vortex generator instead. The advantage of using a delta
wing is that the lift direction created by the supporting surface is parallel to the
lift created by the delta wing. This is false on vane type VGs, where the lifting
forces are perpendicular to each others.
• The aeromodel inputs the geometry and the inflow condition and it outputs the
trailed circulation. A useful tool would be to setup the configuration with the
lowest drag penalty (as output) that produces a target circulation (as input).
==PAGE:88==
72
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX A
==PAGE:90==
74
A
==PAGE:91==
A.1 Database created by Wendt
75
A.1
Database created by Wendt
Figure A.1: Experimental Database, (Source Poole [42])
==PAGE:92==
76
A
A.2
Glauert and Prandtl Algorithms coded in
the aeromodel
Algorithm 1 Prandtl
1: procedure
2:
Input: β,b,c, θ, ⃗u, a0
3:
Output: ¯w, Γ, CL, CD
4:
for i-1 pivot point do
5:
for k-1 pivot point do
6:
Find the influence matrix ¯I by Biot-Savart law Equation 3.8, assuming
Γ(k) = 1
7:
end for
8:
end for
9:
while ROC greater than 5 · 10−3 do
10:
Cl = a0 · αeff
11:
wnew = I · Γ
12:
Update the induction velocity with a relaxation factor w = χ wnew +(1−χ) wold
13:
wold = w
14:
Obtain the induced angle of attack αi = w
V
15:
αeff = αgeom −αi
16:
Check the ROC of the last 5000 steps every 2 · 105 iterations
17:
if wmean is grater than 5 · 106 then return error
18:
end if
19:
if step is grater than 2 · 106 then return error
20:
end if
21:
step = step+1
22:
end while
23: end procedure
A.3
Type of stall on airfoils
It has been mentioned more than once that a wing can stall. The stall kicks in when
the fluid detaches from the surface; the separation can start either at the leading-edge
or at the trailing-edge.
The separation type varies mainly due to the thickness of the airfoil, as shown in Fig-
ure A.2
==PAGE:93==
A.3 Type of stall on airfoils
77
Algorithm 2 Glauert
1: procedure
2:
Input: β,b,c, θ, ⃗u, a0
3:
Output: An, Γ, CL, CD
4:
if any chord-value is null then return error
5:
else
6:
for m-span station do
7:
for n-Fourier coefficient do
8:
Solve equation Equation 3.12
9:
A(n, m) = 4b
a0
c(m) sin(nθ(m)) + n sin(nθ(m))
sin(θ(m)) ;
10:
B(m) = β;
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
Solve An = A(m, n)/B(m)
14:
Once solved for An, obtain the output as in [30]
15:
if Non-monotonic trend toward the tip then return clean from outliers
16:
end if
17:
end if
18: end procedure
Figure A.2: Stall types - a) trailing-edge, b) leading-edge, c) thin-airfoil
The airfoil on the left (a) experiences a trailing-edge stall; the thick rounded leading edge
does not give appreciable steep pressure gradient at the onset of the boundary layer but
on the other said a APG occur at the TE. This kind of separation is typical for example
on the inboard part of wind turbine rotor.
The airfoil on the center (b) experiences a leading-edge separation; the small rounded
leading edge creates a separation bubble close to it that reattaches afterward along the
airfoil suction side. Often this separation occurs for low Reynolds number on thin airfoil.
==PAGE:94==
78
A
Further, the separation bubble has the feature of changing a laminar boundary layer,
upstream the bubble, to a turbulent boundary layer downstream the bubble.
Lastly, on the right (c) it is observed a thin-airfoil stall. The difference to the leading-
edge stall is that the separation bubble does not reattach, but instead propagated toward
the trailing edge. Some symmetric supersonic wing experience this type of stall.
Especially the latter two separation kind can be suppressed by the presence of a Vortex
Generator located slightly upstream the the transition region.
A.4
Kuchemann Theory
This section provides an expression to evaluate the global lift slope found by Kuche-
mann. The expression is plotted in Figure 3.10. The reason why it is presented only the
expression of this researcher, is because of the results that are going to be presented in
chapter 4. It will be seen that the results given by the present model follow the trend
(in Equation A.2) presented here by Kuchemann.
In 1952 Kuchemann [28] described a method to calculate the forces acting on a wing of
any planform (hence also swept wing) and low aspect ratio.
The method imposes a single parameter n to govern a lifting surface approach. That
parameter, referred here as shape parameter is mainly dependent on AR.
The formulation of the problem, similarly to the lifting surface proposed by Multhopp
[36] does not allow a closed form solution. Thus the solution is given numerically.
The main difference to the lifting line, as the name suggests, is that in a lifting surface
approach the spanwise vortices are distributed along the chord, giving to the lifting
problem a 2D effect. As Kuchemann reports:
”It is proposed to use the term ’ lifting-surface theory’ to describe any method
where a distribution of spanwise and streamwise vortices (or of any other
singularities) over the whole wing surface is considered”
The shape-parameter is:
n = 1 −
1
2 +
(
1 +
(
a0
π AR
)2
)1/4
(A.1)
and the global lift slope is
a3D(n) = a0
2n
1 −π n cot π n
(A.2)
Figure A.3 shows that the circulation found by the Kuchemann theory deviates from the
experimental value as increasing the aspect ratio. Thus the deviation seen in Figure 4.13
==PAGE:95==
A.4 Kuchemann Theory
79
Figure A.3: Model and Experiment comparison
is due to a over-estimation of Kuchemann theory instead of a underestimation of the
aeromodel.
==PAGE:96==
80
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
Tao Bai et al. “Effect of surface roughness on the aerodynamic performance of
turbine blade cascade”. In: Propulsion and Power Research 3.2 (2014), pages 82–
89.
[2]
Christian Bak et al. “Full scale wind turbine test of vortex generators mounted on
the entire blade”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Volume 753. 2. IOP
Publishing. 2016, page 022001.
[3]
Daniel Baldacchino et al. “Experimental parameter study for passive vortex gen-
erators on a 30% thick airfoil”. In: Wind Energy 21.9 (2018), pages 745–765.
[4]
George Keith Batchelor and AA Townsend. “Decay of vorticity in isotropic tur-
bulence”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical
and Physical Sciences 190.1023 (1947), pages 534–550.
[5]
EE Bender, BH Anderson, and PJ Yagle. “Vortex generator modeling for Navier-
Stokes codes”. In: Third ASME/JSME Joint Fluids Engineering Conference, Paper
No. FEDSM99-6919. 1999.
[6]
Hansen C.A. Frigaard M.N. Tofte N.F. Bille A. “Eksperimentelle undersøgelser af
3D printede vortex generatorer - Fagprojekt Kursus 41800”. In: (2019).
[7]
Smart Blade. Our technology. 2019. url: www.smartblade.com,urldate={2019-
07-1}.
[8]
Tim P Bray. “A parametric study of vane and air-jet vortex generators”. PhD
thesis. Cranfield University, 1998.
[9]
Ore Catapult. Our technology. 2019. url: www . orecatapult . com , urldate =
{2019-07-1}.
[10]
Patricia Cathalifaud et al. “The flow structure behind vortex generators embedded
in a decelerating turbulent boundary layer”. In: Journal of turbulence 10 (2009),
N42.
[11]
Jean-Jacques Chattot. “Analysis and design of wings and wing/winglet combina-
tions at low speeds”. In: 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. 2004,
page 220.
[12]
Power Curve. Materials. 2019. url: www . powercurve . dk / our - technology /
materials/,urldate={2019-07-1}.
[13]
Power Curve. Our technology. 2019. url: www.powercurve.dk,urldate={2019-
07-1}.
==PAGE:98==
82
Bibliography
[14]
Delphine De Tavernier, Daniel Baldacchino, and Carlos Ferreira. “An integral
boundary layer engineering model for vortex generators implemented in XFOIL”.
In: Wind Energy 21.10 (2018), pages 906–921.
[15]
Adam C DeVoria and Kamran Mohseni. “On the mechanism of high-incidence lift
generation for steadily translating low-aspect-ratio wings”. In: Journal of Fluid
Mechanics 813 (2017), pages 110–126.
[16]
Julianne C Dudek. “Modeling vortex generators in a Navier-Stokes code”. In: AIAA
journal 49.4 (2011), pages 748–759.
[17]
Robert Schaefer Ehrmann. “Effect of Surface Roughness on Wind Turbine Perfor-
mance”. PhD thesis. 2014.
[18]
Unai Fernández Gámiz. “Fluid dynamic characterization of vortex generators and
two-dimensional turbulent wakes”. In: (2013).
[19]
Unai Fernandez-Gamiz et al. “Computational Modelling of Rectangular Sub-Boundary
Layer Vortex Generators”. In: Applied Sciences 8.1 (2018), page 138.
[20]
L Florentie. “Aspects of Source-Term Modeling for Vortex-Generator Induced
Flows”. PhD thesis. Delft University of Technology, 2018.
[21]
Hermann Glauert. The elements of aerofoil and airscrew theory. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1983.
[22]
Gilles Godard and Michel Stanislas. “Control of a decelerating boundary layer.
Part 1: Optimization of passive vortex generators”. In: Aerospace Science and
Technology 10.3 (2006), pages 181–191.
[23]
Dayton A Griffin. Investigation of vortex generators for augmentation of wind
turbine power performance. Technical report. National Renewable Energy Lab.,
Golden, CO (United States); Lynette (R.) and …, 1996.
[24]
Martin Otto Laver Hansen et al. “Aerodynamically shaped vortex generators”. In:
Wind Energy 19.3 (2016), pages 563–567.
[25]
Irena. Renewable capacity highlights. 2019. url: https : / / www . irena . org/ -
/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Mar/RE_capacity_highlights_
2019.pdf?la=en&hash=BA9D38354390B001DC0CC9BE03EEE559C280013F,urldate=
{2019-07-1}.
[26]
Robert T Jones. “Properties of low-aspect-ratio pointed wings at speeds below and
above the speed of sound”. In: (1946).
[27]
Joseph Katz and Allen Plotkin. Low-speed aerodynamics. Volume 13. Cambridge
university press, 2001.
[28]
D Kuchemann. A Simple Method for Calculating the Span and Chordwise Loading
on Straight and Swept Wings of any Given Aspect Ratio at Subsonic Speeds. Techni-
cal report. AERONAUTICAL RESEARCH COUNCIL LONDON (ENGLAND),
1952.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
83
[29]
R Kulfan. “Wing geometry effects on leading-edge vortices”. In: Aircraft Systems
and Technology Meeting. 1979, page 1872.
[30]
Pijush K Kundu, Ira M Cohen, and DW Dowling. Fluid Mechanics 4th. 2008.
[31]
John E Lamar. “Extension of leading-edge-suction analogy to wings with separated
flow around the side edges at subsonic speeds”. In: (1974).
[32]
John C Lin. “Review of research on low-profile vortex generators to control boundary-
layer separation”. In: Progress in Aerospace Sciences 38.4-5 (2002), pages 389–420.
[33]
Spyros G. Voutsinas Marinos Manolesos Giorgos Papadakis. On the application of
the BAY model for Vortex Generator flows. 2018. url: https://www.researchgate.
net/profile/Marinos_Manolesos/publication/325880383_On_the_Application_
of_the_Bay_Model_for_Vortex_Generator_Flows/links/5b2a8b294585150c634261f2/
On-the-Application-of-the-Bay-Model-for-Vortex-Generator-Flows.pdf,
urldate={2019-07-1}.
[34]
Renegade Motorsport. How are Vortex Generators Made? 2019. url: https :
//www.renegade- motorsports.com/resources/vortex- generator- made/
,urldate={2019-07-1}.
[35]
Vidyadhar Y Mudkavi. “The phenomenon of vortex breakdown”. In: (1993).
[36]
H Multhopp. Methods for calculating the lift distribution of wings (subsonic lifting-
surface theory). Aeronautical Research Council London, 1950.
[37]
NASA. Shape Effect on Drag. 2015.
[38]
Stig Øye. “The ELKRAFT 1 MW wind turbine: Results from the test program”. In:
1996 European Union Wind Energy Conference. Proceedings of the 1996 European
Union Energy Conference. 1996.
[39]
Blade Partner. Our technology. 2019. url: www.bladepartner.co.jp,urldate=
{2019-07-1}.
[40]
Edward C Polhamus. “A concept of the vortex lift of sharp-edge delta wings based
on a leading-edge-suction analogy”. In: (1966).
[41]
Edward C Polhamus. “Predictions of vortex-lift characteristics by a leading-edge
suctionanalogy”. In: Journal of aircraft 8.4 (1971), pages 193–199.
[42]
Daniel J Poole et al. “An aerodynamic model for vane-type vortex generators”. In:
8th AIAA Flow Control Conference. 2016, page 4085.
[43]
Ludwig Prandtl. “Tragflügeltheorie. i. mitteilung”. In: Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Mathematisch-Physikalische Klasse 1918 (1918),
pages 451–477.
[44]
Néstor Ramos-García, Jens Nørkær Sørensen, and Wen Zhong Shen. “Three-dimensional
viscous-inviscid coupling method for wind turbine computations”. In: Wind Energy
19.1 (2016), pages 67–93.
==PAGE:100==
84
Bibliography
[45]
Sandia. Leading Edge Erosion. 2019. url: https://energy.sandia.gov/energy/
renewable-energy/wind-power/blade-reliability/leading-edge-erosion/
,urldate={2019-07-1}.
[46]
Sagar Sanjeev Sathaye. “Lift distributions on low aspect ratio wings at low Reynolds
numbers”. In: (2004).
[47]
Witold Skrzypiński, Mac Gaunaa, and Christian Bak. “The Effect of Mounting
Vortex Generators on the DTU 10MW Reference Wind Turbine Blade”. In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series. Volume 524. 1. IOP Publishing. 2014, page 012034.
[48]
Cornelis Jan Stam. “Source term modeling of vortex generators”. In: (2016).
[49]
Harold D Taylor. “The elimination of diffuser separation by vortex generators”. In:
United Aircraft Corporation, East Hartford, CT, Technical Report No 4012 (1947),
page 3.
[50]
Ultimaker. Ultimaker 2+ series. 2019. url: https://ultimaker.com/3d-printers/
ultimaker-2-plus,urldate={2019-07-1}.
[51]
JPJ Van Jaarsveld et al. “Wind tunnel experiments on wake-vortex decay in exter-
nal turbulence”. PhD thesis. Masters thesis (no. R-1726-A), Eindhoven University
of Technology …, 2008.
[52]
Clara M Velte, Martin OL Hansen, and Valery L Okulov. “Helical structure of
longitudinal vortices embedded in turbulent wall-bounded flow”. In: Journal of
Fluid Mechanics 619 (2009), pages 167–177.
[53]
Clara M Velte, Martin OL Hansen, and Valery L Okulov. “Multiple vortex struc-
tures in the wake of a rectangular winglet in ground effect”. In: Experimental
Thermal and Fluid Science 72 (2016), pages 31–39.
[54]
Clara Marika Velte. Characterization of vortex generator induced flow. DTU Me-
chanical Engineering, 2009.
[55]
CM Velte, MOL Hansen, and D Cavar. Flow analysis of vortex generators on wing
sections by stereoscopic particle image velocimetry measurements, Stacks. iop. org.
Technical report. ERL/3/015006, 2008.
[56]
Bruce J Wendt and Tom Biesiadny. “Initial circulation and peak vorticity behavior
of vortices shed from airfoil vortex generators”. In: (2001).
