==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Compute
Implementation of encryption-resistant ”MitM” attack
Implementering af ”MitM” angreb modstandsdygtigt over
for kryptering
by
Frederik Haaning
Nicola Dragoni
Computer Science & Engineering
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
2019
==PAGE:2==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank my supervisor Nicola Dragoni for his assistance during the thesis.
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract:
Man in the Middle (MitM) attacks play a large role in network security re-
search due to its variety of applications and will allow a successful adversary to eavesdrop
conﬁdential information even with the communication protocols used today. Modern com-
munication architectures typically solve the problem through the use of encryption which
has proven eﬀective against many types of MitM. This study will explore and present a
particular type of MitM attack working undetected behind encryption. By utilizing game
software the thesis sets out to illustrate the consequences of a successful attack, demon-
strating the properties of other vigorous MitM attacks such as message relaying and even
manipulation.
A literature review lays the foundation for the proceeding design speciﬁcation, detailing
the attack from an abstract perspective of both victim and attacker. Several implementa-
tion types will follow and the results of those implementations are evaluated and discussed.
Assessment of both implementations show that the attack is indeed possible and pose a
threat to current assumptions of data integrity in encrypted communication channels due
to the fact that the attack allows relaying and manipulation of the data undetected. The
results also indicate that while code obfuscation and intrusion-detection systems may pro-
long and ﬁlter out some attacks, no defense mechanisms can be deployed to guarantee
complete mitigation.
Keywords:
Man-in-the-Middle, MitM, Reverse-engineering, Assembly, Packet sniﬃng
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Man in the Middle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1
Deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
1
==PAGE:4==
2.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2
Autonomous
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.2.1
Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3
Hook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.1
Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.1
Reverse engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1.1
Assembly / Disassembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
Autonomous
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3
Hook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.1
Contrast & Resemblance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.1
Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.1.1
Autonomous
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.1.2
Hook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
LIST OF FIGURES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
LIST OF TABLES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
5.2
Indexers for Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
2
==PAGE:5==
Introduction
MitM attacks are plentiful and diverse in their utilization. Many such attacks rely on
exploiting assumptions of trust or lack of security in essential protocols that our com-
munication relies upon even today. Despite backward compatibility requirements of net-
working equipment and protocols hinder security measurements to mitigate even the most
well-known attacks such as Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) cache poisoning (Goyal
& Tripathy, 2005) at their roots, well-established solutions have been standardized and
widely accepted to prevent it such as Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) over HyperText Transfer
Protocol (HTTP) for the web. This type of prevention relies on an extra layer for secu-
rity and requires an ”agreement” between user and provider before it can be eﬀective.
HTTPS provides a layer of encryption on top of the original protocol which protects the
integrity of the communication channel and has inspired many other forms of communi-
cation with a similar model to achieve data integrity and protection against MitM attacks.
This thesis will address this assumption by proposing a distinct form of MitM able
to work behind encryption and remain undetected in the process. With such a success-
ful attack the idea described in the thesis challenges many modern security suppositions,
hopefully inspiring renewed research interest in the ﬁeld of MitM, both in terms of compli-
menting & reﬁning the technique described in this paper and suggested defensive measures.
The architecture, design & implementation contained in this paper will demonstrate
the severity of the attack by example of a speciﬁc application. The game Nexus, The King-
dom of the winds. (NexusTK) was chosen because of its use of a proprietary encryption
algorithm as well as the visual feedback element that will be helpful in illustrating the
consequences of a successful attack. The ability for the MitM to be selectively applied to
all entities at once or individually in a server-client communication system will be detailed
and demonstrated.
The thesis is divided into sections that describe the design, implementation and results re-
spectively while initially providing background information about MitM attacks, their his-
tory and diﬀerent forms. This will be further elaborated in the supporting literature review.
3
==PAGE:6==
Contribution:
While the proposed attack is demonstrated through the use of a speciﬁc
game, the implications of the attack are much broader. This attack is by no means limited
to this game, let alone a speciﬁc type of application. Any architecture using client-server
communication is potentially vulnerable. The varying degrees of severity in terms of the
potential damage the attack can deliver in neither limited to eﬀects of the game. Within
the game, one could imagine it would be possible to extract sensitive information about
the client such as passwords or credit cards stored incorrectly on the server. Given the
nature of the attack, it could also simply listen to in-game transactions with the credit card
information sent over the wire and expose the information to the hacker in this manner. In
that sense, and given that the attack is rather universal, the implications are quite severe.
4
==PAGE:7==
Man in the Middle
1.1
Deﬁnition
In accordance with the RFC 2828 standard, MitM is deﬁned as “A form of active wire-
tapping attack in which the attacker intercepts and selectively modiﬁes communicated
data in order to masquerade as one or more of the entities involved in a communication
association.” (Shirey, 2000).
Figure 1.1:
Man in the Middle - Depiction
A distinguishing factor between other types of attack and the MitM attack is the fact that
the MitM targets communicating entities rather than targetting the entities themselves.
(Mohiuddin & Muataz, 2010). A successful MitM attack will allow the malicious actor to
monitor or relay information that is being transferred between the communicating agents
and may even allow alteration depending on the type of implementation.
The foundation of this paper relies on literature of MitM techniques and prevention meth-
ods. More speciﬁcally, since a profound and extensive survey of these concepts has been
detailed recently by (Conti, Dragoni, & Lesyk, 2016), this paper will describe the concepts
covered since the time of writing and further elaborate on a few concepts that weren’t cov-
ered as presented by the paper itself. (Conti et al., 2016) categorizes MitM in terms of the
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model and cellular networks, in each category further
breaking down the taxonomy of MitM attacks. Cellular MitM relies heavily on Fake Base
Station (FBS)-based exploitation while the OSI model provides diﬀerent applications for
the diﬀerent layers.
5
==PAGE:8==
ARP spooﬁng based MitM details the ARP cache poisoning techniques of changing the
table entries that map an Internet Protocol (IP) address to its corresponding Media Ac-
cess Control (MAC) address such that an attacker can manipulate the target directly,
making the traﬃc route through the attacker. Domain Name Server/Service (DNS) spoof-
ing is described in various forms from taking control of a trusted DNS server, exploiting
cryptographic weaknesses to poison DNS caches and packet sniﬃng between DNS nodes
on a network. Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Protocol (DHCP)-based MitM is presented
through the exploitation of the bi-directional lack of security measures within the proto-
col itself where authentication isn’t required for the requesting party. Both DHCP clients
and servers are therefore vulnerable to this attack. Furthermore, sniﬃng is possible due to
lack of encryption in the transmission of messages. IP spooﬁng type MitM is categorized
into points of attack techniques from blind/non-blind spooﬁng out & inside of a subnet-
work respectively, where an attacker may analyze seq’s and ack’s for traﬃc analysis, these
metrics belonging to the IP standard. IP spooﬁng may abuse the lack of authenticity in
the Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) to re-route traﬃc from target to attacker.
Additionally, IP-based spooﬁng may abuse sequence numbers in Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) to hijack a session previously established.
An SSL / Transport Layer Security (TLS) MitM attack is categorized into certiﬁcate and
private key types of entry where an attacker might hold the private key for digital sig-
natures of a compromised but seemingly legitimate server, while certiﬁcate-based SSL /
TLS MitM details either the attacker with certiﬁcate generation capabilities, possible by
having access to a Certiﬁcate Authority (CA) or even fooling the user with a fake cer-
tiﬁcate and expecting target-level fault of ignoring the mismatch warnings as presented
in modern browsers. The survey also speciﬁes Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) MitM.
It is a severe topic since the BGP is at the basis of all routing on the internet and does
not provide authenticity compliance. It is based upon IP hijacking and can be imple-
mented in multiple manners of announcing false routing information and falsifying the
Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI) information contained in the BGP pro-
tocol update messages. On a successful attack, an attacker will achieve routing through its
position and may choose to forward the traﬃc to the real destination or simply perform
a Denial of Service (DoS). Finally, the survey details various pitfalls of mobile communi-
cation networks through the use of an FBS, primarily deﬁned through the lack of security
features found on older Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) networks and
6
==PAGE:9==
even newer Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS). Through the use of
an FBS and often times also a Mobile Station (MS), the attacker may capture Interna-
tional Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) codes and other identiﬁcation information from
legitimate targets and position themselves between false Base Transceiver Station (BTS)
and legitimate ones to achieve MitM.
Among the assortment of attacks presented in the survey by (Conti et al., 2016), several
detection and prevention techniques are described for each. These manifests themselves
ranging from hardware, host-based, application-level solutions as well as cryptographic
and may be located on the victim machines or on a centralized server.
7
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Review
As the concepts, implementations and prevention methods described represent a thorough
examination of papers before 2016, the following section will have a focus on continuing
the adequate review until the year of writing in addition to detailing the few concepts that
the authors (Conti et al., 2016) encouraged further research in their concluding words of
the survey. This section is supposed to aid the reader in understanding previous MitM
schemes and in doing so give a good foundation to understanding the current state of
aﬀairs and where the proposed novel idea presented within this paper ﬁts in that context.
In order to do so, snowballing (Wohlin, 2014) will be used as a means of systematic liter-
ature gathering in order to get a good and relevant selection on papers. After a successful
snowballing technique, manual qualitative ﬁltering must be applied in order to narrow
down on the subjects not previously described as explained in the previous paragraph.
The procedure begins by producing a start set deﬁned by any paper included in the initial
search. Afterwards, either backward or forward snowballing must be considered in order
to progress with the systematic literature process, and while backward snowballing is an
excellent technique to achieve highly specialized domain-speciﬁc knowledge by identifying
new papers based on the reference list of the papers included in the initial search, forward
snowballing was chosen for the continued search. Forward snowballing works by identify-
ing new papers based on the new set of papers citing the reference paper. The justiﬁcation
for choosing this route is based on the logic that the literature review of this paper should
aim towards describing the knowledge that has built on top of more recent papers. Thus,
through forward snowballing on the start set, ﬁnding papers on new discoveries than the
ones described prior to 2016 should be more likely in the succeeding iterations. Due to the
motivation of the literature review in this paper, a rather harsh exclusion ﬁlter is applied
to the start set. (Wohlin, 2014). The repository of publications used to discover papers for
the initial searching is comprised of sources, publishers & organizations. Among others,
those include Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEEE) Xplore, Springer (DTU, n.d.).
Some of the results when searching literature by its acronym yields research papers on the
term Meet in the Middle, not to be confused with MitM, a technique best known as an
cryptanalysis attack on ciphers that chains together output into the input in a sequence of
8
==PAGE:11==
the same algorithm to produce a ﬁnal ciphertext. There is no convention that distinguishes
the two acronyms so qualitative ﬁltering is required.
Start set
Forward snowballing
Filter
18
26
9
Table 1.1: Literature selection
Under normal circumstances, the start set in any literature search is signiﬁcantly larger
however the very speciﬁc keywords used to generate the set, primarily driven by a recent
age publication criteria and a small subset of concepts made an impact on the selection
initially. As depicted by table 1.1 a forward snowballing iteration produced 8 more relevant
papers. The selection turned out to be quite reﬁned since a ﬁne-grained qualitative ﬁlter
reduced the ﬁnal set to 9.
The MitM concepts described in the following section has been categorized in accordance
with the OSI model to get a better overview of the level of abstraction at which they
operate. In table 1.2 the schemes are presented in their relative position against the OSI
model.
OSI Layer
Scheme
Application
Password reset (Gelernter, Kalma, Magnezi, & Porcilan, 2017)
Presentation
WLAN (Vondrek, Pluskal, & Ryav, 2018) (Hwang, Jung, Sohn, &
Park, 2008)
Transport
SMitM (Samineni, Barbhuiya, & Nandi, 2012)
Network
SMitM (Samineni et al., 2012), NFC (Akter, Chakraborty, Khan,
Chellappan, & Islam, 2017), SDN (X. Wang, Gao, Zhang, Liu, &
Wang, 2016), BT (Haataja, Hyppnen, Pasanen, & Toivanen, 2013)
Data link
Rogue AP (Hwang et al., 2008), NFC (Akter et al., 2017), SDN
(X. Wang et al., 2016), BT (Haataja et al., 2013)
Physical
NFC (Akter et al., 2017)
Table 1.2:
MitM schemes compared to their relative OSI model layer
9
==PAGE:12==
Bluetooth
MitM in Bluetooth exploits the fact that its communication medium is Radio
Frequency (RF). As with any communication medium and perhaps easier than inﬁltrating
a closed local network, unencrypted data sent over the air can be picked up by a malicious
third-party even at a great distance with an antenna (Haataja et al., 2013). On the other
extreme, a fully authenticated encryption scheme in a recent revision of the Bluetooth
standard, the symmetric encryption key KC must be of suﬃcient length, the recommended
128bit preferably, in order to withstand cryptanalysis attacks on information that has
previously been transmitted over RF. Furthermore, the Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC)
ﬁeld of a Bluetooth Baseband packet indicates whether the payload is encrypted or not.
By far the weakest link in the chain of Bluetooth security is the PIN mechanism. In part
due to the fact that up until Bluetooth 2.0 it was the exclusive pairing mechanism and
still heavily used in modern versions (Haataja et al., 2013), in part because when used, it
is often presented to the end-user, resulting in a low level of entropy since the maximum
128bits is inconvenient to the user and hard to remember. Often, a PIN code of 4 digits
is used, representing 4 ∗log2 10 ≈14 bits of entropy. In later revisions of Bluetooth,
Secure Simple Pairing (SSP) is introduced consisting of the phases Capabilities exchange,
Public key exchange, Authentication stage 1, Authentication stage 2, Link key calculation,
and LMP authentication and encryption. While this scheme provides protection against
eavesdropping, it is possible for a MitM attack to force victim clients to use a method
of authentication to drop down to use the so-called ”Just Works” model that simply
establishes a connection should the victim accept.
Wireless
Wireless networks using Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) and 802.1X
access control can be victims to MitM. The attack is proven to work on EAP-Message Di-
gest 5 (MD5) and EAP-Tunneled Transport Layer Security (TTLS). (Hwang et al., 2008)
On ﬁgure 1.2, steps are labeled in chronological order as to illustrate to steps needed to
take in order to perform the attack.
1. Obtain the channel and SSID of the legitimate Access Point (AP).
2. Mirror the information in the rogue AP.
3. Disrupt the ﬂow of information between client and legitimate AP through means of
DoS
4. The client will connect to rogue AP due to stronger signal and (2)
10
==PAGE:13==
Legitimate AP
Rogue AP
 
Victim
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 1.2:
Man in the Middle - WiFi
5. The connection is established between client and rogue AP.
The MitM attack is then complete and the traﬃc will be transparently routed between
client and legitimate AP going through the rogue AP. In the proposed design by (Hwang
et al., 2008), the routing is achieved in a EAP in conjunction with the 802.1X environment
by asking the client to authenticate with ID and password and create an MD5 hash using
the ID, password and a challenge/request appended. This produces the challenge-response
and authenticates the rogue AP.
A means of prevention in the case of EAP-TTLS is to extend the inner authentication
mechanism known as MS-CHAPv2 to use a two-factor dynamic password instead of the
current static password susceptible to cracking attacks. The extension includes two phases:
ﬁrst the traditional authentication including device ID and password and then a challenge-
response transmitted on a diﬀerent network, for instance, mobile data networks (Cai, Wu,
& Zhang, 2014). The resulting dynamically generated password consist of the following:
SHA256(SHA256(static password) + challenge + IMEI)(Cai et al., 2014) where + de-
notes concatenation. With this improvement, replay attacks and the previously described
vulnerability is mitigated since the static password is hashed.
11
==PAGE:14==
Security Weakness
Several standards are provided by IEEEE to provide Wire-
less Local Area Network (WLAN) with security. Among those, Wired Equivalent Privacy
(WEP) is an older standard which has since been deprecated but is still widely used today
with a measurement of 15% of all security schemes for WLAN (Vondrek et al., 2018).
Establishing a MitM requires the attacker to gain access into the network at which point
any traditional technique such as ARP poisoning may be applied once the adversary has
gained access. In the case of WEP secured networks in Shared Key Authentication (SKA)
mode, connecting clients sends a shared key encrypted using Rivest Cipher 4 (RC4) stream
ciphers (Vondrek et al., 2018). Cracking this key relies upon the Initialization Vector (IV)
used to begin the encryption process. In the case of WEP Open System Authentication
(OSA) mode, any client may simply connect.
Like WEP, Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) is another security scheme for WLAN.
This has been succeeded by WPA2 since, due to the security ﬂaw of transmitting conﬁ-
dential information during its 4-way handshake process of connecting clients. If an attacker
sniﬀs this information, the entropy of computing the Pre-Shared Key (PSK) is reduced
(Vondrek et al., 2018). This is also true for WPA2. Even further reducing the entropy,
Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS), a convenience functionality added to many routers to make
it easier for an end-user to connect to a WLAN. This will authorize access to the network
by asking for a short PIN code and is strongly susceptible to brute-force attacks (Vondrek
et al., 2018).
IPv4
Many traditional MitM attacks are based upon ARP poisoning victims in an IPv4
based network. Due to the inherent side-eﬀect of exposing the position of the attacker in a
traditional ARP based MitM, a novel concept of Stealth-Man-In-The-Middle is presented
(Samineni et al., 2012). The attacker will need to present the victim with their MAC
address as part of the ARP routine leaving the attacker vulnerable to be detected. The
attacker constructs of spoofed ARP packet in such a manner that both victims are invited
to announce their IP address to the network broadcast address: ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff This
results in a scenario where the victims are communicating to each other in the form of a
network broadcast and the attacker will have achieved a trade-oﬀwhere packet manipu-
lation is no longer possible, but their position in the network remains anonymous.
On ﬁgure 1.3 each end represents the victims at which the ARP cache is populated
12
==PAGE:15==
 
Figure 1.3:
Stealth MitM
with the network broadcast MAC address while the attacker knows the correct MAC ad-
dress of the respective victims.
There are several ways to detect and prevent this ranging from passive prevention such as
using static IP’s, installing hardware along the AP and host-based software (Bremler-Barr
& Levy, 2005) (H. Wang, Jin, & Shin, 2007). Intrusion Detection System (IDS) software
can also be installed on the network to notify or disallow hosts to accept ARP packets
requesting the use of the broadcast address as a legitimate client location (Samineni et
al., 2012).
Password Reset
Password Reset Man in the Middle (PRMitM) is an attack in appli-
cation layer space that exploits the similarities between application sign-up and sign-in.
The attacker presents the user with a resource of interest, for instance, a downloadable
ﬁle and prompts the victim for the exact same type of information required to ﬁll out an
email reset form (Gelernter et al., 2017). In that sense, the attack is similar to phishing,
and while it is simple in theory the severity is quite high due to the exploitation of web
design ﬂaws. From a user perspective, registering on a website to access a ﬁle is a normal
concept even when it entails registering security questions, after all, they have done the
same to register with their email provider.
Several large scale enterprise applications have been tested against this attack and
it has been proven that among those, Facebook & Google resulted in 100% success rate
against PRMitM (Gelernter et al., 2017). Prevention against this attack suggests that
email providers need to either adopt a policy of removing the forgotten password feature
or require the user to register a peripheral device, a mobile phone or similar in order to
13
==PAGE:16==
 
Requesting ﬁle
Requesting email
victim@mailprovider.com
mailprovider.com
Forgot password. 
victim@mailprovider.com
CAPCHA: "challenge"
CAPCHA: "challenge"
CAPCHA: "challenge"
CAPCHA: "challenge"
Security question:
Name of best friend?
Security question:
Name of best friend?
Answer: Bob
Answer: Bob
Choose new password
Figure 1.4:
PRMitM ﬂow.
allow the forgotten password feature. This is known as two-factor authentication. Another
possibility might be to tailor the security questions to actions bound to the mail provider
site context that makes them stand out on the attacker site.
NFC
Near Field Communication (NFC) is considered secure against MitM for the sim-
ple reason that the short distance required between the communicating parties make it
infeasible to achieve. With a white paper describing a novel concept of carrying out such
an attack, the authors (Akter et al., 2017) describe a scenario in which the adversary is the
communicating client itself attempting to trick the benign NFC reader. As can be seen,
demonstrated in ﬁgure 1.5, the attacker possesses a legitimate smart card (original card),
an empty NFC tag (MitM card) and some hardware with peripherals in-between that
allow interchangeable communication switching between the two types of cards and the
NFC reader. An isolated communication channel, a serial-wire in the case of the example
(Akter et al., 2017) is used to communicate between the cards and the microcontroller
and registers what messages need to be altered.
The alteration of messages themselves happens when The Readermalicious reads the
messages originating from the original card. The message is sent to the Writermalicious
14
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.5:
NFC MitM (Akter et al., 2017)
node writing the information to the MitM card.
A successful attack will allow any payload modiﬁcation as can be seen in the case of ﬁgure
1.6 where the original message has their ASCII encoded data incremented to represent a
new ASCII string of hello −→ifmmp
Figure 1.6:
NFC MitM results (Akter et al., 2017)
15
==PAGE:18==
In the case of the attack from a malicious initiators perspective, the receiving end of the
NFC session can do little to protect themselves in terms of traditional measures such
as replay protection and cryptographic solutions since all data between the original en-
tity and the MitM cloned card share the exact same information. The same is true for
location-centric schemes where the initiating party is required to be in some location or
perform some action that requires the physical presence and unique action to the initi-
ating party, once again the information is simply cloned. A possibility stems from the
manufacturing process of the original Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) chip known
as Physically Unclonable Function (PUF), a hardware process of making a system that is
easy to evaluate yet hard to clone/predict (Akter et al., 2017).
SDN
Software Deﬁned Networking (SDN) is a modern networking concept that has
reached enterprise adaption and recognition (Google, 2019b). It is a system in which the
physical routing hardware is controlled centrally by a so-called controller. The most pop-
ular implementation is OpenFlow and determines how the control of routing decisions
are spread into the network topology (X. Wang et al., 2016). Although a recent concept,
attacks have been proposed and since mitigated using tools such as TopoGuard (Hong,
Xu, Wang, & Gu, 2015) and SPHINX (Dhawan, Poddar, Mahajan, & Mann, 2015). In
a recent whitepaper (X. Wang et al., 2016), a MitM attack is presented working in an
environment with such tools enabled.
The MitM attacks the service of discovering links in the network which is a vital part
of SDN and something the controller relies heavily upon. The attack is allowed due to
missing integrity checks in the protocol upon receipt of an Link Layer Discovery Protocol
(LLDP) packet. This allows a malicious agent to either create DoS scenarios or simply
position themselves in between links in the SDN network by relaying LLDP packets.
In the example case displayed in ﬁgure 1.7, two adversaries may establish a fake link by
transferring LLDP packets from switch 1 & 2 respectively with a connected compromised
host at each switch. When the compromised server receives the packet it will communi-
cate directly with the host at switch 1 and thus allowing the relay host to obtain a MitM
position in the network (X. Wang et al., 2016). From there, a number of traditional MitM
schemes can take place such as stripping SSL / TLS from HTTP requests which can be
guarded against with traditional measurements.
16
==PAGE:19==
Switch 2
Switch 3
Switch 1
 
Compromised server
Relay host
Figure 1.7:
SDN MitM
Other than resolving to the processing-intensive task of full-packet inspection to detect
the missing integrity of all packets, a more reﬁned resolution of fake link inspection should
be applied to mitigate the MitM. The controller itself may not be able to distinguish
the diﬀerence between a real link and a fake link, however at the attacking phase the
required relay between multiple switches introduce latency, with which the controller could
implement a guard against to attempt to distinguish between a real LLDP packet and a
forged one.
17
==PAGE:20==
Design
2.1
Architecture
In the following section, the architecture and top-down approach of the proposed MitM
attack is detailed. The idea, novel in its application, draws inspiration from concepts such
as emulated private servers (Debeauvais & Nardi, 2010), software cracking (Jain, Kuo,
Soet, & Tse, 2007) & trojan horse malware (Kiltz, Lang, & Dittmann, 2007). In this the-
sis the attack is illustrated with the use of an online video game for instant visual feedback
of the attacker’s capabilities on a successful attack as well as the transparent nature of
the attack, providing the ability to remain completely unknown to the victim. It is crucial
to stress that this attack is applicable to any system that uses a client-server architecture
and not limited to the use-case highlighted in this thesis.
The attack proposed in this thesis is by design a versatile attack and as such, this
section will further describe how it may be used in a diﬀerent manner than traditional
MitM where instead of 3 parties, the attacker will take a more active role and construct
carefully selected sequences of network packets that might allow some functionality oth-
erwise prohibited.
Exactly as traditional MitM attacks, this attack acts as a proxy for network communi-
cation between two unsuspecting parties, typically a client-server environment. In eﬀorts
to circumvent measures to protect against this attack, the proxy is carefully positioned
”closer” towards the client or the server, most likely the client as opposed to traditionally
listening in as a separate entity on the network. In this thesis, the attack is manifested
with two example scripts. One is a script running as a background service on the client’s
machine intercepting the traﬃc before and after it arrives and leaves the server. This
script does not interrupt the program execution ﬂow by any means and its ﬁngerprint is
indistinguishable from another voluntary service making it extremely unlikely for it to be
classiﬁed as malicious code. The other implementation is constructed using the concept of
function hooking, also known as trampolining & detouring (Yin & Song, 2013). The two
implementations share a common goal and are similar in many ways, but what a hook
allows is for manipulation or relaying information to the attacker while the client actively
18
==PAGE:21==
engages with the software. In the example software used in this paper, the game client
recognizes multiple login attempts on a single character and will only allow one connec-
tion. This means that the script running in the background will be disengaged by the login
action of the user while the hook will not. On the contrary, the script may run without
user interaction and at all times. A vital diﬀerence between the two implementations in
terms of mitigation is that function hooking is a technique often used by malware and as
such, protection measures are more readily available. (Kim, Lee, & Cho, 2011)
Example
Before the attack: The attacker has knowledge about & access to an applica-
tion binary such as a game client. The game is compiled to machine code before distribution
and requires debugger software to analyze. This will display the machine code in Assem-
bly Language (ASM) format and provide a sequence of instructions which, while low-level,
provides knowledge about the code logic. The malicious agent extracts vital parts of the
code where the communication between server & client happens as well as the encryption,
decryption & other cryptographic routines involved in the process. A script is then created
to hook into the game functions of interest to perform the exact same steps that the game
client as part of the handshaking and connectivity phase. That script is loaded onto the
victim machine that is known to use this client software, in this case through physical
access.
 
 
push ebx
call 0x1234 
0x1234 
 
... 
mov eax,0x1 
Figure 2.8:
Code logic extraction through a debugger
In the process of extracting code logic related to communication between server and client,
the analyzer ﬁnds areas of interest within the code such as TCP socket calls to send & recv
functions. These type of calls are system calls and can for that reason quickly be ﬁltered
down to the speciﬁc places in the code where the game code interacts with the Operating
System (OS) code. As portrayed in ﬁgure 2.8, functions are extracted by their signatures
such as push opcodes that push data and function return pointers to the stack in what is
known as the prologue in ASM. In the simpliﬁed ﬁgure 2.8 we observe a prologue which in
19
==PAGE:22==
the example calls the function located at address 123416. Once such functions have been
discovered, ﬁnding the functions related to cryptography involves a mix of persistence,
intuition of where they might occur such as before send and receive calls, and of knowing
cryptographic signatures such as constants used in hashes and known ciphers. Special
knowledge speciﬁcally applicable to the compromised software in question is crucial to
reduce the trial-and-error-prone process that is associated with the initial stage of the
attack.
Figure 2.9:
Man in the Middle - Beyond encryption
As portrayed in ﬁgure 2.9, the malicious code requires access to the victim’s machine
that executes the application. This could be a personal laptop, a public library computer
or any machine that runs the client software. Although the malicious code needs to be
present on the victim machine, this can be done in a number of ways from physical access
to the ways in which malware typically propagates such as Cross Site Request Forgery
(CSRF), Cross Site Scripting (XSS) or simple email impersonations. (Liu & Zhong, 2017)
(Wen et al., 2015) Where a traditional MitM attacker is positioned between the two
communicating entities, the MitM described in this paper will be positioned closer to the
communication sources, either in one end or both. This is a vital part of understanding
the mechanisms of the attack since the positioning in its abstract representation is what
allows the attacker to sniﬀ, relay or alter the packets going over the network, in ﬁgure 2.9
represented by the pipe. This is why a regular MitM is described with the malicious agent
in the middle of the ”pipe”/network transmission (2.10) and why we distinguish between
those.
Example
During the attack: Continuing from the previous example, we observe the
attack from a user perspective. At this point in time, the user has no knowledge of the
compromised machine and logs into the game server through his software client. The vic-
tim enters their username & password which the malicious background script registers
through carefully placed hooks in the code. To the user, the game plays exactly as it nor-
20
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.10:
Man in the Middle - Regular representation
mally would while behind the scenes the malicious code is using the cryptographic keys
generated and/or stored in the code to decode the packets going in and out of the machine.
Not only does the attacker have the ability to listen in on all the supposedly encrypted
traﬃc, but the attacker may even choose to reverse the ﬂow of the encryption logic to
construct network packets that perform actions normally only available to the user, all of
the above capabilities executed from a remote location. Such actions could be manifested
as moving a player character, requesting conﬁdential player information only stored on the
server or even perform actions normally not allowed by the player such as running faster.
An example of vital information stored on the server to be retrieved by the attacker is
credit card information that keeps a monthly subscription active for the user. Depending
on the security practices on the server and the assumption levels of trust, critical infor-
mation such as credit card numbers might be stored on the server with encryption and
allowed to be communicated to the client encrypted. In that case, the MitM attack would
hook into the decrypt routine and forward the buﬀer in memory containing the digits.
Apart from the known cryptographic constants described before as signatures, string anal-
ysis plays an important role and is used to hone in on functions of interest. Hashes of
passwords, usernames or something related to the game are examples of strings produced
by the code that helps the attacker identify the relevant routines involved in the com-
munication. In the case of our example from ﬁgure 2.11, Urk#nI7ni appeared multiple
times throughout the codebase especially near the send and recv routines. It is identiﬁed,
in part, to contain the company name of the game, namely ”Kru Inc”. This sequence
of characters, in particular, turned out to represent an array of bytes by their American
Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) codes used as a symmetric key in
early stages of the connection establishing before a temporary key is generated, observed
21
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.11:
IDA Debugger - Graph mode view showing a static key
to be changing rapidly.
0xAA
0x00
0x0E
0x11
0x3A
ACTION_ID
. . . .
Figure 2.12:
Look packet example - Excerpt
Example
As with the previous example, the perspective of an active hacker shows how
actions can be taken on behalf of the user, unknown or otherwise to the victim. With a
successful session establishing as per the last example, the hacker now selects a sequence
of bytes that represent a certain action within the game. In this case, we will demonstrate
it visually which will be known to the user in order to get visual feedback and therefore
a ”look” action is chosen, making the character look towards a direction chosen by the
22
==PAGE:25==
hacker. An example of such a sequence of bytes is shown in ﬁgure 2.12. Direction among
other data necessary to perform the requested action is included later in the sequence as a
number between 0-3 representing up,right,down,left in that order. As seen in snippet
2.1, the script is constructed to send a look packet. After the transmission, we observe the
eﬀect on the character shown in ﬁgure 2.13. When the character logs into the game server,
the hacker initiates a look and with a randomly chosen direction (2.1 and immediately we
see the character move with no touches on the keyboard.
21
this.sendPacket(Packet.look(this.utils.randomInt (0, 3), extra.username ,
sequence_token), send);
Listing 2.1:
SessionHandler excerpt from the code sending a look packet upon receival of
server communication
Figure 2.13:
Character look action - Before and after
In the following section, the design will be described, distinguishing between the two im-
plementations, one aiming for transparent autonomous execution and one using function
hooking. Both implementations will be perceived from a user and an attacker perspective.
23
==PAGE:26==
2.2
Autonomous
When the autonomous software has been installed on the victim machine, it is designed to
register as a service on the OS, running upon boot. As illustrated in ﬁgure 2.14, the script
and the game client run separately. This allows the attacker to extract critical information
from the servers without the victim realizing that the attack is taking place.
TCP Socket
NexusTK Servers
 
Adversary
 
Victim
Autonomous
script
Game client
Figure 2.14:
Transparent, autonomous design
Before the autonomous software begins, a keylogging process must occur to get the
user credentials. There are several ways to accomplish such logging. A TCP connection is
made to the NexusTK login servers. The initiation sequence begins and all the received
packets are received into a First In First Out (FIFO) queue data structure. Once the
initiation sequence is complete, heartbeat packets are transmitted to the server keeping
the connection alive and from this point on the attacker can read and write packets to the
game server on behalf of the client.
24
==PAGE:27==
2.2.1
Perspective
User
With the user away from the machine, no signs of engagement are present unless the user
attempts to log in, at which point the servers will break the connection to the autonomous
software session and establish one for the user. Signs of activity may occur if the adversary
has sent movement packages or stolen in-game currency. Similarly, should the MitM attack
be applied to browser software targeted against an online banking application, money
siphoning will be the obvious signs of unauthorized activity.
Attacker
With the victim away from the machine the hacker may choose to activate the script
remotely. Upon successful authentication within the game, the hacker has access to all in-
coming and outgoing packages. In the script, a variety of packets are represented by their
byte-sequence and can be applied using the abstracted send function to the lower-level
socket.
An adversary running the script may choose to execute hardcoded sequences of packets
upon certain states or conditions or attempt to provide another layer to the software that
allows for Remote Procedure Call (RPC). This approach is advantageous to the attacker
allowing them full control over the victim’s character or client session remotely. In the
case of the game, this would mean complete visual feedback as movement packages or
item trade packets are initiated with the attacker’s character. In ﬁgure 2.15, an excerpt
out the stdout is shown indicating how the ﬂow of information looks as the script is
initiated.
2.3
Hook
Due to the nature of function hooking, allowing the user to operate the game controls
and getting visual feedback while the MitM attack is running simultaneously, this design
assumes that the user takes an adversary role, essentially reducing the system to an at-
tacker attempting to exploit the system directly rather than an attacker relying on the
user-server communication found in traditional MitM designs.
25
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.15:
Node.js console output of running the autonomous script
TCP Socket
NexusTK Servers
 
Adversary
Injected game client
Figure 2.16:
Function hook design
What distinguishes the hooking scheme from the autonomous transparent script is
that the game client receives the malicious code directly at the hooked functions which
overwrites the memory addresses where program code is stored by DLL injection. This
changes the execution ﬂow from the original code to the original including the extra pro-
cessing at the functions of interest, in this case primarily at the en/de-crypt routine where
the plaintext buﬀers are received.
As illustrated in ﬁgure 2.17, the target process, in this case, NexusTK.exe is located
26
==PAGE:29==
which may or may not change memory location, which is why the process guarantees a
base address calculated at hook runtime. This means that the hook can account for any
OS and any diﬀerent randomized memory block allocation for diﬀerent victims since the
function of interest can be calculated by the oﬀset + the base address.
Target Process
...
mov eax, 1
test eax, eax
je 00 11 22 33
...
...
E9 11 22 33 44
(JMP 11 22 33 44)
Target Function
   00 11 22 33
...
...
E9 11 22 33 44
(JMP 11 22 33 44)
Hooked Function
   11 22 33 44
Figure 2.17:
Abstraction of function hooking theory in an x86 environment
Once the function of interest has been found, the hooking code can then overwrite the
beginning of the function to redirect the program execution including the information on
the stack (previous function parameters) to the malicious code function, on ﬁgure 2.17
named Hooked function. At least 5 bytes must be present in the target function in order
to write the relative jump to memory, 1 byte for the jump instruction and 4 bytes for the
address of the other function. Figure 2.18 shows an example of how the initial function is
originally doing arithmetic operations using the Central Processing Unit (CPU) registers
until the hook overwrites the ﬁrst 5 bytes, now pointing to the hooked function which will
perform malicious activity and return to the original function execution in order for the
program not to crash from exhibiting unknown behavior.
..
mov eax, ebx
add eax, 100
..
Target Function
   Before hook
JMP 11 22 33 44
...
   Target Function
    After hook
Figure 2.18:
Target function showing the opcodes manipulated by a hook
27
==PAGE:30==
2.3.1
Perspective
Attacker/User
When the user / attacker begins a session with the game software, the hook is injected.
This can be done in various ways, through auxiliary software or custom software, the
technique is the same regardless: Calculate the memory address location of the game by
process id.
One possible use of this technique is to log all data for analyzing. This allows the
attacker to not only snoop on all the chats, private or otherwise but also all the other
actions performed by the clients such as moving, contacting the game server and trans-
mitting credit card information to purchase in-game goods. This assumes that the hook
implementation is used in the traditional victim/attacker setup. In the case of a combined
user/attacker role the attacker might try to extract information that is sent over the wire
due to security assumptions that the client software is meant to discard this before showing
an unauthorized client the information.
Example
Logging
As the function hook is triggered, the data pointer containing action infor-
mation is read. The hacker knows by analyzing the assembly code during reverse engineer-
ing what position in the memory array represents action id and what position represents
the metadata such as plaintext in chats or credit card number information. This data
is then logged and analyzed. Figure 2.19 & 2.20 illustrates how in-game actions such as
walking, facing a direction and chatting is then shown live in the text ﬁle on the ﬁlesystem
(2.20)
Figure 2.19:
In-game chat log during an injected hook
28
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.20:
File-system chat log during an injected hook
Another possibility of the hook is to access the data pointers living in memory and
changing them before sending them out to encryption and transmitting the packets to
the server, also implemented by the hook, see implementation. This transforms any chat
message typed into the words hi.
Example
Manipulating outgoing messages
Upon entering the function hook the attacker
accesses the data in memory, checks if the outgoing message contains the action id 0x0E
determining the action type of the packet (14 in decimal). In this case, 0x0E is most likely
an enumerator on the server-side and determines the regular chat functionality. In this
29
==PAGE:32==
case the attacker modiﬁes the data contained in the succeeding bytes from the original
message to hi. This means that whenever the game character attempts to speak any sen-
tence no matter the contents, the transmitted chat packet will always contain the text hi.
This is proven to work in the implementation section.
Figure 2.21: Wireshark initiation sequence
The attacks all share the same trait that any manipulation of relaying of information
still works in an encrypted environment as soon as the packets are transmitted over the
socket. In ﬁgure 2.21 a Wireshark connection is shown by ﬁltering all ethernet device
packets by the IP of the NexusTK servers using a ﬁlter ip.src == 52.88.44.46 ||
ip.dst == 52.88.44.46. After the handshake and authorization process is complete,
any succeeding packets will no longer carry any plaintext, as illustrated in 2.22.
30
==PAGE:33==
Figure 2.22:
Wireshark encrypted session
31
==PAGE:34==
In terms of game logic and how it handles the encryption, all packets incoming or outgo-
ing, the payload contains sequence numbers and other information, required to decrypt
the payload as a whole. This is important to understand in order to extract the contained
sensitive information such as chat messages, amount of in-game currency and more.
It is also relevant in order to show that this attack works even when software manufacturers
resolve to distribute their own proprietary encryption routines which is the case of this
game and ties into the general theory advising against security by obscurity. How the
analysis shows it is structured as well as the en/de-crypt routines must be applied is
described in further detail in the implementation section.
32
==PAGE:35==
Implementation
The implementation has multiple stages and options depending on the desired results
from an attack. A requirement to implement any of the designs relies strongly upon a
foundation of reverse engineering that must analyze what happens where in the target
software, such as system calls, TCP socket sends and receives and how diﬀerent actions in
the game is represented in assembly logic. Only at that point on may the real implemen-
tations take place exploiting the knowledge that the analyzing stage has provided. This
paper describes two diﬀerent implementations following the systematic architecture from
the design section, namely the function hook implementation and the autonomous script.
It is worth noting that while there exists at least one demonstration of implementing a
similar attack on this game (Ros, 2017), the novelty of the MitM presented in this paper
should provide the tools and theory to apply the concepts to any client-server architecture
of this kind. The challenge lies not in the implementation of the hooking function or the
autonomous script, but rather in the reverse engineering process that determines where
the unencrypted plaintext lives in memory before it is encrypted and transmitted, how
the packets are structured and all other logic required to implement such an attack. In
this section, this will be thoroughly described.
33
==PAGE:36==
3.1
Reverse engineering
With no prior knowledge of the game, a top-down approach was chosen initially in order
to gather the information that would allow the debugging to hone in on the sections of
the binary that had any relation to the desired goal. To do this, the Linux tool strings
(Software, 1991) was used in conjunction with grep (Kerrisk, 2018) to search the binary
for strings that might assist in this. Some information about minimaps was apparently
available in some hash encoded format directly from the binary, but more importantly,
it was discovered that a speciﬁc string had appeared both in network packet inspection
as well as the strings tool searching. This later turned out to play a vital role in the
generation of the static symmetric key used in the en/de-crypt routines.
Figure 3.23:
strings and grep extracting hashes from the game binary
Figure 3.23 shows the Uniform Ressource Locator (URL) extracted from the analysis
presented the following unprotected list of hashes shown in table 3.3
0,
CA9D088F01A125C6D19BDD43454E1FE0/2,
70754B27ED5E6433EBB5B5C271A9BFE8/3,
B2C8CF90C5853DEC8F4BE4F9EBCCB419/4,
4DEB48EAD8DC78FB32E9DCCDAFE2DD2D/5,
881CA44F878027D1358D83714E4A0EB9/6,
D586377D02EA741DC4510D774A9D855B/7,
FC2067E9237E69874E38AC2552867F09/8,
004F1248CEB497E8695F062D83E7D2AF/9,
832279F08D607EA93A3C582DB7C5EFCE/10,
...
Table 3.3:
Hash values extracted from the binary analysis
34
==PAGE:37==
More context is needed to make sense of the hashes, and in order to form a better picture
we needed to look at the packets going in and out of the system.
Wireshark
To accomplish packet inspection, the tool Wireshark (Wireshark, 2019) was used. The tool
allows for easy ﬁltering on things such as the network protocol and source/destination IP.
When the NexusTK packets were discovered, the payload was investigated to determine if
there was any plaintext information that could prove valuable in the following disassembler
reverse engineering session. Figure 3.24 shows an example of information exchange and
how a packet analysis may help extract vital clues such as the string UrkcnItni also
described in the static key generation process. The username, which has been censored for
conﬁdentiality, was also discovered as shown in ﬁgure 3.25.
Figure 3.24:
Wireshark packet inspection on plaintext during the handshake
35
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.25:
Wireshark packet inspection - username discovered (censored)
3.1.1
Assembly / Disassembly
Before taking up the time-consuming task of reverse engineering a compiled binary it is
critical that the analyst knows ASM and how it relates to the C-syntax it was built from. It
is also vital to understand the architecture it is compiled to, in the case of the game client,
x86 ASM architecture targeted towards a Windows environment. These are all variables
that have a large impact on how the ASM is formed. With a solid foundation, resources
on how to relate common operations between ASM and C such as loops, function calls,
branching and logical operations is strongly recommended to familiarize with (SensePost,
2018). Examples of such are shown in table 3.4 & 3.5.
The tools used in this implementation phase of debugger analysis was a combination
of OllyDBG (OllyDBG, 2019) and IDA Pro (Hex-Rays, 2019). Both have strengths and
weaknesses, but IDA Pro was a huge help especially in the understanding of how the in-
structions related to C and helped jumping back and forth between function calls using
its integrated decompiler which produces C pseudocode. It is important to address that
the disassembler isn’t able to name the variables and functions from the compiled binary
instruction set. It does, however, allow the analyst to rename both and annotate lines.
36
==PAGE:39==
C
x86 ASM
function (int x, char y);
mov eax, y
push eax
mov eax, x
push eax
call function
Table 3.4:
ASM & C relation - Function calls
C
x86 ASM
c = 0;
mov ecx, DWORD PTR [array]
while (c <1000) {
xor eax, eax
array[c] = c;
LoopStart:
c++;
mov DWORD PTR [ecx+eax*4], eax
}
add eax, 1
cmp eax, 1000
jl LoopStart
Table 3.5:
ASM & C relation - Loop calls
Those variables and functions that are named in the illustrations in the following section
is a product of the intuition of the author in the analysis phase of the attack and does not
reﬂect actual variable or function identiﬁers.
Common for both debuggers is terms of locating the en- & de-cryption routines is the
necessity to work backward or forwards respectively through the instructions. For each
branching or function prologue, it is required for the analyst to set a breakpoint and check
the registers and memory dump to try to locate some recognizable input. In the case of
the game-client, we were fortunate to be able to choose plaintext in terms of chat mes-
sages. This gives an advantageous insight into how arguments that get pushed to the stack
must contain a pointer to somewhere in memory where the plaintext is stored before it
is able to be transformed into ciphertext. Through rigorous analysis and knowing what is
able to be skipped from the breakpoint analysis, a function containing just that as well
as some extra information turning out to be the ID that identiﬁes the chat operation was
discovered. In ﬁgure 3.26 it is shown how a speciﬁc instruction calls a function with 4 ar-
guments. In the stack view shown on the lower right section of the debugger the memory
37
==PAGE:40==
addresses to the buﬀers are stored, and when looking at the memory dump they point
to, speciﬁcally the third argument pushed to the stack, the plaintext hello! is found along
with some extra bytes of information preceding it. When selecting the step over tool of
the debugger, taking the analyst to the instruction immediately after the function call is
done, the memory region previously containing the plaintext now had been transformed
into ciphertext shown in ﬁgure 3.27.
Figure 3.26:
Encryption function discovered - plaintext
Another tool that proved valuable to the analysis phase of debugging are plugins for
Olly & IDA Pro that highlights cryptographic constants (Berard, 2019). This aided in
discovering an MD5 hashing process found as part of the key generation described in fur-
ther subsections. More speciﬁcally, a targeted search for the input parameter to a function
which seemed looked like a hash value produced somewhere uncoupled from the general
encryption/decryption routines lead to a speciﬁc function that produced a long hash string
by looping the hashed value from the character name 32 times. Each round the hash results
was appended and used as input for the next round. the bcrypt library was discovered as
part of this, shown in ﬁgure 3.28
The ﬁrst intuition of the author was to look for the WS32 2 send() (Microsoft, 2018b) and
recv() (Microsoft, 2018a) functions from within the game code since it was assumed to be
38
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.27:
Encryption function discovered - ciphertext
Figure 3.28: bcrypt library identiﬁed
the common for those function to either precede or succeed the encryption & decryption,
that is, right before the payload is created, encrypted and sent over the wire and vice-
versa for the receive operations. Once again it is advantageous to have prior knowledge
about operating systems and how sockets in programming languages communicate with
the kernel space rather than much of the game logic located in the user space (Tanenbaum,
2014), an operation known as a system call (Silberschatz, Galvin, & Gagne, 2018). This
39
==PAGE:42==
will allow the analyst to easily identify those calls and with the tools that much debugger
software provides, cross-reference those system calls to the place in the client-software
that makes the send and recv system calls. What this also allows the analyst is to know
the order of arguments being pushed to the stack as well as identify what the arguments
represent such as the memory location of the buﬀer being read & transmitted by the
socket, the length of the buﬀer and certain ﬂags available which can be relevant to the
speciﬁc analysis. This is possible by reading the documentation for the API targeting the
speciﬁc kernel, in the case of this paper the windows socket2 documentation (Microsoft,
2018b) (Microsoft, 2018a).
Figure 3.29:
Memory dump the username as the hashing subroutine begins in relation to
the key generation
40
==PAGE:43==
Once the encryption routine had been discovered the task at hand was to study how,
apart from producing ciphertext, the routine would structure the information into a packet
before sending it oﬀ. Among other things, the packets would always be structured in a
certain manner as a result of the ﬁnal instructions in the function. See the last part of
the function in ﬁgure 3.31 where speciﬁc parts of the buﬀer receives metadata such as the
nonces, the sequence number and some hash values at a consant location oﬀset. This is
part of the subroutine called in the function shown in ﬁgure 3.30. Another discovery was
the use of what the author named sequence number. This variable is counted on all send
and recv actions in relation to the en- & de-cryption routines. The sequence number is
an 8-byte value that exhibits cyclic behavior when the ﬁnal digits has been reached.
Figure 3.30:
Snippet of the outer encryption routine
41
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.31:
Snippet of the inner encryption routine, responsible for arranging the ci-
phertext in the output buﬀer, as presented by the Hex-Rays disassembler
42
==PAGE:45==
Keys
Static key
As mentioned before, the static key was somewhat revealed in the initial
stages in the analysis where a string UrkcnItni appeared both in Wireshark packet in-
spection as well as the binary hex dump. As this wasn’t the ﬁnal static key, it may sound
somewhat contradicting that the static key was later generated from this discovered se-
quence, however, that is, in fact, good security practice to avoid storing the string but
rather generate it at runtime such that a more detailed debugging session had to take
place in order to extract it. The word that appeared in the packet inspection contained
urk, and as ﬁgure 3.32 indicates, the same precursor string to the ﬁnal static key appeared
in the binary as well as in the packet analysis.
Figure 3.32:
strings and grep extracting a static key lead
Searching through all referenced text strings as well as what at the time was likely to be a
subroutine of the encryption routine, the string previously discovered in the reconnaissance
phase UrkcnItni was presented as the primary argument in a loop that kept iterating for
what appeared to be 32 times. The product of this was a repeating sequence of characters
that seemed to have a length of 9 as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.34. This sequence is used as
part of the en- & de-cryption prodedures in conjunction with a dynamically generated key
described below.
Figure 3.33: UrkcnItni discovered in the assembly debugging preparing to create the
static key
43
==PAGE:46==
As mentioned several types prior, the text string UrkcnItni discovered during reconnais-
sance, was used as part of the preparation-steps in creating the static key as seen in ﬁgure
3.33.
Figure 3.34: Static key generation routine
Dynamic key
Continuing from the assembly section, the dynamic key was naturally
discovered as a subroutine of the standard encryption. Coincidentally, the compiler ap-
parently had the two key generation routines placed close to each other in memory, seen
in ﬁgure 3.35. The subroutine illustrated in 3.36 turned out to be part of the algorithm,
initially taking the username and then hashing it 32 times, with each round appending
the string and using the previous hash as input for the next round.
Figure 3.35:
Dynamic key generation routine
44
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.36: Dynamic key generation algorithm
The second part shown in ﬁgure 3.37 & 3.35 is the actual temporary key with a length
of 9 that is generated upon each received package and is cycling over the produced 1024
byte long resulting hash, picking out speciﬁc places determined in part by a (Pseudo) Ran-
dom Number Generation (RNG), generating an 8bit and 16bit value the author classiﬁed
as nonces. A memory dump created by creating a breakpoint at the end of the static key
generation showed the memory address containing the result, shown in ﬁgure 3.38.
Figure 3.39 shows how the algorithm picks out the characters from the resulting 32-
round hash generation to a 9 character long temporary key. The 8-bit and 16-bit nonces
are transmitted along with the payload, presumably in order for the server to know which
characters of the 32-round hash result to replicate since the temp keys are never trans-
mitted. It is assumed that the server decryption routines are symmetric in that regard.
45
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.37: Dynamic key generation algorithm
Figure 3.38:
Memory dump of key resulting 1024 byte hash
46
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.39:
Dynamic key generation algorithm full code
47
==PAGE:50==
3.2
Autonomous
With the vital parts of the communication and encryption extracted by the debugging
analysis phase, it was possible to recreate it as to prove the extent of the attack. In this
section, the code for the autonomous script implementation is described. The project is
written in Typescript, a superset of Javascript (Typescript, 2019). The code also depends
on the runtime environment Node.js that provides access to the Google V8 (Google, 2019d)
javascript engine while providing many helpful modules such as TCP and datatype ob-
jects representing raw binary data, the Buffer module (Nodejs, 2019) which was used
extensively in the recreation of the en- & de-cryption algorithms.
Figure 3.40 shows a very high-level diagram of the mix of modules and classes in the
codebase based loosely on Uniﬁed Modelling Language (UML) (Booch, Rumbaugh, Booch,
Rumbaugh, & Jacobson, 2014). The NTKClient is the main engine behind the code and
controls the ﬂow of information coming in and out through the NTKSocket. NTKSocket
uses the EventEmitter pattern of which NTKClient subscribes to the events, primarily
raw binary streams from the TCP connection with the NexusTK servers. It also hosts a
FIFO queue that stores the incoming data to form a message queue.
When data is ready to be processed from the message queue, recv() in invoked,
decoding the payload based on the current state of the connection. There are 6 main
states deﬁned in the script:
1. INITIAL
2. CONNECTED
3. LOGGING IN
4. LOGIN RESP
5. GAME SERVER HANDSHAKE
6. SESSION
With the exception of INITIAL, the states all have a respective handler type attached
which determines what actions to take, inspired by the chain-of-responsibility Object Ori-
ented Programming (OOP) pattern (BlackWasp, 2019). All handlers include the sequence
48
==PAGE:51==
NTKClient
socket
username
password
username_hash
socket
session_socket
state
ﬁfo
handler
sequence_token
init()
recv()
decode()
incToken()
resetToken()
send()
changeConnection()
closeConnection()
NTKSocket
socket
init()
send()
close()
connect()
NTKPacket
getKru()
getVersion()
getLogin()
getLoginResp()
getGameServerHandshake()
look()
NTKCrypt
_utils
username_hash()
temp_key()
crypt()
nonce_16()
nonce_8()
md5Digest()
preparePacket()
signature()
createPacket()
Handler
handle() { abstract }
setState()
sendPacket()
HandshakeHandler
handle() 
setState()
sendPacket()
SessionHandler
handle() 
setState()
sendPacket()
...
EventEmitter
Figure 3.40:
Diagram of the Node.js Typescript code
token to ensure it is incremented properly, as shown in the example snippet in ﬁgure
3.41. A lot of the logic that is required to trick the server into believing the script is a
legitimate game client is contained within these handlers and they are responsible, among
other things, for extracting the IP that moves the connection from the login servers to the
game session servers.
In order to read this information, the handlers rely heavily upon the module NTKCrypt
by proxy of the Packet class used to generate ciphertext packets. The module is respon-
sible for doing the low-level bitwise XOR logic that transforms plaintext to ciphertext,
generate dynamically allocated keys, hashing and generating usernames all in accordance
with the game logic discovered through debugging analysis. Taking a look at a comparison
between the original decompiled code from IDA Pro with the authors’ annotations along
with the code contained within a method of NTKCrypt shows occasional 1-1 similarity, as
49
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.41:
Example of inheritance from the handler
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.42
It was important keeping the nonces in their expected datatype ranges of 8 and 16 bits
respectively, in order to avoid being disconnected by the remote server. This constraint
is also maintained by the NTKCrypt module, and in general, it contains a lot of the logic
that posed the largest challenges in the analysis phase, whereas the rest maintains the
architecture.
This is the same logic that allows the script to actually trick the server, and saving the
buﬀer from stdout and parsing it through the Linux tool xxd (O’Reilly, 2019) conﬁrms
that the received packages are also identical to the ones received when the initial Wire-
shark traﬃc inspection was done. (2.21)
50
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.42: NTKCrypt method compared to the decompiled code for the game client
Figure 3.43: xxd of stdout dump in the initiation sequence
When the session ﬁnally establishes with the server, the script responds accordingly by
sending a legitimate direction look packet with the direction (north, west, south, east)
determined at random, triggered by every packet received, and can be seen in eﬀect in the
design section in ﬁgure 2.13.
51
==PAGE:54==
3.3
Hook
The hook implementation exploits a mechanic where knowing the correct function address
allows the attacker to direct the logic from the game to a function of choice. This is only
possible with careful consideration of not interrupting the game logic and requires a full
analysis just like the autonomous script before it can be initiated. The implementation
described here makes use of an external library, detours (Microsoft, 2019), that handles
the manipulation of instructions stored in memory while making use of an external script
(Arvanaghi, 2019) to inject the Dynamic Link Library (DLL) into the running process.
The injection process is illustrated with the diagram 3.44.
    DLL Injector
Compiled Hook
Running NexusTK 
Process
Figure 3.44:
Diagram of the hook injection
Detours work by making a template of the original function with the same parameters
and correct datatypes such that the original function can be called towards the end of
the hook. Figure 3.45 a snippet of the DLL code is shown that explains how the original
function is copied as a template function pointer. Detours also require a reference point in
terms of a real memory address that the template belongs to. With updates, this address
is likely to change and must be changed accordingly.
Figure 3.45:
Detours - Original function & detour setup
Implementing the hook requires the same parameters in order to ﬁnally return the
52
==PAGE:55==
results from the original. A snippet of code in ﬁgure 3.46 shows how this is mirrored in the
detour hook function. Some c++ convenience functionality helps the script extract data
easily and cast between datatypes allowing the hook to extract the relevant information.
The ﬁrst 3 bytes of any packet to be encrypted are populated with the action id (move,
chat..) as well as 2 bytes of metadata information reserved for certain types of actions
unrelated to the common ones. The fourth byte contains the beginning of the plaintext
characters that make up a text string. An example of changing plaintext at that location
in memory is presented in the snippet towards the end of the function with a guard that
ensures only actions with id with 0xE, chat messages, get manipulated in this fashion. The
hook can then return execution to the originally intended function crypt orig with the
variables contained in memory manipulated.
Initializing detours within the DLL lifecycle methods is where the library attaches to
the address in memory and overwrites the instructions. It is done using the function
DetourAttach displayed in ﬁgure 3.47.
Launching the game, then injecting the DLL now results in a message box signaling the
injection success / failure and results in all messages being logged to the hard drive as
well as all chat messages manipulated before sending them to the server. This allows full
control for the attacker essentially.
53
==PAGE:56==
Figure 3.46:
Detours - Hook implementation
54
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.47:
Detours - DLL lifecycle methods
55
==PAGE:58==
Discussion
4.1
Contrast & Resemblance
The two main approaches described throughout this thesis has some diﬀerences that need
to be evaluated in determining the manifestation of the general MitM attack. Furthermore,
there are other ways to accomplish the attack which will also be addressed in the following
section. The primary contributing factors that determine the implementation is to what
extent the attackers want to position themselves, to what extent they need to manipulate
the data rather than simply relaying it and which party between client & server needs to
be the target of the attack.
While both solutions allow the client & server to be victimized simultaneously, it has
been shown that for the server to be properly victimized, the hook implementation is most
likely the optimal solution. This is due to the amount of control placed into the adversary’s
hand which often takes the role as client actively as well. Assuming the goal of the attack
is long term undetected break of conﬁdentiality between server & client, the autonomous
script installed as a harmless service is the better choice to achieve this state.
Hooks can be dynamic in ﬁnding the memory addresses using base address + oﬀsets,
however, an update to the binary might completely change the oﬀset for the function
and render the hooking useless across updates. The autonomous script transcends that
by simply acting directly with the socket as if it was a headless game client. Of course,
it is possible for the producer of the software to change their client-server communica-
tion algorithms requiring the complete rewriting, calling for a new reverse engineering
analysis. It is, however, a lot more likely due to factors such as time, cost, resources &
compatibility that a producer might simply resolve to update the game client in such a
way that the instructions are moved or perhaps the encryption functions slightly modiﬁed.
In comparison with MitM attacks that assume a shared local network connection between
peers and adversaries, the MitM attack described in this paper requires more eﬀort in
terms of installing the malware on a victim machine compared to something like ARP
poisoning with a lower barrier of entry. This is a trade-oﬀconsideration between eﬀort
and severity, due to the fact that many techniques such as SSL over HTTP and other
56
==PAGE:59==
prevention methods make the ARP cache poisoning attacks less eﬀective. Both the hook
and the autonomous script may easily be packaged into a bundle that can be installed on
a victim machine quickly through physical access to the victim machine or in other ways
tricking the victim to install the payload onto their machine.
A completely diﬀerent approach would be to change the local victim machine DNS en-
tries and IP addresses found in the instructions of the binary software client to point
to the address of an attacker. This could be done by changing the name resolution of
server1.game.com to the IP of the attacker. Given that the attacker is able to properly
emulate the necessary responses made from the client to the server over the socket, the
attacker may create a situation where the client is fooled into believing that the commu-
nication is legitimate while the attacker receives and is able to decrypt all the packets
sent from the client. This attack of a similar nature draws inspiration from privately em-
ulated game servers known as freeshard (Debeauvais & Nardi, 2010) and may also be
seen as an alternative to traditional MitM attacks that change web-banking application
URLs to point towards an attacker. Such an attack, however, could and should be pre-
vented through the use of certiﬁcates and a CA to verify that the DNS mapping is correct.
Similarly, while the hook and autonomous script are distinguished in this thesis by their
abilities and limitations in terms of allowing the client to control the game simultaneously
with an injected hook and the autonomous script not being able to do this, theoretically it
should be possible to change the DNS entry of the victim’s machine tk0.kru.net (game
server) to localhost and have the script adjusted to serve as a proxy between the real
game servers and the game client software.
Detection & Prevention
While preventing this MitM attack might never be fully pos-
sible, certain things can be done in order to detect it and make it harder to execute, the
primary one being not to hard-code critical strings in the binary ﬁle. Another technique
often used is what’s known as code obfuscation. In the context of mitigating this attack,
the software vendor might ﬁnd it eﬀective to apply register reassignment or dead code in-
sertion to fool the analyst. Examples of such are illustrated in ﬁgure 4.48 while dead-code
insertions are simply trying to fool the attacker by inserting no-operation opcodes and
other instructions that make no diﬀerence.
57
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.48:
Register switching obfuscation. Left-hand side: Original instructions. Right-
hand side: Registers switched. (Iliev, 2019)
Another possibility is for the software vendors to deploy self-modifying code (Anckaert,
Madou, & Bosschere, 2007). This technique alters the actual instructions in memory or
added in a non-protected section of memory as the program executes and makes it very
diﬃcult to follow a programmers logic from an analyst perspective.
Yet another detection measurement that should be considered is a good logging system,
perhaps inspired by an IDS to attempt identiﬁcation of irregular patterns or even catch-
ing packets that are not expected which may occur when an analyst is in their testing
stage without full knowledge of the system. This will allow the server-side administrators
to sanction IPs when such illegal payloads are sent. In the end, it is up to the users to
ensure that their machine doesn’t get compromised through the use of strong passwords
and good practice, and while there are several measures to be taken, the CPU still needs
to be able to execute legitimate machine code. This means that a reverse-engineer will
also be able to de-obfuscate the code and eventually parse its contained logic. There exist
several de-obfuscation tools as a counter-weight to obfuscation tools in what seems to be
a cat-and-mouse act. Eﬀectively, once a machine has been compromised, the MitM attack
should be diﬃcult to detect and at that point prevention methods are unlikely to have
any eﬀect.
Compared to many other types of MitM attacks, this attack requires highly specialized
knowledge to implement due to the constraint that each application has a diﬀerent struc-
58
==PAGE:61==
ture upon compilation. This makes the attack diﬃcult to generalize compared to attacks
like rogue AP MitM or ARP MitM. It also has a high barrier of entry as it requires a broad
understanding of many computer architecture patterns as well as preparation time to un-
derstand speciﬁc clues that are vital in extracting the information such as keys required
to mirror the en- & de-cryption. The attack is also rather undocumented in literature
and trying to gather the knowledge of how to begin makes the barrier even higher. That
being said, the attack, being highly specialized and targeted, is not to be interpreted as
a negative quality, since it does succeed in relaying or manipulating otherwise supposed
conﬁdential information and, most importantly, works undetected through encryption. It
is also likely that, while ARP poisoning attacks have had various eﬀorts to mitigate the
damages due to its popularity and low barrier of entry, this attack will not be granted the
preventive measures it deserves. A successful attack has a high severity due to popular
assumptions of encryption security.
59
==PAGE:62==
4.2
Future work
The ideas presented in this paper is by no means tied to a speciﬁc game or game-type soft-
ware. The game was only used as an example chosen because of the easy visual feedback
and the fact that early analysis had shown the game using a proprietary ciphering scheme.
These two features combined allowed for a good visual representation of the consequences
of the attack while simultaneously backing up the theory behind security by obscurity
(Pavlovic, 2011).
While the attack is highly specialized and diﬃcult to achieve compared to other MitM
attacks, the beneﬁt of working behind encryption is a strong argument to apply it to other
types of software. With the wide-spreading of the internet and apps moving from the desk-
top into the browsers as well as online banking being more or less universally available,
further researchers are encouraged to attempt to deploy the attack on a browser. This
could manifest itself as an attack towards the browser logic of contacting CA to verify cer-
tiﬁcates of remote servers, allowing a successful attack to whitelist any HTTPS website.
The attack could also be application-speciﬁc inside the browser, matching the URL of the
victim application before initiating the attack logic, for instance, logging banking creden-
tials to a remote adversary. This attack would be of several layers as opposed to the one
presented in this paper, in that the compromised browser needs to be reverse-engineered
as well as the victim application.
To prepare for further research, computer architecture literature resources are strongly
recommended as well as a general understanding of diﬀerent programming paradigms and
low-level languages such as C & C++, or more ﬁtting, the language that the target ap-
plication was written in. For example, in the case of a banking application, the browser
is likely to be written in C++ while the frontend could be implemented as a Single Page
Application (SPA), to which several frameworks might have been used. Examples of such
are React (Facebook, 2019a) or Angular (Google, 2019a). Understanding these frontend
frameworks might prove valuable insight required to implement the attack. Several debug-
ging tools are freely available for the respective frameworks (Facebook, 2019b) while the
browsers have embedded debuggers for the Javascript. The same considerations should
be evaluated about the state of the backend. Does it use REpresentational State Transfer
(REST)? GraphQL? This will surely assist in learning the underlying architecture and
60
==PAGE:63==
perhaps reveal information that will assist the analysis. The browser itself should be ana-
lyzed with a debugger tool like OllyDBG (OllyDBG, 2019) or IDA Pro (Hex-Rays, 2019)
capable of presenting machine code as assembly and showing current states of memory
and registers. Regardless of the speciﬁc application, further researchers should familiarize
themselves with concepts described in reverse engineering literature (Mohamed & Ammar,
2014).
61
==PAGE:64==
Conclusion
This thesis set out to investigate the feasibility of a highly specialized MitM attack and
based on the ﬁndings, implement solutions to prove it. Based on the discoveries during
the analysis phase of the thesis, multiple approaches were proposed with respect to the
objectives of the attacker. While the attack ﬁnds common ground with other traditional
MitM attacks in terms of a shared client-server architecture, the suggested implementation
changes with the ambition and preferred target. The proposed implementations are based
on function hooking and traditional malware payloads as well as a conceptual scenario that
draws inspiration from ARP cache poisoning. Following the designs of these attacks will
allow an adversary to choose their victim objective be it the client, the server or even both.
Based on the conclusions of the paper, it can be argued that the ﬁndings support the
theory behind security by obscurity in the sense that a proprietary cipher scheme does
not protect software from intrusion by virtue of the unknown algorithms. Considering
that the attack is by no means limited to the game client driving the examples throughout
this thesis and due to the severity of a successful attack, further research should proceed,
observing the eﬀects on modern applications such as browser web-apps.
To better determine the measures security concerned software developers may have at
their disposal in order to guard themselves against the attack, eﬀorts should be put into
researching to what extent it is even possible. Code obfuscation and aggressive server-side
ﬁlters may aid in prolonging the attack and discovering the presence of remote attackers
attempting to familiarize themselves with the systems, however, this thesis argues that
ultimately even obfuscated code must be understood by the hardware in order to perform
the logic intended by the developers. That along with discreet & meticulous malicious
agents, carefully not leaving traces of analysis, suggests that no absolute prevention meth-
ods are present today.
The thesis has shown that, while requiring specialized knowledge and a large eﬀort to real-
ize the attack, it does indeed work through encryption undetected and allows the attacker
not only to relay and examine the data between server & client but also manipulate it
realtime.
62
==PAGE:65==
Appendix
5.1
Code
5.1.1
Autonomous
The autonomous networking script can be found on GitHub:
https://github.com/ASAPHAANING/ntk-networking
Instructions:
Install Node.js (Google, 2019c). Run npm install, insert game account
credentials into config.json, run npm start.
5.1.2
Hook
The hook code can be found on GitHub:
https://github.com/ASAPHAANING/ntk-hook
Find the primary source code in PayloadLogger →dllmain.cpp
Instructions:
Build the DLL using visual studio through the .sln ﬁle importer or di-
rectly using Microsoft Visual C++ (MSVC) compiler directly through the commandline.
Download the DLL injector (Arvanaghi, 2019), run NexusTK and run the DLL injector
type ”NexusTK” to target the running process and pass the following arguments into the
DLL injector DLL_Injector.exe <Executable_Name> <Path_To_DLL>
63
==PAGE:66==
References
Akter, S., Chakraborty, T., Khan, T. A., Chellappan, S., & Islam, A. B. M. A. A. (2017).
Can you get into the middle of near ﬁeld communication? IEEE 42nd Conference
on Local Computer Networks.
Anckaert, B., Madou, M., & Bosschere, K. D. (2007). A model for self-modifying code.
Springer.
Arvanaghi, B. (2019). Windows dll injector. https://github.com/Arvanaghi/Windows
-DLL-Injector.
Berard, D. (2019). ﬁndcrypt-yara. https://github.com/polymorf/findcrypt-yara.
BlackWasp. (2019). Chain of responsibility design pattern. http://www.blackwasp.co
.uk/ChainOfResponsibility.aspx.
Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J., Booch, I. J., Rumbaugh, J., & Jacobson, I. (2014). The uniﬁed
modeling language user guide. Pearson.
Bremler-Barr, A., & Levy, H. (2005). Spooﬁng prevention methods. Proceedings of 24th
Annual Joint Conference of IEEE computer and communications societies.
Cai, M., Wu, Z., & Zhang, J. (2014). Research and prevention of rogue ap based mitm
in wireless network. Ninth International Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud
and Internet Computing.
Conti, M., Dragoni, N., & Lesyk, V. (2016). A survey of man in the middle attacks (Tech.
Rep.). Podunk IN.
Debeauvais, T., & Nardi, B.
(2010).
A qualitative study of ragnark online private
servers:in-game sociological issues. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Confer-
ence on the Foundations of Digital Games.
Dhawan, M., Poddar, R., Mahajan, K., & Mann, V. (2015). Sphinx: Detecting security
attacks in software-deﬁned networks. NDSS 15, 7 February.
64
==PAGE:67==
DTU.
(n.d.).
Dtu ﬁndit library collections.
http://libguides.dtu.dk/c.php?g=
654792&p=4600996.
Facebook. (2019a). React. https://reactjs.org/.
Facebook.
(2019b).
React developer tools.
https://chrome.google.com/webstore/
detail/react-developer-tools/fmkadmapgofadopljbjfkapdkoienihi.
Gelernter, N., Kalma, S., Magnezi, B., & Porcilan, H. (2017). The password reset mitm
attack. IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy.
Google. (2019a). Angular. https://angular.io/.
Google. (2019b). Google cloud networking in depth: How andromeda 2.2 enables high-
throughput
vms.
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/networking/
google-cloud-networking-in-depth-how-andromeda-2-2-enables-high
-throughput-vms.
Google. (2019c). Node.js. https://nodejs.org/.
Google. (2019d). V8 - javascript engine. https://v8.dev/.
Goyal, V., & Tripathy, R. (2005). An eﬃcient solution to the arp cache poisoning problem.
Springer.
Haataja, K., Hyppnen, K., Pasanen, S., & Toivanen, P. (2013). Bluetooth security attacks.
comparative analysis, attacks, and countermeasures. Springer.
Hex-Rays. (2019). Ida pro. https://www.hex-rays.com/products/ida/.
Hong, S., Xu, L., Wang, H., & Gu, G. (2015). Poisoning network visibility in software-
deﬁnednetworks: New attacks and countermeasures. NDSS 15, 8-11 February.
Hwang, H., Jung, G., Sohn, K., & Park, S. (2008). A study on mitm(man in the middle)
vulnerability in wireless network using 802.1x and eap. International Conference on
Information Science and Security.
Iliev, K.
(2019).
Top 6 advanced obfuscation techniques hiding malware on your
device.
https://sensorstechforum.com/advanced-obfuscation-techniques
65
==PAGE:68==
-malware/.
Jain, A., Kuo, J., Soet, J., & Tse, B. (2007). Software cracking. EECE 412.
Kerrisk, M.
(2018).
Print lines that match patterns.
http://man7.org/linux/man
-pages/man1/grep.1.html.
Kiltz, S., Lang, A., & Dittmann, J. (2007). Cyber warfare and cyber terrorism - malware:
Specialized trojan horse. IGI Global.
Kim, J., Lee, J., & Cho, S.-J. (2011). A new malware propagation technique based on the
send function hooking and its countermeasure. Journal of Kiss: Computer Systems
and Theory 2011, Volume 38, Issue 4.
Liu, W., & Zhong, S. (2017). Web malware spread modelling and optimal control strate-
gies. Scientiﬁc Reports 2017, Volume 7, Issue 1.
Microsoft. (2018a). Winsock2.h - recv function. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
windows/win32/api/winsock2/nf-winsock2-recv.
Microsoft. (2018b). Winsock2.h - send function. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
windows/win32/api/winsock2/nf-winsock2-send.
Microsoft. (2019). Detours. https://github.com/microsoft/Detours.
Mohamed, H. A., & Ammar, H. H. (2014). Reverse engineering for documenting software
architectures, a literature review. International Journal of Computer Applications
Technology and Research.
Mohiuddin, A., & Muataz, H. Z. (2010). A novel algorithm to prevent man in the middle
attack in lan environment. Society for Computer Simulation International.
Nodejs. (2019). Buﬀer. https://nodejs.org/api/buffer.html.
OllyDBG. (2019). Ollydbg. http://www.ollydbg.de/.
O’Reilly. (2019). xxd. https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/linux-pocket-guide/
9780596806347/re28.html.
Pavlovic, D. (2011). Gaming security by obscurity. Proceedings New Security Paradigms
66
==PAGE:69==
Workshop.
Ros, B. (2017). Nexus: The kingdom of winds client. https://github.com/brandonros/
nexustk.
Samineni, N. R., Barbhuiya, F. A., & Nandi, S. (2012). Stealth and semi-stealth mitm
attacks, detection and defense in ipv4 networks. 2nd IEEE International Conference
on Parallel, Distributed and Grid Computing.
SensePost. (2018). A crash course in x86 assembly for reverse engineers. SensePost.
Shirey, R. (2000). Rfc 2828 - internet security glossary. https://www.rfc-editor.org/
info/rfc2828.
Silberschatz, A., Galvin, P. B., & Gagne, G. (2018). Operating system concepts. Hoboken,
NJ Wiley.
Software, M. (1991). Display printable strings in binary ﬁles. https://www.mkssoftware
.com/docs/man1/strings.1.asp.
Tanenbaum, A. S. (2014). Modern operating systems. Pearson.
Typescript. (2019). Typescript - javascript that scales. https://www.typescriptlang
.org/.
Vondrek, M., Pluskal, J., & Ryav, O. (2018). Automation of mitm attack on wi-ﬁnetworks.
Springer.
Wang, H., Jin, C., & Shin, K. G. (2007). Defense against spoofed ip traﬃc using hop-count
ﬁltering. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. vol 15 no 1.
Wang, X., Gao, N., Zhang, L., Liu, Z., & Wang, L. (2016). Novel mitm attacks on security
protocols in sdn: A feasibility study. Springer.
Wen, S., Zhou, W., Zhang, J., Xiang, Y., Zhou, W., Weijia, J., & Zou, C. C. (2015).
Modeling and analysis on the propagation dynamics of modern email malware.
Wireshark. (2019). Wireshark.org. https://www.wireshark.org/.
Wohlin, C.
(2014).
Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a
67
==PAGE:70==
replication in software engineering. The European Association of Science Editors.
Yin, H., & Song, D.
(2013).
Hooking behavior analysis.
Springerbriefs in Computer
Science 2013, Issue 9781461455226.
68
==PAGE:71==
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1
Man in the Middle - Depiction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Figure 1.2
Man in the Middle - WiFi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Figure 1.3
Stealth MitM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Figure 1.4
PRMitM ﬂow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Figure 1.5
NFC MitM (Akter et al., 2017) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Figure 1.6
NFC MitM results (Akter et al., 2017)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Figure 1.7
SDN MitM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Figure 2.8
Code logic extraction through a debugger . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Figure 2.9
Man in the Middle - Beyond encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Figure 2.10 Man in the Middle - Regular representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Figure 2.11 IDA Debugger - Graph mode view showing a static key
. . . . . . .
22
Figure 2.12 Look packet example - Excerpt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Figure 2.13 Character look action - Before and after . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Figure 2.14 Transparent, autonomous design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Figure 2.15 Node.js console output of running the autonomous script
. . . . . .
26
Figure 2.16 Function hook design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
Figure 2.17 Abstraction of function hooking theory in an x86 environment
. . .
27
Figure 2.18 Target function showing the opcodes manipulated by a hook
. . . .
27
Figure 2.19 In-game chat log during an injected hook
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
Figure 2.20 File-system chat log during an injected hook
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Figure 2.21 Wireshark initiation sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Figure 2.22 Wireshark encrypted session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Figure 3.23 strings and grep extracting hashes from the game binary . . . . . . .
34
Figure 3.24 Wireshark packet inspection on plaintext during the handshake . . .
35
Figure 3.25 Wireshark packet inspection - username discovered (censored) . . . .
36
Figure 3.26 Encryption function discovered - plaintext . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Figure 3.27 Encryption function discovered - ciphertext . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
69
==PAGE:72==
Figure 3.28 bcrypt library identiﬁed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Figure 3.29 Memory dump the username as the hashing subroutine begins in
relation to the key generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Figure 3.30 Snippet of the outer encryption routine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Figure 3.31 Snippet of the inner encryption routine, responsible for arranging
the ciphertext in the output buﬀer, as presented by the Hex-Rays
disassembler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Figure 3.32 strings and grep extracting a static key lead . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Figure 3.33 UrkcnItni discovered in the assembly debugging preparing to create
the static key . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Figure 3.34 Static key generation routine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Figure 3.35 Dynamic key generation routine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Figure 3.36 Dynamic key generation algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Figure 3.37 Dynamic key generation algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Figure 3.38 Memory dump of key resulting 1024 byte hash
. . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Figure 3.39 Dynamic key generation algorithm full code . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Figure 3.40 Diagram of the Node.js Typescript code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Figure 3.41 Example of inheritance from the handler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Figure 3.42 NTKCrypt method compared to the decompiled code for the game
client . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Figure 3.43 xxd of stdout dump in the initiation sequence
. . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Figure 3.44 Diagram of the hook injection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Figure 3.45 Detours - Original function & detour setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Figure 3.46 Detours - Hook implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Figure 3.47 Detours - DLL lifecycle methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Figure 4.48 Register switching obfuscation. Left-hand side: Original instructions.
Right-hand side: Registers switched. (Iliev, 2019) . . . . . . . . . . .
58
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.1
Literature selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
70
==PAGE:73==
Table 1.2
MitM schemes compared to their relative OSI model layer
. . . . . .
9
Table 3.3
Hash values extracted from the binary analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Table 3.4
ASM & C relation - Function calls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Table 3.5
ASM & C relation - Loop calls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Indexers for Literature
DTU Library Collections
• DTU data
• Electronic books
• Printed books
• Electronic Journals
• Printed Journals
• Orbit (DTU Research Database)
• Student thesis
Abstract and Indexing Databases
• Biosis Previews (1969-)
• Compendex (1884-)
• Inspec (1898-)
• Pubmed (1947-)
• Scopus (1996-)
• Web of Science (1899-)
Publishers
• Annual Reviews
• Berkeley Electronic Press
• Cambridge University Press (CUP)
• Elsevier (incl. Cell press)
• Emerald
• IOS
• Karger
• Mary Ann Liebert
• Nature
• Oxford University Press (OUP)
• SAGE
• Science Magazine
• Scientiﬁc net
• Springer
71
==PAGE:74==
• Taylor & Francis
• Trans tech publications
• Walter De Gruyter
• Wiley
Organizations
• ACM (Association for Computing Ma-
chinery)
• ACS (American Chemical Society)
• AIP (American Institute of Physics)
• ASTM (American Society for Testing
and Materials)
• Dansk Standard
• IEL (IET/IEEE Electronic Library)
• Int-Res (Inter-Research Science Cen-
ter)
• IOP (Institute of Physics)
• NRC (National Research Council of
Canada)
• PNAS (Proceedings of the National
Acad. of Sciences)
• PubmedCentral (incl. BiomedCentral)
• RSC (Royal Society of Chemistry)
• SAE (Society of Automotive Engi-
neers)
• SIAM (Society for Industrial and Ap-
plied Mathematics)
• SPIE ( International Society for Op-
tics and Photonics)
Other Article Collections
• Crossref (Metadata from DOI reference linking service)
• DOAJ (Directory of Open Access Journals)
• Jstor
Danish Repositories
• Capital Region of Denmark
• Copenhagen Business School
• Copenhagen University
• Danish National Centre for Social Re-
search
• Danish National Centre for Social Re-
search
• IT University
72
==PAGE:75==
• Ministry of Culture
• Research Institutions in Architecture,
Design and Conservation
• Roskilde University
• Royal Danish Defence College
• Technical University of Denmark - Or-
bit
• University Colleges Denmark
• University of Southern Denmark
• Royal Danish Defence College
• Aalborg University - VBN
• Aarhus University
Repositories - Other Countries
• arXiv.org (physics)
• Caltech
(primarily
computing,
eartquake research, aeronautics)
• CERN (particle physics and related
areas)
• CiteSeer (computer and information
science)
• Digital Library for Earth System Ed-
ucation (earth system science)
• Digital Library of Information Science
and Technology (Information Science)
• Dspace at MIT (all intellectual output
of MIT)
• Electronics
and
Computer
Science
Eprints Database (Computer science)
• Numdam (ancient mathematics pub-
lished in France)
• Organic Eprints (organic agriculture)
• Project
Euclid,
Cornell
University
(mathematics and statistics)
• SCOAP (Sponsoring Consortium for
Open Access Publishing in Particle
Physics)
• QutEprints (research literature from
Queensland University of Technology)
73
==PAGE:76==
GLOSSARY
ACM
Association for Computing Machinery
AES
Advanced Encryption Standard
AP
Access Point
ARP
Address Resolution Protocol
ASCII
American Standard Code for Information In-
terchange
ASM
Assembly Language
BGP
Border Gateway Protocol
BTS
Base Transceiver Station
CA
Certiﬁcate Authority
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CRC
Cyclic Redundancy Check
CSRF
Cross Site Request Forgery
DDoS
Distributed Denial of Service
DHCP
Dynamic Host Conﬁguration Protocol
DLL
Dynamic Link Library
DNS
Domain Name Server/Service
DoS
Denial of Service
EAP
Extensible Authentication Protocol
ECDSA
Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm
FBS
Fake Base Station
FIFO
First In First Out
GSM
Global System for Mobile Communications
HTTP
HyperText Transfer Protocol
ICMP
Internet Control Message Protocol
IDS
Intrusion Detection System
IEEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers
74
==PAGE:77==
IMSI
International Mobile Subscriber Identity
IoT
Internet of Things
IP
Internet Protocol
IV
Initialization Vector
LLDP
Link Layer Discovery Protocol
MAC
Media Access Control
MD5
Message Digest 5
MitM
Man in the Middle
MS
Mobile Station
MSVC
Microsoft Visual C++
NexusTK
Nexus, The Kingdom of the winds.
NFC
Near Field Communication
NLRI
Network Layer Reachability Information
OOP
Object Oriented Programming
OS
Operating System
OSA
Open System Authentication
OSI
Open Systems Interconnection
P2P
Peer-to-Peer
PRMitM
Password Reset Man in the Middle
PSK
Pre-Shared Key
PUF
Physically Unclonable Function
RC4
Rivest Cipher 4
REST
REpresentational State Transfer
RF
Radio Frequency
RFID
Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation
RNG
(Pseudo) Random Number Generation
RPC
Remote Procedure Call
RSA
RSA (Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir og Len Adle-
man)
SDN
Software Deﬁned Networking
75
==PAGE:78==
SKA
Shared Key Authentication
SPA
Single Page Application
SSL
Secure Sockets Layer
SSP
Secure Simple Pairing
TCP
Transmission Control Protocol
TLS
Transport Layer Security
TTLS
Tunneled Transport Layer Security
UML
Uniﬁed Modelling Language
UMTS
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
URL
Uniform Ressource Locator
WEP
Wired Equivalent Privacy
WLAN
Wireless Local Area Network
WPA
Wi-Fi Protected Access
WPS
Wi-Fi Protected Setup
XSS
Cross Site Scripting
76
