==PAGE:1==
Glass structures subjected to
seismic excitations
Master’s Thesis, August 2019
Giuseppe Sciacca
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
GIUSEPPE SCIACCA
Glass structures subjected to seismic
excitations
Master’s Thesis, August 2019
Supervisors:
Evangelos Katsanos, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2019
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Glass structures subjected to seismic excitations
This report was prepared by:
Giuseppe Sciacca
Supervisor(s):
Evangelos Katsanos, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
Jens Henrik Nielsen, Associate Professor, DTU-BYG
DTU Civil Engineering
Structural Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: +45 4525 1700
Project period:
January 2019 - August 2019
ECTS:
32.5
Education:
MSc
Field:
Civil Engineering
Class:
No conﬁdentiality
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master
of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. The project is
credited to 32.5 ECTS points. The theme of the project was suggested by the supervisors,
however, small adjustments have been made during the process in collaboration between
the author and the supervisors.
I would like to thank my supervisors for the constant support and the professional but
friendly atmosphere that characterized the project meetings. The results I have achieved
are the ﬁnal step of a long process of studying at DTU, therefore, I want to encourage
students from around to world not to miss this incredible opportunity to study in one of
the best and most hospitable university.
Kgs. Lyngby July 9, 2019
Giuseppe Sciacca (s172353)
i
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Nowadays, glass structures are increasingly common in buildings’ envelopes and the cur-
rent design is moving toward point supported glazing systems (PSGS) for aesthetic and
energetic reasons, among others. However, the research on the topic is scarce despite
much damage has been recorded during the last decades due to seismic events. It has also
been observed failure of glass panels due to small seismic events even if they had resisted
more hazardous ones before. For these reasons, the research work analyses the behaviour
of PSGSs when subjected to seismic loadings with the intent of describing both instant
and long-term behaviour.
The study is performed by Finite Element (FE) modelling of a 4-storey building equipped
with a PSGS and horizontal glass ﬁns and subjected to a set of 6 Strong Ground Motions
recorded by an accelerograph in California over an 18-year period. Analysis of the stress
histories is performed to describe the system capacity with a comprehensive approach
which includes both instant and long-term effects. In fact, not just the instant (inert) glass
strength is considered, but also its time-dependent property (self-fatigue phenomenon)
which makes the glass a material that may accumulate damage.
Results show that the apparent increase in strength for short-duration loadings may pro-
vide the glazings with sufﬁcient capacity, but in the event that the external stress is slightly
smaller than the inert strength, some damage in the glass is induced with the effect of a
reduction in capacity. A practical and simpliﬁed example shows that the glazing life-
time could be reduced to 35 years instead of the expected 50 years due to prior seismic
excitations.
iii
==PAGE:10==
Table of Content
1
Introduction and research background
1
1.1
Motivations and objective of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Earthquake characteristics and engineering modelling . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structural Glass: properties, products and systems . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Reported glass damage due to earthquakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
1.5
Dynamic glass performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2
Numerical investigation: Finite element models
29
2.1
Main model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2
Detailed model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Results and discussion
39
3.1
Instant failure analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.2
Long-term failure analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Conclusion
47
4.1
Summary and conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Recommendations for future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Appendices
49
A Road map to digital annex
51
B
Dynamic masses calculation
53
C Damage accumulation additive property
57
D Matlab scripts
59
iv
==PAGE:11==
TABLE OF CONTENT
v
D.1 Description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
D.2 Calculation of pressure vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
D.3 Plot of the mesh as Matlab Figure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
D.4 Calculation of equivalent stresses and demand/capacity contour plots . . .
70
D.5 Calculation of damage for a set of more SGGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Nomenclature
83
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and research
background
1.1
Motivations and objective of the thesis
Glass has undergone a signiﬁcant transformation in the last decades and it is a popular
choice as a construction material in buildings’ envelopes for both non-structural and load-
carrying purposes. It provides transparency, protects from a large quantity of ultraviolet
rays and has a reasonably high corrosion resistance which make it versatile and suitable to
meet different needs. However, many are the drawbacks that an engineer has to take into
account. Glass lacks yielding capacity meaning that it is a brittle material and in general
it breaks without sufﬁcient warning. For this reason, stress concentration is a threat which
becomes a serious limitation considering that ﬂaws are always distributed on its surface.
In fact, the glass tensile strength is not just a function of the size and distribution of sur-
face ﬂaws, but it is also time-dependent due to their tendency to open when subjected to
tensile stresses.
Nevertheless, glass is one of the most common construction materials in buildings’ façades
and it can be found in all types of structures, from residential to industrial buildings.
The modern façade engineering is moving toward point supported glass systems (PSGS)
so that the main glass property, the transparency, is maximized providing a great visual
impact and reducing energy consumption. However, the great popularity of PSGSs in
buildings’ façades is not supported by an equally great research in terms of load-carrying
performance which is necessary considering that glazing systems are also built in seismic
areas where the hazard is high. The presented literature shows that much damage caused
by earthquakes has been recorded during the last decades and it is interesting to notice
that some earthquakes induced no damage to the structural components of buildings while
the non-structural damage (including to glazings) were incredibly high. For instance, the
1
==PAGE:14==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
1971 San Fernando earthquake caused direct damage quantiﬁed to be about $0.5 billion
(1971 dollars) in which the losses due to non-structural components accounted for 97%
of the total cost. Serious glass damage was also recorded in 63 of the 263 buildings sur-
veyed after the 1985 Mexico City earthquake and glass failure was the primary form of
building damage in 42% of the surveyed structures. It has also been observed failure of
glass panels due to small seismic events even if they had resisted more hazardous ones
before.
These are the reasons that led the study toward the analysis of the instant and long-term
behaviour of a PSGS subjected to seismic excitations by Finite Element Methods (FEM).
1.2
Earthquake characteristics and engineering
modelling
Earthquakes are natural events that release a large amount of energy in the Earth’s crust.
Despite they may be provoked by different sources such as volcanic eruptions, man-made
explosions or collapse of underground cavities (Richter, 1958), the main cause of earth-
quakes is the active tectonic movements taking place in the upper region of the Earth,
called lithosphere. (Elnashai and Di Sarno, 2015). The lithosphere is composed of large
rigid rock slabs, namely plates, which move and interact with each other causing large
tectonic forces at their edges. Due to the brittle nature of the plates, failure and sudden
slip occur at the plates interface causing earthquakes (Scholz, 2019). The phenomenon
becomes clear when the distribution of the earthquakes is compared to the geometry of
the tectonic plates, as shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Tectonic plates (left) and worldwide earthquake distribution (right). Adapted
from (Elnashai and Di Sarno, 2015).
The seismic waves released by the earthquakes travel very rapidly through the Earth’s
crust and produce shaking (Strong Ground Motion) from seconds to minutes when they
reach the ground surface. The intensity and characteristics of the shaking are inﬂuenced
==PAGE:15==
1.2. EARTHQUAKE CHARACTERISTICS AND ENGINEERING MODELLING
3
not only by the earthquake source but also by the site where the shaking occurred. The
characteristics of the soil at the site location strongly inﬂuence the nature of the motion
as some materials may amplify the shaking while others may dampen it. It means that
the same earthquake could induce extensive damage in certain areas while others at short
distance may not be affected (Kramer, 1996). Ground motions are recorded by seismo-
graphs, instruments that are able to measure both characteristics of the speciﬁc earthquake
and the site effects. Relevant earthquake’s properties are the Magnitude, the Epicentral
distance and the Hypocentral distance. The earthquake magnitude is used to quantify
the size of the event, the fault dimension and the amount of energy released during the
fault rupture. Despite many different scales have been proposed for magnitude measure-
ment, the Moment Magnitude Mw is the most reliable index to measure the size of small
up to very large earthquakes nowadays. The hypocentral and epicentral distances are
the distances to the recording station from the point where the rupture have originated
(Hypocenter or focus) and its projection on the surface (Epicenter).
Figure 1.2: Correlation between surface wave magnitude and energy release (left) and
deﬁnition of earthquakes parameters (right).
Adapted from (Elnashai and Di Sarno,
2015).
Regarding the speciﬁc ground motion at the recording site, seismographs produce the
so-called seismograms in two orthogonal horizontal plus one vertical directions which are
the time-histories of acceleration, velocity and displacement of the recorded ground mo-
tion. However, engineers are usually interested in time-histories of accelerations, which
are called accelerograms, and are often measured in units of gravitational constant "g". A
typical accelerogram is illustrated in Figure 1.3, where it is possible to deﬁne the largest
absolute recorded acceleration, called amplitude or peak ground acceleration (PGA), and
the duration of the motion. In general, high PGAs are associated with more destructive
earthquakes but it is not always true. In fact, one of the most important characteristics of
a strong ground motion (SGG) is its frequency content which describes how the acceler-
ation peaks are distributed as a function of the frequency. The most common parameter
structural engineers use to quantify the frequency content and the effect of an SGG on
==PAGE:16==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
a structure is the Response Spectrum. A response spectrum is the plot of the maximum
response (acceleration, velocity or displacement) of a single degree of freedom (SDOF)
system with varying natural period and for a given level of damping when subjected to a
particular component of the SGG.
Figure 1.3:
Example of accelerogram (left) and related response spectrum (right).
Adapted from (Elnashai and Di Sarno, 2015).
Once accelerograms have been selected (and usually scaled to the speciﬁc PGA re-
quired by the code), they can be input as seismic demand in the building structure and the
response compared to the capacity.
1.3
Structural Glass: properties, products and systems
Glass material is discussed in the following sections with the intent of providing the reader
with the necessary knowledge for the work review. First, the generic properties of glass
are summarized considering both pros and cons of employing it as a construction material;
then, the principal types of glass panes and glazing systems are brieﬂy described with
more focus on PSGS.
Glass as a construction material
Glass is classiﬁed as an amorphous ceramic material, meaning that has some character-
istic of ceramics but also presents atypical properties. A ceramic is an inorganic, non-
metallic solid prepared by the action of heat and subsequent cooling. The main difference
is that they usually have a crystalline or partly crystalline structure, while glasses are
classiﬁed as noncrystalline ceramics or amorphous. Therefore, glass can be deﬁned as
an inorganic product of fusion which has been cooled to a rigid condition without crys-
tallization, providing the particular transparency property of the material. Regarding the
chemical composition, there are several different types of glass. The most commonly used
==PAGE:17==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
5
as building materials are ’Soda-lime silica glass’ and ’Borosilicate glass’. The former is
often used for windows or façade systems, while the latter has a more speciﬁc collocation
in hazardous environments thanks to its high resistance to temperature changes, acids and
water action.
The structural use of glass opens a whole new range of architectural possibilities and
structural functionality by virtue of its unique properties. The main reason why glass is
used as a structural material is because of its transparency and transmittance, which allow
the light of a wide wavelength range to pass without absorption while a large quantity of
ultraviolet (UV) and long-wave infrared are partly and completely blocked, respectively.
Another great advantage of glass is its almost perfectly elastic and isotropic behaviour
which allows a better prediction of the response along with a reasonably high stiffness.
Figure 1.4: Transmittance as a function of wavelength for a typical soda-lime silica glass
and a low-iron glass with anti-reﬂective coating. (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
However, an engineer must take into account the disadvantages of glass when used
as a construction material. Despite the high strength could permit its usage in many
structural solutions, its low toughness limits the application to nonstructural and certain
type of structural elements. In fact, glass does not have any yielding capacity leading to
brittle failures when the ultimate stress is reached. For this reason, stress concentration is
a serious threat to be avoided in any way possible. Another weakness of glass is that its
actual tensile strength depends on many factors, especially on the number and orientation
of the mechanical ﬂaws, similarly to other brittle materials, which are present on the
glass surfaces as a result of the manufacturing process. It is known that ﬂaws cause stress
concentration which is not permitted in brittle materials like glass and will lead to failure.
The ﬂaw that initiates fracture is called ’critical ﬂaw’ and it is not necessarily located at
the point of maximum stress (Beason and Morgan, 1984). In fact, while the theoretical
tensile strength could reach 32 GPa, the actual tensile strength may go down to 50 MPa
==PAGE:18==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
for a very deep ﬂaw. Figure 1.5 shows an approximate relation between the short-term
tensile strength as a function of the ﬂaw depth, displaying how only a fraction of the real
material strength is used due to the presence of ﬂaws.
Figure 1.5: Approximate relation between short-term effective tensile strength of glass
and the ﬂaw depth. (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
Despite the compressive strength can be assessed to be a constant due to its indepen-
dence from surface ﬂaws, it is not relevant in structural applications as a glass element
would fail either in buckling mode or tension due to Poisson’s ratio effect before reaching
the compressive strength limit.
The presence of ﬂaws is not just a risk for the brittleness of glass due to stress concentra-
tion around them, but it also causes dependence of the actual tensile strength on the time
due to the tendency of ﬂaws to grow over time. It is demonstrated that glass elements
may fail even if subjected to a constant loading due to slow growth of surface ﬂaws.
The phenomenon is known as ’sub-critical crack growth’ or ’stress corrosion’ which has
been studied extensively in order to be able to predict the lifetime of glass in relation to
the fracture mechanics. Despite many theories have been developed to explain the phe-
nomenon, the ’classical stress corrosion theory’ seems to be the most accredited and is
here reported. When stress is induced into a glass element, molecular water starts dif-
fusing and reacting with silica at the crack tip, as shown in Figure 1.6. The chemical
reaction causes a chemical modiﬁcation in the tip area and a slow crack growth that will
cause failure after a certain period of time. This process is called ’stress corrosion’ when
referring to the chemical phenomenon and ’sub-critical crack growth’, ’static fatigue’ or
’environmental fatigue’ when referring to the consequences of stress corrosion, such as
failure (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008). The activation and velocity of stress cor-
rosion are inﬂuenced by many factors including humidity, temperature, loading rate and
crack geometry among others. It has been demonstrated that the crack velocity increases
==PAGE:19==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
7
Figure 1.6: Steps of stress corrosion: 1. Adsorption of water to Si-O bond, 2. concerted
reaction involving simultaneous proton and electron transfer, 3. formation of surface
hydroxyl groups. (left); Graphical representation of crack growth after stress application
(right). (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
for higher water content in the surrounding medium and higher temperatures and that the
mechanism of fracture occurs also for glass specimens in the air (not immersed in water)
for very small values of relative humidity (Wiederhorn, 1967). Regarding the loading rate
and crack geometry, the inﬂuence is mainly explained by energy-based considerations.
The most important contribution to the understanding of such phenomenon was given by
Inglis (Inglis, 1913), Grifﬁth (Grifﬁth, 1921) and Irwin (Irwin, 1957) who represented the
static crack as a reversible thermodynamic system. According to the theory, the crack has
to extend to have equilibrium between the mechanical energy Um, which increases when
an external load is applied, and internal energy Us used in enlarging existing cracks or
creating new ones.
U = Um + Us
(1.1)
Um increases when an external load is applied while Us decreases when new cracks are
formed due to energy release. The original energy-based approach proposed by Grifﬁth
has been elaborated by Irwin who introduced the ’stress intensity factor K’, representing
the elastic stress intensity around the crack tip. As shown in formula (1.2) and Figure 1.7,
the larger the crack size ’a’, the higher the stress around the tip.
KI = Y · σn · √πa
(1.2)
where ’σn’ is the nominal tensile stress normal to the crack’s plane and ’Y’ is a correction
factor taking into account the crack geometry. For a long, straight-fronted plane edge
crack in a semi-inﬁnite specimen, it is usually taken as Y=1.12. According to the the-
ory, a glass specimen will instantaneously fail whenever the stress intensity factor ’KI’
overcomes the ’critical stress intensity factor KIc’, deﬁning the so-called ’Irwin’s fracture
==PAGE:20==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
criterion’. It is assumed that it will be a failure mode I with uniaxial tension normal to
the crack’s plane, considering that it is the most important failure mechanism of homo-
geneous, isotropic materials as a growing crack will turn itself in a way to minimize any
shear deformation (typical of modes 2 or 3) (Sanford, 2002).
Figure 1.7: Stress ﬂow in a specimen with and without cracks. (left); Predicted failure
mode I among other possible modes.
KI ≥KIc
(1.3)
where ’KIc’ is a material constant that can be conservatively set to 0.75 MPa m0.5
(Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008). Equation (1.3) allows to deﬁne the critical
crack depth ’ac’ that causes instantaneous failure when subjected to a stress ’σn’ or, vicev-
ersa, the critical stress ’σc’ that causes instantaneous failure when a crack of depth ’a’ is
included in the element.
ac =

KIc
σn · Y √π
2
(1.4a)
σc =
KIc
Y · √a · π
(1.4b)
It is important to notice that the set of equations (1.4) deﬁnes a failure that is not trig-
gered by sub-critical crack growth, consequently, the stress found by (1.4b) is called ’inert
strength’ as it would represent the theoretical time-independent strength of a glass speci-
men in inert condition.
Despite the aforementioned Irwin’s failure criterion provides a reasonable method to pre-
dict the resistance of a glass element, a more detailed approach must include the sub-
critical crack growth. Many models have been developed with the aim of describing the
complex response of a glass element, but here the ’lifetime prediction model’ is reported
which is based on a quasi-static linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM). The model is
valid for short loading times and long lifetime but it is still able to include a wide range
of different cases and offers signiﬁcant advantages in terms of structural design. Given a
varying load generating a stress history ’σn(t)’ and a glass specimen with a single ﬂaw of
==PAGE:21==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
9
length ai, it is possible to deﬁne the time ’tf’ after which failure occurs.
Z tf
0
σn
ndτ =
2
(n −2) · v0 · K−n
Ic · (Y √π)n · a(n−2)/2
i
(1.5)
where ’v0’ (speed) and ’n’ (dimensionless) are parameters respectively deﬁning the po-
sition and the slope of the crack velocity curve, found by experiments and usually set to
v0 = 6 mm/s and n = 16 for general applications. Equation (1.5) shows that the failure
stress is a function of the crack depth a meaning that the larger the crack the smaller the
failure stress or the shorter its duration.
An illustrative example is reported in Figure 1.8 where is clear that a larger initial crack
depth will induce failure in a shorter time if the external load is kept constant.
Figure 1.8: Strength of a surface crack as a function of the loading time for varying crack
depth values and generic material and geometric properties. (Haldimann, Luible, and
Overend, 2008)
The left side of (1.5) is called ’Risk integral’ or ’Brown’s integral’ and it is also used to
quantify damage accumulation in glass. It is named after William Brown who analyzed
the failure mechanics of glass panes affected by static fatigue by means of an analytic
formulation combining load duration effects on glass with a probability theory (Brown,
1970). The probability theory was introduced in order to have a practical description of
the ﬂaws on the glass surface assumed to follow a Weibull function. The result of his
studies is the deﬁnition of a relationship between failure probability and stress on the
glass surface, as functions of the glass surface area considering that larger plates are more
likely to have larger cracks, thus, higher failure probability if the load intensity is kept
==PAGE:22==
10
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
constant (Brown, 1972).
Despite the great contribution given by Brown, its approach seemed to be too complicated
to use for glass design. For this reason, Beason and Morgan (Beason and Morgan, 1984)
proposed a simpliﬁed version that expresses the resistance to failure of a surface ﬂaw
exposed to tensile stress and water vapor by expression (1.6a), which yields to (1.6b) in
case of a constant stress. For example, it can be calculated from one of the the data point
(tf, σ(tf)) of the strength function of the speciﬁc crack, see Figure 1.8.
Dcrit =
Z tf
0
[σ(t)]n dt
(1.6a)
Dcrit = [σ(tf)]n · tf
(1.6b)
where σ(t) is the nominal failure tensile stress history at the ﬂaw with duration tf. How-
ever, equation (1.6a) can be used to calculate the damage of a generic stress history that
does not cause failure.
D =
Z t
0
[σ(t)]n dt
(1.7)
The major contribution of this approach is given by the possibility of deﬁning an equiv-
alent constant stress of duration td that induces the same damage on (or failure of) the
surface ﬂaw.
eσtd =
"R tf
0 [σ(t)]n dt
td
#(1/n)
(1.8)
The great advantage of (1.8) is the chance of comparing the damage of different loading
histories if transformed into equivalent stresses of the same duration. It is common prac-
tise to refer to a standard duration of 60 seconds. However, (1.8) points out that damage is
accumulated in glass even for a very low stress, which is not agreed by many researchers.
In fact, it has been demonstrated that there is a threshold of stress below which static fa-
tigue does not occur (Shand, 1954) (Mould, 1961) (Gehrke, Haehnert, and Ullner, 1986)
(Sglavo and Green, 1996). The threshold limit can be described in either unit of stress
intensity factor ’Kth’ or stress ’σ’ and most of the previous researchers agree on stress
values ranging from 0.20 to 0.40 times the inert strength depending on the environmental
conditions. In this sense, the Eurocode (Standardization, 2019) proposes a stress thresh-
old of 29% of the 5-sec strength, equivalent to the 20% of the inert strength, by means of
the reduction factor kmod.
Types of glass panes
Glass elements are used in many applications, each one with distinct requirements and
performance level. A structural glass element should provide enough strength to external
loading, an overhead glass rooﬁng must have improved post-critical behaviour, while
==PAGE:23==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
11
some speciﬁc applications require an in-between behaviour. In the present chapter, the
most common typologies are discussed.
Annealed Glass
It is a standard glass type without any special processing during or after the production. It
is also known as ’ﬂoat glass’, from the most common production process which consists
in having the molten glass poured on a pool of molten tin that allows the former to ﬂoat
due to the difference in speciﬁc weight. Lastly, the glass is slowly cooled down in an
annealing lehr preventing residual stresses, as shown in Figure 1.9. The advantages of
ﬂoating glass are the low cost, the superior optical quality and the large size of panes.
Moreover, it can be cut and drilled without any breakage. However, it has a small strength
and it susceptible to ﬂaws or defects which reduce its lifetime due to ’sub-critical crack
growth’ as previously explained. The fracture pattern is made of large shards with sharp
edges, which can cause serious injuries.
Figure 1.9: Production of ﬂoat glass. (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
Fully tempered Glass
The glass performance can be improved by tempering. It induces an optimal residual
stress with the external surfaces in compression and the core in tension. During the ther-
mal tempering process, the annealed glass in heated in a furnace above the transition
temperature and then rapidly cooled down by jets of cold air. The residual stress pattern
is the result of the cooling process in the core that solidiﬁes after the external surfaces.
An optimal result is obtained if the surface solidiﬁes exactly at the moment when the
maximum temperature difference occurs. The typical residual stress will have a parabolic
function through the thickness with a maximum compression varying between 80 MPa
and 170 MPa.
The main advantage of fully tempered glass is its highest residual stress level which is
necessary in almost any structural application. As illustrated in Figure 1.10, the ﬂaws
in tempered glass are kept closed for any induced tension stress smaller than the residual
compression stress, thus, eliminating the risk of sub-critical crack growth. For such cases,
==PAGE:24==
12
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
the material strength can be set equal to the residual stress and independent of time. Fur-
thermore, it breaks in small dices reducing the risk of harm to people, which is the reason
why it is also called ’safety glass’. Despite the tiny fragments enhance the safety at fail-
ure, they cause a bad post-failure performance as the glass losses completely any carrying
capacity. Another disadvantage of working with tempered glass is that it cannot be drilled
into the tension zone (core) because it will induce an instant failure.
Figure 1.10: Comparison of annealed and tempered glass in terms of residual stress dis-
tribution and load carrying performance. (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
Heat-strengthened glass
It is a glass subjected to the tempering process but with a lower cooling rate, therefore,
smaller residual stresses. It provides a compromise between enhanced material strength
and post-failure performance. In fact, it breaks in sufﬁciently large shards to have some
residual carrying capacity after failure and it also has a larger allowable stress than an-
nealed glass. Behaviour at failure for the three listed types of glass are compared in Figure
1.11 showing that the shard size decreases for increasing tempering.
Laminated glass
It consists of more than one glass pane connected together by a transparent plastic in-
terlayer, usually polyvinyl butyral (PVB). The glass panes can be of different thickness
but no air inclusion is allowed between them. The main advantage is the signiﬁcant im-
provement in the post-breakage behaviour thanks to the bonding ﬁlm which ties together
==PAGE:25==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
13
Figure 1.11: Comparison of the fracture pattern in annealed glass (left), heat strengthened
glass (center) and fully tempered glass (right). (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
the glass fragments so that a residual structural capacity is obtained. Therefore, its per-
formance depends on the size of the fragments, thus, on the type of glass used in the
lamination. A high residual structural capacity is obtained when the lamination is made
of annealed or heat-strengthened glass due to their larger fragments while the application
of fully tempered glass in laminated units has the only advantage of increasing safety as
the shades are kept in place. A recent study proposed novel solutions to increase the post-
breakage capacity of laminated glass by means of fabric embedded into the PVB layer
(Neugebauer, 2005). Figure 1.12 illustrates the difference between structural capacity be-
fore and after breakage.
Figure 1.12: Performance of laminated glass in terms of the glass type used as lamination.
(Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008)
The main disadvantage of laminated glass from the structural point of view is its bending
==PAGE:26==
14
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
strength which is usually smaller than a monolithic glass pane of same thickness (Hooper,
1973). This reduced strength is the effect of the presence of the interlayer material whose
coupling and force transfer performances inﬂuence the behaviour of the whole unit. It is
common practise to model laminated glass units as an intermediate behaviour between a
layered glass unit made of single unconnected glass plies and an equivalent monolithic
glass pane having a thickness equal to the whole lamination (Norville, King, and Swof-
ford, 1998). The effective performance is deﬁned by a coefﬁcient ’q’ representing the
ability of the interlayer to transfer horizontal shear force between glass plies. The main
issue of such a system is the time-dependency of the response due to the visco-elasticity
of PVB that leads to a loss of shear transfer over time. However, it is demonstrated that
the interlayer behaves elastically for short loading (lasting less than 60seconds) with full
horizontal shear force transfer, meaning that the laminated glass can be modelled as a
single monolithic glass pane in those cases (Norville, King, and Swofford, 1998).
Types of glass systems
The optimization of façade transparency has always been one of the major concern in
many projects involving glass design. Several different glazing systems have been devel-
oped with the intent of dematerializing the supporting structure, meaning that designers
tend to reduce the visual impact of structural members. As shown in the present section,
glass systems moved from framed panels to point supported panels with a considerable
enhancement to building daylighting and thermal performance but with a consequent in-
troduction of a more challenging design process. Despite the majority of glazing systems
includes steel or aluminium members, novel projects are moving forward the usage of
glass for supporting structure in order to maximize transparency. A short description of
the most common glass systems is here reported along with a more detailed explanation
of the pros and cons of PSGS with glass ﬁns.
Glass systems can be classiﬁed in many different ways. Considering the aim of the present
work, a major focus is placed on the type of connections used. In order to maximize
transparency, connections size has reduced over time especially in recent years. While
linearly supported glass was the most common glass system in the past, local edge sup-
ported or point supported glass are becoming more popular in modern façades. However,
such connections need special attention to details during the design process due to stress
concentrations at connections which may be deleterious in glass. The main idea is to
avoid in any case contact between glass and hard materials, such as bolts, by means of
intermediate soft materials that can lower the stress redistributing the load in larger areas.
Otherwise, it may be necessary to design an adequate clearance to avoid load transfer into
glass.
==PAGE:27==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
15
In general, glass systems can be classiﬁed into: linearly supported, local edge supported
and local point supported as shown in Figure 1.13
Figure 1.13:
Classiﬁcation of the most common glass systems.
Adapted from
(Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008).
Linearly supported glazing
The structural system of linearly supported glazing systems (LSGS) consists in having
the glass panels supported by two or four edges by a frame (usually made of aluminium)
through plastic setting blocks and clamping, which is the reason why the system is also
known as framed curtain wall. Setting blocks are needed to transfer the glass self-weight
to the frame, therefore, they are placed at the horizontal bottom glass edge. Differently,
clamping connections are necessary in order to transfer lateral load (such as wind) on
two or four sides. The direct contact between glass and frame is commonly avoided by
means of silicone or EPDM (Ethylene-Propylene Diene Monomer) placed in-between
the two elements. It is also common practice to have chamfered glass edges to avoid
local stress concentration or to have glass-frame contact away from the corners which
are weaker than the core. An example of LSGS is illustrated in Figure 1.14 along with
an example of connection detail. LSGS have a good structural performance to static
loads in both in-plane and out-of-plane directions. The outer frame allows a distribution
of stress in a larger glass area and away from the weak edges or corners resulting in a
safer and more reliable system. Moreover, the frame size is larger than the glass panes,
providing the designer more freedom of the deﬁnition of the required clearance between
glass and frame, where a silicone or EPDM soft material may be placed. The permissive
clearance eases the construction and manufacturing process as construction tolerances
are less demanding. It is clear that LSGSs have many structural advantages but a large
==PAGE:28==
16
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
Figure 1.14: Example of linearly supported connection (left) and glazing system (right)
(Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008).
visual impact due to the massive space occupied by the frame with respect to the thin and
transparent glass panes.
Local edge supported glazing
The need for reducing the visual impact of framed glazing led to local edge supported
glazing systems (ESGS) in which glass panes are supported at speciﬁc regions along the
edges. The structural scheme is made of glass panes supported by friction clamped ﬁx-
ings, which are ﬁxed to an interior sub-frame or a glass ﬁn. Glass ﬁns are discussed in the
next section. Usually, clamping connections are designed to bear lateral loads and setting
blocks on the bottom edge for dead-load support as shown in Figure 1.15. The static
Figure 1.15: Example of clamped supported connection (left) and glazing system (right)
(Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008).
performance of ESGSs is strictly dependent on the clamping force of the ﬁxings. In fact,
they should exert a friction force large enough to allow load sharing but limited to avoid
over-stress into the glass and be ﬂexible to construction tolerances. Furthermore, local
clamping for laminated glass panels requires more detailed attention due to the tendency
==PAGE:29==
1.3. STRUCTURAL GLASS: PROPERTIES, PRODUCTS AND SYSTEMS
17
of the glass interlayer (PVB) to ooze out when subjected to a compression force. Despite
ESGSs require a more complicated analysis with respect to LSGSs, a huge improvement
in terms of transparency is given because the size of the connections is noticeably re-
duced. Nevertheless, a clamping plate is necessary which is visible from the exterior
side.
Point supported glazing
Point supported glazing systems (PSGS) have been developed with the aim of reducing
as much as possible the visual impact of connections. While ESGSs manage to remove
the invasive external frame of LSGSs, PSGSs aim to avoid clamping plates or any type of
connection visible from the exterior.
The structural scheme is similar to the one of ESGSs meaning that glass panes are sup-
ported by special joints which are ﬁxed to an interior sub-frame or a glass ﬁn. However,
they require the glass to have holes where bolts are inserted. Modern point supports are
usually articulated bolts, also known as spider joints, that allow rotations but restrain in-
plane and out-of-plane translations. Figure 1.16 shows examples of spider joints and a
proposal of clearance design to avoid over-restraint. Several different types of PSGSs
Figure 1.16: Schematic example of point supported connection (left) adapted from
(Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008) and render of typical spider joint (right) adapted
from (Overend and Maniatis, 2007).
exist in literature, however, the structural system will always be the same. The variance is
the result of the freedom of the designer to choose the main supporting/stiffening struc-
ture. The most common solution consists in spider joints connected to steel members
with circular or rectangular sections acting as beams or columns attached to the main
structural system as shown in Figure 1.17. Steel supporting members are structurally efﬁ-
cient thanks to the material strength but the architectural requirement issue is solved only
on the exterior façade side as the whole system will still have a visual impact from the
interior. A similar problem arises in point supported structure with stiffening cables or
truss structures. They have the advantage of being versatile as they can be employed in
==PAGE:30==
18
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
any direction with an optimization of material usage. However, the façade transparency
can be improved by spatially separating the glass panels from the supporting structure.
Glass ﬁn systems are certainly one of the best structural alternatives in terms of aesthetic
Figure 1.17: Spider joints ﬁxed to steel slender columns at Perth Convention Center (left);
Spider joints ﬁxed to a steel mast in the Eli and Edythe Broad Stage’s façade (center); Ca-
ble structure used as supporting and stiffening system for the La Villete’s point supported
glazing (right).
requirements. In fact, the traditional steel members are substituted by thin glass columns
and beams, namely glass ﬁns, which allow the sunlight to pass through them reducing
the need for lighting in day time and providing a clear view to and from the building’s
interior. Considering that glass was employed only in non-structural elements, glass ﬁn
systems have opened its usage to structural components. One of the ﬁrst projects is the
Willis Faber & Dumas Building’s façade, completed in 1975 and incorporating glass also
as stiffening elements placed perpendicular to glass panes to provide lateral support, as
shown in Figure 1.18. The great architectural advantage provided by PSGS is counterbal-
anced by the structural efﬁciency loss due to the load-transfer method which does not ﬁt
well with the brittleness of glass. In fact, the structural system causes a large stress con-
centration at joints with a consequential risk of instant glass failure. Moreover, drilling
holes in glass panels introduces several additional ﬂaws on the glass surface which are
even more dangerous considering that the loads are transmitted through those holes. In
general, PSGSs are not suitable for transferring large in-plane loads except for the dead
load of vertical glass panels of vertical glazings (Haldimann, Luible, and Overend, 2008).
Another weak point typical of glass ﬁn systems is their slenderness which makes them
prone to buckling. When large lateral loads are introduced, glass ﬁns tend to buckle
laterally at the unsupported edge due to bending moment.
The listed shortcomings lead the designers to avoid glass as structural member if
==PAGE:31==
1.4. REPORTED GLASS DAMAGE DUE TO EARTHQUAKES
19
Figure 1.18: Glass façade system with stiffening glass ﬁns in the Wills Faber & Dumas
Building, Ipswich, England from the outside (left) and the inside (right).
Figure 1.19: IQ Glass showroom in Amersham, England (left); Del Amo Fashion Center
in Torrance, California (center); Example of integration of glass ﬁns and steel structural
members in a PSGS (right).
possible, resulting in a lack of extensive research on the topic in the past. A good example
of this tendency is given by Bordeaux Palais de Justice where a ductile steel ﬁn had
to substitute the prior glass ﬁn after its failure due to bad design (Sakamoto, Itoh, and
Ohashi, 1984a). Nowadays, research is focusing on possible punctual connections in
glass that allow a better stress redistribution (Gowda and Heydari, 2010) (Sivanerupan,
2011) (Sivanerupan et al., 2014), the development of formulae and charts that can predict
the peak stress around the holes (Overend, 2002) (Nielsen, 2011) and the analysis of
lateral stability of glass ﬁns (So and Chan, 1996) (Pešek and Melcher, 2017).
1.4
Reported glass damage due to earthquakes
Earthquakes are likely to induce large damage to both structural and non-structural com-
ponents, including glazing systems or simple glass elements such as doors and windows.
==PAGE:32==
20
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
In fact, glass structures have shown to be very vulnerable to seismic events, even for small
ground accelerations. The most common cause of glass failure is the incompatibility be-
tween the deformation of the main structure and the glazing movement capacity. Flexible
structures, which dissipate the seismic energy by large deformations, will induce exces-
sive interstorey drift causing either serviceability failures (such as sealant damage) or
glass breakage with consequent risk to life safety. The following list of past earthquakes
demonstrates that damage to glass structures, or in general to non-structural components,
has been a serious matter also when structural damage was not experienced.
The 1964 Niigata Earthquake caused damages to both structural and nonstructural
elements. In particular, many broken panes of glass were found especially in ﬂexible
structures due to large inter-storey drifts and vibrations (Sakamoto, 1978).
The 1968 Tokachi-oki Earthquake provoked damage to some non-structural elements
although their primary structures remained intact, such as a composite steel/concrete
structure that suffered no damages but had 120 glass panels broken. Failure of glass
panels also happened in 9 out of the 72 investigated structures (Sakamoto, 1978).
The 1971 San Fernando Earthquake assumed an important role in terms of new atten-
tion to the design of non-structural elements. The total direct damage to buildings was
estimated to have exceeded $0.5 billion dollars (1971), with structural damage accounted
only for about 3%. Some of the fatalities were also caused by falling non-structural
elements. In particular, the cost related to glass breakage was the highest among non-
structural elements. (Charleson, 2008) (Housner and Jennings, 1972) (MacLeod, 2004)
The 1978 Off-Miyagi earthquake induced much glass breakage, especially in build-
ings constructed during 1960-70 in which ﬁxed glass systems with hardening putty were
predominant. Considering the extensive glass damage experienced, a study was possible
to be carried with the aim of plotting a curve of the falling distance of broken glass as a
function of the height of the glass in its original position. A rough estimation is that the
maximum distance is about half of the height (Sakamoto, Itoh, and Ohashi, 1984b).
The 1983 Mid-Japan Sea earthquake resulted in a lot of glass breakage, too (Sakamoto,
Itoh, and Ohashi, 1984b).
The 1985 Mexico City earthquake induced valuable glass damage. It was recorded in
63 of the 263 building surveyed and estimated to be the most common damage among all
the non-structural elements of the building envelops. In particular, glass failure resulted to
be the most serious damage in almost half of the analyzed structures. Research analysis
showed that the majority of glass damage was experienced in ﬂexible buildings (three
to four times bigger than in rigid structures), ﬂexible glazing systems (twice as much as
more rigid systems), structures with complex or irregular conﬁgurations (almost twice
as much as in more regular ones), buildings with partial height adjoining buildings due
to pounding (twice as much as in building with full or none adjoining height), envelops
==PAGE:33==
1.4. REPORTED GLASS DAMAGE DUE TO EARTHQUAKES
21
with larger windows glass panels or vertical glass facades. Figure 1.20 shows that the
earthquake induced not just glass breakage but also damage to some supporting frames
also with buckling modes. (Charleson, 2008) (Evans and Ramirez, 1985) (Pantelides,
Behr, and Truman, 1996) (Bedon, Zhang, et al., 2018).
Figure 1.20: Glass Curtain wall damage in 1985 Mexico City Earthquake. Damage to
corner windows (left) (Charleson, 2008), glass and supporting frame damage (center) and
shattering of glass panes in a commercial building (right) (Bedon, Zhang, et al., 2018).
The 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake was the largest seismic event occurred in the San
Francisco Bay area since 1906 and the largest in California since 1952 causing more
than 60 deaths and serious economic loss due to both direct and indirect effects. It is
said to have been the biggest economic disaster in the US at that time, especially due to
large damage to nonstructural components (such as glass breakage), despite the number
of collapsed structures was very small. For instance, Watsonville Community Hospital
experienced serious direct and indirect problems considering that some departments had
to be evacuated due to glass fragments spread on the ﬂoor throughout the hospital (Behr,
2009) (MacLeod, 2004) (Arnold, 1991) (Ding et al., 1990).
Figure 1.21: Glass damage in punched windows (left) (Behr, 2009) and strip windows
(right) (Reitherman et al., 1995) after the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake.
The 1994 Northridge Earthquake was one of the highest recorded seismic event in
an urban area in North America, which induced large damage to non-structural elements
in most of the buildings surveyed after the event. Of the 66.000 buildings inspected,
==PAGE:34==
22
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
77% had mainly nonstructural damage that explains why the total monetary loss from
the earthquake was estimated to be about 20 billion dollars. It is important to notice
that glass damage proved to be concentrated in storefront glazing (in some commercial
blocks, many buildings lost between 40%-60% of their store-front glazing) while high-
rise buildings suffered from little problems. It is to ascribe to the large size of glass panes
usually present in single-storey storefronts, as already depicted in other seismic events.
Moreover, studies carried right after the seismic events suppose that the broken glazings
are the effect of a lack of consideration of the drift capacity requirements such as large
clearance between glass-to-frame connection. Differently, high-rise buildings were de-
signed according to newer codes were more focus was put on drift ratios requirements.
For what concerns the cumulative damage in glass, it is known that windows of the Airtel
Hotel were completely broken due to an aftershock which was considerably less violent
than the main shock (Pantelides, Behr, and Truman, 1996) (MacLeod, 2004) (Reitherman
et al., 1995) (Behr, 2009), so that Northridge earthquake showed a potential for cumu-
lative damage in glass (Memari, 2013). A focused study (Peek-Asa et al., 1998) on the
earthquake-related deaths and injuries was conducted in order to have a more detailed
understanding of the causes. It was pointed out that most of the fatalities were caused
by building collapse, while non-fatal injuries were mainly caused by falling objects. In
particular, it was found out that some injuries were the effect of falling glass.
Figure 1.22: Shard of broken annealed glass of a multi-storey building (left) and broken
curtain wall due to excessive deformation in the supporting mullions (right) after the 1994
Northridge earthquake. (FEMA, 2011)
==PAGE:35==
1.5. DYNAMIC GLASS PERFORMANCE
23
The 2003 Bam Earthquake, in Iran, induced extensive damage causing the collapse
of more than 70% of the buildings in the area afﬂicted by the earthquake. Non-structural
elements also suffered wide damage, in particular in architectural components such as
masonry walls, internal and external façades, glass ﬁnishing, windows and doors glasses,
parapets and other non-structural components. As already seen in the previous examples,
glass breakage is experienced even in buildings where cracks or other types of damages
are not visible, as shown in Figure 1.23 (Hosseini, 2005).
Figure 1.23: Broken windows in an apparently un-cracked building (left) and damage to
the glass façade of the Trade and Tourism Building (right) after the 2003 Bam earthquake.
(Hosseini, 2005)
The 2011 Christchurch earthquake is the second largest natural disaster in New Zealand,
due to the proximity of the epicenter to the city (about 10 km) and its shallow origin (about
5 km deep). It had a magnitude of 6,3 and a maximum recorded PGA of 2.2g which
caused more than 180 fatalities and widespread damage. As already experienced in many
previous earthquakes, building systems providing small clearance in glass-to-frame con-
nections exhibited more glazing damage. One of the main issues was the risk of falling
glass because standard glass was often adopted instead of laminated glass which would
have reduced the falling glass hazard. While much of the façade damage consisted in
deformed frames and broken glass, it has been observed a serious case of detachment of
a large section of curtain wall system (Figure 1.24), which is attributed to the connection
failure of the wooden sub-frame. Large damage was also experienced in PSGSs probably
due to stress concentration around the holes, which is the effect of the huge interstorey
drifts. For example, the interstorey drift measured in a modern building (220 mm) was
more than four times the capacity of the glazing system (50 mm) (Baird, Palermo, and
Pampanin, 2011).
1.5
Dynamic glass performance
In the previous chapter, earthquakes that have induced signiﬁcant direct and indirect prob-
lematic due to failure of glass elements have been listed. It was mainly caused by the
==PAGE:36==
24
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
Figure 1.24: Damage to a point-supported glazing system (left) and large-scale damage
to strip window glazing (right) after the 2011 Christchurch earthquake. (Baird, Palermo,
and Pampanin, 2011)
brittleness of the glass material and its poor capacity to tensile stresses but the problem
may be overcome or minimized by speciﬁc design methods. As a consequence, many
studies have been carried out during the last ﬁfty years in order to assess the dynamic per-
formance of glass and different glazing systems. The majority of the previous research is
focused on the analysis of framed glass façade systems by means of experimental tests.
On the contrary, analytic studies consists only in a small portion as glazing systems are
usually regarded as ’less important’ due to their non-structural nature (Bedon, Zhang, et
al., 2018). Regarding PSGSs with stiffening glass ﬁns, it seems that they have not been
studied in deep yet.
Dynamic performance in terms of glass type
While Chapter 1.3 treats the general pros and cons of the different glass types and sys-
tems, here the dynamic performance is considered more in detail. In fact, the response
of glass elements is different if subjected to static or dynamic loading, similarly to other
structural materials (such as concrete or steel) (Bedon, Zhang, et al., 2018). As already
mentioned, glass strength is considerably inﬂuenced by cracks propagation which is a
function of many parameters. Among all of them, the load duration plays an important
role in determining the actual material strength and it leads to the deﬁnition of an equiv-
alent glass strength as a function of the load duration. For instance, considerably fast
loads (such as explosions) will cause an apparent increase in strength because the exist-
ing surface ﬂaws have no enough time to grow in size. A deeper explanation of the glass
strength as a function of the cracks propagation is given in Chapter 1.3. Figure 1.8 shows
the strength of a surface crack as a function of the loading time and the crack depth. Ac-
cording to the ﬁgure, the strength increases with shorter loading with a tendency to level
off around 0.001 seconds. It means that very dynamic loads with duration smaller then
0.001s should be compared to the inert strength, for that type of glass. Considering that
==PAGE:37==
1.5. DYNAMIC GLASS PERFORMANCE
25
the behaviour is strictly related to the crack depth, the Eurocode (Standardization, 2019)
proposes to use the inert strength for loading durations or steps shorter than 0.02 seconds.
The dynamic performance of different glass types and systems has usually been analyzed
by experimental tests. Most researchers perform in-plane dynamic racking tests, such as
the ’crescendo test’, to investigate serviceability and ultimate limit states for architectural
glass under seismic loadings. The crescendo test is a speciﬁc seismic experiment intro-
duced by (Behr and Belarbi, 1996) in which the racking amplitude progressively increases
at a constant frequency and it is preferred among others because of its repeatability in the
identiﬁcation of drift capacity (Behr, 1998). Several tests have been conducted in the last
decades in terms of glass resistance to fallout and the results converge on the idea that an-
nealed monolithic glass is the least resistant while fully tempered monolithic glass shows
the highest resistance. An in-between performance is typical of heat-strengthened mono-
lithic glass which is roughly 1.4 times more resistant than annealed glass (Behr, 2006).
The ﬁndings are compatible with the pilot study conducted by (Pantelides and Behr, 1994)
who demonstrated how the seismic performance of annealed and heat-strengthened glass
can be improved by lamination of glass panes considering that they experienced no fallout
in their tests. Moreover, the lamination prevents the unsafe failure behaviour of annealed
glass which is prone to fallout in both small and large fragments while fully tempered
monolithic glass experiences fallout by dicing. An increase in no-fallout capacity is also
shown when the glass is employed in insulating glass units made of more panes with re-
spect to the single glass pane of the same thickness and comparable boundary conditions.
It has been demonstrated by means of dynamic racking motion tests on a curtain wall
frame with varying conﬁgurations and parameters (Memari, Behr, and Kremer, 2003).
Interesting tests are also been conducted to evaluate the damping ratio of the glass when
used as a construction material. (Bedon, Fasan, and Amadio, 2019) summarize previous
ﬁndings and underline how it is not easy to predict the dynamic parameters of glass pan-
els as they are affected by restraint conditions which are not always carefully considered.
Despite other researches resulted in the deﬁnition of damping ratios between 0.6% and
1.2%, the authors conclude that the techniques used to calculate damping ratios may re-
turn potential unsafe predictions. For this reason, damping contribution due to glass is
usually neglected (Bedon and Amadio, 2017).
Dynamic performance in terms of glazing system type
(Bouwkamp and Meehan, 1960) were probably ones of the ﬁrst to study the behaviour of
glass panels with the aim of developing analytic formulas. In particular, the behaviour of
windows panels under in-plane forces was investigated. The mechanical in-plane motion
was imagined as made of more sub-phases. First, the supporting frame deforms and the
==PAGE:38==
26
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND
Figure 1.25: Example of racking test setup where two glass panels are connected to slid-
ing steel tubes excited by an electrohydraulic servoactuator ram. From (Sivanerupan,
2011).
window panel translates within the frame until the maximum displacement exceeds the
frame clearance; secondly, the glass panel starts rotating around one corner until its oppo-
site one coincides with the adjacent frame corner; lastly, the panel continues its rotational
motion while an elastic deformation takes place as diagonal shortening.
(Sucuoˇglu and Girija Vallabhan, 1997) conducted one of the ﬁrst studies about the seis-
mic behaviour of windows glass panels. The mechanical response of a single glass panel
was described by the deﬁnition of simple formulas which could represent the in-plane
deformation and the out-of-plane vibration, with the assumption that the two models can
be treated independently. Great focus was put into the in-plane motion, which was de-
scribed according to (Bouwkamp and Meehan, 1960) expression, while the out-of-plane
vibrations were analyzed in terms of mode shapes. A parametric study was conducted in
order to develop curves of maximum stresses and deﬂections in glass plates in seismic
zone 4 as a function of the thickness and height of the panes. The authors conclude by
pointing that in-plane deformations are controlled by limiting interstorey drift and out-of-
plane vibrations are controlled by specifying minimum lateral forces.
(Sakamoto, Itoh, and Ohashi, 1984b) highlighted that most of the buildings that experi-
enced severe glass damage were those with ﬁxed glasses with hardening putty. This leads
to the conclusion that stiff frames that do not allow glass movement within the frame are
likely to induce damage. They have also observed that larger glass panes are more vul-
nerable that smaller ones.
(Memari, 2013) analyzed the performance of different glazing systems. He conﬁrmed
that glass-to-window frame clearance is the leading parameter for curtain wall systems
==PAGE:39==
1.5. DYNAMIC GLASS PERFORMANCE
27
Figure 1.26: The different phases of the in-plane panel motion according to (Sucuoˇglu
and Girija Vallabhan, 1997)
but he also underlines that other parameters play an important role in different glazing
systems, such as the connection between the glazing frame and the supporting building
wall or structural frame. For example, a punched window enclosed in a wall panel would
not expect damage if sufﬁcient clearance is designed between the windows frame and its
surrounding. In case of strip windows, the response will depend on the method of attach-
ment of the windows at the top and the bottom so that an isolating joint, which allows
sliding, would reduce the risk of glass damage.
Studies on the dynamic performance of PSGSs are limited and what has been ana-
lyzed is mainly the stress concentration around the holes or the comparison between dif-
ferent bushing materials by experimental tests. However, it is demonstrated (Sivanerupan,
2011) that adopting large horizontal slotted holes in spider arms along with low-modulus
silicone sealants can increase the drift capacity under dynamic lateral loads. A typical
conﬁguration of point supported panels to allow for movement consists in having two
horizontally slotted holes and oversized holes on the opposite edge (Ryan, Otlet, and Og-
den, 1997). This conﬁguration allows rigid body rotation of glass panels under in-plane
lateral loading with no stress concentration until the rigid-body movement capacity is
reached. It is also summarized that an increase in drift capacity is reached by smaller and
thicker panels with square geometry or the vertical side longer than the horizontal one.
Despite the lateral capacity of point supported panels has not been investigated in deep
enough, the research indicates that larger drift performance is achieved by other systems,
such as curtain walls. However, one relevant drawback of the latter case is that high
level of accuracy in ﬁnite element models is not easy to achieve as many elements are
involved (modeling of aluminum frame-to-structural frame connections, aluminum frame
member-to-member connections, gasket-to-glass and gasket-to-frame contact) (Memari,
Shirazi, and Kremer, 2007).
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 2
Numerical investigation: Finite
element models
Figure 2.1: Steps of the project work: (a) Application of the set of SGGs in the main
model (b) Extraction of the nodal forces histories at the most stresses panel-to-spider
joint connection from the main model (red cross) (c) Application of the force histories at
the hole surface in a detailed model (d) Post-processing of data in Matlab aimed to the
instant failure and long-term failure analyses.
In this part of the work, the ﬁnite element models are described. The analysis’ steps
are shown graphically in Figure 2.1, which consists in the investigation by two different
FE models of the response of a 4-storey building equipped with a PSGS and subjected to
29
==PAGE:42==
30
CHAPTER 2. NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION: FINITE ELEMENT MODELS
seismic excitations. Firstly, the proposed building is modelled in large-scale and subjected
to a set of 6 SGGs. Then, the forces at the glass panels - spider joints connections are
extracted and used as input in a more detailed FE model of the most stressed glass panel.
The second model is necessary in order to have a ﬁner mesh from which stresses are
extracted at each node of the mesh in proximity of the connection. Lastly, the stress
functions are post-processed in Matlab to evaluate both instant and long-term response of
the glass structure.
2.1
Main model
Geometry and structural system
The structural system of the case study is a 4-storey steel frame building with 15m x
15m ﬂoor area, with 12 m total height made of 3 m single storey height. Steel beams
IPE300 and columns HEB300 are used at every level, except for the ﬁrst ﬂoor where
beams IPE400 and columns HEB400 are needed to bear the larger moments. Concrete
slabs at ﬂoor levels are designed to ensure in-plane rigidity (diaphragm) with openings
in proximity of the façades from level 1 to 3, representing a conﬁguration of a typical
ofﬁce building with glass façade. Glazing systems are located in two opposite sides of
the building in order to have a symmetric scheme. Both of them are made of 2.5m x 3m
laminated glass panels with 30mm total thickness meaning that each ﬂoor is equipped
with two panels. As described in the introduction, the case study analyzes a PSGS with
stiffening glass ﬁns in order to achieve maximum transparency. In fact, steel beams in
proximity of the facades are substituted by 3m x 0.4m laminated glass ﬁns with 54mm
total thickness. They support the glass panels by means of steel spider joints that have
been modelled to better represent the structural connections. Bracing systems are usually
necessary in steel structures subjected to large horizontal loads (e.g. seismic motions)
in order to increase the structural stiffness and reduce excessive interstorey drifts. Here,
X-type braces are located at each ﬂoor on one side of the glazings and are modelled in
Abaqus as 2D springs with a 10.000 N/mm stiffness working in both tension and com-
pression.
Regarding the structural connections, steel beams and columns are considered to be con-
nected by stiff joints (ﬁxed), which do not allow rotation, representing a typical frame
structure. Such a connection is realized in Abaqus modelling the whole structural steel
frame (beams and columns) as a unique part. A different approach is taken for the slab-
beam connections, despite they are also considered to be ﬁxedly connected. For practical
reasons, the steel frame and the slabs are considered as different model’s parts but the
beam motions are coupled to that of the ﬂoors in both translations and rotations with
==PAGE:43==
2.1. MAIN MODEL
31
Figure 2.2: (a) Structural scheme (b) View from the inside of the façade made of glass
panels and supporting horizontal ﬁns (c) Floors geometry.
the former acting as the master elements. It implies that each slab part will follow the
supporting beams in their translations and rotations. On the contrary, MPC (Multi-point
constraint) pin-type joints are used in all the connections involving glass elements in order
to reduce stress concentration. Spider-steel members are connected to the main structure
by pin joints as well, considering that free rotations are needed in such conﬁgurations.
Illustrations of the FE model and the detail of the glass-to-spider-to-frame connections
are shown in Figure 2.2 & 2.3, respectively. Concerning boundary conditions, the steel
Figure 2.3: Detail of the panel-to-spider-to-main structure connections
columns are connected to the ground by ﬁxed supports which neither allow rotations nor
translations. Only the translation along the earthquake direction is freed when the strong
ground motions are applied.
==PAGE:44==
32
CHAPTER 2. NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION: FINITE ELEMENT MODELS
Considering that many long dynamic excitations are applied to the model with a small
time-step, a degree-of-freedom reduction is needed. For this reason, half of the model is
studied by symmetry condition, as reported in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Final model used in the analysis consisting in half of the whole building with
symmetry condition.
Mesh and element types
A long time has been spent in reﬁning the FE model in terms of optimal mesh with the
minimum processing time. The mesh of the structural frame and the ﬂoor panels has been
subjected to a parametric study in order to have a precise description of the building’s
stiffness and dynamic properties with the smallest number of nodes. It resulted in the
followings:
• Beams & Columns: 2-node beam elements in space (B31)
• Spider-joints: 3-node beam elements in space (B32)
• Floor: 4-node shell elements with reduced integration (S4R)
• Glass Panels: 8-node shell elements with reduced integration (S8R)
It is important to notice that the ﬂoor stiffness is well represented only if the nodes of the
ﬂoor shells coincide with the ones of the supporting beams.
==PAGE:45==
2.1. MAIN MODEL
33
Material & System properties
Four different materials are used: Concrete, Elasto-plastic steel, Elastic steel and Glass
that have been assigned to the ﬂoor panels, structural frame, spider joints and glass panels,
respectively. Here, the speciﬁc properties are listed.
• Concrete: isotropic elastic material with an elastic modulus of E = 30 GPa, Pois-
son’s ratio ν = 0.3 and mass-less.
• Elasto-plastic Steel: isotropic elastic with an elastic modulus of E = 210 GPa,
Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3, almost perfectly plastic with kinematic hardening, Rayleigh
damping with a 1% damping in the ﬁrst modes, mass density of 7.85 tonne/m3.
• Elastic Steel: the same properties of the elasto-plastic steel but without any plastic
behaviour.
• Glass: isotropic elastic with an elastic modulus of E = 70 GPa, Poisson’s ratio
ν = 0.22, mass density of 2.5 tonne/m3.
Load deﬁnition
The structure is subjected to two different categories of loads. They can be categorized as
structural loads due to dead loads plus live loads and inertia forces produced by seismic
excitations. It is important to have a realistic deﬁnition of the structural loads considering
that the dynamic response is highly inﬂuenced by the structural masses, which are propor-
tional to the loads. To do so, load combinations comprising structural and non-structural
self-weight plus live loads are used at the ﬂoors’ levels. Then, the loads are transformed
into masses and applied to the supporting steel beams as linear masses of 800 kg/m and
700 kg/m at the beams of the generic ﬂoor and roof level, respectively, while their eval-
uation is reported in the Appendix B.
A more detailed approach is followed for the SGGs deﬁnition. The structure is imag-
ined to be built in a seismic area where real seismic motions have been recorded, i.e.
North Palm Springs in Riverside County, California, United States about 150km from
Los Angeles city. In particular, the ’North Palm Springs Fire Station #36’ station, located
at coordinates 33◦55’28.9"N 116◦32’52.4"W, is used for the SGGs selection by means
of the PEER ground motion database (Paciﬁc Earthquake Engineering Research Center
(PEER) ground motion database 2013). The choice is motivated by the high quality of
the earthquake recordings in Southern California which has produced more than 470,000
events over a period of more than 77 years (Hutton, Woessner, and Hauksson, 2010). Fig-
ure 2.5 shows the 9 SGGs recorded by the station over a period of 18 years (1992 to 2010)
along with the PGA of the horizontal component used. Considering the small excitations
==PAGE:46==
34
CHAPTER 2. NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION: FINITE ELEMENT MODELS
of the last earthquakes, only the 6 strongest ones are selected for the analysis. Despite
’Big Bear-02’ has a PGA smaller than the other disregarded SGGs, it is selected because
of its frequency content (not explicit in the table).
Figure 2.5: The recorded and selected earthquakes from ’North Palm Springs Fire Station
#36’ station.
Figure 2.6: Plots of accelerogram (time [s] vs acceleration [g]) and response spectrum
(period [s] vs spectral acceleration [g]) for each strong ground motion along with the
spectral values for the ﬁrst period of the structure for a 1% damping.
==PAGE:47==
2.2. DETAILED MODEL
35
The dynamic characteristics of the 6 SGGs are shown in Figure 2.6 with the spectral
acceleration corresponding to the ﬁrst swaying mode of the structure and with damping
ratio equal to 1%. The set is made of different types of SGGs: from short-duration (e.g.
Joshua Tree) to long-duration (e.g. Hector Mine) motions, regular (e.g. Joshua) and
irregular (Landers) motions, single events (e.g. El Mayor) and with aftershocks (Big
Bear 01 & 02) or in resonance with the ﬁrst mode (Big Bear-02), small (Landers) or large
(Big Bear-02) ampliﬁcation. These to demonstrate that the PGA cannot be the only way
to classify or describe a seismic event but many variables need to be taken into account,
such as duration, regularity and resonance.
2.2
Detailed model
Geometry
A detailed model of the most stressed glass panel corner is generated. Its dimensions are
400mm x 400mm with 30mm thickness. The size of the model is the result of a parametric
analysis which aimed to minimize the dimensions while keeping a precise stress analysis
around the corner. The two sides opposite to the hole are restrained in the displacement
in the respective orthogonal direction as shown in Figure 2.7.
Mesh and element type
The detailed model has been subjected to a parametric study for the optimal mesh, as
well. It resulted that triangular mesh elements ﬁt better to the circular hole geometry
which is the area of main interest. However, a second-order interpolation with full inte-
gration method is necessary for an accurate result. Therefore, 6-node plain stress triangle
elements with full integration (CPS6) are used. Regarding the size of the mesh, it reduces
approaching the hole, as shown in Figure 2.7.
Material properties
One single material is used, i.e. glass. It has the same properties of the main model since
consistency is required. Therefore, glass is deﬁned as an isotropic elastic material with
an elastic modulus of E = 70 GPa and Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.22. The only difference is
that the mass density is set to zero, otherwise, the element self-weight would be counted
twice. Moreover, a static analysis is here performed, which is not inﬂuenced by mass
density, unlike the dynamic approach of the main model.
==PAGE:48==
36
CHAPTER 2. NUMERICAL INVESTIGATION: FINITE ELEMENT MODELS
Figure 2.7: Detailed model: (a) Geometry and boundary conditions (b) Mesh
Load deﬁnition
The glass panel is loaded with the forces extracted from the main model. They are then
transformed into pressures and applied at the hole surface. It is assumed that the forces are
transferred into the glass panel through 90-degree surfaces in the whole panel thickness.
This hypothesis simpliﬁes the model given that it is not necessary to model the bushing
material placed between the metal and the glass surfaces. However, the deﬁnition of
the loaded surface was an interesting challenge of the present study considering that the
force vector is rotating because of the dynamic property of the problem and so the loaded
surface changes as a function of the force inclination. The issue is solved by the division
of the surface of the hole into 8 portions of 90 degrees that can also be seen as a unique
90-degree surface rotating of 45 degrees around the center, as shown in Figure 2.8. The
single portion will be loaded if and only if the force acts on its inner 45-degree sector,
meaning that only one portion is loaded at a time. For instance, a force ’F’ with an angle
between 22.5◦and 67.5◦to the horizontal will be redistributed as pressure ’p’ over the
surface ’a c’. The Matlab script used for the load deﬁnition is reported in Appendix D.2.
Therefore, the force vector F function of time is divided into 8 pressure vectors applied
to the glass panel in 8 independent static steps. The procedure is repeated for each of the
6 SGGs.
==PAGE:49==
2.2. DETAILED MODEL
37
Figure 2.8: Illustration of the division of the hole into 8 surfaces with their inner sectors.
On the right, an example a force F that would be redistributed over the surface ’a c’.
==PAGE:50==
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3
Results and discussion
The results of the present work are mainly associated with damage accumulation and
transformation of stress histories into equivalent constant stresses. The aim is to show the
distribution of stress in a glass panel when subjected to seismic motion and the accumu-
lation of damage when long stress histories ( e.g. 18 year period ) are considered in the
design.
The capacity of the glass panel to bear the seismic excitation is checked in two differ-
ent steps. Notice that the followings are performed at each node of the mesh and ’stress
histories’ or ’stress’ mean ’max principal stress histories’ and ’max principal stress’, re-
spectively.
• Instant failure: It is veriﬁed that the largest peak of each stress histories is less than
the glass inert strength. Considering that the stress histories are discrete functions
of 0.01-second steps (due to the SGGs time-step) it is reasonable to compare those
peaks to the inert strength due to the very dynamic nature of the loading history. In
fact, it is assumed that glass strength is constant for loading times shorter than 0.01
seconds and equal to the inert strength.
• Long-term failure due to stress-corrosion: The analysis is carried for an 18-year
period of recorded SGGs. Each earthquake causes surface ﬂaws to expand inducing
a decrease in strength, meaning that some damage is accumulated. Stress histories
generated by the single earthquakes are transformed into equivalent-60sec stresses
σ60sec and compared to the equivalent-60sec strength σR,60sec. Then, the cumulative
effects of the whole 18-year period are analyzed in terms of damage D functions for
mathematical reasons (additive property of the damage, demonstrated in Appendix
C). The main analytic difference between instant failure and long-term failure is
the importance given to the loading duration and the deﬁnition of a crack threshold
below which cracks do not propagate, thus, not contributing to the accumulation of
39
==PAGE:52==
40
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
damage for the long-term failure.
3.1
Instant failure analysis
The ﬁrst step of the analysis consists in the deﬁnition of the glass strength as a function
of the loading duration. Considering that an instant failure would not give reason to a
long-term failure analysis, the glass strength function is evaluated starting from an inert
strength which will sustain the instant failure demand. It is demonstrated that a glass
panel with inert strength equal to σinert = 78 [MPa] would not be subjected to instant
failure and it is assumed that the glass strength remains constant for loading time shorter
than 0.01 seconds. These properties allow the deﬁnition of the ﬁrst part of the strength
curved showed in Figure 3.1. The exponential curve is calculated by the equivalent stress
formulation reported in (1.8) for varying reference time td. The third and last straight
curve starts from the stress threshold σth below which crack propagation does not occur.
Its value is assumed to be σth = 15.60 [MPa] which is the 20% of the inert strength. It is
important to underline that the deﬁnition of hypothetical values is reasonable considering
that both glass strength and the residual stresses are very scattered (Haldimann, 2006)
(Brown, 1970). The ’instant failure’ analysis begins with the evaluation of the stress his-
Figure 3.1: Strength of the glass panel as a function of the loading time, with the assump-
tion that the inert strength is σinert = 78 [MPa] and the threshold is σth = 15.60 [MPa]
tories at each node of the mesh. Then, the peak values at each node σmax are compared
to the inert strength σinert. For illustrative and practical purposes, the stress histories
reported in Figure 3.2 are referred to the most stressed node only. The ’jumps’ in the
stress functions are the direct result of the way in which the forces have been applied in
the detailed FE model (see Section 2.2). Peak values are reported in Table 3.1 showing
that a glass with σinert = 78 [MPa] would not experience instant failure for any of the
single SGGs. The important aspect of Figure 3.2 is that the peak values can be predicted
==PAGE:53==
3.2. LONG-TERM FAILURE ANALYSIS
41
Figure 3.2: Plots of the maximum principal stress histories in [MPa] as a function of the
time in [s] at the most stressed node for each strong ground motion.
from the response spectra. In fact, symmetric systems subjected to a seismic motion in
one direction are likely to exhibit behaviour associated with the ﬁrst mode. This also to
demonstrate that the PGA only cannot give a full insight into the dynamic response of a
structure but a modal analysis is necessary.
3.2
Long-term failure analysis
Long-term analysis requires a different approach. Earthquakes will cause damage into
glass every time the surface cracks are subjected to a tension stress normal to the crack’s
plane and with a value larger than the stress threshold. Here, the stress threshold is set
==PAGE:54==
42
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
equal to σth = 15.60 [MPa], corresponding to the 20% of the inert strength σinert, accord-
ing to what explained in Section 1.3. After having extracted the stress histories at each
node and subtracted the stress threshold portion at each step time, they are transformed
into equivalent 60-sec constant stress with (1.8). Lastly, the ratio demand/capacity is eval-
uated. The reference time used in the equivalent stress transformation (60 seconds, here)
is totally arbitrary in term of demand/capacity ratio, meaning that the ratio is independent
of the reference time. The procedure is followed for each of the 6 SGGs and the results
are plotted in a contour plot and the result showed in Figure 3.3. The plots show that the
Figure 3.3: Color plot of demand/capacity ratios for each strong ground motion for an-
nealed glass. Only a portion of 200mm x 200mm is shown.
stresses caused by the earthquakes have the same distribution in the surface but differ in
amplitude. This means that the stress distribution is inﬂuenced by the glazing and con-
nection geometry rather than SGGs’ properties. Regarding the ratio values, it is noticed
that the main contribution is given by the peak values rather than the whole stress history.
This is a clear conclusion considering the higher weight of stress values than time dura-
tion in the equivalent stress function (1.8) (due to the exponential term), which becomes
==PAGE:55==
3.2. LONG-TERM FAILURE ANALYSIS
43
more pronounced in relatively short duration loads as earthquakes (which usually last less
than 2 minutes).
A similar approach is followed for heat-strengthened and fully tempered glass. The main
difference is the increase in strength in the other two types of glass due to the initial
compression of the glass surface (residual stress). Damage is accumulated only if the in-
duced stress decompresses the surface in proximity of the crack and overcomes the stress
threshold. The residual stress at the surface is set equal to σheat = 25 [MPa] and σtemp =
75 [MPa] for heat-strengthened and fully tempered glass, respectively. As expected, the
Figure 3.4: Color plot of demand/capacity ratios for each strong ground motion for heat-
strengthened glass. Only a portion of 200mm x 200mm is shown.
demand/capacity ratios are smaller in heat-strengthened glass than in annealed glass. In
fact, the induced tension had to be reduced by the residual stress to evaluate the effective
tensional stress on the surface. It is illustrated in Figure 3.4 that even a small residual
stress provides a considerable improvement in terms of strength. The residual stress in
fully tempered glass is so large that no crack opening is experienced at the glass surface
even for the largest earthquakes, thus, the ratios are all zeros as shown in Figure 3.5.
==PAGE:56==
44
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Lastly, the actual damage induced in the glass panel is evaluated by means of the damage
Figure 3.5: Color plot of demand/capacity ratios for each strong ground motion for fully
tempered glass. Only a portion of 200mm x 200mm is shown.
function "D" (1.7). The additive property of "D" allows the calculation of damage in-
crease every time an earthquake occurs just by adding the damages of the single seismic
events which makes the calculation possible within an acceptable evaluation time, see Ap-
pendix C. Demand/capacity ratios in terms of damage accumulated and critical damage
are reported in Table 3.1. The SGGs are listed in chronological order from "Joshua Tree,
CA" occurred in April 1992 to "El Mayor-Cucapah" occurred in April 2010. The result
shows that 12.95% of the capacity of an annealed glass will be used if "Joshua Tree, CA"
takes place and it will go up to 14.52% if the second SGG (Big Bear-01) follows. The
interesting aspect of the analysis is that the remaining earthquakes have negligible effects
on the strength reduction, even for high values of σ60sec. As expected, the damage totally
zeros out in case of tempered glass. Despite the damage ratios give an overview of the
effect of earthquakes in glass structures, an example is reported here in order to provide
the reader with a more concrete concept of strength reduction. Only annealed glass is
==PAGE:57==
3.2. LONG-TERM FAILURE ANALYSIS
45
Table 3.1: Results for Annealed glass (A), Heat-strengthened (H) and Fully tempered
(T). SSG = Strong ground motion name; MO.YE = month and year of the seismic event;
PGA= peak ground acceleration registered; Sa.T1 = Spectral acceleration of the ﬁrst modal
period; σmax = maximum tensional principal stress at most stressed node; σ60sec = equiv-
alent 60-sec principal stress at most stressed node; D1..j/Dmax = cumulative damage de-
mand to damage capacity ratio.
SGG CHARACTERISTICS
INSTANT ANALYSIS
LONG-TERM ANALYSIS
SGG NAME
MO.YE
PGA
Sa,T1
σmax
[MPa]
σ60sec
[MPa]
D1..j/Dmax
[%]
[g]
[g]
A
H
T
A
H
T
A
H
T
Joshua Tree, CA
04.92
0.161
0.603
76.54
51.54
1.54
39.85
22.73
0
12.95
0
0
Big Bear-01
06.92
0.142
0.486
68.90
43.90
0
34.93
17.71
0
14.52
0
0
Landers
06.92
0.138
0.352
42.84
17.84
0
17.82
1.30
0
14.52
0
0
Hector Mine
10.99
0.063
0.230
38.37
13.37
0
14.88
0
0
14.52
0
0
Big Bear-02
02.01
0.010
0.102
20.21
0
0
2.90
0
0
14.52
0
0
El Mayor-Cucapah
04.10
0.034
0.096
19.53
0
0
2.52
0
0
14.52
0
0
considered in the example. The present work shows that those SGGs recorded over an
18-year period would cause a reduction of 14.52% of the total damage capacity which
can be translated into an equivalent reduction per year of 0.81% with the assumption of
repetitiveness of earthquakes in seismic areas. Considering that normal buildings usually
have a lifetime of 50 years, it is reasonable to suppose that the glass façade is designed to
last for the same period. It means that glass geometry (e.g. pane thickness) is designed
in a way that external loads (e.g. wind loads) may cause failure after 50 years, which can
be translated into an equivalent reduction per year of 2% of the damage capacity. Figure
3.6 illustrates the damage accumulation as a function of time when earthquakes are and
are not considered in the design, leading to the conclusion that the case considered would
reduce the façade lifetime to around 35 years instead of the expected 50 years. The same
Figure 3.6: Equivalent damage ratio as a function of the number of years when earth-
quakes contribution is and is not taken into account.
approach is followed with the glass strength as variable returning the lifetime reduction in
==PAGE:58==
46
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
year as a function of the strength, as shown in Figure 3.7. The whole long-term analysis
is carried with varying glass strength, thus, with varying stress threshold set to 20% of
the inert strength. It is interesting to see that a glass panel slightly stronger has a con-
siderably beneﬁcial effect in the load-bearing capacity. This outcome may be seen as a
positive aspect of the glass behaviour from one side, but it may also be seen as a short-
coming considering that glass strength is excessively scattered and not easy to predict so
that the opposite situation may occur (slightly weaker glass). Therefore, it is probably not
suggested to reach such a level of detail when glass is involved but in this perspective, a
probabilistic approach would ﬁt better.
Figure 3.7: Lifetime reduction in year for annealed glass as a function of the inert strength.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
4.1
Summary and conclusion
Nowadays, glass structures are increasingly common in buildings’ envelopes and the cur-
rent design is moving toward point supported panels given that transparency is maximized
and energy consumption reduced. However, the presented literature review showed that
frameless glazings have not been studied in detail despite much damage caused by earth-
quakes has been recorded during the last decades. It has also been observed failure of
glass panels due to small seismic events even if they had resisted more hazardous ones
before. For these reasons, the research work analyses the behaviour of point supported
glazing systems when subjected to seismic loadings with the intent of describing both
instant and long-term behaviour.
The study is performed by Finite Element (FE) modelling of a 4-storey building equipped
with large glass panels point-supported by the main steel structure and horizontal glass
ﬁns through spider joints. The seismic loading consists of a set of 6 strong ground mo-
tions (SGG) recorded by an accelerograph in Riverside County, California, United States
and from the three accelerograms recorded (two horizontal and one vertical) per seismic
event, only one is selected and applied in the in-plane direction. Forces at the glass-to-
spider joint connection are extracted and applied to the glass hole in a more detailed FE
model in which only the most stressed glass panel is considered. The stress histories at
each point of the mesh are extracted and post-processed in order to analyze the instant and
long-term behaviour. Considering the former, the peak stresses are compared to the inert
glass strength; while for the latter, the damage accumulation is evaluated by the risk inte-
gral for the whole stress history of the 6 SGGs. It is discussed that the apparent increase
in glass strength for short-duration loadings may provide the glazings with a sufﬁcient
capacity, but in the event that the external stress is slightly smaller than the inert strength,
some damage in the glass is induced. Damage in glass means that the surface ﬂaws open
47
==PAGE:60==
48
CHAPTER 4. CONCLUSION
causing more stress concentration leading to a reduced capacity. A practical and simpli-
ﬁed example shows that the glazing lifetime could be reduced to 35 years instead of the
expected 50 years due to seismic excitations.
4.2
Recommendations for future work
The research project treated a complicated topic in a relatively short time (less than 6
months), therefore, assumptions and simpliﬁcations were necessary. The followings are
recommendations for possible future research which could improve or continue the study.
• The glass strength has been set to a speciﬁc value and assumed to be equal on the
whole glass surface. It means that the surface ﬂaws are assumed to be equally dis-
tributed on the surface and their orientation disregarded. Another approach may
follow a probabilistic analysis of ﬂaws distribution, thus, of the strength (see (Bea-
son and Morgan, 1984)) or start from real experimental tests.
• Regarding the detailed FE model, the glass panel has been modelled as a 2D el-
ement while the bolt has been substituted by distributed reaction forces. A ﬁner
analysis would use a 3D element and model the whole bolt with a contact FE ap-
proach. However, long processing-time must be expected.
• The interaction between panels has been disregarded while it could be interesting
to model the silicone sealant and verify possible detrimental or beneﬁcial contribu-
tions.
• For practical purposes, glass panels of 2.5m x 3m have been considered. Smaller
and more common dimensions could be investigated.
• The damage of a set of SGGs recorded in an 18-year period has been extended to
an equivalent 50-year period by assuming that the seismic events have a constant
occurrence. Considering that it is not always true, a set of SGG recorded for a
50-year period would lead to more realistic results.
• The set of SGGs has been selected with the scope of showing damage in annealed
glass which does not induce large damage in heat-strengthened and fully tempered
glass, as expected. Another research project may select more hazardous seismic
events with the focus on the latter two glass types.
• The damage accumulation with a probabilistic theory may combine well with a
performance-based design. In this context, it is recommended to read (Huang et al.,
2017) which could be applied to a PSGSs.
==PAGE:61==
Appendices
49
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX A
Road map to digital annex
The whole set of scripts and data ﬁle needed to perform the analysis is uploaded on the
server of DTU University, namely ’DTU Inside’. They are grouped according to the
software used and a graphical explanation is illustrated in the following tree structure.
Figure A.1: Graphical explanation of the digital annex
51
==PAGE:64==
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX B
Dynamic masses calculation
53
==PAGE:66==
LOAD analysis
OFFICE LEVEL
≔
gstr
3.60 kPa
≔
gnon.str
1.62 kPa
≔
qoffice
3.80 kPa
≔
gseism
=
+
+
gstr
gnon.str
⋅
0.3 qoffice
6.36 kPa
≔
Asq
=
⋅
5 m 5 m
25 m2
Area of single floor element
≔
Gseism.floor
=
⋅
gseism Asq
159 kN
Concentrated force on the single floor 
element
≔
Gseism.beam
=
――――
Gseism.floor
4
⎛⎝
⋅
3.975 104 ⎞⎠N
Concentrated force on the single beam 
from 1 floor element
≔
Lbeam
5 m
Beams length
≔
gseism.beam
=
――――
Gseism.beam
Lbeam
⎛⎝
⋅
7.95 103 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
mseism.beam
=
――――
gseism.beam
g
⎛⎝
⋅
8.107 10-4⎞⎠―――
tonne
mm
≔
mseism.beam.office
=
Round⎛
⎜⎝
,
mseism.beam 10-4 ―――
tonne
mm
⎞
⎟⎠
800 ―
kg
m
==PAGE:67==
ROOF LEVEL
≔
gstr
3.60 kPa
≔
gnon.str
1.62 kPa
≔
qroof
1.5 kPa
≔
gseism
=
+
+
gstr
gnon.str
⋅
0.3 qroof
5.67 kPa
≔
Asq
=
⋅
5 m 5 m
25 m2
Area of single floor element
≔
Gseism.roof
=
⋅
gseism Asq
141.75 kN
Concentrated force on the single floor 
element
≔
Gseism.beam
=
――――
Gseism.roof
4
⎛⎝
⋅
3.544 104 ⎞⎠N
Concentrated force on the single beam 
from 1 floor element
≔
Lbeam
5 m
Beams length
≔
gseism.beam
=
――――
Gseism.beam
Lbeam
⎛⎝
⋅
7.088 103 ⎞⎠―
N
m
≔
mseism.beam
=
――――
gseism.beam
g
⎛⎝
⋅
7.227 10-4⎞⎠―――
tonne
mm
≔
mseism.beam.roof
=
Round⎛
⎜⎝
,
mseism.beam 10-4 ―――
tonne
mm
⎞
⎟⎠
700 ―
kg
m
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX C
Damage accumulation additive
property
The additive property of the damage accumulation function is here demonstrated. The
hypothesis is that a stress history composed of 2 spaced sub-stress histories can be calcu-
lated by summing up the damage of the 2 sub-stress histories considered alone.
Figure C.1: Stress histories σ (t) and its sub-stress histories σ1 (t) and σ2 (t)
The damage is evaluated by the risk integral (1.7).
D =
Z t2
t0
(σ (t))n dt
(C.1)
The function σ(t) can be decomposed as the sum σ1(t) + σ2(t), therefore
D =
Z t2
t0
(σ1(t) + σ2(t))n dt
(C.2)
The exponential can be solved through the Binomial theorem
57
==PAGE:70==
58
APPENDIX C. DAMAGE ACCUMULATION ADDITIVE PROPERTY
(σ1(t) + σ2(t))n =
n
X
r=0
 
n
r
!
(σ1(t))(n−r) (σ2(t))r
(C.3a)
 
n
r
!
=
n!
(n −r)!r!
(C.3b)
considering the way how σ1(t) and σ2(t) have been deﬁned, the following is true:
σ1(t) · σ2(t) = 0
∀t ∈[0, t2]
(C.4)
It means that (C.3a) returns a non-zero value only for r = 0 ∨n. Therefore, (C.3a)
yields to
(σ1(t) + σ2(t))n = (σ1(t))n + (σ2(t))n
(C.5)
which can be inserted in the risk integral (C.1).
D =
Z t2
t0
(σ (t))n dt =
Z t2
t0
(σ1(t))n + (σ2(t))n dt
(C.6)
It can be simpliﬁed considering the properties of the deﬁnite integrals
Z t2
t0
(σ1(t))n + (σ2(t))n dt =
Z t2
t0
(σ1(t))n +
Z t2
t0
(σ2(t))n dt
(C.7)
and again divided into sub-integrals
D =
Z t1
t0
(σ1(t))n +

*0
Z t1
t0
(σ2(t))n
dt +

*0
Z t2
t1
(σ1(t))n
+
Z t2
t1
(σ2(t))n dt
(C.8)
So, the additive property is demonstrated.
D =
Z t2
t0
(σ (t))n dt =
Z t1
t0
(σ1(t))n +
Z t2
t1
(σ2(t))n dt
(C.9)
The theorem can be extended to a larger number of sub-stress histories σi(t) using the
Multinomial theorem.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX D
Matlab scripts
D.1
Description
59
==PAGE:72==
04/07/19 14:07
C:\Users\s...\script_description_readme.m
1 of 1
%%  Made by Giuseppe Sciacca s172353 sciaccagiuseppe93@gmail.com
%   LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/in/sciaccagiuseppe/
%   student at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the Master's thesis
%   'Glass structures subjected to seismic excitations' - August '19
 
 
%% Set of scripts:
 
% pressure_at_holes.m          calculates the pressure value from force vector and
                                %divide them according to the force inclination
                                
% plot_mesh_triangles.m        plot the mesh of the FE model                        
                                
% eq_stress.m                  calculates equivalent stress of the single
                                %SGG  and demand/capacity ratios at each mesh point
 
% damage_multi_SGG             calculates the damage for the whole set of 6
                                %SGGs. It can be re-adapted to more or less
                                %SGGs than 6.
 
 
%% Set of data required:
 
% nodal_coordinates.mat            contains the nodal coordinate
 
% mesh_coordinates.mat             specificies the nodes of the triangles of the mesh
 
% 'SSG name'_stress_histories.mat  contains the stress histories at each point of the 
mesh
 
% nodal_force_'SGG name'.mat       contains vector components F1 and F2 in
                                    %function of the time vector (first column)
 
%% Steps to follow:
% 1) Run the dynamic analysis on Abaqus on the main model.
% 2) Extract the force F1 and F2 in function of time at the hole
% 3) Run 'pressure_at_holes.m' to calculate the pressure vectors
% 4) Upload the pressure vectors as amplitudes on the detailed abaqus model 
% 5) Run the static analysis and extract the histories of the principal 
% stress at each point of the mesh of interest.
% 6) Upload the stress histories in Matlab like ''SSG name'_stress_histories.mat'
% 7) Run 'eq_stress.m' to calculate the demand/capacity ratios for each SGG
% 8) Run 'damage_multi_SGG' to calculate the total damage for multi SGG
 
==PAGE:73==
D.2. CALCULATION OF PRESSURE VECTORS
61
D.2
Calculation of pressure vectors
==PAGE:74==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sc...\script_pressure_at_holes.m
1 of 6
%% SCRIPT DESCRIPTION
% Check the description_readme.m file for more info.
% The script calculates the pressure on the hole surface from forces
% values. Knowing the two components of the forces (x and y), it is possible
% to calculate the angle to the horizontal. The hole surface is divided
% into 8 sectors so the script return 8 vectors of pressure values to be
% applied at the respective sector. Check the main folder after having run
% the script. .txt files are created.
 
%%  Made by Giuseppe Sciacca s172353 sciaccagiuseppe93@gmail.com
%   LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/in/sciaccagiuseppe/
%   student at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the Master's thesis
%   'Glass structures subjected to seismic excitations' - August '19
 
%% SCRIPT 
 
 
clear all
 
 
%Load forces at TOP RIGHT node
 
load('nodal_force_RSN6024_SIERRA_MEX_NPS180.mat');  %Table of force history. It is a 
2x2 Matrix( 1st column 'x' component; 2nd column 'y' component)
timestep=0.01;                                      %Timestep of the force history 
matrix       
 
 
%Geometry of the hole
t=30;                             %panel thickness in mm]
r=20;                             %hole radius in [mm]
alpha=deg2rad(90);                %angle of the single sector in [rad]
p=r*alpha;                        %lenght of the single sector in [mm]
Area=p*t;                         %area of the single sector in [mm^2]
 
%Force vector with the two components in [N]
F(:,1)=F1(:,2);                   %component 1
F(:,2)=F2(:,2);                   %component 2
 
for i=1:size(F,1)
    F(i,3)=sqrt((F(i,1))^2+(F(i,2))^2);  %modulus
    F(i,4)=rad2deg(atan2(F(i,2),F(i,1))); %angle with positive 1-axis in [degrees]
  
    if F(i,4)<0
        F(i,4)=360+F(i,4);
        else
        F(i,4)=F(i,4);
  end
        
==PAGE:75==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sc...\script_pressure_at_holes.m
2 of 6
    F(i,5)=F(i,3)/Area;         % pressure on the single sector in [MPa]
end
 
%Division of the pressure into different vectors depending on
% the angle inclination. Each vector represent the force on one single 
% sector
 
Pac_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Pbd_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Pce_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Pdf_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Peg_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Pfh_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Pga_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
Phb_tot=zeros(size(F,1),2);
 
for i=1:size(F,1)
if F(i,4)>22.5 & F(i,4)<67.4
    Pac_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
 
elseif F(i,4)>0 & F(i,4)<22.5 & F(i,4)>337.5 & F(i,4)<359
    Pbd_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);  
   
elseif F(i,4)>292.5 & F(i,4)<337
    Pce_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
    
elseif F(i,4)>247 & F(i,4)<292.5
    Pdf_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
    
elseif F(i,4)>202.5 & F(i,4)<247.5
    Peg_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
    
elseif F(i,4)>157.5 & F(i,4)<202.5
    Pfh_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
    
elseif F(i,4)>112.5 & F(i,4)<157.5
    Pga_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
    
elseif F(i,4)>67.5 & F(i,4)<112.5
    Phb_tot(i,2)=F(i,5);
 
end
end
 
%Collapse zero values in each vector
Pac(:,2)=nonzeros(Pac_tot);
Pbd(:,2)=nonzeros(Pbd_tot);
Pce(:,2)=nonzeros(Pce_tot);
Pdf(:,2)=nonzeros(Pdf_tot);
==PAGE:76==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sc...\script_pressure_at_holes.m
3 of 6
Peg(:,2)=nonzeros(Peg_tot);
Pfh(:,2)=nonzeros(Pfh_tot);
Pga(:,2)=nonzeros(Pga_tot);
Phb(:,2)=nonzeros(Phb_tot);
 
%Insert a zero force as last time-step due to Abaqus reasons
 
if size(Pac,1)>0
Pac(size(Pac,1)+1,1)=(size(Pac,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Pbd,1)>0
Pbd(size(Pbd,1)+1,1)=(size(Pbd,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Pce,1)>0
Pce(size(Pce,1)+1,1)=(size(Pce,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Pdf,1)>0
Pdf(size(Pdf,1)+1,1)=(size(Pdf,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Peg,1)>0
Peg(size(Peg,1)+1,1)=(size(Peg,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Pfh,1)>0
Pfh(size(Pfh,1)+1,1)=(size(Pfh,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Pga,1)>0
Pga(size(Pga,1)+1,1)=(size(Pga,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
if size(Phb,1)>0
Phb(size(Phb,1)+1,1)=(size(Phb,1)+1)*timestep;
else
end
 
% Assign time
 
==PAGE:77==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sc...\script_pressure_at_holes.m
4 of 6
for i=1:size(Pac,1)
    Pac(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Pbd,1)
    Pbd(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Pce,1)
    Pce(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Pdf,1)
    Pdf(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Peg,1)
    Peg(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Pfh,1)
    Pfh(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Pga,1)
    Pga(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
for i=1:size(Phb,1)
    Phb(i,1)=(i-1)*timestep;
end
 
% Check load duration if compatible with earthquake duration
 
if size(Pac,1)>0
DurPac=Pac(size(Pac,1),1);
else
DurPac=0;
Pac=zeros(2,2);
end
 
if size(Pbd,1)>0
DurPbd=Pbd(size(Pbd,1),1);
else
Pbd=zeros(2,2);
DurPbd=0;
end
 
if size(Pce,1)>0
==PAGE:78==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sc...\script_pressure_at_holes.m
5 of 6
DurPce=Pce(size(Pce,1),1);
else
Pce=zeros(2,2);
DurPce=0;
end
 
if size(Pdf,1)>0
DurPdf=Pdf(size(Pdf,1),1);
else
Pdf=zeros(2,2);
DurPdf=0;
end
 
if size(Peg,1)>0
DurPeg=Peg(size(Peg,1),1);
else
Peg=zeros(2,2);
DurPeg=0;
end
 
if size(Pfh,1)>0
DurPfh=Pfh(size(Pfh,1),1);
else
Pfh=zeros(2,2);
DurPfh=0;
end
 
if size(Pga,1)>0
DurPga=Pga(size(Pga,1),1);
else
Pga=zeros(2,2);
DurPga=0;
end
 
if size(Phb,1)>0
DurPhb=Phb(size(Phb,1),1);
else
Phb=zeros(2,2);
DurPhb=0;
end
 
DurTot=DurPac+DurPbd+DurPce+DurPdf+DurPeg+DurPfh+DurPga+DurPhb; %Check if DurTot is 
equal to the earthquake duration
 
save('Pac.txt', 'Pac', '-ascii');
save('Pbd.txt', 'Pbd', '-ascii');
save('Pce.txt', 'Pce', '-ascii');
save('Pdf.txt', 'Pdf', '-ascii');
save('Peg.txt', 'Peg', '-ascii');
==PAGE:79==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sc...\script_pressure_at_holes.m
6 of 6
save('Pfh.txt', 'Pfh', '-ascii');
save('Pga.txt', 'Pga', '-ascii');
save('Phb.txt', 'Phb', '-ascii');
 
clearvars Pac_tot Pbd_tot Pce_tot Pdf_tot Peg_tot Pfh_tot Pga_tot Phb_tot
 
==PAGE:80==
68
APPENDIX D. MATLAB SCRIPTS
D.3
Plot of the mesh as Matlab Figure
==PAGE:81==
06/07/19 17:55
C:\Users\...\script_plot_mesh_triangles.m
1 of 1
%% SCRIPT DESCRIPTION
% The script plots the mesh point in a Matlab figure. The matrices
% 'nodal_coordinates.mat' and 'mesh_coordinates.mat' are needed. The former
% specifies the nodal coordinates while the latter has the node numbers
% grouped by triangle elements. Both are necessary because Abaqus returns
% the coordinate of the nodes but it does not specify how they are
% connected ('nodal_coordinates.mat'). However, another option allows to
% extract the node number grouping them by triangles
% ('mesh_coordinates.mat'). Here, the first three nodes make the first
% triangle and so on...
 
%%  Made by Giuseppe Sciacca s172353 sciaccagiuseppe93@gmail.com
%   LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/in/sciaccagiuseppe/
%   student at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the Master's thesis
%   'Glass structures subjected to seismic excitations' - August '19
 
%% SCRIPT 
%load nodal_coordinates.mat                     %nodal coordinates matrix
load mesh_coordinates.mat                       %nodes gruped by triangle
                                                %elements position
 
n_nodes_unsorted=length(nodal_coordinates);
n_nodes_sorted=length(mesh_coordinates);
 
%Assign nodal coordinates to the 'mesh_coordinates.mat' vector
for i=1:n_nodes_sorted
    for j=1:n_nodes_unsorted
    if mesh_coordinates(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1);
        mesh_coordinates(i,2:3)=nodal_coordinates(j,2:3);
    end
    end
end
 
%Create matrices made of the first (p1), second (p2) or third (p3) node of
%the triangles.
hold on
for i=(1:3:n_nodes_sorted)
    p1=mesh_coordinates(i,2:3);
    p2=mesh_coordinates(i+1,2:3);
    p3=mesh_coordinates(i+2,2:3);
    plot([ p1(1) p2(1)], [p1(2) p2(2)], 'b');
    plot([ p1(1) p3(1)], [p1(2) p3(2)], 'b');
    plot([ p2(1) p3(1)], [p2(2) p3(2)], 'b');
end
 
%Plot the mesh of the FEM model
scatter(nodal_coordinates(:,2),nodal_coordinates(:,3),20,'filled');
 
==PAGE:82==
70
APPENDIX D. MATLAB SCRIPTS
D.4
Calculation of equivalent stresses and
demand/capacity contour plots
==PAGE:83==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sciac\Desk...\script_eq_stress.m
1 of 6
%% SCRIPT DESCRIPTION
% The script calculates the equivalent stress to the set reference time 
% and the damage/capacity ratios in terms of equivalent stresses. Notice 
% that a stress threshold equivalent to 20% of the inert strength is used
% meaning that it is assumed that stress below that values does not 
% contribute in inducing damage. The inert strength is assumed to be valid
% up to 0.01s loading durations. Script plot_mesh_triangles.m is needed
% here along with the matrix of the stress histories at each point of the
% mesh (for instance, 'Joshua_stress_histories.mat'). The author has
% created it from Abaqus by extracting stress values at each frame of
% dynamic analyses. Each column represents the stress history at that
% specific point (numbered at the first entry of the columms) except for
% the first column which is the time vector.
 
%    LEGEND GUIDE TO THE EQ_STRESS VECTOR
%    1st column - node label
%    2nd column - x-coordinate
%    3rd column - y-coordinate
%    4th column - equivalent stress value
%    5th column - value used for the colormap
%    6th column - ratio equivalent stress / reduced strength
 
%%  Made by Giuseppe Sciacca s172353 sciaccagiuseppe93@gmail.com
%   LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/in/sciaccagiuseppe/
%   student at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the Master's thesis
%   'Glass structures subjected to seismic excitations' - August '19
 
%% SCRIPT 
 
load nodal_coordinates.mat
load Joshua_stress_histories.mat
 
 
stress_function=Joshua;                 %import your data (change name accordingly)
n=16;                                   %glass materiall parameter
t_ref=60;                               %time of the reference stress (1min)
n_nodes=size(stress_function,2);        %number of nodes with stress data
n_timesteps=size(stress_function,1);    %steps of the stress time series
 
fgk=53;                                  %Characteristic tensile 5sec-strength
fbk_h_net=25;                            %Heat Strengthened glass prestress
fbk_t_net=75;                            %Fully Tempered glass prestress
 
kmod1=0.86;                              %Strength reduction factor for 1min loading
kmod001=1.475;                           %Strength reduction factor for 0.01s loading  
fg1min=fgk*kmod1;                        %Glass strength after 1min loading
fg001s=fgk*kmod001;                      %Glass strength after 0.01s loading
 
crack_th=15.6;                           %stress threshold for crack opening (20% of 
==PAGE:84==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sciac\Desk...\script_eq_stress.m
2 of 6
the inert or 0.01s strength)
 
%Erase the NaN values
for i=n_timesteps:-1:3
if stress_function(i,1)==stress_function(i-1,1)
    stress_function(i,:)=[];
end
end
 
n_timesteps=size(stress_function,1);    %steps of the stress time series
 
stress_function_a=stress_function;
stress_function_h=stress_function;
stress_function_t=stress_function;
 
%FLOAT GLASS
stress_function=stress_function_a;
 
for i=2:n_nodes
    for j=2:n_timesteps      
        if stress_function(j,i)<crack_th
        stress_function(j,i)=0;
        else  stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-crack_th;
         end
    end
end
   
%Calculation of the Risk integral
%Damage
for i=2:n_nodes
damage(2,i)=(trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,
i)).^n));
damage(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
for i=2:n_nodes
equivalent(4,i)=((trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:
n_timesteps,i)).^n))/t_ref)^(1/n);
equivalent(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
 
equivalent(:,1)=[];              %erase the first column which corresponds to the 
time column
equivalenttran=equivalent';      %create a new vector which is the transpose of the 
previous one
 
for i=2:n_nodes-1                %set all the NaN value to 0 to avoid errors
if isnan(equivalenttran(i,4))==1
==PAGE:85==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sciac\Desk...\script_eq_stress.m
3 of 6
equivalenttran(i,4:6)=0;
end
end
 
% Associate nodal coordinates to respective nodal number and stress
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
    for j=1:length(nodal_coordinates)
    if equivalenttran(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1)
equivalenttran(i,2)=nodal_coordinates(j,2);
equivalenttran(i,3)=nodal_coordinates(j,3);
    end
    end
    end
 
% Set colormap with 'jet' colors (from blue to red)
c=jet(length(equivalenttran));
c(:,4)=(0:length(c)-1);
 
equivalenttran(:,5)=round(equivalenttran(:,4)*length(c)/fg1min);  %value used for 
associating a color
equivalenttran(:,6)=equivalenttran(:,4)/fg1min;                   %ratio 
damage/strength for that specific earthquake
 
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
for j=1:length(c)
if equivalenttran(i,5)==c(j,4)
colormap_matrix(i,1:3)=c(j,1:3);
end
end
end
 
eq1min_ann=equivalenttran;
 
figure1 = figure;
 
run script_plot_mesh_triangles.m
 
hold on
scatter(eq1min_ann(:,2),eq1min_ann(:,3),20,colormap_matrix,'filled');
xlabel('Edge Distance in [mm]')
ylabel('Edge Distance in [mm]')
title('Damage accumulation in annealed glass')
xlim([ min(equivalenttran(:,2)) max(equivalenttran(:,2)) ])
ylim([ min(equivalenttran(:,3)) max(equivalenttran(:,3)) ])
colorbar
colormap(jet)
 
clear c color_map equivalenttran
 
==PAGE:86==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sciac\Desk...\script_eq_stress.m
4 of 6
%HEAT STRENGTHENED
stress_function=stress_function_h;
 
for i=2:n_nodes
    for j=2:n_timesteps  
        stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-fbk_h_net;
        if stress_function(j,i)<crack_th
        stress_function(j,i)=0;
        else  stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-crack_th;
         end
    end
end
   
%Calculation of the Risk integral
for i=2:n_nodes
equivalent(4,i)=((trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:
n_timesteps,i)).^n))/t_ref)^(1/n);
equivalent(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
equivalent(:,1)=[];
equivalenttran=equivalent';
 
for i=2:n_nodes-1
if isnan(equivalenttran(i,4))==1
equivalenttran(i,4:6)=0;
end
end
 
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
    for j=1:length(nodal_coordinates)
    if equivalenttran(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1)
equivalenttran(i,2)=nodal_coordinates(j,2);
equivalenttran(i,3)=nodal_coordinates(j,3);
    end
    end
    end
 
% Set colormap with 'jet' colors (from blue to red)
c=jet(length(equivalenttran));
c(:,4)=(0:length(c)-1);
 
equivalenttran(:,5)=round(equivalenttran(:,4)*length(c)/fg1min);
equivalenttran(:,6)=equivalenttran(:,4)/fg1min;
 
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
for j=1:length(c)
if equivalenttran(i,5)==c(j,4)
colormap_matrix(i,1:3)=c(j,1:3);
==PAGE:87==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sciac\Desk...\script_eq_stress.m
5 of 6
end
end
end
 
eq1min_heat=equivalenttran;
figure2 = figure;
 
run script_plot_mesh_triangles.m
scatter(eq1min_heat(:,2),eq1min_heat(:,3),20,colormap_matrix,'filled');
xlabel('Edge Distance in [mm]')
ylabel('Edge Distance in [mm]')
title('Damage accumulation in heat strengthened glass')
xlim([ min(equivalenttran(:,2)) max(equivalenttran(:,2)) ])
ylim([ min(equivalenttran(:,3)) max(equivalenttran(:,3)) ])
colorbar
colormap(jet)
 
clear c color_map equivalenttran
 
 
%FULLY TEMPERED
stress_function=stress_function_t;
 
for i=2:n_nodes
    for j=2:n_timesteps  
        stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-fbk_t_net;
        if stress_function(j,i)<crack_th
        stress_function(j,i)=0;
        else  stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-crack_th;
         end
    end
end
   
%Calculation of the Risk integral
for i=2:n_nodes
equivalent(4,i)=((trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:
n_timesteps,i)).^n))/t_ref)^(1/n);
equivalent(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
equivalent(:,1)=[];
equivalenttran=equivalent';
 
for i=2:n_nodes-1
if isnan(equivalenttran(i,4))==1
equivalenttran(i,4:6)=0;
end
end
 
==PAGE:88==
04/07/19 14:08
C:\Users\sciac\Desk...\script_eq_stress.m
6 of 6
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
    for j=1:length(nodal_coordinates)
    if equivalenttran(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1)
equivalenttran(i,2)=nodal_coordinates(j,2);
equivalenttran(i,3)=nodal_coordinates(j,3);
    end
    end
    end
 
% Set colormap with 'jet' colors (from blue to red)
c=jet(length(equivalenttran));
c(:,4)=(0:length(c)-1);
 
equivalenttran(:,5)=round(equivalenttran(:,4)*length(c)/fg1min);
equivalenttran(:,6)=equivalenttran(:,4)/fg1min;
 
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
for j=1:length(c)
if equivalenttran(i,5)==c(j,4)
colormap_matrix(i,1:3)=c(j,1:3);
end
end
end
 
eq1min_temp=equivalenttran;
 
figure3 = figure;
run script_plot_mesh_triangles.m
 
scatter(eq1min_temp(:,2),eq1min_temp(:,3),20,colormap_matrix,'filled');
xlabel('Edge Distance in [mm]')
ylabel('Edge Distance in [mm]')
title('Damage accumulation in fully tempered glass')
xlim([ min(equivalenttran(:,2)) max(equivalenttran(:,2)) ])
ylim([ min(equivalenttran(:,3)) max(equivalenttran(:,3)) ])
colorbar
colormap(jet)
 
clear c color_map equivalenttran
 
==PAGE:89==
D.5. CALCULATION OF DAMAGE FOR A SET OF MORE SGGS
77
D.5
Calculation of damage for a set of more SGGs
==PAGE:90==
06/07/19 17:42
C:\U...\script_damage_multi_SGG_reduced.m
1 of 5
%% SCRIPT DESCRIPTION
% Check the description_readme.m file for more info.
% The script calculates the damage for the whole set of SGGs.
 
%%  Made by Giuseppe Sciacca s172353 sciaccagiuseppe93@gmail.com
%   LinkedIn https://www.linkedin.com/in/sciaccagiuseppe/
%   student at Technical University of Denmark (DTU) for the Master's thesis
%   'Glass structures subjected to seismic excitations' - August '19
 
%% SCRIPT 
 
 
%%                              EARTHQUAKEs INPUT
%--------------------------------------------------------------------------%
 
load stress_histories/Joshua_stress_histories.mat      %earthquake 1
load stress_histories/BigBear_stress_histories.mat     %earthquake 2
load stress_histories/Landers_stress_histories.mat     %earthquake 3
load stress_histories/Hector_stress_histories.mat      %earthquake 4
load stress_histories/Sierra_stress_histories.mat      %earthquake 5
load stress_histories/Bearaft_stress_histories.mat     %earthquake 6
 
 
%------------------- COMMON DATA------------------------%
 
load nodal_coordinates.mat
 
n=16;                                 %glass material parameter
t_ref=60;                             %time of the reference stress (1min)
 
fgk=53;                               %Characteristic tensile 5sec-strength
fbk_h_net=25;                         %Heat Strengthened glass prestress
fbk_t_net=75;                         %Fully Tempered glass prestress
 
kmod1=0.86;                           %Strength reduction factor for 1min loading
kmod001=1.475;                        %Strength increasing factor for 0.01s loading    
fg1min=fgk*kmod1;                     %Glass strength after 1min loading
fg001s=fgk*kmod001;                   %Glass strength after 0.01s loading
 
crack_th=15.6;                        %stress threshold for crack opening
 
 
 
%%                        DAMAGE ACCUMULATION FOR 1^st EARTHQUAKE
 
stress_function=Joshua;                %import your data
 
%%
n_nodes=size(stress_function,2);        %number of nodes with stress data
==PAGE:91==
06/07/19 17:42
C:\U...\script_damage_multi_SGG_reduced.m
2 of 5
n_timesteps=size(stress_function,1);    %steps of the stress time series
 
%Erase the NaN values
for i=n_timesteps:-1:3
if stress_function(i,1)==stress_function(i-1,1)
    stress_function(i,:)=[];
end
end
 
n_timesteps=size(stress_function,1);    %steps of the stress time series
 
stress_function_a=stress_function;
stress_function_h=stress_function;
stress_function_t=stress_function;
 
 
% ------------------------- ANNEALED GLASS--------------------------- %
stress_function=stress_function_a;
 
for i=2:n_nodes
    for j=2:n_timesteps      
        if stress_function(j,i)<crack_th
        stress_function(j,i)=0;
        else  stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-crack_th;
         end
    end
end
   
%Calculation of the Risk integral
for i=2:n_nodes
equivalent(4,i)=(trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:
n_timesteps,i)).^n));
equivalent(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
 
equivalent(:,1)=[];              %erase the first column which corresponds to the 
time column
equivalenttran=equivalent';      %create a new vector which is the transpose of the 
previous one
 
for i=2:n_nodes-1                %set all the NaN value to 0 to avoid errors
if isnan(equivalenttran(i,4))==1
equivalenttran(i,4:6)=0;
end
end
 
% Associate nodal coordinates to respective nodal number and stress
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
==PAGE:92==
06/07/19 17:42
C:\U...\script_damage_multi_SGG_reduced.m
3 of 5
    for j=1:length(nodal_coordinates)
    if equivalenttran(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1)
equivalenttran(i,2)=nodal_coordinates(j,2);
equivalenttran(i,3)=nodal_coordinates(j,3);
    end
    end
end
    
eq1min_ann=equivalenttran;
 
clear equivalenttran
 
% ------------------------- HEAT STRENGTHENED--------------------------- %
 
stress_function=stress_function_h;
 
for i=2:n_nodes
    for j=2:n_timesteps  
        stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-fbk_h_net;
        if stress_function(j,i)<crack_th
        stress_function(j,i)=0;
        else  stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-crack_th;
         end
    end
end
   
%Calculation of the Risk integral
for i=2:n_nodes
equivalent(4,i)=(trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:
n_timesteps,i)).^n));
equivalent(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
equivalent(:,1)=[];
equivalenttran=equivalent';
 
for i=2:n_nodes-1
if isnan(equivalenttran(i,4))==1
equivalenttran(i,4:6)=0;
end
end
 
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
    for j=1:length(nodal_coordinates)
    if equivalenttran(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1)
equivalenttran(i,2)=nodal_coordinates(j,2);
equivalenttran(i,3)=nodal_coordinates(j,3);
    end
    end
==PAGE:93==
06/07/19 17:42
C:\U...\script_damage_multi_SGG_reduced.m
4 of 5
    end
 
eq1min_heat=equivalenttran;
 
clear equivalenttran
 
 
% -------------------------- FULLY TEMPERED --------------------------- %
stress_function=stress_function_t;
 
for i=2:n_nodes
    for j=2:n_timesteps  
        stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-fbk_t_net;
        if stress_function(j,i)<crack_th
        stress_function(j,i)=0;
        else  stress_function(j,i)=stress_function(j,i)-crack_th;
         end
    end
end
   
%Calculation of the Risk integral
for i=2:n_nodes
equivalent(4,i)=(trapz(stress_function(2:n_timesteps,1),(stress_function(2:
n_timesteps,i)).^n));
equivalent(1,i)=stress_function(1,i);
end
 
equivalent(:,1)=[];
equivalenttran=equivalent';
 
for i=2:n_nodes-1
if isnan(equivalenttran(i,4))==1
equivalenttran(i,4:6)=0;
end
end
 
for i=1:length(equivalenttran)
    for j=1:length(nodal_coordinates)
    if equivalenttran(i,1)==nodal_coordinates(j,1)
equivalenttran(i,2)=nodal_coordinates(j,2);
equivalenttran(i,3)=nodal_coordinates(j,3);
    end
    end
    end
 
eq1min_temp=equivalenttran;
 
clear equivalenttran
 
==PAGE:94==
06/07/19 17:42
C:\U...\script_damage_multi_SGG_reduced.m
5 of 5
%%  assigning values to the 1^st earthquake
damage1min_ann_1=eq1min_ann;                   %Creating a new vector associated to 
the specific earthquake
damage1min_heat_1=eq1min_heat;    
damage1min_temp_1=eq1min_temp;    
 
clear eq1min_ann eq1min_heat eq1min_temp equivalent stress_function stress_function_a 
stress_function_h stress_function_t
 
 
%%                        DAMAGE ACCUMULATION FOR 2^nd EARTHQUAKE
 
stress_function=BigBear;                %import your data
 
%%
 
%.... the procedure is followed in the same way for the other 5 SGGs. For
% practicle purposes it is not reported entirely here but it can be
% downloaded from the Digital Annex.
%
 
 
%%                  DAMAGE ACCUMULATION FOR 1st+2nd+3rd+4th+5th+6th EARTHQUAKEs
damage1min_ann_1to6=damage1min_ann_1;
damage1min_ann_1to6(:,4)=damage1min_ann_1(:,4)+damage1min_ann_2(:,4)+damage1min_ann_3
(:,4)+damage1min_ann_4(:,4)+damage1min_ann_5(:,4)+damage1min_ann_6(:,4);
 
damage1min_heat_1to6=damage1min_heat_1;
damage1min_heat_1to6(:,4)=damage1min_heat_1(:,4)+damage1min_heat_2(:,4)
+damage1min_heat_3(:,4)+damage1min_heat_4(:,4)+damage1min_heat_5(:,4)
+damage1min_heat_6(:,4);
 
damage1min_temp_1to6=damage1min_temp_1;
damage1min_temp_1to6(:,4)=damage1min_temp_1(:,4)+damage1min_temp_2(:,4)
+damage1min_temp_3(:,4)+damage1min_temp_4(:,4)+damage1min_temp_5(:,4)
+damage1min_temp_6(:,4);
 
==PAGE:95==
Nomenclature
(ESGS)
Local Edge Supported Glazing System
(LSGS)
Linearly Supported Glazing System
(PSGS)
Point Supported Glazing System
(D)
Damage function
(FE)
Finite Element
(PGA)
Peak Ground Acceleration
(SDOF)
Single degree-of-freedom
(SGG)
Strong Ground Motion
(σinert)
Inert strength
(σR.60sec)
Equivalent 60sec-strength
83
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
Arnold, C. (1991). “The seismic response of nonstructural elements in buildings”. En-
glish. In: Bulletin of the New Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering 24.4, pp. 306–
316. ISSN: 11749857.
Baird, A., A. Palermo, and S. Pampanin (2011). “Facade damage assessment of multi-
storey buildings in the 2011 Christchurch earthquake”. English. In: Bulletin of the New
Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering 44.4, pp. 368–376. ISSN: 23241543-
11749857.
Beason, W. L. and J. R. Morgan (1984). “Glass failure prediction model”. English. In:
Journal of Structural Engineering 110.2, pp. 197–212. ISSN: 07339445.
Bedon, C. and C. Amadio (2017). “Enhancement of the seismic performance of multi-
storey buildings by means of dissipative glazing curtain walls”. English. In: Engi-
neering Structures 152, pp. 320–334. ISSN: 18737323.
Bedon, C., M. Fasan, and C. Amadio (2019). “Vibration Analysis and Dynamic Charac-
terization of Structural Glass Elements with Different Restraints Based on Operational
Modal Analysis”. English. In: Buildings 9.1, pp. 1–23. ISSN: 20755309.
Bedon, C., X. Zhang, et al. (2018). “Performance of structural glass facades under ex-
treme loads - Design methods, existing research, current issues and trends”. English.
In: Construction and Building Materials 163, pp. 921–937. ISSN: 09500618.
Behr, R. A. (1998). “Seismic performance of architectural glass in mid-rise curtain wall”.
English. In: Journal of Architectural Engineering 4.3, pp. 94–98. ISSN: 19435568.
— (2006). “Design of architectural glazing to resist earthquakes”. English. In: Journal
of Architectural Engineering 12.3, pp. 122–128. ISSN: 10760431.
— (2009). Architectural Glass to Resist Seismic and Extreme Climatic Events. 1st ed.
Oxford, UK: Elsevier. 260 pp.
Behr, R. A. and A. Belarbi (1996). “Seismic test methods for architectural glazing sys-
tems”. English. In: Earthquake Spectra 12.1, pp. 129–143. ISSN: 19448201.
85
==PAGE:98==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bouwkamp, J.G. and J. F. Meehan (1960). “Drift Limitations Imposed by Glass”. In:
Proceedings of the Second World Conference on Earthquake Engineering. (July 11–
18, 1960). Tokyo, Japan: pp. 1763–1778.
Brown, W. C. (1970). A practicable formulation for the strength of glass and its special
application to large plates. Research rep. NRCC 14372. National Research Council
Canada. Institute for Research in Construction.
— (1972). A load duration theory for glass design. Research rep. NRCC 12354 / NRC-
IRC-2631. National Research Council Canada. Division of Building Research.
Charleson, A. (2008). Seismic design for architects, outwitting the quake. 1st ed. Oxford,
UK: Elsevier. 281 pp.
Ding, D. et al. (1990). “Architecture, building contents, and building systems”. English.
In: Earthquake Spectra 6.S1, pp. 339–377. ISSN: 19448201-87552930.
Elnashai, A. S. and L. Di Sarno (2015). Fundamentals of Earthquake Engineering: from
source to fragility. 2nd ed. Chichester, United Kingdom: John Wiley
Sons, Ltd.
469 pp.
Evans, D. and F. J. L. Ramirez (1985). “Glass Damage in the 19 September 1985 Mex-
ico Earthquake”. In: Lessons Learned from the 1985 Mexico Earthquake. Reducing
earthquake hazards. Proceedings of 3rd U.S.- Mexico Workshop on 1985 Mexico
Earthquake Research. (Mar. 16–18, 1989). Mexico City, Mexico: pp. 234–236.
FEMA (2011). “Reducing the Risks of Nonstructural Earthquake Damage - A Practical
Guide E74”. In: (). Washington, D.C.: Federal emergency management agency.
Gehrke, E., M. Haehnert, and C. Ullner (1986). “Strength and fatigue of some binaru and
ternary silicate glasses”. English. In: Journal of Non-crystalline Solids 80.1, pp. 269–
276. ISSN: 18734812.
Gowda, B. and N. Heydari (2010). “High displacement glass seismic systems”. English.
In: Practice Periodical on Structural Design and Construction 15.2, pp. 170–176.
ISSN: 10840680.
Grifﬁth, A. A. (1921). “The Phenomena of Rupture and Flow in Solids”. English. In:
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. A 221, pp. 163–198. ISSN:
02643952.
Haldimann, M. (2006). “Fracture strength of structural glass elements - analytical and
numerical modelling, testing and design”. PhD thesis. Lausanne: École polytechnique
fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Haldimann, M., A. Luible, and M. Overend (2008). Structural use of glass. Ed. by Inter-
national Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering. Zurich, Switzerland:
Hooper, J. A. (1973). “On the bending of architectural laminated glass”. English. In: Int
J Mech Sci 15.4, pp. 309–323. ISSN: 18792162.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
Hosseini, Mahmood (2005). “On the Nonstructural elements and their behavior in the
Bam earthquake of 26 Decmember 2003”. English. In: Earthquake Spectra 21.S1,
pp. 439–453. ISSN: 87552930.
Housner, G. W. and P. C. Jennings (1972). “The San Fernando California earthquake”.
English. In: Earthquake engineering and structural dynamics 1, pp. 5–31.
Huang, B. et al. (2017). “Seismic demand and experimental evaluation of the nonstruc-
tural building curtain wall: A review”. English. In: Soil Dynamics and Earthquake
Engineering 100, pp. 16–33. ISSN: 02677261.
Hutton, K., J. Woessner, and E. Hauksson (2010). “Earthquake monitoring in southern
California for seventy-seven years (1932-2008)”. English. In: Bulletin of the Seismo-
logical Society of America 100.2, pp. 423–446. ISSN: 19433573.
Inglis, C. E. (1913). “Stresses in a plate due to the presence of cracks and sharp corners.”
English. In: Transactions of the Institution of Naval Architects 55, pp. 219–241.
Irwin, G.R. (1957). “Analysis of stresses and strains near end of crack traversing plate”.
English. In: Journal of Applied Mechanics 24.3, pp. 361–364.
Kramer, S. L. (1996). Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering. 1st ed. New Jersey, U.S.A.:
Pearson Education. 672 pp.
MacLeod, F. A. (2004). “The latest developments in seismic mitigation of suspended
ceiling systems”. In: 13th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering. (Aug. 1–6,
2004). Ed. by 13 WCEE Secretariat. Vancouver, B.C., Canada: 13 WCEE Secretariat.
Memari, A. M. (2013). “Design of curtain walls for earthquake-induced loads and drifts”.
English. In: Asce Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice 1.126, pp. 105–128.
ISSN: 07347685.
Memari, A. M., R. A. Behr, and P. A. Kremer (2003). “Seismic behavior of curtain walls
containing insulating glass units”. English. In: Journal of Architectural Engineering
9.2, pp. 70–85. ISSN: 19435568.
Memari, A. M., A. Shirazi, and P. A. Kremer (2007). “Static ﬁnite element analysis of
architectural glass curtain walls under in-plane loads and corresponding full-scale
test”. English. In: Structural Engineering and Mechanics 25.4, pp. 365–382. ISSN:
15986217.
Mould, R. E. (1961). “Strength and Static Fatigue of Abraded Glass Under Controlled
Ambient Conditions: IV, Effect of Surrounding Medium”. English. In: Journal of the
American Ceramic Society 44.10, pp. 481–491. ISSN: 15512916.
Neugebauer, J. (2005). “A Special Fixation With Which The Broken Laminated Safety
Glass Is Prevent From Falling Down”. In: Proceedings of Glass Processing Days 2005.
(June 17, 2005–June 20, 2007). Tampere, Finland: Tamglass, pp. 105–109.
Nielsen, J. H. (2011). “Tempered glass. Bolted connections and related problems”. PhD
thesis. Copenhagen: Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:100==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Norville, H. S., K. W. King, and J. L. Swofford (1998). “Behaviour and strength of lami-
nated glass”. English. In: Journal of Engineering Mechanics 124.1, pp. 46–53. ISSN:
19437889.
Overend, M. (2002). “The appraisal of structural glass assemblies”. PhD thesis. Guild-
ford: University of Surrey.
Overend, M. and I. Maniatis (2007). “The inﬂuence of ﬁnite element modelling parame-
ters on the stress distribution in bolted glass connections”. In: Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Civil, Structural and Environmental Engineering Com-
puting. (Sept. 18–21, 2007). Ed. by B.H.V. Topping. St. Julians, Malta: Civil-Comp
Press, pp. 1–19.
Paciﬁc Earthquake Engineering Research Center (PEER) ground motion database (2013).
URL: https://ngawest2.berkeley.edu/ (visited on 06/21/2019).
Pantelides, C.P. and R. A. Behr (1994). “Dynamic in-plane racking tests of curtain wall
glass elements”. English. In: Earthquake engineering and structural dynamics 23,
pp. 211–228. ISSN: 00988847/10969845.
Pantelides, C.P., R. A. Behr, and K. Z. Truman (1996). “Development of a loading history
for seismic testing of architectural glass in a shop-fron wall system”. English. In:
Engineering Structures 18.12, pp. 917–935. ISSN: 01410296.
Peek-Asa, C. et al. (1998). “Fatal and hospitalized injured resulting from the 1994 Northridge
earthquake”. English. In: International Journal of Epidemiology 27.3, pp. 459–465.
ISSN: 14643685-03005771.
Pešek, O. and J. Melcher (2017). “Lateral-Torsional Buckling of Laminated Structural
Glass Beams. Experimental Study”. English. In: Procedia Engineering 190, pp. 70–
77.
Reitherman, B et al. (1995). “Non Structural Damage”. English. In: Earthquake Spectra
11.S2, pp. 453–514. ISSN: 87552930.
Richter, C. F. (1958). Elementary Seismology. 1st ed. San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman
and Company. 768 pp.
Ryan, P., M. Otlet, and R. G. Ogden (1997). Steel supported glazing systems. 1st ed.
Ascot, Berkshire: Steel Construction Institute. 74 pp.
Sakamoto, I. (1978). Seismic performance of nonstructural and secondary structural el-
ements. Research rep. EERC-78/10. University of California.
Sakamoto, I., H. Itoh, and Y. Ohashi (1984a). “Glass structures – learning from experts”.
In: COST Action TU0905, Mid-term Conference on Structural Glass. (2013). Porec,
Croatia: London, Taylor Francis Group, pp. 1093–1100.
— (1984b). “Proposals for aseismic design method on nonstructural elements”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Eighth World Conference on Earthquake Engineering. (1984). San
Francisco, California: pp. 1093–1100.
==PAGE:101==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
89
Sanford, R. J. (2002). Principles of Fracture Mechanics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Person
Education, Inc.
Scholz, C. H. (2019). The mechanics of earthquakes and faulting. 3rd ed. Cambridge,
United Kingdom: Cambridge University press. 493 pp.
Sglavo, V. M. and D. J. Green (1996). “Threshold stress intensity factor in soda-lime
silicate glass by interrupted static fatigue test”. English. In: Journal of the European
Ceramic Society 16.6, pp. 645–651. ISSN: 1873619x.
Shand, E. B. (1954). “Experimental Study of Fracture of Glass: I, The Fracture Pro-
cess”. English. In: Journal of the American Ceramic Society 37.2, pp. 52–59. ISSN:
15512916.
Sivanerupan, S. (2011). “In-plane seismic performance of glass façade systems”. PhD
thesis. Melbourne: Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia.
Sivanerupan, S. et al. (2014). “Drift Performance of Point Fixed Glass Façade Systems”.
English. In: Advances in Structural Engineering 17.10, pp. 1481–1495. ISSN: 13694332.
So, A. K. W. and S. L. Chan (1996). “Stability and strength analysis of glass wall sys-
tems stiffened by glass ﬁns”. English. In: Finite Elements in Analysis and Design 23,
pp. 57–75.
FprEN 16612 Glass in building - Determination of the lateral load resistance of glass
panes by calculation (2019). EN. Brussels: CEN.
Sucuoˇglu, Haluk and C.V. Girija Vallabhan (1997). “Behaviour of window glass panels
during earthquakes”. English. In: Engineering Structures 19.8, pp. 685–694. ISSN:
01410296.
Wiederhorn, S. M. (1967). “Inﬂuence of water vapour on crack propagation in soda-lime
glass”. English. In: Journal of the American Ceramic Society 50.8, pp. 407–414. ISSN:
15512916.
