==PAGE:1==
MSc Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
DTU Aqua
National Institute of Aquatic Resources
Forecasting sandeel recruitment in the
North Sea
Christian Mathias Rohde Kiær
Supervisor:
Mark R. Payne
July 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Aqua
National Institute of Aquatic Resources
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Bygning 202
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Recruitment modelling has been one of the largest problems in ﬁsheries science since
the beginning of the 1900s. This has lead to the use of advanced statistical models
for recruitment predictions, including both environmental processes and demographic
variables. While progress has been seen, models tend to loose skill when revisited.
Applying these models in an operational setting has mostly been deemed impossible.
However recent advances in earth system modelling and observations has made for-
casting of the ocean more skillful, allowing more precise ecological predictions.
Here we propose a recruitment prediction framework, using advanced recruitment
model ensembles in combination with environmental observation and forecast products.
The framework is ﬂexible, allowing multiple stocks, species and modelling techniques.
Forcast validation is done consistently for all selected stocks, using retrospective
forecasts together with skill and accuracy evaluations borrowed from atmospheric
science.
This will be used for prediction of the North Sea sandeel stocks, where each individual
stock and an aggregated portfolio, are forecasted. Sandeel is a heavily studied species,
due to its place in the food web and large industrial ﬁshery, making it ideal for
a case study. Comparing the utility from retrospective forecasts of the individual
stocks and the portfolio, the aggregated forecast shows highest accuracy and best skill
scores, indicating aggregation increasing predictability. Preliminary forecast for 2019
recruitment shows high probability of being in the lower tercile of historic data for all
individual stocks. The aggregated forecast has the highest probability of the medium
recruitment year.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This MSc Eng. thesis was prepared at the National Institute of Aquatic Resources at
the Technical University of Denmark, in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring
a Masters degree in Engineering.
July, 26th July 2019
Christian Mathias Rohde Kiær
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Mark Payne for his valuable help throughout this project. Your
input has been appreciated both during the good and more frustrating periods. I’m
very much looking forward to further developing this project and hopefully produce
some valuable scientiﬁc results.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
The lesser sandeel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Ecology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Trends and current ﬁsheries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Stock-Recruitment modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Environmental Predictors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.2
Modelling approaches
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2.1
General additive modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2.2
Empirical dynamic modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.2.3
Model ensembles and multimodel inference . . . . . .
13
2.3
Near-term climate predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Marine ecological forecasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Forecast validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Methods
19
3.1
RecPredEng - A framework for automated recruitment prediction . . .
19
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
3.2
Data Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Assessment data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Environmental data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2.1
CMEMS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2.2
OISST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2.3
Bank speciﬁc temperature extraction
. . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Complete dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Modelling Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Multimodel inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
Other modelling modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Portfolio forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Forecasting and skill evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results
33
4.1
Skill evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Continuous skill
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Categorical skill
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Model diagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
2019 Forecasts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.1
Single stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.2
Portfolio forecast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Discussion
46
5.1
Using and extending the prediction framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.1
Modelling extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.1.1
Empirical Dynamic Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.1.1.2
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.1.1.3
Mixed eﬀects model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.1.2
Involving stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.1.3
Further development and usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2
Selection of environmental variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2.1
Circulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.2
Zooplankton concentrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.3
Marine heatwaves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
5.2.4
Using seasonal to decadal climate predictions . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Conclusion
57
Bibliography
58
A Appendix name
66
B Appendix name
68
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Predicting recruitment to ﬁsh stocks has been a key aspiration in ﬁsheries science for
over a hundred years. The earliest models used spawning stock biomass as a predictor,
treating the recruitment as a discrete-time population model (Beverton and Holt, 1957;
Ricker, 1954). However, despite these early successes, recruitment forecasting has been
plagued by many failures (Myers, 1998) and today the ﬁeld is eﬀectively discredited:
there are, for example, no known examples of operational recruitment forecasting
systems (Payne et al., 2017). Nevertheless, recent years have seen the development
of advanced statistical models (e.g. GAMs, EDM and machine learning), improved
technologies for observing and forecasting the ocean (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013), and
ever increasing time series of recruitment against which to develop and test models.
Lesser sandeel (Ammodytes marinus) in the North Sea makes a good case study to
revisit this problem. The species forms the basis for a commercially important ﬁshery,
particularly in Denmark, where they are used in the production of ﬁshoil and ﬁshmeal.
The species lives on sandy banks distributed throughout the North Sea: while the
adults are typically bound to a speciﬁc bank, larval sandeel are pelagic and drift
between banks (Christensen et al., 2008). Earlier studies have laid the groundwork
for ﬁsh stock recruitment models and predictions in some areas of the North Sea
(Lindegren et al. (2018), Payne. in prep). These models can give a forecast with good
skill of a speciﬁc stock with a signiﬁcant lead time, but doesn’t capture the complete
image across all areas in the North Sea. As all stocks are closely related and exposed
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction
2
to many of the same environmental factors, many of the same approaches can be taken
across stocks.
1.2
Problem
The lesser sandeel has seen a decline in both total stock biomass and recruitment during
the beginning of the 2000s. This has lead to reduced quotas and a focus on the general
management of the stock. The recruitment dynamics of the species has been heavily
studied, given the sandeels position in the ecosystem and large commercial ﬁsheries
(e.g. Arnott and Ruxton (2002); Frederiksen et al. (2007)). Although relationships
between the environment, demography and recruitment are seen, oﬃcial assessment
advice uses geometric means to forecast and project recruitment (ICES, 2018). This
coupled with general scepticism regarding recruitment forecasting, shows a need for
rethinking of current methods and further developing of modelling approaches.
1.3
Aim
The aim of this project is to extend these models across several stocks throughout the
North Sea, operationalizing the forecasting across the selected stocks. The project will
require data extraction from satellite observations, development and assessment of
statistical models and aggregation across multiple ﬁsh stocks throughout the North
Sea.
The project will introduce the RecPredEng framework for recruitment forecasting. This
framework has been developed with the intentions of being an operational recruitment
forecast system, where multiple stocks, species and portfolios of both can be forecasted.
Here we will attempt a portfolio forecast for four ICES managed stocks of sandeel in
the North Sea. The portfolio will use forecast information from each of the individual
stocks, combined into a single aggregated forecast. This should improve forecast
skill compared to the less predictable stocks, while performing on par with the more
==PAGE:11==
1 Introduction
3
predictable. The aggregation can potentially reduce uncertainties compared to the
less predictable stocks.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER2
Background
2.1
The lesser sandeel
2.1.1
Ecology
The lesser sandeel (Ammodytes marinus), is a pelagic species of the Ammodytidea
family. It’s one of the most common sandeel found in the North Sea, living in the
sandy banks (Green, 2017). Sandeel has a lifespan of 10 years, and generally reach
maturity at 2 years. Spawning season start in December and last until January with
eggs hatching during February and March (Van Deurs et al., 2009). During larval
stages they are found throughout the water column and will be aﬀected by circulation,
where larval drift happens between habitat banks (Christensen et al., 2008). Sandeels
will settle in the sandy banks after metamorphosis, which usually happens 33 to 99
days after egg hatching (Wright and Bailey, 1996). Several studies has shown that
post-settlement, sandeel will not disperse and generally tend to stay at a given habitat
(e.g. Pedersen et al. (1999)). After settlement the settled individuals are counted as
recruited to the population (Van Deurs et al., 2009). Recruitment in the southwestern
part of the North Sea shows signs of being inﬂuenced negatively by temperature, while
the main prey, Calanus Finmarchus, abundance has a positive inﬂuence (Arnott and
Ruxton, 2002). The eﬀect of density dependence also plays a large role in recruitment
(Van Deurs et al., 2009), where adult sandeel has shown cannibalistic behavior, feeding
on late stage larvae and juveniles (Eigaard et al., 2014). Sandeel has also been found
to be on of the main links between primary production and the higher trophic levels.
==PAGE:13==
2 Background
5
This has been shown true for both larger piscivorous ﬁsh (e.g. cod and haddock) and
seabirds (Eliasen et al., 2011).
2.1.2
Trends and current ﬁsheries
Before 2010 the North Sea sandeels were managed as a single stock, but due to studies
of regional variation in demography (e.g. Frederiksen et al. (2007)) and larval drift
models (e.g. (Christensen et al., 2008)), the total stock is divided into 7 sub-populations
(see ﬁg. 2.1, ICES (2016)). Individual assessments are done on each sub-population,
where analytical stock assessments are done in area 1r, 2r, 3r and 4. Quoatas are
currently only available in area 1r, 2r, 3r and 6.
Figure 2.1: From ICES (2019c) showing the management units deﬁned by ICES. These divisions are
divided from larval drift models and demographic studies.
Since the beginning of 2000s a general trend of lower recruitment and overall spawning
stock biomass has been observed in the North Sea (e.g.
ICES (2019c)).
Levels
measured below the ICES reference points Bpa (biomass precautionary advice limit
reference point) and Blim (biomass lower limit reference point) has been observed on
==PAGE:14==
2 Background
6
multiple occasions (see ﬁg. 2.2 and A.1, A.2). Area 3r and 4 shows some signs of
recovery, while biomass levels and recruitment has stayed low in area 1r and 2r.
(a) Sandeel management area 1r
(b) Sandeel management area 3r
Figure 2.2: Oﬃcial ICES stock assessment graphs from ICES (2019c) and ICES (2019a). Upper
graphs shows recruitment, with the last year in the timeseries being a recruitment forecast, while the
lower graphs shows the spawning stock biomass. Red dotted line shows MSY, while black dotted line
is Blim. 90% conﬁdence interval shown in green. General downward trends in both areas, with a
small recovery in area 3r. Area 2r and area 4 can be found in Appendix A.
Sandeel has been commercially ﬁshed since the 1950s, and is now one of the largest
industrial ﬁsheries in the North Sea (Furness, 2003). While it wasn’t initially heavily
ﬁshed, the ﬁshing reached levels of an average of more than 800 thousand tonnes
annualy during the 1980s and 1990s (ICES, 2014). Over 1 million tonnes was catched
in 1988 and multiple times during the 1990s (see ﬁg. 2.3). After the beginning of the
2000s a large decline in the sandeel ﬁsheries has been seen, largely related to closures
in ﬁsheries and general stock condition.
==PAGE:15==
2 Background
7
Figure 2.3: From ICES (2014) showing the total landings in tonnes across all 7 management areas
from 1982 to 2013. After 2000 the total landings dropped severely. Closures in ﬁshery areas and
increased focus on management due to fear of depletion likely lead to the large drop.
Sandeel ﬁsheries are currently one of the more valuable danish ﬁsheries, netting around
10% of the total yearly income from danish ﬁsheries (see ﬁg. 2.4, Marine Ingredients
(2019)). This is only considering sandeel catches and not products produced, like ﬁsh
oil and ﬁsh meal. Including these products would further increase the value of the
sandeel ﬁshery.
==PAGE:16==
2 Background
8
Figure 2.4: From Marine Ingredients (2019) showing the total income from ﬁsheries in Denmark.
Sandeel contributes to around 10% (shown on the graph as Tobis). This is excluding income from
production and export of products like ﬁsh meal and ﬁsh oil, which are largely produced from sandeels.
During June 2019 the Danish Fisheries Agency closed ﬁshing in Area 2r and 3r.
2.2
Stock-Recruitment modelling
Since the beginning of the 1900’s, one of ﬁsheries sciences largest problems has been
solving the stock recruitment issues. Stock recruitment depends on many factors,
including egg survival, larval stage food availability and other environmental drivers
(Paulik, 1973). Methods, such as Paulik diagrams (see ﬁg. 2.5), are used to identify
during which life stages shifts in survival happens (Nash, 1998).
==PAGE:17==
2 Background
9
Figure 2.5: Paulik diagram from Nash (1998). Used to identify in which life stage bottlenecks occur.
In this example Irish Sea plaice shows a shift in survival between egg and metamorphis.
The state of a given stock will always be dependent on recruitment and population
dynamics within the stock (e.g.
growth rate, mortality, ﬁshing pressure), while
recruitment will also be heavily inﬂuenced by the state of the stock (e.g. spawning
stock biomass) (Subbey et al., 2014). Thus the overall aim of stock recruitment
modelling is predicting recruitment given information about a given stock. Early
approaches primarily used SSB as a predictor, viewing the recruitment problem as
a logistic growth equation (see eq. 2.1 and 2.2; Beverton and Holt (1957); Ricker
(1954)).
Rt = Steα−βSt
(2.1)
Rt =
αSt
1 + βSt
(2.2)
Both equations determines recruitment at time t being a function of spawning stock
biomass. Some exponential function is introduced, determining the density dependence
at high SSB (Britten et al., 2016). α represents the reproductive rate, while β is the
==PAGE:18==
2 Background
10
reduction in reproduction rate due to density dependence. The residuals from these
types of models generally indicate other environmental factors determining recruitment
(Britten et al., 2016). Biologically this means at low SSB size, recruitment is driven
independent of density, while larger stock size introduces density dependence.
While this is used for assessing stock recruitment relationships in multiple species,
using SSB as the only predictor can be very inaccurate. An example is Baltic Sprat,
where biomass is above biological limits, but no signiﬁcant relationship is seen between
SSB and recruitment numbers (MacKenzie et al., 2008). Here recruitment forecasts
are made using geometric means of the whole time series. Earlier studies showed a
highly signiﬁcant relationship between temperature, the North Atlantic Oscillation
index and recruitment in Baltic Sprat (MacKenzie and Köster, 2004).
2.2.1
Environmental Predictors
As linking the current state of the stock to diﬀerent environmental drivers became
more popular, several of the original recruitment models was reworked to include
environmental predictors (e.g. Hilborn and Walters (1992)). This leads to the inclusion
of several environmental predictors into the classic Ricker/Beverton-Holt models (see
eq. 2.3 for Ricker with environmental variables). Here Z1...Zn environmental predictors
are included, with c1...cn coeﬃcients.
Rt = Steα−βSt+c1Z1+...+cnZN
(2.3)
The modiﬁed Ricker model has been used more commonly, due to lower computational
requirements and easier linearization (Subbey et al., 2014). While an improvement,
the approach still had ﬂaws, where especially the linear approximations of non-linear
eﬀect can result in uncertainties (e.g. temperatures eﬀect on recruitment) (Drinkwater,
2005).
Forgoing investigation of environmental eﬀects has also been seen to have detrimental
eﬀects.
Studies of the North Sea herring has shown that during the 2000s, the
stock showed very poor recruitment, despite seeing a large adult population and low
exploitation. This was linked to the rising lower survival of overwintering larvae,
==PAGE:19==
2 Background
11
possibly related to changes in plankton composition and rising water temperatures
(Payne et al., 2008).
When revisiting models where environmental processes was included, many of these
previously seen correlations were gone. Only species living close to thermal limits, still
showed signs of environmental correlations (Myers, 1998).
2.2.2
Modelling approaches
Here we discuss some of the recruitment modelling approaches considered for building
the forecasting system.
Other types of modelling philosophies for working with
recruitment exists and are used for decision making (e.g. Ricker/Beverton-Holt models
and geometric means (MacKenzie et al., 2008; Mantzouni and Mackenzie, 2010)).
2.2.2.1
General additive modelling
Generalized additive models (GAMs) introduces non-parametric linear predictors by
using some function f(x) instead of the linear predictor x. This allows the otherwise
linear regression model to capture non-straight behavior, such as it is generally seen in
ecological data. Models use the same structure as generalized linear models (GLMs),
but replaces any linear predictor with a smoothing function (see eq. 2.4, (Zuur et al.,
2009)). Linear predictors can still be included in a GAM and will behave normally.
y = β0 + f1(x1) + ϵ,
ϵ ∼N(0, σ2)
(2.4)
Smoothing functions includes splines (piecewise functions), polynomials or step func-
tions depending on the problem. An example of using GAM to ﬁt a sine model, from
data generated from a sine function with some added stochasticity can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.6. The GAM can model the sine function using the smoothing functions,
where a GLM would be unable to do so.
==PAGE:20==
2 Background
12
Figure 2.6: Sample GAM ﬁt from generated data using a sine function. Where a GLM would have
be unable to capture the non-straight sine function, using a GAM ﬁt captures the pattern.
GAMs are used in multiple ecological settings, where examples include recruitment
predictions (e.g. Lindegren et al. (2018)), spatial distribution models (e.g. Teichert
et al. (2011)) and species distributions models (e.g. Brun et al. (2016)).
2.2.2.2
Empirical dynamic modelling
Empirical dynamic modelling (EDM) is a non-parametric framework for representing
dynamic systems through a time series by projecting it to a n-dimensional space
(Sugihara et al., 2012). This mathematical approach was initially described by Takens’
theorem (Takens, 1981), stating a delayed embedding can be used to reconstruct a
dynamic systems time series. Instead of reconstructing the time series, EDM uses
the time series to construct an attractor (see ﬁg. 2.7, state-dependant behavior of an
attractor described originally in Lorenz (1963)), from which Takens’ theorem can be
utilized. EDM assumes a deterministic system, where the constructed attractor can
be used to completely recreate the time series. The axes of the n-dimensional space
represent the state variables of the dynamic system.
==PAGE:21==
2 Background
13
Figure 2.7: Schematic of construction of an attractor from a time lagged time series (from Ye et al.
(2019)). The attractor can afterwards be used to predict future events using algorithms like nearest
neighbor.
EDM uses diﬀerent methods for forecasting, including weighted nearest neighbor. Data
are generally split into a learning (reconstruction) and an out-of-sample part (Ye et al.,
2019). EDM is not only used for forecasting, but also as tool for identifying causality
(Sugihara et al., 2012).
2.2.2.3
Model ensembles and multimodel inference
Borrowing from atmospheric science and principles from Anderson (2008), ensemble
forecasting aims at producing a more realistic forecast covering multiple possible
outcomes. For atmospheric sciences this range of outcomes can come from uncertainties
in initial values or model inadequacies (Leutbecher and Palmer, 2008). This was shown
directly by comparing the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts
(ECMWFs) deterministic model with their ensemble models for hurricane forecasting
(see ﬁg. 2.8. Here a large variety was seen in the model ensemble, showing very
diﬀerent outcomes compared to the deterministic model. Using multiple models in
an ensemble can improve accuracy compared to the individual models (Zhou and Du,
2009).
==PAGE:22==
2 Background
14
Figure 2.8: From Leutbecher and Palmer (2008) showing ECMWFs deterministic (heavy black line)
and model ensemble (thin black lines). This was a 5-day track forecast of the Katrina hurricane,
showing the possible ranges of tracks.
From an information theoretic perspective, a selection criteria can be used for model
selection and/or weighting. One commonly used approach is the Akaike information
criteria (AIC), combining entropy and Kullback-Leibler (K-L) information with Fishers’
likelihood theory (Anderson, 2008). This approach can give an estimation of how
much information is lost by a given model. When used in model selection, this allows
to directly compare models and choosing the highest quality (i.e. least information
lost) model. In a model ensemble, the AIC values provides a measure of which models
to trust most, allowing to weight predictions by a quality.
2.3
Near-term climate predictions
During recent years the predictive skill of climate models has increased, with an
increased focus on seasonal to decadal climate forecasts (Kushnir et al., 2019). This
near-term climate predictions (NTCPs) can be used as input for decision makers,
showing use in a wide variety of ﬁelds (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013).
NTCPs are generally outputs from coupled earth system models, initialized from
observations, running on a shorter timescale (Kushnir et al., 2019). Initializing both
==PAGE:23==
2 Background
15
atmosphere and ocean states plays a huge role in NTCP, due to its short timescale,
with especially the ocean state being of particular importance Kushnir et al. (2019).
Ensemble forecasts can be used to reduce the impact of initial state uncertainties,
by having models with diﬀerent pertubations of the initial state (Meehl et al., 2009).
Depending on temporal resolution (monthly to yearly averages), NTCPs can show
high correlation with observations, where decadal predictions can show comparable
skill to seasonal forecasts (see ﬁg. 2.9)(Kushnir et al., 2019).
Figure 2.9: From Kushnir et al. (2019) showing near-term (decadal) forecast skill for both surface air
temperature and precipitation. a) shows initialized decadal forecast of air temperatures correlation to
observation. b) shows the same but for precipitation. c) shows seasonal forecast of air temperatures
correlation to observation. d) shows the same but for precipitation.
Ocean dynamics generally plays a large role in predictability of climate, as the ocean
in general can be linked to most patterns of climate variability (e.g. El Nino-Southern
Oscillation)(Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013).
This coupled with the slower and more
predictable dynamics, makes the ocean one of the main drivers of NTCPs Doblas-
Reyes et al. (2013). Highest oceanic skill from seasonal to decadal forecast systems
can be found in the North Atlantic, Western Paciﬁc and Indian Ocean (e.g. (Meehl
et al., 2014)).
==PAGE:24==
2 Background
16
2.4
Marine ecological forecasts
Climate changes are likely to impact the marine ﬁsheries, aquaculture or other marine
industries (Hobday et al., 2018).
Climate real-time observations, near-term and
projections can be combined with ecological models, producing marine ecological
forecast products (Tommasi et al., 2017). Ecological forecast products are potentially
of great values to stakeholders and management of marine resources, allowing for
preparation and mitigation for these potential impacts (Payne et al., 2017).
Several forecast products are already available, ranging from distribution models to
timing events (see ﬁg. 2.10). Examples of these are Great Australian Blight tuna
distribution(number 4 on ﬁg. 2.10), using SST satellite data with a 3 months lead
time, and timing of Gulf of Maine lobster re-emergence (number 7 on ﬁg. 2.10), using
observational data with a 3-4 months lead (Payne et al., 2017).
Figure 2.10: From Payne et al. (2017) showing map of known marine ecological forecast and nowcast
products. Products are mostly seen in Australia and North America, with number 9, the Coral Reef
Watch product, covering reefs between 45◦N and 45◦S.
While advances has been seen in spatial and phenology forecasts, recruitment forecasts
using environmental predictors are still lacking behind (Payne et al., 2017). This is
==PAGE:25==
2 Background
17
mainly due to environmental relationships breaking down (Myers, 1998), and a high
sensitivity to oceanographic variability Payne et al. (2017). However due to the increase
in predictive skill of the ocean, better understanding of environmental relationships
and more advanced models this can potentially lead to better understanding and
predictability of recruitment usable for marine industries and decision makers.
2.5
Forecast validation
Assessing a forecast is of high importance to indicate the goodness of a given product.
This can lead to interpretations of what a good forecast is, dealing with consistency
between forecasters knowledge and the forecast, quality between forecasts and ob-
servations and value of the forecast (Murphy, 1993). While a forecasters knowledge
can be wrong or lacking, there’s generally a large relationship between a forecasts
quality and value. Poor performing forecasts will generally not provide much value.
Understanding and properly evaluating a forecasts quality is critical for providing
value, providing potential users with a good and clear understanding of uses and
limitations of a product (Hobday et al., 2019; Payne et al., 2015).
While more ecological forecasts are appearing, a general lack of attention to quant-
itatively assessing the quality of these products are seen. No standard methods for
forecast veriﬁcations are used. Most common is correlation between observations and
forecast, which inherently only assess agreement between the two (Barnsley, 2007).
Looking at the atmospheric sciences, forecast veriﬁcation has always been integral
and has multiple tools available for forecast veriﬁcation (e.g. Wilks (2011)). With
ecological forecasting and atmospheric sciences sharing the same underlying goals,
using these approaches can be eﬀective in evaluating products.
Murphy (1993) described 9 quality measures, for which certain aspects of a forecasts
quality could be assessed. While many of these are useful, here we primarily focus
on 1) accuracy and 2) skill. These two measures can be used eﬀectively to describe
the correspondence between the forecast and observation and the accuracy of forecast
relative to a reference forecast (e.g. climatology, random guessing or other forecasts,
Murphy (1993); Wilks (2011)). Multiple metrics can be used to describe both measures,
==PAGE:26==
2 Background
18
where an in depth description can be found in Murphy (1969). Accuracy measures are
commonly done with Root-Mean-Squared Error (RMSE), describing how far from the
observations the predictions are. Choosing a skill score is highly dependent on the
goal. Examples can be Ranked Probability Skill Score (RPSS), indicating increase in
accuracy compared to reference forecast, and the True Skill Score (TSS), indicating
categorical forecast performance. Application and mathematical deﬁnitions varies
greatly.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER3
Methods
3.1
RecPredEng - A framework for automated recruit-
ment prediction
During this project, the primary focus has been on the development of a framework
allowing for ﬂexible and extensible productivity forecasts for ﬁsh stocks. This includes
ﬂexibility in the modelling approaches and the assessed stocks.
Data extraction
and preparation is done as a part of the workﬂow (see ﬁg. 3.1), ensuring consistent
modelling data. Several recruitment modelling approaches can be incorporated into
the system. In its current state only a single modelling module is ﬁnalized (see 3.3.1),
but the aim is to allow several modelling modules. The framework is developed in R
(R Core Team, 2013), using several statistical and modelling packages working towards
an automatized forecasting system. Borrowing from the meteorological sciences, an
ensemble approach is used, indicating the range of possible outcomes from the model
prediction. Comparable skill assessment will be done across all modelling frameworks
and selected stocks (see 3.5).
The modelling framework requires stock assessment data, environmental data (obser-
vational SST and/or model forecasts in the present state) and geographic information
about the stock. From this a probabilistic recruitment forecast is created by the
framework for a given species. Forecasts are always produced using the full dataset
available to the system for lead 0. Retrospective forecasts are produced, using only
parts of the data available, to assess the skill of the forecast system. Depending
on stock, the number of retrospective forecasts will diﬀer. Due to data availability
the sandeel datasets allows for retrospective forecasts from 2006 until 2018. During
==PAGE:28==
3 Methods
20
this project, forecasts, retrospective forecasts and skill assessments was produced for
sandeel management areas 1r, 2r, 3r and 4.
Figure 3.1: Workﬂow for the recruitment prediction framework. The system will setup, conﬁgure
and run for all stock conﬁguration ﬁles present. This results in data extraction, modelling and skill
metrics calculation. The framework will ensure identical skill assessment for each modelling approach,
allowing for easy comparisons and evaluation.
3.2
Data Extraction
As this is developed with an aim of being a forecasting system, data has to be available
at the time of the forecast. This limits approaches to data acquisition, and can
exclude some data which otherwise has been proven to have some explanatory power
(e.g. sandeel and its preferred zooplankton prey, Calanus ﬁnmarchicus and Temora
longicornis (Arnott and Ruxton, 2002; Lindegren et al., 2018)).
==PAGE:29==
3 Methods
21
3.2.1
Assessment data
As the project aims towards recruitment forecasting of sandeel in the North Sea,
assessment data for the given stocks are used for the modelling (see ﬁgure 2.1 from
the background for management area overview). A stochastic multi-species assessment
model (SMS), originally developed by Lewy and Vinther (2004), is used for sandeel
assessment in the North Sea. The SMS model is run in a single stock mode for sandeel
assessments, and integrates catches, catch eﬀort, maturity, weight, ﬁshing mortality
and natural mortality at a given age (ICES, 2018). All stock assessment data are
the current (2019) assessments provided by ICES for area 1r, 2r, 3r and 4 (ICES,
2019a,b,c,d). As sandeel area 5r, 6 and 7r are considered data poor stocks, where
ﬁshing is currently closed, there is insuﬃcient data to warrant an analytical assessment
and these stocks will not be considered for the project.
From the assessment data, 4 demographic variables are extracted and log transformed.
These 4 demographic variables are extracted according to literature (e.g. Lindegren
et al. (2018) and Arnott and Ruxton (2002)). The 4 demographic includes spawning
stock biomass (SSB), total stock biomass (TSB), number of individuals with an age
greater than 1 (SumN) and number of one-year olds (N1). This allows for diﬀerent
types of interactions between the demography, including density dependence and SSB
impact on recruitment. All demographic data is log-transformed for modelling.
3.2.2
Environmental data
The framework is designed to use high resolution spatial sea surface temperature data
is gathered from either Copernicus Marine Environment Monitoring Service (CMEMS)
or Optimum Interpolation Sea Surface Temperature (OISST). Either of the products
can be selected for running the recruitment predictions. This leaves the user with
the ability to choose a product which ﬁts best for a given stock. All temperature
extractions are converted to climatological anomalies are based on the full dataset.
Anomalies are chosen for easier identiﬁcation of impact and being easier to interpret
(e.g. a 13◦C SST might not be very informative, while an 3◦C SST anomaly is).
==PAGE:30==
3 Methods
22
3.2.2.1
CMEMS
The CMEMS portal provides an interface to the Operational Sea Surface Temperature
and Sea Ice Analysis (OSTIA) system, which provides a 0.05◦× 0.05◦global grid
of daily SST data. The dataset is split into two global SST products, namely the
near real time (NRT) and reprocessed (REP) (see table 3.1 for product information).
OSTIA uses satellite data provided by the GHRSST project and in-situ measurements
to calculate SST. An optimal interpolation method is used for calculation, which can
be found in Martin et al. (2007). More information about the dataset in Banzon et al.
(2016).
Table 3.1: Description of the Copernicus Marine Services products used for generating a complete
historic dataset of global SST from 1985 to present day.
SST_GLO_SST_L4_REP_
OBSERVATIONS_010_011
SST_GLO_SST_L4_NRT_
OBSERVATIONS_010_001
Spatial Resolution
0.05◦× 0.05◦
0.05◦× 0.05◦
Temporal resolution
daily mean
daily mean
Temporal coverage
- Start
01.01.1985
01.01.2007
Temporal Coverag
- End
31.12.2007
present
Processing level
L4
3.2.2.2
OISST
Donlon et al. (2012) provides information of the Optimum Interpolation Sea Surface
Temperature (OISST) dataset. The product is a 0.25◦× 0.25◦global grid of daily SST
data. It is constructed from observations from satellites, ships and buoys, creating a
spatially complete map, by interpolating to ﬁll missing data.
==PAGE:31==
3 Methods
23
The daily OISST are extracted from the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
(AVHRR) only dataset, which ranges from 1981 to present day.
3.2.2.3
Bank speciﬁc temperature extraction
As adult sandeel are bound to speciﬁc banks, extracting only these areas will provide
data that is more representative of what is experienced by the individual ﬁsh. From ﬁg.
3.2 the four management areas can be seen, and in particular the light gray polygons
indicate the banks where sandeel are found. For each management area, averaged bank
speciﬁc temperature anomalies are extracted and split into 6 quarters. P3 and P4
represents the temperature anomalies experienced by the adult sandeel from July to
December before and during spawning (i.e. the temperatures experienced by a cohorts
parents just before spawning). Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 are SST anomalies experienced
during the egg, larval and juvenile stages from January to December by a given cohort.
All 6 temperature variables are extracted for every cohort year.
Figure 3.2: Map showing the 4 management areas considered. Habitats are shown in light grey and
corresponds to the banks where SST is extracted from.
==PAGE:32==
3 Methods
24
3.2.3
Complete dataset
The complete modelling dataset consists of several demographic assessment types,
combined with the extracted environmental data. Table 3.2 shows an overview of all
extracted variables and their description.
When modelling it should be noted that many of these explanatory variables (demo-
graphic and temperature) can be highly correlated. This needs to be considered and
addressed during modelling.
Table 3.2: Complete list of the explanatory variables contained in the dataset. This is the data used
in the modelling modules.
Name
Description
Year
Assessment year
logSSB
Log transformed spawning stock biomass. SSB is measured in tonnes
logTSB
Log transformed total stock biomass. TSB is measured in tonnes
logSumN
Log transformed sum of individuals across all age groups
logN1
Log transformed number of 1 year olds. Measured in number of individuals
P3
Jul-Sep temperature anomalies experienced by the adults prior to spawning
P4
Oct-Dec temperature anomalies experienced by the adults during spawning
Q1
Jan-Mar temperature anomalies experienced during egg development
Q2
Apr-Jun temperature anomalies experienced by larvae during pelagic drift phase
Q3
Jul-Sep temperature anomalies experienced by post-settlement juveniles
Q4
Oct-Dec temperature anomalies experienced by post-settlement juveniles
==PAGE:33==
3 Methods
25
3.3
Modelling Modules
3.3.1
Multimodel inference
Based on Burnham and Anderson (2004) the multimodel inference module is developed
using the R package MuMIn developed by Bartoń (2018). The module combines
the usage of GAMs with the multimodel inference philosophy (see section 2.2.2.1
and 2.2.2.3). A global GAM model is selected from ecological knowledge and data
availability (see eq. 3.1). From this global GAM a subset of models is created and
weighted according to AICc (a version of Akaike Information Criteria, which allows
for smaller sample sizes in relation to model parameters (Anderson, 2008)).
log Recruits ∼s(log SSB) + s(Year) + log SumN + log N1 + log TSB + ...
P3 + P4 + Q1 + Q2 + Q3 + Q4
(3.1)
All demographic and environmental variables are included in this global model. The
cohort year is also included in the model as a non-parametric smoother, allowing for
time variance in the baseline productivity to be incorporated (e.g. due to unquantiﬁed
variables).
To minimize risk of overﬁtting due to colinearity between model parameters, predictors
are split into groups based on correlations (e.g. temperatures). Each model in the
subset will be limited to only include one parameter from each group (see eq. 3.2 for
an example of an allowed subset model).
log Recruits ∼s(log SSB + s(Year) + log N1 + Q1
(3.2)
The module will automatically weight models, making it ideal for a automatized
forecasting system. Model weighting is done according to AICc values, where lowest
AICc values indicates "Model closest to full reality, given the data" (Anderson,
2008). This leads to a model ensemble, where models with lowest scoring AICc are
given highest weight. When predicting, the highest weighted models will be the
largest contributors to the prediction, essentially using the ranking of the models
to determine inﬂuence. The large subset of weighted models will be used to make
ensemble predictions. To understand the range of possible outcomes of a future value,
a probabilistic predictive distribution is created from the prediction interval from the
==PAGE:34==
3 Methods
26
ﬁtted models. It is assumed that the prediction interval is normal distributed around
the mean prediction (see ﬁg. 3.3). The predicted probabilities of the forecasted year
class are compared to three historical terciles (high, medium or low recruitment, see
ﬁg. 3.3), where a categorical forecast are chosen from the most likely tercile. Tercile
thresholds are based on the values from the complete timeseries.
Due to the updating nature of the modelling module, relative variable importance (RVI)
throughout model iterations will be of high importance to understand recruitment
dynamics.
Figure 3.3: Figure showing a predictive distribution and the complete timeseries with terciles. The
predictive distribution is for a 2019 forecast from area 4. The timeseries shows the full recruitment
split into terciles of low, medium and high.
3.3.2
Other modelling modules
The framework includes the choice of diﬀerent reference forecasts. This includes
geometric mean forecasts (see eq. 3.3), both for the whole data series (GM Full) and
==PAGE:35==
3 Methods
27
10 years moving (GM10), and a Ricker model.
GM =
n√x1x2x3...xn =
" n
Y
i=1
xi
# 1
n
(3.3)
These models can be used for direct comparison and model validation. As an example,
the oﬃcial ICES sandeel advice use either the GM10 or the GM Full for recruitment
forecasts, making this comparison very valuable (ICES, 2018).
Extending using other reference forecasts is possible. All model comparisons with the
MuMIn sandeel forecasts will be made with the GM10 and GM Full forecasts.
Smaller unﬁnished modelling modules are in development in the current state. These
include empirical dynamic modelling, random forest and neural network.
3.4
Portfolio forecast
Moving towards a portfolio forecast of the North Sea sandeel, an aggregation of each
of the individual management area forecasts was made. As each forecast consists of a
posterior distribution, indicating a range of the likely forecast, these distributions can
be used and aggregated for a portfolio forecast.
This requires drawing randomly from each areas posterior distribution, adding each
draw from each stock to create a single forecast for the combined portfolio. The
resulting distribution will be the aggregated forecast. The current aggregated forecast
makes 4000 draws from each management areas forecast to produce the ﬁnal forecast
(see ﬁg. 3.4 to see a forecast distribution created from 4000 draws).
==PAGE:36==
3 Methods
28
Figure 3.4: Distribution created from 4000 draws from the 4 retrospective forecasts using data from
2006 to forecast the recruitment in 2006. The blue line is the mean of the forecast. Recruitment
numbers are log transformed.
Using the aggregated forecast distribution, the skill evaluation can be done exactly
like a single stock forecast. The mean value of the forecast are used to do continuous
evaluation, while the probability distribution are used for categorical evaluation. The
probability distribution will also be used for the forecast, by evaluating the distribution
against the terciles deﬁned by the overall timeseries (see ﬁg. 3.5).
==PAGE:37==
3 Methods
29
Figure 3.5: Complete timeseries for the aggregated recruitment of sandeel in the North Sea. Dashed
lines indicate the terciles, with the labels describing the recruitment. Note the Y-axis describes the
recruitment in number of individuals and is not log transformed.
3.5
Forecasting and skill evaluation
Initial forecast of interest will be the lead 0 forecast for the sandeel stocks. Lead is
calculated by a cohort year and current model assessment year (see eq. 3.4).
lead = cohort year −assessment year
(3.4)
Forecasting the cohort of a given assessment year will have lead 0 for sandeel (see ﬁg.
3.6 for graphical explanation for retrospective forecast of 2014). Using the model will
also predict earlier cohorts, resulting in negative leads. Data from negative leads are
part of the calibration set. In retrospective forecast mode, the model will also predict
positive leads, using data available for a given cohort year.
==PAGE:38==
3 Methods
30
Figure 3.6: Retrospective forecast of the 2014 assessment year, where recruitment predictions are
seen as a function of lead and cohort year. Lead 0 is shown at the dashed line, where both cohort
and assessment year are 2014.
This forecast can be done with a 2 months prior lead time to the oﬃcial ICES advice.
As this requires temperature data from from January to December, the actual forecast
of 2019 recruitment can be made at earliest the 1st of January 2020. As this timing is
problematic with regards to the current project, placeholder temperature values will
be used for forecasting. These temperature values for Q3 and Q4 of 2019 are based on
arithmetic means of measurements from the last 10 years.
Forecast skill was assessed using retrospective forecasting. This mimics operational
usage of the modelling system, using the system in a state where only a limited subset of
the data is available. Values from the retrospective forecasts can be directly compared
to observed values and skill measures calculated. The complete dataset was truncated
up until a cut-oﬀ(starting at 2006) and the model (see section 3.3.1, although same
procedure for reference forecasts) was ﬁtted using the subset (i.e in-sample data) of
the complete data. Both the in-sample and out-of-sample data were then used to
make predictions for each year class, giving a forecast for each year class in the time
series (see ﬁg. 3.7). This process is then repeated for every assessment year, from
==PAGE:39==
3 Methods
31
the start cut-oﬀyear until 2018. Forecast skill was then evaluated by comparing the
predicted values with the observed recruitment values as a function of lead time.
Figure 3.7: Model ﬁtted from data up until the 2006 cut-oﬀpoint. The model is then used to predict
the in-sample data (i.e. the data the ﬁt is based on) and out-of-sample data. This would mimic
an operational forecast from 2006, where all future data is unknown. Performance of the model is
evaluated against both the in-sample and out-of-sample data. Retrospective forecasts are made from
2006 and up until current assessment year.
Multiple skill metrics were calculated (see tab. 3.3 for full list) for assessment. This
includes both continuous and categorical skill evaluations, using both the mean of
the probabilistic forecasts and the tercile forecast. Continuous skill uses the mean
prediction for a root-mean-square error (RMSE) analysis, giving indications of the
accuracy of the forecast. The categorical forecasts are analysed using the hit rate, false
alarm rate, ranked probability skill score (RPSS) and true skill score (TSS). This will
give indications of the accuracy of the forecast, but also show forecast performance in
each of the terciles (Murphy, 1969). As the continuous metric RMSE is the square root
of the average of the squared errors, the eﬀect of larger errors have a disproportional
impact on the RMSE. A smaller RMSE is better and predictions are closer to the
observed values.
==PAGE:40==
3 Methods
32
Table 3.3: Skill metrics used in this project to evaluate the skill of the system. These values are
calculated for all retrospective forecasts. Continuous skill evaluation are also done on most reference
forecasts, while the categorical and binary forecast evaluation are only calculated for probabilistic
forecasts. Information about all forecasting metrics can be found in Murphy (1969).
Name of Forecast Quality Measure
Deﬁnition
Range
Application
Mean square error (MSE)
1
n
Pn
i=1(Fi −Oi)2
[0,inf]
Cont.
Root-mean-square error (RMSE)
√
MSE
[0,inf]
Cont.
Proportion correct / Hit rate
H =
hits
hits+misses
[0,1]
Cat.
False alarm rate
F =
misses
hits+misses
[0,1]
Cat.
Ranked Probability Score (RPS)
1
M−1
PM
M=1 [CDFfc,m −CDFobs,m]2
[0,1]
Cat.
Ranked Probability Skill Score (RPSS)
1 −
RPS
RPSreference
[-inf,1]
Cat.
True Skill Score (TSS)
H - F
[-1,1]
Bin
The hit rate and false alarm rate gives indications of how well a categorical forecast
performs. A hit rate of 1 means a perfect forecast, where the system always hits
the correct category, while false alarms indicate the fraction of observed events was
incorrectly predicted as a hit. Hit rate and false alarm rate are used together to
calculate the TSS, which shows the forecast skill of each category. This metric ranges
between -1 and 1, where 0 corresponds to random guessing. As TSS is a binary skill
metric (yes and no forecasts) it allows to identify category based performance, showing
indications of poor performance in some categories where the overall forecast system
has high skill.
RPS determines the accuracy of the categorical forecasts. The skill score ranges
from 0 to 1, where 0 indicates perfect accuracy. This can be used to indicate how
well the probabilistic forecast predicted the category. As it uses the squared CDF of
the forecast and observed values, it has similar characteristics as RMSE. Using this
together with a reference forecast, the RPSS can be used to indicates performance
realtive to the reference forecast (i.e random guessing).
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER4
Results
4.1
Skill evaluation
Skill evaluations of the retrospective forecasts are presented to assess the utility of
the RecPredEng framework. This allows determination of accuracy and evaluation
of skill scores before using it in an operational (although preliminary) mode. Skill
evaluation of individual areas are compared to the reference forecast used by ICES,
while categorical compares the individual forecast to the aggregated forecast.
4.1.1
Continuous skill
RMSE are compared between the individual area forecasts and the reference forecasts,
showing higher accuracy using the MuMIn models (see ﬁg. 4.1). Both area 1 (see ﬁg.
4.1a) and area 2 (see ﬁg. 4.1b) outperforms the negative leads, while positive leads
are less predictable for area 1. Lead 0 shows very strong evidence of an overall more
accurate forecast using the MuMIn approach compared to the ICES standard. This
tendency is also present in area 3 and 4, although the MuMIn models doesn’t show
as large of an improvement (see Appendix B, ﬁg. B.2a and B.2b). The individual
management areas responds very diﬀerently to positive lead times, with area 3 and 4
looking less predictable. As these areas also have the least data available, this can be
expected.
==PAGE:42==
4 Results
34
(a) Sandeel management area 1r
(b) Sandeel management area 3r
Figure 4.1: RMSE of the MuMIn modelling approach compared to the reference forecasts GM10 and
GM Full used in oﬃcial ICES advice. Management area 1 (a) and area 2 (b) are shown. GM Full
shown in green, GM10 shown in red and MuMIn shown in blue. RMSE is shown as function of lead
time. For both areas the forecasting system using MuMIn outperforms the reference forecasts from
ICES considerably. Most importantly is the lead 0, where RMSE is almost halved in both cases.
==PAGE:43==
4 Results
35
As all individual forecasts shows improvements compared to the reference forecasts
(GM10 and GM Full), comparing the RMSE of the individual areas to the aggregated
forecast shows the ﬁrst indications of aggregation increasing predictability (see ﬁg.
4.2).
Figure 4.2: RMSE of all management areas and the aggregated forecast. RMSE shown as a function
of lead time. The best performing forecasts are the individual area 1 forecast and the aggregated
forecast, showing very similar accuracy. Aggregated forecast shown with red line, area 1 in dark
yellow, area 2 in teal, area 3 in blue and area 4 in purple.
At lead 0 the aggregated forecast RMSE is lower than the best performing individual
model (see ﬁg. 4.3), while positive leads shows a decrease in RMSE and an increase in
mean forecast accuracy.
==PAGE:44==
4 Results
36
Figure 4.3: RMSE for each individual area and the aggregated forecast at lead 0. RMSE is lowest in
the aggregated forecast indicating highest accuracy.
==PAGE:45==
4 Results
37
4.1.2
Categorical skill
In assessing the categorical skill of the system, an initial performance estimate can
be seen in the hit rate (see ﬁg. 4.4). All forecasts are assessed, with two standing
out. The MuMIn of area 1 and the aggregated forecast has the best hit rate at lead
0, both reaching above 60%. While area 2, 3 and 4 all outperform random guessing
at the 90% signiﬁcance level, the aggregated forecast has a hit rate of around 15%
higher than all of them. At the negative lead years, no areas stand out which is a
strong indication of no model being overﬁtted (unless all models are). Looking at the
positive lead years only area 1 and area 2 outperforms random guessing, with area
2 performing very well even at lead 5. The aggregated forecast hit rate drops oﬀat
leads larger than 0, probably heavily inﬂuenced by the low scoring areas.
Figure 4.4: Correct hit rate of all management areas and the aggregated forecast as a function of
lead time. Dashed line shows 90% signiﬁcance level, compared to random guessing. The aggregated
forecast performs particularly well at lead 0, reaching a hit rate close to 70%. All forecasts outperforms
random guessing at the 90% signiﬁcance level.
The ranked probability skill score (RPSS) is highest in area 1, area 2 and the aggregated
forecast, indicating the largest improvements in the forecast relative to the reference
of random guessing (see 4.5). At lead 1 only area 1 and area 2 see improvements
==PAGE:46==
4 Results
38
compared to the reference forecast. The sudden loss of skill between the calibration
data and out-of-sample data can suggest an overﬁtting of the models.
Figure 4.5: RPSS plot of all management areas and the aggregated forecast as a function of lead time.
The highest RPSS score is seen at area 1, area 2 and the aggregated forecast. This indicates those
areas has the highest improvement in forecasting skill relative to the reference (i.e random guessing).
Due to lead 0 being the most important forecast in the current state of the framework,
a complete list of lead 0 skill metrics can be found in table 4.1. Overall the aggregated
forecast is the best performing model, having the highest hit rate and improvement in
accuracy compared to the reference forecast.
Table 4.1: List of all areas individual forecast and the aggregated forecast and corresponding skill
metrics at lead 0. In general the aggregated forecast is on par with or better performing than all
other forecasts.
Area 1
Area 2
Area 3
Area 4
Agg. forecast
Hit rate
0.62
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.69
RPS
0.15
0.14
0.19
0.16
0.14
RPSS
0.391
0.40
0.26
0.29
0.379
==PAGE:47==
4 Results
39
Figure 4.6 shows the MuMIns and aggregated forecast TSS as a function of lead time
for high recruitment (see apendix B, ﬁg. B.3 and B.4 for TSS skill as a function of
lead for medium and low recruitment). Area 1, area 4 and the aggregated forecast
shows a TSS higher than 0 at lead 0, revealing skill at forecasting the given category.
In both negative and positive lead years, only area 1 shows noticeable skill.
Figure 4.6: TSS for the high forecast tercile as a function of lead time. Area 1, area 4 and the
aggregated forecast has the highest skill score at lead 0. Negative and positive leads generally shows
low skill, with only area 1 maintaining a high skill score.
As the current focus is primarily on the lead 0 forecasts, ﬁgure 4.7 shows TSS of
all evaluated models according to tercile. Here it clearly shows that the aggregated
forecast is the only model with a consistent high TSS. This shows the aggregated
forecast as being the only model to correctly distinguish between occurrence and
absence of all types of recruitment events at lead 0. On the opposite, area 3 is unable
to correctly distinguish between events.
==PAGE:48==
4 Results
40
Figure 4.7: TSS at lead 0 for all terciles. All MuMIn models are represented. The aggregated draws
stands out, only being outperformed by the Area 1 forecast in the high tercile. Management area 3
performs very poorly, being unable to properly distinguish forecast categories.
In general the aggregated forecast seems to score high in all skill evaluations, matching
or outperforming each of the individual forecasts. The aggregated forecast has the
lowest RMSE and highest hit rate at lead 0, while also scoring near the top of all the
skill scores.
Area 1 follows closely, with high hit rate, high skill scores and a low RMSE. Area 2
looked highly predictable when only looking at hit rate, but taking the timeseries into
account, this seems to be related to the recruitment being generally low throughout
the latter part of the timeseries (where forecast evaluation is being performed). TSS
scores are above 0 only in the low category, while still maintaining a relatively high
RPSS. Area 3 and 4 seems to be the most unpredictable areas. Both have high RMSE
with low skill scores.
==PAGE:49==
4 Results
41
4.2
Model diagnostics
While model diagnostics have primarily been used in development, they can also
highlight a wrong modelling approach, where inconsistencies between model assumption
and data are seen. As the method of using the whole dataset for forecasting, thereby
updating the models each forecast year, is somewhat diﬀerent to most previous work,
looking at changes relative variable importance (RVI) between models can be useful.
Figure 4.8 shows that while some variables (e.g. logN1 and Q4 temperatures) have a
stable RVI between model iterations, the RVI of the time variance and Q2 temperature
anomalies shifts. With shifting RVI through model iterations, updating the model at
each forecast year can heavily impact model performance. An updating non-stationary
model framework should be able to handle shifts in recruitment dynamics much more
eﬃciently than static models. All modelling areas show similar patterns of shifting
RVI between diﬀerent model iterations (see Appendix B, ﬁg. B.5, B.6 and B.7).
Figure 4.8: Full timeseries of the Relative Variable Importance for management area 1. It shows
while some variables looses importance during the forecast periods, the time varying component gets
increasingly important.
==PAGE:50==
4 Results
42
4.3
2019 Forecasts
Preliminary forecasts for 2019 cohort recruitment strength are available for all in-
dividual management areas as well as a portfolio forecast. As all areas outperform
GM10 and GM Full at lead 0, all forecasts will be evaluated.
4.3.1
Single stock
Figure 4.9 shows individual management area forecast for area 1 and 2. Both areas
have a high probability of low recruitment in 2019, with the areas respectively reaching
47% and 61% probability of low recruitment (recruitment falling in the lower third of
historical observation. While medium and low recruitment probabilities are close in
Area 1, both areas show very low probability of high recruitment. Area 3 and area
4 recruitment prediction graphs can be found in Appendix B ﬁg. B.1. Area 3 and
4 models predicts a low recruitment in 2019, with 64% and 44% probability for low
recruitment respectively. A full table of all probabilities for the individual areas is
shown in tab. 4.2.
==PAGE:51==
4 Results
43
(a) Sandeel management area 1r
(b) Sandeel management area 2r
Figure 4.9: Preliminary forecast for sandeel management area 1 (a) and area 2 (b). Both forecasts
indicate low recruitment in the 2 management areas, with a very low probability of high recruitment.
Complete recruitment timeseries are shown on both ﬁgures, with the terciles marked by a dashed line.
Recruitment is shown in number of individuals.
==PAGE:52==
4 Results
44
Table 4.2: Table showing the forecast probability of each tercile for all individual 2019 forecasts. All
areas show highest probability of low recruitment in 2019.
Low tercile
Medium tercile
High tercile
Area 1
47%
38%
15%
Area 2
61%
33%
6%
Area 3
64%
19%
17%
Area 4
44%
30%
25%
==PAGE:53==
4 Results
45
4.3.2
Portfolio forecast
The aggregated forecast of the North Sea, drawing from each of the individual man-
agement area forecasts, predicts a medium recruitment year (see ﬁg. 4.10). This is
predicted to have a 45% probability. While this results in a medium prediction, it must
be noted that the forecast has a 41% probability of low recruitment. Probabilities of a
high overall recruitment seems unlikely at 14%.
Figure 4.10: Preliminary aggregated forecast of sandeel production in sandeel management areas 1r,
2r, 3r and 4. The forecast shows highest probability of a medium recruitment, closely followed by low.
High recruitment seems unlikely. Complete timeseries of aggregated recruitment can be seen as a
solid line, while the dashed lines indicate terciles. Recruitment is shown in number of individuals.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER5
Discussion
While using RecPredEng on sandeel recruitment forecasts, both individually and
portfolio, shows promise, several approaches to improve the framework can be taken.
Here we discuss possible modelling extensions and environmental variables, that can
be included in the further development of the RecPredEng.
5.1
Using and extending the prediction framework
5.1.1
Modelling extensions
As ensemble forecasts are used in this modelling approach, incorporating multiple
modelling frameworks might be a way to further increasing skill and reducing prediction
error. Several modelling techniques have been considered, with some being in early
development phase.
5.1.1.1
Empirical Dynamic Modelling
Early stage development of a EDM module is available in the RecPredEng. This
module primarily shows that recruitment prediction is possible using EDM, while
no skill evaluation is currently working. The module is also only running in single
model and single year mode, leaving it with much to be desired before being at the
level of the MuMIn module. Although at early stages, looking at the some of the
prediction time series for very basic models shows some interesting results (see ﬁg.
==PAGE:55==
5 Discussion
47
5.1). Here two very simple models ﬁtted with approximately half of the available
time series, produces very respectable out-of-sample predictions. Both models uses
recruitment and the number of one-year olds, while one of the models also include
an environmental predictor. Further investigation is required to determine the actual
skill of these models.
Figure 5.1: Early development phase of a sandeel prediction using EDM. Shown is two diﬀerent
models, where 1983 to 2000 data are used for model training. Out-of-sample forecast is done on
the remaining time series. The ﬁrst model uses only time lagged recruitment data and number of
one-year olds for ﬁtting and predicting. The second model includes a P3 temperature variable. This
model is implemented a shorter time series, where zooplankton data are available (but not used).
Literature also reveals uses of EDM with regards to operational forecasting. McGowan
et al. (2017) shows intentions of using EDM for predicting and forecasting red tide
events in the southern California. This issue of coastal algal blooms are thought to
be irregular and highly non-linear. Looking at ﬁgure 5.2, the Pearson correlation
==PAGE:56==
5 Discussion
48
coeﬃcient unsurprisingly shows higher skill at predicting non-bloom days, but also
has some skill for predicting blooms.
Figure 5.2: from McGowan et al. (2017) showing the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient as a measure of
forecast skill. Higher performance is seen in forecasting non-bloom days compared to bloom days.
A more in-depth look into the usage of recruitment prediction of Atlantic cod was
done in Sguotti et al. (2019), where EDM was evaluated against the Ricker model
amongst others. Closer evaluation showed EDM had the potential to have the highest
model performance in certain situation.
5.1.1.2
Machine Learning
Using machine learning eﬃciently can prove to be an interesting approach to unsuper-
vised modelling. These tools are good in an operational environment and the number
of algorithms seems endless. Of models used speciﬁcally in marine ecology, artiﬁcial
neural networks and random forest are amongst some of the more well known.
Krekoukiotis et al. (2016) uses artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) for recruitment
predictions of Baltic cod. This model uses both environmental and assessment variables
for prediction, making it similar in approach to what we do. Figure 5.3 shows an
in-sample and out-of-sample prediction made from one the ANNs, which seems to
some skill compared to observed ICES values.
==PAGE:57==
5 Discussion
49
Figure 5.3: From Krekoukiotis et al. (2016) showing a time series of observed and predicted values of
Baltic cod. In-sample and out-of-sample predictions are made with the model ﬁtted from the subset
of the data.
Chen and Ware (2011) dealt with recruitment of Paciﬁc herring, where an ANN was
compared to a multiple linear regression analysis and a Ricker model with environmental
variables. Here the nerual network outperformed both reference forecasts, improving
R2 signiﬁcantly, reaching between 0.6 −0.7 while the Ricker model had 0.42.
Brun et al. (2016) used the random forest algorithm for plankton species distribution
modelling. Here random forest outskilled a GAM model in almost all cases, although
plankton species proved diﬃcult to model.
==PAGE:58==
5 Discussion
50
Figure 5.4: From Brun et al. (2016) showing diﬀerent skill scores for predicting diﬀerent species. 3
models are evaluated with the random forest generally performing best.
Machine learning is not without problems though. Many machine learning problems
usually requires large amounts of data, which is generally problematic in marine
ecology, particularly in recruitment predictions where timeseries are typically short.
This leaves us with concerns of overﬁtting models, poor performance and spurious
behavior. Thus much care and in-depth analysis of the behavior of the models must
be taken to really take full advantage of machine learning.
==PAGE:59==
5 Discussion
51
5.1.1.3
Mixed eﬀects model
For complex biological problems, with non-independence among observational units,
a mixed eﬀects models can be used. Mixed eﬀects models extends on traditional
linear models, allowing both random and ﬁxed eﬀects as predictors (Zuur et al., 2009).
Mixed eﬀects models allows for modelling of non-independent units, by introducing
randomness in the predictor between the units (Harrison et al., 2018). Randomness
can be applied on both the intercept and the slope of a given model, resulting in two
very diﬀerent types of models (see 5.5. While a random slope can generally check for
non-independence in data, the random slope allows for variability in the coeﬃcient of
a predictor between units (Harrison et al., 2018).
Figure 5.5: From Harrison et al. (2018) showing random eﬀects on intercept or intercept and slope.
Coloured lines and dots show diﬀerent groups, while black line is the global mean. This also shows
the idea behind mixed eﬀects models, where an underlying randomness between groups can be seen.
Data from all observational groups are used to ﬁt a mixed eﬀects model, generating a
global distribution of group means. This allows for shrinkage, which causes the mean
of each groups estimated mean to drift towards the global mean. For each individual
group, this can lead to reduced errors around mean, resulting in a more precise model.
Shrinkage has the largest eﬀect on small sample sizes, as the data from diﬀerent groups
can counteract it, eﬀectively borrowing information from other groups (Harrison et al.,
2018). For the sandeel, the pooling of data could especially improve the predictability
==PAGE:60==
5 Discussion
52
for the management areas with shorter timeseries (i.e area 3r and 4). As recruitment
timeseries are generally short, an overall improvement of predictability could be seen.
Mantzouni et al. (2010) showed that mixed eﬀects can be used to understand population
dynamics in North Atlantic cod. Here multiple mixed eﬀects models were compared,
most based on complex Ricker models. Mixed eﬀects were applied between all stocks,
showing how recruitment dynamics can be identiﬁed across stocks.
While mixed eﬀects models has the same structure and is relatively easy to implement,
choosing the correct random eﬀects and understanding the model is not trivial. Mixed
eﬀects models also requires more data than a normal linear model, generally needing
5 or more units for correctly estimating the among units variation (Harrison et al.,
2018).
5.1.2
Involving stakeholders
Creating a forecasting system can potentially have large value for stakeholders. In
this case, the industry surrounding sandeel ﬁsheries can use this forecast for decision
making processes. This has some consequences as stated in Hobday et al. (2019),
where an overview of the ethical considerations of deploying an ecological forecast can
be found. We are currently in the second phase of development, where the ethical
focus lies in correctly representing skill and uncertainties. Moving forwards with this
project, the last two phases of delivering and evaluating the impact of the forecast
also has its own considerations, where a general plan needs to be in place.
Phase 1 in Hobday et al. (2019), named "Scoping the forecast system" involved
including stakeholders to understand needs and potential. This step is where scientists
and stakeholders can work together on ﬁguring out the needs and usages of a forecast
product. While scientists can develop plenty forecasting products, if the product has
no real-world potential and application, the overall goal is not achieved.
At the moment we are in a place in the development phase where stakeholders must
be included. We need to make sure that what we are producing is useable, while
stakeholders can be able to give inputs the development. Information needed is what
==PAGE:61==
5 Discussion
53
kind of forecast (e.g. tercile), how should we present skill and uncertainties and what
lead time makes the forecast useable.
5.1.3
Further development and usage
During the development of the RecPredEng framework, using the tool for predicting
multiple stocks across European waters has always been an aim. While the tool now
works for multiple sandeel stocks, indicating its usefulness across multiple stocks, data
types and formats has been identical for forecasts. Moving to other species and areas
has yet to be tested, potentially requiring extensions to the software.
As portfolio forecasts has shown promise, including multiple species in a portfolio is a
logical next step. An example could be the forecasting of all small pelagic ﬁsh in the
North Sea. Including stakeholders to identify use cases and needs is necessary.
While the software has been written with ﬂexibility and ease of use in mind, this
is still a work in progress and known bugs and issues are present. Some are minor
issues, but others might require a total rework and redesign of the software package.
This process seems crucial if the RecPredEng framework is going to be successful, as
forecasting multiple species, stocks and management areas can’t require too much
individual modiﬁcations.
5.2
Selection of environmental variables
While forecasts can be made from the current framework, identifying and including new
environmental variables could lead to better model performance. This requires further
investigation across multiple disciplines, hopefully resulting in a greater knowledge of
a given species. Much work has been done on the sandeel, but operational use might
limit the usability in this framework.
==PAGE:62==
5 Discussion
54
5.2.1
Circulation
As Henriksen et al. (2018) identiﬁed, circulation patterns to have a potential impact on
recruitment of the sandeel, incorporating this into a modelling module could inﬂuence
skill. Christensen et al. (2008) already implemented an IBM, using transport matrices
for larval drift. Combining the knowledge from both papers could lead to a better
understanding of how circulation and drift could be included into statistical models.
5.2.2
Zooplankton concentrations
As several studies found zooplankton concentrations to be of high importance for
recruitment (e.g. Arnott and Ruxton (2002); Lindegren et al. (2018)). Van Deurs et al.
(2009) even presented results of abundance of 1 year-olds and Calanus ﬁnmarchicus
could explain 65% of the inter-annual variation. As most zooplankton abundance data
is collected from the continuous plankton recorder survey, this provides some issues.
Data is signiﬁcantly time lagged, proving diﬃcult to use in an operational setting.
Modelling modules would have to predict zooplankton abundance or use identiﬁed
proxies instead.
5.2.3
Marine heatwaves
Temperature has often been described as one of the main drivers behind sandeel
stock health (CITE). While that is currently included in the RecPredEng framework,
looking into including temperatures in another way might be useful. Marine heatwaves
(MHWs) is currently an unexplored variable in ecological forecasts. As the climate
is changing and extreme events are more frequent (Perkins and Alexander, 2013),
quantifying MHWs can prove useful for determining impact of extreme events. Hobday
et al. (2016) provides an easy and clear approach to quantifying MHWs, where most
ideas are borrowed from terrestrial heatwave literature. An exact deﬁnition of a MHW
can be expressed as "prolonged discrete anomalously warm water event that can be
described by its duration, intensity, rate of evolution, and spatial extent" (Hobday
==PAGE:63==
5 Discussion
55
et al., 2016). Later categorizing MHWs from their intensity was suggested (see ﬁg.
5.6, Hobday et al. (2018)).
Figure 5.6: From Hobday et al. (2018) showing MHW categories according to distance from the 90th
percentile. Higher categories indicate more extreme conditions, which could have a larger inﬂuence
on marine ecosystems.
As ecological systems can be aﬀected by prolonged exposure to large temperature
anomalies, identifying metrics which can capture both length and intensity of the
heatwave is required.
5.2.4
Using seasonal to decadal climate predictions
Incorporating seasonal climate forecasts can reduce lead time of the forecast, at most
moving the lead time from 2 to 12 months. As seasonal forecasts can be skillful
(Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013), this is an obvious choice for improving the forecast.
As decadal skill has shown promise with high skill, especially in the North Atlantic
(Meehl et al., 2014), using these predictions would allow for investigation of recruitment
projections. As most of the skill evaluations used also include a positive lead forecast,
this essentially gives an indication of best theoretical forecast, given full knowledge
of the assessment data and the climate. Replacing this full knowledge with decadal
==PAGE:64==
5 Discussion
56
forecast, the system can be used for recruitment projections. This will introduce
more uncertainties in a forecast and decrease skill. If this is pursued, the recruitment
forecast system will have to work with a true stock assessment model, projecting the
assessment data used for recruitment forecasts. As an example, RecPredEng could
be coupled with the SMS (Lewy and Vinther, 2004) model used for current stock
assessment of the sandeel by ICES (ICES, 2018).
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER6
Conclusion
Here we show a recruitment modelling framework, able to predict sandeel recruitment
with higher accuracy than what is currently used in stock assessment. The general
skill of the system clearly outperformed the reference forecasts GM10 and GM Full,
which at the moment are used by ICES.
The preliminary forecasts for recruitment of all management areas in 2019 seems to
be in the lower tercile of historic records, while the aggregated forecast predicts a
medium year.
Aggregated forecasts showed an overall improvement of skill, matching or increasing
performance in all skill assessments. Using this, we can start to deﬁne portfolios
of species and stocks, where an aggregated forecast can be of value. Usage can be
extended to multi-species portfolios, where a total prediction of recruitment can show
indications of overall productivity.
RecPredEng is far in development, ready for integration of new modelling techniques
and environmental processes related to recruitment. This also includes integration
of environmental forecast products, further increasing the usability and allowing for
stock projections.
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
Anderson, D.R., 2008. Model Based Inference in the Life Sciences: A Primer on Evidence.
Springer New York, New York, NY.
URL: http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.
1007/978-0-387-74075-1, doi:10.1007/978-0-387-74075-1.
Arnott, S.A., Ruxton, G.D., 2002. Sandeel recruitment in the North Sea: Demographic,
climatic and trophic eﬀects. Marine Ecology Progress Series 238, 199–210. doi:10.3354/
meps238199.
Banzon, V., Smith, T.M., Chin, T.M., Liu, C., Hankins, W., 2016. A long-term record of
blended satellite and in situ sea-surface temperature for climate monitoring, modeling
and environmental studies. Earth System Science Data 8, 165–176. URL: https://www.
earth-syst-sci-data.net/8/165/2016/, doi:10.5194/essd-8-165-2016.
Barnsley, M.J., 2007.
Environmental Modeling.
CRC Press.
URL: https://www.
taylorfrancis.com/books/9781420021462, doi:10.1201/9781315275970.
Bartoń, K., 2018. MuMIn: Multi-Model Inference. URL: https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=MuMIn. r package version 1.42.1.
Beverton, R.J.H., Holt, S.J., 1957.
On the Dynamics of Exploited Fish Popula-
tions.
Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-94-011-2106-4, doi:10.1007/978-94-011-2106-4.
Britten,
G.L.,
Dowd,
M.,
Worm,
B.,
2016.
Changing recruitment capacity in
global ﬁsh stocks.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, 134–139.
URL: http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.1073/pnas.1504709112, doi:10.1073/pnas.
1504709112, arXiv:arXiv:1408.1149.
Brun, P., Kiørboe, T., Licandro, P., Payne, M.R., 2016. The predictive skill of species
distribution models for plankton in a changing climate. Global change biology 22, 3170–
3181. doi:10.1111/gcb.13274.
==PAGE:67==
6 Conclusion
59
Burnham, K.P., Anderson, D.R. (Eds.), 2004. Model Selection and Multimodel Inference.
Springer New York, New York, NY. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/b97636,
doi:10.1007/b97636.
Chen, D.G., Ware, D.M., 2011. A neural network model for forecasting ﬁsh stock recruitment.
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 56, 2385–2396. doi:10.1139/f99-178.
Christensen, A., Jensen, H., Mosegaard, H., St. John, M., Schrum, C., 2008.
Sandeel
(Ammodytes marinus) larval transport patterns in the North Sea from an individual-
based hydrodynamic egg and larval model. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences 65, 1498–1511.
URL: http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/abs/10.1139/
F08-073, doi:10.1136/bmj.e1675.
Doblas-Reyes, F.J., García-Serrano, J., Lienert, F., Biescas, A.P., Rodrigues, L.R., 2013. Sea-
sonal climate predictability and forecasting: Status and prospects. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change 4, 245–268. doi:10.1002/wcc.217.
Donlon, C.J., Martin, M., Stark, J., Roberts-Jones, J., Fiedler, E., Wimmer, W., 2012. The
Operational Sea Surface Temperature and Sea Ice Analysis (OSTIA) system. Remote Sens-
ing of Environment 116, 140–158. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0034425711002197, doi:10.1016/j.rse.2010.10.017.
Drinkwater, K.F., 2005.
The response of Atlantic cod ( Gadus morhua ) to future
climate change .
ICES Journal of Marine Science 62, 1327–1337.
URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.icesjms.2005.05.015,
doi:10.1016/j.icesjms.2005.05.015,
arXiv:http://oup.prod.sis.lan/icesjms/article-pdf/62/7/1327/7550848/62-7-1327.pdf.
Eigaard, O.R., Van Deurs, M., Behrens, J.W., Bekkevold, D., Brander, K., Plambech,
M., Plet-Hansen, K.S., Mosegaard, H., 2014. Prey or predator - Expanding the food
web role of sandeel Ammodytes marinus. Marine Ecology Progress Series 516, 267–273.
doi:10.3354/meps11064.
Eliasen, K., Reinert, J., Gaard, E., Hansen, B., Jacobsen, J.A., Grønkjær, P., Christensen,
J.T., 2011. Sandeel as a link between primary production and higher trophic levels on the
Faroe shelf. Marine Ecology Progress Series 438, 185–194. doi:10.3354/meps09301.
Frederiksen, M., Furness, R.W., Wanless, S., 2007. Regional variation in the role of bottom-up
and top-down processes in controlling sandeel abundance in the North Sea. Marine Ecology
Progress Series 337, 279–286. doi:10.3354/meps337279.
Furness, R., 2003. Impacts of ﬁsheries on seabird communities. Scientia Marina 67.
==PAGE:68==
6 Conclusion
60
Green, E., 2017. A literature review of the lesser ( Raitt ’ s ) sandeel Ammodytes marinus in
European waters .
Harrison, X.A., Donaldson, L., Correa-Cano, M.E., Evans, J., Fisher, D.N., Goodwin, C.E.,
Robinson, B.S., Hodgson, D.J., Inger, R., 2018. A brief introduction to mixed eﬀects
modelling and multi-model inference in ecology. PeerJ 6, e4794. doi:10.7717/peerj.4794.
Henriksen, O., Christensen, A., Jonasdottir, S., MacKenzie, B., Nielsen, K., Mosegård, H., van
Deurs, M., 2018. Oceanographic ﬂow regime and ﬁsh recruitment: reversed circulation in
the North Sea coincides with unusually strong sandeel recruitment. Marine Ecology Progress
Series 607, 187–205. URL: https://www.int-res.com/abstracts/meps/v607/p187-205/,
doi:10.3354/meps12786.
Hilborn, R., Walters, C.J., 1992. Quantitative Fisheries Stock Assessment. Springer US,
Boston, MA.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4615-3598-0, doi:10.
1007/978-1-4615-3598-0.
Hobday, A.J., Hartog, J.R., Manderson, J.P., Mills, K.E., Oliver, M.J., Pershing, A.J.,
Siedlecki, S., 2019. Ethical considerations and unanticipated consequences associated with
ecological forecasting for marine resources. ICES Journal of Marine Science doi:10.1093/
icesjms/fsy210.
Hobday, A.J., Spillman, C.M., Eveson, J.P., Hartog, J.R., Zhang, X., Brodie, S.,
2018.
A Framework for Combining Seasonal Forecasts and Climate Projections to
Aid Risk Management for Fisheries and Aquaculture. Frontiers in Marine Science 5, 1–
9. URL: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmars.2018.00137/full,
doi:10.3389/fmars.2018.00137.
Hobday, A.J., Spillman, C.M., Paige Eveson, J., Hartog, J.R., 2016. Seasonal forecasting for
decision support in marine ﬁsheries and aquaculture. Fisheries Oceanography 25, 45–56.
doi:10.1111/fog.12083.
ICES, 2014. Sandeel in Divisions IIIa and IV. In Report of the Herring Assessment Working
Group (HAWG). ICES CM 2014/ACOM:06, Section 11. Technical Report.
ICES, 2016. Danish request regarding real-time monitoring for sandeel in Divisions 4b and 4c,
SA 1 (Central and South North Sea, Dogger Bank). ICES Special Request Advice, Greater
North Sea Ecosystem. Technical Report.
ICES, 2018. Report of the Herring Assessment Working Group for the Area South of 62◦N
(HAWG). 29-31 January 2018 and 12-20 March 2018. Technical Report. ICES. ICES HQ,
Copenhagen, Denmark. URL: ICESCM2018/ACOM:07.
==PAGE:69==
6 Conclusion
61
ICES, 2019a. Sandeel (ammodytes spp.) in divisions 4.a–b and subdivision 20, sandeel area
3r (northern and central north sea, skagerrak). in Report of the ICES Advisory Committee
ICES Advice.
ICES, 2019b. Sandeel (ammodytes spp.) in divisions 4.a–b, sandeel area 4 (northern and
central north sea). in Report of the ICES Advisory Committee ICES Advice.
ICES, 2019c. Sandeel (ammodytes spp.) in divisions 4.b–c, sandeel area 1r (central and
southern north sea, dogger bank). in Report of the ICES Advisory Committee ICES
Advice.
ICES, 2019d. Sandeel (ammodytes spp.) in divisions 4.b–c, sandeel area 2r (central and
southern north sea, dogger bank). in Report of the ICES Advisory Committee ICES
Advice.
Krekoukiotis, D., Palacz, A.P., St. John, M.A., 2016. Assessing the Role of Environmental
Factors on Baltic Cod Recruitment, a Complex Adaptive System Emergent Property.
Frontiers in Marine Science 3.
URL: http://journal.frontiersin.org/Article/10.
3389/fmars.2016.00126/abstract, doi:10.3389/fmars.2016.00126.
Kushnir, Y., Scaife, A.A., Arritt, R., Balsamo, G., Boer, G., Doblas-Reyes, F., Hawkins, E.,
Kimoto, M., Kolli, R.K., Kumar, A., Matei, D., Matthes, K., Müller, W.A., O’Kane, T., Per-
lwitz, J., Power, S., Raphael, M., Shimpo, A., Smith, D., Tuma, M., Wu, B., 2019. Towards
operational predictions of the near-term climate. Nature Climate Change 9. URL: http:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41558-018-0359-7, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0359-7.
Leutbecher, M., Palmer, T., 2008.
Ensemble forecasting.
Journal of Computational
Physics 227, 3515–3539.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0021999107000812, doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2007.02.014.
Lewy, P., Vinther, M., 2004. Modelling stochastic age-length-structured multi-species stock
dynamics, pp. 1–33.
Lindegren, M., Van Deurs, M., MacKenzie, B.R., Worsoe Clausen, L., Christensen, A., Rindorf,
A., 2018. Productivity and recovery of forage ﬁsh under climate change and ﬁshing: North
Sea sandeel as a case study. Fisheries Oceanography 27, 212–221. doi:10.1111/fog.12246.
Lorenz,
E.N.,
1963.
Deterministic
Nonperiodic
Flow.
Journal
of
the
At-
mospheric Sciences 20,
130–141.
URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/
10.1175/1520-0469{%}281963{%}29020{%}3C0130{%}3ADNF{%}3E2.0.CO{%}3B2,
doi:10.
1175/1520-0469(1963)020<0130:DNF>2.0.CO;2.
==PAGE:70==
6 Conclusion
62
MacKenzie, B.R., Horbowy, J., Köster, F.W., 2008. Incorporating environmental variability
in stock assessment: predicting recruitment, spawner biomass, and landings of sprat (Sprat-
tus sprattus) in the Baltic Sea. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences
65, 1334–1341.
URL: http://article.pubs.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/ppv/RPViewDoc?issn=
1205-7533{&}volume=65{&}issue=7{&}startPage=1334{&}ab=y, doi:10.1139/F08-051.
MacKenzie, B.R., Köster, F.W., 2004. FISH PRODUCTION AND CLIMATE: SPRAT IN
THE BALTIC SEA. Ecology 85, 784–794. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1890/02-0780,
doi:10.1890/02-0780.
Mantzouni, I., Mackenzie, B.R., 2010.
Productivity responses of a widespread marine
piscivore, Gadus morhua, to oceanic thermal extremes and trends. Proceedings. Biological
sciences / The Royal Society 277, 1867–74.
URL: http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.
gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2871868{&}tool=pmcentrez{&}rendertype=abstract,
doi:10.1098/rspb.2009.1906.
Mantzouni, I., Sorensen, H., O’Hara, R.B., Mackenzie, B.R., 2010. Hierarchical modelling of
temperature and habitat size eﬀects on population dynamics of North Atlantic cod. ICES
Journal of Marine Science 67, 833–855. URL: http://icesjms.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/
doi/10.1093/icesjms/fsp291, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsp291.
Marine Ingredients, 2019. Dansk ﬁskeri og ﬁskeindustris økonomiske fodaftryk. Technical
Report.
URL: http://maring.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Opdatering-{\T1\
o}konomisk-fodaftryk-CE-01MAJ2019{_}Endelig-version.pdf.
Martin, M.J., Hines, A., Bell, M.J., 2007. Data assimilation in the FOAM operational short-
range ocean forecasting system: a description of the scheme and its impact. Quarterly
Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 133, 981–995. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/
10.1002/qj.74, doi:10.1002/qj.74.
McGowan, J.A., Deyle, E.R., Ye, H., Carter, M.L., Perretti, C.T., Seger, K.D., de Verneil,
A., Sugihara, G., 2017. Predicting coastal algal blooms in southern California. Ecology 98,
1419–1433. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/ecy.1804, doi:10.1002/ecy.1804.
Meehl, G.A., Goddard, L., Boer, G., Burgman, R., Branstator, G., Cassou, C., Corti, S.,
Danabasoglu, G., Doblas-Reyes, F., Hawkins, E., Karspeck, A., Kimoto, M., Kumar, A.,
Matei, D., Mignot, J., Msadek, R., Navarra, A., Pohlmann, H., Rienecker, M., Rosati, T.,
Schneider, E., Smith, D., Sutton, R., Teng, H., Van Oldenborgh, G.J., Vecchi, G., Yeager,
S., 2014. Decadal climate prediction an update from the trenches. Bulletin of the American
Meteorological Society 95, 243–267. doi:10.1175/BAMS-D-12-00241.1.
==PAGE:71==
6 Conclusion
63
Meehl, G.A., Goddard, L., Murphy, J., Stouﬀer, R.J., Boer, G., Danabasoglu, G., Dixon, K.,
Giorgetta, M.A., Greene, A.M., Hawkins, E., Hegerl, G., Karoly, D., Keenlyside, N., Kimoto,
M., Kirtman, B., Navarra, A., Pulwarty, R., Smith, D., Stammer, D., Stockdale, T., 2009.
Decadal Prediction: Can it be skillful? Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 90,
1467–1486. URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/10.1175/2009BAMS2778.1, doi:10.
1175/2009BAMS2778.1.
Murphy,
A.H.,
1969.
On
the
“Ranked
Probability
Score”.
Journal
of
Ap-
plied
Meteorology
8,
988–989.
URL:
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/
10.1175/1520-0450{%}281969{%}29008{%}3C0988{%}3AOTPS{%}3E2.0.CO{%}3B2, doi:10.
1175/1520-0450(1969)008<0988:OTPS>2.0.CO;2.
Murphy, A.H., 1993. What Is a Good Forecast? An Essay on the Nature of Goodness in
Weather Forecasting. Weather and Forecasting 8, 281–293. doi:10.1175/1520-0434(1993)
008<0281:WIAGFA>2.0.CO;2.
Myers, R.A., 1998.
When Do Environment–recruitment Correlations Work?
Reviews
in Fish Biology and Fisheries 8, 285–305. URL: http://www.springerlink.com/index/
P76366G6716KN272.pdf.
Nash, R.D., 1998.
Exploring the population dynamics of Irish Sea plaice, Pleur-
onectes platessa L., through the use of Paulik diagrams.
Journal of Sea Research
40, 1–18. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1385110198000124,
doi:10.1016/S1385-1101(98)00012-4.
Paulik, G.J., 1973. Studies of the possible form of the stock–recruitment curve. Rapp. P-v.
Reún. Cons. int. Explor. Mer. 164, 302–315.
Payne, M.R., Barange, M., Cheung, W.W.L., MacKenzie, B.R., Batchelder, H.P., Cormon,
X., Eddy, T.D., Fernandes, J.A., Hollowed, A.B., Jones, M.C., Link, J.S., Neubauer, P.,
Ortiz, I., Queirós, A.M., Paula, J.R., 2015. Uncertainties in projecting climate-change
impacts in marine ecosystems. ICES Journal of Marine Science: Journal du Conseil 73,
1272–1282. URL: http://icesjms.oxfordjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.1093/icesjms/
fsv231, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsv231.
Payne, M.R., Hatﬁeld, E.M.C., Dickey-Collas, M., Falkenhaug, T., Gallego, A., Groger, J.,
Licandro, P., Llope, M., Munk, P., Rockmann, C., Schmidt, J.O., Nash, R.D.M., 2008.
Recruitment in a changing environment: the 2000s North Sea herring recruitment failure.
ICES Journal of Marine Science 66, 272–277. URL: https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/
article-lookup/doi/10.1093/icesjms/fsn211, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsn211.
==PAGE:72==
6 Conclusion
64
Payne, M.R., Hobday, A.J., MacKenzie, B.R., Tommasi, D., Dempsey, D.P., Fässler, S.M.M.,
Haynie, A.C., Ji, R., Liu, G., Lynch, P.D., Matei, D., Miesner, A.K., Mills, K.E., Strand,
K.O., Villarino, E., 2017. Lessons from the First Generation of Marine Ecological Fore-
cast Products. Frontiers in Marine Science 4. URL: http://journal.frontiersin.org/
article/10.3389/fmars.2017.00289/full, doi:10.3389/fmars.2017.00289.
Pedersen, S., Lewy, P., Wright, P., 1999. Assessments of the lesser sandeel (Ammodytes
marinus) in the North Sea based on revised stock divisions.
Fisheries Research 41,
221–241. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0165783699000260,
doi:10.1016/S0165-7836(99)00026-0.
Perkins, S.E., Alexander, L.V., 2013.
On the Measurement of Heat Waves.
Journal
of Climate 26, 4500–4517.
URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/
JCLI-D-12-00383.1, doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00383.1.
R Core Team, 2013. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation
for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. URL: http://www.R-project.org/.
Ricker, W.E., 1954. Stock and Recruitment. Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of
Canada 11, 559–623. URL: http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/10.1139/f54-039,
doi:10.1139/f54-039.
Sguotti,
C.,
Otto,
S.A.,
Cormon,
X.,
Werner,
K.M.,
Deyle,
E.,
Sugihara,
G.,
Möllmann,
C.,
2019.
Non-linearity
in
stock–recruitment
relationships
of
At-
lantic
cod:
insights
from
a
multi-model
approach.
ICES
Journal
of
Mar-
ine Science URL: https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/advance-article/doi/10.1093/
icesjms/fsz113/5522545, doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsz113.
Subbey, S., Devine, J.A., Schaarschmidt, U., Nash, R.D., 2014. Modelling and forecasting
stock–recruitment: current and future perspectives. ICES Journal of Marine Science
71, 2307–2322. URL: https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/71/8/2307/2804451,
doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsu148.
Sugihara, G., May, R., Ye, H., Hsieh, C.h., Deyle, E., Fogarty, M., Munch, S., 2012. Detecting
Causality in Complex Ecosystems. Science 338, 496–500. URL: http://www.sciencemag.
org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.1227079, doi:10.1126/science.1227079.
Takens, F., 1981. Detecting strange attractors in turbulence, pp. 366–381. URL: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/BFb0091924, doi:10.1007/BFb0091924.
==PAGE:73==
6 Conclusion
65
Teichert, M.A., Foldvik, A., Forseth, T., Ugedal, O., Einum, S., Finstad, A.G., Hedger, R.D.,
Bellier, E., 2011. Eﬀects of spawning distribution on juvenile Atlantic salmon ( Salmo
salar ) density and growth. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 68, 43–50.
URL: http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/10.1139/F10-141, doi:10.1139/F10-141.
Tommasi, D., Stock, C.A., Hobday, A.J., Methot, R., Kaplan, I.C., Eveson, J.P., Holsman,
K., Miller, T.J., Gaichas, S., Gehlen, M., Pershing, A., Vecchi, G.A., Msadek, R., Delworth,
T., Eakin, C.M., Haltuch, M.A., Séférian, R., Spillman, C.M., Hartog, J.R., Siedlecki, S.,
Samhouri, J.F., Muhling, B., Asch, R.G., Pinsky, M.L., Saba, V.S., Kapnick, S.B., Gaitan,
C.F., Rykaczewski, R.R., Alexander, M.A., Xue, Y., Pegion, K.V., Lynch, P., Payne,
M.R., Kristiansen, T., Lehodey, P., Werner, F.E., 2017. Managing living marine resources
in a dynamic environment: The role of seasonal to decadal climate forecasts. Progress
in Oceanography 152, 15–49. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0079661116301586, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2016.12.011.
Van Deurs, M., Van Hal, R., Tomczak, M.T., Jónasdóttir, S.H., 2009. Recruitment of
lesser sandeel Ammodytes marinus in relation to density dependence and zooplankton
composition. Marine Ecology Progress Series 381, 249–258. doi:10.3354/meps07960.
Wilks,
D.,
2011.
Statistical Methods in the Atmospheric Sciences. volume 100.
URL:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9780123850225000014http:
//www.scirp.org/journal/doi.aspx?DOI=10.4236/ojs.2012.23032,
doi:10.4236/ojs.
2012.23032.
Wright, P., Bailey, M., 1996. Time of hatching in ammodytes marinus from shetland waters
and its signiﬁcance to early growth and survivorship.
Marine Biology 126, 143–152.
doi:10.1007/BF00571386.
Ye, H., Clark, A., Deyle, E., Munch, S., 2019. rEDM: Applications of Empirical Dynamic Mod-
eling from Time Series. Https://ha0ye.github.io/rEDM, https://github.com/ha0ye/rEDM.
Zhou, B., Du, J., 2009. Fog Prediction from a Multimodel Mesoscale Ensemble Prediction
System. Weather and Forecasting 25, 303–322. doi:10.1175/2009waf2222289.1.
Zuur, A.F., Ieno, E.N., Walker, N., Saveliev, A.A., Smith, G.M., 2009.
Mixed eﬀects
models and extensions in ecology with R. Statistics for Biology and Health, Springer New
York, New York, NY. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-0-387-87458-6,
doi:10.1007/978-0-387-87458-6.
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTERA
Appendix name
Appendix related to theory
Figure A.1: Oﬃcial ICES advice for sandeel management area 2r
==PAGE:75==
A Appendix name
67
Figure A.2: Oﬃcial ICES advice for sandeel management area 4
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTERB
Appendix name
Appendix related to results
==PAGE:77==
B Appendix name
69
(a) Sandeel management area 3r
(b) Sandeel management area 4
Figure B.1: Preliminary forecast for sandeel management area 3 (a) and area 4 (b). Complete recruit-
ment timeseries are shown on both ﬁgures, with the terciles marked by a dashed line. Recruitment is
shown in number of individuals.
==PAGE:78==
B Appendix name
70
(a) Sandeel management area 1r
(b) Sandeel management area 3r
Figure B.2: RMSE of the MuMIn modelling approach compared to the reference forecasts GM10 and
GM Full used in oﬃcial ICES advice. Management area 3 (a) and area 4 (b) are shown. GM Full
shown in green, GM10 shown in red and MuMIn shown in blue. RMSE is shown as function of lead
time. For both areas the forecasting system using MuMIn outperforms the reference forecasts from
ICES considerably.
==PAGE:79==
B Appendix name
71
Figure B.3: TSS for the medium forecast tercile as a function of lead time.
Figure B.4: TSS for the low forecast tercile as a function of lead time.
==PAGE:80==
B Appendix name
72
Figure B.5: Full timeseries of the Relative Variable Importance for management area 2. It shows
while some variables looses importance during the forecast periods, the time varying component gets
increasingly important.
Figure B.6: Full timeseries of the Relative Variable Importance for management area 3. It shows
while some variables looses importance during the forecast periods, the time varying component gets
increasingly important.
==PAGE:81==
B Appendix name
73
Figure B.7: Full timeseries of the Relative Variable Importance for management area 4. It shows
while some variables looses importance during the forecast periods, the time varying component gets
increasingly important.
