==PAGE:1==
Detection and processing of
anomalies in data from drinking
water treatment plants
Jesper Bæk Nielsen
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
We will in this thesis look at data from drinking water treatment plants from
Denmark with the assistance of the company Krüger A/S. We will with machine
learning, more speciﬁcally deep learning, try to look for anomalies in this data.
In order to look for anomalies we will do predictions of the data, such that we
can try and decide whether a data entry is an anomaly or not. The nature of
the data from a drinking water treatment plants in Denmark is very predictable,
because it follows the routine of the average danish family. This means that in
the morning when people get up and shower we see an increase in the ﬂow out
from the plant, which will decrease a bit during the day, and then around lunch
time it will go a bit up, then go down until its dinner time where it will go up
again. Then during night time it will be very low, until it all starts again when
its morning. These habits are however diﬀerent during weekends and holidays,
so its not possible just to look at yesterday ﬂow, and then use that. Because of
this very predictable behavior we ﬁrst establish some ground knowledge whether
using deep learning is overkill or if we could solve this with a simpler and less
computational heavy model. We do this by comparing the predictions of a linear
regression model to those of a deep learning model. Afterwards we look at the
predictions and compare diﬀerent strategies of how to decide when a prediction
is an anomaly. We also go through how it should get implemented, as we have
an existing system which collects data, and has a decent interface for viewing
this, and the ability to notify the users. All of these things will are handy for a
machine learning task, so implementing it such that it interacts with this system
will be preferable.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Purpose of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Short about Krüger
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.3
V-History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.4
Proof of concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.1.5
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Research
5
2.1
Choosing which model to use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Coding language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Choice of model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Alternative models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Data diﬃculties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Data normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Experiment
11
3.1
Prediction of single measuring channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Measuring accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
First Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.1
Tuning model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.2
Analyzing accuracy results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.3
Analysis of predictions and targets . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
iii
4
Implementation
22
4.1
Final product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1.1
Changes between test and production
. . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.1
Python modules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.2
V-History extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.3
Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Discussion
28
5.1
Anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.1
Static % threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.2
Static distance threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.3
Threshold from fractiles of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.4
Choice of anomaly detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.1.5
Things to look for
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.6
Types of anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Robustness of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Simulate missing or bad measurements . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Test of robustness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.3
Exclusion of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Mistakes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4.1
Solution to data normalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Conclusion
38
6.1
The model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.1.1
Missing tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.2
Next steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
A Appendix
41
Bibliography
53
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Purpose of thesis
The purpose of the thesis is to create a tool which uses machine learning, to
identify anomalies in the sensor data from the control of a drinking water treat-
ment plant. This tool will communicate with a software system called V-History,
which Krüger uses. The data that the tool will analyze will be deﬁned via an
interface in V-History, where the output from the tool will also have an inter-
face, where it can be viewed. This interface will also be developed as part of this
thesis, however, it will only be brieﬂy discussed. The machine learning part will
focus on deep learning and the use of a neural network to ﬁnd these anomalies
in the data. From the interface, the operator should be able to give feedback to
the network, such that its threshold for what is an anomaly can be adjusted.
1.1.2
Short about Krüger
The water treatment plants where Krüger, in one way or another, has been part
of the manufacturing, are controlled by a SCADA (Supervisory Control And
==PAGE:7==
1.1 Background
2
Data Acquisition) system. This system gives a real-time overview of the diﬀer-
ent sensors on the plant. These sensors are measuring and storing data gathered
such as ﬂow, power consumption, pressure, water levels, etc. To visualize the
gathered data Krüger has built a system called V-History, which generates re-
ports and curve graphs of the gathered data. The system can also be set up
to perform diﬀerent calculations on the data specialized for data treatment for
water treatment plants.
The calculations can include multiple measurement
points to create a combined ﬂow of a plant and such values, which are used
as documentation for how much water the plant produces. The data is usually
collected per hour, however, it can be adjusted to be collected per minute. The
latter is rarely used as the focus often lies on the general performance of the
plant, and thus, measurements per hour are suﬃcient. However, whenever there
is a faulty sensor, or when maintenance work is performed, there will either be a
loss of data or wrong data which is transferred to the system. The operators of
the water treatment plant may not notice this when it happens, as they are oc-
cupied by trying to solve the problem. If this occurs multiple times throughout
the year, then by the end, the data will have so many errors that the operators
can not trust the data, which makes all of the gathered data useless.
1.1.3
V-History
As previously stated, V-History is a system which Krüger already has developed,
and is used by almost all of their water treatment plant customers. V-History is
an ASP.NET application with multiple modules and web services, which is run
on a web server. In most cases, a supply company will host this themselves, but
it can also be hosted externally, or by Krüger. In V-History the user will deﬁne
all the measuring points, where each point in V-History is called a measuring
channel. These channels are the measuring points in the plant, which will be
used to collect data from the SCADA system controlling a plant.
If we look at KLAR Forsyning (a water treatment plant in Køge), this plant
has 303 diﬀerent measurement channels.
These include; operation hours for
pumps, fans, and wells, kWh usage from buildings, pumps, and wells, water
levels and ﬂow from pumps, wells and water towers. Furthermore, the number
of ﬁlter rinses and the pressure levels from wells and pipes are measured. On
top of this, there are 93 diﬀerent calculation channels deﬁned. These calculation
channels are also deﬁned in V-History. Then comes the strength of V-History,
viewing all this data. V-History has a report module, which allows the user
to create and view a report on the deﬁned data. These reports can either be
a daily, monthly or annual report. There are usually both reports containing
all the information from the diﬀerent pumps and such but also reports with
these calculation channels which is used to have an overview of the plant for
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Background
3
the last day, month or year. See ﬁgure A.1 in the appendix for a daily report
from KLAR Forsyning.
The calculation channels are typically used for the
whole plant to create a combined ﬂow in and out of the plant. The calculations
can also be economic factors, ie. for a pump, this would be water ﬂow over
energy consumption
m3
kW h. Another calculation is water ﬂow between 0 and 4
AM, which is helpful in leakage ﬁnding. These diﬀerent calculation channels
might not be interesting when analyzing the data with machine learning as they
are calculated from the collected data, and ﬁnding anomalies in the calculated
data should hopefully result in an anomaly in the data which was used for the
calculation. See ﬁgure A.3 for a screen capture of the interface, which is used
for deﬁnition of measuring channels. V-History also has a graph module, which
allows the user to create curve graphs of any measuring points.
These can
both be predeﬁned with a set of measuring points, or be created on the ﬂy, by
simply double-clicking a data point when viewing a report. See ﬁgure A.2 in
the appendix for a daily report with such a graph.
These reports are not just used for the supply companies to monitor their plant,
but in many cases, they are used for documentation of the water extraction from
each well, as there can be quotas of how much they are allowed to extract. If
the supply companies compare these reports it is easy to see if some values are
signiﬁcantly higher or lower than expected, and then they can look into that
and analyze the old data to ﬁnd out what went wrong. Now, this could just as
well be because one measurement is 10 or 100 times as big as it should be, or
maybe even negative, or missing. This is a likely scenario as it might be that
a sensor broke down and wasn’t changed for a month, or maybe there was an
update to the PLC program controlling the plant, which then accidentally reset
some counter values. Most of the supply companies will not notice this when it
happens, but ﬁrst notice it when its time to look at the annual report. If the
data anomaly is collected in June it might be extremely diﬃcult to remember
what the exact problem was at the end of the year.
The supply companies would like to be notiﬁed when unpredictable events,
such as the above mentioned, occur, so they better and faster can adjust the
errors/faults. As for such a module was built into V-History which can monitor
the data and send out emails when certain rules are violated. However, in the
current state, these rules are tedious and conﬁguration heavy to set up, as they
are very static in nature. i.e. you can create a rule with a limit, such that if
the daily value of a measuring point is below or above this limit, an event in
the system occurs, and you get an email. While this can be powerful, there is
too much conﬁguration required for it to be powerful, as these limits are best if
they are tailored for each measuring point. This is a huge task, even for a small
plant such as KLAR Forsyning, as it would require that up to 300 rules were
tailored. For a human employee, this will take a long time, and it will almost
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Background
4
certainly result in some human errors as well, making this an undesirable task
to perform manually.
1.1.4
Proof of concept
The problems mentioned in Section 1.1.3, regarding identifying anomalies in
data, can be solved using machine learning. To use deep learning for the task,
could be overkill depending on the nature of the data and simpler methods
might be suﬃcient or even better.
Water treatment plant data in Denmark
is usually very predictable, as the water ﬂow out of a plant follows the daily
routine of the average danish person. In the morning when they get up and
shower, there there ﬂow will spike. Then be pretty even until lunch when it will
spike a bit again. But then around dinner time, when every family is cooking,
it will spike again, and then during night time it will be almost 0. Because of
this we will use a linear regression for prediction on the data ﬁrst, which can
then be compared to the predictions of a LSTM. A LSTM is the primary deep
learning model that we would like to use for this task. It is expected that the
LSTM will outperform the linear regression, even without much tuning. If the
LSTM turns out, to not be able to outperform the linear regression, then deep
learning in general is properly overkill, in the sense that more computational
power is required to perform it, compared to a linear regression.
1.1.5
Limitations
For most supply companies, their system is a server which runs the SCADA
system, and this server also acts as web server and runs V-History. This also
means that we, in most cases, won’t have access to GPU power, as this was not
a requirement when such servers were purchased. This means two things:
1: Training will be slow, but it is not necessarily a problem if a model has to
train for days, so long as it is a process which can run in the background.
2: Something which might become a problem on these servers, is memory. In
some cases this could also become a problem, so we can’t just take all results
from each epoch in memory. It is necessary to save often and clear up memory.
Hopefully it will not be a problem, but during tests we will need to monitor
memory usage, so that we can get an idea of whats possible.
Because of these limitations, it is also important to establish whether or not we
should use deep learning for the task, or if simpler methods are suﬃcient.
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Research
2.1
Choosing which model to use
2.1.1
Coding language
In Krüger all desktop applications are developed using the programming lan-
guage C#, and because of this, it would be preferable that this project also is
programmed in C#. For machine learning in C# there are a few interesting
libraries to look at.
One of them is ML.NET, Microsoft’s own take at ma-
chine learning. It is likely also the same framework which they use for their
cloud service, Azure. ML.NET sounds promising, but there are a few problems
that show up immediately. Firstly they have tried to make it easier to use by
grouping it as problems and not algorithms, which is ﬁne for users with less
understanding of the subject. However, for this project, that is not the case.
Even at this point, research on the subject is far and decisions on algorithms
and models have already been formed which makes their grouping noisy. When
looking further at their documentation, it becomes clear that it is rather new,
and far from fully developed. There are some algorithms like regression and k-
means clustering, models like ResNet50 and AlexNet, but also things with odd
names like Spike Detector, which don’t tell what the underlying algorithm is. It
seems like ML.NET is not developed enough for this project. Another library in
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Choosing which model to use
6
C# is the Accord.NET framework, which is an open-source framework and has
a lot of machine learning algorithms and models. They also have libraries for
computer vision and audio. Compared to ML.NET this is a lot more developed
in all areas, and looks like a good choice, with one exception - the last update
for the library was September 2017, and it appears that the primary develop-
ers on the library have stopped developing it. The library is a bit lacking in
the neural network / deep learning aspect, and since development has stopped
more than a year ago, it is unlikely that it would be developed further. No other
suitable C# libraries for machine learning seem to exist, which are developed
enough to use for the current task. Because of this, the choice of language to
use for the machine learning part of the development was free, as long as it
could interface with V-History, as that would still be used to setup parameters
and view outputs. This will most likely not be that diﬃcult, as data can be
shared via the database of V-History, or via web services, more likely it being
web services, such that we still with V-History can control what happens with
what data, and keep as much logic in C# code as possible. In machine learning
courses at DTU, students are often using Python, which has multiple libraries
for machine learning with more features than needed for this project (such as
Tensorﬂow, Pytorch, and Keras). Because of this, and experience with Python
and Pytorch from courses such as Deep learning, this seems like a good choice
of framework. Furthermore, as its a familier framework, there might be some
development time to save, compared to a whole new framework, regardless of
language.
2.1.2
Choice of model
When solving a problem with machine learning, one of the ﬁrst tasks is to
deﬁne how to solve the problem - and with what kind of model - as there are
several models, and most of them have been used for multiple tasks.
Some
are more popular than others for certain problems, which was looked further
into. Firstly, the problem previously described, is a time series data problem
of a sensor network. Time series data is considered more diﬃcult to handle
than e.g. image recognition. For example, time series data are harder to label,
and in order to analyze the data, you must have an understanding of where
the data comes from. Compared to image recognition of animals, the human
brain will in milliseconds recognize if there is a cat in the image or not, which
then makes validation very trivial. This validation cannot be done without an
understanding of the speciﬁc data set, which is a time-consuming task that is
usually left undone in the industry. In [ML14] they try to give an overview of
what models are good for what kind of problems, they also mention that time
series data is one of harder problems in machine learning, however, there are
plenty of options to go for solving the task at hand. They mention in their
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Choosing which model to use
7
summary section of the model rundown, that a generative model is preferred if
the model should be used for synthesizing new data or predictions. Additionally,
a discriminative model will be more aﬀected by noisy data than a generative
model, and concludes that a generative model is better for outlier detection. As
the primary goal for this thesis is to detect outlier/anomalies for future data,
choosing a generative model seems like the right choice. They have a handful
of diﬀerent time series data problems which they try to assign which model is
better for which, however, they don’t include a sensor network. In [NM17] the
authors discuss process monitoring in the industry manufacturing environment,
which is what a water treatment plant is. Here they also mention the issue
that most techniques require experts in the data for feature extraction. They
have used a stacked LSTM Autoencoders to capture the features, which they
then pass through a deep feedforward network. However, since RNNs are very
good for sequence data, which time series data are, and LSTM tries to solve
the vanishing gradient problem, which a RNN has, a LSTM network would be a
proper choice for outlier/anomaly detection in time series data. Also, with the
consideration that it is a generative model, with the possibility to have a really
large input.
2.1.2.1
Features in the model
The features of the model primarily consist of the measuring channels which
we want to investigate. In the proof of concept, we take all measuring channels
but one, from a water treatment plants that KLAR Forsyning has and then the
date and time for each measurement. The one measuring channel not used as
a feature was used as a target, i.e. we would try to predict this one channel
from all the others. The day feature was translated into 7 features, i.e. Monday,
Tuesday, .., Sunday, being either 0 or 1, 1 for the correct day, and 0 for the rest.
The same was done for the hour part of the time stamp, so 24 features, 00, 01,
.. , 23. Where the correct hour was set to 1, and the rest to 0. This creates
some redundancy in the features, but it seems to work better than having it
represented as an integer going from 0 to 6 for the day and from 0 to 23 for the
hour. Another feature which should be added, is whether a day is a holiday or
not because holidays will make the results diﬀer a lot. We see a much higher
consumption from households during holidays, as a regular family will not be
working or attending school, but be at home all day.
However, this is not
included in the initial models but will be implemented later.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Choosing which model to use
8
2.1.2.2
Sequence length
Choosing the sequence length, wasn’t an entirely obvious choice, even though
the data has a speciﬁc length. The data is measured per hour, but it could be
interpreted as per day or maybe even week. The reason to interpret it a day at
a time, is that during a day the values will change, as there during night time
is very little ﬂow out of the plant, while during the day there is a more steady
output. So to catch this relation, it might be a good idea to have the whole
day as a sequence. Then the ﬂow out of the plant on weekdays and weekends
are also diﬀerent. In the weekdays, the ﬂow will spike when an average danish
family gets up and when they get home from work and start cooking, but these
spikes are much more averaged out during the whole day on weekends, and in
general, the ﬂow out is higher, as the average danish citizen is not at work.
Now, these relations could be gained from having the sequence a week long. By
trial and error, it appears that using a whole week for sequence length, gave
pretty inconsistent results. In this case, less data was stored and treated as a
year is only 52 weeks, which reduced the dataset signiﬁcantly. Using a whole
day, or just a single hour, was pretty close, but by the end, a whole day seemed
to yield a bit better, and also training was faster. Therefore, it was decided to
use a day as sequence length. This made the input for the model a matrix of
size 24 ∗(measuringChannels + 31).
2.1.3
Alternative models
2.1.3.1
Deep belief network
Before landing on LSTM as the primary model, alternative models were eval-
uated, one of these is a Deep Belief Network (DBN). A DBN are stacked Re-
stricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM). RBM is also mentioned in [ML14], that
they also can be used for time series data. If the C# library Accord.NET has
been chosen as machine learning framework, then it would most likely have been
a DBN which had been the primary model, because it was available in the li-
brary and a LSTM was not. However, it seems as LSTMs and RNNs are more
popular than DBN, which also means there are more results with using LSTMs,
which could mean that its a safer choice of model than a DBN is.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Choosing which model to use
9
2.1.3.2
Convolutional network
During the research [Cul18] was stumbled upon, where it is claimed that RNNs
and their deviations, which include LSTM, are a thing of the past. Some of
the major companies, like Google and Facebook are changing away from using
the otherwise popular RNNs and starting to use Convolutional neural network
(CNN) instead.
In [Cul18] it is mentioned that CNNs outperform RNNs at
diﬀerent tasks, but other articles show the opposite, so exactly which is better
for anomaly detection in time series data is diﬃcult to say.
One important
thing that is mentioned about CNN though, is that the CNN is less heavy in
the computation needed for training, and can also work with a smaller training
set. However in most cases for Krüger, there are years of data available and no
urgency in the task, so right now, it doesn’t matter that it requires more data
and time to perform training. However, it will be worth trying out a CNN like
DeepAnT to see which performs best. DeepAnT is mentioned in [MM18], and
is made exactly for anomaly detection in time series data.
2.1.4
Data diﬃculties
Usually, when you have a problem which you want to solve using machine learn-
ing, the ﬁrst thing to do is to get comfortable with the data, so that you have
an easier time understanding the output of your model. Part of this can be re-
moving "bad" data, like series where not all features are present, or where some
feature is thousands of factors diﬀerent from all other (anomalies). However, we
do not want to have to this in our case, because this is part of the problem that
we are trying to solve; removing the need for analyzing all the data. But, we
know for a fact that we will have points in our data where not all features are
present, and we will with almost certainty also have anomalies in the data unless
they have been "washed" before. So another solution to this would be to use
a data loader, which attempts to solve these problems automatically. Building
a data loader which can check for anomalies, would be a solution to the real
problem which we are trying to solve here, so lets assume, we can’t build a data
loader which does this. But what the data loader can do, is remove sequences
which are not complete, this can in fact be done rather easily with some checks,
so this we have done, in order to ensure that the model will receive sequences of
the correct length for training. Another solution to removing these sequences,
could have been padding them, such that the are of correct length. This is not
necessary in this case, because we will more often than not, have access to plenty
of data, so we might as well just remove these rather than trying to ﬁsh out the
partial information which they contain.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Choosing which model to use
10
2.1.5
Data normalization
Another thing which can be done to optimize learning or convergence speed
is normalization of the data. Normalization, typically means scaling the input
values, a very common way of scaling is by min-max, which is done by x′
i =
xi−min(x)
max(x)−min(x) where x′
i is the normalized value of xi. The advantage of this
scaling is that all values will be between 0 and 1.
There are multiple loss
functions, which require this. However, as we are using MSE for loss function,
this is not needed. As we normalize the input, in order for the output to be
readable by the user, it should be re scaled by the same function, which was used
for normalization. A problem with the min-max scaling however, is that since we
have time series with continuous data we do not know the min or the max value
from the data set (as these can change with time).
There are other scaling
functions which can be used, but also algorithms are available most machine
learning frameworks. Normalization can also be done across batches, such that
they are similar, which is called batch normalization. Normalization can also be
done element wise, which is what would be called layer normalization. When
digging into batch normalization, we ﬁnd that its not recommended to use for
RNNs (which our LSTM is). However, in [TC17] they successfully use batch
normalization for a LSTM, and see faster convergence. Although they do use
a reparameterized LSTM to achieve this. This is interesting because it seems
like it would make it more diﬃcult to code and use, and this will most likely
require a lot of custom coding of the model. Whereas we are looking more for a
black box type of model rather than coding our own, as also seen in the choice
of library for the machine learning part. So we will not be doing normalization.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Experiment
3.1
Prediction of single measuring channel
3.1.1
Hyperparameters
As mentioned, for proof of concept a linear regression model and a LSTM net-
work was trained for prediction of a single measuring channel, in order to estab-
lish some knowledge, whether or not it would be smart to use a neural network
for our problem, or if a simple linear regression could do the job. It was antici-
pated that the LSTM would beat the LR without much tuning, but after some
trial and error, it appeared that this was a false assumption. Because of it being
a proof of concept, there never was an intention of getting well tuned, hyper
parameters, but it turned out that it was necessary to be tuned a bit for it to
give any usable results. This could also have been because of the starting values
for the hyper parameters, as they were only estimated due to the focus being on
getting the model running, rather than what would be a smart starting point.
Consulting [Eck18] afterwards, helped give a better starting point for choosing
layers, hidden size, and dropout. The learning rate had been tuned by trial and
error already. For both models, SGD (Stochastic gradient descent) was used
as an optimizer. While Adam optimizer is easier to use than SGD optimizer,
through own experiences in the course ’Deep learning’, the SGD optimizer, once
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Prediction of single measuring channel
12
applied with the proper learning rate, will often outperform Adam optimizer.
For the loss function, the paper [Gro18] was consulted. Firstly, we wanted a loss
function which works for prediction of real values and not just binary values, or
values between −1 and 1, which is how many loss functions operate. For this we
can use an error loss function like mean squared error (MSE) or mean absolute
error (MAE), and [Gro18] talks about MSE being better for ﬁnding anomalies,
where MAE is robust against anomalies if the predicted value is the important
factor. But because the task is to ﬁnd the anomalies, MSE will be used for both
models as a loss function.
3.1.2
Measuring accuracy
When measuring accuracy, one needs to take into account what is trying to
be achieved. If we want to know whether a picture contains either a dog or a
cat, then its rather easy to calculate; if the model says there’s a cat, but its
a dog, then the prediction is wrong. To not have as strict models, we usually
say there’s some likelihood of it being a cat, and some being a dog. In our case
we want to predict some measured value from a sensor, and cannot as easily be
measured how likely its one value or another, we need a value. However it may
not be possible to predict the exact value, and we don’t expect this.Therefore we
introduce a threshold to our accuracy calculation, and as long as the prediction
is within this threshold, then it will be counted as correct in terms of accuracy
when viewing the performance of the model. Having such a threshold presents
a new variable, that we need to ﬁgure out how to choose. But this is accuracy is
easier to use when comparing diﬀerent settings between models, because when
changing features in the model, the MSE will no longer be comparable between
models, as it can change by large factors. Where a measure of accuracy can
be compared regardless of model. This will also be important, not just when
comparing diﬀerent amount of input and output features, but also if we are to
compare it to diﬀerent types of neural networks later, such as a CNN.
3.1.3
First Test
We will look at some of the tests that were run, and analyze which were good
and what needs to perform better. The full test with all hyper parameter tuning
can be found in appendix in table A.1 to table A.5 and ﬁgure A.5 to ﬁgure A.6.
Below there is a sample of the tested hyper parameters for both models, which
had the most interesting comparisons.
The linear regression is a simple model, and hence it doesn’t have many pa-
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Prediction of single measuring channel
13
Linear Model #
1
2
3
7
8
Learning rate
10−6
10−7
10−8
10−7
10−7
Weight decay
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.15
0.2
Table 3.1: Linear regression model hyper parameters
LSTM Model #
1
3
10
14
18
Learning rate
10−5
10−8
10−5
10−5
10−5
Weight decay
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.15
0
LSTM layers
3
3
15
1
3
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
0.1
Hidden size
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
(Ni+No)
1.4
(Ni + No)
Table 3.2: LSTM model hyper parameters
rameters to choose from, it was primarily a matter of tuning the learning rate.
For the LSTM model there are a few more options to choose from. The weight
decay mentioned here for both models is from the SDG optimizer, which has a
weight decay option. The dropout rate is a dropout layer between every LSTM
layer, which means that for a LSTM with only 1 layer, dropout will not work.
The hidden size variables are chosen ﬁrst from [Eck18] where Ni is the number
of input features and No is the number of output features, so in this test No is
always 1. During the training of the models, each training set was run for 1000
epochs, and an evaluation was done every 50 epoch. The training data consists
of 250 days of data, and then evaluation is 50 days of data. Each day contains
a value for each hour for 31 measuring points from a water treatment plant
in KLAR Forsyning called Fruedal. These are all but 1 of the measured point
from that plant. The target is then the last point, which is the combined water
output from the plant for each hour of the day. MSE graphs of the evaluation
of the linear and the LSTM evaluation are depicted below.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Prediction of single measuring channel
14
Figure 3.1: Mean Squared Error for Linear models
When looking at the MSE for the linear models in ﬁgure 3.1, an important
thing to note is that for Linear1, the values went to inﬁnity before the ﬁrst
evaluation, hence Linear2 and 3 were tests with lower learning rate to avoid the
inﬁnite values, and when running 1000 epochs 10−6 is superior, and stabilizes
pretty quickly. It looks like it overﬁts slightly after evaluation 14, but the weight
decay seems to keep it in check.
Figure 3.2: Mean Squared Error for LSTM models
Looking at the MSE for the LSTM models in ﬁgure 3.2, we can instantly see that
the MSE for most models is signiﬁcantly higher than that of the linear models,
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Prediction of single measuring channel
15
actually only LSTM13, comes close to the MSE of the linear models. Interesting
though is that making the model deeper seems to have a negative eﬀect on the
MSE, LSTM9 being the deepest with 15 layers, and LSTM13 being the most
shallow, with just 1 layer are the edge cases here. LSTM3 which has the lowest
learning rate looks like it could overtake the other models with more epochs, but
otherwise, both LSTM1 and LSTM17 stabilize before the 1000 epochs, around
700 for LSTM1 and around 800 for LSTM17. However, it is also necessary to
measure the accuracy for comparison as mentioned before. This is reviewed
below.
Figure 3.3: Accuracy for Linear models
Once again, since Linear1 reached inﬁnity in prediction before the ﬁrst evalua-
tion, it holds 0 in accuracy all the way. But generally, the same tendencies are
seen here with the accuracy as with the MSE for the linear models, which is as
expected.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Anomaly detection
16
Figure 3.4: Accuracy for LSTM models
The accuracy for the LSTM surprises. The LSTM model with the best MSE
is clearly LSTM13, however, LSTM13 is outperformed by both LSTM1 and
LSTM17 in terms of accuracy. LSTM13 have an accuracy of around 0.3, also
beating the linear model, but LSTM17 comes out with 0.45, which means almost
half the predicted values are within 10% of the true values. Now if this had been
a binary prediction, none of the models would be beating random (50%), but
predicting these integers are quite a bit more complex than a binary prediction.
3.2
Anomaly detection
In order to test the LSTM for anomaly detection. The output of the LSTM
was changed from a single channel, to all the channels. In the single channel
prediction, we didn’t include the channel, which we were predicting, however
now that we are predicting all channels, we also include all channels.
3.2.1
Tuning model
As a result of the change in output, the feature size have changed, and we will
need to perform a similar test, to tune the hyper parameters. But we now have
a much better starting point (the hyper parameters from the single channel pre-
diction LSTM). The reason for tuning again is especially the parameter hidden
==PAGE:22==
3.2 Anomaly detection
17
size which haven’t shown the "best" solution yet. Below here in table 3.3 are
the hyper parameters tested.
Model #
1
2
3
6
7
Learning rate
10−5
10−5
10−6
10−5
10−5
Weight decay
0.1
0.1
0
0
0
LSTM layers
3
2
2
2
10
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Hidden size
2
3(Ni + No)
(Ni+No)
1.4
(Ni+No)
1.4
1.4(Ni + No)
1.4(Ni + No)
Table 3.3: Anomaly model hyper parameters
Figure 3.5: Mean squared Error for Anomaly models
Looking at the loss in ﬁgure 3.5, we see similar results as from the single channel
prediction, which is good. The loss is a lot smaller, but as it is calculated from
a larger output, it is unclear what this exactly means. With Anomaly #7 a
deeper network was tried again, which failed again, and only returned inﬁnite
values - perhaps it needs less dropout, or diﬀerent learning rate when deeper,
or more hidden units, but for now, it would appear that the shallow network is
better.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Anomaly detection
18
Figure 3.6: Accuracy for Anomaly models
Looking at the accuracy, we see the same tendencies as with the linear vs LSTM
model. These being that a higher loss results in higher accuracy, which is odd.
We have to ﬁnd out why this is, which means that an analysis of the target and
prediction values has to be made. A small note though, the higher hidden size,
in anomaly #6, is the only diﬀerence.
3.2.2
Analyzing accuracy results
So far we have looked at a measure of the accuracy which is very simple and
static, and also the mean squared error, both from evaluation of the model on
part of the dataset only used for evaluation. But, the predictions and targets
should also be analyzed and compared with human eyes, in order to truly conﬁrm
whether or not the model is going in the right direction. The ﬁrst thing to
notice, is the fact that the measure of accuracy is too simple. when predicting
values between 1 and 20 the 10% means a lot more than when predicting values
between 5000 and 7000. In the case of measuring ﬂow, when there’s low ﬂow (1
to 20), it doesn’t matter if it is 5 or 15, but in this interval, the top value is 3
times the lowest value, which means the percentage calculation will not work as
intended. But during high ﬂow (5000 to 7000), the interval low value just needs
to be incremented by 40% before its a the top level, and here the percentage
calculation will work well.
Analyzing targets and predictions earlier during
tuning of the model, would most likely have yielded the same, but the statistical
values, the accuracy and the MSE, appeared ﬁne, so there was no reason to
investigate the matter further. Additionally about the accuracy threshold; when
predicting the value 0, the percentage calculations won’t work, because even
with values as 10−10, its still not within a 10 percentile of 0. This could be
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Anomaly detection
19
the explanation for the accuracy being poor when the mean error is good, but
hopefully this will be determined.
3.2.3
Analysis of predictions and targets
For the analysis of the predictions and target the trained model was used to
predict a single day, and the predictions were then plotted with the real values,
channel by channel, for the whole day.
Looking at 3.7, the orange lines are the true values, while the blue lines are the
predicted values. The y-axis shows the value, while the x-axis shows hours of
the day. Here its pretty obvious, that there is a problem in the prediction, as all
of them (except the one having some negative values) have the same curve, just
in diﬀerent intervals of values. So this either means that the sequence length
should be changed to prediction per hour, or that it is necessary to output a
single channel at a time.
Changing the sequence length to 1 hour was easier and faster than having to
train multiple models with one output channel each, so this was done ﬁrst. Then
24 predictions of 1 hour each, (resulting in 1 day) was made, and plotted in the
exact same fashion as before, with the same line colors and axis, which is seen
in ﬁgure 3.8.
It is pretty clear that this made a huge diﬀerence in the model, and it no longer
predicts the channels with the same function across time, but each channel
individually across time. This now means that it follows the true values a lot
more. We can from this conclude that the sequence length for the model should
be hour based and not a whole day (and properly not a week either), when we are
doing prediction of data with the features that we have. It seems quite possible,
that in order to capture the importance of time, then each step, should be the
same length as the time we are trying to model. However, this still doesn’t solve
the issues of using a percentage based approach to deciding whether some data
is an anomaly or not, but for now, fairly good predictions can be made.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Anomaly detection
20
Figure 3.7: Targets and predictions pr channel, sequence length : 1 day
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Anomaly detection
21
Figure 3.8: Targets and predictions pr channel, sequence length : 1 hour
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Implementation
4.1
Final product
During both the testing phase, and the implementation of the production version
of the tool, a lot of code has been changed, both back and forth. This means
that some of the code used to run the test and produce its results doesn’t exist
anymore. These are things like early versions of training loops. But the parts
contained in their own classes, such as the dataloader and the models, still have
their early versions available, as new classes were made instead of replacing the
code. However, as none of the code is anything advanced or special, there was
no reason to keep all unused parts, and for the same reason I will not go into
speciﬁcs about that code. Although I will here go through the implementation
of the diﬀerent modules.
The code can be seen in the github repository [Nie19] mentioned in the bibli-
ography. In the repository a short explanation of the repository also exists. All
the commented out code is from the testing phase, and could just be deleted,
and will be once the product is ﬁnally delivered. None of the code is advanced
or particular in anyway, so there’s no reason to go through it, instead we will
list what each module does and where its located.
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Modules
23
4.1.1
Changes between test and production
As a proof of concept version was ﬁrst made, some of the implementations were
skipped, like the input features, the measuring channels to use, this was for
the proof of concept version done as hardcoded values. Of course, this will not
work in a production environment and had to be changed. The input features
were not the only part that were hardcoded, most of the other parameters,
like the time intervals of the training, the accuracy threshold and so on. The
proof of concept version also connected to the V-History database by itself
with a hardcoded connection string, however, this is not how it should be. In
order for the module to be easily replaceable, it should get its data from a web
service within V-History, such that access to the database can be limited to
V-History. If the python module is to be replaced by some external machine
learning framework run by another company, then we don’t want this other
company getting access to the database directly.
There are also features that were not needed in the proof of concept, but will
be needed for the ﬁnal product. One of such features is that, the measuring
channels used, the input and output, might not include the same channels,
because we might not want to monitor on and oﬀsignals from a pump, but we
would like to use them in the training and prediction as it still has a correlation
to the output of the pump, which could be what we want to monitor. So we
need the possibility to choose an input set, and a output set of channels instead
of it being the same. When choosing the training data for the model, we will
also have the need to be able to exclude certain time periods from the training
set, if there are periods where we know parts of a plant have been shut down, or
had some maintenance, having the ability to exclude this data will easily come
in handy. Also when anomalies are found, it might be because of a scheduled
downtime e.g. a system restart, and then the day or couple of hours when this
happened, we might also want to be able to exclude that day from the training
data.
4.2
Modules
Generally, the goal is to put as much of the logic in V-History as possible, V-
History is already build up in a modular fashion, such that new technologies can
be introduced and implemented more easily. But there will be three main python
modules which will also interact with V-History. Along with implementing these
python modules, there will need to be updates to some of the existing modules
in V-History, and some additions to the database of V-History as the anomaly
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Modules
24
detection required some more settings than the rule deﬁnition of V-History,
which was brieﬂy mention. But the anomaly detection, will be part of same
module, as the output is using a warning system, which we want to reuse for
the anomaly detection.
There will also be some shared python ﬁles for the
modules, such as deﬁnition of dataloader and model.
4.2.1
Python modules
4.2.1.1
Main modules
The ﬁrst python modules is the module which will do the initial training of the
models. Where after training a model, it will save a state of the model, which
can then be used by an other module for prediction and anomaly detection.
This module does not have an interface, as it is supposed to be running in
the background, takes no input, but checks if there are any untrained models
by a web service. A model is untrained when just created, or if changes are
made in the deﬁnition (like which measuring channels it should use). Once the
model is trained, the module will through a web service inform of the ready
model, and its speciﬁcations. The code can be seen in the python ﬁle called
TrainUntrainedModels placed in the python folder.
The second python module, is the module that will use the saved model, and
perform predictions. This module doesn’t have an interface either, as it will also
be running in the background, and will through a web service get information
about which models to use for doing predictions. Afterwards it will use another
web service to store the predicted data, such that comparisons for anomalies
can be made later. The code can be seen in the python ﬁle called DoPredictions
placed in the python folder.
The third and last python module, will be used for continues training of the
model, this will be a smaller task than the initial training of the model. Exactly
how often it will be training is hard to say, as this will require more testing. We
assume, that it doesn’t make sense to train with each new hour that is added,
and even with each new day. We are guessing it will be ﬁne just to train once
a week or maybe once a month. In order to ﬁnd this out, multiple models,
with the same input and output will have to be made, which train at diﬀerent
intervals. As we have the feature of adding dates, which should be excluded
from training, and such dates, might be added because of found anomalies, then
this module, should make sure to save multiple versions of the model, such that
we don’t have to do the initial training every time a new date to be excluded is
added, where the model was already updated with the latest data. Instead we
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Modules
25
will just fetch the newest model, that is older than the added date, and train
from there. To ensure that the continuous training of the model, is run enough,
we will compare the loss during each training epoch of the new data with the
loss of the last training. And keep training with the new data until we reach the
same or better loss, or 1000 epochs like the initial training. In the case that it
reaches 1000 epochs before reaching the same loss, so converging with the new
data, is very unlikely, so in this case we want to inform the user about this. The
web service the continuous training module contacts when its done, will take
care of this notice. This module hasn’t been thoroughly tested and ﬁnalized,
but the code can be seen in the python ﬁle called ContinuousTraining placed in
the python folder.
4.2.1.2
Common python ﬁles
The python module called Model, where the model classes are deﬁned, LSTM
and Linear regression models.
This is a simple module, containing only the
model classes and their deﬁnitions and functions. The saving and loading logic
of a model have also been placed here, at least for the LSTM. As the linear
regression was only used as a proof of concept, we never saved any of them. The
code can be seen in the python ﬁle called Model placed in the python folder.
The python module called DataLoader, contains the dataloader which was de-
veloped for this project. There are 4 classes of dataloaders, each of diﬀerent
iterations. A dataloader class for both types of models were build in the be-
ginning to make things simpler. The DataLoaderAnomaly and DataLoaderPre-
dictionSingleChannel are practical identical classes, which the exception of the
output length. Then a DataLoaderProduction was build after the ﬁrst testes,
but this was also replaced by DataLoaderWebservice, which gets the data from
V-History instead of accessing the database directly. Only DataLoaderWebser-
vice will be used and the other classes are just kept incase some of the ﬁrst tests
would need to be run again. The code can be seen in the python ﬁle called
DataLoader placed in the python folder.
The python module called DBConnect, took care of the connection to the
database during the testing phase of the project, it also contains the select
query which separates the datetime value into the 31 features. The holiday fea-
ture was ﬁrst introduced in the web service dataloader. The code can be seen
in the python ﬁle called DBConnect placed in the python folder.
The python module called PythonTest1, contains the ﬁrst training script, and
was used to run the ﬁrst many tests, using hardcoded values for everything
except the data. This ﬁle have been edited a lot, depending of which test was
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Modules
26
run, and can’t be used for much anymore, as the logic have been moved to the
separate modules. Its only kept as source for creating new training loops. The
code can be seen in the python ﬁle called PythonTest1 placed in the python
folder.
4.2.2
V-History extensions
As mentioned in 4.2.1, the python modules should not access the database itself,
but instead be using web services when access to the database is needed. These
web services are supposed to be simple, and have few and small jobs each, such
that they are also easily replaceable and extendable.
One of such web services should take care of providing the python modules with
the training data and data for predictions. A web service which can provide
data already exists in V-History, when given a channel, or series of channels,
together with a starting and ending date, can output data series for the period.
The existing web service will need to get extended, because we want it to be
able to take care of the excluded dates, and formatting the data such that we
have all the features for the model ready, such that the training module doesn’t
have to do this. While this was initially built into the dataloader in python,
this will now be built into V-History. As previously stated, we want as much
logic as possible in V-History. This will make this web service less simple, but
as it will replace the dataloader from the python modules, that is ﬁne, as this
will make it a lot easier to replace the python modules. This code can be seen
in the DataService ﬁle placed in the C# folder.
An other web service will be one that gives the python modules the speciﬁcations
of the models, input channels, output channels, start and end dates, which it
needs to pass to the web service, which provides data. This code can be seen in
the SmartAssistantService ﬁle placed in the C# folder.
The output of the model, the predicted values, we want to save these, because
then the logic which will be deciding whether a predicted value is an anomaly
or not, can be placed within V-History and not the python modules. For this
a web service which can receive the data will be used. This already exists and
requires not further work. This code is not included, as no changes were made
it it.
The two python modules which do training of the models both the initial, but
also the continuous training, will need to communicate when their jobs are com-
pleted, for this we will need another web service for which they can communicate
this. This code can be seen in the SmartAssistantService ﬁle placed in the C#
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Modules
27
folder.
Another extension to V-History, is the added support for the deﬁnition of a
model, which channels to use for input, and which to use for output, together
with a starting date for training, and the possibility to add dates to exclude from
training. When a model is deﬁned (which measuring channels to use as data,
and which to check for anomalies), the model will need to be trained initially.
If the input or output of a model is changed, then it will need to be retrained
from scratch, which this interface will ensure, and removing old version of no
longer needed models. This interface will be built into the existing interface of
the rules, mentioned in the beginning, as this anomaly detection will be part of
the same module. This code can be seen in the SmartAssistantDef ﬁle placed
in the C# folder. A screen capture of the interface can be seen in ﬁgure A.4
ﬁx ref
ﬁx ref
Lastly we have the part that will be responsible for deciding whether some-
thing is an anomaly or not. As it will be part of the rule module of V-History,
this part will be run from the same module, and the code placed within the
same set of classes. For the moment we only have the accuracy threshold dis-
cussed earlier, but will later look at other options. This code can be found in
ClsSmartAssistantCalc ﬁle placed in the C# folder.
4.2.3
Execution
The diﬀerent python modules are created as standalone modules, which will
be started, most likely by windows task scheduler, or something like it. Their
interaction with V-History, which is through the web services described in 4.2.2,
will be asynchronous, which brings a few challenges with the saved models (ﬁles).
If a user changes the deﬁnition while the modules are saving, we have multiple
modules trying to use the same resources.
While this is an old problem in
computer science, which has been solved in various ways, it is still a problem
which keeps appearing, when working with asynchronous systems. Seeing as V-
History will be in charge of telling the python modules which models to train,
it will be a easy task to solve, as we have V-History taking care of which models
are being trained, and which are doing predictions, we can easily set ﬂags to
control whether the resources are in use or not.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 5
Discussion
5.1
Anomaly detection
We established that using the % threshold for deciding if something is an
anomaly is not very eﬀective, so what alternative options are avaliable?
5.1.1
Static % threshold
The % threshold works poorly because of the diﬀerence in the values at diﬀerent
hours of the day. So one option could be to set multiple threshold for diﬀerent
intervals of hours on a day. However this might require to set up 24 threshold for
some measuring channels, and the threshold might even have to be diﬀerent for
each channel, which makes a static threshold a very conﬁguration heavy choice,
which is one of the things we are trying to avoid. There’s also the issue when
the real value is 0, because here a % threshold really won’t work, so we have to
decide for an other mechanism to decide when something is an anomaly, if the
real value is 0.
==PAGE:34==
5.1 Anomaly detection
29
5.1.2
Static distance threshold
Instead of calculating whether a value is within some % margin of the real value,
another option could be to calculate the distance between the real value and the
predicted value. This was tested, and it turns out the distances are of the same
size whether the value is around 10 or around 100, which could imply that this
is a better measurement than a static % threshold. But choosing a threshold for
this distance, will require that the predictions and targets are analyzed in order
to ﬁnd the distance for each channel. Again, it comes with high conﬁguration
of the threshold. Normalization of the data could be a solution to the diﬀerence
between channels, although not for certain.
5.1.3
Threshold from fractiles of data
A third option, could be to take these distances, and do a frequency plot, like in
ﬁgure 5.1. Then having the threshold chosen by selecting maybe the 95% or 97,5
% fractile, depending on the amount of anomalies we expect to ﬁnd. This way
we could get a distance threshold, which is independent of knowledge about the
distance size. This plot of course needs to be updated all the time, and then the
distance threshold will change over time, at the same fractile. The advantage
of this compared to the static thresholds, is that we do not necessarily have to
conﬁgure this for each channel or hour. But it would be interesting to separate
the distances into channels or hours. But what exactly is the better option here
is not easy to predict. This fractile version, doesn’t remove the conﬁguration
completely, but it will make it a lot easier, both to conﬁgure and to understand
what it means, where a static distance threshold very much is comparable to
just having a max and min threshold for each hour for a channel, which would
work pretty well, but also have the highest possible conﬁguration. Figure 5.1
is the distance between the predicted values and the real values calculated by
|xreal −xpred|. The plot is of 550 predicted hours, and as we can see choosing
the top 5% fractile, will give us a distance threshold around 15.5. An important
thing to take note of, is that this is a relatively small sample, and in the given
period there have been no fall outs or unexpected occurrences, so its not really
the best example for choosing the threshold, however it shows very well that
the distance is the same independant of hour. This can be seen in table 5.1
where we have shown the 10 highest distances and the values which they are
calculated from.
==PAGE:35==
5.1 Anomaly detection
30
Figure 5.1: Fractile plot
Date and time
Real value
Predicted value
Distance
2019-07-03 13:00
77
52,91
24,09
2019-07-01 15:00
78
56,40
21,60
2019-07-14 04:00
31
51,59
20,59
2019-07-03 16:00
83
103,43
20,43
2019-07-17 15:00
86
65,68
20,32
2019-07-03 08:00
82
102,21
20,21
2019-07-07 20:00
77
96,29
19,29
2019-07-22 12:00
84
102,47
18,47
2019-07-01 13:00
96
78,03
17,97
2019-07-14 07:00
64
81,52
17,52
Table 5.1
5.1.4
Choice of anomaly detection
While the static distance threshold is not an ideal solution, it is what we have
implemented, for version 1 of the anomaly detection. This means that it will be
more conﬁguration heavy, until something which has the same function as the
fractile plot is implemented. There potentially exist libraries which can do this,
but this has not been research currently, as the ﬁrst prototype was important
to get completed for showcasing what we can do now.
==PAGE:36==
5.1 Anomaly detection
31
5.1.5
Things to look for
When looking for anomalies in water treatment plants, an interesting thing to
look for is leakage. During night time, the water supply for households is very
stable with little to no deviation as long as its the same day of the week which
is compared. So if a pipe has a leakage, the night time supply can reveal this.
To detect this Krüger have created an algorithm, however, for the algorithm to
work, one must ﬁne-tune its parameters, which in most cases doesn’t happen as
it is complex and clumsy to use.
Another thing to look for is faulty sensors. A faulty sensor, usually means the
value will be stuck. As the data is read from a SCADA system, which gets the
input from the sensor, it will hold the last known value, which V-History will
keep reading. In measuring channels where the increment is calculated, we will
see a lot of 0 values, as the value will be stuck on the same, and not increment.
5.1.6
Types of anomalies
For now we have primarily been focusing on one type of anomalies, while there
in fact exists multiple anomalies. This is also mentioned in [VC09], that they
see 3 types of anomalies. One of them being point anomalies, which is when
the value is way oﬀ. These points anomalies are what we have primarily been
concerned about, because they are easy to understand and ﬁnd, most of them
can be found using the rule system which V-History has, where one can set a
threshold, and if this threshold is surpassed the user will be warned. These are
also easy to ﬁnd with the static distance threshold.
A second type is the collective anomalies, where the data is within its normal
range, but because of the continual series of them, it is an anomaly. A leakage
in the piping, would be such an anomaly. These will be harder to detect than a
sequence breaking. Another type of collective anomaly could be if some sensor
is producing the same value for a longer period of time, then something is most
likely wrong with it. However these will, because of the nature of the up and
down going values by the hour, get detected as a point anomaly, because if its
stuck with some high value it would be a point anomaly during the night, or if
its stuck at a low value, it would be a point anomaly during the day. The small
increment, which is the leakage, this is uncertain if this is detectable with our
current solution. It will for certain require that the training set used does not
contain such a leakage, otherwise the model will just believe that over time, the
output will increase as the values slowly increments with the leakage.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Robustness of model
32
The third type of anomaly are the contextual anomaly, where they in [VC09]
mention really low temperature during summer to be an anomaly, while it being
normal conditions during the winter. In our case, this could be, during a holiday
which lands on a Monday, and the total water ﬂow from the plant is similar to
that of a regular Monday, then that would be an anomaly, because, as mentioned
before, during holidays, water ﬂow from the plant increases. However this will
be detected as a point anomaly as well.
5.2
Robustness of model
5.2.1
Simulate missing or bad measurements
If we ﬁnd out that a sensor is malfunctioning or broken, we will then until its
ﬁxed, not receive data from this sensor. However, as our model is trained using
this data, we need it for the model to keep working. We can retrain the model
without the faulty sensor, but eventually it will be ﬁxed and its input restored.
So if we retrained the model without it, we would then now need to retrain it
again once the sensor is ﬁxed, which is not a very optimal way to handle it.
Instead what we could do, at least in the case where the model will output all
the features that it takes as input, we can then feed the predicted value, from
the model, to itself, as the input of the faulty sensor while its broken.
This way we don’t have to retrain our model every time something fails, or
if some part of a plant is getting changed in a way where some sensors are
removed and multiple new ones are introduced. Then in the period until we
have collected enough data from the new sensors, we can simulate the removed
ones, with the models own predictions. For reasons like this, it would be good to
have the model predict all the input features, even if the customer thinks some
of them aren’t interesting to watch. However in the current form of the tool, we
cannot exclude channels that we predict from being monitored for anomalies,
but this would also be a trivial to implement later, if we want our to have the
ability to do this.
This simulation of measurements is also very useful in the case where we for
some reason don’t have all the features. Currently we discard a sequence if its
incomplete, with the argument that we don’t need the broken data as we have
enough. While this is ﬁne for training, this means that for prediction, we don’t
get a prediction for a speciﬁc hour, if the sequence for that hour is incomplete.
The missing data should be marked as an anomaly instead of just skipping the
sequence like the tool does for training. With the missing measuring channels
==PAGE:38==
5.2 Robustness of model
33
marked as anomalies, we could use the predicted values for that hour, and still
look at the measuring channels we have, and decide if they are okay or not. This
is a better approach, because it might be that we are missing data because a
sensor broke down, then the rest of the data should be okay, but there might be
a bigger problem, and if there is, we would like to try and detect this as well,
even with the incomplete sequence.
5.2.2
Test of robustness
In order to ﬁnd out if we should simulate data when sensors are faulty we will
do a small test of the robustness of our model. So we will simulate that a sensor
breaks down for a week, this will be done multiple times with a diﬀerent sensor
each time, then where 2 sensors are missing, and also a test where half of the
sensors are missing. In order to do this, a modiﬁed data set will be fed to the
model, and for simulating that the sensor is missing, we will set its input value
to 1. Whether we set this value to 0, 1 or some large value, doesn’t really matter,
whats important is that it no longer receives the input which follows the ﬂow of
the day, but instead some gibberish value. One could argue that for gibberish
values, inputting a random value would be good, but in a real setting, its more
likely that the value is stuck on the last measured value so random isn’t as good
for this test.
We have taken a model which takes in 31 measuring channels, and outputs 31
measuring channels. We then look at some of the channels where there is a big
diﬀerence in the values, to try and observe if or how much the behavior changes.
In ﬁgure 5.2 just below here, we have a plot of the prediction of the measuring
channel at output 0. Its quite clear to see how some values have a greater impact
that others. All that doesn’t exclude input 1, appear to be performing alright,
but once input 1 is gone, the model is way oﬀ. Its the exact same tendency
in ﬁgure A.12 and ﬁgure A.13, which can be found in the appendix. Its rather
curious, that even when removing half of the input the model is still better at
prediction output 0 and 1, than when input 1 was gone, which was not expected.
Although for output 24 its way oﬀ, as excepted.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Robustness of model
34
Figure 5.2: Plot of predictions of measuring channel at output 0
We can conclude, that simulating the values of faulty sensor will be a good idea.
Now we didn’t check all outputs, and didn’t try to remove all inputs, because
its hard to believe that the results from removing input 1 is a single case. Input
1 is the combined water ﬂow out of the plant, which of course has a correlation
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Exclusion of data
35
to all the other measuring points, as the higher it gets, the more water will
need to be pumped in from all drillings, which increases power consumption
and reduces ground water levels. Therefore its no surprise that the combined
ﬂow out is important. What is surprising, is that we did not see similar results
when removing input 2, which is the combined ﬂow into the water tank, which
the ﬂow out is pumped from, but the conclusion is the same.
5.3
Exclusion of data
We mentioned before that there is a function which allows us to exclude bad
data from the training, and this can be used both when setting up the initial
training, or for the continuous training. i.e. if a day is ﬁlled with anomalies, it
could be a good idea to exclude that whole day, from the training of the model.
But when removing anomalies from the data, one also makes the model more
likely to mark real data as anomalies. Because if the training is done entirely
with anomaly free data, you might end up with a model which becomes too
strict. To avoid this, the exclusion of the data is not done by the model, when
it detects an anomaly, but by the user. This means that false positives will stay
in the training set, and hopefully make a similar false positive not an anomaly.
Now this will mostly be relevant when we choose the distance threshold from
the frequency plot as discussed in section 5.1.3. Actually for the static distance
threshold, which is the current function for deciding if something is an anomaly,
the perfect predicts are very good.
5.4
Mistakes
As with any project, some mistakes were made along the way. Like the initial
assumption that almost no tuning of hyper parameters would be necessary,
the sequence length of the data or the initial means of deciding what is an
anomaly. In section 2.1.5 we discussed batch normalization, and how it is not
recommended when using RNNs. However, what is recommend, and strongly
advised, is normalizing the input data, such that larger scaled values doesn’t
weigh higher during training than lower scaled values.
Now the data which
is used for training values between 0 and 150, with the exception of very few
outliers, where the highest is 1338.
Because of this small scale between the
values, we are able to get useful results even without normalizing the input
data. The water treatment plant which we have used for these tests is a small
one, where the outgoing ﬂow, which is the highest value, isn’t going above these
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Mistakes
36
150 m3
h .
In other larger plants we have values going 10 times this amount, which could
mean that the model would get worse results, because those values might get
weighted higher in training. An other reason that we are getting good results
without data normalization, can be because of the very predictive nature of such
a plant and very high correlation between all the sensor data. When the water
ﬂow is high, then the power consumption of the pumps generating this ﬂow,
will also be high, the water level in the well, will then fall and so forth. While
this is the case in the water treatment plant that we have looked at from KLAR
Forsyning, there are other plants, where they also include levels of chemicals in
the data, either because they mix it in the water for cleaning, or if the water
has earlier been measured to have too high concentrations of pesticides or such
contaminants, then they need to monitor it going forward. These types of data
might not have the same high correlation with the rest of the data.
5.4.1
Solution to data normalization
Regardless of why exactly we are getting good prediction without data normal-
ization, data normalization have now been implemented also. The normalization
is done by a normalization layer in the model, such that the input is normalized
before its used by the LSTM. Before discarding all previous results, a small com-
parison was made, to support the claim made in 5.4, that we get good results
even without any normalization. We see this comparison in ﬁgure 5.3. The true
values are the blue curve, labelled without a ruleId, and then the green curve
is the predicted values from a model using the normalization layer, labelled
SARuleId 93. The red curve is the predicted values from a model not using the
normalization layer, labelled SARuleId 82. Now this is just 1 channel where the
values are compared for a week, in the appendix in ﬁgure A.9, A.10 and A.11
we see 3 other channels. In all ﬁgures, we see that the predictions are very close
to each other, regardless of normalization layer, so we can conclude that it in
this case, is working even without, but the issue has been ﬁxed.
==PAGE:42==
5.4 Mistakes
37
Figure 5.3: Prediction with and without normalized data
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
6.1
The model
We have successfully shown that we can use a LSTM to predict values, which can
be used to decide whether or not, something is an anomaly in a drinking water
treatment plant, and also implementing it, in a way such that it can interface
with an already existing system, which is widely used by supply companies that
Krüger advise today. While it is more conﬁguration heavy than we wanted,
because of the static distance threshold for deciding when a prediction is an
anomaly, its still pretty good as we got really good prediction results from the
model.
It would have been wise to look closer at the predicted values, earlier in the
iterations of the model training, and not just trying to reach good MSE loss
from evaluation of the model, as this could have saved time, and helped avoid
some of the mistakes mentioned in 5.4. Another thing about the training that
should have been done diﬀerently, is that it would have been better to have the
model running using some example data to start with, where it would have been
easier to know if the output of the model was correct. Because there were a
number of problems with the model in the beginning due to the coding mistakes.
With example data it would have been faster getting all the code working, rather
than starting to use the real data, where the output was harder to understand.
==PAGE:44==
6.2 Next steps
39
While a product has been created, it has also opened up a lot of other questions
and opportunities, as it is no surprise that the application of machine learning is
so broad, it does surprise, that what seemed like a solution for just one problem
actually can be used for multiple applications.
6.1.1
Missing tests
The continuous training module has not been tested thoroughly, only by local
system runs, which means that there are properly some unintended features
(bugs) in the code, which will need to be corrected once a real test have been
made. While it, naturally, would have been good to have all tests completed,
this was the least important, as it doesn’t have to be used just yet. Right now
the predictions which are 1 month older than the training set are still doing
just ﬁne, so the continuous training could be set to be once a month. While
it doesn’t need to be implemented just yet, that doesn’t mean that the test
couldn’t have been done. As we have access to years of data, the module could
have been tested extensively, as it will be before running in a real environment.
6.2
Next steps
We will need to implement that the dataloader can use predicted values if the
real data is missing as mentioned in section 5.2.1, such that the model can
continue working, even when the data is not complete. While it would also be
good to switch to simulated data in cases where a sensor is stuck, but we are
still receiving data, this will not be as easy to implement, because sometimes
pumps are standing still for more than 1 day, so it can be diﬃcult to determine
when a sensor is stuck.
Implementing the possibility to choose between diﬀerent types of models, where
the ﬁrst will most likely be a CNN to compare the results, as this was part of the
initial plan. Having more models could also be used to have multiple sources to
decide whether a value is an anomaly or not, which was also one of the original
ideas to make it useful, even in the case where the predictions had not been as
close to the real values, as they are.
The fact, that the modules, in their current form, can actually be used for
more than just anomaly detection, as we also have prediction of values, is very
strong. One application of the predictions, in their current form, is to use them
to optimize the energy eﬃciency of the plant.
Because the predicted values
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Next steps
40
from the model takes things like if the current day is a weekday or weekend into
account, it is a much more reliable source when trying to estimate how much
water is needed in the next hour. This prediction can be used to calculate the
number of pumps needed, which in turn can allow us to run with a more eﬃcient
number of pumps at a given time.
Another thing to implement, is for the model to be able to train using data
of higher resolution, as some plants have data pr minute for some measuring
channels, because this could make the number of pumps problem mentioned just
before, even more eﬃcient, as we can switch oﬀunneeded pumps even earlier.
What might even be needed now, but will deﬁantly be needed if using data of
higher resolution, is some way of training the models on other systems than the
server running the SCADA system. It will vary depending on the size of the
dataset they choose to use, but ultimately there will be servers which do not
have enough memory to perform the initial training. But here comes another
strength of using V-History as data interface, because this means the structure
of the data is the same for all installations. Because most of the installations
aren’t accessible from outside a supply company’s internal network, and actually
doesn’t have access to the outside, then it won’t be able to use some external
server to run the training. But it would be possible to backup their database and
simply restoring it on one of Krügers servers, because its a V-History database,
the structure will always be the same. Having the database on a Krüger server
means we can both run the training our selves, or use whatever means we want,
and then move the saved model to the supply company’s server where it should
be able to perform the predictions without any problems. If the continuous
training will also be a problem is hard to tell, the datasets for continuous training
will be a lot smaller, so it will hopefully not be a problem, but as its not fully
developed, its hard to tell at the moment.
==PAGE:46==
Appendix A
Appendix
==PAGE:47==
42
Figure A.1: Screen capture of a daily report in V-History
==PAGE:48==
43
Figure A.2: Screen capture of a daily report in V-History, with a graph opened
==PAGE:49==
44
Figure A.3: Screen capture of Histdef in V-History, the measuring channel
deﬁnition interface
==PAGE:50==
45
Figure A.4: Screen capture of SmartAssistantDef in V-History, the deﬁnition
interface for the rule system, where the machine learning models
are deﬁned.
Linear Model #
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Learning rate
10−6
10−7
10−8
10−8
10−8
10−8
10−7
10−7
Weight decay
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
0.05
2
0.15
0.2
Table A.1: Linear regression all models hyper parameters
LSTM Model #
1
2
3
4
5
Learning rate
10−6
10−7
10−8
10−7
10−7
Weight decay
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
LSTM layers
3
3
3
2
3
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
Hidden size
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
Table A.2: LSTM all models hyper parameters table 1/4
==PAGE:51==
46
LSTM Model #
6
7
8
9
Learning rate
10−7
10−7
10−6
10−6
Weight decay
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
LSTM layers
3
3
2
15
Dropout
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
Hidden size
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
2
3(Ni + No)
Table A.3: LSTM all models hyper parameters table 2/4
LSTM Model #
10
11
12
13
14
Learning rate
10−6
10−6
10−6
10−6
10−6
Weight decay
0.1
0.1
0
0.15
0
LSTM layers
3
2
2
1
2
Dropout
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
0.1
Hidden size
2
3(Ni + No)
Ni+No
1.2
Ni+No
1.4
Ni+No
1.4
Ni + No
Table A.4: LSTM all models hyper parameters table 3/4
LSTM Model #
15
16
17
18
Learning rate
10−6
10−6
10−6
10−6
Weight decay
0
0
0
0
LSTM layers
2
2
3
5
Dropout
0.15
0.2
0.1
0.05
Hidden size
Ni + No
Ni + No
Ni + No
Ni + No
Table A.5: LSTM all models hyper parameters table 4/4
==PAGE:52==
47
Figure A.5: Mean Squared Error for all Linear models
Figure A.6: Accuracy for Linear all models
==PAGE:53==
48
Figure A.7: Mean Squared Error for all LSTM models
Figure A.8: Accuracy for LSTM all models
==PAGE:54==
49
Figure A.9: Prediction with and without normalized data for power usage
Figure A.10: Prediction with and without normalized data, water ﬂow of
drilling # 3
==PAGE:55==
50
Figure A.11: Prediction with and without normalized data.
distance from
measuring point to water level of drilling # 1
==PAGE:56==
51
Figure A.12: Plot of predictions of measuring channel at output 1
==PAGE:57==
52
Figure A.13: Plot of predictions of measuring channel at output 24
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[Cul18] Eugenio Culurciello.
The fall of rnn / lstm, 2018.
https://
towardsdatascience.com/the-fall-of-rnn-lstm-2d1594c74ce0.
[Eck18] Karsten Eckhardt.
Choosing the right hyperparameters for a sim-
ple lstm using keras, 2018.
https://towardsdatascience.com/
choosing-the-right-hyperparameters-for-a-simple-lstm-
using-keras-f8e9ed76f046.
[Gro18] Prince Grover. 5 regression loss functions all machine learners should
know,
2018.
https://heartbeat.fritz.ai/5-regression-loss-
functions-all-machine-learners-should-know-4fb140e9d4b0.
[ML14] Amy Loutf Martin Längkvist, Lars Karlsson. A review of unsupervised
feature learning and deep learning for time-series modeling. Pattern
Recognition Letters, 42 (2014) 11–24, 2014.
[MM18] Andreas Dengel Sheraz Ahmed Mohsin Munir, Shoaib Ahmed Sid-
diqui. Deepant: A deep learning approach for unsupervised anomaly
detection in time series.
Digital Object Identiﬁer, 10.1109/AC-
CESS.2018.2886457, 2018.
[Nie19]
Jesper Bæk Nielsen.
Github for this thesis with the code de-
veloped in the process,
2019.
https://github.com/darekion/
AnomalyDetection.
[NM17] Andreas Emrich David Enke Peter Fettke Peter Loos Nijat Mehdiyev,
Johannes Lahann. Time series classiﬁcation using deep learning for
process planning: A case from the process industry. Procedia Computer
Science, 114 (2017) 242–249, 2017.
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
54
[TC17]
César Laurent Çaglar Gülçehre Aaron Courville Tim Cooijmans, Nico-
las Ballas, editor. RECURRENT BATCH NORMALIZATION, 2017.
[VC09]
VIPIN KUMAR VARUN CHANDOLA, ARINDAM BANERJEE.
Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 41, No.
3, Article 15, 2009.
