==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exploring industrial symbiosis potentials
using data driven approaches
Emilie Trouillard
Kongens Lyngby 2019
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Waste management and natural resources depletion are two main environmental is-
sues that are consequences of the consumption society. Industrial symbiosis (IS) is
a possible solution to both of them as it implies using the waste from one company
to replace raw materials in another proximate company. However, as yet industrial
symbiosis is little practised, and severe data and knowledge gaps on the potentials
exist. With the topical circular economy agenda, there is rising interest into clarifying
the potentials of industrial symbiosis.
The purpose of this thesis is to apply data analysis methods on existing waste-related
datasets in order to give insights about industrial symbiosis potentials. In particular,
the investigation focuses on identifying patterns in resource use and waste production
of the firms in order to identify matches between residues from some industries or
firms and consumption of others.
An important challenge that emerged throughout the project is that the existing
datasets are not really suited to this kind of analysis. This is due to some flaws in
their structure and features, some missing data and a lack of documentation about
where the data is coming from.
An exploratory approach is employed, which means that several leads are explored,
in different directions, and that they might not be directly linked together. Given
the quality of their results, the leads are further explored, they suggest new paths to
follow, or they are simply disregarded.
The range of possibilities of such leads is though limited by the data quality issue.
Some interesting results are nevertheless obtained. Different computational tools are
used, such as clustering and outlier detection. Based on them, some methods are
defined, that are able to spot some industries or companies with good IS potentials.
Some other processes also provide information regarding IS at a national scale.
Hence this project presents a list of insights that can be used in order to spot IS
potentials and maybe later actually settle industrial symbioses. It also establishes
that in the case where a suitable dataset was available, the results would be much
better, reliable and useful.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science (DTU Compute) with collaboration of the Innovation Section of the Depart-
ment of Technology, Management and Economics, at the Technical University of
Denmark, in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. degree in Mathe-
matical Modelling and Computation.
This thesis also fulfills the final project requirement for obtaining a Master in En-
gineering (Diplôme d’Ingénieur) from Ecole Centrale Paris (CentraleSupélec), as a
double degree.
It is about exploring the available datasets in order to define and assess industrial
symbiosis potentials.
The project was supervised by Associate Professor Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen
(DTU Compute), Senior Researcher Maj Munch Andersen (DTU Management) and
Postdoc Researcher Lourenço Galvão Diniz Faria (DTU Management).
Kongens Lyngby, August 4, 2019
Emilie Trouillard
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my main supervisor Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen, for help-
ing me find an interesting project but also for guiding me and giving me constructive
feedback throughout these five months. The regular discussions were very helpful,
especially to adapt to the unexpected challenges and keep me on the right direction.
I would also like to thank Maj Munch Andersen and Lourenço Galvão Diniz Faria,
not only for their help and their interesting insights and ideas, but also for the efforts
they made to get interesting datasets for me, which was far from being an easy task.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
A definition of Industrial Symbiosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Waste data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Problem definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Exploratory approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Project overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
IS potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Transition from linear to circular flow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
IS potential per industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Big data approach to implement IS networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Waste water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
The data
21
3.1
The ideal dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
About the NACE classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Statistics Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register) . . . . .
23
3.5
Other datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Theory
33
4.1
Concentration measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Outlier Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Results
49
5.1
First exploration of the pollutants emitted through water
. . . . . . .
49
5.2
IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Factory similarity given the pollutant emissions through water
. . . .
73
5.4
Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry 75
5.5
Investigating the Agriculture industry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.6
Advanced outlier detection regarding the recovery score
. . . . . . . .
95
5.7
Time consistency of the solid waste generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
6
Discussion
107
6.1
Choice of the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
6.2
Exploratory approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
6.3
The data issue
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6.4
About the background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
6.5
Scope of this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
7
Conclusion
111
8
Future Work
113
8.1
Improve the way of dealing with the available datasets . . . . . . . . . 113
8.2
Leads for the ideal dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
8.3
About the background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
8.4
Actually use the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
8.5
Define a quantitative potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
A Lorenz curves
117
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
121
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant
emissions through water
137
D Adapted Isolation Forest Algorithm
149
E Project Plan
153
E.1
Initial Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
E.2
Following the initial project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
Bibliography
157
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Despite serious policy efforts in waste management since the 1960s, resource depletion
and waste accumulation are rising global problems.
In 2014, 11.74 million tonnes of waste were generated in Denmark. About 29% are
municipal solid waste, i.e. generated by households and government activities, while
the remaining 71% come from the companies [Min16]. This is why some attention
is increasingly put on finding novel, more preventive and circular solutions to every
single industrial production practice, in order to reduce this amount of waste.
Figure 1.1: Hierarchy of the different ways of managing waste, adapted from [NSW]
Figure 1.1 presents the hierarchy of the different ways of dealing with waste, sorted
from the most preferable to the least preferable regarding the environment. The focus
of this project is on the second and third categories: reuse and recycle.
1.1
A definition of Industrial Symbiosis
As defined in the Nordregio report 2015:1 [Joh+15], the circular economy (CE) is an
input output system that generates as little economic loss as possible and where most
of the products are reused or recycled within the system, and for instance turned into
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
resources, see Figure 1.2. It has three main goals [Tis+17]. First, these interactions
allow to extend the useful life of materials. Second, it is a way to maximize the mate-
rial service per resource, as in a resource is not disposed while it can still be used for
something. The third objective is to lower environmental impacts of waste disposal
and resource use.
Figure 1.2: European Commission Circular Economy diagram [Eur14]
The industrial symbiosis (IS) is a mean to achieve circular economy. Frosch and Gal-
lopulos (1989) describe it as follows: ”Wastes from one industrial process can serve
as the raw materials for another, thereby reducing the impact of industry on the
environment.” [FG89] It is also defined as the collaboration between at least three
entities who interact by exchanging at least two resources, used as replacements to
products or raw materials [Joh+15].
Chertow (2007) adds a geographical dimension in his definition of IS: ”Industrial sym-
biosis has been defined as engaging traditionally separate industries in a collective
approach to competitive advantage involving physical exchange of materials, energy,
water,and by-products. The keys to industrial symbiosis are collaboration and the
synergistic possibilities offered by geographic proximity” [Che07].
The role model of a successful industrial symbiosis is Kalundborg, in Denmark, which
is also the oldest known industrial symbiosis park in the world.
As shown in Figure 1.3, the symbiosis is at the town-level. It consists of nine pub-
lic and private companies, plus the energy, water and material flows that link them
together. It is made possible by the complementarity of those factories in terms of
inputs and outputs, as well as their geographic proximity.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Waste data collection
3
Figure 1.3: Representation of the Kalundborg Symbiosis [Kal]
1.2
Waste data collection
Most of the available waste-related data is collected for control reasons by the envi-
ronmental authorities. It is in general self-reported, which means that it is not 100%
reliable: companies might indeed underestimate, on purpose or not, the quantities of
waste they emit.
The purpose of such datasets is to be able to access and control the emissions of
pollutants and waste, as well as generate data for the European Union. Hence, they
are not perfectly adapted for IS-oriented studies. The two main flaws are the lack of
data regarding the input flows of the companies, i.e. the materials they use, and the
lack of details about the waste nature, such as its quality, its physical form, etc.
Despite these limitations, this is the closest of the real picture that can be obtained
about waste generation at this level.
1.3
Problem definition
Setting up an industrial symbiosis is not an easy process. Among other factors, the
choice of the companies to be involved is key, but also difficult, due to the little
amount of available information about the resources that could be potentially ex-
changed among them.
This lack of information could be filled with the modern methods using data analy-
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
sis and modelling, assuming that there is a suitable dataset to do so. This project
aims to investigate this possibility. However, the data challenge reveals harder than
expected, mostly because there is not really such suitable dataset available for that
purpose.
Hence, the research focuses on how to use data driven methods investigating the
available datasets in a European and partly Danish setting, in order to assess IS
potentials and give IS-related insights.
1.4
Exploratory approach
In that perspective, an exploratory approach is used, on the different datasets that
are available and seem relevant. It means that various leads are investigated in order
to determine whether they can provide interesting IS-related results. This exploration
process follows a cyclic succession of steps, illustrated in Figure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: The data exploration process
Depending on how interesting the results of an experiment are, it is decided to either
explore that lead deeper or to drop it and start something else.
All data manipulations are performed on Python3 [Pyt15], using libraries such as
pandas [McK+10] or scikit-learn [Ped+11].
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Project overview
5
1.5
Project overview
The project has the following structure.
Chapter 2 presents an overview of the challenges and key aspects of the IS and more
generally the circular economy: it is the background of the project. It is necessary
to understand the challenges and opportunities of this subject, in order to determine
the relevant things to look for in the data and results.
Chapter 3 aims to describe all the different datasets that were considered for this
study. Those that are actually not used in the project are only briefly described,
while the main ones are presented in details.
Then, the theory of the methods that are used in the project are introduced in Chap-
ter 4. These descriptions are written as high level as possible, but still keeping in
mind their application.
The results of these applications are presented in Chapter 5, along with some dis-
cussion. Some of the experiments that are performed are chosen as a consequence of
analyzing the results of a previous exploration. Hence, presenting the description and
discussion of the results in the same chapter allows the reader to follow the thought
processes that lead to these particular choices of models.
Chapter 6 is another discussion, about the project as a whole. The idea is to in-
terpret the results on a higher level, and be critical on what they imply.
The conclusion, in Chapter 7, is a summary of the main findings of the project.
Finally, some ideas of future work, as well as the perspectives that are opened by
this project, are described in Chapter 8.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
The purpose of this Chapter is to present the context of the project. It helps to keep
in mind the actual applications of the data analyses that are performed, and gives
the necessary knowledge to understand the challenges and opportunities that are at
stake.
2.1
IS potential
The main goal of this project is to be able to target the entities - factories, industries,
etc. - that would be the best to include and match in an IS system, i.e. to find those
that have a high industrial symbiosis potential, either as a receiver or a donor of waste
(solid or fluid). However, this potential is not an easy concept to define, because many
parameters are at stake, and not easily quantifiable [Che07]. Furthermore, there is
very limited literature about it [BSM11], [Vel17]. Therefore this section is mostly
based on intuition and personal understanding of the background, its opportunities
and challenges.
First, a list of intuitive criteria for this potential is built. It is then discussed, taking
into account the practical subtleties and limitations.
2.1.1
Potential in theory
The first interpretation of the IS potential is to evaluate how well an entity is suited
for an IS system. The easier it would be to integrate it in an IS system, the higher
the potential.
A company or industry with a high IS potential would in that case have the following
characteristics:
• Its waste emissions are Dirac distributed: a few waste types are generated in
big quantities, while the others are ideally not generated at all;
• The types of waste that are emitted are materials that can be reused or recycled;
• Those emissions are constant in time;
• The input resources can come from reused or recycled waste;
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
• Since IS usually is more profitable between geographically proximate firms
[Joh+15], it is better if the company can move, or has few geographical criteria
for its implantation place. Indeed, the waste is in general a low-value material,
whereas its transportation is costly. Thus, the shorter the flows, the better,
and identifying potential symbiosis matches between proximate companies is
therefore of key interest.
2.1.2
From theory to practice
The criteria that were presented in the previous section are nice in the sense that they
would not be difficult to assess from a dataset, a priori. However, they do not reflect
exactly the reality, and some other external parameters should also be considered
when trying to define the IS potential.
First, one has to keep in mind that innovation is constantly on the move and might
introduce new processes at any time. Hence, the limitation around the inputs and
outputs being materials that are possible to reuse or recycle, is not as strict. Setting
up an IS network could also include doing research about recover processes for the
types of waste to be exchanged in the system, considering that novel applications are
often involved.
A limitation to the assessment of IS potential is that the actual value of the waste is
not known. A good measure for this value is needed in order to evaluate the benefits
of the IS, and hence optimize it. It can be related to the quantity of the waste, but
also to its quality, how pure it is for instance, or just to its nature itself. This kind of
information is not directly available in the datasets. That is why, for this matter, the
inputs of experts would be very useful to help understand and interpret the available
data.
Another thing to consider in this study is the dynamic of the company, i.e.
how
its waste management and eco-strategies evolve in time. Indeed, a company that is
willing to be more circular and tries to change some things in its management in
that perspective, would then be likely to do some efforts to be involved in a circular
network.
Lastly, some institutional and organizational parameters also have an influence on
the potential. They can be related to regulatory frameworks, willingness of local au-
thorities and companies to support or engage in such clusters, etc.
All these elements show that the IS potential is not an easy concept to define clearly.
It is even less obvious when considering that a high potential can also come from
a company that has a high waste value (in terms of quantity, quality or nature of
waste) but is not doing much to recover it, as detailed in the next section.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Transition from linear to circular flow
9
2.1.3
Biggest gain from turning to IS
This approach to IS potential is quite the opposite from what is presented in section
2.1.1. Instead of looking for entities that would be the easiest to include in an indus-
trial symbiosis, it is the gain from doing so that is assessed. Indeed, if a company is
already in the circular mindset, and recycles a consequent part of its waste, it would
be ”easy” to include it in an IS system, but the difference in terms of waste savings
would not be massive.
For instance, some companies would be easy to include because they are generating
waste that is simple to recycle, such as paper, wood or metal scrapes. Those are
approximately fulfilling the criteria presented in section 2.1.1. On the other hand,
the ones that have a lot of waste but where there is a lack of knowledge about the
recovery potentials, or a lack of recovery processes, are also highly interesting for IS.
As an example, a lot of plastic is collected from companies and municipal waste, but
there are very few existing methods to recycle it. Those companies and materials
represent a high waste value to include in a circular economy, and hence a potential
big (positive) impact on the environment.
However, if the chosen company is not doing much regarding waste recovery, more
effort will be necessary to include it in an IS system, but it would make a bigger
difference in the long term on the quantities of disposed waste.
Yet, that additional effort still has to be reasonable and feasible. One way to measure
that is to compare the similar entities (i.e. companies from the same industry for in-
stance): if one of them has a very poor circular behaviour, as in does not do much
for waste recovery, but the others are ”performing” well, then it can be assumed that
this not so circular one could be improved quite easily, following the example of the
others.
To continue on this path, if in a group of similar entities, one of them has a more
circular behaviour regarding waste compared to the others, it can be seen as a doable
business practice and an example to follow. It showed the way for all the others,
which should then make the effort to catch up that good entity. In that case, the
whole group has quite a good potential.
2.2
Transition from linear to circular flow
Changing from a regular linear production system to a circular one by joining an
industrial symbiosis is a big step to take for a company. Three challenges are at stake
in that situation [DB15].
First, the company might have to define a new business model.
There might be
more expenses on the reuse/recycle logistics and innovation needs, but on the other
hand some money can be spared from the old waste disposal expenses, as well as the
raw material input management.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
Second, it is also important to maintain the quality and performance of the activity
despite the change. In an IS system, the input and output streams are respectively
influenced by and influencing the other companies of the agreement. The production
rhythms should then be able to vary without having bad consequences on the overall
firm activity.
Finally, the new system has to be controlled and managed properly, which might
not involve the same methods as a linear operation. In particular, the speed of the
circular flow has to be controlled once it is implemented. Indeed, some of the reused
waste might have a time-limited life cycle, which means the loop has to be optimized
in that extent.
2.2.1
Reasons change to IS
Despite the awareness of the global resource depletion and and waste accumulation
issues, the companies need to find motivations to join an IS, regarding their compet-
itiveness, business etc.
A requirement and motivation to build an industrial symbiosis is that the partners
recognize a net cost saving [EC02]. As mentioned before, some costs are reduced or
removed: the input materials might be cheaper, and some waste management costs
might be reduced, as a result of new contracts being established between firms [FP17].
A loop economy, which is fitted for IS, allows the companies to do profit without ex-
ternalising costs and risks associated with waste [Gei+17]. Furthermore, the waste
emitted by the companies has value, which they are often not aware of. If the leaders
realize this business potential, they are likely to grow an interest in circular strategies
in order to actually use this value.
Additionally, this is a way to enforce the European Union Waste Framework Directive,
which states that the waste recover must increase by 70 % by weight in Europe by
2020 [Eur16]. It can be expected that more regulations will be enforced in the future
towards waste reduction. Hence, starting the process now allows the companies to be
ready for them and to be one step ahead.
Some opportunities appear with the marketing of ”green products” and opens a new
market share for the company’s activities [Hen+02].
However, many barriers are restraining companies from doing this transition.
2.2.2
Barriers to the IS transition
Circular Economy and Industrial Symbiosis started developing more than forty years
ago with for instance the Kalundborg Symbiosis in 1972 [Kal]. Even though it is
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Transition from linear to circular flow
11
quite old, it has barely expanded and it is still almost non existent.
The reason why IS and circular economy in general are almost not developing at all is
that there are multiple barriers that discourage the companies from taking the steps
toward the circular management.
Those barriers, or in a more optimistic way, those challenges, are listed in the liter-
ature and can be organized in three categories: practical challenges, that are linked
to economic or technical matters; challenges related to the behavior changes; and
challenges that lie in the circular model as such [PS14].
2.2.2.1
Practical challenges
There is a general lack of public awareness of circular economy and even more of in-
dustrial symbiosis [WKD17], [Su+13]. One result of an informative survey conducted
in China in 2010 [Xue+10] is that 16.70% of the 252 interviewed officials had just
heard of CE. It is a very high number, and it shows that authorities still have to
improve their knowledge and understanding of CE and IS to be able to support their
expansion. It is also the case of the public, thus some communication has to be done
around these matters, so that people, and especially the decision-makers of companies
are aware of the opportunities coming along.
This low level of knowledge about CE implies also that the companies lack informa-
tion and have no qualified personnel in this subject, who would be able to perform
an expert analysis on these opportunities and eventually find a way to make the com-
pany move towards CE. [Kum+19],[Su+13]
Furthermore, the government and local authorities, which have significant roles in
the key decisions made by the companies, do not give any clear directive regarding
CE and IS [WKD17]. There is a general legislation that aims at promoting CE, but
it is not followed by other regulations, legislation, and development of effective policy
instruments [Nau14]. It means that there is no solid legal background to hold law
enforcement and guidance towards CE.
In the same domain, there is no tax regulation that encourage companies to turn
to circular systems, it is even often the opposite: sometimes, it is cheaper to buy new
raw materials than to get them from reuse or recycle streams [Nau14], [GD08]. This
is the case in China for example, where the resource taxes are very low [GD08].
Additionally, inserting a company in a circular system is costly, and requires an in-
vestment that is paid back in the long term. This long term scale often needs a longer
period than the usual term limit, which is a managerial challenge [LB14]. Also, that
investment is not affordable for most companies, except the large ones. Since they
get no financial support from the authorities and the banks, most companies have to
avoid doing the transition, even if they are willing to [Kum+19], [GD08].
Also, the whole structure of the companies might have to change: the production
flow has to be flexible and able to adapt to variable input streams, and the chains
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
have to become eco-industrial [LB14] which might require some material upgrades,
and thus imply more costs. Again, the lack of information about the operation of
such chains is another challenge to CE.
Finally, these uncertainties about long-term investments and lack of knowledge turn
the CE transition into a high-risk operation for the companies, which in the end prefer
to stick with their strategies rather than taking that risk [Kum+19].
2.2.2.2
Behavior challenges
Changing from a linear and individual operation to an IS is not only a material chal-
lenge. The company in general and its members have to change their mindset to an
awareness of environmental challenges, as well as revise their behavior to be more
eco-responsible and adapt to the new needs of the circular system [PS14].
First, the communication system has to be changed in order to share the right infor-
mation. This has to be done internally in the company, but also externally [Su+13].
Indeed, the stakeholders of the different companies, such as business managers, or
supply chain engineers have to build a communication channel to work together, in
order to manage and coordinate the different streams. This is a big change as most
managers are only focused on their own company and its benefit. In an industrial
symbiosis, the profit is not the only key indicator anymore: every company has to
make sure their own management decisions are coordinated with the whole system.
For instance, one factory cannot decide to double its production just like that; be-
cause it would not have the appropriate input flow, and its output will be too big for
the next company in the loop to handle. [Kum+19]
The companies have adopt a collaborative business model, and in that way accept this
group symbiosis and the fact that their own profit does not always come first. This
requires a change of state of mind that all companies are not ready to make.[Kum+19]
Lastly, another necessary behavior change is the one of the customers.
A survey
that was done in Warsaw in 2008 on 200 respondents shows two alarming numbers.
61% of the interviewed people, do not consider it as a problem if the environmen-
tal requirements are not respected in the production process, and 58% do not care
whether the components of the products are safe for the environment [Mro10]. For
now, the key criteria when choosing a product are its price and its look, not its
sustainability or environmental impact. Also, a study about customer perception of
refurbished products [vMB16] shows that the consumers’ willingness to pay is lower
for such products due to a high perceived risk and low perceived quality. However,
as mentioned in the previous paragraph, the circular system implies a raise of certain
costs, which might end up by a raise of the product price. That would in the end
make the product less attractive compare to the same one, but produced in a linear
flow and thus cheaper. Unless the demand is changing, which could be the case if
==PAGE:23==
2.3 IS potential per industry
13
customers were getting more concerned about the sustainability and the environment
effects of the products they buy [Kum+19].
2.2.2.3
Challenges linked to the circular system itself
As presented by Ayres [Ayr99], there is a limitation with the ideal circular economy
principle, which is based on an interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics.
That law states that, in an isolated system, i.e. with no flow between the system and
the outside environment (also called exogenous flow, see section 2.4.2.1), the entropy,
which is a measure of disorder in the system, can only increase over time, until it
reaches the maximum entropy state.
In the case of an ideal industrial symbiosis, there is no exogenous flow, so the system
is isolated and the law can be applied. The result is that the materials cannot be
reused of recycled indefinitely. To be able to do so, the system needs at least an
exogenous input of energy [PS14],[Ayr99].
As a final word on this matter, the transition from a usual linear activity to an
integration in a IS system, thus with a more circular structure, is a big step to make.
Not all companies are able to adapt to it and to take advantage from it. The goal
of this project is to give an idea of how likely a company is to be beneficiary of this
transition.
2.3
IS potential per industry
Winans et. al. (2017) present a literature review of applications of circular economy
to specific domains [WKD17]. Even though industrial symbiosis is only a particular
case of circular economy, this study provides interesting findings regarding IS, which
are summarized in this section.
Six categories are mentioned to be of key interest regarding circular economy and
industrial symbiosis.
The first is the wood, paper and pulp industry, whose firms can share heat and elec-
tricity with municipal power plants.
The plastic industry has also a high potential because of the big quantities of unex-
ploited waste. This is why some initiatives are in progress to improve plastic recycling
and reuse processes.
The third industry at stake is metal. Iron and steel are already being exchanged in
existing industrial symbioses, but some technological innovation is still required to
give more opportunities.
Chemicals also have high IS potential, mainly phosphorus and carbon. The first is
suited for CE which would increase its utilization ratio, while the second is key be-
cause it is the base element for most organic chemicals.
Even though there are not many studies about it, the agriculture industry has some
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
potential regarding the waste management, but also the fertilizers and the land itself.
Last but not least, the circular use of water is a big opportunity for IS. It is detailed
in section 2.5.
As Winans et. al. underlines [WKD17], those fields represent a good potential for IS,
but some research and innovation are always necessary to improve the processes and
optimize the flows.
2.4
Big data approach to implement IS networks
2.4.1
The ideal situation
With a proper dataset, the problem of modelling an industrial symbiosis system is
not complicated. One needs to get data on the inputs and outputs of the companies,
with properties such as quantities, detailed description, etc. [Cec+15]
Then, the idea is quite simple. The first thing to do is to explore the data in order to
see what features are actually available and how precise they are. Then, one should
spot the companies that have matching inputs and outputs, and list the technically
feasible networks. The last step is the implementation of some optimization in order
to get a shortlist of those networks [Bin+15].
The optimization criteria have to be defined. It could be the savings, the flow speed,
the environmental benefits, and many other things.
2.4.2
Waste input/output theory
The input/output tables are a very useful tool in the IS network synthesis, in order
to model the flows and thus be able to optimize the system. The book Waste Input-
Output Analysis [Shi09] contains a good explanation of this theory from scratch. An
overview of this method is presented in this section, as related work.
2.4.2.1
Exogenous and endogenous inputs
A system is a set of different processes, involving inputs and outputs, that are linked
by some interactions within the flows of those inputs and outputs. It means that
some outputs from one process are used as inputs for other processes.
An endogenous - or primary - input is one of those materials that are supplied some-
where in the system, whereas an exogenous input has to be provided from outside the
system. The diagram in Figure 2.1 illustrates these two notions.
Building an IS network is trying to settle as many interactions as possible between
the processes of a system. That is, one goal is to minimize the exogenous inputs. If
one manages to do that, then natural resources and raw materials can be preserved.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Big data approach to implement IS networks
15
Figure 2.1: A representation of a system with rice production and household con-
sumption. The area circled by the broken line refers to the system boundary. The
flows generated inside the boundary are endogenous, and the remaining flows - water,
land - are exogenous. [Shi09]
2.4.2.2
Input/output tables
Usually, the input output table is used in order to optimize a production process
given the demand for the output.
The idea here is to use this process modelling to find which interactions between
different companies would make sense to implement, in order to build an IS network.
A lot of different approaches are used to do this model, the following one is from
Yazan et. al. [YRA16].
Each process involves up to 3 types of flows, which are presented in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Process input and output flows
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
Considering one process i at a time, the input-output model consists of a 3-equation
system:
xi = (I −Ai)−1f i
(2.1)
ri = Rixi
(2.2)
wi = W ixi
(2.3)
The variables in those equations are specific to the process i and are described below.
xi: vector of the gross outputs;
Ai: intermediate coefficient matrix, models the quantities of output products that
are going back to the system as inputs. For example, in a corn culture, some of the
grown corn is used as seeds for the next cycle.
f i: demand vector of outputs;
ri: vector of inputs;
Ri: primary inputs coefficient matrix: amount of input materials needed to create a
unit of output;
wi: vector of by-products and wastes that are emitted from the process;
W i: output coefficient matrix: amount of by-products and wastes that are emitted
for a unit of output produced.
2.4.2.3
Perfect symbiosis
Assuming that the processes are simple (xi = f i in Equation 2.1) and that no exoge-
nous input (i.e. coming from outside of the system) is needed, a perfect industrial
symbiosis occurs when all the inputs are substituted by reused waste, and all the
waste is also used. This can be described by the equation:
n
∑
i=1
W i
l f i =
n
∑
p=1
∑
k∈Φl
Ψlk
Rp
k
ρlk
f p, ∀l
(2.4)
where:
l stands for a kind of waste;
k stands for a kind of input;
i stands for a process, i.e. a transformation of input into waste and output. There
are n processes in the system;
Φl is the set of all primary inputs that can be substituted by waste l;
Ψlk is the repartition coefficient: the fraction of input k that is obtained from the
waste l;
ρlk is the conversion factor: the amount of input k that can be obtained with a unit
of waste l;
It is also expected, in case of perfect symbiosis, to have ∀k, ∑
l Ψlk = 1.
However, such a perfect IS is an ideal optimum that is hardly reached in practice
[YRA16].
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Waste water
17
The proof of this formula is presented in the paper [YRA16].
The point here is
to show that some theoretical models exist for the IS, not to explore them in depth.
Furthermore, all the parameters in the equation can only be known (or approximated)
by some experts within the companies. Hence, this model might be used a posteriori,
to evaluate an IS performance, but in practice it would not be possible to use it on
the whole big dataset.
2.4.3
Real-life limitations
The problem is, it is rare to have a complete and accurate dataset, which is necessary
to implement the input/output model. No such dataset was available for this project,
which means that this method is not used. However, it is still interesting to see that
there is some theoretical modelling that can be applied, because it is a motivation to
build the appropriate dataset in order to be able to use it.
A semantic approach to IS network implementation has been presented a couple of
times [Cec+15], [TCR14] in order to counter act the lack of precision in the available
data classification. This is a trade-off between full consistency and using the data as
much as possible.
It uses an ontology to represent the data, their properties and how they interact. This
will not be further detailed as it is not used in this project, and is quite theory-heavy.
2.5
Waste water
The main focus of circular economy and IS flows is solid waste. Therefore, including
waste water treatment and pollutant extraction is rarely even considered, even though
it represents a great opportunity. Hence, data issues are especially big in this context.
2.5.1
Waste water reuse
The waste water treatment alone could be a source of energy savings, and be very
well fitted for an IS system.
First of all, waste water could be treated in order to be purified and reused. Some
research are done to develop processes that are suited for specific industries in that
purpose. For instance, in the dairy industry, which is one of the most polluting food
industries in terms of volume (with 0.2 to 10L of waste water generated per litre of
produced milk) [Vou+08] aims at purify the waste water in order to reuse it internally,
in a circular way. The idea is that according to the degree of purification of the water,
it can be reused for different purposes [Vou+08]. Vourch et. al. (2008) also cite
efforts and emerging methods that are developed in other food industries, such as
beverage or poultry.
An even better process would be to reuse both the cleansed water and the elements
that were extracted from it during the purification.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Background
2.5.2
Compounds extraction from waste water
2.5.2.1
Methods
Methane extraction from the water could produce electricity instead of consuming it
[MBK11]. Also, the recovery of phosphate and ammonium, which are ions obtained
from respectively phosphorus and nitrogen, could be used to create fertilizer, ready
to be distributed to agriculture facilities [LYR15]. In particular, if the waste water
has high concentrations of phosphate and ammonium, which is the case of livestock
waste water, the nutrients could be recovered as struvite, which is a solid and hence
highly concentrated form of fertilizer, easier to store and transport. [LYR15].
Figure 2.3 shows the opportunities of waste water treatment and several ways to reuse
it at different steps of the process.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Waste water
19
Figure 2.3: Waste water treatment presents multiple opportunities for recovery and
energy savings. Figure from [LYR15].
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Background
2.5.2.2
Key compounds
This paragraph aims at present the extraction and reuse opportunities for some el-
ements to be found in waste water. That is helpful in order to get a better under-
standing of the implications of some results to be presented in Chapter 5.
The most common compounds to be extracted from water in a reuse perspective
are the nutrients, i.e. nitrogen and phosphorus. They are usually turned into fertil-
izer, either remaining in the water, or following a precipitation process to produce
struvite for instance. If safety requirements are fulfilled, the nutrients can also be
upgraded to food or feed ingredients, such as the microbial proteins from aglae or
bacteria.
Organic carbon, which is one of the most common pollutants in waste water, can
also be retrieved in two different ways. If there is a mix of different carbon sources
with high concentrations, biogas can be created using anaerobic digestion. If the waste
water is rich in specific organics, again with high concentrations, various fermenta-
tion processes can be applied to produce platform chemicals. Platform chemicals are
building blocks which can be converted to a wide range of chemicals or materials
[Klä14].
Metals, such as nickel, zinc, or copper, can be recovered from waste water using
electrochemical technologies. It is however not applied at full scale yet, but some
research are going in that direction.
There are no common methods for the extraction of the other compounds present
in the results, such as benzene, chlorides, fluorides or arsenic.
2.5.3
Challenges to circular waste water treatment
For now, more energy is necessary to treat waste water than it is produced through
the process [MBK11]. Also, the technologies to be able to perform the extractions
mentioned above are still in the development state, and are facing difficulties to
expand and thrive on a large scale. To be able to do that, they would need support
from governments and authorities [LYR15]. Also, a communication campaign could
reveal useful, as the main barrier to invest in waste water treatment, and even more
in including it in circular processes, is the uncertainty about what methods to use,
and how to use them. [LYR15].
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
The data
In this Chapter, the different available datasets are introduced: the opportunities
they provide are presented, as well as their limitations.
3.1
The ideal dataset
To be able to perform this study perfectly, the dataset should provide a certain num-
ber of features.
First, the data should be on the factory scale, and the details about the factories
should as well be available, such as the country (or better, its location), the quan-
tified input and output flows, with a detailed description of their composition (the
ideal would be to have the same characterization system for the inputs and the out-
puts), and this at different times: yearly is fine, weekly or monthly would be more
interesting.
Unfortunately, no such dataset was found. Among all the datasets that were con-
sidered, and that are described in this section, only two were used, each of them
having interesting properties.
3.2
About the NACE classification
The NACE nomenclature [Eur19b] is used by most of the datasets, to classify the com-
panies according to their activity. Hence, it is also the basis of the activity-related
results, and it is necessary to understand how it works.
Rev. 2 of the NACE code is used. It has the form AXX.YZ.
A is a letter, and it refers to the industry. That is the highest level of the classifica-
tion.
XX is a one or two-digit number that refers to what is called big sector in this project.
The big sectors are sub categories of the industry. For instance, the industry Agricul-
ture, forestry and fishing, coded by the letter A, has three big sectors: Crop animal
production, hunting and related service activities; Forestry and logging; and Fishing
and aquaculture.
Similarly, Y is the sector level, and Z is the subsector level.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 The data
For instance, the NACE code F43.1.1 designates the Demolition subsector.
It is
part of the sector F43.1, which is Demolition and site preparation, and of the big sec-
tor F43, Specialised construction activities. Finally the industry, F, is Construction.
Sometimes the industry code is not included in the NACE, because it can be de-
duced from the big sector code. Indeed, the big sector codes 1 to 3 belong to industry
A, 5 to 9 are from industry B and so on (there is no big sector 4).
The industry C, which is Manufacture, is very big and has a wide variety of big
sectors. Hence, a sub-classification of this industry is used, which is already in the
data for the Statistics Denmark and E-PRTR datasets. It is presented in Table 3.1.
Code
Industry name
Big sector codes
CA
Manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco
10 - 12
CB
Textiles and leather products
13 - 15
CC
Wood and paper products and printing
16 - 18
CD
Oil refinery etc.
19
CE
Manufacture of chemicals
20
CF
Pharmaceuticals
21
CG
Manufacture of plastic, glass and concrete
22 - 23
CH
Basic metals and fabricated metal products
24 - 25
CI
Manufacture of electronic components
26
CJ
Electrical equipment
27
CK
Manufacture of machinery
28
CL
Transport equipment
29 - 30
CM
Manufacture of furniture and other manufacturing etc.
31 - 33
Table 3.1: Classification of the manufacture activities
Those industry, big sector, sector and subsector terms are used a lot in this project
to refer to the level of classification.
3.3
Statistics Denmark
The official Danish Statistics provide some free data tables on energy, water and waste
on statistikbanken.dk [Sta]. They are aggregated, and the maximum number of
datapoints that can be retrieved at once is 10,000.
Some tables were studied more in depth.
• Waste generation by industry and waste category (AFFALD01): this ta-
ble presents the amount of waste generated by subsector (using the NACE code)
and year. It is classified in 13 big solid waste categories, divided into 29 sub-
categories. 236 NACE categories are present. The data is yearly, from 2011 to
==PAGE:33==
3.4 E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register)
23
2015. Even though the original dataset is detailed on the factory level, only an
industry-aggregated version is available.
This table is actually used in this project, mostly because of the detailed infor-
mation on the waste type.
Due to the aggregation, no distinction is made between missing data and a
quantity of generated waste equal to zero. Hence, it is difficult to assess the
quality of the dataset, and the only way to approximately do it would be to
have a close look at the numbers and try to spot the suspicious values. But this
requires an expertise on the matter, hence for this project it is considered that
the data is correct.
• Economy-wide material flow accounts by material type and indicator
(MRM2): this table is the only one that was found with data on the input flows.
However, it is aggregated on the national level: there is no information about
the factories or even their sector. Additionally, the classification of the input
elements is not the same as the one used for the waste in the table that was
previously described. Hence, it is not directly possible to link those two tables.
That is why this ”input” table is not used in the end.
3.4
E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer
Register)
3.4.1
General information about the dataset
This dataset provides information on the emissions of factories from all European
countries. It can be accessed online [Eur18]. Version 14 of the database was used in
this project, because it was the latest available at the beginning.
Not all companies have to report to the E-PRTR, there are some conditions on their
sector and some thresholds on the emissions. According to the E-PRTR regulations
[Eur], a facility has to report data under E-PRTR if it fulfills the following criteria:
• The facility falls under at least one of the 65 E-PRTR economic activities listed
in Annex I of the E-PRTR Regulation and exceeds at least one of the E-PRTR
capacity thresholds
• The facility transfers waste off-site which exceed specific thresholds set out in
Article 5 of the Regulation.
• The facility releases pollutants which exceed specific thresholds specified for
each media - air, water and land - in Annex II of the E-PRTR Regulation.
3.4.2
Tables
The dataset is built on an SQL structure, and it has 3 main tables:
==PAGE:34==
24
3 The data
• WasteTransfer,
• PollutantRelease,
• PollutantTransfer.
Alongside there are other tables that give information on the facility that emits and
its activity, the transfer method used, etc.
There are around 400 different activity sectors, with their full NACE code (old version
though, see section3.4.3), which allow to aggregate the companies in different level
categories regarding their activity.
3.4.2.1
WasteTransfer
This table shows the amount of solid waste that was transferred from the companies
to some treatment.
It has 558,274 rows, of waste transfer quantities. Only 282 of those quantities are
missing, which is fine.
It can be linked to the facility table to get information about the emitter: its industry,
location, etc.
However, there is almost no available information about the nature of the waste. Only
the three following categories aim at characterising the waste:
• Hazardous waste within country,
• Hazardous waste outside country,
• Non hazardous waste.
Some clustering would be possible, but this is way too much aggregated on the waste
type to perform solid waste data analysis.
The transfer type of the waste, when available, is either recover or disposal. It means
that all the waste that goes to disposal could potentially be reused in an IS system.
The issue is that the nature of waste is not available, apart from that 3-category split.
Still, this table can be used to draw some profiles on how much of the waste is reused,
among all the waste. And this can be done at different scales: country, industry,
factory, etc.
Also, there are very few details about the meaning of those two categories, Recovery
and Disposal. For instance, it is not clear in which would belong the waste that goes
to incineration.
It is hence considered that Recovery means that the waste is to be somehow reused
or recycled, and it will only be considered that the more recovered waste, the better.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register)
25
3.4.2.2
PollutantRelease
This table shows the pollutant emissions in air, water and land. The quantity of each
pollutant is presented in kg, but there is no information about the concentrations.
These tables are pretty well detailed on the nature of the pollutant that is released,
which is interesting.
The table has 431,944 rows.
Some pollutants that are released through water can be retrieved with specific pro-
cesses, see section 2.5.2, and might be reused by some industries. That is the first
thing that makes this table interesting for the project.
The second is more method-oriented: the idea is that this dataset would be close
to perfect if it had solid waste instead of water pollutants. Hence, the structure of
the exploratory analysis to be performed on this table would also be applicable to a
proper solid waste table.
3.4.2.3
PollutantTransfer
This table is quite similar to the PollutantRelease, but it is about the transfers, i.e.
the products that are transferred off-site for treatment. It is not used in the study,
because the two other tables are preferred and this one does not bring any more useful
information.
3.4.2.4
Overall structure
The data is structured around reports, that are published yearly and provide data to
the different tables. The companies might then appear several times in the data, if
they register several reports. It is expected to be the case for most of them. The time
range of these reports is between 2001 and 2016 for pollutants, and 2007 to 2016 for
solid waste.
3.4.3
NACE code issue
A NACE table is available in the database, to reference the big sector, sector and
subsector codes to their industry and name, but it appears it has two main flaws.
First, some subsector to industry links are missing, but this has been easily fixed.
The empty cells were manually filled with help from the official NACE description
[Eur19b].
The other issue, which is way more important, is that the NACE classification in
this database is a mix between the old NACE version (Rev. 1.1) and the current
one (Rev. 2). Indeed, the NACE codes in the facility tables are either in the format
NACE_1.1:XX.XX or XX.XX, which refer respectively to the old and the current
versions of the NACE nomenclature.
The reason why a version is preferred over
==PAGE:36==
26
3 The data
the other is not clear. The NACE table is referring to the Rev. 1.1. All this con-
fusion is due to the lack of documentation for the NACE related table in the database.
In order to fix this issue, two tasks had to be done.
First, a new NACE table was created in the database, that describes the Rev.2 ver-
sion. (It is the version that is chosen to be used in the whole dataset.) This was done
using the official description of the nomenclature [Eur19b].
Second, the old-version codes had to be converted to their equivalent in the current
NACE system. In that purpose, a new column was added in the existing NACE ta-
ble, with the best-fitting Rev.2 code to each of the codes. This was done using some
NACE documentation and a conversion table [Eur17].
Then another issue arises: the two tables are not equivalent. Indeed, that some cat-
egories in the old version are split in the current version. For instance, the Hotels
& restaurants sector in Rev. 1.1 is split between Hotels and Restaurants in Rev. 2.
Thus, this conversion is not completely reliable.
Despite the difficulties, a quite clean NACE table with Rev. 2 is then built and is
used in the queries during the data fetching. It is later called NaceCode table.
3.4.4
Amount of data per country
One interesting aspect of this dataset is that is provides data from all European
countries. However, it is quite imbalanced, as in some countries have many more
datapoints than others. The amount of data per country is presented in Figure 3.1.
(a) Number of factories per country
(b) Number of datapoints per country
Figure 3.1: Amount of available data per country
It can be seen that most Eastern countries and Iceland have very few data, which
==PAGE:37==
3.4 E-PRTR (European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register)
27
means that it is difficult to draw proper conclusions about them, based only on this
dataset.
On the other hand, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy and Spain have good
amounts of datapoints from many factories.
3.4.5
Data reliability and missing data
This paragraph aims at discussing the quality of the E-PRTR dataset and its limita-
tions with regards to the project.
3.4.5.1
Missing data in the WasteTransfer table
Table 3.2 presents the available quantities of emitted solid waste for the company
with facilityid = 229176.
Recover
Disposal
Hazardous waste
within country
Non hazardous
waste
Hazardous waste
within country
Non hazardous
waste
2007
16,900
2008
2,080
26,500
2009
12,200
13,100
2010
23,900
23,300
2011
29,500
37,300
Table 3.2: Available data for company 229176 - quantities in tonnes. Empty cells
mean that no data is available for that type of waste and type of treatment. The
rows for years between 2012 and 2016, and the columns for hazardous waste outside
country, are not in the table because they never have available data.
It shows that the dataset is suspicious, as in the emissions of a company should be
quite similar every year, at least in terms of emitting or not each type of waste. Here
it is almost the case, except for the first year, which could make sense if the company
changed something between in 2008 and started emitting hazardous waste then. But
the change from everything to nothing regarding the treatment of is suspicious. It
happens in 2008 for the non hazardous waste and in 2010 for the hazardous waste. A
change of process can be considered, but in that case one would expect a continuous
change, with small quantities of recovered non hazardous waste in 2008, as well as
disposed non hazardous waste in 2007. Instead, it is assumed that the company chose
to register only one treatment category for each type of waste. Either by omitting
one or grouping them together. In both case, it means that the data is not reliable,
because either wrong or incomplete.
Another issue that comes with this is that for the years in red in the table the
waste of that company is either 100% recovered or 100% disposed of. It becomes a
==PAGE:38==
28
3 The data
problem when the recovery score (i.e. the proportion of recovered waste among the
total waste, see section 5.2) is investigated, as it is 0.0 or 1.0, which is not realistic.
A way to attenuate this issue is to aggregate the company data over the years, hop-
ing that the missing data ”compensate” each other. This is arguable, as this hope
is quite naive and blind, but considering the few amount of available information on
the dataset, it seems acceptable. For the example of Table 3.2, the hazardous waste
quantities would compensate quite well. However, once this aggregation is done, the
time feature is not available anymore.
The other solution is to disregard the years for which the company has either only
recovered or only disposed waste. In the case of company 229176 in Table 3.2, more
than half the data would be ignored.
In the data preprocessing, all the scores which are either 0.0 or 1.0 are removed,
because considered as resulting from missing data. In the case of company 229176,
only two recovery scores are then accepted: 2008 and 2009, even though the company
has data for five different years in total.
When this separation is done, and all the (factory, year) pairs with only one waste
treatment type available are removed, it is possible to count how many valid years
each factory presents, out of the 10 possible. Figure 3.2 displays the proportion of
factories given the number of such valid years, i.e. possibly valid recovery score they
provide.
Figure 3.2: Distribution of the companies according to the number of valid years they
present in the database, i.e; the number of years for which they have reported both
recovered and disposed waste quantities.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Other datasets
29
The advanced study of the missing data is not the point of the project, therefore the
suspicious points are removed before building the models.
3.4.5.2
Interpretability of the water pollutants
As mentioned earlier, the only available information regarding the pollutants emitted
through water are their quantity in kg. There is no mention of their concentration, i.e.
the water volume corresponding to those emissions. Furthermore, there is also a lack
of information about the water composition, i.e. whether the different pollutants are
emitted in the same water flow, or are they separated, etc. These kind of information
would be very useful in order to assess the feasibility and optimize the treatment
processes to follow.
3.5
Other datasets
This section is about the other available datasets that were not used in this study,
and the reasons why they were not.
3.5.1
Aquastat
This dataset is from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
and provides data by country on water resources, water use and agricultural water
management.
Figure 3.3: Part of the available data for Denmark
==PAGE:40==
30
3 The data
It is not used in the project because it is too much aggregated and seems to be missing
most of the data about waste water, see Figure 3.3.
3.5.2
Eurostat
This database is provided by the European Union [Eur19a].
The available features in the best table that was found are:
• the country
• the type of waste (among 7 coded categories)
• the year (even year between 2004 and 2016)
• the industry
• the total quantity of waste
This is too aggregated for the project, especially on the sector feature.
3.5.3
ADS
ADS stands for affaldsdatasystemet (the system of waste data) and is part of the
Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark.
This dataset looks convincing because it is very detailed. Indeed, each observation
has information on the type of waste, the subsector of the company, the treatment
of the waste, and the quantities for 2014, 2015 and 2016, among others.
But there are two main issues.
The first is that there is no way of identifying the companies. In other words, there is
one observation per emission, but it is not possible to group together all the emissions
from a single company. Hence, it is not possible to draw company profiles, which is
one of the main purposes of this project.
Also, the companies that are providing the data are not representative of all Dan-
ish activities. Figure 3.4 shows that the companies that have to register their waste
streams to the ADS database are actually those that have an activity related to waste
or waste treatment.
However, this project aims at studying the ”regular” companies, that are not par-
ticularly involved in any waste treatment. Hence, this dataset is not used in this
project.
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Overview
31
Figure 3.4: Snapshot of ADS website, translated [Mil]
3.6
Overview
Table 3.3 presents a summary of the main attributes of the different datasets that
were listed above. This table was useful to assess the opportunities offered by each
dataset and hence make a choice of which ones to use.
Location
Aggregation
level
Type of waste
Year
Summary
Danish
Statistics
Denmark
subsector
solid waste
2011-2015
Emissions of different kinds
of solid waste per subsector
in Denmark.
E-PRTR
Europe
company
mostly pollutants,
a bit of solid waste
2001-2016
Detailed emissions of
pollutants and non detailed
emissions of solid waste
per company in Europe
Aquastat
World
country
waste water
1988-2017
Data regarding waste water
in the world, at the country
level
Eurostat
Europe
industry
solid waste
2004-2016
Solid waste type emissions
per industry in Europe
ADS
Denmark
raw emissions
solid waste
2014-2016
Raw emissions of solid waste
in Denmark, by the companies
that have a waste-related
activity
Table 3.3: Overview of the available datasets and their main properties
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
This chapter presents the methods that are used in the project, and the theory that
lies behind them. They are introduced in the same order as they appear in Chapter
5 (Results).
4.1
Concentration measures
When considering the emissions of a specific element by a group of companies, it is
interesting to be able to comment on how the emissions are distributed, and try to
answer questions such as: are the emissions similar? Do a few companies emit most
of the total quantity ? Etc.
Several methods exist to measure this dispersion, or similarity, in the group of com-
panies emitting the same element.
4.1.1
Lorenz curve
The Lorenz curve is a visual tool, mostly used in economics, to give a representation
of the distribution of the income among a group. It shows the proportion of income
as a function of the percentage of bottom population. This tool can be used for any
comparable quantity among a group, and hence is applied in this project to the emis-
sions by the companies.
In this case, to create the curve, the factories must be sorted by the emitted quantity,
in an ascending order. The Lorenz curve is then the cumulative plot of this ordered
list.
If the point (x0, y0) belongs to the curve, it means that the x0 % smallest
companies emit y0 % of the total emitted pollutant, waste, etc. In other words, the
closer the curve to the x=y line, the more equally the emissions are distributed. If
the curve is straight (and then equal to x=y), it means all factories are emitting the
exact same quantity. Figure 4.1 presents some examples of Lorenz curves for different
distributions.
These curves provide an interesting insight to assess the similarity of the emitters.
However, it is not easy to use them as a tool to compare two distributions quantita-
tively.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Theory
(a) Very dispersed
(b) Intermediate
(c) More equal distribution
Figure 4.1: Examples of Lorenz curves
4.1.2
Gini coefficient
The Gini coefficient is directly linked to the Lorenz curve, and aims to give a quanti-
tative measure from it.
It is equal to two times the area between the Lorenz curve and the x=y line. It has
hence a value between 0 and 1. The smaller the coefficient, the more uniformly the
emissions are distributed.
As an example, the Gini coefficients for the distributions that gave the Lorenz curves
in Figure 4.1 are respectively, from left to right: 0.85, 0.64 and 0.47.
4.1.3
Herfindahl index
The Herfindahl index, or Herfindahl-Hirschman index, is also an economic indicator
that is used to analyze the amount of competition among similar firms. It is defined
as the sum of squares of the market shares.
It can also be applied to the emission context. To compute it, the individual quanti-
ties must be normalized, i.e. divided by the total quantity. The quantities are then
ratios lying between 0 and 1, which correspond to the ”shares” of the emissions.
Let the number of companies in the group be n and the previous defined ratios be
xi, i = 1..n.
The Herfindahl index H is calculated as the sum of the squares of those ratios:
H =
n
∑
i=0
x2
i
(4.1)
Actually, if n is the number of factories, the index H ranges then from 1
n to 1. To
get rid of this dependence in n, and possibly have values from 0 to 1, a normalized
version of the index H′ is introduced:
H′ = H −1
n
1 −1
n
(4.2)
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Linear Regression
35
H′ can then take values between 0 and 1.
Once again, the lower the index, the more uniform the emissions distribution.
4.2
Linear Regression
Linear Regression is a basic supervised machine learning model. It can be used for
prediction or to help interpret the data. The model and the significance test are only
briefly described because it is expected that the reader already has some knowledge
about it.
4.2.1
The model
The input vector is x = (x1, x2, ..., xp) ∈Rp and the output is a scalar y ∈R.
The linear regression model has the following form:
f(x) = β0 +
p
∑
j=1
xjβj
(4.3)
where βj, j = 0...p are the unknown coefficients [HTF16].
In this project, the linear regression is only used with one-dimensional data, i.e. p = 1.
Hence, the input is also a scalar x ∈R and Equation 4.3 can be simplified to:
f(x) = β0 + xβ1
(4.4)
The goal is to use the available datapoints (xi, yi), i = 1...n from the training data to
find the best coefficients β0 and β1. The most common method is the least squares.
The chosen coefficients are the ones minimizing the residual sum of squares
RSS(β0, β1) =
n
∑
i=1
(yi −f(xi))2 =
n
∑
i=1
(yi −β0 −β1xi)2.
(4.5)
An exact solution exists to this minimization problem, but it is not detailed here.
The LinearRegression model from the linear_model module in sklearn is used in
this project [Ped+11].
4.2.2
Significance measure
The two most popular methods to evaluate the performance of the model on the
dataset, i.e. how well it fits the data, are the R2 and the p-value.
In this project, the p-value is preferred because there are some common thresholds
that can be used and make sense, whereas the R2 is more difficult to interpret on its
own.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Theory
The p-value is related to the test of the null hypothesis H0 that the coefficient β1 = 0
against H1: β1 ̸= 0. A common threshold to reject H0, and hence assume that the
model is a good fit for the data, is p-value ≤0.05.
Because it involves a test statistics, this method is subject to false discoveries, i.e.
rejecting true hypotheses. This risk is even bigger when multiple tests are performed
in a row. To take it into account, the Bonferroni correction can be applied. In that
case, the null hypothesis is rejected if p-value ≤α
m where α is the significance level,
and m is the number of hypothesis tests.
4.3
Clustering
Clustering is one of the main unsupervised data analysis methods, which aims at
grouping the similar datapoints together in different clusters. It is useful when ex-
ploring large datasets, as it allows to highlight various patterns and properties of the
data.
There are various methods to perform clustering [HBV01], which are grouped in sev-
eral categories.
• Partitional clustering: The goal is to decompose the data into several disjoint
clusters. In general, the number of clusters to create is passed as a hyperpa-
rameter to the model. The most common method of partitional clustering is
K-Means.
• Hierarchical clustering aims at building a tree structure of clusters, also called
dendrogram.
The process consists of successively merging small clusters to-
gether into big ones, ore split big clusters into smaller ones. One cluster parti-
tion of the data is created at each step of the algorithm.
• Density-based algorithms use the density of the data as criterion to the clus-
tering. These models don’t need the number of clusters to be determined be-
forehand; the parameters they require are more related to the density of the
clusters to be built.
• Grid-based clustering methods perform projections of the data on to a discrete
grid space, and generate the clusters from that grid space. This is mostly used
for spatial data.
In this project, only a density-based algorithm is used, because is turns out to be
very appropriate to deal with outliers in the data.
4.3.1
The DBSCAN algorithm
The DBSCAN clustering algorithm is one of the most common density-based clus-
tering methods. There are two considerable advantages of this category. First, the
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Clustering
37
optimal number of clusters is determined by the algorithm, which is very useful when
the data has a high dimension, and visualization is difficult. The other good thing
is that these methods allow the data to have outliers, which are considered as noise,
and not forced to fit in a cluster.
The idea of the DBSCAN algorithm is to look at one datapoint at a time. For a point
x to be a core point of a cluster, it has to have at least a certain number m of other
points in its neighbourhood of a given radius ε. If a point z in the neighbourhood of
a core point x is not a core point itself, it is called a rim point.
A cluster is then defined as the union of all the core and rim points that are linked
together through ε-neighbourhoods.
There can be several distinct clusters in one
dataset.
Finally, the points that belong to no cluster are called noise.
The DBSCAN algorithm needs two hyperparameters: m and ε that have just been
introduced and determine how dense the clusters should be.
The algorithm is described as follows. For the sake of clarity, it has been split in
three distinct algorithms, the main one DBSCAN along with two intermediate, expand
and neigh.
Algorithm 1 DBSCAN
∀xi ∈S : mark xi unvisited
for xi ∈S do
if xi unvisited then
N ←neigh(xi, ε)
if |N| < m then
Mark xi as noise
else
C ←∅
Mark xi as core
expand(xi, N, C, ε, m)
end if
end if
end for
In Figure 4.2, the result of the DBSCAN algorithm is presented for m = 4. The core
points are in red, the rim point in yellow and the noise points are blue.
When computing the neighborhood of a point, in the neigh algorithm, a distance
measure is needed. The most common distances to use are, in p dimensions:
• The Euclidean distance - or norm 2:
d(xi, xj) =
v
u
u
t
p
∑
k=1
(xik −xjk)2
(4.6)
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Theory
Algorithm 2 expand(x, N, C, ε, m)
C ←C ∪{x}
for z ∈N do
if z unvisited then
Mark z as visited
N ′ ←neigh(z, ε)
if |N ′| ≥m then
N ←N ∪N ′
end if
end if
if z is not in any cluster then
C ←C ∪{z}
if |N ′| ≥m then
Mark z as core
else
Mark z as rim
end if
end if
end for
Algorithm 3 neigh(x, ε)
return all points z with dist(x, z) ≤ε
Figure 4.2: Example of DBSCAN clustering result [Fis18]
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Clustering
39
• The Manhattan distance - or norm 1:
d(xi, xj) =
p
∑
k=1
|xik −xjk|
(4.7)
• The Mahalanobi distance:
d(xi, xj) =
√
(xi −xj)T Σ−1(xi −xj)
(4.8)
Where the points are assumed to be from the same distribution with equal
dispersion matrix Σ.
• The Tanimoto distance:
d(xi, xj) =
xT
i xj
xT
i xi + xT
j xj −xT
i xj
(4.9)
The choice of the distance measure should be made taking into account the nature of
the dataset.
4.3.2
Evaluation methods for a cluster partition
In order to choose the best values for the hyperparameters, some evaluation metrics
are used, that give an idea of how well the cluster partition fits the data.
The
parameter values that give the best partition are then chosen.
There are many evaluation methods, but only three of them are presented here.
4.3.2.1
Davies Bouldin index
The first evaluation method is the Davies Bouldin index. It is defined as follows:
DB = 1
k
k−1
∑
i=0
max
{ σi + σj
dist(ci, cj)|j ̸= i
}
(4.10)
where ci is the center of cluster i (there are k clusters), and σi is the average distance
of points in cluster i from its center ci.
For well-separated dense clusters, the Davies Bouldin index will have a low value.
In other words, the lower DB, the better.
4.3.2.2
Dunn index
For the Dunn index, two metrics have to be defined. First, δ(Ci, Cj) as the distance
between two clusters. It can be the distance between the two centers, or the distance
between the two closest points from each cluster, etc. The second, ∆l, is the so-called
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Theory
size of cluster l. Again, it can be defined as the mean distance to the center of the
cluster, the maximum distance between 2 elements of the cluster, etc. Once those 2
metrics are defined, the Dunn index can be computed:
DI = mini̸=j δ(Ci, Cj)
maxl=1..k ∆l
(4.11)
where k is the number of clusters. This time, the index should be as high as possible.
4.3.2.3
Silhouette visualization
As implied by its name, the silhouette method is more a visualization tool [Rou87].
The idea is to compute the silhouette value s(i) for each point i of the dataset and
display all of them.
Let i be a point of the cluster partition that is not marked as noise. Let A be the
cluster i belongs to. The following dissimilarities are then computed:
a(i) =
1
|A| −1
∑
j̸=i,j∈A
dist(i, j)
(4.12)
d(i, C) =
1
|C|
∑
j∈C
dist(i, j)
(4.13)
b(i) = min
C̸=A d(i, C)
(4.14)
The cluster B for which b(i) is attained is the second best cluster choice for i. This
method considers then only how far the second cluster choice is from the actual one
in the partition. Once a(i) and b(i) are computed, the silhouette value is:
s(i) =
b(i) −a(i)
max{a(i), b(i)}
(4.15)
s(i) lies between -1 and 1, and a value close to 1 means that element i clearly belongs
to the cluster it has been assigned to. s(i) = 0 means that it is not obvious which
cluster the point should be in, between the first and second choices. Finally, a negative
value for s(i) means that i is overall closer to the elements of the other cluster than
the elements of its own.
A numerical indicator of the silhouette evaluation can be the mean value of the s(i)
over the whole dataset. But the main use of this method is to plot the silhouettes
and get a visual assessment of them. Figure 4.3 presents an example of silhouette
visualization, after a KMeans clustering algorithm on a sample dataset.
In this project, the silhouette computation is performed using the python scikit-learn
package called metrics, which contains silhouette-related tools [Ped+11].
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Outlier Detection
41
Figure 4.3: Example of silhouette visualization [Bui+13]
4.3.2.4
Validation for DBSCAN
The three methods above are used in this project to evaluate the cluster partitions on
the data. There is however one thing to consider, when used to evaluate the DBSCAN
algorithm: noise datapoints. Unlike the proper clusters, it is fine to have noise points
being very far from each other. This would be penalized by the evaluation metrics if
the noise category was considered as a cluster. This is why all these points are ignored
when computing the evaluations. But this rises another issue: the models with more
points in the noise category have therefore less points to separate into clusters, and
the evaluation scores are then better.
The validation process, which consists in selecting the hyperparameter values that
give the model with the best evaluation scores, has to overcome this issue.
The
solution that has been found is to set a maximum threshold of approximately 10%
for the number of datapoints categorized as noise.
4.4
Outlier Detection
There are several methods to perform outlier detection. Most of them, such as the
one-class Support Vector Machine (SVM), are drawing an area where the normal
values are standing. Then, any point lying out of it is considered an outlier. However,
other algorithms are just isolating anomalies, without attempting to build an inlier
profile [LMZ09]. This is the case of the Isolation Forest model.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Theory
4.4.1
Isolation Forest
The principle of the isolation forest is that in a dataset, an outlier needs fewer parti-
tions than an inlier to be completely isolated from the rest of the points, as illustrated
in Figure 4.4.
(a) Isolating the inlier xi
(b) Isolating the outlier xo
Figure 4.4: Outliers are more likely to be isolated using few random splits than inliers.
Figures from [LMZ09]
The idea behind the isolation forest is then to count the random splits that are nec-
essary to isolate one point, and determine from there whether it is an outlier or not.
It is an ensemble method, made of many isolation trees.
4.4.1.1
Notations
The notations to be used in the section are introduced in detail below.
• The dataset is designated by X. The notation Xa is used to refer to a subset
of X, where a aims to describe the characteristic of the subset as explicitly as
possible.
• x refers to a datapoint, or observation, from X.
• The set of available features is F.
• Every datapoint x has a set of values for the features in F. The notation for
the value of point x for feature f ∈F is x[f].
• Note: the ID of a datapoint is not part of its features. It is then possible to have
several distinct points that have the same values for all the available features.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Outlier Detection
43
In that perspective, it is useful to define the following: FY is the subset of F
that is obtained after removing all features that are constant on the subset Y
of X.
FY =
{
f ∈F | ∃xi, xj ∈Y 2 : xi[f] ̸= xj[f]
}
(4.16)
4.4.1.2
Isolation Tree
Building an isolation tree is an iterative process which aims at splitting the datapoints
x ∈X regarding their feature values. In the beginning, all the observations are at the
root of the tree. Then, a feature f is randomly chosen, and a value s is also randomly
picked between min(f) and max(f).
The datapoints are then split into the groups Xleft = {x ∈X|x[f] < s} and
Xright = {x ∈X|x[f] ≥s}.
Then, each group is categorized as either external node or internal node. Two con-
ditions are required for the node to be internal. First, the tree height must not be
higher than a certain limit L (see section 4.4.1.4 for more details). Second, the group
has to be separable, i.e. it has to have at least two points that don’t have the same
values for all the features. If the node is internal, the iteration continues: the node
is split again following the same steps. On the other hand, if the node is external,
the iteration stops and it is not considered further in the algorithm. It means that it
does not have any child in the tree. The detailed tree building process is presented
in Algorithm 4.
Algorithm 4 iTree(X, e, L)
if e ≥L or |X| ≤1 or FX = ∅then
return exNode
{ Data ←X,
Depth ←e
}
else
f ←random_choice(FX)
s ←random([minX(f), maxX(f)])
Xl ←{x ∈X | x[f] < s}
Xr ←{x ∈X | x[f] ≥s}
return inNode







Left ←iTree(Xl, e + 1, L),
Right ←iTree(Xr, e + 1, L),
SplitFeature ←f,
SplitValues ←s







end if
For a datapoint x ∈X, the path length h(x) in the isolation tree T is the distance
between the root of T and the external node which contains x, i.e. the depth of that
external node, see Algorithm 4.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Theory
4.4.1.3
Ensemble approach to build an Isolation Forest
In order to build an isolation forest, a certain number N of isolation trees are succes-
sively generated, as presented in Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 iForest(X, N, L)
Forest = ∅
for i = 1 to N do
Forest ←Forest ∪iTree(X, 0, L)
end for
return Forest
The output is then, for each point x ∈X, a N-long list of path lengths, one for each
tree. The anomaly score for a datapoint x is then defined by
s(x, n) = 2−E(h(x))
c(n)
(4.17)
where E(h(x)) is the average path length of element x in the trees in the forest, n
is the number of external nodes and c(n) is the average path length of unsuccessful
search in a Binary Search Tree, defined as
c(n) = 2H(n −1) −2n −1
n
(4.18)
where H(i) is the ith harmonic number:
H(i) =
n
∑
k=1
1
k
(4.19)
4.4.1.4
Parameters
There are three different ways to tune the isolation forest model.
• The number N of trees in the forest: a big N gives a more stable model, in the
sense that if it is run several times in a row, the output are similar. However,
it also implies that the tree construction has to be done many times, which is
also computationally heavy. Also, once the result is stable, increasing N does
not change the output, only the running time. Therefore, a good choice for N
is the smallest value that gives quite stable results. The literature states that
N = 100 is a fair trade-off [LMZ09], which is verified and then adopted in this
project.
• The maximum height of the tree, or path length L: this parameter aims at
terminate the iteration earlier. When the decision for a node to be internal or
external is made, its path length is checked. If it is equal to L, the node is
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Outlier Detection
45
external and the iteration stops. If the path length is lower than L, and it has
more than one observations, another split is performed. One can note that the
path length of the nodes then never exceeds L, as this check is performed at
each iteration. The idea behind this parameter is that the outliers are supposed
to be isolated in external nodes quite early in the process. It means that the
iterations on very deep trees are just sorting out the inliers, which is not the
point of interest of this model. A low value for L would reduce the running time,
but also reduce the quality of the results, as the splits might be stopped too
early. Liu et. al. (2009) state that a standard value for L is ⌈log2(ψ)⌉, where
ψ is the size of the dataset [LMZ09]. However, the purpose of this model with
regards to the project is not to binary separate the outliers, but to be able to
numerically assess how outlier the points are. This is why this parameter is not
used in the application of the isolation forest, i.e. it is set to +∞.
• The random distribution used to choose the feature and the split value at every
iteration can also change from a model to another. In general, the uniform dis-
tribution is used, but in case of parametric variables in the features for instance,
it might make sense to choose another. In this project, the uniform is kept.
4.4.1.5
Adaptations of the model to the project
As presented in the previous paragraph, the isolation forest is built with N = 100,
L = +∞and using uniform distributions. Some other adaptations are needed.
One-hot encoding
First, most of the features are categorical, such as the coun-
try or the industry of the companies. This is a problem regarding the fact that the
isolation forest model needs numerical features in order to be able to do the splits.
The solution to that issue is quite simple: the categorical features are one-hot encoded.
The purpose of the one-hot encoding method is to turn a categorical variable into
a numerical one, or more precisely into several numerical ones. The notations intro-
duced in section 4.4.1.1 are kept. Let V = {v1, v2, ...vn} be the possible values for
feature f.
The idea of the one-hot encoding is that a new feature is created for every vi ∈V .
The values of that new feature are then binary:
∀(x, vi) ∈X × V, x[vi] =
{ 1
if x[f] = vi
0
otherwise
(4.20)
Once these new features are built, the old categorical can be dropped. The random
splits can be performed on these new features.
Hierarchical NACE code features
The second adaptation that is made to the
model takes into account the hierarchical nature of the NACE code. First of all, given
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Theory
the structure of the NACE codes, presented in section 3.4.3, the feature could be used
as numerical without touching it.
However, when looking closely at its values, this might not be fully appropriate, for
two reasons. First, the random splits might end up cutting an industry in two, one
part being grouped with the industries with a higher code, and the other part joined
to the industries with a lower code. This does not really make sense considering the
hierarchical structure of the industry - subsector designation system. The other lim-
itation of the NACE code being used as a continuous variable is that the values are
not evenly spread, which means that the random choice for the split value is biased.
Indeed, all the subsectors that are an other or n.e.c. category are coded with a 9, see
the example in Figure 4.5. They are then more likely to be separated from the other
subsectors.
Figure 4.5: NACE codes of the big sector Civil engineering, within the Construction
industry. [Eur19b]
Therefore, the model is built with the NACE code as a categorical variable. In order
to avoid having hundreds of features resulting from the one-hot encoding of all NACE
code values, another strategy is implemented. The idea is to follow the hierarchy of
the NACE classification, with four levels: industry (letter), big sector (first 2 digits
of the NACE code), sector (3rd digit) and subsector (4th digit).
At the beginning, the available features regarding activity classification are the one-
hot encoding of the industries. If one of them is picked in the random choice of a
feature, Agriculture for instance, the two child trees respectively contain the non-
agriculture and the agriculture factories. There is no major algorithmic change for the
first. But in the agriculture tree, new features are then available for the random pick,
which correspond to one level down in the NACE hierarchy: the one-hot encoding of
the agriculture big sectors: animal production, forestry and fishing. The same
principle is followed until the lowest level in the NACE codes.
Most of the usual outlier detection algorithm methods are not adapted for such a
modification in their feature structure. However, the iterative process of the isolation
forest makes it possible to build this hierarchical system in the features.
Emphasize one feature
In equation 4.17, the anomaly score of an observation x
is computed using the path lengths h(x) from all the trees in the forest. This implies
that all features are equally considered for the decision of a point being an outlier or
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Outlier Detection
47
not. However, that is not the goal of the use of the isolation forest model. Instead,
the idea is to spot the points that are anomalies regarding the one particular feature,
given the others. As this might not be very easy to understand with explanations, an
example is shown in Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Example of outliers to be detected by the model
In this case, there are two features: recovery_score and total_waste. The fea-
ture to be emphasized is recovery_score, hence the only two outliers to be pointed
out by the model would be the ones in blue. Their values of recovery_score are in-
deed very low compared to the other points that have similar values of total_waste.
There are two challenges in the detection of such points.
First, the model should not categorize the green points as outliers, even if they
are, considering the feature total_waste.
Indeed, there is no other point with
similar value of total_waste to compare them to, so one cannot say that their
recovery_score value is noticeable. Most density-based outlier detection algorithms
would fail that challenge.
One could then be tempted to only look at the recovery_score values, by projecting
the points on the y axis. But in that case, then the green and the blue points would
be projected in the same area, which would wake none of them outliers because they
would be too dense.
One solution to this problem is to use two outlier detection models in a row. First,
a model (I) taking into account all the features, except the one to be emphasized.
The second model (II) takes in the original data, with all the features. The idea is
to compare the anomaly scores from the two models, and see which points became
outliers when that particular feature was added to the model. To go back to the
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Theory
example in Figure 4.6, the red points would be classified as inliers in both cases (I)
and (II). Thee green points would be outliers in both cases, and the blue would be
inliers in (I) and outliers in (II).
In that perspective, the new anomaly score is defined as
∆s(x) = s(II)(x, n) −s(I)(x, n)
(4.21)
where s(II)(x, n) and s(I)(x, n) refer to the anomaly scores defined in 4.17, respectively
for model (II) and (I). The points of interest are the ones that are outliers in model
(II), i.e. with a high s(II)(x, n), and inliers in model (I), i.e. with a low s(I)(x, n).
Hence, the points that are outliers for that particular feature are the ones with a high
value of ∆s(x).
This adapted version of the isolation forest was manually implemented on Python,
and the code can be found in Appendix D.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Results
In this chapter, the results of the successive experiments are presented.
Due to
the exploratory approach of this project, some experiments are performed as a logic
succession given the result interpretation of others. Hence, some discussion of the
results is included in this chapter, so that the reader can follow the thoughts that
lead to performing those particular experiments.
5.1
First exploration of the pollutants emitted through
water
The first data exploration is performed on the E-PRTR dataset, because it has factory-
level data. The focus is put on the PollutantTransfer table, as it is the only one
that has details about the nature of the pollutants.
Only the emissions through water are considered. As explained in Chapter 2, there
are some opportunities to perform recovery on the waste water, either extracting the
pollutants, or reusing the water itself.
The goal of this first experiment is to get an idea of what is in the dataset, how the
quantities are distributed among the different pollutants and the different industrial
sectors.
5.1.1
The data
It is extracted from the table PollutantTransfer, linked to FacilityReport and
NaceCode. There is one row per report and pollutant. The information that are
selected for this section are :
• The nature of the pollutant
• The sum of the quantities emitted by the factory for all its reports, in tons
• The industry of the factory
These datapoints are aggregated in different ways at each step of this exploration.
The level of aggregation is explained at the beginning of each of these steps.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results
5.1.2
Overview of the emitted pollutants
The first step is to get an idea of which pollutants are the most emitted. In order to
do so, the data is aggregated on the industry level, which means that for each indus-
try, the quantities of pollutants are summed. Of course, the distinction between the
different pollutants is kept.
There is then, for each industry, one quantity per pollutant. Only the ten most emit-
ted pollutants are kept, again for each industry.
Once these ten top pollutants are selected for each industry, the data is again ag-
gregated, on the pollutant level only: the data ends up being only one total quantity
per pollutant.
Figure 5.1: Pie chart of the emissions per type of pollutant, by all industries
It is quite easy to notice that the chlorides are massively emitted, way more than the
rest. There are two other significant pollutants, though way less important, which
are the organic carbon and the nitrogen.
After these observations, the 3 different pollutants are studied separately.
5.1.2.1
Chlorides
The chart in Figure 5.2 presents the part of each industry in the chloride emissions
through water. To create it, the data is taken one aggregation step back, when there
was the ten biggest emissions per industry. This time, the industry distinction is kept,
but only the chloride emissions are considered.
The chlorides are mostly emitted by the manufactures of chemical products. Other
industries are also big emitters, such as sewerage etc., mining & quarrying, electricity
& gas supply, and plastic, glass and concrete manufactures.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 First exploration of the pollutants emitted through water
51
Figure 5.2: Pie chart of the chloride emissions, per industry
5.1.2.2
Nitrogen
The same process is applied to the nitrogen emissions.
Figure 5.3: Pie chart of the nitrogen emissions, per industry
For the nitrogen emissions, one can notice seven main emitting industries: sewerage,
agriculture, chemical manufacturing, metal manufacturing, electricity & gas supply,
wood & paper manufacturing, and food manufacturing.
5.1.2.3
Organic Carbon
The last pollutant to be investigated in this way is the organic carbon.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results
Figure 5.4: Pie chart of the organic carbon emissions, per industry
Seven industries are predominant for carbon emissions: sewerage, wood & paper man-
ufacturing, agriculture, food manufacture, chemical manufacturing, pharmaceutical
manufacturing, and electricity & gas supply.
5.1.2.4
Analysis of the emission distributions
For the three pollutants mentioned above, and for each of their main emitter indus-
tries, an analysis of the company emission distribution is performed. It is indeed
interesting to know whether few factories are emitting most of the chlorides or the
emissions are rather equally distributed. The first situation would mean that there
are some powerful factories that release a lot of chlorides and would be useful as a
chloride supplier in an IS system. But on the other hand, it would also mean that
the profiles are very different from a factory to another within one industry. And this
would then also induce that no general statement can be made on companies from
that industry.
The Lorenz curves are generated, and are presented in Appendix A. Some numerical
indicators are then computed: the Gini coefficient and the Herfindahl index. Two
more down-to-earth indicators are also added for the comparison. They are the per-
centage of emissions the top 10 and top 20 most emitting companies are releasing.
This depends a lot on the number of factories that emit the considered pollutant.
Indeed, if the top 10 factories emit 95% of the emissions when there are 11 factories
in total, the distribution is quite uniform. On the other hand, if the top 10 emit
95% in a 100-factory sample, then the emissions are very concentrated on those 10
factories.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
53
Herfindahl
index
Gini
coef.
# of
factories
Top 10
Top 20
Chlorides (92% of the emissions)
Chemical manufactures
0.042
0.85
213
57.6%
79.0%
Water supply, sewerage, waste treat.
0.022
0.72
582
36.1%
47.0%
Mining and quarrying
0.049
0.72
86
61.3%
80.5%
Electricity and gas supply
0.090
0.75
71
71.0%
87.3%
Plastic, glass and concrete man.
0.30
0.29
6
Nitrogen (2% of the emissions)
Water supply, sewerage, waste treat.
0.0052
0.67
1288
16.5%
23.9%
Agriculture, forestry, fishing
0.0011
0.47
1168
5.6%
8.8%
Chemical manufactures
0.014
0.67
236
30.1%
46.2%
Metal manufactures
0.045
0.64
78
56.1%
75.6%
Electricity and gas supply
0.059
0.73
74
72.1%
86.6%
Wood and paper manufactures
0.014
0.55
119
31.8%
50.6%
Food, beverage and tobacco man.
0.017
0.52
226
26.7%
37.6%
Organic carbon (6% of the emissions)
Water supply, sewerage, waste treat.
0.0044
0.67
1272
16.2%
24.1%
Wood and paper manufactures
0.0087
0.75
439
20.3%
34.9%
Agriculture, forestry, fishing
0.00065
0.49
1398
3.2%
5.9%
Food, beverage and tobacco man.
0.036
0.69
436
31.4%
40.8%
Chemical manufactures
0.021
0.68
333
35.1%
45.6%
Pharmaceutical manufactures
0.48
0.83
55
87.4%
94.7%
Electricity and gas supply
0.12
0.78
60
81.6%
93.2%
5.1.2.5
Discussion
Some comments can be made about the results.
First, the Agriculture, forestry and fishing industry is the most equally distributed,
despite having a lot of factories, and this for the two pollutants it appears in the most
emitting industries: Nitrogen and Organic Carbon.
The Water supply, sewerage & waste treatment industry on the other hand, even
though it also has a great number of industries, and appears for the three pollutants,
presents quite high values for the indicators, which means that it is far from being
uniformly distributed. That means it might not be very reliable to draw conclusions
on the industry level for this industry, because the factories are very different. It
makes sense for this industry, especially the sewerage and waste treatment part. In-
deed, the emissions depend a lot on the nature of the waste to treat, and it might be
very different from one company to another, even within a company through time.
5.2
IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
Treating waste water to extract pollutants in order to reuse them is more complicated
in general than reusing or even recycling solid waste. The latter are indeed easier to
transport, and require less transformation process. Hence, they are more likely to be
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Results
involved in industrial symbiosis systems and worth to be looked into.
In this section, the recovery score is investigated. It is quite simple: it is defined as
the quantity of recovered waste divided by the total amount of waste:
s =
Wrecovered
Wrecovered + Wdisposed
(5.1)
It is an interesting metric as it can be used and compared on different scales: factory,
industry, country, etc.
Also, it can be interpreted as an indicator on the current
position of an entity regarding waste management: a high recovery score should
mean that the entity has an eco-responsible behavior about waste. It might also not
be as simple as that, but this hypothesis is made following common sense.
5.2.1
The data
In that purpose, the dataset that is used is extracted from the E-PRTR one, and
using mainly the WasteTransfer table, linked to the FacilityReport and NaceCode
tables. In the first, there is one row per kind of emission, factory and report (i.e.
year). The data is then extracted on the factory level, and the following features are
selected:
• The facility ID, which is the index for the factories;
• The waste treatment name, which can take three values: Destined for disposal,
Destined for recovery or Confidential.
The last mentioned is considered as
missing data and is filtered out of the study.
• The quantity of waste, in tons. This feature is actually the sum of the quantities
for a company and treatment, over the potentially multiple years and types of
waste (Hazardous waste within country, Hazardous waste outside country or
Non hazardous waste).
• The country of the factory;
• The NACE code of the factory;
• The industry code of the factory.
In the end, there is at most two observations per factory in the dataset, one for the
recovered waste quantity and one for the disposed waste quantity. Once built, the
dataset has 82,447 observations from 47,609 factories.
5.2.2
Recovery score at country level
Two different methods are used to compute the recovery score of European countries.
First, the most simple is to sum all the recovered and disposed waste quantities that
==PAGE:65==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
55
are produced by the factories within a country, and use equation 5.1 with them.
The second method is to compute the recovery scores of the factories, and then take
the average score of each country.
5.2.2.1
Results
The results are shown in Figure 5.5.
(a) Overall country score
(b) Mean factory score per country
Figure 5.5: Recovery score in Europe
5.2.2.2
Discussion
The differences that can be seen between the two plots are due to the size difference
of the factories, in terms of waste emission. For instance, it is assumed that there are
only 2 companies A and B in one country C, where A emits 90t of waste and reuses
everything, while B emits 10t of waste and transfers it to disposal. A and B have
recovery scores of respectively 1 and 0. The recovery core of the country C would be
0.9, whereas its mean factory score would be 0.5.
France and Italy for instance, have a higher score than a mean factory score.
It
means that in proportion, their big companies are in general recovering more waste
than their small companies. It is the opposite in the Netherlands and Spain, but the
difference is less important.
It is expected that in general, big factories tend to reuse more, because they are deal-
ing with bigger quantities of waste, so the recovery processes become more worth it.
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Results
Iceland has quite high scores. But given the fact that there are very few data available
for that country, see section 3.4.4, no proper conclusion can be drawn.
On the other hand, Germany has also good scores, along with a good amount of data.
Belgium and Poland are also quite good examples. The UK, France, Italy and Spain
are not bad but could be better.
Regarding the IS potential given those results, two interpretations are possible.
• First, one could say that countries such as Germany, with a high recovery score,
are already into the mindset of recovering waste. It means that it would be
easier to include German companies in an IS system.
• On the other hand, if one manages to include in an IS system factories that are
recovering little waste at the moment, the benefit would be bigger.
5.2.3
Recovery score at industry level
The same idea is applied to the factories grouped by industry.
5.2.3.1
Results
Table 5.1 presents the recovered waste ratio per industry (column score) and the
average factory recovery score (column mean factory score), alongside the number
of factories in that industry (column n) and the total amount of waste that is gener-
ated.
The industries are sorted according to their overall recovery score value.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
57
sector
n
score
mean factory
score
total waste
(tons)
Wholesale and retail trade
525
0.917
0.749
3.14e+07
Real estate activities and renting of non-
residential buildings
13
0.899
0.476
1.20e+05
Information and communication
16
0.880
0.708
1.05e+05
Transportation
264
0.877
0.547
1.85e+07
Wood and paper products and printing
1753
0.851
0.683
2.26e+08
Transport equipment
773
0.838
0.552
4.51e+07
Financial and insurance
12
0.823
0.504
2.72e+04
Manufacture of electronic components
132
0.821
0.616
1.22e+06
Manufacture of food products, beverages and
tobacco
3412
0.803
0.706
2.53e+08
Electrical equipment
272
0.775
0.573
3.22e+06
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
1671
0.765
0.709
4.44e+07
Manufacture of plastic, glass and concrete
2833
0.755
0.563
5.86e+07
Knowledge-based services
71
0.750
0.391
1.64e+06
Mining and quarrying
1710
0.740
0.590
5.48e+08
Basic metals and fabricated metal products
5908
0.719
0.499
5.30e+08
Manufacture of furniture and other
manufacturing etc
314
0.705
0.472
8.71e+06
Travel agents, cleaning, and other operational
services
80
0.684
0.568
1.93e+06
Construction
165
0.683
0.655
2.41e+07
Manufacture of machinery
220
0.669
0.427
2.12e+06
Water supply, sewerage and waste
management
15711
0.618
0.617
2.45e+09
Education
10
0.615
0.519
2.12e+05
Other service activities
44
0.614
0.434
3.48e+06
Pharmaceuticals
577
0.596
0.445
2.15e+07
Textiles and leather products
381
0.592
0.554
3.14e+06
Public administration, defence and
compulsory social security
71
0.591
0.546
4.53e+06
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning
supply
2201
0.575
0.562
5.30e+08
Human health and social work
20
0.490
0.313
2.36e+05
Manufacture of chemicals
3253
0.467
0.478
1.40e+08
Oil refinery etc.
257
0.425
0.543
3.58e+07
Arts, entertainment and recreation activities
14
0.361
0.571
1.81e+05
Activities of extraterritorial organisations and
bodies
1
0.030
0.030
5.45e+04
Table 5.1: Recovery score per industry
5.2.3.2
Discussion
Before commenting on the score values, some observations are made to help the reader
understand their limitations due to the data quality.
The number of factories that are present in each industry gives an idea of how re-
liable the results are. It would indeed not be reasonable to draw conclusion about
the Education industry for instance, which has only 10 observations. All industries
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Results
that have less than 100 cannot be considered as well represented in this dataset, and
hence no general statement should be made about them based on these results. The
industries with between 100 and 1000 factories should be studied carefully, while the
most interesting are obviously the ones with the most datapoints.
Also, the comparison between the overall score of an industry (column score) and the
average of the factory scores in that industry (column mean factory score) gives an
idea of how comparable the firms are, within the same industry. The closer the two
values, the more likely the companies are to be similar within the industry, in terms
of size and emissions. For instance, surprisingly enough, the Water supply, sewerage
and waste management industry seems very even, despite having the highest number
of factories. On the other hand, the Transportation industry, among others, is likely
to have big disparities in the recovery scores and sizes of its firms.
Almost all the industries have a higher overall score than average factory score. It
suggests that the big firms have higher scores in general, compared to the small firms
in the same industry. This is not the case for three industries though: Manufacture of
chemicals, Oil refinery etc., and Arts, entertainment and recreation activities, which
are the three industries with the lowest overall scores.
Regarding the values of the scores themselves, the Wood and paper products and
printing, as well as the Manufacture of food, beverages and tobacco industries have
high recovery scores for a high number of companies. Their average factory scores
are also decent. It was expected especially for the first, because paper, cardboard and
wood recycling are very common. On the other hand, the Manufacture of chemicals
industry has an overall recovery score below 50%, which might be due to the lack of
processes to recycle or reuse chemicals.
5.2.4
Distribution of the scores
It is then interesting to look at the distribution of the factory scores.
The scores of 0 and 1 are removed from the results, because it is assumed that they
result from missing data.
5.2.4.1
Results
The boxplots of the recovery scores of factories from the same industry are presented
in Figure 5.6, whose x-axis can be read with help from Table 5.2.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
59
Figure 5.6: Recovery score values distribution among the industries
code
Industry
code
Industry
A
Agriculture, forestry and fishing
E
Water supply, sewerage and waste management
B
Mining and quarrying
F
Construction
CA
Manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco
G
Wholesale and retail trade
CB
Textiles and leather products
H
Transportation
CC
Wood and paper production and printing
J
Information and communication
CD
Oil refinery etc.
K
Financial and insurance
CE
Manufacture of chemicals
L
Real estate activities and renting of non-residential buildings
CF
Pharmaceuticals
M
Knowledge-based services
CG
Manufacture of plastic, glass and concrete
N
Travel agents, cleaning, and other operational services
CH
Basic metals and fabricated metal products
O
Public administration, defence and compulsory social security
CI
Manufacture of electronic components
P
Education
CJ
Electrical equipment
Q
Human health and social work
CK
Manufacture of machinery
R
Arts, entertainment and recreation activities
CL
Transport equipment
S
Other service activities
CM
Manufacture of furniture and other manufacturing etc.
T
Activities of households as employers
D
Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
U
Activities of extraterritorial organisations and bodies
Table 5.2: Industry names and their code
5.2.4.2
Discussion
The idea is that within an industry, if there are some factories that have a low score
compared to the others, it means they have a high IS potential: if the other compa-
nies from that industry manage to have quite high scores, these ones should also be
able to have a good one. This is based on the assumption that within an industry,
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Results
factories have similar behaviors.
In the boxplots in Figure 5.6, two factories stand out in the industries J (Information
and Communication) and S (Other service activities). Their score is way lower than
the other factories in their respective industries, which means that they might have
a high IS potential. However, it appears that those two industries have respectively
very few data (16 industries) and few data (44 factories). No conclusion can then be
drawn for the J industry factory. That service activity factory might have a high IS
potential.
The focus is now on the Agriculture, forestry and fishing industry. It has a lot of
outliers in the bottom part of the boxplot, and the industry has a great amount of
datapoints (1671 factories.) This industry is quite broad, so it will be studied in more
details in section 5.5.
Another way to see the IS potential with this kind of data is that if it is possible
to spot a factory with a high score, then all other companies that are similar to it
but with lower scores have a high potential. It kind of showed the way on how to get
a better score, and it is then possible for alike factories to do the same.
5.2.5
Recovery score evolution in time
In order to get an idea of the companies’ dynamics regarding recovering waste, the
evolution of the recovery scores in time is investigated.
5.2.5.1
Overview
As a first step, the distribution of the recovery scores per year are studied, per in-
dustry. Most of the industries present plots from which it is not possible to conclude
anything, as shown in Figure 5.7.
Only two industries have interesting patterns, which turn out to show that the indus-
tries are getting better recovery score over time, see Figure 5.8. The evolution is still
slight and barely perceptible, but it is encouraging.
==PAGE:71==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
61
(a) B industry - Mining and quarrying
(b) CK industry - Manufacture of machinery
Figure 5.7: Distribution of the companies’ recovery score for two industries over time
from which one can barely conclude anything.
(a) CL industry - Manufacture of transport
equipment
(b) E industry - Water supply, sewerage and
waste management
Figure 5.8: Distribution of the companies’ recovery score for two industries over time,
which show a progress.
5.2.5.2
Selection of the companies with enough data
As presented in section 3.4.5.1, the majority of the companies has usable data for
only a few of the 10 years between 2007 and 2016. That makes it difficult and of little
interest to study the time dependency of the recovery score. These companies might
even alter the overall results. To prevent this issue, a selection is performed: to start
with, only the companies with 10 valid recovery scores are kept. They are 3,686 in
total.
The evolution of the distributions of the scores in Figure 5.9 shows that there is a
slight improving tendency over time, but again it is not obvious.
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Results
Figure 5.9: Recovery score evolution from 10-report companies
(a) CL industry - Manufacture of transport
equipment
(b) E industry - Water supply, sewerage and
waste management
Figure 5.10: Distribution of the companies’ recovery score for two industries over
time, with only the companies with 10 reports available.
5.2.5.3
Linear Regression
Process
A simple linear regression model is to be applied to the 10-point time series
described above. The idea is to look at the coefficient of this model once it is fitted to
the data, and more precisely at its sign. A positive coefficient would reflect a trend
towards a higher recovery score, and inversely for a negative coefficient.
However, the data does not make it that easy.
Indeed, Figure 5.11 presents three randomly picked factories and their score evolution
over the ten years. If the top one seems to have an upward tendency, it is hard to
determine one for the other two graphs.
But the linear regression model gives a
coefficient anyway, even though it is very unclear.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
63
(a) Example 1, facilityid = 15030
(b) Example 2, facilityid = 138913
(c) Example 3, facilityid = 14669
Figure 5.11: Some examples of time evolution of the recovery score. The title of each
plot is the ID of the factory in the database.
Thus, it is necessary to introduce a significance measurement in order to put the focus
only on the companies that have a clear tendency, and discard the others. Indeed,
the goal here is to investigate the trends, but only when they actually exist.
The computation of the p-value is added to the model, as significance measure.
It is however worth it to state that the p-value is not used as a hypothesis test in
this case, but only a significance indicator that allows to ranks the models and put
a threshold to select the most interesting. That is the reason why no false discovery
prevention, such as the Bonferroni correction, is performed in this project: it is not
the point of interest.
Results
After fitting a linear regression model with intercept to every of the 3,686
factories with 10 points, only the ones with a p-value lower than 0.05 are kept. That
leaves 2,344 companies. Their distribution among the industries and countries are
presented respectively in Figures 5.12 and 5.13. The companies with a coefficient
between -0.05 and 0.05 are considered less interesting than the others, because even
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Results
though they have a clear pattern due to a low p-value, this pattern is almost constant.
In the figures, the companies in dark green (resp. dark red) have then an increase
(resp. decrease) of the recovery score, by at least 5% per year on average.
Figure 5.12: Number of factories with 10 datapoints according to the sign of their
linear regression coefficient with p-value ≤0.05
The numbers of companies per industry, regardless their coefficient, are very different
from previously, see Table 5.1. For instance, Agriculture is absent from Figure 5.12
despite having over 1,600 companies. This is either because these companies do not
have 10 datapoints available, or because their linear regression model is not significant
enough.
The same kind of observations can be made on the countries, in Figure 5.13.
From Figure 5.13 it can be noticed that factories from France, Spain, and maybe the
United Kingdom are in majority in a raising recovery score dynamic. No country is
mostly following a decreasing trend, which is a good sign, but most of them are quite
balanced between the two opposite trends.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
65
Figure 5.13: Number of factories with 10 datapoints according to the sign of their
linear regression coefficient with p-value ≤0.05
5.2.5.4
Extension of the selected data
By curiosity, and considering that there is a quality check performed with the p-value
threshold, the same analysis is performed, with the data extended to all companies
that have at least 5 valid datapoints out of the 10 possible. Note: those points are
not necessarily consecutive, the data might be missing within the sequence.
The 0.05 threshold for the p-value is kept. The extended set of companies has then a
size of 9,424.
Figure 5.14 shows that the industry E, which is Water supply, Sewerage and Waste
management (see Table 5.2 for the other code references) becomes dominant when
the incomplete-data factories are added to the model. If the raw number of factories
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Results
Figure 5.14: Number of factories with at least 5 datapoints according to the sign of
their linear regression coefficient with p-value ≤0.05
is different, the proportion of them that are getting a better score is quite similar, i.e.
approximately twice as many as the ones reducing it.
One interesting thing to notice in the country plot is the comparison of Figures 5.13
and 5.15 regarding the United Kingdom. It switches from one of the minor countries
to the biggest.
Furthermore, it turns from mostly positive coefficients to almost
balanced between positive and negative.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
67
Figure 5.15: Number of factories with at least 5 datapoints according to the sign of
their linear regression coefficient with p-value ≤0.05
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Results
5.2.5.5
100 top companies
The next step is to have a closer look at the companies that have extreme behaviors.
The factories that have less than 10 points are put aside again.
Lowest p-values
The first to be considered are the companies with the lowest p-
values, i.e. the ones that definitely show a trend. A 0.05 filter on the absolute value
of the coefficient is applied, because constant trends are not interesting for this study.
The goal is to get an idea of the profile of those companies, in terms of industry and
country.
The companies are separated in two groups, according to the sign of their linear
coefficient. The two groups are designated as positive and negative. The top 100
factories are selected, according to their p-value.
(a) Positive group
(b) Negative group
Figure 5.16: Industry and country distribution of the 100 companies with the best
p-values, for each trend sign.
Once more, France and Germany stand out, respectively in the positive and neg-
ative groups. Regarding industries, E (Water supply, sewerage and waste manage-
ment) and CH (Basic metals and fabricated metal products) are the most common
in the positive group, while E again and CE (Manufacture of chemicals) are the most
represented in the negative top 100.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
69
(a) Lowest p-value, positive coefficient
29.10: Manufacture of motor vehicles
(b) Second lowest p-value, positive coefficient
29.10: Manufacture of motor vehicles
(c) Lowest p-value, negative coefficient
10.11: Processing and preserving of meat
(d) Second lowest p-value, negative coeffi-
cient
23.13:Manufacture of hollow glass
Figure 5.17: Plots of the actual score evolution and the model output, for the two
factories with the lowest p-values in each group
Figure 5.17 shows that the trends in the recovery score evolution are quite obvious
in all the plots, even though they do not have the same slope. They testify that
the factories are indeed in the dynamic of changing the way they treat their waste.
Unfortunately, it looks like it is not always in the ”right” direction, as in plots 5.17(c)
and 5.17(d) the factories are heading towards a disposal of most of their waste. Note:
it is not that obvious though, and it is discussed in the following Discussion section.
Extreme coefficients
The second study case is the one of the companies with a
very high or very low linear coefficient, with the p-value ≤0.05 condition, to guarantee
a correct goodness of fit. Again, the positive and negative coefficients are treated
separately, and the 100 extreme companies are extracted from the dataset.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Results
(a) Positive group
(b) Negative group
Figure 5.18: Industry and country distribution of the 100 companies with the biggest
linear coefficients, for each trend sign.
From Figure 5.18(a) it can be seen than France and Spain are the countries with
the most of the extreme positive coefficients, and in majority from the industries CH
(Basic metals and fabricated metal products) and E (Water supply, sewerage and
waste management) again. On the other hand, the industries with the most of the
extreme negative coefficients are once more CH and CE (Manufacture of chemicals),
and mostly in Germany.
==PAGE:81==
5.2 IS potential regarding recovery of solid waste
71
(a) Highest coefficient
10.13: Production of meat and poultry meat
products
(b) Second highest coefficient
24.10:
Manufacture of basic iron and steel
and of ferro-alloys
(c) Lowest coefficient
35.11: Production of electricity
(d) Second lowest coefficient
20.14:
Manufacture of other organic basic
chemicals
Figure 5.19: Plots of the actual score evolution and the model output, for the two
factories with the extreme coefficients in each group
Figure 5.19 presents the actual values of the recovery scores for each year as well
as the linear model, for the four extreme cases: the two highest and the two lowest
coefficients. It can be seen that all four of them are in a 2-step shape, showing that
they completely changed their waste treatment management within a couple of years.
5.2.5.6
Discussion
The point of studying the evolution of the recovery score of a company in time is to
assess its dynamic, if it has one. Indeed, a company that is improving its recovery
score in time can be said to be in a green dynamic, and further step in this direction
could be the will to join an industrial symbiosis. The data reveals that some com-
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Results
panies are indeed in such a dynamic, even though others are following the opposite
trend and have a decreasing recovery score, see Figure 5.17. It can also be seen that
they do not have the same transition speed, comparing Figures 5.17 and 5.19, as the
latter shows a change from one extreme to the other that took only one or two years
to perform.
However, one should be careful when interpreting these results. Indeed, a subtlety
comes from the fact that the amounts of waste in the dataset are only accounting
for the waste that is sent for external treatment. For example, if a company that
was sending half its waste to recover and half to disposal (thus had a recovery score
of 0.5), starts to recycle the waste internally instead of sending it for recovery, its
score would drop to 0, as all the waste it would then send out would be that disposal
half. In that case, the green attitude of settling waste recover internally would be
reflected by a drop of the score, which is counter intuitive. To counteract that issue,
the recovery score should include all the waste, not only the part that is sent away
for treatment. However, this information is unfortunately not available in the data,
which is one big limitation.
This is not the only data-related issue at stake here.
This investigation was also
altered by the missing data, or more specifically the lack of information about the
data which leads to assume that extreme numbers, as 0.0 and 1.0 recovery scores,
are due to missing data. If some documentation was explaining why those extreme
numbers are normal, they would have been kept in the input dataset. But in that
case, it is considered safer for the model results to remove them.
The results presented above give more information about the missing data, and sug-
gests that some of them are missing not at random, i.e. the fact that they are missing
is due to their own values. Indeed, looking at the difference between Figures 5.13
and 5.15 for the United Kingdom shows that the companies with 10 datapoints have
mainly a positive coefficient, while the group of companies missing 0 to 5 points is
quite balanced between positive and negative. It means that the companies that do
have a trend raising their score are more likely to input their data to the system,
while the ones that have a lowering score might skip the data registration, either on
purpose for the public image of the company, or because they might not be consid-
ering the waste issue at all, neither in their behavior and how they treat it, nor in
participating to related data campaigns.
Aside from the data limitations, the model itself has some flaws.
The main one
is that the trend is assumed to be linear, because it is the most simple. But if the
data have an exponential shape for instance, or any other non-linear trend, the model
might miss it and give bad results that would not reflect the tendency.
It would have been possible to use a more complex method to do this, but the results
would not have been much different, considering the high level of this study. Fur-
thermore, considering the quality of the data the model is based on, building more
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Factory similarity given the pollutant emissions through water
73
complex models does not seem worth it. Indeed, the goal is not to dig into the data
in order to extract every little piece of information they can give, but instead to take
it easier and let the data ”talk” by themselves.
5.3
Factory similarity given the pollutant emissions
through water
This experiment aims at see whether the factories from the same industry have similar
profiles in terms of pollutant emissions. Among the three available release methods,
water, air and land, it appears that the water-emitted are the most likely to be reused
or recycled, after waste water treatment. Hence, for the purpose of this study, only
the pollutants that are emitted through water are considered.
5.3.1
The data
This section uses the E-PRTR database, mainly the PollutantRelease table.
A specific dataset is built from that table, linked to the FacilityReport and NaceCode
tables. It is made of one datapoint per company and reporting year. In that purpose,
the rows of the PollutantRelease are aggregated per factory and year. The features
that are kept are the following:
• The facility ID, which is the index for the factories;
• The year;
• The country of the factory;
• The NACE code of the factory;
• The industry code of the factory;
• For each pollutant, the emitted quantity
Some companies released several reports between 2001 and 2016, while some have
done it only once. This means that there is not necessarily the same amount of data
coming from each factory.
5.3.2
Analysis
The data is separated by industry. the idea here is to investigate the emission profiles
of the company, regardless of their size. In other words, the interesting quantities are
the relative ones.
In order to do so, for each observation, the quantities are divided by the maximum
quantity value within that observation. Each observation has then one quantity equal
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Results
to 1 and the others between 0 and 1.
The results are presented in plots, one per industry.
(a) Agriculture
(b) Mining & Quarrying
(c) Oil Refinery
(d) Manufacture of Chemicals
Figure 5.20: Some examples of the relative emissions of all the factories within the
same industry
Figure 5.20 presents a selection of four industries and the relative emissions of pol-
lutant through water. These plots have to be seen as matrices. Each column is one
observation, and each row represents one pollutant. There is no specific order for the
columns. The plots for all the industries can be found in bigger size in Appendix B.
The horizontal patterns testify that there are profile similarities in the observations.
Some industries have really clear patterns, such as Agriculture, Forestry and Fish-
ing (Figure 5.20(a)), whereas some are less obvious, even though distinguishable, as
Manufacture of Chemicals (Figure 5.20(d)).
5.3.3
Discussion
This method is very simple, as there is almost no data transformation performed.
It is just a visualization tool that allows to get an overview of the emissions in the
industries. It allows to conclude that there are indeed patterns within industries.
==PAGE:85==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
75
The Mining & Quarrying sector in particular seems to present a couple of distinct
patterns. It is investigated in more depth in the next section.
5.4
Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining
& quarrying industry
After the display of all emissions for each industry, see Section 5.3 and Appendix B,
the mining and quarrying industry reveals quite interesting. Indeed, it has a good
amount of data - 354 factories -, and it seems like several clear patterns could be
extracted for study, see Figure 5.21.
Figure 5.21: Relative pollutant emissions through water from the mining and quar-
rying factories
There are at least 3 patterns that can be highlighted in this plot:
• Factories that emit mostly chlorides,
• The ones emitting mostly benzene,
• The ones emitting mostly zinc.
The goal of this section is to properly extract the relevant patterns, and investigate
them.
Among the 81 available pollutants, 49 are not emitted at all, so they are taken out of
the table. Only 32 pollutants are then left.
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Results
5.4.1
Preliminary study
Several hypotheses are raised to explain these different patterns. First, the less likely,
is that it is due to time.
Maybe the pattern is different according to the year(s)
the factories have reported their emissions. The second idea is that it might reflect
the country differences. Finally, the most probable is that the patterns characterize
subsectors within the mining & quarrying industry. Although all hypothesis do not
seem justified, they are investigated.
5.4.1.1
Year
The same heatmap as in Figure 5.21 is presented, but the observations (i.e.
the
columns) are sorted by year.
Figure 5.22: Relative pollutant emissions through water from the mining and quar-
rying factories, sorted by year
Even though the data is unbalanced between the different years, it is clear in Figure
5.22 that time has no influence on the emission pattern: all three main ones are
present in almost every year.
5.4.1.2
Country
The second hypothesis was geographical: are the emissions different from country to
country?
The same method is applied: this time the data is aggregated per factory, and then
displayed with the country on the x axis.
Some interesting things can be taken out from the plot in Figure 5.23. Some countries
seem to present only one of the three main patterns. For instance, in Germany it
is mostly the chloride one, whereas in Norway the benzene pattern dominates. But
==PAGE:87==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
77
Figure 5.23: Relative pollutant emissions through water from the mining and quar-
rying factories, sorted by country
on the other hand, the patterns are not present in only one country: even if Norway
presents almost only the benzene-like emission type, that pattern is also present in
the UK.
5.4.1.3
Subsector
The NACE code is also available in the dataset. It allows to characterize the activity
of the factories more precisely than industry-wise. Figure 5.24 presents the same plot
as usual, with the NACE codes on the x axis.
This seems to be the most relevant solution to split the 3 main patterns. It looks like
one can do the following categorization:
• The chloride-categorized pattern is emitted by factories with NACE codes
among 05.10 (Mining of hard coal), 08.91 (Mining of chemical and fertilizer
minerals), 08.93 (Extraction of salt), 08.99 (Other mining and quarrying n.e.c.),
09.10 (Support activities for petroleum and natural gas extraction) and 09.90
(Support activities for other mining and quarrying).
• The benzene-dominant pattern seems to be a characterization of sectors 06.10
(Extraction of crude petroleum) and some factories from 06.20 (Extraction of
natural gas).
• The zinc-based profile is harder to clearly characterize. It seems to be dominant
in the sector 06.20 (Extraction of natural gas), but also in 07.10 (Mining of
iron ores) and 07.29 (Mining of other non-ferrous metal ores), among other
miscellaneous patterns.
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Results
Figure 5.24: Relative pollutant emissions through water from the mining and quar-
rying factories, sorted by subsector
5.4.2
Clustering
In order to confirm, or challenge the previous results, the data is studied the other
way around: a clustering algorithm is performed on the non-year-aggregated data.
Several different methods could be chosen to do a cluster analysis on this data. One
could do a basic K-means algorithm, as the number of clusters seems to be known (3).
In fact, those three profiles, that have been studied, are the main ones. But they are
not the only ones: some factories are emitting completely different pollutants. This
might be because they are using specific processes, or they are the few representatives
of a specific sector, etc. Those data points would damage the clusters if a partitional
clustering method is used, such as K-means.
However, using a density-based clustering method, like the DBSCAN algorithm,
would take into account the presence of outliers.
The datapoints are in 32 dimensions: one dimension per pollutant. Actually, they lie
in the unity cube of dimension 32, as their coordinates in all dimensions are between
0 and 1. The idea here is to group the factories that have approximately the same
emissions for each pollutant. In other words, the idea is to perform an elementwise
comparison. That is why the manhattan metric is chosen for the DBSCAN clustering
algorithm.
5.4.2.1
Tuning the hyperparameters
There are two parameters that need to be tuned: the neighborhood radius ε and the
minimum number of datapoints m to be in that neighborhood.
A grid search is performed, with the three evaluation methods that are described
in section 4.3.2: Davies Bouldin index, Dunn index and Silhouettes. It is decided
==PAGE:89==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
79
that the model must have no more than 250 datapoints classified as noise, which is
approximately 10%.
Figure 5.25: Number of noise datapoints in the cluster partition for each pair of
parameter values
Figure 5.25 shows that the noise condition excludes ε ≤0.25 and m ≥18 for ε = 0.5.
This mask is applied to the other evaluation metrics.
As presented in section 4.3.2.2, for k clusters, the Dunn index follows the equation:
DI = mini̸=j δ(Ci, Cj)
maxl=1..k ∆l
(5.2)
where the distances δ(Ci, Cj) and ∆l have to be defined.
Here, δ(Ci, Cj) is chosen to be the distance between the centers of the two clusters
Ci and Cj. ∆l is computed as the maximum distance between two datapoints from
the cluster l.
In Figure 5.26 are presented the different scores.
Davies Bouldin is the only one
to be minimized, while the other two are to be maximized. With these values it
appears that the best model is obtained with ε = 0.5 and m = 15.
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Results
(a) Davies Bouldin index
(b) Dunn index
(c) Average silhouette
Figure 5.26: Grid search values for the 3 evaluation methods
5.4.2.2
The model
The cluster partition of the DBSCAN with those parameters is presented in Figure
5.27. In the x axis, -1 refers to outlier datapoints, and then each integer is a cluster.
It appears that there are more than 3 clusters as previously assumed. Instead, the
model was able to separate 9 relevant clusters.
Figure 5.27: Cluster partition of the pollutant emissions from mining & quarrying
factories
The silhouette visualization of this model is also presented in Figure 5.28. Overall, it
looks good, except for cluster 5 which has some points with negative silhouette values.
It appears indeed a bit blurry in Figure 5.27 compared to the other clusters, and it
is investigated in more depth later.
==PAGE:91==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
81
Figure 5.28: Silhouette profile of the cluster partition
5.4.2.3
Cluster-by-cluster analysis
The clusters are designated by their dominant pollutant in the emissions. From left
to right in Figure 5.27, the clusters are designated by: (Noise), Fluorides, Chlorides,
Zinc, Nickel, Nitrogen, Benzene, Organic carbon, Arsenic and Copper. Each cluster
is looked at in details. For clarity reasons, only the descriptions of the three biggest
clusters are kept in this section, i.e. Chlorides, Zinc and Benzene. The details of all
the other clusters can be found in Appendix C.
Chlorides cluster
The cluster with label 1 is now considered.
From Figure 5.27, it is the one standing out, because it is big and very neat.
It has 646 datapoints, coming from 92 factories.
Figure 5.29 presents 3 plots that attempt to characterize the cluster. The first one,
Fig 5.29(a) shows the number of distinct factories that appear in the cluster for each
country. For that one, the data is aggregated over the year. For the second plot, Fig
5.29(b), each factory is assigned the number of datapoints it has in the cluster, and
the distribution of those values is presented. The last one, Fig 5.29(c), is the number
of factories per subsector that belong to that cluster.
The following observations can be made from the plots in Figure 5.29:
• This cluster has mostly data from Germany and Poland
• Almost half the companies were assigned to this cluster 10 times (i.e. from 10
different emission reports), which shows it is quite stable
==PAGE:92==
82
5 Results
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Subsector of the factories in the cluster
Figure 5.29: Analysis of the cluster members
• This cluster represents mostly the NACE code 05.10 (Mining of hard coal), but
also some 08.93 (Extraction of salt) and 08.91 (Mining of chemical and fertiliser
minerals).
The next step is to have a look at the emissions themselves from the cluster. On the
x axis of the plot in Figure 5.30 are all the pollutants that are emitted by at least one
factory from the cluster. For each of them, the (relative) emitted quantities from the
cluster datapoints are presented in a boxplot.
The boxplot structure is invisible here because the datapoints have almost the same
values. Hence this cluster is very uniform in terms of emission patterns. Apart from
one datapoint that has a higher part of organic carbon emissions, all the others are
==PAGE:93==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
83
Figure 5.30: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
only emitting chlorides.
This is all the more important to notice considering the high number of points in that
cluster: 646.
Zinc cluster
This cluster groups 192 emission reports, from 75 factories. The same plots as before
are presented.
Most of the companies have only one report belonging to that cluster. It is not known
whether they are categorized once in that cluster and then in another one, or if those
are companies only have one datapoint.
However, it is quite clear that this cluster contains factories from a quite wide variety
of countries, but mostly from Italy.
This cluster is not as easy to characterize. Indeed, all datapoints have their most
emitted pollutant being zinc, but some other pollutants are also significant, such as
nickel and copper. However, there are other clusters whose dominant pollutants are
respectively nickel and copper. So, if from one year to another, the emissions of a
factory change just by a little, it might end up in different clusters for those different
years. This means that the clusters are not very stable. One can also see it looking
at the year distribution: a great number of factories end up in this cluster only once.
It might be because they are appearing only once in the dataset, but it could also be
that they are categorized to this cluster by accident because they had an unusually
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Results
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Sector of the factories in the cluster
Figure 5.31: Analysis of the cluster members
high emission of zinc that year.
==PAGE:95==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
85
Figure 5.32: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
Benzene cluster
This cluster has a lot of data: 801 datapoints from 125 factories. However, it can
also be seen that its identity is not as clear as the other clusters. Indeed, in the
cluster figure, is can be seen that all other clusters are characterized by a white line,
corresponding to the factories emitting almost only one pollutant. This one is bigger,
and involves 4 to 5 different pollutants, that are emitted but not always in the same
proportions: benzene, toluene, phenols, xylenes and naphthalene.
From Figure 5.33, one can see that it is quite stable, given that many factories are
assigned to this cluster 10 times. It is also clear that this cluster contains almost only
Norwegian and British factories, which are mainly in the 06.10 sector (Extraction of
crude petroleum) – although some are 06.20 (Extraction of natural gas). This cluster
is interesting as it has sharp characteristic on the country and sector side, it has a
good amount of data and seems stable.
At first sight, the distribution in Figure 5.34 looks quite messy, with a lot of variation
for several pollutants: phenols, benzene, ethylbenzene, toluene, xylenes, naphthalene
and isoproturon. But these pollutants are emitted by elements from the cluster only,
no other. So, in a sense, it has a kind of stability. Factories might just be jumping
from that cluster and the noise category of the clustering.
==PAGE:96==
86
5 Results
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Sector of the factories in the cluster
Figure 5.33: Analysis of the cluster members
==PAGE:97==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
87
Figure 5.34: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
==PAGE:98==
88
5 Results
5.4.2.4
Overview of the clusters
It is interesting to grab an overview of the main characteristics of all the clusters, even
the ones that are not detailed in this section. Table 5.3 presents the main countries
and subsectors for each cluster, when it makes sense. There are few overlaps in those
Cluster
Countries
NACE codes
Fluorides
N/A
N/A
Chlorides
Poland, Germany
05.10, 08.93
Zinc
Italy
06.20, 07.29, 05.10
Nickel
Finland, Belgium
07.29, 08.11, 08.99
Nitrogen
N/A
N/A
Benzene
Norway, UK
06.10, 06.20
Organic carbon
Poland, UK
05.20
Arsenic
N/A
07.29
Copper
N/A
07.29
Table 5.3: Wrap-up of the main characteristics of the clusters. N/A means that the
cluster does not reveal any obvious characteristic, due to either its too small size or
its variety.
characteristics, apart from sector 07.29. This is interesting as it means there is a sort
of bidirectional characterization between cluster and country or NACE code.
5.4.2.5
Factories in multiple clusters
As previously mentioned, the data is not aggregated per year. That is why some
factories are represented by several datapoints, that might not all be assigned to the
same cluster, or even sometimes to some clusters and sometimes to the noise category.
The idea here is to look at those unstable companies and see what characterize them.
Among 354 companies in the Mining & quarrying industry, 303 have more than one
datapoint, and 108 of them are ‘split’ in several clusters.
Those splits are presented in Figure 5.35.
Figure 5.35: Factories that belong to multiple clusters or noise
==PAGE:99==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
89
Each row represents one cluster – or the noise category.
A factory belongs to a
particular column if it has at least one datapoint belonging to each cluster with a
black square on that column. The top row shows how many factories belong to each
kind of split, and in the last column, the number on row i shows the percentage of
companies that are assigned to cluster i and that are also assigned to another at some
point.
It can be observed that the chlorides cluster is very stable, while the copper and
arsenic ones are not. The noise category is also unstable, which means that it is
mostly companies that had an unusual emission pattern at some point, but that are
not always categorized as outliers.
5.4.2.6
07.29 sector
It has been seen that this category is well represented in many different clusters. It
is then interesting to look further into it and see why it is the case.
First, the sector is the Mining of other non-ferrous metal ores. Here other means
different from uranium and thorium, which are in sector 07.21. The higher-level sec-
tor 07.2, Mining of non-ferrous metal ores, has only those two 07.21 and 07.29 as
subsectors. 07.29 might then group factories that work with different kinds of ores,
which could explain the differences in the emissions.
There are 52 factories from that sector, and 298 datapoints in total.
Figure 5.36: Heatmap representation of the emissions from the factories of sector
07.29
Figure 5.36 confirms that there are very different emission patterns in that subsector.
Figure 5.37 displays the cluster assignment of the datapoints from 07.29 factories. All
9 clusters plus the outlier category (-1) are present, even though the zinc cluster (2)
is dominant and the benzene one (5) is insignificant.
==PAGE:100==
90
5 Results
Figure 5.37: Number of 07.29 factories per cluster
Figure 5.38: Pollutant emissions of the 07.29 factories
The emission patterns are indeed not clear at all, as it can be seen in Figure 5.38.
However, the interesting part is the link between country and emissions. The Table
5.4 presents the number of factories in 07.29 for each country. This is quite important
to understand the following results.
Figure 5.39 shows the number of datapoints per cluster and country. One can see
dependencies in the 2 directions: each cluster is mostly made of data from a small
number of countries, and each country is quite focused on one or a couple of clusters.
For instance, almost all Swedish datapoints belong to the zinc cluster, whereas the
==PAGE:101==
5.4 Investigating the pollutant emissions of the mining & quarrying industry
91
Country
Number of factories
Germany, France, Romania, Norway
1
Portugal, Ireland, Poland
3
Spain, Serbia
6
Bulgaria
7
Sweden
9
Finland
11
Table 5.4: Number of factories per country in 07.29
Figure 5.39: Distribution of the 07.29 datapoints per country and cluster
Finnish are split between the zinc and the nickel clusters.An equivalence between the
Chloride cluster and Poland can also almost be drawn.
5.4.3
Conclusion and Discussion
The conclusion of that study is that the Mining & quarrying industry has a good in-
dustrial symbiosis potential regarding water pollutants. Indeed, most of the factories
seem to have a relatively good stability in their emissions. Furthermore, these facto-
ries emit different kinds of pollutants, according to their subsector and the country
they are from. This means that a good number of different flows could be used within
that industry, and it gives many opportunities to build different industrial symbioses.
This method could be applied to all the industries that have enough observations.
In Figure 5.20 and Appendix B, it can be seen that most of them seem to have also
some underlying clusters, which is promising for applying this process again. How-
ever, due to time restriction, it was not done in this project.
==PAGE:102==
92
5 Results
Despite being limited to the study of water pollutant emissions, this methodology
could very well be applied to solid waste emissions too. This would also give very
interesting insights of the IS opportunities of the studied industry. Unfortunately, no
suitable dataset is available for now to perform this analysis.
5.5
Investigating the Agriculture industry
In this section, the Agriculture, forestry and fishing is studied. It is designated as
Agriculture only from this point, for more simplicity.
This industry is interesting for several reasons. First, it has a big amount of data
(6,046 datapoints), which allows to actually draw conclusions. According to the first
exploratory model, this industry has a good unity among its factories, see section
5.1.2.5. It has also been seen in section 5.2.3 that some agriculture factories might
have a high IS potential in terms of recovering waste. More specifically, this industry
is interesting about the recovery score, which is defined in section 5.2. Indeed, the
distribution of the factories’ scores in Figure 5.6 shows that there are some outliers
that have low scores. The boxplot is presented again in Figure 5.40.
Figure 5.40: Distribution of the recovery scores of the agriculture factories
The idea in this section is to have a closer look at these factories on the left side of
the whisker.
In that perspective, the data that are collected are the same as in section 5.2.1, except
that only the data from Agriculture factories are kept. There are 120 companies with
a score lower than 0.22, i.e on the left of the whisker in the boxplot. The first thing
to do is to look at the country and the subsector they belong to. This is presented in
Figure 5.41.
These first results are already interesting, both from the subsector and from the
country perspectives.
• Two countries are dominant: the UK and Slovakia. The UK being very repre-
sented might just be because this country has a lot of data in the dataset, see
==PAGE:103==
5.5 Investigating the Agriculture industry
93
Figure 5.41: Number of low-performing agriculture factories per sector and country
section 3.4.4. But the very interesting part is that Slovakia is a very small coun-
try regarding the amount of available data. Indeed, it has only 383 factories in
total, and 95 in the Agriculture industry.
• Also, two sectors are more frequent than the others in this category: 01.47
(Raising of poultry) and 01.46 (Raising of swine/pigs). The question is then
to determine whether those subsectors are in general not very into recovering
waste, or if those particular factories have a high potential.
Figure 5.42 shows, per subsector, the recovery score distribution of all the factories
from the industry.
It can be seen that here as well, for NACE codes 01.46 and
01.47, the factories with particularly low scores are outliers. Therefore, the factories
from those subsectors have a high recovery score in general, and those outliers are
performing abnormally low.
That confirms the fact that the factories that were
considered before have a high IS potential: they are similar to factories that have a
good - or at least decent - recovery score and thus it should not be difficult for them
to follow their example and also get a good score.
==PAGE:104==
94
5 Results
Figure 5.42: Recovery score distribution for each subsector of Agriculture
Discussion
It is quite clear that the subsector Raising of poultry in Slovakia has a high potential
of improvement towards a more circular waste handling. This result is on the subsec-
tor and country level, not factory, which is interesting as it is wider.
Even though it is arguable given the total amount of British data, there are quite
many interesting factories in the UK as well, and only for two subsectors, Raising of
poultry and Raising of swine/pigs.
This outlier approach is very interesting, because it is quite simple to perform and
it brings good results. This is why it is decided to use that approach on the whole
dataset, with a more advanced and theory-oriented outlier detection method. It is
the purpose of the next section.
==PAGE:105==
5.6 Advanced outlier detection regarding the recovery score
95
5.6
Advanced outlier detection regarding the
recovery score
In the previous section, it has been shown that the concept of outlier is key in the
definition of the IS potential. That is why it is interesting to focus on this outlier
detection and see what can be obtained with more advanced methods than just the
visualization of the boxplots.
The WasteTransfer table from the E-PRTR database is the one used in this section,
along with NaceCode. As a reminder, it includes company-level quantities of solid
waste emissions, as well as whether the waste is disposed or somehow recovered.
There is unfortunately no information on the nature of the waste.
The features to be considered in this study are the country, the industry and subsector,
the total amount of waste and of course the recovery score, and this for every company.
The goal is to spot the companies that have an abnormally low recovery score, given
their sector, size and country. Indeed, that would mean that these companies should
be able to get a better recovery score by following the behavior of the similar peers.
The first step is then to spot all outliers in the dataset, and later on to select the ones
that are in the lower part. Spotting the outliers with a surprisingly high score could
also be interesting, as it would mean that one company has found a way to recover a
big part of its waste, and it can be seen as a role model for all the similar companies.
5.6.1
The data
As previously mentioned, the data is aggregated on the factory level. It was described
in section 3.4.5.1 that the data looks suspicious from one year to another for many
companies, probably as a result of missing data. In order not to drop too much data,
it is chosen to first aggregate all the available data for each company over the years.
Then, once it is done, the recovery score is computed. The factories with a score of
exactly 1 or 0 are taken out from the dataset, as it is assumed that it results from
missing data for all available years.
In the end, there is one datapoint per factory, with the following features:
• country, categorical variable;
• NACE code, categorical (or continuous) variable;
• size of the factory: total amount of solid waste generated divided by the number
of years with available data, from 1 to 10, continuous variable;
• recovery score, continuous variable.
Note: The NACE code is a four-digit number, the first two referring to the big sector,
the third to the sector and last to the subsector of the company. This is why it can
be used both as a categorical or a continuous variable in the model. However, as
==PAGE:106==
96
5 Results
detailed in section 4.4.1.5, it is preferred to treat it as a categorical variable, and to
take into account its hierarchical structure.
5.6.2
The model
The normal points, or inliers, might not form a unique group, but they are instead
expected to be distributed between several clusters. It might then be wise to choose
a model that does not focus on building a profile of the normal datapoints to spot
the abnormal ones, but a model that is able to detect how likely the points are to be
anomalies by looking at how isolated they are in the dataset. In that perspective, two
models seem to fit the situation: isolation forests and DBSCAN algorithm. However,
some features are categorical, such as the country or the industry. Also, the focus is
to be on the recovery score only, given the other features. Lastly, the model should
be able to take into account the hierarchical structure of the NACE feature. For those
reasons, the isolation forest model is more appropriate than the DBSCAN.
Again, the goal of this model is to spot the outlier companies regarding the recovery
score only.
For instance, if all pen factories in Spain have a high recovery score,
except companies x1 and x2 which have very low ones, then the model should point
them out as outliers. But if all pen factories in Spain have very low scores, then no
anomaly should be detected. Following the same idea, if the dataset only has one
company from cable manufacturing in Iceland, it should not be pointed out as outlier.
In that perspective, the adapted version of the isolation forest presented in section
4.4.1.5 is applied to the dataset. The output, i.e. the values of ∆s (see Equation
4.21) are investigated.
5.6.3
Results
As justified in section 4.4.1.4, 100 trees are created to build each of the two isolation
forests. They are grown until the external nodes contain only one datapoint or several
identical points.
Figure 5.43 shows that the values of ∆s are standing in a quite narrow interval:
[−0.1; 0.1].
Figure 5.44 shows the results of the model for the Polish companies with NACE code
35.30 (steam and air conditioning supply). Those were also used as an example in
section 4.4.1.5, more precisely in Figure 4.6. It was then stated that the model should
point the two datapoints on the bottom left corner as outliers, but not the two on the
bottom right. Looking at the numerical results, the values of ∆s for the four points
at stake are, from left to right: 0.108, 0.072, 0.031 and 0.026. Comparing those values
with the distribution of Figure 5.43 allows to state that the model succeeded in that
example.
==PAGE:107==
5.6 Advanced outlier detection regarding the recovery score
97
Figure 5.43: Distribution of the ∆s values
Figure 5.44: ∆s values for the factories from steam and air conditioning supply (35.30)
in Poland
Some other cases are presented in Figure 5.45.
In Figure 5.45(a) it is quite clear that the values of ∆s are growing when the values
of the recovery score go down (i.e. from up to down in the plot), regardless the value
of total waste. That was the purpose of this model. It is interesting to point out
the fact that in Figure 5.45(a), the datapoint at the bottom represent the company
with facilityid=193186, which is also the one that appears in Figure 5.41, for 01.47
factories in Romania. It makes sense as it is the one with the lowest recovery score,
but it is comforting to note that it has a high ∆s, and therefore is indeed considered
==PAGE:108==
98
5 Results
(a) Raising of poultry (01.47) - Romania
(b) Manufacture of other organic basic chemicals
(20.14) - Netherlands
Figure 5.45: Examples of ∆s values
an outlier by the model.
The interesting thing that can be seen in Figure 5.45(b) is the yellow point on the
top left corner. It testifies that the model detects also the high outliers, i.e. the ones
that have abnormally high values of recovery score, compared to the others.
5.6.4
Discussion
This model seems to perform quite well for the outlier detection regarding the recov-
ery score.
One limitation is that it is not really possible to validate this method other than
assessing it visually. Firstly because it is an unsupervised method, hence there is
no true answer on whether a point should be labelled as outlier or not. The second
reason is that there is no baseline method to compare the results with, which is able
to perform that feature-specific outlier detection.
Another arguable point is that it is not making any distinction on the kind of outlier,
as in whether the score value is abnormally low or abnormally high. It can be easily
avoided, applying a 0.5 threshold on the score value. However, this ambivalence is not
necessarily a bad thing, considering that in this application, the two types of outliers
are interesting. The ones with high scores can serve as role model to follow, or at
least give some insights to the similar companies on how to improve. On the other
hand, the low-score outliers are the ones that are the most likely to have high-value
waste, at least in terms of quantity. Hence they have a high IS potential.
==PAGE:109==
5.7 Time consistency of the solid waste generation
99
Regarding simplicity, the model could also have been performed separately on each
group characterized by a country and a NACE code. But the idea was to build a
model on high level, able to handle the whole dataset. Also, this allows the different
subsectors and countries to kind of influence each other: for instance if an outlier for
a certain subsector in a certain country has similar points in another country for the
same subsector, its ∆s value might be lower and it might be less considered as an
outlier.
This method could also be used with another key metric instead of this recovery
score, which might make more sense for the study of IS potentials. It could be the
waste value generated by the companies, or some sort of evaluation metric to assess
how green the companies are, and so on. The choice of such a metric is very im-
portant for the interpretability of the results and should be chosen while taking into
account all the background parameters. This requires a more in-depth study of the
opportunities that are provided by the available data with an expert point of view.
5.7
Time consistency of the solid waste generation
It has been explained that one criterion for including a factory in an industrial sym-
biosis is that it has constant emissions through time, so that the system can be stable
in the long term.
The goal of this section is to see how stable the solid waste emissions are, for each
type of waste and each sector.
5.7.1
The data
In this section, the data is extracted from the Danish statistics dataset. It is taken
as separated as possible, which means that the features are:
• The type of waste emitted;
• The sector: the least aggregated level is chosen. It seems like these sectors are
a mix between some big sectors and some sectors from the NACE classification.
Hence they are referred to as sectors in this section;
• The year, between 2011 and 2015;
• The quantity of waste, in tons.
From this raw dataset, an aggregation is performed on the year feature. Each obser-
vation consists then of three features: the type of waste, the sector, and an ordered
list of five quantities, one per year.
The sectors that produce no waste, i.e.
the ones with lists of zeros for all kinds
of waste, are filtered out from the data: all the observations from that sector are
removed.
==PAGE:110==
100
5 Results
5.7.2
Data analysis
For each observation, the list of 5 quantities is normalized by the mean, and the
standard deviation is computed. Note: if a sector never produces a certain waste
type, then the output for the standard deviation is NaN.
The lower the value of the normalized standard deviation, the better because the
more stable.
The results are shown in Figure 5.46. Figures 5.47, 5.48 and 5.49 present the same
plot, cut in three, so that the labels are visible. The big plot is kept because it gives
an overview of the stability per type of waste (the columns).
==PAGE:111==
5.7 Time consistency of the solid waste generation
101
Figure 5.46: Normalized standard deviation of the emissions of solid waste per sector
and waste type between 2011 and 2015. A zoom-in of this Figure is presented in
Figures 5.47, 5.48 and 5.49
==PAGE:112==
102
5 Results
Figure 5.47: Zoom 1 of Figure 5.46
==PAGE:113==
5.7 Time consistency of the solid waste generation
103
Figure 5.48: Zoom 2 of Figure 5.46
==PAGE:114==
104
5 Results
Figure 5.49: Zoom 3 of Figure 5.46
==PAGE:115==
5.7 Time consistency of the solid waste generation
105
5.7.3
Discussion
Various observations can be made from these results.
5.7.3.1
Regarding the type of waste
The most stable waste types are waste suited for incineration and cardboard incl.
packaging. The first is very vague, and by definition not well suited for industrial
symbiosis. The second makes sense, as one can assume that most of waste cardboard
comes from the packaging of the inputs, which should be quite constant if the pro-
duction is also stable. It is also one of the easiest materials to recycle, which means
that it is likely to be included in an IS system.
The mixed construction waste and contaminated soil types are only emitted by 4 sec-
tors, which are construction-related, but the normalized standard deviation of those
emissions are very low. Therefore these are stable waste types, when produced. The
same thing can be said about the sludge from sewage treatment plants, which is very
stable but only produced by the sewerage sector.
On the contrary, the least stable waste types are chemically treated wood, PVC, metal
packaging, wood packaging and glass. It suggests that they have a low potential re-
garding IS.
5.7.3.2
Regarding the sector
Another interesting thing to notice is that on one hand, the three sectors construc-
tion of new buildings, civil engineering and professional repair and maintenance of
buildings have extremely similar results, almost equal. On the other hand, the sector
own-account repair and maintenance of buildings seems to be missing all data except
for one waste type, and the result for that one looks very similar to the previous three
sectors. Therefore it could be assumed that this latter sector has a similar emission
profile to the other three. The fact that these sectors are quite close in terms of type
of activity can only support this assumption.
They are also some of the most stable sectors, along with agriculture and horticulture,
and freight transport by road and via pipeline.
The sectors that vary the most in time in terms of solid waste generation are Manu-
facture of leather and footwear, Information service activities, Extraction of oil and
gas, and Oil refinery etc. Hence they might not be stable enough to join an industrial
symbiosis.
5.7.3.3
Comments
This study is interesting to get a first idea of the stability of the emissions in time for
the sectors.
However, two limitations should be taken into account.
==PAGE:116==
106
5 Results
First, a 5-point time series is not enough to perform more advanced analysis, which is
why this normalized standard deviation is the only tool used here to measure stability.
If the data were split on the week or month level and/or if they were covering a bigger
time range, the series would have more datapoints and therefore would be suited for
more advanced methods and would provide more trustworthy results.
The other limitation is due to the aggregation of the data on the sector level. Indeed,
for a ”stable” sector such as agriculture and horticulture, it is not impossible to have
some very unstable companies in the category, hidden by the others. Similarly, the
”unstable” sectors should not be completely disregarded as they might have some
stable individual firms despite an overall big variation.
The conclusion of this study is that these results should be used with caution, as
a first insight on the time stability of the sectors regarding their solid waste emissions.
However, a case-by-case investigation on the factory level is necessary before making
decisions.
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
Since the results have been discussed already throughout Chapter 5, the following
discussion is on a higher level and is about the project as a whole.
The initial purpose of this project, which was to actually use machine learning and
big data methods to help build IS networks, was altered by the quality of the available
datasets. It turned into an exploratory mission in order to assess what was actually
possible to do with the available data.
6.1
Choice of the dataset
Chapter 3 presents a list of datasets that are related to IS and could be used in that
purpose. It has been decided to use only two of them. This is arguable, because those
that were not selected also present interesting properties. However, time restrictions
made it necessary to make a choice. In particular, the ADS dataset, which has inter-
esting information about the waste nature, was not selected because it presents some
flaws (see section 3.5.3) and it was provided too late in the project, approximately
less than two months before the end.
6.2
Exploratory approach
Exploration is not the most theory-heavy step in data analysis, but it is key to un-
derstand the dataset and what can be done with it.
In this project, many different things were tried out, and not all of them had convinc-
ing results. The choice of which experiment to try out is motivated either by some
previous results, such as the Mining & Quarrying investigation in section 5.4 being
inspired by the results of all industry visualization in section 5.3; or by intuition,
which is harder to justify. Indeed, the possibilities are almost unlimited and it is
difficult to know in advance which would give interesting results. This project gives
a list of some methods that can be employed, but does not claim to be exhaustive,
on the contrary.
However, in the case when the leads to explore were chosen following intuition, it
would maybe have been better to talk to IS experts first, or at least people with
a background knowledge on waste management, to validate the choices or find new
==PAGE:118==
108
6 Discussion
ones. The thing is, no such person had time for this and was responsive enough.
This multiple-angle approach of the project leads to a list of distinct results that
are not necessarily easy to link together and hence drawing proper conclusions is also
a challenge.
6.3
The data issue
Conclusions and final statements are all the more difficult to present given the quality
of the data they are based on. There are indeed very few available documentation
on the data itself, especially regarding missing data and how representative they are
of the European or Danish companies. Hence, even though the methods are correct
and the results look nice, they might not be 100% reliable. This is one of the main
limitations of the project.
It could have been interesting to investigate the missing data and their distribution
in order to understand better the dataset, but it has been decided not to. It was
indeed preferred to spend time on the actual exploratory methods, in the perspective
of applying them to another dataset that does not have such issues.
6.4
About the background
The background of industrial symbiosis is complex as it presents many opportunities
and challenges, some of which are presented in Chapter 2.
All the results have to be analyzed taking into account this context, which is not
an easy task. The specificities of waste, waste water, and factories should also be
considered , which is an additional challenge.
This project is somehow missing such deep contextual analysis, and instead gives
quite blind results. That is why it would be very interesting to work together with
some experts in order to be more critical on the results and discuss on what they
imply and how to actually use them, when it is possible.
6.5
Scope of this study
Even though they should be interpreted with caution, some results are interesting.
The different methods that were developed in this project are providing useful el-
ements for the detection of IS potentials. Their most useful function is to act as
pointers towards the special cases that would require a manual investigation. For
instance, the method in section 5.5 was able to point out that raising poultry compa-
nies in Slovakia are a group of interest for IS purposes.
Another opportunity to use this project would be the case of a new dataset being
released, either more suited to this study, or just with better quality data.
The
==PAGE:119==
6.5 Scope of this study
109
investigated methods could indeed act as starting point for a new study, and give
more interesting results to investigate. For instance, the method described in section
5.4 (performing DBSCAN clustering analysis) could very well be used on a dataset
that details the emissions of solid waste. That would give more interesting inputs for
industrial symbiosis.
==PAGE:120==
110
==PAGE:121==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Industrial symbiosis potential is not easy to define and can be influenced by contrary
concepts. A factory could have a high potential because of previous experiences with
circular strategies; but on the other hand a high potential could also come from a
high waste value from a company which is far from following circular ideas. A busi-
ness challenge lies in the fact that if the companies realize they have a high IS waste
value, they quickly develop an interest in circular strategies. However, in general, this
business potential is not known.
The exploratory approach allows to find several ways to link patterns in the datasets
to this concept of IS potential. Four main leads should be remembered from this
project.
First, the recovery score, which is assumed to give a good indication on the cur-
rent position of an entity regarding waste management: the higher the score, the
more eco-responsible the entity. It allows to study the datasets at a higher level of
interpretation regarding IS.
The second interesting investigation is about the pollutant emissions through wa-
ter. It allows to draw emission profiles for the companies and compare them within
countries or industries: some similarities and disparities are revealed using clustering.
Due to the lack of data, this method is only applied to water pollutants, but it could
be used on any kind of emissions, including solid waste, if the dataset is detailed
enough.
Some results in the exploration suggest that outlier detection is a key method when
looking for IS potentials, especially when linked to an environment-related perfor-
mance measure, such as the recovery score. It allows to study the distribution of
the companies within the industries, and spot both the companies that could serve
as role model in terms of waste management and hence induce a good IS potential
for the whole industry, and the ones that are ”left behind” and therefore have a big
improvement potential.
Finally, the time stability is a very important criterion for establishing long term
industrial symbioses. It can be studied in the dataset and give hints on which sectors
==PAGE:122==
112
7 Conclusion
or kinds of waste are likely to be quite stable in time. This stability can be measured
both in terms of emissions profile with clustering and of quantity of emissions with
variation study. However, a data issue rises again, as the available datasets do not
have long enough series of points. More elaborate methods could be used on a dataset
with more detailed time data than one point per year.
Another main conclusion from this project is that the range of exploratory opportu-
nities depends a lot on the quality of the available data. For now, it is not sufficient.
It is still possible to find out interesting results, but they are not completely reliable,
and their applications are limited. However, the good thing is, if such correct results
are given by not really appropriate datasets, it can be assumed that the same kind
of methods, applied to suitable data, would provide very interesting insights for IS
potentials.
==PAGE:123==
CHAPTER 8
Future Work
This project provides many opportunities for future work. Of course, the exploration
of new leads in the same idea as the ones that are described in the results is already
an endless work that can be done to extend this project. However, there are other
possibilities, that might be more interesting and more useful.
8.1
Improve the way of dealing with the available
datasets
The main challenge of this study is the datasets and their quality. Some more time
could be spent trying to get the best possible out of them.
One could try to link the different datasets together to get more interesting results.
For instance, the ADS dataset could be used to study the nature of the solid waste
that are emitted by a sector in order to draw a profile, and the E-PRTR could bring
information about the factories within that sector: how stable they are, etc. This
way, the two datasets would be complementary and could get better results.
Some work could also be done about the missing data. For instance in the Danish
Statistics dataset, there is no distinction between missing data and zero quantities,
but some investigation could be performed to try and spot the ”suspicious” zeros,
and fill them. For instance in section 5.7.3.2 it is suggested that the data for sector
own-account repair and maintenance of buildings seems to be missing and could be
filled using similar sectors.
8.2
Leads for the ideal dataset
The datasets that are used in the project were built for other purposes than studying
IS. That is one of the reasons that make them not really suitable.
However, this project shows that many different things can be done and could provide
very useful inputs if they were based on a solid dataset. That might inspire decision
makers in the IS field to actually build a dataset suited for this kind of studies.
Then, going through the methods and results in this project, and understanding the
advantages and flaws of the different datasets would provide a good basis for the
design of such a new database.
==PAGE:124==
114
8 Future Work
For instance, in the ADS dataset, it is quite a shame that the emissions cannot be
grouped together by the factory they come from. It is understandable that there are
some confidentiality issues, but a simple random ID given to each factory would have
been the solution for anonymity while providing a much more interesting dataset.
8.3
About the background
This project is mostly focused on the data aspect, and not taking much into account
the background. As mentioned in section 6.2, it should be more considered when
choosing the leads to explore and their results. For example, when studying a certain
type of waste, it would be useful to consider also how ”popular” it is, i.e. how easy
it is to recycle or reuse it, if there are many opportunities to recover this waste as an
input for another process, and if not, how good are the chances that some innovation
create a process to easily insert it in a circular system.
Also, new perspectives could be added to the study and the actual understanding of
the data. For instance, instead of always looking at the quantities of waste, it would
be interesting to define a more advanced value of waste. Its calculation could include
different properties of the waste, such as its quantity, its nature, its concentration, its
quality etc. In order to do that, it is necessary to fully understand the stakes of waste
and IS. It means again that some inputs are necessary from experts in this field.
8.4
Actually use the results
Another main possibility of future work is to actually use the results that are provided
by the different methods. It means looking into the different specific cases that are
mentioned, and assess what could be done to develop industrial symbiosis. It is the
case in the results of section 5.6, where the outliers regarding the recovery score are
pointed out.
The last step of that investigation, and maybe the most important,
would be to look closely at those outliers and understand why they are recovering
more waste (or less), compared to the others. It could be due to multiple factors:
their processes, the nature of their waste, their location, etc. That would allow to
actually know if they would fit an IS, and hence have a high IS potential as predicted
by the model.
8.5
Define a quantitative potential
As explained in section 2.1, the industrial symbiosis potential is not easy to define.
However, it would be very useful for the interpretability and analysis of the results
to have a numerical measurement of this potential.
This study does not present such a measure, but it gives some interesting leads on
possible ways to do so. One simplistic interpretation of the IS potential is being an
==PAGE:125==
8.5 Define a quantitative potential
115
outlier among the similar entities regarding a performance measure, while fulfilling
some stability criteria in the emissions. The high-value outliers would reveal an IS
potential in the whole group as they can be role models to follow, while the low-value
outliers would have high IS potential for themselves. Using this definition and the
different results and methods that are presented in this project, it is possible to sketch
such a quantitative measure for the IS potential, as follows.
First, the DBSCAN clustering method presented in section 5.4 could be used as a
selective stability criterion. After performing the cluster algorithm on the different
industries (or even in the whole dataset, which would not make a big difference), the
selected companies would be the ones that have all their datapoints in the same clus-
ter (the noise category not being considered as a cluster). Inversely, the companies
that are split on different clusters and/or noise through time would be considered
unstable and hence have no IS potential.
The second step would actually give a quantitative measure of the potential, and
for that the most simple solution would be to use the ∆s values from the adapted
isolation forest model presented in section 5.6. It fits well the purpose as it gives high
values for both types of outliers.
Mostly due to time limitation, this method was not implemented. Even if it had been,
it would not have been possible to validate it, because no such measure have been
introduced before. Also, there is another data limitation that would have altered the
results. Indeed, the DBSCAN algorithm was performed on the PollutantTransfer
table of the E-PRTR dataset, while the isolation forest requires the recovery score and
hence come from the WasteTransfer table in the same dataset. The issue is that only
4,600 companies are present in both tables, among the 7,485 from PollutantTransfer
and the 40,735 from WasteTransfer, which is not a big number.
==PAGE:126==
116
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX A
Lorenz curves
In this appendix are shown the Lorenz curves from section 5.1.
(a) Chemical manufactures
(b) Water
supply,
sewerage
and
waste treatment factories
(c) Mining and quarrying factories (d) Electricity and gas supply facto-
ries
(e) Plastic, glass and concrete man-
ufactures
Figure A.1: Lorenz curves for the emissions of chlorides
==PAGE:128==
118
A Lorenz curves
(a) Water supply, sewerage and waste
treatment factories
(b) Agriculture, forestry, fishing facto-
ries
(c) Chemical manufactures
(d) Metal manufactures
(e) Electricity and gas supply factories
(f) Wood and paper manufactures
(g) Food, beverage and tobacco manu-
factures
Figure A.2: Lorenz curves for the emissions of nitrogen
==PAGE:129==
A Lorenz curves
119
(a) Water supply, sewerage and waste
treatment factories
(b) Wood and paper manufactures
(c) Agriculture, forestry, fishing facto-
ries
(d) Food, beverage and tobacco manu-
factures
(e) Chemical manufactures
(f) Pharmaceutical manufactures
(g) Electricity and gas supply factories
Figure A.3: Lorenz curves for the emissions of organic carbon
==PAGE:130==
120
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX B
Visualization of the
relative pollutant
emissions through
water
This appendix is related to Chapter 5.3, and presents the visualizations for all the
industries with at least 2 observations.
Figure B.1: Agriculture, forestry and fishing
==PAGE:132==
122
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.2: Mining & Quarrying
Figure B.3: Manufacture of food products, beverages and tobacco
==PAGE:133==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
123
Figure B.4: Textiles and leather products
Figure B.5: Wood and paper production and printing
==PAGE:134==
124
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.6: Oil refinery etc.
Figure B.7: Manufacture of chemicals
==PAGE:135==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
125
Figure B.8: Pharmaceuticals
Figure B.9: Manufacture of plastic, glass and concrete
==PAGE:136==
126
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.10: Basic metals and fabricated metal products
Figure B.11: Manufacture of electronic components
==PAGE:137==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
127
Figure B.12: Electrical equipment
Figure B.13: Manufacture of machinery
==PAGE:138==
128
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.14: Transport equipment
Figure B.15: Manufacture of furniture and other manufacturing etc.
==PAGE:139==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
129
Figure B.16: Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
Figure B.17: Water supply, sewerage and waste management
==PAGE:140==
130
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.18: Construction
Figure B.19: Wholesale and retail trade
==PAGE:141==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
131
Figure B.20: Transportation
Figure B.21: Financial and insurance
==PAGE:142==
132
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.22: Real estate activities and renting of non-residential buildings
Figure B.23: Knowledge-based services
==PAGE:143==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
133
Figure B.24: Travel agents, cleaning, and other operational services
Figure B.25: Public administration, defence and compulsory social security
==PAGE:144==
134
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
Figure B.26: Education
Figure B.27: Arts, entertainment and recreation activities
==PAGE:145==
B Visualization of the relative pollutant emissions through water
135
Figure B.28: Other service activities
==PAGE:146==
136
==PAGE:147==
APPENDIX C
Cluster description of
the Mining &
Quarrying industry
pollutant emissions
through water
This Appendix refers to section 5.4.2, and presents the analysis of the secondary
clusters from the Mining & Quarrying pollutant emissions through water.
Fluorides cluster
This cluster has the label 0.
It contains 36 datapoints, that are from 8 distinct factories. This is not a lot, so the
detail of those factories can be displayed in Table C.1.
Nothing obvious comes out from this table, except maybe that 5 out of the 8 factories
are in the 07.2 sector, Mining of non-ferrous metal ores, which is the union of 07.21
and 07.29 subsectors.
==PAGE:148==
138
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
FacilityID
NACE code
Country
Number of reports
27018
05.10
Italy
1
17754
07.21
France
2
17792
07.21
France
9
3590
07.29
Germany
1
24759
07.29
Spain
9
24805
07.29
Spain
4
14600
08.12
Belgium
1
74335
08.99
Germany
9
Table C.1: Detailed data of the fluorides cluster
The next step is to have a look at the emissions themselves from the cluster, see
Figure C.1.
Figure C.1: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
It can be seen that all factories are emitting only fluorides, i.e. the cluster is very
stable.
Nickel cluster
This cluster presents 71 datapoints from 22 different factories. This is not much but
still worth to have a look at.
This cluster is mainly representing Finland and Belgium, but it is not obvious given
the low amount of data. One can notice that 07.29 sector is quite dominant once
more in the cluster.
==PAGE:149==
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
139
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Sector of the factories in the cluster
Figure C.2: Analysis of the cluster members
This cluster is interesting because it has a good uniformity in the emissions given its
71 datapoints, see Figure C.3. Only the 4 or 5 outliers might be related to the arsenic
cluster.
==PAGE:150==
140
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
Figure C.3: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
Nitrogen cluster
This cluster is too small to draw any interesting conclusion. It has 73 datapoints from
11 factories only. They are listed as it was done for the fluorides cluster.
FacilityID
NACE code
Country
Number of reports
12857
05.20
Czech Republic
5
16365
05.20
Czech Republic
4
16366
05.20
Czech Republic
9
239292
07.10
Finland
1
8165
07.10
Sweden
12
8241
07.10
Sweden
12
17033
07.29
Finland
5
19123
07.29
Ireland
9
192124
07.29
Norway
4
8166
07.29
Sweden
4
20701
08.11
Poland
9
Table C.2: Detailed data of the nitrogen cluster
Once more, there are some factories from 07.29, but nothing else comes out from that
cluster.
This cluster is emitting only nitrogen. It looks neat, which is confirmed by the table:
there are five factories with 9 or more datapoints - and it is not known whether the
other are split between this cluster and another or just have few datapoints in the
dataset. However, it is not possible to draw real conclusions, given the low amount
==PAGE:151==
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
141
Figure C.4: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
of data in this cluster.
==PAGE:152==
142
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
Organic carbon cluster
This is a quite small cluster, with 81 datapoints from 23 factories.
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Sector of the factories in the cluster
Figure C.5: Analysis of the cluster members
This cluster does not look very stable, as a great part of the factories are there only
once. Also, it has mainly British and Polish factories, and is dominated by sector
05.20.
The uniformity is correct, but it could be better given the small number of datapoints.
==PAGE:153==
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
143
Figure C.6: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
Arsenic cluster
Once again this is not a major cluster, with 60 datapoints from 27 factories.
This cluster seems to contain mostly factories from sector 07.29, but the country
distribution is quite even, and there is only one factory that appears more than 4
times.
Among 60 points in the cluster, there are only at most 2 outliers from the pattern of
emitting only arsenic. That is pretty stable, and it might explain why there are so
few points.
==PAGE:154==
144
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Sector of the factories in the cluster
Figure C.7: Analysis of the cluster members
==PAGE:155==
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
145
Figure C.8: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
==PAGE:156==
146
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
Copper cluster
The size of that cluster is similar to the previous one: 68 datapoints from 23 factories.
(a) Country of the factories in the cluster
(b) Number of datapoints per factory in the clus-
ter
(c) Sector of the factories in the cluster
Figure C.9: Analysis of the cluster members
Again, the only thing that is observed is that this is one more cluster with mainly
07.29 factories.
Figure C.10 shows that the copper cluster is quite unstable, even more given its small
size.
==PAGE:157==
C Cluster description of the Mining & Quarrying industry pollutant emissions through water
147
Figure C.10: Pollutant emissions in the cluster
==PAGE:158==
148
==PAGE:159==
APPENDIX D
Adapted Isolation
Forest Algorithm
This appendix presents the code of the adaptation of the isolation forest that was
introduced in section 4.4.1.5 and used in section 5.6.
1 eps = 0.00000000001
2 class Data:
3
def __init__(self, data, nace_level , features=None):
4
# data has to be a pandas dataframe
5
self.data = data
6
self.nace_level = nace_level # industry: 1, big sector: 2, sector: 3
or subsector: 4
7
# The following if statement aims at optimizing the running time
8
# The feature names are in the form 'i-featurename' where i is the
NACE level
9
# (0 if the feature is not related to the activity)
10
if features is not None:
11
self.features = features
12
else:
13
self.features = [feature for feature in self.data.columns if int
(feature[0]) <= self.nace_level]
14
15
def check_nace_level(self):
16
# this function checks that the available features about NACE/
industry are corresponding to self.nace_level
17
# If not, the level is increased until it's correct.
18
l = max([int(f[0]) for f in self.features])
19
if l < self.nace_level and self.nace_level < 4:
20
self.nace_level_up()
21
22
def nace_level_up(self):
23
# This is the function to increase self.nace_level and unpdate the
features
24
if self.nace_level < 4:
25
self.nace_level += 1
26
to_add = [f for f in self.data.columns if int(f[0]) == self.
nace_level]
27
# those are the features corresponding to the new
nace_level , to add.
28
# Note: there is no needt to remove the lower level features
==PAGE:160==
150
D Adapted Isolation Forest Algorithm
, because they are all constant on the dataset
29
# (otherwise the level would not change)
30
one_more_level = True
31
# This boolean is created to check if the level increase has to
be only one step or more
32
# e.g. if the transition is from big sector to sector, and there
is actually only one sector,
33
# then we go directly to the subsector level.
34
for f in to_add:
35
m, M = (min(self.data[f]), max(self.data[f]))
36
if M - m > eps: # if this feature is not constant on the
dataset
37
one_more_level = False
38
self.features.append(f)
39
if one_more_level:
40
self.nace_level_up()
41
42 class ExternalNode:
43
def __init__(self, data, length):
44
self.id = list(data.data.index)
45
self.data = data
46
self.length = length
47
48
49 class InternalNode:
50
def __init__(self, left, right, splitfeature , splitvalue):
51
self.left = left
52
self.right = right
53
self.splitfeature = splitfeature
54
self.splitvalue = splitvalue
55
56
57 class iTree:
58
def __init__(self, data, length):
59
self.external_nodes = []
60
self.internal_nodes = []
61
self.data = data
62
self.length = length
63
# Check if it is an internal or external node:
64
if len(self.data.data) <= 1 or self.data.features == []:
65
n = ExternalNode(self.data, self.length)
66
self.external_nodes.append(n)
67
else:
68
self.data.check_nace_level()
69
flag = True
70
number_features = len(self.data.features)
71
while flag and number_features > 0: # Random choice of a feature
for the split
72
f = np.random.choice(self.data.features)
73
f_values = self.data.data[f].values
74
low, high = (min(f_values), max(f_values))
75
if high - low <= eps:
76
# if the chosen feature is constant on the dataset, it
is removed from the available features
77
# and another feature is chose, if possible
==PAGE:161==
D Adapted Isolation Forest Algorithm
151
78
self.data.features.remove(f)
79
number_features -= 1
80
else:
81
# if it is not constant, it is kept
82
flag = False
83
if number_features ==0:
84
# This is when all features are constant on the dataset
85
n = ExternalNode(self.data, self.length)
86
self.external_nodes.append(n)
87
else:
88
nace_level_up = 0 if f[0] == '0' else 1
89
# The nace level is not changed if the chosen feature is not
related to the activity classification (starting with
0)
90
s = np.random.uniform(low=low, high=high) # split value
91
left = self.data.data[f] < s
92
data_left = Data(self.data.data[left].copy(), self.data.
nace_level, features=self.data.features.copy())
93
data_right = Data(self.data.data[~left].copy(), self.data.
nace_level + nace_level_up , features=self.data.features.
copy())
94
# In case of nace related split, only the right tree will be
the points with the chosen feature = 1, hence a nace
level
95
# increase is necessary. For the left tree, the points have
th chosen feature = 0, so we don't know if a nace level
change
96
# is needed
97
tree_left = iTree(data_left, self.length+1)
98
tree_right = iTree(data_right , self.length+1)
99
n = InternalNode(tree_left, tree_right , f, s)
100
self.internal_nodes.append(n)
101
self.internal_nodes.append([n for n in tree_left.
internal_nodes + tree_right.internal_nodes])
102
for n in tree_left.external_nodes + tree_right.
external_nodes:
103
self.external_nodes.append(n)
Listing D.1: Isolation Forest definition
The data to use as input of the isolation forest has to be a pandas DataFrame, with
one column per feature and one row per observation (company). The column names,
that are also the feature names, have to include the digit of their NACE level in first
position. All the features that are not NACE-related are level 0; industry is level
1, big sector is level 2, sector is level 3 and subsector is level 4. Some examples of
features are '0-Denmark', '1-CE', '3-3' etc.
To give another example, a company with a NACE code of G 46.4.8 has the features
'1-G', '2-46', '3-4' and '4-8' equal to 1, and all other NACE-related features
equal to 0.
Once such a DataFrame data is set up, the forest can be built, see the following
Listings.
==PAGE:162==
152
D Adapted Isolation Forest Algorithm
1 import numpy as np
2 N = 100 # 100 trees in the forest
3 init_nace_level = 1
4 scores_no_rs = dict()
5 lengths = []
6 data_no_rs = data.drop('0-recovery_score', axis=1) # The first forest to
build is without the recovery_score feature
7 for count in range(N):
8
tree = iTree(Data(data_no_rs,init_nace_level),0)
9
e = tree.external_nodes
10
n = len(e)
11
H = sum([1/np.float(k+1) for k in range(n-1)])
12
c = 2*H-2*(n-1)/n
13
for node in e:
14
for i in node.id:
15
lengths.append(node.length)
16
try:
17
scores_no_rs[i].append(2.0**(-float(node.length)/c))
18
except KeyError:
19
scores_no_rs[i] = [2.0**(-float(node.length)/c)]
20 scores_avg_no_rs = {key: np.mean(value) for key, value in scores_no_rs.items
()}
Listing D.2: Building the first forest
1 scores_with_rs = dict()
2 lengths = []
3 recovery_score feature
4 for count in range(N):
5
tree = iTree(Data(data,init_nace_level),0)
6
e = tree.external_nodes
7
n = len(e)
8
H = sum([1/np.float(k+1) for k in range(n-1)])
9
c = 2*H-2*(n-1)/n
10
for node in e:
11
for i in node.id:
12
lengths.append(node.length)
13
try:
14
scores_with_rs[i].append(2.0**(-float(node.length)/c))
15
except KeyError:
16
scores_with_rs[i] = [2.0**(-float(node.length)/c)]
17 scores_avg_with_rs = {key: np.mean(value) for key, value in scores_with_rs.
items()}
Listing D.3: Building the second forest
1 delta_scores = {key: scores_avg[key] - scores_avg_no_rs[key] for key in
scores_avg_with_rs.keys()}
Listing D.4: Computation of ∆s values
==PAGE:163==
APPENDIX E
Project Plan
This appendix is about the Project Plan that was handed in one month after the start
of the project. Section E.1 presents the project plan as it was sent, while in section
E.2 it is compared to the actual project progress.
E.1
Initial Project Plan
E.1.1
Scope of the project
An industrial symbiosis (IS) network consists of flow interactions between different
industrial processes in order to reduce expenses, global waste generation and raw
material use. The idea is to use the waste that is generated by some industries as an
input to another industry. It can be directly reused or some transformations might
be needed: it is then recycled.
In order to settle such a network, its structure and the actors involved have to be
chosen wisely, so that the network allows the saving of significant quantities of waste
and raw materials, and is sustainable.
The goal of this project is to assess how the available data can be used to determine
the IS potential of a company or an industry, that is how well it would fit in such an
IS network.
As explained in section E.1.2.1, one of the main challenges of this project will rely on
getting and adapting to the available data.
E.1.2
Overall Project Plan
Week
Activity
Risk
1 - 4
Literature study
1
1 - 6
Data gathering
4
5 - 7
Build a descriptive map of all the available datasets
2
5 - 16
Explore the data
2
17 - 21
Writing
1
==PAGE:164==
154
E Project Plan
E.1.2.1
About the data
One challenge of this project is that it seems that there is no perfect dataset -i.e. well
detailed, on a company level, with input and output data on solid material / waste,
water, and energy - that is easy to access. But there are several datasets that are
still interesting for this project, even though not ideal. It is then necessary to gather
them all, and build a map of what each of them provides, their aggregation level, etc,
in order to have an overview of all the opportunities.
Then, instead of dealing with separate datasets, it would be interesting to see how
well they can be combined in one, with all kinds of flows: waste, energy and water.
This might not be the easiest thing to do given the differences of the datasets.
E.1.2.2
Data exploration
The core of this project is to explore the data in order for example to determine which
models can be used for which purpose. This exploration process will follow a cyclic
succession of steps.
Figure E.1: The data exploration process
Depending on how interesting the results are, the time spent on an idea / a model
will vary.
==PAGE:165==
E.2 Following the initial project plan
155
E.1.2.3
Risk Analysis
In the project plan, the risk is estimated on a scale from 1 to 5, which are respectively
no risk and high risk. It refers mainly to a risk of being delayed.
Some data is already available, but getting it took longer than planned. The idea is
to get more datasets to explore, and that might take a long time as well, which is
why the data gathering task has a high risk.
The other steps have lower risk because no external interaction is needed, a priori.
Of course, there is a risk that the results might be not as interesting as expected, but
that is taken into account in the cyclic process presented in Figure E.1.
E.2
Following the initial project plan
The cyclic structure of the exploratory analysis was followed for the different inves-
tigations, and the map of the available datasets was built in the form of a table, see
Table 3.3 in section 3.6.
However, building that table and gathering the data took longer than expected, as
for instance access to the ADS database was granted in week 12, which is very late
compared to the planned schedule.
==PAGE:166==
156
==PAGE:167==
Bibliography
[Ayr99]
Robert U Ayres. “The second law, the fourth law, recycling and limits
to growth”. In: Ecological Economics 29.3 (1999), pages 473–483. issn:
0921-8009. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-8009(98)00098-
6. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921800998000986.
[Bin+15]
Song Bin et al. “A Big Data Analytics Approach to Develop Indus-
trial Symbioses in Large Cities”. In: Procedia CIRP 29 (2015). The
22nd CIRP Conference on Life Cycle Engineering, pages 450–455. issn:
2212-8271. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2015.01.
066. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2212827115005016.
[BSM11]
Frank Boons, Wouter Spekkink, and Yannis Mouzakitis. “The dynam-
ics of industrial symbiosis: a proposal for a conceptual framework based
upon a comprehensive literature review”. In: Journal of Cleaner Produc-
tion 19.9 (2011), pages 905–911. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jclepro.2011.01.003. url: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0959652611000072.
[Bui+13]
Lars Buitinck et al. “API design for machine learning software: experi-
ences from the scikit-learn project”. In: ECML PKDD Workshop: Lan-
guages for Data Mining and Machine Learning. 2013, pages 108–122.
[Cec+15]
Franjo Cecelja et al. “Semantic algorithm for Industrial Symbiosis net-
work synthesis”. In: Computers & Chemical Engineering 83 (2015). 24th
European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering(ESCAPE),
pages 248–266. issn: 0098-1354. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compchemeng.2015.04.031. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0098135415001325.
[Che07]
Marian R. Chertow. ““Uncovering” Industrial Symbiosis”. In: Journal of
Industrial Ecology 11.1 (2007), pages 11–30. doi: 10.1162/jiec.2007.
1110. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1162/
jiec.2007.1110. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1162/jiec.2007.1110.
==PAGE:168==
158
Bibliography
[DB15]
Jean-Pierre Doussoulin and Mariana Bittencourt. “Analysing the miti-
gation actions in the French construction sector related to the circular
economy approach: A Waste Input-Output analysis”. In: (July 2015).
[EC02]
John R Ehrenfeld and Marian R Chertow. “27. Industrial symbiosis:
the legacy of Kalundborg”. In: A handbook of industrial ecology (2002),
page 334.
[Eur]
European Environment Agency. About E-PRTR. https://prtr.eea.
europa.eu/#/static?cont=about. Online; accessed 02-August-2019.
[Eur14]
European Commission. Towards a circular economy: A zero waste pro-
gramme for Europe. Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.
html?uri=cellar:50edd1fd-01ec-11e4-831f-01aa75ed71a1.0001.
01/DOC_1&format=PDF. 2014.
[Eur16]
European Union. Waste Framework Directive. http://ec.europa.eu/
environment / waste / framework / targets . htm. Online; accessed 01-
July-2019. 2016.
[Eur17]
Eurostat (European Commission). “NACE Rev. 2 Statistical classifica-
tion of economic activities in the European Community”. In: KS-RA-07-
015-EN-N (2017).
[Eur18]
European Environment Agency. The European Pollutant Release and
Transfer Register (E-PRTR), Member States reporting under Article 7
of Regulation (EC) No 166/2006. https://www.eea.europa.eu/ds_
resolveuid/. Online; accessed 28-March-2019. August 2018.
[Eur19a]
European Commission. Eurostat database - Generation of waste by eco-
nomic activity. Online; accessed 19-May-2019. 2019. url: https://ec.
europa.eu/eurostat/databrowser/view/ten00106/default/table?
lang=en.
[Eur19b]
European Union. List of NACE codes. http://ec.europa.eu/competition/
mergers/cases/index/nace_all.html. Online; accessed 26-June-2019.
1995-2019.
[FG89]
Robert A Frosch and Nicholas E Gallopoulos. “Strategies for manufac-
turing”. In: Scientific American 261.3 (1989), pages 144–152.
[Fis18]
P. Fischer. “02807 Computational Tools for Data Science, Lecture 9”. In:
2018.
[FP17]
Aglaia Fischer and Stefano Pascucci. “Institutional incentives in circu-
lar economy transition: The case of material use in the Dutch textile
industry”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 155 (2017). Making, Buy-
ing and Collaborating for More Sustainable Production and Consump-
tion, pages 17–32. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2016.12.038. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0959652616320935.
==PAGE:169==
Bibliography
159
[GD08]
Yong Geng and Brent Doberstein. “Developing the circular economy
in China: Challenges and opportunities for achieving ’leapfrog develop-
ment’”. In: International Journal of Sustainable Development & World
Ecology 15.3 (2008), pages 231–239. doi: 10.3843/SusDev.15.3:6.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.3843/SusDev.15.3:6. url: https:
//doi.org/10.3843/SusDev.15.3:6.
[Gei+17]
Martin Geissdoerfer et al. “The Circular Economy – A new sustainability
paradigm?” In: Journal of Cleaner Production 143 (2017), pages 757–768.
issn: 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.
048. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0959652616321023.
[HBV01]
Maria Halkidi, Yannis Batistakis, and Michalis Vazirgiannis. “On Clus-
tering Validation Techniques”. In: Journal of Intelligent Information Sys-
tems 17 (October 2001). doi: 10.1023/A:1012801612483.
[Hen+02]
Chris T Hendrickson et al. “36. Industrial ecology and green design”. In:
A Handbook of Industrial Ecology (2002), page 457.
[HTF16]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of
Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, Second Edi-
tion (Springer Series in Statistics). Springer, 2016. isbn: 9780387848570.
[Joh+15]
I. H. G. Johnsen et al. The potential of industrial symbiosis as a key
driver of green growth in Nordic regions. Technical report. Retrieved
from http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:norden:org:
diva-4241. Stockholm: Nordregio, 2015.
[Kal]
Kalundborg Symbiosis. Kalundborg Symbiosis. www.symbiosis.dk/en/.
Online; accessed 28-June-2019.
[Klä14]
Thomas Kläusli. Bio-based Platform Chemicals and Alternative Feed-
stocks. https://communities.acs.org/community/science/sustainability/
green - chemistry - nexus - blog / blog / 2014 / 07 / 17 / bio - based -
platform-chemicals-and-alternative-feedstocks. Online; accessed
10-July-2019. July 2014.
[Kum+19]
Vikas Kumar et al. “Circular economy in the manufacturing sector: ben-
efits, opportunities and barriers”. In: Management Decision 57.4 (2019),
pages 1067–1086. doi: 10 . 1108 / MD - 09 - 2018 - 1070. eprint: https :
//doi.org/10.1108/MD-09-2018-1070. url: https://doi.org/10.
1108/MD-09-2018-1070.
[LB14]
Yong Liu and Yin Bai. “An exploration of firms’ awareness and behav-
ior of developing circular economy: An empirical research in China”. In:
Resources, Conservation and Recycling 87 (2014), pages 145–152. issn:
0921-3449. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2014.04.
002. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921344914000883.
==PAGE:170==
160
Bibliography
[LMZ09]
Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. “Isolation Forest”. In:
In ICDM ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 Eighth IEEE International Confer-
ence on Data Mining. IEEE Computer Society. January 2009, pages 413–
422. doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2008.17.
[LYR15]
Wen-Wei Li, Han-Qing Yu, and Bruce E. Rittmann. “Chemistry: Reuse
water pollutants”. In: Nature 528.7580 (December 2015), pages 29–31.
doi: 10.1038/528029a.
[MBK11]
Perry L. McCarty, Jaeho Bae, and Jeonghwan Kim. “Domestic Wastewa-
ter Treatment as a Net Energy Producer–Can This be Achieved?” In: En-
vironmental Science & Technology 45.17 (September 2011), pages 7100–
7106. doi: 10.1021/es2014264.
[McK+10]
Wes McKinney et al. “Data structures for statistical computing in python”.
In: Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. Volume 445.
Austin, TX. 2010, pages 51–56.
[Mil]
Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet. Hvem Skal Indberette. https://mst.dk/
affald-jord/affald/affaldsdatasystemet/hvem-skal-indberette/.
Online; accessed 20-July-2019.
[Min16]
Ministry of Environment and Food of Denmark. “Waste statistics 2014”.
In: (2016). url: http://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publications/2016/12/
978-87-93529-48-9.pdf.
[Mro10]
Bogdan Mroz. “Consumerism vs. sustainability: The emergence of new
consumer trends in Poland”. In: International Journal of Economic Policy
in Emerging Economies 3.1 (2010), pages 1–15.
[Nau14]
Jon Naustdalslid. “Circular economy in China – the environmental di-
mension of the harmonious society”. In: International Journal of Sus-
tainable Development & World Ecology 21.4 (2014), pages 303–313. doi:
10.1080/13504509.2014.914599. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/
13504509.2014.914599. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.
2014.914599.
[NSW]
NSW EPA (New South Wales Environment Protection Authority). The
waste hierarchy. https://www.epa.nsw.gov.au/your-environment/
recycling-and-reuse/warr-strategy/the-waste-hierarchy. On-
line; accessed 02-August-2019.
[Ped+11]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pages 2825–2830.
[PS14]
Sharon Prendeville and Jude Sherry. “Circular Economy. Is it Enough?”
In: (April 2014). doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.1473.1128.
[Pyt15]
Python Core Team. Python: A dynamic, open source programming lan-
guage. Python Software Foundation. 2015. url: https://www.python.
org/.
==PAGE:171==
Bibliography
161
[Rou87]
Peter J. Rousseeuw. “Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation
and validation of cluster analysis”. In: Journal of Computational and
Applied Mathematics 20 (November 1987), pages 53–65. doi: https://
doi.org/10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7.
[Shi09]
Yasushi Kondo Shinichiro Nakamura. Waste Input-Output Analysis Con-
cepts and Application to Industrial Ecology. Edited by Japan Gradu-
ate School of Economics Waseda University Tokyo. Springer, Dordrecht,
2009. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9902-1.
[Sta]
Statistics Denmark. Geography, Environment and Energy. https : / /
www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/SelectTable/Omrade0.asp?
SubjectCode=01&ShowNews=OFF&PLanguage=1. Online; accessed 22-
January-2019.
[Su+13]
Biwei Su et al. “A review of the circular economy in China: moving
from rhetoric to implementation”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 42
(2013), pages 215–227. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2012.11.020. url: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0959652612006117.
[TCR14]
Nikolaos Trokanas, Franjo Cecelja, and Tara Raafat. “Semantic input/out-
put matching for waste processing in industrial symbiosis”. In: Comput-
ers & Chemical Engineering 66 (2014). Selected papers from ESCAPE-
23 (European Symposium on Computer Aided Process Engineering -
23), 9-12 June 2013, Lappeenranta, Finland, pages 259–268. issn: 0098-
1354. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compchemeng.2014.02.
010. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0098135414000428.
[Tis+17]
Alexandre Tisserant et al. “Solid Waste and the Circular Economy: A
Global Analysis of Waste Treatment and Waste Footprints”. In: Journal
of Industrial Ecology 21.3 (2017), pages 628–640. doi: 10.1111/jiec.
12562. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/
jiec.12562. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
1111/jiec.12562.
[Vel17]
Anne P. M. Velenturf. “Initiating resource partnerships for industrial
symbiosis”. In: Regional Studies, Regional Science 4.1 (2017), pages 117–
124. doi: 10.1080/21681376.2017.1328285. eprint: https://doi.org/
10.1080/21681376.2017.1328285. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
21681376.2017.1328285.
[vMB16]
Eline van Weelden, Ruth Mugge, and Conny Bakker. “Paving the way
towards circular consumption: exploring consumer acceptance of refur-
bished mobile phones in the Dutch market”. In: Journal of Cleaner
Production 113 (2016), pages 743–754. issn: 0959-6526. doi: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.11.065. url: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261501731X.
==PAGE:172==
162
Bibliography
[Vou+08]
Mickael Vourch et al. “Treatment of dairy industry wastewater by reverse
osmosis for water reuse”. In: Desalination 219.1 (2008), pages 190–202.
issn: 0011-9164. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2007.05.
013. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0011916407005747.
[WKD17]
K. Winans, A. Kendall, and H. Deng. “The history and current appli-
cations of the circular economy concept”. In: Renewable and Sustain-
able Energy Reviews 68 (2017), pages 825–833. issn: 1364-0321. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.123. url: http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032116306323.
[Xue+10]
Bing Xue et al. “Survey of officials’ awareness on circular economy devel-
opment in China: Based on municipal and county level”. In: Resources,
Conservation and Recycling 54.12 (2010), pages 1296–1302. issn: 0921-
3449. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . resconrec . 2010 . 05 .
010. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921344910001217.
[YRA16]
Devrim Murat Yazan, Vincenzo Alessio Romano, and Vito Albino. “The
design of industrial symbiosis: an input–output approach”. In: Journal
of Cleaner Production 129 (2016), pages 537–547. issn: 0959-6526. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.03.160. url: http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652616302542.
