==PAGE:1==
Modeling Carbon and Water ﬂuxes using spectral
data from Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) in a
commercial agricultural farm
Technical University of Denmark
Bendik Odland Nordstrøm
28 July 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Agricultural management is based on a thorough understanding and monitoring
of the soil, plant and local climate, and the ﬂuxes of energy and matter between
them. In dry regions such as the dryland tropics, the main constraint for plant
growth is water, and irrigation consumes 80% of the available fresh water. Targeted
irrigation or fertilization in precision agriculture will beneﬁt from spatially explicit
information of crop vegetation Water Use Eﬃciency (WUE), which is the amount of
carbon ﬁxed per unit of water transpired. WUE is the ratio between the vegetations’
Gross Primary Production (GPP) and the Evapotranspiration (ET). Fluxes of GP
and ET are closely connected as both processes are regulated by a variety of linked
biotic and abiotic controls aﬀecting stomatal conductance.
GPP, ET and WUE have traditionally been derived by satellite data modeling
and/or in-situ Eddy Covariance (EC) data measured by ﬂux towers. Both satellite
and EC data present some limitations. The spatial resolution of satellite data is not
always appropriate for small scale applications. The images obtained by these plat-
forms are often subjected to cloud cover during the time of crop growth. Flux tower
Eddy Covariance (EC) systems cannot detect spatial variability of carbon and water
ﬂuxes at the farm scale, and are not always able to measure whole crop ﬁelds as the
footprint ranges between 100-1000m2. Tools to close the gap between coarse spatial
resolution satellite remote sensing and narrow EC measurements are highly needed.
This can be achieved by adjusting remote sensing models by the use of Very High
Resolution (VHR) data obtained by Unmanned Aerial Sytems (UAS). The thesis
aim was to test and validate an existing joint GPP and ET model, originally devel-
oped for Danish conditions, in dryland tropics. This was achieved by using VHR
imagery from UAS Remote Sensing (RS) and EC data derived from a comercial sug-
arcane plantation in, El Viejo, Costa Rica. Results from VHR modeling using ﬁve
images over the dry season show that the original model could simulate the variation
of GPP and LE with RMSE of 3.63gC/m2day and 41.94 W/m2, respectfully. The
NRMSE for GPP and LE is 19.67% and 19.71%, respectfully. A stripping eﬀect in
the imagery causing variability of 10% in the red band (650 nm) was detected. This
eﬀect propagated on the GPP and ET causing an error of 11.2% and 6.3%, respect-
fully. As a possibility to account for the striping eﬀects the Normalized Diﬀerence
Vegetation Index (NDVI) could be substituted with a developed modiﬁed Red Edge
vegetation Index (mREI) where stripping eﬀects were non-existent.
Additionally, we modiﬁed the original model for GPP to include PRI as a biophysical
constraint related with the canopy light use eﬃciency. Using time series of in-situ
normalized LUE and PRI for 2018, an exponential relation was ﬁtted(r2=0.73 for
data collected at 14:00 h) which could be then used with the UAS PRI images.
1
==PAGE:3==
Various GPP model versions using the PRI were compared with the original model
version that did not included PRI. The best performing application could simulate
the variation of GPP with RMSE of 2.19gC/m2day and NRMSE of 11.8%, with the
additional advantage of getting rid of the input data for VPD, soil moisture, and
air temperature. Our results demonstrated the use of UAS to model GPP, ET and
WUE at the farm level and the potential of using diﬀerent spectral regions to reduce
the amount of in-situ information. Incorporation of PRI showed to especially beneﬁt
the model when the vegetations photosynthetic activity is high. These models can be
also used to benchmark models that can be applied using satellite data for regional
assessments.
2
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis is the ﬁnal project for the double MSc degree in Environmental
Engineering, oﬀered by the Nordic Five Tech alliance. The degree comprised one
year at Kungliga Tekniska Högskolan (KTH) and one year at Technical University
of Denmark (DTU). The thesis was conducted at the Department of Environmental
Engineering at DTU, and accounts for 35 ETCS.
I would like to give sincere thanks to my supervisor Associate Professor Monica
Garcia for all the guidance and support she has given me throughout the project.
It’s safe to say I have learned a lot this semester and I would not be able to do so
without her help.
A big thank you to my co-supervisor PhD student Verónica Sobejano for her help
and contribution to the project.
I would also like to thank my supervisor from KTH Associate Professor Gyözö
Gidofalvi.
Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge PhD Christian Josef Köppl who conducted
the UAS campaigns, PhD Sheng Wang who pre-processed the images, and PhD
Yeonuk Kim who gap-ﬁlled the EC data.
3
==PAGE:5==
Nomenclature
GPP gross primary production
ET
Evapotranspiration
DSM Digital Surface Model
EC
Eddy Covariance
EF
Evaporite Fraction
GCP Ground Control Point
NDVI Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation Index
NIR
near-infrared
fAPAR Fractional Absorption of Photosynthetically Active Radiation
VIs
Vegetation Indices
IR
Infrared
R
Red
PRI
Photochemical Reﬂectance Index
GCI
Green Chlorophyll Index
DSM Digital Surface Model
DEM Digital Elevation Model
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
LAI
Leaf Area Index
LE
Latent heat
LUE
Light Use Eﬃciency
LW
Longwave
SW
Shortwave
PAR Photosynthetically Active Radiation
RGB Red Green Blue
4
==PAGE:6==
RH
Relative Humidity
RMSD Root Mean Square Deviation
RTK Real-Time Kinematic
SM
Soil Moisture
SR
Simple Ratio vegetation index
TSEB Two Source Energy Balance
UAS Unmanned Aerial Systems
VRH Very High spatial Resolution
WD
Wind Direction
WS
Wind Speed
Water Use Eﬃciency
EVI
Enhanced Vegetation Index
LAI
Leaf Area Index
GNDVI Green Normal Diﬀerential Vegetation Index
BRDF Biderectional Reﬂectance Distribution Function
5
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
8
1.1
Current methods of estimating land surface ﬂuxes . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.1.1
Remote sensing background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.1.2
Direct measurements: The Eddy Covariance technique
. . . .
13
1.2
Remote sensing by Unmanned Areal Systems (UAS)
. . . . . . . . .
14
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Materials and methods
16
2.1
Study Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.1.1
Eddy Covariance (EC) ﬁeld site and data sets . . . . . . . . .
19
2.1.2
Phenotyping ﬁeld . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Remote sensing data from Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) . . . . . .
22
2.2.1
Payload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3
Sensor calibration and image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.1
Pre-processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.2
Calculating reﬂectance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.4
Vegetation Indices (VIs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Gross Primary Production (GPP) and Evapotranspiration (ET) mod-
eling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
==PAGE:8==
2.5.1
Incorporating the Photochemical Reﬂectance Index (PRI) in
the Gross Primary Production (GPP) and Evapotranspiration
(ET) model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.6
Gross Primary Production and Evapotranspiration model validation .
36
2.7
Spectral anisotropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.8
Time series validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3
Results and Discussion
39
3.1
Image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Vegetation Indices (VIs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.3
Gross Primary Production (GPP) and Evapotransiration (ET) mod-
eling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.1
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.2
Incorporating the Photchemical Reﬂectance Index (PRI) . . .
49
3.3.3
Application to the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.3.4
Modiﬁed model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.4
Propagation of striping eﬀects on the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.4.1
Modiﬁed red-edge index (mREI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.5
Time-series validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4
Conclusions
61
7
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Since the industrial revolution, natural lands have been transformed at a rate far
greater than ever before in history. One of the primary motivations of these land
use changes have been to provide area for agricultural ﬁelds, in order to secure food
for the ever rising population. It is estimated that since 1850, the global expansion
of croplands have converted around 6 million km2 of forest and woodlands, and 4.7
million km2 of savannas, grasslands and steppes. Furthermore, 1.5 and 0.6 million
km2 of the aforementioned categories, respectfully, have later been abandoned (Ra-
mankutty and Foley (1999)). These vast changes in land use and land cover directly
impact biotic diversity worldwide (Sala et al. (2000); Reidsma et al. (2006)), and
contribute to local and regional climate change (Chase et al. (2000)). They are also
the primary source of soil degradation, and aﬀect the ability of biological systems
to support human needs (Lambin et al. (2001)).
Agriculture consumes 70% of the worlds’ water resources for human use and produces
45% of the worlds’ food supply (Döll and Siebert (2002)). Even though agriculture
currently consumes an immense portion of land cover and fresh water, it is necessary
to double the current crop production to be able to satisfy the global food demand
that is predicted for 2050 (Tilman et al. (2011)). In order to combat food and water
scarcity, and to preserve the already curtailed biodiversity, it is crucial to invest in
research that will beneﬁt agricultural monitoring and management decision making
in order to "make more with less" or create "more crop per drop" (Gago et al. (2015)).
Thus, the optimization of agricultural monitoring has a direct link with many of the
established Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), such as "zero hunger", "clean
water and sanitation", "responsible consumption and production", "climate action",
and "life on land" (goals 2, 6, 12, 13 and 15, respectfully) (UN).
8
==PAGE:10==
Agricultural monitoring is based on a thorough understanding of the soil, plant and
local climate, and the ﬂuxes of energy and matter between them. Technological
advancements throughout the years have made way for a closer understanding of
how plants and vegetation behave under various environmental stresses, which have
lead to subsequent acts of optimizing plant growth and health. However, crop yield
as a percentage of potential yield shows much room for improvements (Table 1). This
can especially be seen in dry regions and dryland tropics, where Central America
and the Caribbean only score 30% of actual yield relative to the crops potential
Valipour et al. (2015). In dry regions, irrigation consumes 80% of the available fresh
water. Targeted irrigation or fertilization in precision agriculture will beneﬁt from
information of the vegetations Water Use Eﬃciency (WUE), revealing the amount
of carbon ﬁxed per unit of water transpired. WUE can be deﬁned as the plant
yield over water use. Ecosystem WUE can be calculated as the ratio between Gross
Primary Production (GPP) and Evapotranspiration (ET) (Equation 1). The main
ﬂuxes (movements of energy and/or matter) that aﬀect the WUE of vegetation are
those of photosynthetic carbon as a measure of GPP, and water as a measure of ET.
WUE = GPP
ET
(1.1)
Table 1.1: Actual yield relative to potential yield in diﬀerent parts of the world
(Valipour et al. (2015)).
Area
Actual yield relative to potential yield (%)
North America
>60
Western Europe
>60
Central Europe
>60
South America
<50
North Africa
<50
Central America
30
Caribbean
30
9
==PAGE:11==
Gross Primary Production (GPP) is an important parameter within the carbon cycle
and climate research. It quantiﬁes the total amount of energy or biomass produced
by vegetation over a unit of time. Every year, between 90 and 130 Tg of carbon
are absorbed from the atmosphere by terrestrial ecosystems (Cramer et al. (2001)).
This photosynthetic ﬂux is one of the major components of the global carbon cycle
and interacts in complex ways with environmental factors such as light, nutrients,
soil water content (SWC), vapour pressure deﬁcit (VPD), air temperature (Ta), and
soil temperature (Ts) (Drolet et al. (2005)).
Evapotranspiration (ET) includes water evaporation from land and water surfaces
in addition to the water that is transpired by vegetation. ET represents 90% of the
annual precipitation in water-limited regions, which cover 40% of the Earths’ surface
(Glenn et al. (2007)). In these water-scarce regions, there is a close link between
carbon and water cycles, where water availability is the main control for biological
activity (García et al. (2013)). Evapotranspiration is recognized as the most impor-
tant process in determining exchanges of energy and mass between the hydrosphere,
atmosphere and biosphere (Sellers et al. (1996)). Fluctuating weather and wind con-
ditions lead to a regional and seasonal variation in ET, which is crucial to understand
for managers who are responsible for planning and management of water resources.
This is particularly evident in water limited regions of the world where crop water
demand generally exceeds precipitation and requires irrigation from surface and/or
groundwater resources to meet the deﬁcit (Valipour et al. (2015)). Any attempts to
improve the consumptive use of irrigation water must be based on reliable estimates
of ET.
The amount of carbon assimilated by terrestrial ecosystems or gross primary pro-
ductivity (GPP) is closely connected to the water loss as evapotranspiration (ET), as
both processes are regulated by a variety of linked biotic and abiotic controls(Wang
et al. (2019b)). In order to advance towards a more sustainable world, it is crucial
to better understand these biosphere-atmosphere carbon and water ﬂuxes which are
extremely dynamic in time and space (Garbulsky et al. (2011)). Very high spatial
resolution (VHR, <1m) maps of GPP, ET and WUE can be used for optimising
food and bioenergy crop production and oﬀer great possibilities to understand eco-
hydrological processes and systems. Furtermore, VHR maps will be able to reduce
uncertainties in estimations land surface ﬂuxes that are present due to unresolved
scaling issues in estimation of land surface ﬂuxes (Wang et al. (2019b)).
10
==PAGE:12==
1.1
Current methods of estimating land surface
ﬂuxes
Quantative maps in physical units that depict the amount of carbon assimilated by
vegetation, such as GPP, and land surface energy such as ET, comprise signiﬁcant
potential in guiding decision making within ecosystem and water resource manage-
ment, in addition to sustain an eﬀective agricultural monitoring system. These maps
can be obtained by remote sensing (RS) technology, where optical and thermal sen-
sors mounted on a satellite, airplane or Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) capture
images to obtain desired information concerning crop physiology of a designated
area.
1.1.1
Remote sensing background
Remote sensing refers to the science of obtaining information about an object, area,
or phenomenon through analysis of data acquired by a sensor that is not in direct
contact with the target of investigation. The aquired information is based on the
reﬂected or emitted electromagnetic or gravitational signals from the Earth (Sander-
son (2010)) and can be either passive or active. Passive sensors respond to external
light sources, which commonly are energy that is reﬂected (e.g sunlight) or emitted
(infrared light) from the Earths’ surface. Active sensors use internal light sources,
where energy is projected onto the surface of the Earth in order for the sensor to
record the time it takes before the energy is reﬂected back (NOA).
When the suns’ projected electromagnetic energy reaches the surface of the Earth,
diﬀerent elements respond in distinct ways. A typical "ﬁngerprint" of green veg-
etation is shown in Figure 1.1, where the various constituents that comprise the
plant either absorb or reﬂect the solar energy depending on its frequency. The val-
leys (absorption features) in the visible portion of the spectrum are determined by
the pigmentation of the plant. Chlorophyll, which is the primary photosynthetic
pigment in green plants, absorbs strongly in the blue (450nm) and red (670nm) re-
gions and reﬂects much of the green (570nm) light (Govender et al. (2007)). When
the plant experience stress that hinders normal growth and subsequent chlorophyll
production, there is less absorption in the blue and red regions and the amount of
reﬂectance in the red region increases. The near-infrared (NIR) region (700-1300nm)
shows a dramatic increase in reﬂection, where a plant leaf typically reﬂects between
40-50 % of electromagnetic radiation, whereas the rest is transmitted with only 5%
being absorbed. Variability in leaf structure permits one to diﬀerentiate between
species, even though they might have the same signature in the visible region (Lille-
sand et al. (2015)). The three strong absorbtion "valleys" at 1400, 1900 and 2700nm
are a result of the water content in the plant.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.1: The electromagnetic spectrum and the typical footprint of vegetation.
Chlorophyll absorbs blue and red light while it reﬂects green light. The vegetation
cell structure reﬂect near-infrared while infrared and microwaves are absorbed by
the water content. Modiﬁed from Roman and Ursu (2016).
The sensors that collect spectral data can be mounted on satellites, and manned -
and unmanned airborne vehicles. Traditionally, ecological models have relied on data
collected by RS-instruments mounted on satellites, because these provide regional-
to global-scale observations and repeat time-series sampling of ecological indicators
(Gould (2000)).
Remote sensing techniques derived from satellite imagery have
transformed ecological research by providing both spatial and temporal perspectives
on ecological phenomena that would otherwise be diﬃcult to study (Anderson and
Gaston (2013)).
However, satellite data has its limitations. The pixel resolution of regional-extent
sensors (e.g. Sentinel 2 [spatial resolution of 10-60m] and Sentinel 3 [spatial resolu-
tion of 500m-1km]) may not be appropriate for small scale applications. The data
obtained by these platforms are often too general to meet regional or local objectives
(Wulder et al. (2004)). Even though new generation of satellite sensors are devel-
oped that provide ﬁner spatial resolution (>10m) such as Quickbird, IKONOS, and
GeoEye-1 (Anderson and Gaston (2013)), certain operational constraints persists;
12
==PAGE:14==
suitable repeat times are often only possible if oblique angles are used, distorting
geometric and radiometric pixel properties, and pictures are often subject to cloud
cover, which can obscure features of interest (Loarie et al. (2007)).
1.1.2
Direct measurements: The Eddy Covariance technique
The Eddy Covariance (EC) technique, introduced by Swinbank (1951), is widely
applied around the world to measure ﬂux exchanges across various ecosystems and
climate regions between the land surface and the atmosphere (Baldocchi (2003)). It
is a micro-meteorological technique that obtains an indirect measure of a turbulent
ﬂux density of a scalar such as water vapour, temperature or CO2. The assumption
behind is that the turbulent eddies transport the water vapour, temperature and
CO2 from one height above the surface to another, up or down (Figure 1.2). The
concentrations of water vapour, CO2 and temperature present gradients with height.
Therefore, there has to be some relation between ﬂuctuations in the vertical velocity
(air coming from above or below) and changes in the amounts of these scalars. The
ﬂux density of each scalar is measured by calculating the covariance of ﬂuctuations in
the vertical wind velocity and the quantity of the scalar. The EC method is regarded
by many as the most eﬃcient method for measuring the interactions between a ter-
restrial biosphere and the atmosphere on an ecological scale (Baldocchi et al. (2000);
Goulden et al. (1996); Liang et al. (2012); Friend et al. (2007)). The turbulent ﬂux
data is gathered by various sensors mounted on a monitoring station, that is situated
in the ﬁeld. These towers can be integrated to achieve estimations of broader scale
energy ﬂuxes. The FLUXNET project unites regional and continental networks into
an integrated global network to help investigate climate regions and diversity of
biomes (Baldocchi et al. (2001)), and currently comprise more than 500 tower sites
around the world (FLU). Other ﬂux tower networks include the Integrated Carbon
Observatory System in Europe (ICOS), National Ecosystem Observatory Network
(NEON) in USA and AsiaFlux in Asia.
Current estimates of GPP and ET depend on variables gathered by the EC method,
which has several limitations. The ﬂux tower networks cannot detect local hetero-
genities of carbon and water ﬂuxes at the farm scale, and the local EC tower ob-
servations are not always able to measure whole crop ﬁelds. The EC technique can
only be applied in ﬂat and homogeneous sites, and the footprint (i.e. the area that
are included) of the measurements usually only covers areas around 100-1000m2.
Furthermore, EC ﬂux towers are expensive for farmers to use as they have to rou-
tinely monitor the crops water status and growth. It is necessary to close the gap
between coarse spatial resolution satellite remote sensing and narrow EC measure-
ments. This can be achieved by optimizing remote sensing models by the use of
VHR data obtained by UAS.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.2: Flux tower measuring GPP and ET ﬂuxes by the eddy covariance method
(Wang, PhD).
1.2
Remote sensing by Unmanned Areal Systems
(UAS)
Remote sensing from UAS has great opportunities in ecological and environmental
monitoring (Anderson and Gaston (2013)), particularly in the context of precision
agriculture (Zarco-Tejada et al. (2012)). The UAS RS technique is acknowledged as
one of the most exciting recent advances in near-Earth observation (McCabe et al.
(2017)). The relatively short distance between the desired object and the UAS-
mounted sensor (e.g 70m), relative to a satellite-mounted sensor (e.g 700 × 103m),
provide the opportunity for Unammed Aerial Systems to create VHR imagery and
subsequent high resolution maps of local variations in ﬂuxes of energy and matter.
Agricultural maps of this resolution oﬀer great opportunities to understand eco-
hydrological processes and to reduce the large uncertainty in the estimation of land
surface ﬂuxes, which are present due unresolved scaling issues (Wang et al. (2019b);
Anderson and Gaston (2013)). UAS ﬂight Campaigns can be conducted at ﬂexible
times, in uneven locations, and at low operating costs relative to manned airborne
surveys (Wang et al. (2019b)). Furthermore, UAS ﬂight Campaigns can be operated
autonomously and can be performed under various weather conditions, solving the
issue of cloudy images obtained by satellite optical and thermal data.
VHR remote sensing imagery from UAS has the potential of ﬁlling the gap between
satellites and ﬂux tower-based remote sensing to facilitate out understanding to-
ward the scaling issues (Anderson and Gaston (2013)). Even though UAS remote
sensing already has been applied for various environmental monitoring applications
such as vegetation height (Zarco-Tejada et al. (2014)), biophysical parameters (Berni
et al. (2009)), and species identiﬁcation (Laliberte et al. (2011)), studies on mon-
14
==PAGE:16==
itoring land surface ﬂuxes based upon UAS are rare. One of the ﬁrst studies to
monitor WUE from UAS sensor was done by Wang et al. (2019b) over a Danish
willow bioenergy plantation. However, how transferable the methods developed at
this Danish platform are to dry tropical cropland areas is not clear. Current ET
and GPP modeling typically takes use of a speciﬁc vegetation indice (VI), the Nor-
mal Diﬀerentiation Vegetation Index (NDVI). There are other indices and spectral
wavelengths that can used to better constraint the models reﬂecting the actual crop
status. For example, the Photochemical Reﬂectance Index (PRI) has been tested
with satellite data, but not with imagery from UAS. This index can help to account
for the vegetation’s photosynthetic status, as further explained in section 2.4.
1.3
Objective
This thesis aims to validate existing GPP and ET models that have been developed
and tested for Danish conditions and permanent vegetation. This is achieved by
VHR data obtained from UAS remote sensing and direct EC data. The EC data
are used to benchmark the model and test its accuracy. The potential of other Veg-
etation Indices (VIs), rather than the conventional NDVI (Chapter 2), are explored
to assess crop status and yield.
The motivation of the research lies in the possibility to map crop water use eﬃciency
(WUE),and carbon and water footprints (GPP and ET) of tropical crops exported
to EU. This is the ﬁrst step to improve water - and agricultural management on local
and global scales. The results of this thesis will be useful when creating guidelines
as to how multiple sensors can best be used for assessing crop water and nutrient
requirements in order to help agricultural managers and other stakeholders and
to increase the socio-economic impact of ET data. By the segregation of in-situ
data, GPP and ET data, and subsequent WUE, can be estimated and optimized by
local farmers who may not have the resources available to install costly monitoring
stations. Furthermore, by benchmarking the model with VHR RS data and in-situ
EC data, the hope of upscaling to satellite data brings forward the potential of
estimating energy ﬂuxes on an extensive spatial and temporal scale.
15
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Materials and methods
This chapter includes all steps from collecting new and ancillary data, to processing,
modelling and ﬁnally interpretation and analysis. Figure 2.1 depicts the general
workﬂow, where three distinct areas have been analysed; Gross Primary Productivity
and Evapotranspiration modeling, spectral striping eﬀects, and yield estimation
based upon vegetation indices. The main focus of the thesis rest upon the GPP and
ET modelling.
Figure 2.1: General workﬂow showing the major steps of the research.
Stapled
lines and boxes indicate intented objectives that could not be achieved due to time
constraints.
16
==PAGE:18==
2.1
Study Area
El Viejo lies within the Tempisque basin, situated in the Guanacaste region North-
West in Costa Rica. Guanacaste contains mainly of tropical dry forest, much of
it cleared for agricultural production. The Tempisque basin is a ﬂat, alluvial low-
land area, sloping up to the foothills of the Guanacaste Volcanic Cordillera (Calvo-
Alvarado et al. (2009)). The climate in the Guanacaste region is highly seasonal.
There is a severe dry season between December to April, and a short mid-rainy
season drought in July and August. The area comprises two rainy seasons, with
the most intense rain occurring in October and November. The total annual pre-
cipitation in the El Viejo area is around 2200mm, with less rain in recent years
(Karp et al. (2018)). Guanacaste has experienced severe drought for several years,
and climate projections suggest that the region may be subject to as much as 25%
decline in summer precipitation over the next century (Rauscher et al. (2008)).
Figure 2.2: Land-type map of Costa Rica. Study area is marked by a red square.
17
==PAGE:19==
Sugarcane is an important cash crop in the region, and promotes economical growth.
Figure 2.3 shows the sugarcane production in El Viejo, run by Azucarera El Viejo.
The area comprises several ﬁelds of diﬀerent sugarcane plant species. The two study
ﬁelds of the research are the Eddy Covariance (EC) ﬁeld and the phenotyping ﬁeld.
Figure 2.3: A: The study area position within Costa Rica. B: The various ﬁelds of
the sugarcane plantation. C: The EC ﬁeld, also showing the UAS ﬂight path. D:
The phenotyping ﬁeld with the UAS ﬂight path marked as blue dots.
18
==PAGE:20==
2.1.1
Eddy Covariance (EC) ﬁeld site and data sets
The EC ﬁeld (10◦25’08.75”N, 85◦28’20.90”W) contains the sugarcane species Sac-
carum Oﬃcinarum and comprises an area of 17200m2. The ﬁeld is highly homoge-
neous and has a monitoring station situated in the South-West corner (marked with
a red circle in Figure 2.4). The monitoring station was installed in July 2014, and
comprise an EC system selected for being the most accurate available to monitor
long-term water and carbon ﬂuxes of an actual cropland in real time. An open
path Eddy Covariance system is installed at 2,3 m height to record actual ﬂuxes
at a frequency of 20Hz, and 30 min averages were recorded. Raw EC data records
were processed with EddyPro software (versions 6.0.0 to 6.2.0) using the Express
Mode (Wilczak et al. (2001)). Dynamic canopy height during the crop seasons was
modeled from measurements taken during regular ﬁeld visits and modelled canopy
height was used for processing the data with EddyPro. Analysis of the footprint of
the EC tower based on Kljun et al. (2015) showed that the main contribution area
(peak area) ranged between 30m-120m, depending on wind speed and canopy height
(maximum footprints matching periods of low crop canopy and high wind speed).
30-min averages from continuous measurement of the micro-meteorological, vege-
tation and soil variables presented in Table 2.1 were simultaneously recorded and
stored in a Campbell CR1000 logger at each monitoring sites. Sporadic data gaps of
precipitation derived from our sensors malfunctioning during the study period were
gap ﬁlled to calculate annual precipitation values using data recorded from nearby
meteorological stations at both sites.
Figure 2.4: The Eddy Covariance (EC) ﬁeld. The ﬁeld is very homogenous, with
the most notably diﬀerence being the white area in the North-East long side. This
is due to ﬂowering of the sugarcane plants. The red circle denotes the position of
the ﬂux tower.
19
==PAGE:21==
Table 2.1: The various measuring instruments mounted on the monitoring station
Type of
Variables
Instrument
Sugar cane
measurment
station
Water,
Actual ET
carbon and
CO2
Licor 7500A
6m height
energy ﬂuxes
Sensitble heat ﬂux
Vegetation
PRI Index
NDVI index
DecagonSRS
5.4m height
Wind speed
,
Meterological
Air temperature
Vaisala WXT520
2.8m height
Air pressure
Relative humidity
Weather transmitter
2.8m height
Rain
Net radiation
NRLite 2
5.65m height
Lil90SB
Energy
PAR radiation
Quantum sensor
5.45m height
Soil heat ﬂux
Campbell Heat Flux Plate
0.10m depth
HPP01SC-L
Soil Water Content
Decagon GS3
0.08m depth
Electric conductivity
Soil
Temperature
Decagon MPS2
0.08m depth
Soil Water potential
20
==PAGE:22==
2.1.2
Phenotyping ﬁeld
The phenotyping ﬁeld (10◦25’14.55”N, 85◦27’30.00”W) has an area of 42768m2 and is
composed of 4 distinct blocks, each of them comprising 64 diﬀerent sugarcane species
(Figure 2.5). Therefore, the phenotyping ﬁeld is signiﬁcantly more heterogeneous
than the EC ﬁeld.
The 4 blocks are harvested in diﬀerent months (December,
January, February and March for block 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectfully). The aim of this
experimental ﬁeld is to determine the varieties of sugarcane with the highest cane
production and the varieties that comprise the most sucrose. Also, it is of interest
to learn which species that mature early, intermediate and late. Maps of vegetation
indices in this ﬁeld could potentially be used for phenotyping the diﬀerent species
or to predict yields or changes in sugar content that are measured by Azucarera El
Viejo.
Figure 2.5: Phenotyping ﬁeld site containing various species of sugarcane in 4 dis-
tinct blocks. Each block has a distinct harvesting time. Each name in the matrix
refers to a diﬀerent species of sugarcane.
21
==PAGE:23==
2.2
Remote sensing data from Unmanned Aerial
System (UAS)
Multispectral, thermal and Red Blue Green (RGB) imagery of the two ﬁeld sites were
collected in November and December by the use of an Unmanned Aerial System. A
total of 6 ﬂight Campaigns were carried out, including 5 Campaigns over the EC ﬁeld
and 1 Campaign over the phenotyping ﬁeld (Table 2.2). The ﬂight paths (Figure
2.3 c&d) where designed using a software created in matlab, and the commercial
software UgCS Ground Station Software was used to execute the ﬂights. The UAS
used on the ﬂight Campaigns, consists of a rotary wind platform, DJI Matrice 600
Pro, which has high maneuverability and hovering capability, and can carry up to
6kg payload during 15 minutes ﬂight for actual imagery and positioning data (Figure
2.6). The Matrice is controlled by the A3 ﬂight controller.
Table 2.2: Campaign dates, times and area. All times are reported in solar time.
Campaign #
Date
Local time (UTC-6)
Field site
1
20/11/18
09:33-09:48
EC ﬁeld
2
22/11/18
10:36-10:54
EC ﬁeld
3
04/12/18
10:46-11:02
EC ﬁeld
4
05/12/18
08:07-08:24
Phenotyping ﬁeld
5
11/12/18
08:37-08:59
EC ﬁeld
6
13/12/18
08:34-08:52
EC ﬁeld
2.2.1
Payload
The payload consists of three primary parts; an imagery system, a navigation system,
and a micro-processor (Figure 2.6). The imagery system includes a multispectral
camera (MCA, Multispectral Camera Array, Tetracam, Chatsworth, CA, USA), a
consumer grade RGB camera (Sony DSC-RX100), and a thermal camera (FLIR
Tau2 324, Wilsonville, OR, USA). The MCA provides reﬂectance intensities at spe-
ciﬁc wavelengths, which reveal information about plant physiology. Data from the
thermal camera is used to retrieve absolute surface temperature. This data is utilized
to estimate soil moisture. The RGB camera is mainly used to generate a high ac-
curacy digital surface model (DSM), which is used to orthorectify the multispectral
and thermal images (Chapter 2.3).
The multispectral camera incorporates an array of six individual channels for the
visible and near-infrared wavelengths, each consisting of a CMOS sensor with a
progressive shutter, an objective lens and mountings for interchangeable band-pass
ﬁlters. All six channels have a focal length of 9.6mm and a Field Of View (FOV)
of 38.3◦× 31◦. These six bands include blue, light green, dark green, red, red edge
and near infrared with the central wavelength of 470, 530, 570, 670, 710 and 800nm,
respectively. The thermal camera comprises an uncooled VOx microbolometer which
records longwave radiation in the 7.5 - 13.5 range. It captures images in dimension
324 × 256 pixels and has a FOV of 48.5◦× 39.1◦. Finally, the RGB camera has a
focal length of 10.7mm and a FOV of 64.8◦× 45.9◦.
22
==PAGE:24==
The navigation system consists of a Global Positioning Sensor (GPS) (Ublox) and
the internal location data that are recorded by the UAS. The UAS also records the
platform’s altitude, which is its positioning relative to the horizontal and vertical
planes, known as pitch, yaw and roll. The micro-processor Beaglebone Black is used
for sensor triggering, location communication and data storage.
The incoming solar spectral radiance (Lin) was measured before and after each
ﬂight, with a handheld spectraradiometer (ASD, FieldSpec HandHeld2tm, Ana-
lytical Spectral Devices, Inc., Boulder, USA). The spectraradiometer contains a
Spectralon panel that has a nominal reﬂectance of 99.99%. The average value from
measurements before and after each ﬂight were used as incoming solar radiance.
Figure 2.6: Top: DJI Matrice 600 Pro equipped with the payload. Bottom: The
diﬀerent components on the payload.
23
==PAGE:25==
Table 2.3: Information on optical and thermal sensors in the UAS. VIs: Vegeta-
tion Indices; DSM: Digital Surface Model; NDVI: Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation
Index; Ts: land surface temperature).
Camera
Focal
Image dimen-
Field of
Spectrum
Purpose
length(mm)
sion (pixel)
View (◦)
RGB
10.4
5472 ×3648
64.8 ◦×45.9◦
Red, Green,
DSM
Blue
MCA
9.6
1280 ×1024
38.3 ◦×32◦
470, 530, 570,
NDVI,
670, 710, 800nm
VIs
Thermal
9
324 ×256
48.5 ◦×39.1◦
0.75µm −13.5µm
Ts
24
==PAGE:26==
2.3
Sensor calibration and image processing
The workﬂow of the image processing can be seen in Figure 2.7.
The workﬂow
contains 3 major steps; Pre-proccessing and calibration of individual and cameras,
photogrammetry and orthorectiﬁcation of imagery, and reﬂectance conversion.
Figure 2.7: Preproccesing, photogrammetry and orthorectiﬁcation, and reﬂectance
and vegetation indices calculation. Blue: input data, orange: results, green: method.
Hexagon shapes indicate results and blue outline represents major results referring
to the main goal of the thesis (GPP and ET model)
25
==PAGE:27==
2.3.1
Pre-processing
The raw data captured in Digital Numbers (DN) by the digital and multispectral
cameras were converted to Tagged Image File Format (TIFF). Next, the GPS loca-
tion points needed to be linked with their respective RGB images. The data from
the on-board GPS and image triggering have diﬀerent time steps, it was therefore
necessary to interpolate the GPS data to ﬁt with the image name, which corresponds
to the same location. This was done by linear interpolation. The initial GPS data
were converted to BeagleBoard.mat format, which afterwards was used to interpo-
late observations from BeagleBoard to the RGB and MCA camera time steps. The
resulting GPS ﬁle lists digital image names and their corresponding GPS locations.
The multispectral camera comprises 6 distinct lenses for each channel, which have
slightly diﬀerent position on the payload. It was therefore necessary to align the
six photos together, so that they correspond to the exact same ﬁeld of view. The
alignment was conducted in the program PixelWrench2x64, which was also used for
MCA TIFF convertion.
Vignetting refers to the phenomenon of brightness attenuation away from the image
center, making the image darker in the corners (Goldman (2010)). To ensure high
quality MCA imagery, vignetting correction for each channel was applied.
The
most accurate way to calibrate vignetting is to use an integrating sphere (Szeliski
(2010)). Wang et al. (2019a) used a pixel based calibration function developed in
the laboratory using an integrating sphere. Then, each pixel radiance was estimated
from DN with unique factors that also account for the vignetting eﬀect.
26
==PAGE:28==
Orthorectiﬁcation
Orthorectiﬁcation is the process of removing the eﬀects of the image perspective
(sensor tilt) and relief (topography) in order to obtain a planimetrically correct im-
age (Figure 2.8). The ﬁnal image is composed of all images taken by the UAS over
the respective ﬁelds. The numerous images need to be stitched together in order to
obtain GPP, ET, WUE, and VI maps covering the whole area of the two ﬁelds. The
software Agisoft PhotoScan (Agisoft LLC, St.Petersburg, Russia) was used to stich
the images together. The software is based on the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) al-
gorithm by Westoby et al. (2012), and is generally used to perform photogrammetric
processing that produces 3D model reconstruction based on the the overlaying of
an arbitrary number of images. As seen in Figure 2.7, the photoscanning process
includes four main steps; camera alignment, dense point cloud build, DSM build,
and orthomosaic build.
The multispectral and RGB images are aligned by identifying common features in
the various images while simultaneously acquiring camera positioning and reﬁning
camera calibration parameters. The thermal images could not be aligned, and was
therefore not used.
Information that was going to be derived from the thermal
imagery was instead gathered from the ﬂux tower data. Compared to MCA images,
RGB images have larger FOV and higher radiometric resolution. The feature points
in RGB images can be more easily detected and thereby linked to MCA images.
The sparse point clouds from RGB images thereby help improve the MCA image
alignment.
A dense point cloud is generated to provide detailed topographic data, which is
needed in order to create the Digital Surface Model (DSM). the DSM was created
by the use of RGB imagery. The MCA camera cannot generate DSMs with high
accuracy due to a narrow FOW, small image size, and low geometric camera per-
formance. Subsequently, the orthomosaic image is created based upon the DSM.
Figure 2.8: Orthorectiﬁcation process.
The Digital Surface Model (DSM) is for
sensor-object distance (red=high elevation, blue=low elevation)
27
==PAGE:29==
2.3.2
Calculating reﬂectance
To analyze the spectral images and calculate VIs that can be used to assess crop
status, the data in the MCA orthomosaic TIFF ﬁle needed to be converted from
digital numbers (DN) to radiance values (W/m2). The reﬂectance from the six bands
was calculated based on the radiance method, as the ratio between the reﬂected
radiance from the surface and the incoming solar irradiance. The incoming solar
spectral radiance (Lin) was measured before and after each ﬂight, with the handheld
spectraradiometer. The at-sensor radiance (LMCA), collected by MCA during the
ﬂight Campaigns, was used to represent the surface reﬂected radiance.
Speciﬁc
calibration factors for each channel was used which depend on the incoming radiance
and sensor exposure times, estimated by (Wang et al. (2019a)). It is assumed that
radiation at the sensor is equivalent to that at the surface as the atmospheric eﬀects
have been shown to be lower than 5-10% (Wang (2019)). The reﬂectance for each
wavelength (λ) was thereby calculated as shown in Equation 2.1.
ρλ = LMCA,λ
Lin,λ
(2.1)
Where ρ is the reﬂectance in the MCA image, λ is the wavelength (nm), LMCA,λ
is the reﬂected spectral radiance measured by the MCA camera (Wm−2sr−1nm−1),
and Lin,λ is the incoming spectral radiance measured by the ASD with a Spectralon
panel on the ground (Wm−2sr−1nm−1).
28
==PAGE:30==
2.4
Vegetation Indices (VIs)
VIs from remote sensing have been shown to correlate with vegetation photosyn-
thetic activity, leaf area, biomass and physiological functioning while reducing the
eﬀects of factors such as background substrate, atmosphere and illumination (Ver-
relst et al. (2008)). The VIs are obtained by mathematically combining or trans-
forming the various spectral values to yield a single value that indicates the amount
of biomass, pigments, Leaf Area Index (LAI), and photosynthetic activity of the
vegetation within a pixel. The reﬂected radiance from the plant canopy is the result
of overlapping radiance from diﬀerent constituents of the plant. The indices try
to ﬁnd spectral regions or combinations of them that help to quantify distinctive
constituents.
In plants, there are three major classes of pigments; chlorophylls, caretonoids, and
anthocyanins (Thenkabail and Lyon (2016)). Subtle changes in these pigment ratios
can reveal plant stress or altered photosynthetic activity (USTIN et al. (2006)).
Red light (R) is absorbed by the pigment in plant leaves, chlorophyll, in order to
convert light energy into stored chemical energy to be used in the photosynthesis
process. However, light over a certain wavelength, infra-red (IR) light, is reﬂected
by the mesophyll found in the cell structure of the leaves, because the wavelength
is too large to be converted into chemical energy in the photosystems. Thereby, an
important relationship arises where a high IR/R ratio can be observed for actively
growing plants and can provide a measure of potential photosynthetic activity and
biomass within a pixel (Hernández-Clemente et al. (2012); Thenkabail and Lyon
(2016)). The IR/R relationship is only one of many measures of vegetation vigor
and abundance where speciﬁc relationships can provide information about plant
pigments, water content, light use eﬃciency, carbon assimilation, nitrogen content
etc (201 (2019)).
The Normalized diﬀerence vegetation index (NDVI) is one of the most widely used
VIs, originally developed from channel 5 and 7 of the Landsat Multispectral scanner
system (MSS) (Rondeaux et al. (1996); Rouse et al. (1974)). NDVI is calculated
from the absorbed light in the PAR region (use red as most light is absorbed in this
spectrum) and the near-infrared light reﬂected by vegetation.
NDV I = ρ800 −ρ670
ρ800 + ρ670
(2.2)
NDVI values range between -1 to +1, where the vegetation health is assessed by how
high the NDVI is. The relationship between the NDVI and vegetation productivity
and LAI is well established (Pettorelli et al. (2005)) and it’s relation with fraction of
Photosynthetic Active Radiation (aPAR) has been thoroughly documented (Sellers
et al. (1992); Asrar et al. (1984)). Furthermore, the direct eﬀect of climatic condi-
tions play on biomass and phenological patterns of vegetation, as well as feedback
eﬀects of vegetation on local climate has been assessed by the use of NDVI (Nemani
et al. (2003); Roerink et al. (2003); Yu et al. (2003); Jingyong et al. (2008)). How-
ever, NDVI is extremely sensitive to soil optical properties, and results using NDVI
can be arduous to interpret in areas with low vegetation cover when the soil spectral
29
==PAGE:31==
signature is unknown (Rondeaux et al. (1996)).
In order to optimize the vegetation signal by enhancing the sensitivity of vegetation
indices in high biomass regions and avoiding the saturation of NDVI at high LAIs
the Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) was established by Equation 2.3. EVI reduces
the atmospheric inﬂuence in the blue band and decouples the canopy background
signal, which gives an clearer picture of the vegetation health, also in areas with
sparse and high vegetation (Huete et al. (2002)).
EV I = 2.5 ×
ρ800 −ρ670
ρ800 + 6 × ρ670 −7.5 × ρ470 + 1
(2.3)
The Optimized Soil-Adjusted Vegetation Index (OSAVI) was developed by Ron-
deaux et al. (1996) as a means to correct for the NDVIs sensitivity to soil background
and atmospheric eﬀects.
OSAV I =
ρ800 −ρ670
ρ800 + ρ670 + 0.16
(2.4)
Accurate estimation of spatially distributed chlorophyll content (Chl) in crops is of
great importance for regional and global studies of carbon balance and responses
to fertilizer applications. Changes in Chl can be related to photosynthetic capacity,
developmental stage and canopy stresses (Gitelson et al. (2005)). The Green Chloro-
phyll Index (GCI), developed by Gitelson et al. (2005), estimates the chlorophyll
content in the canopy by the following equation:
GCI = ρ800
ρ530
−1
(2.5)
Wu et al. (2012) tested the GCI for the estimation of midday LUE in maize and
coniferous forest and grassland ecosystems. LUE and canopy chlorophyll content
showed a good correlation (r2=0.736) which opens the possibility of incorporating
this vegetation index in GPP estimations.
30
==PAGE:32==
The Photochemical Reﬂectance Index (PRI) can provide information of the changes
in the eﬃciency of photosynthesis that are assumed to be reﬂected in changes in
the 530 and 570nm bands, due to activation of the xanthophyll cycle (Gamon et al.
(1990); Gitelson et al. (2017)). The xanthophyll cycle comprise pigments of the
carotenoid group, which regulates the absorption of radiant energy by adjusting the
energy distribution at the photosynthetic reaction center Gamon et al. (1997); Drolet
et al. (2005). If plants are subjected to more light than they can use for photosynthe-
sis, they will protect their chloroplast from the creation of harmful reactive oxygen
species. This protection process includes the formation of zeaxanthin, a carotenoid
formed in the xanthophyll cycle, which is necessary to dissipate excess light as heat
and at the same time decrease reﬂectance in a narrow wavelength range centered
around 531 nm Demmig et al. (1987); Gamon et al. (1990); Goerner et al. (2011).
Thereby, the formation of zeaxanthin and subsequent decrease of reﬂectance can
be used to derive an index that give information around the plant’s photosynthetic
activity;
PRI = ρ531 −ρ570
ρ531 −ρ570
(2.6)
However, it has to be noted that the mechanistic basis for these wavelength selections
has been fully explored at leaf scale Gamon (1993), but has not been fully established
at canopy scales. Therefore, it is not certain that the wavelengths most suited at leaf
scale (531 and 570 nm) are ideal at progressively larger scales, where the spectral
response of the xanthophyll cycle may be altered by multiple scattering and other
confounding eﬀects Garbulsky et al. (2011).
Since the xanthophyll cycle pigments adjust the energy distribution at the photo-
synthetic reaction center, PRI can thereby provide insight into how well the plants
perform with regards to photosynthesis by their photochemical state and acts as a
key indicator of stress (Gamon et al. (1997); Drolet et al. (2005)). PRI is thereby
closely related to the plants Light Use Eﬃciency (LUE) of a plant canopy (Tor-
tini et al. (2017)), a key parameter in photosynthesis models Monteith (1972, 1977)
deﬁned as the net amount of CO2 assimilated (gC/m2d) per unit of PAR light
absorbed (W/m2). However, the relationship between PRI and LUE is species de-
pendent and varies with canopy structure, age, Leaf Area Index (LAI) and possible
disturbances (Tortini et al. (2017); Gitelson et al. (2017)). PRI also shows a close
correlation with overall CO2 and water vapour ﬂuxes (Fuentes et al. (2006)) and can
thus provide signiﬁcant information of an area. Further, PRI measures the relative
reﬂectance on either side of the green reﬂectance "hump" (550 nm), and therefore
compare the reﬂectance in the blue (chlorophyll and carotenoids absorption) and
the red (chlorophyll absorption only) regions of the spectrum. For this reason it can
serve as an index of relative chlorophyll and carotenoids levels, often referred to as
bulk pigment ratios or "pools sizes" Garbulsky et al. (2011); Gitelson et al. (2017).
The responses to the de-epoxidation state of the xanthophyll cycle and the measure
of chorophyll:carotenoid ratio ensures that PRI represents photosynthetic eﬃciency
across a wide range of conditions, special and functional types Gamon et al. (1992);
Penuelas et al. (1995); Garbulsky et al. (2011). The value ranges from -1 to 1 where
the common range for green vegetation is -0.2 to 0.2 (201 (2019)).
31
==PAGE:33==
2.5
Gross Primary Production (GPP) and Evap-
otranspiration (ET) modeling
The remote sensing models estimating ET and GPP can be classiﬁed as "top-down"
and "bottom-up" approaches (Wang et al. (2018)). "Bottom-up" models are based
upon mechanistic descriptions of leaf-level photosynthetic processes, which later are
scaled to the canopy. This approach generally require the speciﬁcation of many
species-dependent leaf-scale parameters because it relies on the speciﬁcation of an
appropriate leaf-to-canopy scaling framework (Houborg et al. (2009)). “Top-down
models do not consider the behavior of individual leaves and model the canopy re-
sponse to its environment in bulk, they are therefore generally less complex than
bottom up models as they are constrained by some empirical relationship developed
at the stand-level and thus implicitly incorporate scaling eﬀects“ (Houborg et al.
(2009)). One of the foundations for top down models of Gross Primary Production
is based on the work of Monteith (1972).
“In thermodynamic terms, ecosystems are machines supplied with energy from an
external source, usually the sun. When the input of energy to an ecosystem is exactly
equal to its total output of energy, the state of equilibrium which exists is a special
case of the First Law of Thermodynamics.
The Second Law is relevant too.
It
implies that in every spontaneous process, physical or chemical, the production of
’useful’ energy, which could be harnessed in a form such as mechanical work, must
be accompanied by a simultaneous ’waste’ of heat. No biological system can break or
evade this law. The heat produced by a respiring cell is an inescapable component
of cellular metabolism, the cost which Nature has to pay for creating biological order
out of physical chaos in the environment of plants and animals.” These ﬁrst phrases
of Monteith (1972) put into words the general underlying principles of LUE, which
Potter et al. (1993) later based their "top-down" carbon assimilation model (LUE
GPP) on. “The LUE model is built upon two fundamental assumptions: (1) that
ecosystem GPP is directly related to absorbed photosynthetically active radiation
(APAR) through LUE, where LUE is deﬁned as the amount of carbon produced per
unit of APAR and (2) that realized LUE may be reduced below its theoretical potential
value by environmental stresses such as low temperatures or water shortages.” Yuan
et al. (2007). The LUE GPP model is recognized as a robust method to estimate
GPP across various ecosystems and climate regimes (McCallum et al. (2009)). The
model estimates GPP under potential conditions, which later are down-regulated
by biophysical constraints reﬂecting multiple limitations or stresses as shown in
Equation 2.7.
GPP = ϵmax × PARc × fT × fg × fM × fD
(2.7)
PARc represents the PAR obtained by the canopy. The maximum light use ef-
ﬁciency (ϵmax) term is a biome-speciﬁc value, representing optimal potential (e.g.
non-limiting conditions) of the vegetation for converting PAR into GPP (Drolet
et al. (2005)). This value is down-regulated by various constraints to obtain the
"true" LUE value of the vegetation.
The down-regulating constraints, fT (plant
32
==PAGE:34==
temperature), fg (amount of green canopy), fM (plant moisture), and fD (vapour
pressure deﬁcit), can be derived from remote sensing and atmospheric data (García
et al. (2013)).
In order to quantify ET, a similar approach of down scaling from optimal to actual
value was used. The Priestley-Taylor Jey Propulsion Laboratory model (PT-JPL)
derived by Fisher et al. (2008) is based on the equation for potential evapotranspi-
ration, and incorporates eco-physiological variables to down-regulate potential ET
to actual ET. The ET is a sum of evaporation from wet surface (Ei), transpiration
from canopy (Ec) and evaporation from the soil (Es) as described below
λET = λEi + λEc + λEs
(2.8)
λEi = fwet × α∆/(∆+ γ) × Rnc
(2.9)
λEc = (1 −fwet) × fg × fM × fTa × αc∆/(∆+ γ) × Rnc
(2.10)
λEs = fSWC × α∆/(∆+ γ) × (Rns −G)
(2.11)
where λET is the latent heat ﬂux for total evapotranspiration (Wm−2), λEi is
evaporation of intercepted water (Wm−2), λEc is transpiration (Wm−2) and λEs is
evaporation of soil water (Wm−2). fwet represents the relative surface wetness to
partition the evapotranspiration from the intercepted water and canopy transpira-
tion Fisher et al. (2008). The constraints fg and fM are the same as in Equation
2.7, while fTa is air temperature and fSWC is the soil water content. Rnc and Rns
are the net radiation for canopy and soil, respectfully. G is the ground heat ﬂux, ∆
is the slope of saturation-to-vapour pressure curve, and γ is the psychrometric con-
stant. α is an empirical ratio of potential evapotransiration to equilibrium potential
evapotranspiration (PT coeﬃcient) replacing the atmospheric demand and surface
resistance eﬀects in the Penman-Monteith ET equation. αc is the coeﬃcient for λEc
and is the only parameter in the model that requires calibration. The resulting ET
can be converted from latent heat ﬂux energy (W/m2) to ET (gC/kg) by dividing
it by the latent heat of vaporization (2.4MJ/kg) and an appropriate time stamp.
This is needed to later quantify WUE. A joint "top-down" ET and GPP model con-
strained by the same environmental variables was proposed by Wang et al. (2018),
by expanding the capabilites of the PT-JPL ET model from Fisher et al. (2008)
and merging it with the LUE GPP model from Potter et al. (1993). As the before-
mentioned models, this joint GPP ET model calculated the potential rates of ET
and GPP and thereafter estimates the actual values based on downregulation from
environmental constraints.
33
==PAGE:35==
2.5.1
Incorporating the Photochemical Reﬂectance Index
(PRI) in the Gross Primary Production (GPP) and
Evapotranspiration (ET) model
While the stress scalars that are present in Equation 2.7 all account for important
variables that deduct the true LUE, there is no term that accounts for the veg-
etation’s photosynthetic activity. As discussed in section 2.4, the PRI can reveal
information of the vegetation’s altered photosynthetic activity by assessing it’s pig-
ment ratio, speciﬁcally the changes within the xanthophyll cycle as violaxanthin
de-epoxidates to zeaxanthin. By the use of a PRI constraint (fpri), the uncertainty
in GPP estimates can be reduced further as the photosynthetic activity of the veg-
etation is accounted for (Gitelson et al. (2017)). Further, by replacing constraints
that are usually derived from EC-data such as fV PD the GPP-ET model be fully
derived from RS data. However, using the PRI to track photosynthetic changes at
canopy scales is not straightforward.
It has been demonstrated in various studies that PRI can be used as a proxy for LUE
when estimating the primary productivity of vegetation across various plant func-
tional types, including crops, deciduous forests, boreal forests and Mediterranean
forests (Drolet et al. (2005); Wu et al. (2015); Goerner et al. (2009, 2011); Gitelson
et al. (2017)). In these studies, the relationship between LUE and Leaf Area Index
(LAI) is also often discussed as LAI accounts for the structural variation of the
canopy and is a major determinant of the canopy APAR, the other variable needed
to estimate GPP from the widely used radiation eﬃciency model (Monteith (1972,
1977)), and thereby directly related to the photosynthesis (Wu et al. (2015)).
Gitelson et al. (2017) investigated stand-level PRI relations to LAI, LUE and pig-
ment pools in soybean and maize. They found that PRI has a strong linear relation
to green LAI (r2 > 0.9) and stand chlorophyll content (r2 > 0.93), where PRI is
3-fold more sensitive to green LAI in the reproductive stage relative to the veg-
etative stage.
They could not ﬁnd a strong relationship between PRI and LUE
(highest r2 = 0.12 for maize). However, by subtracting the component of PRI that
is explained by stand chlorophyll content, they could reveal the component of PRI
that is most likely related to periods of stress. When LUE was compared with the
diﬀerence of PRI and red edge vegetation index (PRIsc-CIsc, very similar to GCI)
the linear relationship is much stronger (r2 = 0.61) (Gitelson et al. (2017)).
Wu et al. (2015) used ground measured PRI and LUE of wheat where canopy LAI
overall explained 66% variance of PRI. This shows again the inﬂuence of external
structural factors on PRI. Wu et al. (2015) further deﬁned a PRI variable indepen-
dent on canopy structural characteristics by deﬁning the structural-related signal
in PRI as a function of LAI and later subtracting this from the PRI measurments.
Afterwards, a mixed non-linear model showed an increased r2 between LUE and PRI
from 0.27, 0.40 and 0.20 to 0.68, 0.68 and 0.67 for 2005-2007, respectfully. Goerner
et al. (2011) explored exponential relationships between observed LUE and MODIS
PRI with Bayesian hierarchical models where PRI-LUE relations up to r2=0.78 are
reported. However, they conclude that parameterizing a model which gives LUE
estimations from MODIS PRI data is diﬃcult to generalize, as the variability of
LUE explained by PRI is low for sites comprising diﬀerent plant functional type
34
==PAGE:36==
and location.
MODIS data was also used by Drolet et al. (2005) to investigate
PRI:LUE relationship over boreal forest in Canada. A strong positive linear rela-
tionship (r2 = 0.76) between MODIS-sPRI calculated by bands 531 and 667 nm
(MODIS does not have 570 nm band) and a ﬂux tower-derived photosynthetic LUE
of a boreal aspen stand. The relationship was only robust when MODIS scenes with
backscatter reﬂectance were used to calculate sPRI. Hall et al. (2008) conﬁrms that
the relationship is the strongest in the backscatter direction, where the sun exposure
is the highest.
The results from the before-mentioned studies all comprised data derived from ﬂux
towers and/or satellite data. The PRI:LUE relationship measured by remote sensing
can also be investigated with greater detail by using VHR remote sensed data from
UAS, where the spatial resolution is far greater than satellite images. The GPP UAS
model requires soil moisture and several constraint from meteorological datasets or
thermal data, as it only uses NDVI. By the additional use of PRI we hope to be able
to track combined changes in the LUE due to chages in photosynthetic eﬃciency. In
this ﬁrst step we do not correct for structural eﬀects (growth). However, since day
of year (DOY) 100 the LAI are almost constant in the study site and can therefore
be considered as controlled.
All the in-situ values are derived from the local EC data, which comprise half-
horly measurments throughout the year 2018.
In-situ GPP values was obtained
using a net ecosystem exchange (NEE) partitioning model to separate respiration
and assimilation (GPP) (Lasslop et al. (2010)). In order to incorporate PRI as a
constraint in the modeling framework, we normalized LUE values between 0-1. The
original PRI values between 07:00 and 17:00 (7am-5pm) solar time (UTM-6) for
each day of the year were correlated in order to deﬁne the time of day that provides
the strongest correlation. The fpri constraint was then deﬁned by the best ﬁt type.
Five applications, corresponding to equations 2.12-2.16, respectfully, of the devel-
oped fpri constraint was tested for both LUE and GPP estimations, altering the
original formula from Equation 2.7:
GPP = ϵmax × PARc × fpri
(2.12)
GPP = ϵmax × PARc × fpri × fg
(2.13)
GPP = ϵmax × PARc × fpri × fg × fM
(2.14)
GPP = ϵmax × PARc × fpri × fg × fM × fD
(2.15)
GPP = ϵmax × PARc × fpri × fg × fM × fD × fT
(2.16)
35
==PAGE:37==
2.6
Gross Primary Production and Evapotranspi-
ration model validation
The ﬁnal variables from the ET and GPP model were benchmarked with the in-situ
measurements from the EC ﬂux tower. Flux footprint models are often used for
interpretation of ﬂux tower measurements, to estimate position and size of surface
source areas, and the relative contribution of passive scalar sources to measured
ﬂuxes (Kljun et al. (2015)). To compare with the simulated spatial land surface
ﬂuxes from UAS imagery, it was intended to use the Flux Footprint Prediction (FFP)
from (Kljun et al. (2015)). However, not all the required inputs were available during
the research period, rendering the model inoperative. Instead, EC measurements
were correlated with average values of GPP, ET, and WUE collected from a region
of interest (ROI) within the orthomosaic maps. The ROIs comprise an area around
the ﬂux tower which estimates 70% of total ﬂuxes (Table 2.4). Correlations were
done with GPP, ET and WUE values from the original model, and from the modiﬁed
fpri version.
Table 2.4: Estimation of crosswind integrated footprint area for 70% of total ﬂuxes
for a given day and time.
Time
Radius [m]
20/11 09:30
63
22/11 10:30
57
05/12 08:00
55
11/12 08:30
55
13/12 08:30
58
2.7
Spectral anisotropy
Traditional remote sensing methods generally presume that the canopy is a so called
"Lambertian surface", where the light that is reﬂected from it comprise an equal
intensity in all directions Lee and Kaufman (1986); Smith et al. (1980).
In the
contrast, a "specular surface" will reﬂect all incident light in the same direction, much
like a mirror, where the reﬂectance angle is derived from the angle in which the light
hits the surface. Canopies compose a heterogenic structure, where numerous leaves
present themselves in diverse shapes and orientations. Depending on the vegetation
type and health, and the suns position, light scattering can change depending on
the time of day or year. Larger spectral responses are commonly observed in the
backward scattering (opposite direction to the incident light), whereas the forward
scattering (solar direction) tends to be of lower intensity Kimes (1983). This can
lead to a subsequent anisotropic or bidirectional reﬂectance eﬀects, which imply that
diﬀerent reﬂectance might be presented in diﬀerent directions along images.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.9: Illustration of the forward scattering and backward scattering directions.
In contrast to a Lambertian surface, where the reﬂected light is equal in all directions,
this surface has a factor of specular reﬂectance where one direction reﬂect more than
the others.
The surface reﬂectance can be described by the Biderectional Reﬂectance Distri-
bution Function (BRDF), a factor of proportionality that describes the reﬂectance
of a surface. Introduced by Nicodemus et al. (1992), the BRDF is derived by the
ratio between the reﬂected radiance (Rr(θr, φr, λ)) in the viewing direction (θr, φr)
and the incident irradiance (Ei(θi, φi, λ)) in the illuminating direction (θi, φi) for a
determined wavelength λ as shown in Equation 2.17 and Figure 2.10. θ represents
the sun or sensor zenith angle while φ the sun or sensor azimuth angle with respect
to north.
BRDF(θi, φi, θr, φr, λ) = Rr(θr, φr, λ)
Ei(θi, φi, λ)
(2.17)
Figure 2.10: Geometry for the deﬁnition of the BRDF, derived from Matsapey et al.
(2013)
37
==PAGE:39==
A modiﬁed red-edge index (mREI) was calculated to substitute NDVI in images that
were subject to striping eﬀects. Two sections were extracted from maps derived from
Campaign 1, containing 20×105 pixels from both the bright and shaded areas. The
diﬀerence between the average value for all pixels in the bright and shaded areas
was computed for each map result and thereafter used to give an subsequent error
derived from the striping eﬀect.
2.8
Time series validation
The data from UAS Campaign covers November and December, corresponding to
the transition from the wet season to the dry season in the Guanacaste area. To
evaluate the model performance through the whole sugarcane lifecycle, NDVI from
EC-data was used to model GPP, ET and WUE throughout the year for both the
original model and the fpri modiﬁed version. These values were then correlated
with the GPP, ET and WUE obtained directly from the ﬂux tower. Furthermore,
NDVI and PRI values throughout the year were investigated to interpret similarities
and potential diﬀerences between the two indices during the diﬀerent stages of the
sugarcane lifecycle.
38
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
This chapter includes results and discussion of image processing and orthorectiﬁ-
cation, calculated vegetation indices, results from ET and GPP modeling, spectral
anisotropic eﬀects, and validation of original and modiﬁed versions of the GPP and
ET model.
3.1
Image processing
Figure 3.2 shows the orthomosaic maps that are derived from the EC ﬁeld after
processing, orthorectiﬁcation, and reﬂectance conversion. Each of the these maps
comprise between 400 and 500 MCA images which have been "stitched" together
during the orthorectiﬁcation process. It can be observed that the Campaigns pro-
duce maps of diﬀerent quality, where especially maps derived from Campaign 2 and
3 comprise generally lower quality than maps from the other Campaigns. The maps
derived from Campaign 4 accommodates white patches that are spread out in the
ﬁeld. These patches are areas that lack information of reﬂectance. The bad quality
in some of the maps and the areas of no information in Campaign 4 are a result of
sub-optimal image alignment in Agisoft, which in turn leads to low quality topo-
graphic estimates. A DSM cannot be made if the image alignment is under a certain
standard, which was the case for Campaign 4, 5 and 6. Therefore, 3D model mesh
constructions were made for these Campaigns. A 3D model is secondary in quality
to a DSM because the sensor-target (crop) distance has a larger uncertainty. Also,
when basing the orthomosaic on a 3D model, the resulting orthorectiﬁed image is
mirrored relative to the original orientation. This can be observed in Figure 3.2,
where only Campaign 1 and 2 are oriented relative to true north. This is an issue
that needs further investigation and could not be pursued in this research due to
time constraints.
One reason behind the sub-optimal alignment in these Campaigns is that the EC ﬁeld
is highly homogeneous, which makes it challenging to align imagery that comprises
low quality. Alignment is dependant on classifying distinct features which are shared
by several images. Since the EC ﬁeld only comprises the Saccarum Oﬃcinarum
sugarcane plants, with no real structural change in the canopy, it proves problematic
39
==PAGE:41==
for the photoscanning software to ﬁrst deﬁne a feature in one image and thereafter
locating the exact same feature in another image.
In addition, the images are
captured at diﬀerent times as the UAS moves over the ﬁeld.
This implies that
physical conditions such as wind and light can change the appearance of a feature
from one image to another. Another reason for the sub-optimal aligment is the
camera location error. This error represents the shift that Agisoft Photoscan has
to implement in order to achieve a good set of tie-points according to the results of
the image matching. A large error can arise from faulty GPS data, and will hinder
the alignment process by showing imprecise location estimations for the vegetation
features. Table 3.1 lists the location error estimates in longitude (x), latitude (y),
altitude (z) for all ﬁeld Campaigns. It is evident that Campaigns 3-6 comprise a
signiﬁcantly high error relative to Campaign 1 & 2.
Figure 3.1 displays the MCA maps derived from the phenotyping ﬁeld. The re-
ﬂectance is lower here than in the EC ﬁeld, but the pattern of intensity between the
diﬀerent bands is the same. Areas of low values can be observed in the middle of
block 1, 2 and 3. This could be a result of the camera location error.
In order to minimize alignment issues it is advisable to apply Ground Control Points
(GCP) in the ﬁeld. These are features that are manually put in the ﬁeld before a
ﬂight Campaign with the purpose of serving as easily detectable points that can
be shared in several images. GPS locations of the GCPs can then be measured
and imported in the photoscanning program to optimize the image alignment pro-
cedure. Without the use of survey measured GCPs and checkpoint data, it is highly
problematic to fully determine the accuracy of the orthomosaic maps.
Figure 3.1: All 6 bands of the MCA orthomosaic maps derived from the phenotyping
ﬁeld. Areas of low reﬂectance in block 1 and 2 are observed in all bands.
40
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.2: All 6 bands of the MCA orthomosaic maps derived from the EC ﬁeld
Campaigns (C). Note: C3 should be C4.
Table 3.1: Average camera location error for the all the Campaigns
Campaign
Longitude (X)
Latitude (Y)
Altitude (Z)
XY
Total
and date
error[m]
error[m]
error[m]
error[m]
error[m]
1 (20/11)
3.82
3.97
0.78
5.51
5.56
2 (22/11)
0.57
0.75
1
0.95
1.38
3 (04/12)
68.89
51.4
20.23
85.95
88.3
4 (05/12)
32.1
35.69
29
48
56
5 (11/12)
51.05
31.6
1.4
60
60
6 (13/12)
40.2
39.5
29.5
56.3
63.63
41
==PAGE:43==
3.2
Vegetation Indices (VIs)
Figure 3.3 displays the NDVI for each Campaign (1,2,4,5&6) of the EC ﬁeld. The
NDVI values are generally high (0.4>), which corresponds to a healthy vegetation.
An overall minor decline in NDVI can be observed from November to December,
which reﬂects the change in the Guancaste climate, from rainy to dry season.
The phenotyping ﬁeld is favoured to explore the relationships of the VIs due to its
heterogeneous nature, where diﬀerences between the indices are more easily detected
than in the homogenous EC ﬁeld. The spatial similarity between the indices give an
idea as to how well they explain one another, and can provide important information
of the various sugarcane species that can be used for the local farmers. As seen in
Figure 3.4, OSAVI and EVI bear a noticeably similar spatial structure compared
to the other indices.
These indices seems to be more aﬀected by the low value
areas described above. The low similarity towards the NDVI is unexpected as all of
these three indices are focusing on similar characteristics of the vegetation, and are
derived in similar fashion. An explanation of the dissimilarity towards NDVI may
lie in the fact that the vegetation is quite lush and the ﬁeld comprises few areas of
bare soil. OSAVI and EVI have the purpose of evaluating vegetation health while
accounting for disturbance from the soil and atmosphere. Given that the input of
reﬂectance from soil and atmosphere is so low, the factors that should reduce soil
and atmosphere noise may instead alter the reﬂectance from the actual vegetation.
PRI is assessed to further improve the GPP and ET model, and should therefore
comprise characteristics that NDVI are in lack of. As observed in Figure 3.4, the
spatial pattern between the two indices are somewhat similar. The border between
the diﬀerent blocks and sub-blocks are less deﬁned in the PRI map relative to the
other indices.
PRI has a lower variance than NDVI. PRI and NDVI comprises
standard deviations of 0.055 and 0.25, respectfully.
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.3: NDVI maps of the EC ﬁeld Campaigns
Figure 3.4: Various VIs derived from spectral data from the phenotyping ﬁeld
43
==PAGE:45==
3.3
Gross Primary Production (GPP) and Evap-
otransiration (ET) modeling
Maps of the simulated variables GPP and ET derived from the EC ﬁeld are displayed
in Figure 3.5 and 3.6. GPP values range 15-30 gC/m2d. ET values show higher
variation throughout the Campaigns, ranging 100-400 W/m2 on average.
GPP
values indicate high photosynthetic activity and little plant stress. GPP values can
seen to be overall declining over time (with the exception of Campaign 5 (11/12),
which ﬁts well with the change from wet to dry season.
It is not certain what
causes the high values for Campaign 5.Cooley et al. (2019) undertook a study of
regional drought impacts on vegetation and evaporation in Guanacaste, Costa Rica.
Compared to their average ET estimates of 400 and 380W/m2 for the wet and dry
season, respectfully, the values from the VHR RS maps are underrated. However,
Cooley et al. (2019) investigated the whole region, while this research focus on a
particular ﬁeld. The RS estimates are compared with the in-situ EC measurments
below, which provide a better indication of reliability. Figure 3.7 shows the WUE
of the EC ﬁeld during the various Campaigns. Contrary to GPP and ET, the WUE
shows a rising trend which is a result of a larger decline in ET compared to GPP.
The GPP and WUE derived from the phenotyping ﬁeld can be seen in Figure 3.8.
They all share a spatial pattern, which resembles that of the NDVI (Figure 3.4). A
higher NDVI leads to a higher GPP and WUE.
Figure 3.5: GPP maps of the various Campaigns over the EC ﬁeld.
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.6: ET maps of the various Campaigns over the EC ﬁeld.
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.7: WUE maps of the various Campaigns over the EC ﬁeld. Note: the
values are in gC/Wd instead on gC/kg. However, this does not aﬀect the spatial
pattern.
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.8: GPP, ET and WUE maps derived from the phenotyping ﬁeld. GPP and
WUE show high values where ET show low values.
47
==PAGE:49==
3.3.1
Model validation
Figure 3.9 shows an example of the ﬂux footprint used to gather the in-situ data for
Campaign 1. Considering the ﬂux footprint, the model could simulate the variation
of GPP and ET with RMSE of 3.38gC/m2d and 52.1 W/m2, respectfully (Figure
3.10). The NRMSE for GPP and ET is 17.8% and 22%, respectfully. The model
results are not as good as when applied for the Danish willow ﬁeld. In his research,
Wang et al. (2019b) obtained RMSDs of 1.6187gC/m2d, and 41.19W/m2 for GPP
and ET, respectfully.
Figure 3.9: Flux tower (circle) and the measured area (shaded) in the EC ﬁeld. This
image show a maximum radius of 70m, corresponding to Campaign 1.
Figure 3.10: Comparison between the observed EC data and the estimated RS data
for all Campaigns.
48
==PAGE:50==
3.3.2
Incorporating the Photchemical Reﬂectance Index (PRI)
Figure 3.11 displays the relationship between PRI and LUE for all ﬂux tower mea-
surments (n=6993). The two parameters comprise similar trends, especially from
January to May. Both variables increase in late April and stay generally higher until
the end of the year. LUE data shows a much higher variation in this area although
distinct peaks can be observed. The correlation seems to have two distinct trends
in the LUE ranges [0-0.2] and [0.2-1]. The overall trend is exponential with an r2 of
0.4383. The sudden increase in both variables can be explained by the precipitation
pattern in the area, as the wet season lies within April-November.
Figure 3.11: Correlation of LUE and PRI, observe 2 distinct trends.
49
==PAGE:51==
Table 3.2 lists the ﬁtting results between 07:00 and 16:30 (solar time), ranked based
upon their coeﬃcient of determination value (r2). An exponential ﬁt is used to stay
true to the original correlation plot (Figure 23). Values measured between 13:00 and
14:00 show the highest correlation with r2 = 0.64 and a RMSE of 0.386 gC/m2d
for values gathered at 14:00 solar time. The correlation of LUE and PRI is greatly
improved when only comparing the values gathered at 14:00. The fpri constraint is
deﬁned based on this correlation as such:
fpri = 2.11 × e7×PRI
(3.1)
Table 3.2: Table of ﬁtting results, sort after correlation strength
Time
SSE
r2
RMSE
14:00
46.4
0.64
0.38
13:30
41.2
0.63
0.36
13:00
37.3
0.61
0.34
15:30
67.9
0.60
0.46
14:30
60.3
0.59
0.44
15:00
37.2
0.56
0.34
12:30
70.1
0.56
0.47
16:00
85.1
0.55
0.53
16:30
102.2
0.51
0.58
08:30
66.8
0.47
0.46
08:00
51.4
0.46
0.40
10:00
74.8
0.46
0.48
09:00
62.8
0.43
0.44
17:00
96.8
0.41
0.55
07:30
127.2
0.40
0.67
09:30
63.5
0.40
0.45
10:30
57.7
0.37
0.43
11:00
54.3
0.36
0.42
07:00
125.3
0.33
0.63
12:00
59.4
0.28
0.44
11:30
73.7
0.08
0.48
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.12: Top: Relationship between PRI and LUE throughout 2018. Bottom:
Correlation of LUE vs PRI for daily values gathered at 14:00 solar time.
3.3.3
Application to the model
Figure 3.13 display the correlation between the GPP derived from application 1-
5 and the original model (x-axis), in relation to observed EC values (y-axis). By
simply adding the fpri constraint to Equation 2.7, the GPP is down-regulated too
much (application 5). By keeping the fraction of green vegetation fg, a structural
feature which PRI do not account for, the resulting values display more promising
correlation (application 2)
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.13: Correlations of GPP versus the diﬀerent fpri applications. The original
model comprise the best ﬁt, followed by application 2.
52
==PAGE:54==
3.3.4
Modiﬁed model validation
Even though Figure 3.13 show a lower correlation to GPP observed than the original
model it improves the GPP and WUE results for the Campaign dates in November
and December. The modiﬁed model (application 2) could simulate the variation of
GPP with RMSE of 1.62gC/m2d and NRMSE of 8.57%. It is likely that the fpri
can improve the model when GPP is high. As seen in Figure 3.13, the original
model can not account for values higher than 15 gC/m2d, while application 2 can.
This implies that PRI can account for varieties that NDVI are insensitive for under
certain conditions. However, the ET estimates are not improved by the application
of fpri (Figure 3.16). The WUE values where therefore estimates by modiﬁed GPP
results and original ET results.
Figure 3.14: The modiﬁed model shows an improvement in RMSE, and a more
precise GPP estimate for all the Campaigns.
Figure 3.15: The WUE estimates are more precise when applying the fpri constraint
to GPP, relative to the original model. However, original ET estimates are used in
the WUE calculation.
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.16: Scatter plots of ET results comparison. ET estimates are more precise
for the original model.
54
==PAGE:56==
3.4
Propagation of striping eﬀects on the model
Some of the images contain observable patterns of shaded areas, most notably in
Campaign 1 & 6. These patterns are thought to be a result of spectral anisotropy,
where the reﬂectance intensity from features in the ﬁeld varies relative to the sensor
position. As seen in Figure 3.18, the pattern bears a close resemblance of the ﬂight
path over the ﬁeld.
The data from the EC ﬁeld are obtained before the sun reaches its highest point
(solar noon). Campaign 1, 2, 3,5 and 6 was conducted at 09:30, 10:30, 08:00, 08:30,
and 08:30 (solar time), respectfully (Table 2.2). During these Campaigns the Solar
Azimuth Angle (SZA, deg from north) were between 130-155◦, and the Solar Zenith
Angle (SZA, deg from nadir) between 47-41◦. As seen in Figure 3.17, the suns’ posi-
tion relative to the UAS ﬂight path create distinct areas of backscatter and forward
scatter reﬂectance. Because the UAS (and thereby the sensor position) move over
line-sections of the ﬁeld, advancing towards the sun, distinct features in the ﬁeld
are located in diﬀerent areas of the image (forward scattering and backscattering
areas). Assuming some factor of specular reﬂectance, the forward scatter reﬂectance
will show a higher reﬂection than the backscatter for a speciﬁc vegetation feature.
The blending or radiance in the ﬁnal moasic is picking areas with very diﬀerent radi-
ance due to insuﬃcient overlapping. This could be checked by looking at individual
imagery as done by Sobejano Paz (2017).
Figure 3.17: Left: The ﬂight path of Campaign 1 (20/11 - 09:30) over the EC ﬁeld.
Arrow indicate the direction of ﬂight.
Right: Part of the EC ﬁeld indicated in
black square in. The black circle denotes a speciﬁc feature which is captures in two
pictures as the UAS moves up and down across the ﬁeld. The area surrounding
the speciﬁc feature is divided in fore scatter and backscatter reﬂectance areas. The
sensor on the UAS has is in diﬀerent locations when the two images are taken. This
leads to one image where the vegetation feature reﬂect light in the fore scatter area,
and one image where the vegetation feature reﬂect light in the back scatter area.
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 3.18: Left: Map of the ﬂight path the drone followed during the data collec-
tion in the sugar cane ﬁeld for Campaign 1 (20/11). Right: Map of the vegetations
GPP (Campaign 1) where the pattern can be observed. The pattern can be corre-
lated with the drones ﬂight path.
In her study, Sobejano Paz (2017) investigated bidirectional reﬂectance eﬀects on
a UAS ﬂights in a willow ﬁeld in Roskilde, Denmark, using the same MCA sen-
sor as in this study. The spectral response of each wavelength was compared with
the radiative transfer model PROSAIL for diﬀuse/direct radiation and various so-
lar zenith angles. The green (530nm) and red (570nm) bands proved to be more
sensitive to anisotropy eﬀects, where the red band showed the highest coeﬃcient of
variation (65%). Anisotropy eﬀects were highly marked from backward scattering at
large viewing zenith angle (VZA) and minimum from forward scattering. Biderec-
tional reﬂectance showed to vary more with VZA in sunny conditions, thus it is
recommended to obtain data when the sun elevation is highest or ﬂy under overcast
conditions if this eﬀects should be minimized.
By inspecting all the bands it is evident that the pattern is only observable in one
out of the six bands, namely band 5 (670nm) which represents the red spectrum
(Figure 3.19). This happens to be one of the two bands used to derive NDVI, which
is the reason that the pattern is presence in this index and the resulting GPP image.
670nm is also used to calculate EVI and OSAVI, which explains the ranking list of
images aﬀected by the pattern (Table 8). PRI comprise the largest diﬀerence, but
is unaﬀected by the banding because it is derived from other bands.
56
==PAGE:58==
Table 3.3: A list of the average values for each ROI extracted from various images
and their diﬀerence in percent.
Image
White avg value (green)
Dark avg value (red)
Diﬀerence (%)
PRI[-]
0.038
0.049
+28
GPP[gC/m2d]
22
19
-11.2
GCI[-]
4.53
4.09
-9.6
NDVI[-]
0.74
0.68
-7.5
OSAVI[-]
0.53
492
-7.4
LE[W/m2]
278
261
-6.3
EVI[-]
0.817
0.77
-5.5
Rn[W/m2]
480
473
-1.3
Figure 3.19: Top: A display of all bands from the multi spectral camera.
The
number refer to the band number with he correspondent wavelength. The values
are streched in order to enhance any patterns and do therefore not correspond in
values. Bottom: the spectral signature of the EC ﬁeld. From Campaign 1 (20/11 -
09:30).
57
==PAGE:59==
3.4.1
Modiﬁed red-edge index (mREI)
In order to account for the striping eﬀects in band 5 (670nm) it could be substituted
with band 6 (710nm), which is unaﬀected (Figure 3.19). Although both 670nm and
710nm can be said to fall within the red spectrum (710nm more commonly called
red-edge), in the literature it is more common to use wavelength between 580 and
700nm (Table 3.4) when calculating NDVI. The use of 710nmm results in the red-
edge vegetation index (REI).
REI = ρ800 −ρ710
ρ800 + ρ710
(3.2)
The GPP images derived from NDVI and REI show a mean variation of 31%. In
order to account for this error the signal in 710nm was recalculated so it simulates
that of 670nm. Another index was created (mREI) by using 710nm and thereafter
bumping the intensity 15%, to account for the aforementioned error.
mREI = ρ800 −ρ710 × 1.15
ρ800 + ρ710 × 1.15
(3.3)
The result is an modiﬁed red-edge vegetation index (mREI) image that show no
banding error, and comprise more or less the same values as NDVI. The scatter plots
in Figure 3.20 show the correlation of NDVI with REI and mREI. NDVI and mREI
comprises the highest correlation. The original GPP and the GPP results from REI
adn mREI are also shown. The GPP derived from mREI shows to correlate well
with the original GPP. Figure 3.21 shows the NDVI and the mREI for Campaign
1. It can be seen that mREI and NDVI have similar values, but where the striping
problem is only present in the NDVI map.
Table 3.4: A list of articles and which wavelengths they use for NDVI calculation.
Landsat MultiSpectral Scanner band 5 and 7*.
NIR(nm)
RED(nm)
Article
800-1100*
600-700*
Rouse et al. (1974)
725-1100
580-680
Jingyong et al. (2003)
800-1100*
600-700*
Rondeaux et al. (1996)
781
672
Verrelst et al. (2008)
800
670
Hernández-Clemente et al. (2012)
800
650
Liu et al. (2015)
842
665
Lin et al. (2019)
58
==PAGE:60==
Figure 3.20: Top: Scatter plots of REI derived from band 710nm and mREI derived
from 710nm*1.15 versus the original NDVI derived from 670nm. It is clear that
the mREI image is better correlated with the original NDVI than the REI. Bot-
tom: Scatterplots of GPP derived from REI and mREI compared with the original
GPP derived from the original NDVI. GPP derived from mREI show a stronger
resemblance to the original GPP.
Figure 3.21: Comparison of NDVI(Left) and mREI(Right). mREI is not aﬀected by
the striping eﬀect, and comprise similar values to NDVI.
59
==PAGE:61==
3.5
Time-series validation
Figure 3.22 show in-situ GPP measurments gathered 14:00 local time, every day
for 2018. Overlain are GPP estimates derived from the original GPP code, and
the modiﬁed version (application 2). It also shows the similarities between NDVI
and PRI throughout the year. From DOY [0-80] both GPP estimates are poorly
correlated with the in-situ values.
From DYO 80 and onwards, the correlation is improving with the major rise in
DYO 80-120 occurring simultaneously. Increased precipitation make way for the
sugarcane to grow and thereby the uptake of CO2 rises. GPP is highly variable
throughout the wet season which make it challenging to detect any real similarity
between the estimates and in-situ values. However, During high GPP values [DOY
160-300] one can notice that estimates derived from the modiﬁed code is generally
closer to the in-situ values. It is also in this time period NDVI and PRI deviate
most from each other. PRI has a larger variation than NDVI here. PRI is therefore
thought to optimize the GPP model when photosynthetic activity is high.
Figure 3.22: Top: Time series of GPP values from observed EC data, estimates
from the original model and application 2 where fpri are substituting fD, fM and
fT. EC values are gathered at 14:00 everyday. Bottom: Time series of NDVI and
PRI values obtained from the ﬂux tower everyday at 14:00 local time for 2018
60
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 4
Conclusions
The aim of this study was to validate a Gross Primary Production (GPP) and Evap-
otranspiration (ET) model, which was originally developed and tested for Danish
conditions, in a subtropical dryland climate. Six ﬂight campaigns, conducted with
an UAS, were carried out over two sugarcane ﬁelds in November and December of
2018 in El Viejo, Costa Rica. Multispectral and RGB imagery was used to obtain
orthorectiﬁed maps over the ﬁelds. In addition, in-situ EC data was used validate
the model results, and to provide input in order to test the model over a larger time
frame.
Some of the orthorectiﬁed MCA maps showed poor quality, which is a result of
sub-optimal image alignment in the photoscanning process. Reasons behind the
sub-optimal alignment may lie in the fact that the ﬁelds are very homogeneous, and
it is therefore challenging to align imagery that comprises low quality and account
for changes in in feature appearance over time due to wind and light.
Another
reason for the sub-optimal aligment is the camera location error. Campaigns 3-6
comprise a signiﬁcantly high error relative to campaign 1 & 2. In order to minimize
alignment issues it is advisable to apply Ground Control Points (GCP) in the ﬁeld.
Model results show that the GPP values range 15-30 gC/m2d in the sugarcane
ﬁelds. ET values show a higher variation throughout the Campaigns, ranging from
400 to 100 W/m2 on average. The high GPP values indicate a high photosynthetic
activity. The vegetation Water Use Eﬃciency (WUE) was derived from the GPP
and ET results. Values in GPP and ET show general declining from November
to December, which is correlated with change in climate, from wet to dry season.
Contrary to GPP and ET, the WUE comprises a rising trend, which is a result of a
larger decline in ET compared to GPP.
Validation results show that the GPP and ET model could simulate the variation of
GPP, ET and WUE well, with RMSE of 3.63gC/m2d, 41.94 W/m2, and 4.16 gC/kg,
respectfully. However, the model results were not as the validation performed in
Danish conditions. In order to better account for photosynthetic activity, various
applications of a PRI derived constraint was assessed in the GPP and ET model.
The constraint was developed on the underlying relationship between PRI and the
vegetations Light Use Eﬃciency (LUE). The application of the PRI constraint, fpri,
61
==PAGE:63==
showed to improve the GPP and WUE estimates. The new modiﬁed could simulate
the variation of GPP with RMSE of 2.19gC/m2d and NRMSE of 11,8%, and the
variation of WUE with RMSE 2.82 gC/kg and NRMSE of 30%. Furthermore, time-
series validation showed that the modiﬁed model perform better than the original
version throughout the year of 2018.
A striping eﬀect could be observed in many of the maps. The striping eﬀect is
particurlarly evident in the red band (670nm).
The red band is used to derive
NDVI, which is a crucial input in the GPP and ET model. In order to account for
the striping eﬀect, a modiﬁed Red Edge vegetation Index (mREI) was developed
and tested. NDVI was substituted with the mREI and the resulting GPP images
derived from mREI was well correlated with the original GPP estimates.
Our results demonstrated the use of UAS to model GPP, ET and WUE at the farm
level and the potential of using diﬀerent spectral regions to reduce the amount of in
situ information. The model was well validated for a dry-land tropic region, where
the incorporation of PRI reduced the overall error of GPP and WUE estimations.
The incorporation is shown to be especially beneﬁting the model when the vegeta-
tion’s photosynthetic activity is high. These models can be also used to benchmark
models that can be applied using satellite data for regional assessments.
62
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
EarthData ﬂuxnet. https://daac.ornl.gov/cgi-bin/dataset_lister.pl?p=9.
Accessed: 2019-07-08.
MS
Windows
NT
sustainable
development
goals.
https://
sustainabledevelopment.un.org/. Accessed: 2019-04-30.
NOAA
what
is
remote
sensing.
https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/
remotesensing.html. Accessed: 2019-06-30.
(2019). HarrisGeospatialSolutions.
Anderson, K. and Gaston, K. J. (2013).
Lightweight unmanned aerial vehicles
will revolutionize spatial ecology.
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment,
11(3):138–146.
Asrar, G., Fuchs, M., Kanemasu, E., and Hatﬁeld, J. (1984). Estimating absorbed
photosynthetic radiation and leaf area index from spectral reﬂectance in wheat 1.
Agronomy journal, 76(2):300–306.
Baldocchi, D., Falge, E., Gu, L., Olson, R., Hollinger, D., Running, S., Anthoni,
P., Bernhofer, C., Davis, K., Evans, R., et al. (2001). Fluxnet: A new tool to
study the temporal and spatial variability of ecosystem-scale carbon dioxide, water
vapor, and energy ﬂux densities. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society,
82(11):2415–2434.
Baldocchi, D. D. (2003). Assessing the eddy covariance technique for evaluating
carbon dioxide exchange rates of ecosystems: past, present and future. Global
change biology, 9(4):479–492.
Baldocchi, D. D., Meyers, T. P., Wilson, K. B., et al. (2000). Correction of eddy-
covariance measurements incorporating both advective eﬀects and density ﬂuxes.
Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 97(3):487–511.
Berni, J. A., Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Suárez, L., and Fereres, E. (2009).
Thermal
and narrowband multispectral remote sensing for vegetation monitoring from an
unmanned aerial vehicle. IEEE Transactions on geoscience and Remote Sensing,
47(3):722–738.
Calvo-Alvarado, J., McLennan, B., Sánchez-Azofeifa, A., and Garvin, T. (2009). De-
forestation and forest restoration in guanacaste, costa rica: Putting conservation
policies in context. Forest Ecology and Management, 258(6):931–940.
63
==PAGE:65==
Chase, T. N., Pielke Sr, R., Kittel, T., Nemani, R. R., and Running, S. W. (2000).
Simulated impacts of historical land cover changes on global climate in northern
winter. Climate Dynamics, 16(2-3):93–105.
Cooley, S. S., Williams, C. A., Fisher, J. B., Halverson, G. H., Perret, J., and
Lee, C. M. (2019). Assessing regional drought impacts on vegetation and evap-
otranspiration: a case study in guanacaste, costa rica. Ecological Applications,
29(2):e01834.
Cramer, W., Bondeau, A., Woodward, F. I., Prentice, I. C., Betts, R. A., Brovkin,
V., Cox, P. M., Fisher, V., Foley, J. A., Friend, A. D., et al. (2001). Global response
of terrestrial ecosystem structure and function to co2 and climate change: results
from six dynamic global vegetation models. Global change biology, 7(4):357–373.
Demmig, B., Winter, K., Krüger, A., and Czygan, F.-C. (1987). Photoinhibition
and zeaxanthin formation in intact leaves: a possible role of the xanthophyll cycle
in the dissipation of excess light energy. Plant Physiology, 84(2):218–224.
Döll, P. and Siebert, S. (2002). Global modeling of irrigation water requirements.
Water Resources Research, 38(4):8–1.
Drolet, G. G., Huemmrich, K. F., Hall, F. G., Middleton, E. M., Black, T. A., Barr,
A. G., and Margolis, H. A. (2005). A modis-derived photochemical reﬂectance
index to detect inter-annual variations in the photosynthetic light-use eﬃciency
of a boreal deciduous forest. Remote Sensing of Environment, 98(2-3):212–224.
Fisher, J. B., Tu, K. P., and Baldocchi, D. D. (2008). Global estimates of the land–
atmosphere water ﬂux based on monthly avhrr and islscp-ii data, validated at 16
ﬂuxnet sites. Remote Sensing of Environment, 112(3):901–919.
Friend, A. D., Arneth, A., Kiang, N. Y., Lomas, M., Ogee, J., Rödenbeck, C.,
Running, S. W., SANTAREN, J.-D., Sitch, S., Viovy, N., et al. (2007). Fluxnet
and modelling the global carbon cycle. Global Change Biology, 13(3):610–633.
Fuentes, D. A., Gamon, J. A., Cheng, Y., Claudio, H. C., Qiu, H.-l., Mao, Z., Sims,
D. A., Rahman, A. F., Oechel, W., and Luo, H. (2006). Mapping carbon and
water vapor ﬂuxes in a chaparral ecosystem using vegetation indices derived from
aviris. Remote Sensing of Environment, 103(3):312–323.
Gago, J., Douthe, C., Coopman, R., Gallego, P., Ribas-Carbo, M., Flexas, J.,
Escalona, J., and Medrano, H. (2015).
Uavs challenge to assess water stress
for sustainable agriculture. Agricultural water management, 153:9–19.
Gamon, J., Penuelas, J., and Field, C. (1992). A narrow-waveband spectral in-
dex that tracks diurnal changes in photosynthetic eﬃciency. Remote Sensing of
environment, 41(1):35–44.
Gamon, J., Serrano, L., and Surfus, J. (1997). The photochemical reﬂectance in-
dex: an optical indicator of photosynthetic radiation use eﬃciency across species,
functional types, and nutrient levels. Oecologia, 112(4):492–501.
Gamon, J. A. (1993). The dynamic 531-nanometer a reﬂectance si qlnal: A survey of
twenty angiosperm species. Gilmore Hall 202-3050 Maile Way Honolulu, Hawaii
96822 Oﬃce of the Director August 26, 1993, page 172.
64
==PAGE:66==
Gamon, J. A., Field, C. B., Bilger, W., Bjiirkman, O., Fredeen, A. L., and Peﬁuelas,
J. (1990). Remote sensing of the xanthophyll cycle and chlorophyll ﬂuorescence
in sunﬂower leaves and canopies*. Technical report.
Garbulsky, M. F., Peñuelas, J., Gamon, J., Inoue, Y., and Filella, I. (2011). The
photochemical reﬂectance index (pri) and the remote sensing of leaf, canopy and
ecosystem radiation use eﬃciencies: A review and meta-analysis. Remote Sensing
of Environment, 115(2):281–297.
García, M., Sandholt, I., Ceccato, P., Ridler, M., Mougin, E., Kergoat, L., Morillas,
L., Timouk, F., Fensholt, R., and Domingo, F. (2013). Actual evapotranspira-
tion in drylands derived from in-situ and satellite data: Assessing biophysical
constraints. Remote Sensing of Environment, 131:103–118.
Gitelson, A. A., Gamon, J. A., and Solovchenko, A. (2017). Multiple drivers of
seasonal change in PRI: Implications for photosynthesis 1. Leaf level. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 191:110–116.
Gitelson, A. A., Vina, A., Ciganda, V., Rundquist, D. C., and Arkebauer, T. J.
(2005). Remote estimation of canopy chlorophyll content in crops. Geophysical
Research Letters, 32(8).
Glenn, E. P., Huete, A. R., Nagler, P. L., Hirschboeck, K. K., and Brown, P. (2007).
Integrating remote sensing and ground methods to estimate evapotranspiration.
Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences, 26(3):139–168.
Goerner, A., Reichstein, M., and Rambal, S. (2009). Tracking seasonal drought
eﬀects on ecosystem light use eﬃciency with satellite-based pri in a mediterranean
forest. Remote Sensing of Environment, 113(5):1101–1111.
Goerner, A., Reichstein, M., Tomelleri, E., Hanan, N., Rambal, S., Papale, D.,
Dragoni, D., and Schmullius, C. (2011). Remote sensing of ecosystem light use
eﬃciency with modis-based pri. Biogeosciences, 8(5):189–202.
Goldman, D. B. (2010). Vignette and exposure calibration and compensation. IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 32(12):2276–2288.
Gould, W. (2000). Remote sensing of vegetation, plant species richness, and regional
biodiversity hotspots. Ecological applications, 10(6):1861–1870.
Goulden, M. L., Munger, J. W., Fan, S.-M., Daube, B. C., and Wofsy, S. C. (1996).
Measurements of carbon sequestration by long-term eddy covariance: Methods
and a critical evaluation of accuracy. Global change biology, 2(3):169–182.
Govender, M., Chetty, K., and Bulcock, H. (2007). A review of hyperspectral remote
sensing and its application in vegetation and water resource studies. Water Sa,
33(2).
Hall, F. G., Hilker, T., Coops, N. C., Lyapustin, A., Huemmrich, K. F., Middleton,
E., Margolis, H., Drolet, G., and Black, T. A. (2008). Multi-angle remote sens-
ing of forest light use eﬃciency by observing pri variation with canopy shadow
fraction. Remote Sensing of Environment, 112(7):3201–3211.
65
==PAGE:67==
Hernández-Clemente, R., Navarro-Cerrillo, R. M., and Zarco-Tejada, P. J. (2012).
Carotenoid content estimation in a heterogeneous conifer forest using narrow-band
indices and PROSPECT+DART simulations. Remote Sensing of Environment.
Houborg, R., Anderson, M. C., Norman, J. M., Wilson, T., and Meyers, T. (2009).
Intercomparison of a ‘bottom-up’and ‘top-down’modeling paradigm for estimat-
ing carbon and energy ﬂuxes over a variety of vegetative regimes across the us.
Agricultural and forest meteorology, 149(12):2162–2182.
Huete, A., Didan, K., Miura, T., Rodriguez, E. P., Gao, X., and Ferreira, L. G.
(2002). Overview of the radiometric and biophysical performance of the modis
vegetation indices. Remote sensing of environment, 83(1-2):195–213.
Jingyong, Z., Wenjie, D., Congbin, F., and Lingyun, W. (2003). The inﬂuence of
vegetation cover on summer precipitation in china: a statistical analysis of ndvi
and climate data. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences, 20(6):1002.
Jingyong, Z., Wenjie, D., Congbin, F., and Lingyun, W. (2008). The inﬂuence of
vegetation cover on summer precipitation in China: A statistical analysis of NDVI
and climate data. Advances in Atmospheric Sciences, 20(6):1002–1006.
Karp, D. S., Frishkoﬀ, L. O., Echeverri, A., Zook, J., Juárez, P., and Chan, K. M.
(2018). Agriculture erases climate-driven β-diversity in neotropical bird commu-
nities. Global change biology, 24(1):338–349.
Kimes, D. (1983). Dynamics of directional reﬂectance factor distributions for vege-
tation canopies. Applied optics, 22(9):1364–1372.
Kljun, N., Calanca, P., Rotach, M., and Schmid, H. P. (2015).
A simple two-
dimensional parameterisation for ﬂux footprint prediction (ﬀp).
Geoscientiﬁc
Model Development, 8(11):3695–3713.
Laliberte, A. S., Goforth, M. A., Steele, C. M., and Rango, A. (2011). Multispectral
remote sensing from unmanned aircraft: Image processing workﬂows and appli-
cations for rangeland environments. Remote Sensing, 3(11):2529–2551.
Lambin, E. F., Turner, B. L., Geist, H. J., Agbola, S. B., Angelsen, A., Bruce, J. W.,
Coomes, O. T., Dirzo, R., Fischer, G., Folke, C., et al. (2001). The causes of
land-use and land-cover change: moving beyond the myths. Global environmental
change, 11(4):261–269.
Lasslop, G., Reichstein, M., Papale, D., Richardson, A. D., Arneth, A., Barr, A.,
Stoy, P., and Wohlfahrt, G. (2010). Separation of net ecosystem exchange into
assimilation and respiration using a light response curve approach: critical issues
and global evaluation. Global Change Biology, 16(1):187–208.
Lee, T. Y. and Kaufman, Y. J. (1986). Non-lambertian eﬀects on remote sensing
of surface reﬂectance and vegetation index. IEEE transactions on geoscience and
remote sensing, (5):699–708.
Liang, S., Li, X., and Wang, J. (2012). Advanced remote sensing: terrestrial infor-
mation extraction and applications. Academic Press.
Lillesand, T., Kiefer, R. W., and Chipman, J. (2015). Remote sensing and image
interpretation. John Wiley & Sons.
66
==PAGE:68==
Lin, S., Li, J., Liu, Q., Li, L., Zhao, J., and Yu, W. (2019). Evaluating the eﬀec-
tiveness of using vegetation indices based on red-edge reﬂectance from sentinel-2
to estimate gross primary productivity. Remote Sensing, 11(11):1303.
Liu, Y., Zhao, W., Omasa, K., Wang, Z., Lu, X., and Lu, S. (2015). Comparing veg-
etation indices for remote chlorophyll measurement of white poplar and Chinese
elm leaves with diﬀerent adaxial and abaxial surfaces. Journal of Experimental
Botany.
Loarie, S. R., Joppa, L. N., and Pimm, S. L. (2007). Satellites miss environmental
priorities. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 22(12):630–632.
Matsapey, N., Faucheu, J., Flury, M., and Delafosse, D. (2013). Design of a gonio-
spectro-photometer for optical characterization of gonio-apparent materials. Mea-
surement Science and Technology, 24:065901.
McCabe, M. F., Rodell, M., Alsdorf, D. E., Miralles, D. G., Uijlenhoet, R., Wagner,
W., Lucieer, A., Houborg, R., Verhoest, N. E., Franz, T. E., et al. (2017). The
future of earth observation in hydrology. Hydrology and earth system sciences,
21(7):3879.
McCallum, I., Wagner, W., Schmullius, C., Shvidenko, A., Obersteiner, M., Fritz, S.,
and Nilsson, S. (2009). Satellite-based terrestrial production eﬃciency modeling.
Carbon balance and management, 4(1):8.
Monteith, J. (1972). Solar radiation and productivity in tropical ecosystems. Journal
of applied ecology, 9(3):747–766.
Monteith, J. L. (1977). Climate and the eﬃciency of crop production in britain.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences,
281(980):277–294.
Nemani, R. R., Keeling, C. D., Hashimoto, H., Jolly, W. M., Piper, S. C.,
Tucker, C. J., Myneni, R. B., and Running, S. W. (2003). Climate-driven in-
creases in global terrestrial net primary production from 1982 to 1999. science,
300(5625):1560–1563.
Nicodemus, F. E., Richmond, J. C., Hsia, J. J., Ginsberg, I., and Limperis, T. (1992).
Geometrical considerations and nomenclature for reﬂectance. NBS monograph,
160:4.
Penuelas, J., Filella, I., and Gamon, J. A. (1995). Assessment of photosynthetic
radiation-use eﬃciency with spectral reﬂectance. New Phytologist, 131(3):291–
296.
Pettorelli, N., Vik, J. O., Mysterud, A., Gaillard, J. M., Tucker, C. J., and Stenseth,
N. C. (2005). Using the satellite-derived NDVI to assess ecological responses to
environmental change.
Potter, C. S., Randerson, J. T., Field, C. B., Matson, P. A., Vitousek, P. M.,
Mooney, H. A., and Klooster, S. A. (1993). Terrestrial ecosystem production: a
process model based on global satellite and surface data. Global Biogeochemical
Cycles, 7(4):811–841.
67
==PAGE:69==
Ramankutty, N. and Foley, J. A. (1999). Estimating historical changes in global land
cover: Croplands from 1700 to 1992. Global biogeochemical cycles, 13(4):997–1027.
Rauscher, S. A., Giorgi, F., Diﬀenbaugh, N. S., and Seth, A. (2008). Extension
and intensiﬁcation of the meso-american mid-summer drought in the twenty-ﬁrst
century. Climate Dynamics, 31(5):551–571.
Reidsma, P., Tekelenburg, T., Van den Berg, M., and Alkemade, R. (2006). Impacts
of land-use change on biodiversity: An assessment of agricultural biodiversity in
the european union. Agriculture, ecosystems & environment, 114(1):86–102.
Roerink, G. J., Menenti, M., Soepboer, W., and Su, Z. (2003). Assessment of climate
impact on vegetation dynamics by using remote sensing. Physics and Chemistry
of the Earth, 28(1-3):103–109.
Roman, A. and Ursu, T. (2016). Multispectral satellite imagery and airborne laser
scanning techniques for the detection of archaeological vegetation marks, pages
141–152.
Rondeaux, G., Steven, M., and Baret, F. (1996).
Optimization of soil-adjusted
vegetation indices. Remote sensing of environment, 55(2):95–107.
Rouse, J. W., Haas, R. H., Schell, J. A., and Deering, D. W. (1974). Monitoring
Vegetation system in The Great Plains with ERTS. Technical report, Remote
Sensing Center, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.
Sala, O. E., Chapin, F. S., Armesto, J. J., Berlow, E., Bloomﬁeld, J., Dirzo, R.,
Huber-Sanwald, E., Huenneke, L. F., Jackson, R. B., Kinzig, A., et al. (2000).
Global biodiversity scenarios for the year 2100. science, 287(5459):1770–1774.
Sanderson, R. (2010).
Introduction to remote sensing.
New mexico space grant
consortium.
Sellers, P., Randall, D., Collatz, G., Berry, J., Field, C., Dazlich, D., Zhang, C., Col-
lelo, G., and Bounoua, L. (1996). A revised land surface parameterization (sib2)
for atmospheric gcms. part i: Model formulation. Journal of climate, 9(4):676–
705.
Sellers, P. J., Berry, J. A., Collatz, G. J., Field, C. B., and Hall, E. G. (1992).
Canopy Reﬂectance, Photosynthesis, and Transpiration. III. A Reanalysis Using
Improved Leaf Models and a New Canopy Integration Scheme. Technical report.
Smith, J., Lin, T. L., Ranson, K., et al. (1980). The lambertian assumption and
landsat data.
Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 46(9):1183–
1189.
Sobejano Paz, V. (2017).
Analysis of vegetation biophysical properties and
anisotropy eﬀects using images from an unmanned aerial system, analyse af vege-
tationens biofysiske egenskaber og anisotropiske eﬀekter ved hjælp af billeder fra
et dronesystem.
Swinbank, W. (1951). The measurement of vertical transfer of heat and water vapor
by eddies in the lower atmosphere. Journal of Meteorology, 8(3):135–145.
68
==PAGE:70==
Szeliski, R. (2010). Computer vision: algorithms and applications. Springer Science
& Business Media.
Thenkabail, P. S. and Lyon, J. G. (2016). Hyperspectral Remote Sensing of Vegeta-
tion. CRC Press, 1st edition.
Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J., and Befort, B. L. (2011). Global food demand and
the sustainable intensiﬁcation of agriculture. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 108(50):20260–20264.
Tortini, R., Coops, N. C., Nesic, Z., Christen, A., Lee, S. C., and Hilker, T. (2017).
Remote sensing of seasonal light use eﬃciency in temperate bog ecosystems. Sci-
entiﬁc Reports, 7(1).
USTIN, S. L., ROBERTS, D. A., GAMON, J. A., ASNER, G. P., and GREEN,
R. O. (2006). Using Imaging Spectroscopy to Study Ecosystem Processes and
Properties. BioScience, 54(6):523.
Valipour, M., Ziatabar Ahmadi, M., Raeini-Sarjaz, M., Gholami Seﬁdkouhi, M. A.,
Shahnazari, A., Fazlola, R., and Darzi-Naftchali, A. (2015). Agricultural water
management in the world during past half century. Archives of Agronomy and
Soil Science, 61(5):657–678.
Verrelst, J., Schaepman, M. E., Koetz, B., and Kneubühler, M. (2008). Angular sen-
sitivity analysis of vegetation indices derived from CHRIS/PROBA data. Remote
Sensing of Environment.
Wang, S. (2019). Hyperspatial mapping of land surface water, energy and co2 ﬂuxes
from unmanned aerial systems.
Wang, S., Baum, A., Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Dam-Hansen, C., Thorseth, A., Bauer-
Gottwein, P., Bandini, F., and Garcia, M. (2019a).
Unmanned aerial system
multispectral mapping for low and variable solar irradiance conditions: Potential
of tensor decomposition. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,
155:58–71.
Wang, S., Garcia, M., Bauer-Gottwein, P., Jakobsen, J., Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Ban-
dini, F., Paz, V. S., and Ibrom, A. (2019b). High spatial resolution monitoring
land surface energy, water and co2 ﬂuxes from an unmanned aerial system. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 229:14–31.
Wang, S., Ibrom, A., Bauer-Gottwein, P., and Garcia, M. (2018). Incorporating
diﬀuse radiation into a light use eﬃciency and evapotranspiration model: An 11-
year study in a high latitude deciduous forest. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,
248:479–493.
Westoby, M. J., Brasington, J., Glasser, N. F., Hambrey, M. J., and Reynolds, J.
(2012).
‘structure-from-motion’photogrammetry: A low-cost, eﬀective tool for
geoscience applications. Geomorphology, 179:300–314.
Wilczak, J. M., Oncley, S. P., and Stage, S. A. (2001).
Sonic anemometer tilt
correction algorithms. Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 99(1):127–150.
69
==PAGE:71==
Wu, C., Huang, W., Yang, Q., and Xie, Q. (2015). Improved estimation of light
use eﬃciency by removal of canopy structural eﬀect from the photochemical re-
ﬂectance index (pri). Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 199:333–338.
Wu, C., Niu, Z., and Gao, S. (2012). The potential of the satellite derived green
chlorophyll index for estimating midday light use eﬃciency in maize, coniferous
forest and grassland. Ecological Indicators, 14(1):66–73.
Wulder, M. A., Hall, R. J., Coops, N. C., and Franklin, S. E. (2004). High spa-
tial resolution remotely sensed data for ecosystem characterization. BioScience,
54(6):511–521.
Yu, F., Price, K. P., Ellis, J., and Shi, P. (2003). Response of seasonal vegetation
development to climatic variations in eastern central Asia. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 87(1):42–54.
Yuan, W., Liu, S., Zhou, G., Zhou, G., Tieszen, L. L., Baldocchi, D., Bernhofer, C.,
Gholz, H., Goldstein, A. H., Goulden, M. L., et al. (2007). Deriving a light use
eﬃciency model from eddy covariance ﬂux data for predicting daily gross primary
production across biomes. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 143(3-4):189–207.
Zarco-Tejada, P. J., Diaz-Varela, R., Angileri, V., and Loudjani, P. (2014). Tree
height quantiﬁcation using very high resolution imagery acquired from an un-
manned aerial vehicle (uav) and automatic 3d photo-reconstruction methods. Eu-
ropean journal of agronomy, 55:89–99.
Zarco-Tejada, P. J., González-Dugo, V., and Berni, J. A. (2012).
Fluorescence,
temperature and narrow-band indices acquired from a uav platform for water
stress detection using a micro-hyperspectral imager and a thermal camera. Remote
sensing of environment, 117:322–337.
70
