==PAGE:1==
Single Particle Resonance
Anders Carlsen s134276
Supervised by:
Anja Boisen
Co-supervised by:
Peter Ouma Okeyo
Peter Emil Larsen
Technical University of Denmark
August 2019
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Characterizing the physical properties of pharmaceutical at an early stages of drug development,
can assist in reducing the substantial investment of both time and money, associated with the
development of new pharmaceuticals. In this thesis, a new method of drug characterization is
evaluated. The method is called particle thermomechanical analysis (PTMA).
The method is based on using a single drug particle as a cantilever resonator and measuring the
resonance response through laser Doppler vibrometry (LDV). To evaluate this method, the dehy-
dration mechanism of theophylline monohydrate (TPMH) and carbamazepine dihydrate (CBZD)
was studied using PTMA. The results were compared to similar measurements using conventional
methods of material characterization, such as thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), diﬀerential
scanning calorimetry (DSC), dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) and X-ray powder diﬀraction
(XRPD).
The experimental results of PTMA showed clear evidence of a connection between the dehy-
dration of the particle and the resonance response. The results of the conventional method were in
agreement with the temperatures of dehydration as measured by PTMA. The changes in mass and
Young’s modulus measured from bulk amounts using TGA and DMA, was shown to be insuﬃcient
in order to describe the resonance response of a single particle.
The PTMA method was also used to study the re-hydration mechanism of TPMH in a humid
environment. The results of the experiments provided evidence of an initial surface absorb of the
water, followed by a gradual re-hydration of the particle interior. The surface absorption occurred
within the ﬁrst 30 minutes of exposure, while the re-hydration of the interior was still ongoing at
the end of a 24 hour experiment.
I
==PAGE:3==
List of Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Full Phrase
CBZ
Carbamazepine
CBZD
Carbamazepine Dihydrate
DMA
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis
DSC
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry
LDV
Laser Doppler Vibrometry
PTMA
Particle Thermomechanical Analysis
TGA
Thermal Gravimetric Analysis
MEMS
Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems
NEMS
Nano Electro-Mechanical Systems
PVP
Polyvinylpyrrolidone
TP
Theophylline
TPMH
Theophylline Monohydrate
XRPD
X-Ray Powder Diﬀraction
Table 1: List of common abbreviations used throughout this thesis.
II
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Deﬁnition of a Single Particle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Structure of Organic Hydrates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Cantilever Resonance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.1
Ideal Lossless Cantilever . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3.2
Resonator as a Lumped Element Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.3
The Quality Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Simulations of Thermal Behaviour
12
3.1
Model Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Single Particle Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Eﬀects of Epoxy Adhesive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Eﬀects of Crystal Water Evaporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Eﬀects of Optical Readout Laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Eﬀect of Base Thickness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Eﬀects of Humidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Validity of the Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Experimental Methods
29
4.1
Drug Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
X-Ray Powder Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Thermal Gravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.6
Particle Thermomechanical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6.1
Tracking software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Investigation of Hydrate Dehydration by Conventional Methods
38
5.1
Thermal Gravimetric Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
III
==PAGE:5==
5.3
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
X-Ray Powder Diﬀraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Thermal Response of Single Particle Resonance
44
6.1
Carbamazepine Dihydrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.1
Tracking of Multiple Resonance Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.1.2
Reproducibility of Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.3
Double Clamped Cantilever . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.1.4
CBZD + PVP Particle Resonator
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Theophylline Monohydrate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Humidity Response of Single Particle Resonance
65
8
Conclusions and Outlook
68
References
74
Appendix
75
8.1
Appendix A: Mesh Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.2
Appendix B: Copper Cage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
8.3
Appendix C: Raw Data of Resonance Response of Anhydrous CBZ Particles.
. . .
79
IV
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The ﬁeld of drug discovery is a competitive multi billion dollar industry, where the development
and approval of new active pharmaceutical ingredients is a very time consuming and expensive
investment. Studies suggest that it takes an average of 10 years and costs between 1.8 to 2.6
billion dollars to develop a single drug product to the point where it is ready to be marketed.[1][2]
The development cycle of pharmaceuticals can be divided into four steps as illustrated by ﬁgure
1.1. In the ﬁrst step of drug discovery is to identify an appropriate target of the human biology
which the drug should eﬀect in order to treat the disease in question. Once a potential target has
been found and produced in suﬃcient quantity, a screening process can begin to identify interacting
pharmaceutical ingredients. Once a number of interacting ingredients are found, the process move
to the next step which is the drug development. In this stage the potential active ingredients are
characterized and have their physical and pharmaceutical properties optimized for the intended
use, and a pharmaceutical formulation of the drug can be made. The few candidates which could
be suﬃciently optimized are then ready to go on to a long range of clinical trials on animals and
eventually humans. If the clinical trials provides convincing evidence of the beneﬁcial eﬀects and
the safety of any of the tested drugs, these drugs can go to the next step and be submitted for
regulatory approval. If the drug is approved it is ready to be marketed.[3]
The preferred method of marketing pharmaceutical products is in the tablet form. The active
pharmaceutical ingredient is subjected to external forces such as varying temperature, humidity
and pressure, both during the production cycle and the storage of the drug. For this reason, any
potential active ingredient must be tested for the stability of its solid state forms. The stability of
the solid state forms is important to ensure the eﬀectiveness of the drug, since the diﬀerent solid
states can have very diﬀerent physicochemical properties.[3] Water is a common ingredient and
will in almost all cases be present in both storage and production, making water-drug interactions
unavoidable. The hydrate form is of special interest in the ﬁeld of pharmaceuticals, as it appears
in a large fraction of existing active pharmaceutical ingredients and can aﬀect the solubility and
the rate of dissolution of the drug signiﬁcantly.
These are important properties regarding the
1
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the diﬀerent stages of drug development. Figure by Genome Research
Limited.[4]
bioavailability of the drug.[3] Understanding the dehydration mechanism of a hydrate and the
stability of the anhydrous form in the presence of water is therefore vital when designing production
and storage procedures. Developing new methods which can accurately determine solid state phase
transformations of an active ingredient at a very early stage in drug development is a possible
solution to reduce cost.
The aim of this thesis is to demonstrate a new method for early development material char-
acterization on a particle level and compare it to conventional methods using bulk amount. The
method uses a clamped single particle as a resonator and probes the resonance response using
laser Doppler vibrometry. The method in known as Particle thermomechanical analysis. LDV is
a well established technique in the engineering ﬁeld which is non invasive and can achieve high
temporal resolution. The combination of the utility of LDV and the high sensitivity of MEMS
have the potential to be a powerful method of characterization. The basic sensing concept behind
MEMS resonators is to design a scenario where the change in resonance frequency is maximized
in relation to changes in the parameter of interest. An eﬃcient way to achieve this is to reduce
2
==PAGE:8==
the dimensions of the resonator. LDV with a MEMS approach to characterize material properties
on a very small amount of polymer or drug sample has already been done by e.g. M. Karl[5], M.
Kurek[6] and S.Bose[7]. These studies all utilize clean room fabricated resonator devices as a base
to deposit the sample material. The method proposed in this thesis circumvents the need for clean
room devices by measuring the resonance response of the sample particle itself.
The objective of this thesis are to evaluate the resonance response of single particle hydrate
resonators during the dehydration event, by comparing the results to similar measurements of the
dehydration using well established thermal methods such as thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA),
diﬀerential scanning calorimetry, dynamic mechanical analysis and x-ray powder diﬀraction. Ad-
ditionally, the study of the hydrate single particle resonators by PTMA, will investigate the con-
sistency of the resonance response during dehydration, both between individual particles, but also
between the diﬀerent modes of bending within the same single particle. Experiments investigating
the re-hydration of a dehydrated single particle resonator will also be presented. The thesis includes
the study of the dehydration mechanism of two diﬀerent hydrates, theophylline monohydrate and
carbamazepine dihydrate.
The thesis is structured with the the second chapter describing the theoretical background
needed to understand and analyse the resonance behaviour of single particle hydrates. This chapter
includes the origin and derivation of important properties of resonance behaviour.
The third
chapter includes a thorough study of the thermal behaviour within the chamber of the PTMA
setup, based on numerical simulations performed using COMSOL Multiphysics.
The chapter
investigates the deviation in temperature along the particle resonator and identiﬁes the most
signiﬁcant parameters.
In the fourth chapter descriptions of the basic functionality of all the
experimental methods used throughout this project are presented.
A description of the used
equipment and important experimental parameters are also included. The ﬁfth chapter consists
of an analysis of experimental results using the conventional methods TGA, DSC, DMA and
XRPD. The sixth chapter includes the experimental results of the PTMA measurements. In the
chapter the measurements are presented, analyzed and compared to the results of the conventional
thermal methods presented in the ﬁfth chapter. The seventh chapter presents and analyses the re-
hydration response of dehydrated single particle resonators. In the eighth chapter ﬁnal conclusions
are drawn based on the experimental ﬁndings of this project. The advantages, disadvantages and
future potential of the PTMA method are discussed.
3
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Theory
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce some of the essential concepts and deﬁnitions used
when studying hydrate particles in a MEMS setting. First, the concept of a single particle will be
deﬁned, followed by a brief description of the crystalline structure of the hydrates used throughout
this project and how their structure relates to the study of the resonance response.
The ﬁnal section will go through some of the theoretical derivations of the resonance frequency
and the quality factor of a cantilever resonator.
2.1
Deﬁnition of a Single Particle
The interpretation of the term ”single particle” can be ambiguous, and is not always clearly deﬁned.
In the context of pharmaceuticals, where powdered samples are often used, the term single particle
refers to an individual particle from the powdered sample. In this thesis the single particles used
for PTMA experiments are single crystalline hydrate particles. For anyone familiar with MEMS,
the ﬁrst thing which comes to mind when encountering the term single crystal will most likely be
a silicon wafer. The Hydrate single particles studied throughout this projects are single crystal,
but have a lot higher density of defects and impurities compared to a typical silicon wafer.
2.2
Structure of Organic Hydrates
Characterizing the solid state forms of pharmaceuticals is essential when it comes to ensuring a
consistent performance of the drug. Diﬀerent crystal structures of the drug have diﬀerent physical
properties, such as solubility, which aﬀects the bioavailability. Determining the stability of the
solid state forms of a drug is therefore critical in ensuring a consistent eﬀect of the drug product.
Production processing and storing can induce a variety of diﬀerent external conditions, which could
additional meta stable states with changed properties. In addition to these diﬀerent solid state
forms, approximately one third of pharmaceuticals can form hydrates, where water molecules are
4
==PAGE:10==
adopted into the crystal lattice.[8][9]
Depending on the crystal structure of the hydrate, the water molecules can be arranged in
diﬀerent manners within the crystal. The hydrates studied throughout this thesis are both channel
hydrates, which means that the water molecules are ordered in channels along a speciﬁc crystal
direction.[9] In the case of both TPMH and CBZD, the hydrate channel axis was located along the
length of the needle shaped crystals. With this type of hydrate structure, the water tends to leave
through these channels during dehydration.[8]
The structural dynamics during dehydration of TPMH has been the subject of a previous study
by E. Suihko[10], which show that the dehydration process leaves the crystal in a high energy meta
stable state. Eventually the crystal will reorganise into a stable form. The exact dynamics of
the dehydration and the presence of stable and meta stable forms are highly dependant on the
conditions of the dehydration.
2.3
Cantilever Resonance
In the ﬁeld of micro resonators, a variety of mechanical structures are used such as cantilever,
strings, plates and membranes. Each structure has a diﬀerent solution to the deﬂection problem
and the resonance problem, but the general approach to the problems are equal. During this project
experiments were done primarily on single clamped cantilevers, but double clamped cantilevers are
also investigated. The focus of this section will be on single clamped cantilevers. An illustration
of a single-clamped cantilever is shown in ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of a single-clamped cantilever.
2.3.1
Ideal Lossless Cantilever
An ideal lossless cantilever resonator can be considered using Euler-Bernoulli beam theory, which is
used to describe the motion of the beam under certain assumptions. It is assumed that the beam
is thin, that rotational inertia and shear deformation can be neglected, the material is linearly
elastic and that the deﬂection of the beam is small.
5
==PAGE:11==
Given all these assumptions, Euler-Bernoulli beam theory describes the motion of the beam
by: [11] [12]
ρA∂2u(x, t)
∂t2
+ EIy
∂4u(x, t)
∂x4
= 0
(2.1)
Where u(x, t) is the time dependant deﬂection of the beam at a given x-coordinate, A is the
cross sectional area of the beam, ρ is the mass density of the material, E is Young’s modulus and
Iy is geometric moment of inertia around the y-axis.
By separation of variables, the solution to the diﬀerential equation can be found to be a su-
per position of the product of a time dependant harmonic function and a position dependant
displacement function:
U(x, t) =
∞
X
n=1
Un(x) exp(iωt)
(2.2)
Where ω is the angular velocity, Un(x) is the displacement function, and n is the modal number.
Inserting this result in equation 2.1 the diﬀerential equation can be simpliﬁed to:
∂4Un(x)
∂x4
exp(iωt) = β4
nU(x) exp(iωt),
β = ω2ρA
EIy
(2.3)
A general solution to the displacement function is a combination of trigonometric functions,
and can be expressed as:
Un(x) = an cos βx + bn sin βx + cn cosh βx + dn sinh βx
(2.4)
Where β is the wave number and an, bn, cn, dn are constants. The sine and cosine terms
indicates the presence of a standing wave which are responsible for the modal shape at the center
of the beam. The hyperbolic terms are responsible for the behaviour due to clamping at the ends
of the beam.[12]
In the case of a single-clamped beam, as primarily used throughout this project, it is known
that the deﬂection and the derivative of the deﬂection must be zero at the clamped ends. It is
additionally known that at the deﬂecting tip, the second and third derivative of the deﬂection must
be zero. In the case of a beam with dimensions as depicted in ﬁgure 2.1 with length L and clamped
at x = 0, the boundary conditions can be expressed as:
Un(0) = ∂Un(0)
∂x
= ∂2Un(L)
∂x2
= ∂3Un(L)
∂x3
= 0
(2.5)
The frequency equation can now be found by applying these boundary conditions to equation
2.4:
cos βL cosh βL −1 = 0
(2.6)
6
==PAGE:12==
This equation can be solved numerically for each modal number. The solution to the ﬁrst three
modes are:
λn = βnL = 1.8751, 4.6941, 7.8548
(2.7)
At modal numbers above n = 3, βnL can be reasonably approximated by βnL ≈(2n −1)π/2.
[12]
Figure 2.2 shows the ﬁrst four bending modes of a single-clamped beam with normalized am-
plitude. From these ﬁgures it can be seen that each mode has a distinct shape, with the bending
occurring in diﬀerent regions of the beam. At the nodal points there is no bending at all. This
means that a particle cantilever can be probed in diﬀerent places by analyzing diﬀerent modes,
which allows for a level of spacial resolution within the single particle resonator.
Figure 2.2: Plot of the ﬁrst four bending modes of a single-clamped beam.
The dispersion relation can now be found by inserting equation 2.4 in 2.3:
Ωn = ω = β2
n
s
EIy
ρA = λ2
n
L2
s
EIy
ρA
(2.8)
Where Iy is given as Iy = h3w
12 for a rectangular cross section beam. In the case where the width
to height ratio of the beam is w/h > 5, it is necessary to consider it as a plate and substituting
Young’s modulus E, with
E
1−ν2 , where ν is Poisson’s ratio, to account for the compression induced
deformation.[11]
7
==PAGE:13==
The dispersion relation reveals that a vibrating single clamped cantilever will not only bend
with its speciﬁc modal shapes, but each bending mode will vibrate at a speciﬁc frequency known
as the eigenfrequency.
The eigenfrequencies of the bending modes are dependant on both the
physical properties of the cantilever material, but also the geometrical structure of the cantilever
itself. With this relation, a change to the eigenfrequency can be contributed to a change in the
physical properties of the cantilever.
2.3.2
Resonator as a Lumped Element Model
Modeling the resonator as an ideal lossless system is not an accurate approximation, considering
the resonators analyzed in this project are made of a single crystal particle with often visible crystal
defects. The PTMA measurements are done at atmospheric pressure and the particle resonator is
clamped using epoxy adhesive. All of these factors will contribute to both intrinsic and extrinsic
dampening of the resonance.
The dampening eﬀect of the resonator can be modeled as a lumped element with a mass, a
spring and a dash pod, as shown in ﬁgure 2.3. Considering this resonator when actuated by a
periodic force, the force balance becomes:
meff
d2z(t)
dt2
+ cdz(t)
dt
= F0 cos ωt
(2.9)
Where z(t) is the one dimensional time dependant deﬂection, meff is the eﬀective mass of the
resonator, c is the dampening coeﬃcient and F0 is the amplitude of the periodic actuation.
The eﬀective mass of the damped resonator can be calculated through a comparison of the
kinetic energy of the lumped element to the kinetic energy of a vibrating beam. In the case of
the ﬁrst bending mode of a single-clamped beam, the eﬀective mass becomes meff = 1
4m0.[12]
The corresponding eﬀective spring constant of a bending mode can be calculated by assuming the
mode to behave like a harmonic oscillator such that:
Ωn =
s
keff,n
meff,n
(2.10)
Equation 2.9 is an inhomogeneous diﬀerential equation with the solution consisting of the
sum of the solution to the homogeneous equation and a particular solution. The solution to the
homogeneous equation representing the unactuated system is:
z(t) = z0 exp(−Ωnζt) cos

Ωn
p
1 −ζ2t

(2.11)
And a particular solution to the inhomogeneous equation is:
z(t) = z0 exp(iωt)
(2.12)
Where z0 is the amplitude of the vibration and ζ is the dampening ratio, which is given as:
8
==PAGE:14==
ζ =
c
2meffΩn
(2.13)
The size dampening ratio gives a clear indication of the vibrational behaviour of the undriven
system. If the dampening ratio is ζ ≥1 the system will be over damped, and the system will return
to its resting position by exponential decay. In the case of ζ ≤1 the system will be under damped
and will return to the resting position through oscillations with exponentially decreasing amplitude.
In this case the system will resonate at a frequency slightly lower than the eigenfrequency.[12] From
equation 2.11 the natural frequency is given as:
Ωnat = Ωn
p
1 −ζ2
(2.14)
Inserting the particular solution, equation 2.12, into the inhomogeneous diﬀerential equation
of the system, equation 2.9, the complex amplitude z0 can be calculated as:
z0 =
F0
meff
1
(Ω2n −ω2) + 2iζΩnω
(2.15)
This complex amplitude can be separated into the norm and the phase:
∥z0∥=
F0
meff
1
p
(Ω2n −ω2)2 + 4(ζΩnω)2
(2.16)
ϕ = arctan 2ζΩnω
ω2 −Ω2n
(2.17)
The phase can be interpreted as the phase lag between the periodic actuation force and the
response of the damped system.
The normalized amplitude and phase response is plotted in ﬁgure 2.3 as a function of the
frequency relative to the eigenfrequency, for diﬀerent values of the dampening ratio. Interestingly,
it can be seen that as the frequency approaches the eigenfrequency, the amplitude spikes noticeably
at the same frequency range that the phase shifts by π. The frequency at the peak amplitude is
known as the resonance frequency and can be calculated by ∂∥z0∥
∂ω
= 0. By this calculation, the
resonance frequency is given in terms of the eigenfrequency and the dampening ratio:
Ωres = Ωn
p
1 −2ζ2
(2.18)
Where Ωres is the resonance frequency. When the dampening ratio becomes very small, the
damped system approaches the behaviour of the ideal system and the resonance frequency can
reasonably be approximated to be Ωres ≈Ωn.
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Left: Sketch of the lumped element model of a damped resonator. m is the eﬀective
mass of the cantilever, c is the coeﬃcient of dampening and k is the eﬀective spring constant. Right:
The top plot shows the relative amplitude response of a damped resonator with eigenfrequency
Ω, actuated by a force with a frequency of ω. The bottom plot shows the corresponding phase
response. Figures by S. Schmid.[12]
2.3.3
The Quality Factor
In addition to the resonance frequency, the quality factor is another important parameter in the
description of a resonating system. The quality factor is deﬁned as the ratio between the total
stored potential and kinetic energy, and the energy loss during one vibrational cycle.
Q = 2π W
∆W
(2.19)
Where Q is the quality factor, W is the total stored energy and ∆W is the loss of energy over
one resonance cycle.
The quality factor can also be described by the reciprocal sum of the dissipation mechanisms:
1
Q =
1
Qair
+
1
Qmaterial
+
1
Qclamping
+ ...
(2.20)
The Q factor is a measure of the sharpness and amplitude of the resonance peak, for MEMS
applications it is most often desired to have a high Q factor in order to boost the signal. The
experiments presented in this thesis have all been done at atmospheric pressure on single particle
10
==PAGE:16==
hydrates, clamped to an aluminium base with an epoxy adhesive. It would be expected that one
of these factor will dominate, causing low Q factors.
K. L. Ekinci et al. [13] have shown that the contribution of viscous dissipation due to air is
Qair ≈100 for a double clamped NEMS resonator. As will be shown later, the Q factor of the
hydrate crystals studied throughout this project was in the order of 20 to 1000.
The Q factor can be expressed in terms of the dampening ratio by calculating the stored energy
as the maximum kinetic energy of a resonating system described by Z(t) = z0 cos(Ωrest):
W = max
"
1
2meff
dz(t)
dt
2#
= 1
2meffz2
0Ω2
res
(2.21)
The energy loss over one resonance cycle can be calculated by integration of the force applied
by dampening, multiplied by the velocity, over the time span of one resonance cycle:
∆W =
Z 2π/Ωres
0
c
dz(t)
dt
2
dt
(2.22)
Inserting into equation 2.19 and using the deﬁnition of the dampening ratio in equation 2.13,
the Q factor becomes:
Q = 2π W
∆W =
p
1 −ζ2
2ζ
(2.23)
An accurate method of extracting the Q factor from a measurement of the amplitude and phase
response is to calculate it from the slope of the phase at resonance:
Q = −Ωres
2
∂ϕ
∂ω
for
ω = Ωres
(2.24)
The software used to analyze the resonance data calculates the Q factor based on the slope of
the phase at resonance. This is done by ﬁtting to the measured phase data and extracting the
slope at the resonance frequency. This approach is similar to how the Q factor is extracted by
Maximilian Karl et al.[5] The exact function used for the ﬁt can be found in the supplementary
information of the article.
11
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Simulations of Thermal Behaviour
In this chapter the thermal behaviour of the PTMA is studied by modelling the experimental
setup in the numerical simulation tool COMSOL Multiphysics. Modelling the setup is important
to evaluate the thermal distribution of the single particle resonator. The particle is measured as a
cantilever, where a signiﬁcant fraction of the particle length is overhanging. Therefore it cannot be
reasonably assumed that the temperature of the particle is exactly the set temperature, or that the
temperature is evenly distributed across the entire length of the particle. If there are signiﬁcant
temperature deviations between the measured temperature and the actual temperature of the
particle, the results need to be adjusted accordingly. It could also be that there is a signiﬁcant
temperature diﬀerence between the ends of the particle cantilever, which could result in some
very diﬀerent dehydration dynamics. For these reasons, it is important to understand the heat
distribution of the experimental setup, in order to fully understand the thermal behaviour of the
measured particles.
To solve this task, COMSOL Multiphysics is used to construct a numerical simulation of the
thermal behaviour of the experimental setup. COMSOL Multiphysics is a modeling software tool
which solves a numerical problem based on a coupled system of partial diﬀerential equations, which
is discretized using the ﬁnite element method.[14]
When the resonance of a single particles are measured with PTMA, there are several factors
which could contribute to the distribution of heat in the particle. In the experiments done through-
out this project, the needle like particles were constructed as cantilevers by attaching the particle
to an aluminium base with an epoxy adhesive, such that the single particle cantilever was extend-
ing over the side of the aluminium base. During the experiments, the aluminium base was placed
directly on top of the heating element. The purpose of these simulations is to test how the thickness
of the base, the thickness of the epoxy, the humidity of the ambient, the width and length of the
particle itself, aﬀects the temperature distribution of the particle. In addition to this, the eﬀect of
the evaporation of the crystal water and the eﬀect of the laser will also be tested.
12
==PAGE:18==
3.1
Model Setup
This section will go through the setup of the model in COMSOL, how the geometry and mesh is
set up, and which physics, boundary conditions and approximations are used to accurately model
the system. It is assumed that the temperature ramping of the heating element is slow, such that
a solution to the stationary case is suﬃcient.
The geometry of the model is a replica of the chamber of the Linkam stage used in the PTMA
experiments. The model chamber is cylindrical with a diameter of 6.5 cm and a height of 1.5 cm.
The heating element in the center of the chamber is also cylindrical and has a diameter of 2 cm
and a height of 1 cm. The chamber geometry is visualized on ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the geometry of the model.
The black grid on the surfaces of the
geometry indicates the mesh used in these simulations.
The aluminium base is placed on top of the heating element, such that the particle is over-
hanging the center of the heating element. The aluminium base have a side length of 8 mm and a
thickness of 300 µm.
The single particle is modeled as having a square cross section with side length varying from
20 µm to 50 µm. The length of the overhanging part of the particle is varying from 300 µm to
1000 µm, while the part of the particle in contact with the base is set to 300 µm. The geometry of
the base and the particle is illustrated on ﬁgure 3.2 and 3.3.
For all the simulations done in this project, the single particle is set as TPMH, the base as
aluminum and the ambient in the chamber is set as air. The COMSOL default material properties
of air and aluminium are used, and for TPMH the material properties used are the density ρTPMH =
1.458 g/cm3, the heat capacity at constant pressure Cp,TPMH = 1176 J/(kg K) and the thermal
conductivity kTPMH = 0.2974 W/(K m).[15] Experimentally, more drugs than TPMH was tested,
13
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the model geometry and mesh. Zoomed in on the top of the heating
element.
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the geometry and mesh of the model. Zoomed in on the single particle.
The plane placed along the particle is not a structural element in the simulation, but is used to
visualize the results.
14
==PAGE:20==
but for these simulations only TPMH was used.
Being organic compounds, these drugs have
similar thermal properties, and the results of running diﬀerent drugs through the simulation would
ultimately be very time consuming without yielding very diﬀerent results.
The physics which needs to be modeled is the natural convection that occurs due to the temper-
ature induced density diﬀerence of the air in the chamber. This eﬀect will induce an airﬂow in the
chamber, which will cool the particle. In COMSOL, this eﬀect can be simulated by combining a
ﬂow physics module and a heat transfer module. Before adding a speciﬁc ﬂow module, it is relevant
to estimate the ﬂow behaviour. For a natural convection case, it seems appropriate to estimate
the Rayleigh number, which can be used to estimate the transition region between turbulent and
laminar ﬂow. The Rayleigh number can be calculated by the product of the Grashof number and
the Prandtl number, where the Grashof number describes the ratio between the buoyancy forces
and the viscous forces and the Prandtl number describes the ratio between momentum diﬀusivity
and the thermal diﬀusivity.[16]. The Prandtl number can be expressed as:
Pr = ν
α
(3.1)
Where ν is the kinematic viscosity and α is the thermal diﬀusivity. For an ideal gas at 25 ◦C
the Prandtl number is Pr = 0.71.
The Grashof number can be expressed as:
Gr = gβ(Ts −T∞)L3
ν2
(3.2)
Where g is the gravitational acceleration, β is the coeﬃcient of thermal expansion, Ts is the
surface temperature, T∞is the bulk temperature and L is the characteristic length given by the
volume to surface area of the system.
The Rayleigh number is given as the product of the two:
Ra = Gr · Pr
(3.3)
Considering a scenario where the heating element is set to 110 ◦C, the Rayleigh number can
be estimated by approximating air to be an ideal gas, such that β = 1
T , where T is determined as
the average temperature of the surface of the heating element and the surface of the chamber wall.
From these values Rayleigh’s number can be estimated to Ra = 1.53 · 107. This is signiﬁcantly
lower than the transition region from laminar to turbulent ﬂow, which occurs at Ra ≈109.[16]
From this estimation, it seems very reasonable to apply a laminar ﬂow physic to the model, in
combination with heat transfer in both ﬂuids and solids.
The laminar ﬂow module solves the Navier-Stokes equations and the continuity equation for
conservation of mass, and the boundary conditions are chosen to be no-slip. In this model, it is
additionally assumed that the ﬂuid is incompressible, and gravity is added as a force.
15
==PAGE:21==
The heat transfer module solves the heat equation using Fourier’s law. The boundary condition
on the sides and top of the heating element are set as the temperature Thotplate. The boundary
condition on the sides and top of the chamber walls are set to 25 ◦C.
The Multiphysics module combines the laminar ﬂow and the heat transfer module to a non-
isothermal ﬂow, which makes sure the temperature dependence of the ﬂuid is applied. This is
important since the temperature dependency of the density of the air in the chamber is the driving
force of the convection. When the ﬂuid is deﬁned as incompressible, the Boussinesq approximation
must be enabled for the density to be evaluated with respect to temperature. The Boussinesq
approximation neglects variation in all ﬂuid properties except density, and variation in density is
ignored unless it arises due to gravity.[17]
The physics of the model was setup in accordance with a similar case study of natural convection
made by COMSOL as a tutorial model.[18]
The model is meshed using tetrahedral elements. The elements of the mesh has a maximum
size of 3 mm and a minimum size of 8 µm and a minimum resolution of 2 in narrow regions, which
ensures a reasonable resolution of the particle itself, while also ensuring reasonable calculation
times. The mesh is visualized by the black grid of ﬁgure 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. A mesh study was
conducted to verify that the mesh resolution was high enough to converge on the correct solution.
The mesh study is presented in appendix A.
3.2
Single Particle Geometry
Using the model as setup in the previous section, the temperature proﬁle of the particle resonator
can be extracted from the simulation. The temperature proﬁle is extracted along the entire length
of the particle, at the lower edge which is in direct contact with the aluminium base.
The simulation was done using diﬀerent particle lengths and widths. The particle length is
denoted l beam and is deﬁned as the length of the overhang of the particle. This is the part of
the particle which functions as a resonator, and the model is solved for l beam = 300 µm and
l beam = 1000 µm. The length of the particle attached to the base was 300 µm in all simulations.
The particle width is denoted w beam and is deﬁned as the side length of the square cross section
of the particle.
The results of the simulation is shown by ﬁgure 3.4 and 3.5 for a set temperature of 70 ◦C
and 110 ◦C respectively.
The reason 70 ◦C and 110 ◦C are shown is that 70 ◦C is close to the
dehydration temperature, and 110 ◦C is the maximum temperature a TPMH particle would be
heated to during PTMA measurements.
The results of the simulation shown in ﬁgure 3.4 and 3.5 indicate that due to the temperature
variation along the particle, it can be expected that the temperature at the end of the particle is
5 ◦C lower at a set temperature of 110 ◦C. Similarly in the case of a set temperature of 70 ◦C, the
temperature at the end is approximately 2.5 ◦C lower. This will have some eﬀect on the resonance
16
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.4: Plot of the temperature proﬁle along the length of a TPMH particle with diﬀerent
geometries. The set temperature is 70 ◦C. The arc length is the length along the particle, starting
from the end attached to the aluminium base.
Figure 3.5: Plot of the temperature proﬁle along the length of a TPMH particle with diﬀerent
geometries.
The set temperature is 110 ◦C.
The arc length is the length along the particle,
starting from the end attached to the aluminium base.
17
==PAGE:23==
frequency measurement, since the mechanical properties of the particle is temperature dependant.
The diﬀerence in temperature variation between particles of diﬀerent widths is small enough
that variation in particle width can be neglected. Particles of diﬀerent lengths follow the same
temperature proﬁle, meaning that the total length of the particles does not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
temperature of a speciﬁc point on the particles.
One eﬀect of the temperature variation along the particle, which should be avoided, is having
the dehydration occur as separate events. One could imaging a scenario where the temperature
variation was so large that one end of the particle would dehydrate, while the other would not. The
experiments done throughout this project aim to characterize the dehydration as a single event,
so this eﬀect would invalidate all data.
Later in this thesis data will be presented, which shows that the dehydration of TPMH happens
over a temperature range of approximately 15 ◦C to 20 ◦C, depending on the ramp speed, which
means that the dehydration must happen as a single event, according to the simulation results.
For the simulations done to further investigate the thermal behaviour, the default geometry of
the particle is a length of 1000 µm and a width of 50 µm.
3.3
Eﬀects of Epoxy Adhesive
In order to clamp the particle resonator to the aluminium base, an epoxy adhesive is used. Being
an organic material, it could be expected that an epoxy layer would reduce the amount of heat
conducted from the aluminum to the particle, compared to having a direct contact. To investigate
this an additional layer of epoxy is added to the model geometry as shown by ﬁgure 3.6. The
material properties of the epoxy used in this model are entered manually, and are set as the
following: Density is set to ρepoxy = 1.15 g/cm3, the heat capacity is set to Cp,epoxy = 1.1 J/(g K)
and the thermal conductance is set to kepoxy = 0.17 W/(m K).[19]
The simulation was run for 3 diﬀerent epoxy layer thicknesses, 1 µm, 5 µm and 10 µm. The
layer thickness was denoted t epoxy and the simulation results are presented by ﬁgure 3.7 and 3.8.
From the simulation results in ﬁgure 3.7 and 3.8, it can quickly be observed that the thick-
ness of the epoxy layer has a negligible eﬀect on the temperature distribution along the particle.
Comparing with the corresponding simulations without the epoxy layer on ﬁgure 3.4 and 3.5, it is
also apparent that adding the layer makes no signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the temperature distribution
along the particle.
3.4
Eﬀects of Crystal Water Evaporation
During dehydration, the crystal water trapped in the particle is released and evaporates on the
surface of the particle. This evaporation functions as a cooling eﬀect on the particle. Due to the
nature of the crystal structure of TPMH, the crystal water is located in channels along the length of
18
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Illustration of the model geometry, zoomed in on the particle. The red square indicates
the location of the epoxy layer.
Figure 3.7: Plot of the temperature proﬁle along the length of a TPMH particle for varying
thickness of the epoxy adhesive layer. The set temperature is 70 ◦C. The arc length indicates the
length along the particle, with 0 being at the clamped end of the particle.
19
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.8: Plot of the temperature proﬁle along the length of a TPMH particle for varying
thickness of the epoxy adhesive layer. The set temperature is 110 ◦C. The arc length indicates the
length along the particle, with 0 being at the clamped end of the particle.
the needle like single particle. During dehydration, the water will mainly leave the particle through
these channels and evaporate at the ends of the particle. The simulation model is set up as a worst
case scenario, where all the crystal water leaves and evaporates through the overhanging end of
the particle. In order to simulate the eﬀect of the evaporation, two properties of TPMH must be
known, the amount of water leaving the particle and the rate at which it leaves. By comparing
the molar mass of TPMH and water the theoretical weight percentage of water in TPMH can be
calculated to be 9.1%.
The rate at which the water leaves is more tricky, as it is dependant on the rate at which the
particle is heated. To determine the rate of dehydration, TGA measurements were done at diﬀerent
heating rates of 2 ◦C/min, 5 ◦C/min and 10 ◦C/min. The results of the TGA measurements are
shown in ﬁgure 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11.
Using the maximum weight loss per unit time as shown by the TGA experiments in ﬁgure 3.9,
3.10 and 3.11, the evaporation eﬀect can be implemented in the model. It should be noted that
the evaporation is a time dependant event, and the model is set up to solve for a steady state
solution. Considering the weight loss peaks of the TGA data, it can be said that 80% of the peak
maximum is maintained for at least a minute, which is long enough that a steady state solution
can be considered a good approximation within this time range.
For comparison, the simulation was run for a set temperature of 70 ◦C even though the TGA
data shows that dehydration occurs over diﬀerent temperatures ranges, for varying heating rates.
The simulation results including the evaporation eﬀect are presented in ﬁgure 3.12.
From the simulation results in ﬁgure 3.12, it must be concluded that even considering a worst
20
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.9: TGA measurement of TPMH at 2 ◦C/min. The black plot shows the weight as a func-
tion of temperature. The red plot shows the weight loss per unit time as a function of temperature.
Figure 3.10: TGA measurement of TPMH at 5 ◦C/min.
The black plot shows the weight as
a function of temperature.
The red plot shows the weight loss per unit time as a function of
temperature.
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.11: TGA measurement of TPMH at 10 ◦C/min. The black plot shows the weight as
a function of temperature.
The red plot shows the weight loss per unit time as a function of
temperature.
Figure 3.12: Plot of the simulated temperature proﬁle along the particle resonator with the eﬀect
of the evaporating crystal water at a set temperature of 70 ◦C. The cooling eﬀect is applied at
the particle end surface. The maximum mass loss is extracted from the TGA data presented in
ﬁgure3.9, 3.10 and 3.11
22
==PAGE:28==
case scenario regarding the eﬀect of the evaporated crystal water, the temperature discrepancy is
less than 1 ◦C at the end of the particle.
During PTMA measurements, the particle can be seen visually change as it dehydrates, chang-
ing from transparent to opaque. Observing the particle as it dehydrates, it becomes clear that the
assumption regarding the crystal water leaving through channels in the crystal, is not accurate.
The particle seem to dehydrate quickly on the edges, while the bulk dehydrates more slowly. This
observation indicates that the cooling eﬀect of the evaporation will have even less impact on the
real world application.
3.5
Eﬀects of Optical Readout Laser
Measuring the resonance response of a particle using PTMA is done through an optical readout of
a laser reﬂecting oﬀthe surface of the particle, and the signal is the interpreted trough the Doppler
eﬀect in order to track the movement of the particle. The surface of the particles can be rather
rough, and the hydrate itself is transparent, which means that some amount of the laser power is
absorbed in the particle. The absorbed laser power is added to the model by adding a cylindrical
volume heat source with radius equal to the radius of the laser spot extending through the particle.
The implemented laser spot geometry is shown in ﬁgure 3.13.
The exact size of the laser spot is dependant on how well the user is able to focus it, but a good
approximation is to use a laser spot radius of 3 µm for the simulation model. To model the eﬀect
of the laser, it is also necessary to know the amount of power absorbed by the particle, but this
can be a diﬃcult property to estimate. The laser in the LDV is a class 2 laser, with a maximum
power output of 0.4 mW, but the percentage of power absorbed by the particle is unknown, and is
dependant on the individual particle.[20] It seems reasonable to assume that the power absorption
is somewhere between 1% to 10%, so the simulation was run for diﬀerent values within this range.
The results of the simulation is shown in ﬁgure 3.14.
Before analysing the results of this simulation, it should be noted that during measurements,
the laser is only active on a speciﬁc spot for around a tenth of a second, while the model solves for a
steady state solution with a stationary laser. This means that the simulation results cannot be di-
rectly interpreted with regards to the case of the temperature proﬁle during PTMA measurements.
However the results will give an indication to the importance of the laser in this scenario.
Considering the results presented by ﬁgure 3.14, the laser does have a signiﬁcant impact on
the particle temperature, especially because the temperature proﬁle is extracted from the particle
edge, while the laser spot is located at the center. The laser power in the experimental setup is
adjustable, and these simulations results are evidence that this setting should be adjusted with
care. Increasing the laser power will usually result in a better signal, but could come at the cost
of uneven and unpredictable heating of the particle.
Experiments could be made which could determine the absorbed power of a particle, but there
23
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.13: Illustration of the model geometry, zoomed in on the particle resonator. The red
cylinder indicates the volume which is heated by the laser.
Figure 3.14: Plot of the temperature proﬁle along the particle resonator at a set temperature of
70 ◦C for diﬀerent fractions of absorbed power.
24
==PAGE:30==
are some issues associated with this approach. First, single particles can have signiﬁcant variance
in physical properties from particle to particle, so it would be necessary to measure the power
absorption of each particle.
Second, as the particle dehydrates, the optical properties change,
making it very diﬃcult to determine the power absorption in the area of interest.
Now that a model is set up which includes the eﬀect of the epoxy adhesive, the evaporation
of crystal water and the laser, it would be interesting to compare the temperature proﬁle of
the particle to the temperature of the ambient surrounding the particle.
Figure 3.15 shows a
temperature surface plot of the particle and its surroundings, seen from a side view. Comparing
the temperature of the particle to the ambient, it is clear that there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence,
which means that the particle is too thin and too long to eﬀectively transport heat from the base
to the overhanging part of the particle.
Figure 3.15: Surface temperature distribution of the particle resonator with the surrounding am-
bient. The particle is seen from a side view, and the temperature is extracted from a surface
that is in plane with the side surface of the particle. The black lines outline the particle and the
aluminium base where it is attached.
3.6
Eﬀect of Base Thickness
From ﬁgure 3.15 it could be concluded that the ambient temperature is the dominant factor in
regards to the particle temperature. This realization gives rise to a potential solution to minimize
the temperature variance along the particle, which is to move the particle closer to the heating
element. The easiest way to reduce the distance between the particle and the heating element is
to reduce the thickness of the aluminum base. This change is easily implemented in the model,
and the result of the simulation is shown in ﬁgure 3.16, with t base denoting the thickness of the
25
==PAGE:31==
base. For this simulation, the eﬀect of the epoxy, the water evaporation and the laser were not
considered.
Figure 3.16: Plot of the temperature distribution along the particle at a set temperature of 110 ◦C
for diﬀerent base thicknesses.
As predicted, the thickness of the aluminium base has a signiﬁcant impact on the temperature
distribution. Reducing the thickness from 300 µm to 100 µm, reduces the end to end temperature
discrepancy from 5 ◦C to 2 ◦C. With this information in mind, it is desirable to situate the particle
as close as possible to the heating element, leaving room only for the particle to vibrate freely.
The issue with this approach is that reducing the base thickness reduces the rigidity of the base.
Even at a thickness of 300 µm, which was used in the experiments during this project, the base is
challenging to fabricate by milling without causing any bending.
Another possible solution to reduce the temperature discrepancy is to encapsulate the particle
resonator in a copper cage. This approach is investigated through simulation in appendix B.
3.7
Eﬀects of Humidity
In addition to experiments investigating the dehydration of hydrates through PTMA, experiments
investigating the re-hydration are done in a similar fashion using a humidity chamber. For these
experiments it would be relevant to know the eﬀect the humidity has on the heating of the particle.
The presence of humid air can be added to the simulation to determine the eﬀect on the temperature
distribution along the particle. The humid air in the chamber is implemented in COMSOL by using
a build in function which adds a humidity dependency to the material properties of the air. The
relative humidity is labeled p humid, and is relative to 25 ◦C air at a pressure of 1 atm.
The simulation results including air humidity on ﬁgure 3.17 clearly indicate that the humidity
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.17: Plot of the temperature distribution along the particle at a set temperature of 110 ◦C
for diﬀerent values of the relative humidity. The 3 plot are directly on top of one another, implying
that the humidity has no eﬀect at all.
in the chamber has insigniﬁcant eﬀect on the temperature distribution along the particle. The
diﬀerence between 100% humidity and 0% humidity is too small to distinguish the plot from each
other.
3.8
Validity of the Model
Whenever simulation is used in order to investigate real phenomena, it is important to ask the
question: What assumptions does the model make? And how accurately do these assumptions
describe reality?
In the model presented in this thesis, the hydrate particle is assumed to be isotropic and
stationary, which experiments have shown is not the case. The drug particles are each unique with
their own structure and defects. Simulations show however, that the temperature of the ambient
dominates, so these factors will likely have negligible eﬀect. The assumption that the particle is
stationary is surprisingly untrue as well. The stress induced by dehydration can in some cases be
large enough to visibly bend the particle, which ﬁgure 3.16 shows has a signiﬁcant impact on the
temperature.
Regarding the temperature boundary conditions, having the top of the chamber, which is only
0.5 cm from the heating element, be set to room temperature, is not an accurate assumption in all
cases. Ramping from room temperature to 110 ◦C and back at a rate of 5 ◦C/min will leave the
heating element at a high temperature for a long time. Eventually the equipment will heat up,
making the boundary conditions of the model inaccurate.
27
==PAGE:33==
It should also be noted that in the model, the thermal contact from particle to base and from
base to heating element is assumed to be perfect. This assumption will be wrong in every real
world application. But judging from the simulations investigating the epoxy layer and the base
thickness in ﬁgure 3.8 and 3.16, the error caused by this assumption is insigniﬁcant.
28
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Experimental Methods
The purpose of this chapter is to give a brief description of the core functionalities of the experi-
mental methods and equipment used to generate the data presented in this thesis. The methods
described in this chapter are, PTMA, TGA, DSC and XRPD. In addition to these experimental
methods, the process of re-crystallization of the model hydrates is also described.
4.1
Drug Crystallization
In order to create the needle like hydrate crystals, enabling the drug to function as a cantilever
resonator, a supersaturated solution is made from the anhydrous drug and a solution including
water. The supersaturated solution is made by adding more than the soluble amount of drug to
the solution and then heating and stirring the mixture until all drug is dissolved. Once all the drug
has been dissolved, the mixture is left to slowly cool and evaporate. At this point, the solution will
become super saturated and eventually nucleation will happen and the hydrate crystal will start
to grow. After a few days the crystals will be fully formed. The ﬁnal shape and size of the crystal
are dependant on the solution, the amount of drug added and the drug itself.
TPMH crystals were grown in a 40 ml water. Theophylline has a solubility of 8.3 mg/ml in
water and an extra 50% drug was added to make the super saturated solution, resulting in a
total of 498 mg Theophylline. The mixture was heated to 70 ◦C before it was left to cool and
evaporate.[21] This resulted in needle shaped crystals with square cross section. The length of the
crystals varies from 1000 µm to 5000 µm and the width of the crystals varies from 20 µm to 200 µm.
The CBZD crystal was prepared in a 40 ml solution of 1 part water to 2 parts ethanol, corre-
sponding to an ethanol mass fraction of 0.62. A previous study have experimentally determined
the solubility of CBZ in a water ethanol solution to be 22.6 mg/ml at an ethanol mass fraction of
0.6 and at room temperature.[22] An additional 10% drug was added to the solution, resulting in a
total of 996 mg CBZ. The solution was heated to 65 ◦C before it was left to cool. This resulted in
rectangular plate shaped crystals. The length of the crystals varies from 2000 µm to 7000 µm, the
29
==PAGE:35==
width of the crystals varies from 200 µm to 800 µm and the thickness varies from 50 µm to 500 µm.
4.2
X-Ray Powder Diﬀraction
The periodic structure of a crystal can diﬀract electromagnetic waves by the same principal as a
grating. This phenomena can be used to measure the inter-atomic distances in a crystal, which
can be used to study the structural composition. A monochromatic X-ray source is typically used
for this purpose as the wavelength is similar to the spacing between atoms. When the x-rays hit
the crystal lattice they will either be scattered by the crystal plane, or pass through to the next
plane. At a speciﬁc angle, the distance between crystal planes will be such that the x-rays scattered
by each plane will be in phase, illustrated by ﬁgure 4.1. The relation between the crystal plane
distance, the incident angle and the wavelength is described by Bragg’s law:
sin θ = nλ
2d
(4.1)
Where θ is the incident angle of the x-ray, n is an integer, λ is the wavelength and d is the
distance between the parallel crystal planes.
When the sample is in powder form, as opposed to being a single crystal, the orientation of each
crystalline grain in the powder can be assumed to be random. This means that all the diﬀerent
inter-atomic distances shows up in the diﬀraction pattern at the same time as rings. A detector
can be swept across a desired range of angles to measure the angle at which each peak intensity
occurs. By knowing the angles of diﬀraction, the inter atomic distance can be calculated with
Bragg’s law.[23] An illustration of a diﬀractometer setup is shown by ﬁgure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Left: X-ray diﬀractometer setup. X-rays are beamed from the source onto the sample.
The diﬀracted x-rays are detected by sweeping the detector across a chosen range of angles. Right:
Illustration of diﬀraction by a crystal lattice. Figure from chem.libretexts.org [24].
30
==PAGE:36==
4.3
Thermal Gravimetric Analysis
In its essence, thermal gravimetric analysis is a very simple method. A very sensitive scale measures
the weight of the sample as it is heated in a controlled environment. Changes in the weight of
the sample reveals the occurrence of a thermal event.
The nature of this technique makes it
useful only when investigating certain thermal events where there is some transfer of mass, such as
decomposition, oxidation or dehydration.[25] TGA is commonly used method of determining the
water content of hydrates.
The TGA used is a Discovery TGA running TRIOS software. The samples were prepared by
spreading a few milligrams of drug on an aluminium pan, to increase heat conduction to the sample
during the experiment. Measurements were run in triplicates.
4.4
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry
DSC functions by heating both the sample and a known reference at the same rate, while ensuring
that there is zero diﬀerence in temperature between them. The diﬀerence in the applied power
between the sample and the reference is recorded. This diﬀerence in the supplied energy reveals
thermal events where energy is exchanged between the sample and the ambient. This technique
was used to determine the enthalpy of the dehydration of the model hydrates.[26]
The equipment used to run DSC experiments is a Discovery DSC running Trios software.
Samples were prepared by sealing approximately 5 mg drug in an aluminium pan. A small hole
was poked the pan lid to ensure resulting moisture could diﬀuse out of the system. Measurements
were run in triplicates.
4.5
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis
DMA is a technique for measuring the mechanical response of a sample as a function of temperature
or time. In practise, this is done by clamping the sample and exposing it to an oscillating force at
a chosen frequency, measuring the response. Measuring the amplitude and phase response of the
sample in relation to the applied force, the elastic modulus and the loss modulus of the sample
can be calculated. An example of a sample response is illustrated by ﬁgure 4.2.
The DMA method measures the complex modulus, E∗= E′ + iE′′, where the real part E′
is known as the elastic modulus and the imaginary part E′′ is known as the loss modulus. The
material dampening can be calculated as the ratio between these moduli:[27]
E′′
E′ = tan δ
(4.2)
The DMA experiments presented in this thesis were done using powdered samples. The con-
sequence of this is that the value of the moduli becomes diﬃcult to interpret, since they become
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.2: Example of a response curve using DMA. Fd is the oscillating force, Fs is the clamping
force. Figure by K. P. Menard.[27]
dependant on the eﬀective area of sample exposed to the oscillating force. Additionally, it should
be considered that the crystal direction of the powder is randomized, which means that the elastic
modulus measured via DMA is not equivalent to the Young’s modulus. This is relevant when com-
paring the DMA method to the PTMA method, where measurements are done on single particle
samples with anisotropic Young’s modulus.
The purpose of using DMA in this study is to investigate the change of the mechanical properties
of the hydrate during dehydration, which can still be done by measuring the relative change of the
moduli during temperature ramp.
The DMA experiments were done on a DMA Q800 from TA instruments.
The needle like
crystals were spread evenly in a steel tray and clamped in the instrument with a matching steel
lid. Measurements were performed with amplitude 20 µm and frequency 1 Hz, at a temperature
ramp of 5 ◦C/min from room temperature to 100 ◦C. Measurements were done in triplicates.
4.6
Particle Thermomechanical Analysis
PTMA is a thermal technique based on laser Doppler vibrometry.
The concept of LDV is an
optically based readout of the amplitude and velocity of the vibrational movement of a given
sample. This is done through interference between a measurement beam and a reference beam.
The scattered light of the measurement beam on the vibrating sample is collected and combined
with the reference beam through interference. The diﬀerence in frequency modulation and phase
between the two beams is used to extract the velocity and the deﬂection of the resonating object.
An illustration of a typical LDV setup is shown in ﬁgure 4.3.
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.3: Setup of a typical laser Doppler vibrometer. The laser beam is spilt in two, one for
measuring and one for reference. The measurement beam is directed to the sample where the beam
is scattered on the surface. The scattered light is frequency shifted and phase shifted due to the
Doppler eﬀect and the change in the optical path length. The beams are then combined trough
interference and directed at the detector. The reference beam is frequency shifted by a known
amount using a Bragg cell, to allow for the detection of the direction of the Doppler frequency
shift. Figure from polytec.com.
A typical LDV setup functions by splitting a HeNe-Laser into a measurement beam and a
reference beam using a beam splitter. The measurement beam is then directed at the vibrating
sample, where the light will be scattered. Due to the movement of the sample, the optical path
length changes as a function of time, resulting in a phase shift of the beam. This time dependant
phase shift manifests as a shift in frequency of the beam. This eﬀect is know as the Doppler eﬀect
and the resulting frequency shift can be expressed in term of the velocity of the sample:[28]
∆f = 2v(t)
λ
(4.3)
Where ∆f is the frequency shift, v(t) is the velocity of the sample and λ is the wavelength of
the laser.
A fraction of Doppler shifted light will be scattered back and is combined with the reference
beam through interferometry. Prior to combining the beams, the reference beam is passed through
a Bragg cell which shifts the frequency of the reference by a set amount, typically 40 MHz. The
frequency shift of the reference is added, such that the resulting signal of the interference between
the measurement beam and the reference beam is a frequency modulated beam. When the sample
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.4: Left: The inside of the Linkam hotstage. The heating element is located at the center
of the chamber and the aluminum base is attached using a carbon pad. A single particle cantilever
resonator can be seen. Right: Overview of the vibrometer setup. The LDV is mounted on an
optical table. The laser beam is directed through the microscope lens onto the hotstage placed
below. The piezo speaker is located in the 3D printed lid. The screen located on the vibrometer
shows a live preview of the measured particle.
moves towards the laser, the modulation frequency increases, and when it moves away from the
laser it decreases.
The frequency modulation is proportional to the velocity of the sample, as
described by the Doppler eﬀect in equation 4.3.[28]
For many applications, it is beneﬁcial to measure the resonance response in many points across
a sample surface in order to map the response. The deﬂection measured in each point is aligned
by an actuation trigger.
The LDV system used throughout this project is a Polytec MSA-500, in combination with a
Linkam hotstage, a temperature controller and a humidity controller they form the PTMA setup.
Picture of the setup is shown in ﬁgure 4.4. All PTMA experiments performed during this project
used a 5X optical zoom. A custom designed 3D printed lid is used as the hotstage lid. The lid is
used to clamp and focus a piezo speaker which is used as an actuator. The lid is courtesy of Peter
Emil Larsen.
Before each experiment, a custom grid of measurement points is determined. This is an im-
34
==PAGE:40==
portant and fairly laborious process which is especially important when working with hydrates,
since these often have very poor signal in large areas of the particle surface. Maintaining a decent
signal throughout the entire experiment on a number of measurement points is required to be able
to track the vibrational modes during the dehydration of the particle. Dehydration changes the
optical properties of the particle, which often reduces the signal even further, and in some cases
the dehydration induced stress can even bend the particle, causing the particle to be out of focus
or causing measurement points to be moved to low signal areas. Due to these eﬀects, it can be
necessary to adjust the measurement points during the measurement, but this needs to be done
quickly to reduce the amount of lost data. It is also necessary to adjust the focus during thermal
measurements, due to thermal expansion.
The measurement is set up by choosing a frequency resolution and the bandwidth of the mea-
surement. Each scan will measure the vibrational amplitude as a function of the frequency at each
point in the custom grid. The software plots the response at each point and interpolates the results
to create an animation of the movement of the grid for any chosen frequency. By inspecting the
movement of the grid, the mode of bending can be determined.
The particle resonator samples are prepared by hand picking particles that look clean, uniformly
shaped and have appropriate dimensions. The chosen particles are then each glued to a 300 µm
thick aluminium base to create a cantilever resonator.
4.6.1
Tracking software
The data processing of the PTMA experiments was done using a custom script written in MAT-
LAB. The purpose of the software was to track the resonance peak of a single resonance mode
throughout the entire experiment and calculate the corresponding Q factor and apply appropriate
post processing.
The functionality of the software can be understood as a multi-step process. First, the data
is loaded and each measurement point is inspected manually. Second, all the noisy measurement
points are removed based on the manual inspection. Next is the actual tracking of the resonance
peaks, which is a semi-automated process. Last is the post processing, which includes the calcula-
tion of the resonance frequency and the Q factor, in addition to ﬁltering and smoothing.
When the data is loaded, the temperature at each measurement is determined by inputting
the temperature proﬁle used in the experiment, and matching these to the time stamps of the
data ﬁles. The temporal development of each measurement point in the grid is inspected manually
in order to discard noisy or low signal measurements. The number of measurement points used
for PTMA experiments in this project was typically between 20 and 35.
For the purpose of
tracking the vibrational modes, it is important that the tracked mode is visible throughout the
entire experiment. Figure 4.5 shows the raw data of two diﬀerent measurement points of the same
PTMA experiment, where the resonance peak of a 3rd bending mode of a single particle hydrate is
35
==PAGE:41==
marked by a red line. The left plot is an example of a measurement point that would be included in
the tracking, while the plot on the right would be discarded due to the large amount of consecutive
measurements with insuﬃcient signal.
The tracking of the resonance peaks is done by manually selecting the initial resonance peak.
The software is able to automatically track the following resonance peaks if they shift less than a
set maximum peak shift range and the signal to noise level is above a set value. The resonance
frequency is tracked by calculating a ﬁt to the selected peak. The tracking interface with the peak
ﬁt is shown in ﬁgure 4.6.
The post processing calculates the Q factor based on a ﬁt to the phase and ﬁlters the ﬁtted
results based on the goodness of ﬁt factor. The post processing is ﬁnished by applying smoothing
to the ﬁltered results to highlight the overall tendency of the vibrational mode during dehydration.
36
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.5: Left: Raw data of a single measurement point (#9) of a PTMA experiment. The red
line indicates the resonance peak of the 3rd bending mode of a single particle hydrate. Notice
that the resonance peak is trackable throughout the experiment. Right: Raw data of a single
measurement point (#10) of a PTMA experiment. The red line indicates the resonance peak of
the 3rd mode of the particle. Notice that the resonance peak is not trackable throughout the entire
experiment due to a streak of measurements with insuﬃcient signal.
Figure 4.6: The tracking interface, showing the peak ﬁt to the amplitude with a red line and the
phase ﬁt in the subplot indicated by the blue line.
37
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Investigation of Hydrate
Dehydration by Conventional
Methods
The purpose of this chapter is to form an experimental foundation of the hydrate dehydration mech-
anism. This foundation will be used as a point of comparison for the PTMA method. Speciﬁcally
TGA, DSC, DMA and XRPD have been used to study the dehydration mechanism.
To ensure consistent behaviour, the thermal behaviour of the hydrate is measured in the context
of a 5 ◦C ramp from room temperature to a temperature well above the onset of dehydration. 100 ◦C
for TPMH and 120 ◦C for CBZD. The method of applying the thermal eﬀect is important as the
rate of dehydration is dependant on the ramping speed, as shown by TGA data on ﬁgure 3.9, 3.10
and 3.11.
5.1
Thermal Gravimetric Analysis
Triplicate TGA measurements of TPMH and CBZD at 5 ◦C/min ramp are presented in ﬁgure 5.1.
The triplicate TGA measurements showed a consistent weight loss of approximately 9.5% for
TPMH and 13.7% for CBZD. These values correspond well with the theoretical values of 9.1% for
TPMH and 13.2% for CBZD. The discrepancy between theoretical and experimental results is most
likely due to the samples being slightly moist, as the sample was ﬁltered from the supersaturated
solution shortly before it was analyzed.
Seeing as these TGA measurement are done well below the melting point of both of the anhy-
drous forms of the drugs, 273 ◦C[29] for TP and 190 ◦C[30] for CBZ, it is to be expected that the
only cause of weight loss is dehydration.
From the TGA data presented in ﬁgure 5.1 it can be seen that TPMH slowly dehydrates at
38
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.1: Left: TGA measurement of the dehydration of TPMH. Right: TGA measurement of
the dehydration of CBZD.
temperatures between room temperature and 60 ◦C.
Above 60 ◦C the dehydration accelerates
noticeably, until it plateaus at a weight loss of approximately 9.5% just above 80 ◦C. For CBZD a
slow dehydration also is observed between 40 ◦C and 60 ◦C. The rate of dehydration of CBZD can
been seen to shift at approximately 85 ◦C. The additional step seen in the dehydration of CBZD
is due to CBZD containing 2 moles of water for each mole of CBZ. Previous studies have shown
that CBZD dehydrates as a two step process as a result of diﬀerence in bond strength between the
two attached water molecules.[31]
The dehydration mechanism as measured by TGA of TPMH and CBZD are in agreement with
previous studies.[31][8]
5.2
Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry
Figure 5.2: Left: DSC measurement of the dehydration of TPMH. Right: DSC measurement of
the dehydration of CBZD.
39
==PAGE:45==
Triplicate DSC measurements of TPMH and CBZD at 5 ◦C/min ramp are presented in ﬁgure
5.2.
Comparing the DSC measurement of TPMH in ﬁgure 5.2 to the TGA measurement in ﬁgure
5.1, the heat ﬂow changes signiﬁcantly at the same temperature as the mass loss sets in. The
negative sign of the heat ﬂow means that the sample requires additional energy to heat, which is
to be expected due to the evaporation of the crystal water. This is clear evidence that this indeed
is the dehydration event. Similarly for CBZD, a clear change in the heat ﬂow can be observed to
match the TGA measurement. From the DSC measurement, the two stages of the dehydration of
CBZD can also be observed, and show results matching the TGA results.
From the DSC measurement of TPMH, it should be noted that the dehydration has two peaks,
ﬁrst a very sharp peak followed by a soft peak. According to E. Suihko[8] the ﬁrst sharp peak corre-
sponds to the release of the crystal water and the second soft peak corresponds to the evaporation
of the released crystal water.
The triplicate measurements show a consistent tendency of the heat ﬂow for both TPMH and
CBZD. Even though the tendencies are similar, the triplicate curves are not as identical as the TGA
measurements shown in ﬁgure 5.1. This diﬀerence could be explained, as the DSC measures more
complex dynamics compared to the TGA, which is a very simple method at its core. Additionally,
it is important to consider the sample size used for each method. The single crystal particles
measured in these experiments are large compared to particles of powdered samples. So when a
very small amount of sample is used, the particle size distribution can vary signiﬁcantly between
measurements, as the measured sample can consist of less than 10 individual particles. This is
especially true in the case of DSC measurements of CBZD. As described in the method chapter,
the particle size of CBZD is large compared to TPMH, and the sample size used in the DSC is
approximately 5 mg, so some variation due to a diﬀerence in particle size is to be expected.
5.3
Dynamic Mechanical Analysis
The triplicate DMA measurements presented in ﬁgure 5.3 show the mechanical response of TPMH
and CBZD during the dehydration. From this ﬁgure CBZD appears to have a relatively consistent
response, both in terms of the elastic modulus and the loss modulus. The elastic modulus of TPMH
does have an inconsistency in the triplicate measurements, which is curious considering that the
loss modulus of the corresponding measurement is consistent with the other two measurements.
From the two similar measurements of TPMH, elastic modulus can be seen to slightly reduce
until the temperature is approximately at the temperature of dehydration, as seen from TGA
experiments. Above this temperature there is a slight increase of the elastic modulus, follow by a
sharp drop. The loss modulus of TPMH shows a rise to a peak corresponding to the sharp drop
in elastic moduli.
The mechanical response of CBZD follows a similar pattern to that of TPMH, considering
40
==PAGE:46==
Figure 5.3: A) and B): DMA measurement of the elastic modulus of TPMH and CBZD. C) and
D): DMA measurement of the loss modulus of TPMH and CBZD. E) and F): DMA measurement
of the dampening of TPMH and CBZD.
41
==PAGE:47==
CBZD has two separate, but overlapping, dehydration events.
The elastic modulus increases
slightly before a signiﬁcant drop. Leading up the sharp drop in elastic modulus, the loss modulus
is increasing and peaks at the same temperature as the elastic modulus starts to drop. Judging
from these responses, it seems as if the crystal slowly reorganizes prior to the dehydration event,
causing the loss modulus to increase signiﬁcantly. As the particle starts to dehydrate, the elastic
modulus drops signiﬁcantly as it transforms to the anhydrous form. As the dehydration completes
and the crystal relaxes, the loss modulus reduces.
Comparing the dehydration events measured by DMA to the events measured by TGA and
DSC, the events measured through DMA can be seen to occur at higher temperature. One cannot
be sure that the mechanical response of the dehydration of hydrate is not delayed, but it seems
likely that onset of the dehydration would be diﬀerent in the DMA, considering the diﬀerent way
the bulk material is treated. In TGA and DSC, the sample particles are measured in an open
environment. In the DMA the sample particles are mechanically clamped, which results in the
needle like particle being ground to a powder. Additionally, the tray in which the sample is clamped
creates a much more sealed environment than TGA and DSC. These two factors will contribute to
altering the dehydration behavior. The discrepancy in the temperature could also be due to the
DMA having temperature lag issues at higher ramping rates.
As described by equation 4.2, the internal dampening of the sample is calculated as the ratio
between the elastic modulus and the loss modulus. With this relation in mind, ﬁgure 5.3 shows
how the change in internal dampening is dominated by the loss modulus in case of both TPMH
and CBZD. In the case of TPMH, the relative change of the loss modulus is between 140% and
185%, while the relative change of the elastic modulus is between 9% and 15%. This means that
the Q-factor of a hydrate resonator can be expected to change through dehydration, with little
eﬀect on the resonance frequency.
Having DMA measurements with a temperature cycle including both heating and cooling, to
match the temperature cycle of the PTMA experiments, would have been optimal. The DMA used
for these experiments was unfortunately unable to cool at a set rate.
5.4
X-Ray Powder Diﬀraction
X-ray powder diﬀraction is used to verify the solid state form of a material.[23] In this case
the presence of the hydrate form of CBZ and TP are investigated. Each peak in the measured
spectrum corresponds to a characteristic inter molecular distance. The combination of diﬀraction
peaks acts like a ﬁngerprint for the solid state form of the drug. Utilizing the Cambridge structural
database[32], a simulated spectrum of the pure powdered drug can be used as a point of comparison.
Figure 5.4 presents the comparison of the XRPD spectrum of both TPMH and CBZD compared
to the simulated spectrum. The red curves in the ﬁgure are the experimental values and the black
curves are the simulated values.
42
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.4: Left: XRPD measurement of TPMH. The red curve is the measure spectrum of
the TPMH sample. The black curve is simulated spectrum for powdered TPMH. Right: XRPD
measurement of CBZD. The red curve is the measure spectrum of the CBZD sample. The black
curve is simulated spectrum for powdered CBZD.
Comparing the experimental spectrum of TPMH to the simulated spectrum, the peaks can be
seen to appear in similar positions, conﬁrming that this re-crystallization did produce TPMH. The
relative amplitude of the peaks are not similar, which is due to the sample not being powder, but
quite large crystals where the exposed crystal planes are diﬀerently distributed.
Comparing the CBZD spectrum, similar peaks can be seen between the experimental and the
simulated data. The relative amplitude is diﬀerent in the case of CBZD as well, due to the just
described eﬀect. The experimental spectrum of CBZD also shows an intense peak which does not
match the simulated spectrum. This means that the sample contains something other than CBZD.
This impurity could be cross contamination of another drug, but it seems more likely that it is the
anhydrous form of CBZ, which is present in the sample due to the drug not being totally dissolved
during re-crystallization, or due to dehydration at room temperature. The dehydration at room
temperature should not be an issue in this experiment, as the crystals were extracted from the
solution less than an hour before the XRPD experiment.
43
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Thermal Response of Single
Particle Resonance
In the previous chapter, the dehydration dynamics of TPMH and CBZD was explored using a
range of thermal analysis techniques in order to separate the diﬀerent dehydration responses, such
as weight loss and mechanical properties, as a function of the temperature. The purpose of this
chapter is to introduce similar measurements using the PTMA method and to evaluate the method
by comparing with the results of the conventional methods presented in the previous chapter.
This chapter is separated into two sections. The ﬁrst section will present a quantitative ap-
proach to the method with a focus on single particle CBZD. In this section the reproducibility of
the PTMA method is investigated, both by tracking the modes of multiple diﬀerent particles, and
by tracking multiple modes of the same particle.
In the second section, the focus is on resonators of single particle TPMH, and the results of
the PTMA method will also be compared to Raman imaging of single particle dehydration by P.
Okeyo[33].
6.1
Carbamazepine Dihydrate
In this section, measurements of multiple diﬀerent modes of the same particle will be presented and
compared in addition to similar modes of diﬀerent particles. In addition to this reproducibility
study, measurements of a double clamped cantilever and a CBZD particle grown in a solution
containing PVP polymer will also be presented.
The CBZD single particles were all measured through two thermal cycles. First, a 5 ◦C/min
ramp from room temperature to 120 ◦C and back, to analyze the resonance response to the de-
hydration. The Second thermal cycle was a 10 ◦C/min ramp from room temperature to 120 ◦C
and back to analyse the resonance response of the corresponding anhydrous particle, to ensure the
44
==PAGE:50==
response during the ﬁrst ramping indeed is due to dehydration of the particle.
6.1.1
Tracking of Multiple Resonance Modes
In the theory chapter, it was shown how a single clamped beam will vibrate at speciﬁc discrete
frequencies dependant on the physical properties of the beam, and how the bending at each of the
allowed frequencies will result in a unique bending shape as illustrated by ﬁgure 2.2. Due to the
diﬀerence in shape, the diﬀerent bending modes will apply stress in diﬀerent parts of the particle.
Analyzing the resonance response of diﬀerent modes during dehydration of a single particle could for
this reason potentially be used to extract more information about the thermomechanical response
in diﬀerent regions of a single particle. Although each bending mode will probe diﬀerent regions of
the particle, a level of similarity is to be expected of the resonance response of each bending mode.
The raw data of a measurement capturing the response of the ﬁrst three bending modes and
the ﬁrst torsional mode are presented in ﬁgure 6.1 - 6.4. The raw data of the second temperature
ramp, analysing the anhydrous particle, can be found in appendix C.
Figure 6.1: Raw data of the 1st bending mode of the CBZD single particle.
The raw data plot of the diﬀerent bending modes shown in ﬁgure 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4 shows
the tracked resonance frequency as black dots, and the Q factor calculated from the phase slope ﬁt
as red dots. The pink line is a result of ﬁltering and smoothing of the raw Q factor measurements.
The blue line is the corresponding processed resonance frequency data.
The top of the ﬁgure
shows a row of images of the measured single particle resonator on a time axis spanning the entire
experiment. Over the top of the images is a ﬁt to the image intensity. The Intensity of the image
is used to visually conﬁrm the dehydration, as the particle transforms from transparent to opaque.
The cyan line, which is also drawn on the main plot, indicates the time where the measured
45
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.2: Raw data of the 2nd bending mode of the CBZD single particle.
Figure 6.3: Raw data of the 3rd bending mode of the CBZD single particle.
46
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.4: Raw data of the 1st torsional mode of the CBZD single particle.
intensity is halfway in between hydrous and anhydrous. The resonance frequency and the Q factor
at the transformation time is indicated by the dashed black and red lines.
As expected, the ﬁrst bending mode has the lowest resonance frequency followed by the second
bending mode and then the third. Comparing the initial resonance frequency of the ﬁrst three
bending modes with the description of an ideal lossless cantilever given by equation 2.8 and 2.7,
the relative distance in frequency ﬁts reasonably well. By calculating the fractions λ2
2
λ2
1 and λ2
3
λ2
2 , the
theory suggest that the second bending mode should have a resonance frequency 6.27 times higher
compared to the ﬁrst bending mode. In the case of the measured particle, the resonance frequency
of the second mode is approximately 7.4 times higher. Similarly, the theory suggests the resonance
frequency of the third bending mode should be 2.8 times higher compared the second mode. For
this particle it is approximately 3 times higher.
When analysing processed data, it is important to still consider the raw data. From ﬁgures 6.1
- 6.4, the ﬁltered resonance frequency can be seen to represent the raw data very well. However,
the same thing cannot be said of the Q factor. Both the measurements of the hydrous and the
anhydrous particle, shown in appendix C, reveals the Q factor to be ﬂuctuating and often noisy.
For this reason, one should be careful when drawing conclusions based on the ﬁltered Q factor
curves. It should also be noted that some of the ﬁltered curves have a rough texture, which is an
artifact of the smoothing and the order the data points are extracted. This artifact can easily be
ignored.
To conﬁrm that the resonance response is due to dehydration, and in order to compare these
results with the conventional methods, the resonance frequency response and the Q factor response
of each mode is plotted as a function of temperature. Each plot containing the measurements of
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure 6.5: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle. The red and blue dots indicate the initial
response.
Figure 6.6: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 2nd bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle. The red and blue dots indicate the initial
response.
48
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.7: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 3rd bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle. The red and blue dots indicate the initial
response.
Figure 6.8: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st torsional
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle. The red and blue dots indicate the initial
response.
49
==PAGE:55==
both the ﬁrst and second temperature cycles. Since the temperature cycle is from room temperature
to 120 ◦C and back, the initial response is marked with a dot.
The resonance frequency and Q factor response of the ﬁrst bending mode is shown in ﬁgure
6.5. The resonance frequency drops initially, but regains and stabilizes above 60 ◦C and drops a
second time when cooling from 120 ◦C. The second temperature cycle shows a consistent softening
with increasing temperature and is reversible during cooling. This indicates that after the ﬁrst
temperature cycle, the particle is in a stable anhydrous form. The Q factor also drops signiﬁcantly
during the initial drop in resonance frequency and then slowly regains. At approximately 120 ◦C
the Q factor regains to level of the stable anhydrous form.
The resonance response of the second and third bending mode in ﬁgure 6.6 and 6.7 are very
similar. It drops steadily from room temperature to approximately 80 ◦C. After the drop the
resonance frequency regains slowly until it stabilizes as the stable anhydrous form. The Q factor
response of the second bending mode does seem to stabilize in the anhydrous form along with
the resonance frequency, but the Q factor response of the third bending mode does not show any
consistency.
The response of the ﬁrst torsional mode shown in ﬁgure 6.8 show a somewhat similar resonance
frequency response as the second and third bending modes below 70 ◦C. After the initial drop, the
resonance frequency regains slightly before slowly dropping again and stabilizing as the anhydrous
form. The Q factor response of the ﬁrst torsional mode is too noisy to analyse. It is to be expected
that the torsional mode responds diﬀerently compared to the bending modes. The torsional mode
applies shear stress in the beam, while the bending mode applies compressive and tensile stress. It
is reasonable to assume that the Young’s modulus of a complex crystallized organic material will
be anisotropic, resulting in a diﬀerent response between shear and compression.
On the basis of the experimental results of TGA and DMA, the dehydration of the particle is
expected to reduce the mass of the CBZD particle by approximately 13% and reduce the elastic
modulus by 7% to 10%. The resonance frequency of the single particle cantilever can be expressed
in terms of the eﬀective mass meff and the eﬀective spring constant keff:
Ω=
s
keff
meff
(6.1)
Where the eﬀective mass is given as: [12]
meff = 1
4m0
(6.2)
Where m0 is the total mass of the cantilever. The eﬀective spring constant of a single clamped
beam can be expressed as: [34]
keff = 3EIy
L3
= Ewh3
4L3
(6.3)
50
==PAGE:56==
Where E is Young’s modulus, Iy is the geometric moment of inertia and w, h and L are the
width, height and length of the cantilever, as indicated by ﬁgure 2.1.
On the basis of these equations, the following relations can be made, when considering only
changes of the eﬀective mass and the Young’s modulus respectively.
Ωres,hyd −Ωres,anhyd
Ωres,hyd
=
r
m0,hyd
m0,hyd −m0,anhyd
(6.4)
And
Ωres,hyd −Ωres,anhyd
Ωres,hyd
=
s
Ehyd −Eanhyd
Ehyd
(6.5)
Where Ωres,hyd, m0,hyd and Ehyd are the resonance frequency, the total mass and the Young’s
modulus of the hydrated particle, and Ωres,anhyd, m0,anhyd and Eanhyd are the resonance frequency,
the total mass and the Young’s modulus of the anhydrous particle.
Using these equations with the expected relative changes in mass and elastic modulus measured
by TGA and DMA, an estimate of the expected relative resonance frequency response can be
calculated. A reduction of 13% in total mass should result in an increase of the resonance frequency
of 3.6%, and a reduction of 10% in the elastic modulus results in an reduction of the resonance
frequency of 3.2%. Comparing this with the resonance frequency response of the measured bending
modes in ﬁgures 6.5 - 6.8, the single particle resonator can be seen to respond very diﬀerently. The
resonance frequency starts to drop signiﬁcantly at temperature close to room temperature, below
the onset of the dehydration as measured with TGA. The reduction in the resonance frequency is
also much larger than expected based on the TGA and DMA measurements, and the drop would be
expected to occur at temperatures close to room temperature. The dampening ratio measured by
DMA does show a consistent increase from room temperature to dehydration, and this will result
in a reduction of the resonance frequency as dictated by equation 2.18. However the dampening
ratio is still too small to have any noticeable eﬀect.
There is many factors which could contribute to the discrepancy between the response of CBZD
measured through PTMA and the response measured through TGA and DMA. The main diﬀerence
between the methods is that TGA and DMA measures on bulk sample, while the PTMA method
only probes the response of a single particle. Due to the bulk nature of the DMA measurements,
the measured moduli is a combination of the randomly organised crystal orientation of the bulk.
On the contrary the PTMA method probes only the mechanical properties of a single crystal
orientation of the particle. Based on the anisotropy of crystal structure of CBZD, it is reasonable
to assume a signiﬁcant degree of anisotropy of the mechanical properties and a signiﬁcant degree
of anisotropy of the response of the mechanical properties. The change in the solid state form
from hydrous to anhydrous can cause changes to the size of the unit cell, causing the particle to
shrink. This eﬀect could also be anisotropic, changing the relative dimensions of the single particle
cantilever. As can be seen from equation 6.3, changes to the structural dimensions could result in
51
==PAGE:57==
signiﬁcant changes to the resonance frequency. With the clear change in the optical properties of
the particle as a result of dehydration, it seems undeniable that the signiﬁcant drop in resonance
frequency is caused by dehydration. All the tracked modes in ﬁgures 6.1 - 6.4 show a signiﬁcant
drop in resonance frequency matching the optical intensity ﬁt at the top of the ﬁgures.
In order to truly compare the consistency of the response of each of the tracked modes, the
relative response of both the resonance frequency and the Q factor is plotted for the hydrous and
the anhydrous particle. These plots are presented in ﬁgure 6.9.
Figure 6.9: Plot of the relative response of the resonance frequency and the Q factor for all the
tracked bending modes. Measurements of both the hydrous particle and the anhydrous particle
are presented.
From the relative response of the resonance frequency shown in ﬁgure 6.9, it can be seen
that the diﬀerent modes have diﬀerent responses to dehydration. The second and third bending
modes exhibit a very similar behaviour. The resonance frequency of the second mode drops a
maximum of 20% at approximately 80 ◦C and slowly regains to a 15% loss in resonance frequency
at the end of the thermal cycle. The initial drop in resonance frequency of the third bending
mode is steeper compared to the second bending mode, and drops to a maximum 25% loss at
52
==PAGE:58==
approximately 75 ◦C and slowly recovers to a 15% loss at end of the thermal cycle.
The ﬁrst
bending mode seems to respond quite diﬀerently to the dehydration compared to the two higher
bending modes. The resonance frequency does drop initially, but only about 8% before it regains.
The resonance frequency drops a second time when cooling from 120 ◦C to 90 ◦C. At this point
in the temperature cycle, all other modes have stabilized as the anhydrous form and according to
TGA measurements shown in ﬁgure 5.1 all the water should be gone at this point. Inspecting the
raw data of the tracked ﬁrst bending mode in ﬁgure 6.1, it can be seen that the second drop in
resonance frequency is due to a step like loss, which suggests that there could be an error in the
tracking of the ﬁrst bending mode.
Interestingly, the resonance frequency response of the ﬁrst torsional mode is quite signiﬁcant,
and behaves slightly diﬀerent compared to the bending modes. Similarly to the bending modes, the
resonance frequency initially drops, but for the torsional mode it drops by 37%, and the anhydrous
form stabilizes at a 33% loss in the resonance frequency.
Inspecting the resonance frequency response of the anhydrous form in ﬁgure 6.9, the ﬁrst and
second bending mode can be seen to be nearly identical. The third bending mode follows the
same tendency at the ﬁrst and second, but at approximately 85 ◦C, the response of the third mode
diverges from the ﬁrst and second. The torsional mode of the anhydrous particle show similar
behaviour to the ﬁrst and second bending modes, but with less relative shift in the resonance
frequency.
The only general trend that can be extracted from the relative shift in Q factor of the diﬀerent
modes is that they all show a decrease in Q factor with increasing temperature.
Overall, these measurements show that each diﬀerent resonance mode of the same particle
show a similar, but unique response to dehydration. Since the particles used in these experiments
are not totally uniform, it is to be expected that the diﬀerent bending modes, which probes
diﬀerent sections of the particle, responds diﬀerently.
At the same time, it is to be expected
that harmonically spaced resonance modes of a single particle resonator exhibit a high degree of
similarity in their response to external forces.
6.1.2
Reproducibility of Measurements
In the previous section, the consistency of the resonance response to dehydration of diﬀerent res-
onance mode was studied, which would allow this method to have a degree of spacial resolution
within a single particle.
But for this method to be useful, measurement should not only give
consistent results between resonance modes, but also between diﬀerent single particle resonators.
The single particles crystals grown for these experiments are very noticeably diﬀerent, and espe-
cially CBZD crystals have quite large variety in length and shape. In addition to varieties in size
and shape, the distribution of crystal defects is also noticeably diﬀerent from particle to parti-
cle. Based on these observations, the resonance response of diﬀerent particles should be expected
53
==PAGE:59==
to show variations. Despite these issues, the resonators should show a similar tendency in the
resonance response during dehydration. To test this hypothesis, resonance modes of a secondary
CBZD single particle resonator was tracked.
The raw data capturing the response of the third bending mode and the ﬁrst torsional mode
are presented in ﬁgure 6.10 and 6.11. The raw data of the second temperature ramp, analysing
the anhydrous particle, can be found in appendix C.
Figure 6.10: Raw data of the 3rd bending mode of a CBZD single particle.
Figure 6.11: Raw data of the 1st torsional mode of a CBZD single particle.
From the raw data of the resonance response of the third bending mode and the ﬁrst torsional
mode shown in ﬁgure 6.10 and 6.11, the response of the resonance frequency can be seen to show a
similar behaviour as the CBZD resonator studied in the previous section. One important thing to
54
==PAGE:60==
note with this particular measurement is that dehydration induced stresses in the particle caused it
to bend signiﬁcantly during the dehydration. The eﬀect of this bending can be seen in the intensity
plot at the top of the ﬁgures. The bending caused a major part of the particle resonator to be
out of focus, which in turn made it impossible to estimate the transition time of the dehydration
based on the intensity ﬁt. The bending can also be seen to aﬀect the resonance frequency during
the initial drop.
The secondary temperature cycle measuring the resonance response of the corresponding an-
hydrous particle can be found in appendix C.
Figure 6.12: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 3rd bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle.
Figure 6.13: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st torsional
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle.
Figure 6.12 and 6.13 shows the resonance frequency response and the Q factor response of
the third bending mode and the torsional bending mode of both the hydrous and the anhydrous
particle.
The overarching behaviour of the dehydration appears to be similar to the particle
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.14: Comparison of the relative resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 3rd
bending mode for two diﬀerent CBZD single particles.
measured in the previous section. There is a signiﬁcant initial drop in resonance frequency, followed
by a regain until it stabilizes as the anhydrous form. The Q factor also have some similar behaviour.
During the dehydration and the initial drop in resonance frequency the Q factor is noisy, but at
approximately the same temperature as the resonance frequency stabilizes as the anhydrous form,
the Q factor stabilizes as well. Even after the Q factor seem to have stabilized, there still seems
to be a signiﬁcant discrepancy at low temperatures. This is most likely due to the issues with the
experimental setup. During cooling, the hotplate has diﬃculties maintaining a 5 ◦C/min ramping
speed when approaching room temperature. The software analysing the data does not take this
issue into account, and the prolonged experiment due to slow cooling is interpreted as a linear
cooling rate to temperatures even lower than room temperature.
In order to accurately compare the diﬀerence in resonance response of the two diﬀerent single
particles, both the relative resonance frequency response and the relative Q factor response of
the third bending mode and the ﬁrst torsional mode are plotted together. Figure 6.14 shows a
comparison of the third bending mode response in case of both the hydrous and anhydrous particles
56
==PAGE:62==
Figure 6.15: Comparison of the relative resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st
torsional mode for two diﬀerent CBZD single particles.
and 6.15 shows the corresponding plots for the ﬁrst torsional mode.
From ﬁgure 6.14, the resonance response of the third bending mode can be seen to behave in a
very similar manner between particles, except for the fact that particle#2 seem to have a shorter
and less signiﬁcant initial drop in resonance frequency. Knowing that these hydrates are prone to
slowly dehydrate at room temperature, a likely explanation could be that particle#2 was not as
freshly made as particle#1. Therefore it did not contain as much water and as a result dehydrated
faster. Although it cannot be ruled out that the diﬀerence in dehydration behaviour is solely due
to the uniqueness of each particle.
Inspecting the resonance frequency response of the anhydrous particles, the behaviour is similar
at low temperatures, but then diverges. Interestingly, the response of particle#2 is almost identical
to that of the anhydrous ﬁrst and second bending modes of particle#1, as seen in ﬁgure 6.9, with
an approximate 7% reduction of the resonance frequency at 120 ◦C.
As discussed previously, the Q factor can be noisy and have inconsistent behaviour even between
modes of the same particle. The relative response of the Q factor shown in ﬁgure 6.14, gives no
57
==PAGE:63==
indication of similar behaviour between particle#1 and particle#2.
Comparing the relative resonance frequency response of the ﬁrst torsional mode between the
two particles, a behaviour similar to that of the third mode can be seen.
The initial drop in
resonance frequency is not as pronounced for particle#2 and occurs within a smaller temperature
range, which is consistent with the hypothesis that particle#2 was partially dehydrated at the
start of the experiment.
It should be noted that the particles also show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the behaviour of
the ﬁrst torsional mode. After the dehydration, particle#2 regains to almost the same resonance
frequency in the anhydrous form, while the anhydrous form of particle#1 regains only few percent
of the initial drop in resonance frequency.
From the resonance frequency response of the anhydrous particles, the ﬁrst torsional mode of
particle#2 can be seen to have a 7% drop in resonance frequency at 120 ◦C, consistent with the
third bending mode of the same particle.
Comparing the Q factor response of the ﬁrst torsional mode of the two particles, shown in
ﬁgure 6.15, does not reveal any consistent behaviour.
From the comparison of just these two diﬀerent CBZD single particle resonators, no deﬁnitive
conclusions can be draw regarding the general dehydration mechanism of single particle CBZD, but
the single particle resonators have been shown to exhibit comparable yet unique behaviour. One
approach to eliminate the uniqueness of each particles response could be to average a large number
of measurements. This approach is rather time consuming due to the length of the experiment
combined with a user dependant success rate.
6.1.3
Double Clamped Cantilever
The dehydration of the single particle resonators can cause internal stresses, which can often be
seen when measuring very narrow needle like particles or very thin plates, as these tend to bend
signiﬁcantly during dehydration and can in extreme cases even break apart. A solution to keep
the position of the particle stable is to clamp it at both ends. The consequence of the double
clamping is that the resonance behaviour of the particle will now be dependant on both the stress
generated through dehydration, and the diﬀerence in the coeﬃcient of thermal expansion between
the particle resonator and the aluminium base. The stress induced by dehydration is caused by
rearrangement of the crystal structure, resulting in the unit cell changing size. The bending then
occurs when diﬀerent parts of the particle dehydrates at diﬀerent rates.
The raw data of the dehydration of a double clamped CBZD single particle resonator is pre-
sented in ﬁgure 6.16, where the ﬁrst bending mode has been tracked. Considering the resonance
frequency response, a slight reduction can be seen prior to the onset of the dehydration, which
is consistent with the behaviour of the single clamped CBZD resonators studied in the previous
sections. Based on the intensity ﬁt at the top of the ﬁgure, the dehydration can be seen to cause
58
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.16: Raw data of the 1st bending mode of a double clamped CBZD single particle.
a huge increase of the resonance frequency. This is in sharp contrast to the response of a single
clamped resonator, where the dehydration results in a signiﬁcant reduction of the resonance fre-
quency. From the single clamped CBZD particles, the resonance frequency can be seen to recover
post dehydration as the crystal restructures to the anhydrous form, which stiﬀens the particle. In
the case of the double clamped resonator, the resonance frequency can be seen to reduce signiﬁ-
cantly after the dehydration which is most likely due to a release of stress as the particle stabilizes
as the anhydrous form.
Figure 6.17: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous double clamped particle.
Inspecting ﬁgure 6.17 which shows a comparison of both the resonance frequency response
and the Q factor response between the hydrous and the anhydrous double clamped particle, the
resonance frequency can be seen to stabilize as the anhydrous form. But in this case of a double
59
==PAGE:65==
clamped CBZD resonator, the stable anhydrous form of the particle has a resonance frequency
signiﬁcantly above that of the hydrated particle, in comparison to the single clamped resonators
which all stabilized at a lower resonance frequency. This is evidence that the CBZD particle shrinks
during dehydration and the increase in resonance frequency is a result of the induced tension in
the particle. This increase of the resonance frequency is achieved despite the anhydrous form being
soft compared to the hydrous form.
Another diﬀerence in the behaviour of the double clamped resonator is that the anhydrous
particle has increasing resonance frequency with increasing temperature, opposite to that of a
single clamped resonator. This suggest that the coeﬃcient of thermal expansion of CBZ is lower
than that of the base material, aluminum.
The Q factor response of the double clamped resonator as seen in ﬁgure 6.17 does not show
any consistent behaviour.
6.1.4
CBZD + PVP Particle Resonator
Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is a water soluble polymer, which is used in a wide variety of appli-
cations such as cosmetics, food, adhesives and pharmaceuticals, due to its unique properties. In
pharmaceuticals PVP is used as binder, coating, stabilizer and solubilizer. PVP is very hygro-
scopic, meaning that it has the ability to absorb water from its surroundings.[35] Seeing as PVP
is a common ingredient in tablet pharmaceuticals and considering its interactive properties with
water, it would be interesting to investigate the eﬀect of PVP on the resonance response of a single
particle resonator. CBZD was crystallized as described in a previous chapter, with the exception
of having PVP added in the supersaturated solution.
Figure 6.18 presents the resonance behaviour of the ﬁrst bending mode of a CBZD particle
crystallized in a solution with PVP. The resonance frequency response has a similar behaviour to
the CBZD particle resonators studied in the sections, which did not contain PVP. A signiﬁcant
initial reduction of the resonance frequency, followed by a stabilization to the anhydrous form. The
corresponding measurement of the anhydrous particle can be found in appendix C.
A comparison of the resonance response of the hydrous and the anhydrous particle is presented
in ﬁgure 6.19. From this comparison the particle with PVP can be seen to also stabilize as the
anhydrous from, both in the resonance frequency response and the Q factor response, similar to
previously presented CBZD particles.
Although the behaviour of the resonance frequency response to dehydration is similar compared
to the previously studied CBZD particles, the CBZD particle with PVP dehydrates noticeably
slower. From the intensity ﬁt at the top of ﬁgure 6.18 and the cyan line in the plot, the tran-
sition time can be seen to be at approximately 10 minutes. Comparing this time to the other
measurements with a successful intensity ﬁt in ﬁgure 6.16 and 6.1, which have a transition times of
approximately 5 and 6 minutes. Plotting the resonance frequency response as a function of temper-
60
==PAGE:66==
Figure 6.18: Raw data of the 1st bending mode of a CBZD + PVP single particle.
ature in ﬁgure 6.19, the initial reduction in resonance frequency, indicating the dehydration, lasts
all the way up to approximately 90 ◦C. The other CBZD particles measured in previous sections are
all fully dehydrated at temperatures between 60 ◦C and 80 ◦C. This could be an indication that the
hygroscopic properties of PVP retards the dehydration of the particle. The observed diﬀerence in
resonance response could also be attributed to the uniqueness of each particle, as the eﬀectiveness
of incorporating PVP onto a single particle via crystallization has not been demonstrated.
This experiments shows that the addition of PVP has the potential to alter the dehydration
mechanism of single particles, but to truly demonstrate the eﬀect, more particles would need to
be measured in order to average out the uniqueness of each particle. Also, a consistent method of
applying the PVP would need to be developed.
Figure 6.19: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle containing PVP.
61
==PAGE:67==
6.2
Theophylline Monohydrate
In this section, the resonance response of the dehydration of a TPMH single particle resonator is
studied. The resonance response measured by the PTMA method will be compared to the result
of the conventional methods presented in this thesis.
The single particle TPMH resonators were prepared and measured via the same procedure as
the CBZD particles. The crystallization of the TPMH was done as described in the experimental
methods chapter, and the particles was prepared as single clamped cantilevers by clamping them
to an aluminium base using epoxy adhesive.
Figure 6.20: Raw data of the 1st bending mode of a TPMH single particle.
Figure 6.20 presents the raw data of a tracked ﬁrst bending mode of a TPMH particle, measured
through a temperature cycle from room temperature to 100 ◦C and back. This mode was tracked
using an improved fully automated version of the tracking software. This software ﬁlters out noisy
and low signal measurement points, which are evident by the signiﬁcantly reduced point density
in the transition region, where the signal is the weakest.
The resonance frequency response of the TPMH particle can be seen to have a slow gradual drop,
follow by a sharp and sudden increase in the resonance frequency from approximately 12.5 kHz to
approximately 14.5 kHz where the resonance frequency stabilizes. Inspecting the intensity ﬁt at
top of the ﬁgure, the intensity can be seen not to follow the expected arctangent behaviour as seen
from previous measurements where the hydrate goes from transparent to opaque. Even though the
intensity does not follow the expected behaviour, it can be seen to clearly change over the course of
the measurement, and the change is especially noticeable at the resonance frequency spike. At this
point, the base of the particle cantilever can be seen to change from bright white to a darker gray
matching the rest of the particle. The bright white is caused by the reﬂection oﬀthe aluminium
62
==PAGE:68==
surface underneath the TPMH particle, but as it dehydrates and goes opaque the surface is no
longer visible. This is clear evidence that the spike in the resonance frequency is caused by the
dehydration of the particle.
An interesting observation is that the Q factor has signiﬁcant changes before the dehydration,
and seems to reach a stable level just as the dehydration sets in.
Following the ﬁrst heating cycle, a second heating cycle was performed to measure the resonance
response of the corresponding anhydrous particle. The raw data of the tracked ﬁrst bending mode
can be found in appendix C.
Figure 6.21: Plot comparing the resonance frequency and Q factor response of the 1st bending
mode, between the hydrous and the anhydrous particle.
In order to compare the response of the hydrous and the anhydrous particle, the resonance
frequency and the Q factor are plotted separately for both measurements in ﬁgure 6.21. From this
comparison, the resonance frequency can be seen to stabilize as the anhydrous form at approxi-
mately 75 ◦C, immediately after the spike. The Q factor on the other hand, does not stabilize as
the anhydrous form until approximately 90 ◦C. So while the resonance frequency response shows
a very quick and sudden transition, the Q factor reveals that the transition is more complicated
than just a direct transformation from hydrous to anhydrous, and might involve meta-stable states.
In a study by P. Okeyo [33], Raman spectroscopy was used to study the dehydration mechanism
of single particle TPMH. In this study the particle was dehydrated isothermally at 50 ◦C over a
time span of 90 minutes. The TPMH particle was found to dehydrate via two meta-stable states,
which both were present in volume fractions approaching 50% and were present for the majority
of the 90 minute dehydration process. Since the experiments done by P. Okeyo was performed
isothermally, a direct comparison cannot be drawn, especially considering the acceleration of the
dehydration at increasing temperatures, as shown by the TGA experiments presented in ﬁgure
5.1. The knowledge that these meta-stable states are produced during dehydration, and that they
have potentially long lifetimes, does help to explain changes in the Q factor both before and after
63
==PAGE:69==
dehydration.
Comparing these results obtained with the PTMA method to the results obtained with the
conventional methods, the temperature at the spike in the resonance frequency can be seen to
matched well with the onset of the dehydration as measured by TGA, see ﬁgure 5.1. On the basis
of the PTMA measurement, the TPMH particle dehydrates in the temperature interval 65 ◦C to
75 ◦C. The TGA measurement indicates that the dehydration occurs in the temperature interval
60 ◦C to 80 ◦C. Considering that the TGA measures bulk amount with particles of many diﬀerent
sizes, these measurements are in good agreement.
Comparing the elastic modulus of TPMH measured by DMA, ﬁgure 5.3A, to the resonance
response of TPMH shown in ﬁgure 6.21, the DMA measurements does not show any signiﬁcant
change in the elastic modulus in the temperature range from 60 ◦C to 80 ◦C as would be expected.
As previously described, there is some concern regarding temperature lag at a ramping speed of
5 ◦C/min in the DMA instrument, so one could imagine that the sharp drop in elastic modulus
measured above 80 ◦C corresponds to the eﬀect of the dehydration. Seeing that the resonance
frequency of the single particle resonator increases by approximately 18% during the dehydration
from 65 ◦C to 75 ◦C and that a mass loss of 9.1% only corresponds to an increase in the resonance
frequency of 3%, the elastic modulus would be expected to increase signiﬁcantly. But based on
the DMA measurements, the opposite is observed. As discussed in a previous section, there are
reasons to be hesitant when comparing results from bulk measurements to particular measurements,
especially in the case of anisotropic properties.
64
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 7
Humidity Response of Single
Particle Resonance
In the previous chapter, the focus was on the mechanism of the dehydration of two model organic
hydrates, but in the context of investigating the stability of the drug during processing and storage,
studying the mechanism of the re-hydration is equally important. Water is everywhere, both as
humidity in the air and as a commonly used solvent in production. Eliminating the presence of
water of any kind is a nearly impossible task. Knowing the conditions and the timescale which
allows for re-hydration of an organic compound is essential in predicting the potency of the active
pharmaceutical ingredient after certain steps in production or during prolonged storage times.
Previous studies have successfully managed to convert TP into TPMH by storing powdered TP
in a humid environment. A study by Y. Lin[15] transformed pure TP into TPMH by storing it an
a 75% relative humidity atmosphere for one week. The median particle diameter of the hydrated
powder was reported to be 81 µm and the water content was conﬁrmed by TGA measurements to
be 9.1%.
An experiment to study the re-hydration of TP at the single particle level can be done using
the PTMA method presented in this thesis, by adding a humidity controller to the experimental
setup. The measurement of the resonance response to the re-hydration was performed similarly to
the dehydration experiments. A TPMH single particle was clamped to the aluminium base and the
dehydration response was measured through a temperature cycle from room temperature to 100 ◦C
and back. After the initial thermal cycle to dehydrate the particle, the humidity of the chamber
was set to hold 90% relative humidity at room temperature. The humidity controller was with
this setup able to increase the humidity from an initial value of 20% to 80% after approximately
10 minutes and stabilize at the set point of 90% after approximately 20 minutes.
In the ﬁrst experiment, the humidity response was measured over 24 hours, with the response
being measured every 3 minutes for the ﬁrst 6 hour and then every 5 minutes for the remaining 18
65
==PAGE:71==
Figure 7.1: Raw data of the 1st bending mode of an anhydrous TP single particle measured for 24
hours in a 90% relative humidity atmosphere at room temperature. Measurements were performed
every 3 minutes for the ﬁrst 6 hours, then every 5 minutes for the remaining 18 hours.
hours. The raw data showing the tracked 1st bending mode of the particle is presented in ﬁgure
7.1.
From ﬁgure 7.1, the resonance frequency can be seen to change signiﬁcantly within the ﬁrst
hour of the experiment. After the ﬁrst hour, the resonance frequency of the particle changes slowly.
At ﬁrst it seems to be stable at around 17 kHz, but after approximately 10 hours the resonance
frequency starts to drop. Even after the full 24 hours at 90% relative humidity, the resonance
frequency does not seem to have stabilized. Inspecting the optical images of the particle at the
top of the ﬁgure, the particle can be seen to not have any change in optical properties, suggesting
that the majority of the particle is still in the anhydrous form at the end of the experiment. The
resonance frequency of the 1st bending mode of the hydrated particle was measured to be 15 kHz,
which is signiﬁcantly lower than the resonance frequency of the ﬁrst bending mode at the end of the
re-hydration experiment. Together, these observations suggests that the initial drop in resonance
frequency at the start of the re-hydration is due to absorption of water at the surface level of the
particle. The re-hydration of the inner parts of the particle happens on a longer time scale than
this experiment.
Due to the length of the re-hydration experiments, the temporal resolution had to be reduced in
order to keep the load of the data processing within reasonable limits. The low temporal resolution
is not an issue after the ﬁrst hour of the experiment, where the derivatives of the resonance
frequency and the Q factor are low, but the initial drop in the resonance frequency is poorly
resolved. To achieve a higher temporal resolution of the surface absorption, a second experiment
was done on a diﬀerent particle. The measurement was performed following the same procedure as
66
==PAGE:72==
Figure 7.2: Raw data of the 1st bending mode of an anhydrous TP single particle measured for 2
hours in a 90% relative humidity atmosphere at room temperature.
the ﬁrst re-hydration experiment, however this measurement was optimized for temporal resolution
and was run for a total of 2 hours. The resonance response of the 1st bending mode is presented
in ﬁgure 7.2.
The humidity response measurement of the second TP particle shown in ﬁgure 7.2 shows a
consistent behaviour of the re-hydration. An initial response in the resonance frequency which
causes the resonance frequency to drop signiﬁcantly. With an increased temporal resolution, the
resonance frequency can be seen to initially increase before it drops to a more stable level. Also
the Q factor can be see to vary slightly during the initial humidity response, which all seem to
suggest that the surface of the particle initially re-hydrates through meta-stable states.
The point density during the drop in resonance frequency on ﬁgure 7.2 can be seen to be
signiﬁcantly lower due to ﬁltering of the software removing low signal measurements.
Similarly to the previous re-hydration experiment, the particle is evidently not totally re-
hydrated after the initial changes in resonance frequency and Q factor. The optical images at the
top of the ﬁgure show that the particle does not signiﬁcantly change optical properties over the
course of the experiment, only a slight change in the intensity can be seen. The resonance frequency
of the 1st bending mode of the hydrous particle was measured to be 13 kHz, which is signiﬁcantly
below the 14.5 khz where the resonance frequency stabilizes during the humidity experiment. Even
though its only slight, the particle can be seen to change in the 30 minutes to 120 minutes time
span of the experiment. The Q factor is much less noisy, which reveals a gradual increase in the
Q factor with time. Additionally, the intensity of the optical images are also slightly increasing
with time, and a bright spot on the particle can even be seen to appear towards the end of the
experiment. These gradual increases suggests that the particle is still re-hydrating.
67
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 8
Conclusions and Outlook
The purpose of this thesis was to demonstrate the potential of the new laser Doppler vibrometry
based particle thermomechanical analysis technique for studying the dehydration mechanism of
organic hydrates at the single particle level. This was done through a series of experiments where
both the dehydration and the re-hydration of single particle hydrates were measured, and compared
to conventional methods using bulk amount.
The resonance response during dehydration of two hydrates, TPMH and CBZD, was measured
using the PTMA method. When tracking change in resonance frequency, both hydrates showed
clear responses corresponding to the dehydration of the particle, which was conﬁrmed by simulta-
neously capturing the optical changes of the hydrate as it goes from transparent to opaque over
the course of the dehydration. The needle shaped hydrate single particles were prepared in situ.
The quality, water content and temperature of dehydration were conﬁrmed using TGA, DSC and
XRPD. The temperature of dehydration measured by TGA and DSC correlated well with the ob-
served resonance response of TPMH, while CBZD did show inconsistencies between the resonance
response and the dehydration temperatures measured by TGA and DSC. The resonance response
of the measured CBZD particles showed signiﬁcant responses noticeably below the dehydration
temperature suggested by TGA and DSC. This discrepancy could be due to the hydrous to an-
hydrous transformation going through meta stable states prior to dehydration. This eﬀect was
also seen to a lesser extend with the dehydration of TPMH, but it is likely that the dehydration
mechanism of CBZD are more complicated compared to TPMH, seeing that CBZD is a dihydrate
with two separate but overlapping dehydration events. To further study if meta stable states are
responsible for the resonance frequency response at low temperatures, the Raman spectroscopy
method demonstrated in P. Okeyo[33] could be used to measure the presence of any intermediate
states.
The resonance response of the single particle CBZD and TPMH revealed that the weight loss
associated with the dehydration is not the dominant factor in determining the response of the
resonance frequency. Based on the weight loss alone, the resonance frequency of a CBZD and
68
==PAGE:74==
a TPMH single particle should increase by 3.6% and 3.0% respectively, however this is not the
behaviour that is observed. The dehydration of TPMH causes a sharp increase in the resonance
frequency from the hydrous to the anhydrous form, while CBZD has a more gradual transformation
which results in a reduction of the resonance frequency. The CBZD particles measured throughout
this project showed a reduction of the relative resonance frequency response between 15% and
37% during dehydration, while the TPMH particle showed an increase of the relative resonance
frequency response of 18%. These responses of the resonance frequency make it clear that the eﬀect
of the weight loss is dominated by changes to the eﬀective spring constant of the hydrate resonators.
Changes in the eﬀective spring constant can be the result of either changes to the Young’s modulus
of the material or changes to the geometric structure of the resonator. The change of the Young’s
modulus was estimated by DMA measurements on bulk sample. However, these measurements did
not correlate well with the results of the PTMA experiments. This could lead to the conclusion
that the structural changes is the main parameter responsible for the resonance response, but
there is some signiﬁcant consideration regarding the accuracy of comparing the measurement of
bulk sample to a measurement of a single particle. The anisotropy of the Young’s modulus could be
a determining factor in the resonance response of single particle hydrates. An experiment which
could measure the response of the Young’s modulus along the desired axis, could be to use an
atomic force microscope type setup. With this setup, the force to deﬂection ratio of a single particle
cantilever could be probed through a thermal cycle. From this experiment, a Young’s modulus
of the hydrate could be calculate, which would be directly comparable to the PTMA experiments
presented in this thesis. Evidence of change to the geometric structure of the cantilever has also
been presented in this thesis.
Comparing the resonance frequency response of single clamped CBZD particles to the double
clamped CBZD particle, it is clear that the double clamped particle responds signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
due to the particle shrinking during the dehydration, causing tensile stress in the particle and
increasing the resonance frequency. To determine the geometric changes to the structure of the
single particle cantilevers, optical microscopy could be used to measure the dimensions of the
particle during the dehydration.
To examine the re-hydration mechanism, this thesis also presented experiments utilizing the
PTMA method to study the humidity response of an anhydrous particle.
These experiments
showed a signiﬁcant initial response followed by a slow gradual response. The initial response
showed optical evidence that the particle had not transformed to the hydrated state, indicating
that this response was due to re-hydration of the surface of the particle. Measurements revealed
that the re-hydration of a TPMH particle was still in progress after a full 24 hours. Previous studies
have shown re-hydration of smaller TP particles by exposure to a humid atmosphere within the
time span of one week. In order to study the re-hydration mechanism further, an extended PTMA
experiments would need to be performed. Measuring the resonance response through the entire re-
69
==PAGE:75==
hydration of the particle could reveal important information about the nature of the re-hydration.
Does the re-hydration restore the optical properties, making the particle transparent? Does the
resonance frequency of the particle return to the originally measured values? Does some regions of
the particle re-hydrate before others? And would the re-hydrated particle have similar resonance
response to the second dehydration?
Using PTMA as a method to characterize the dehydration mechanism of organic hydrates as the
single particle level has many advantages in the context of early stage drug discovery. Compared
to conventional methods, the amount of drug needed to perform a single measurement is 3 orders
of magnitude lower, which can be a signiﬁcant advantage in early stages of development where
the price of manufacturing new active pharmaceutical ingredients can be very high. The PTMA
method also have the advantage of measuring only on a single particle which allows for accurate
measurements of the material behaviour, due to the response not being diluted by multiple particles
having diﬀerent responses. This can also be seen as a disadvantage, as the response of each particle
will be unique and not representative of the general response of a powdered sample.
Another unique property of PTMA is the amount of information gathered by just measuring
and tracking the resonance frequency. The change in the resonance frequency contains information
about the change in mass, stiﬀness, geometric structure and internal dampening of the single
particle. However, measuring all of these responses at once makes it very diﬃcult to separate the
eﬀect of each parameter. For this reason this method will not be able to replace the conventional
techniques.
The usefulness of the PTMA approach to material characterization extends much beyond the
dehydration of organic hydrates, any solid state material can be used as a cantilever resonator at
the micro scale. This method is also not limited to humidity and thermal analysis, the resonator
of choice could be exposed to exposed to any external force. This ﬂexibility is an exiting feature of
the PTMA method, which could extend it usefulness from the pharmaceutical ﬁeld onto material
science as a whole.
In its current state, the PTMA method still has areas of uncertainty which would need to be
resolved. As shown by the majority of the PTMA measurements, the quality factor is so noisy
that meaningful information cannot be extracted. This issue is partially an experimental issue
and partially a software issue. Experimentally it is often observed that a bending mode appears
as collection of multiple peaks and not as a single well deﬁned peak. It is also not uncommon
to have noise peaks interfering with the resonance peaks. Issues arise in the software when the
amplitude of the tracked resonance peak reduced below that of a nearby peak, or the peaks are
too close to each other to distinguish. In these cases the software will very likely make a bad ﬁt
to the complicated phase, resulting in high levels of uncertainty in the calculated quality factor.
This issue could be minimized by improving the accuracy of the software ﬁtting, or by optimizing
the re-crystallization in order to produce more uniform crystals with clean and smooth surfaces.
70
==PAGE:76==
Improving the quality of the crystals would make the PTMA measurements more consistent by
the bending modes being more well deﬁned and by improving the signal of the laser reﬂected oﬀ
the surface of the particle.
Throughout this thesis the proposed PTMA method for characterizing the dehydration of
organic hydrates at the single particle level, was demonstrated to measure a signiﬁcant response
in the resonance behaviour of two diﬀerent hydrates. This was shown to be clearly linked to the
dehydration of the particle by comparison to optical observation and TGA and DSC measurements.
The method was also shown to capture the mechanism of the re-hydration of the anhydrous form
of a TP single particle.
The weakness of this method in the context of single particle dehydration is the complexity of
the response. Separating the response to extract qualitative information about a speciﬁc param-
eter is not possible based on the PTMA measurement alone, meaning that this method is not a
replacement for the conventional methods, but a supporting technique for accurate measurement of
solid state properties at the single particle level. Despite being unable to replace the conventional
methods, PTMA does provide opportunity of characterizing pharmaceutical ingredients at early
stages of drug development. At this stages, the experimental ingredients can be both diﬃcult and
expensive to produce. In such cases PTMA have the ability to provide information regarding the
thermomechanical properties of the material, from only a single particle. Reducing the required
amount of sample need for material characterization can help reduce the cost of development, by
allowing for a more eﬃcient screening of the potential active ingredients. The eﬃciency is gained
by determining the ﬁt and unﬁt candidates, without the need to invest heavily in the production
of each potential ingredient.
71
==PAGE:77==
References
[1] Pratik P. Upadhyay, Nawin Pudasaini, Manish Kumar Mishra, Upadrasta Ramamurty, and
Jukka Rantanen.
Early assessment of bulk powder processability as a part of solid form
screening. Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 136:447–455, 2018.
[2] Steven M. Paul, Daniel S. Mytelka, Christopher T. Dunwiddie, Charles C. Persinger,
Bernard H. Munos, Stacy R. Lindborg, and Aaron L. Schacht.
How to improve rd pro-
ductivity: The pharmaceutical industry’s grand challenge. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery,
9(3):203–214, 2010.
[3] J.G. Stowell S.R. Byrn, R.R. Pfeiﬀer. Solid-State Chemistry of Drugs. Academic Press, second
ed. edition, 1999.
[4] https://www.yourgenome.org/facts/how-are-drugs-designed-and-developed.
[5] Maximilian Karl, Peter E. Larsen, Varadarajan P. Rangacharya, En Te Hwu, Jukka Ranta-
nen, Anja Boisen, and Thomas Rades. Ultrasensitive micro string resonators for solid state
thermomechanical analysis of small and large molecules. Journal of the American Chemical
Society, 140(50):17522–17531, 2018.
[6] Maksymilian Kurek, Matthias Carnoy, Peter Emil Larsen, Line Hagner Nielsen, Ole Hansen,
Thomas Rades, Silvan Schmid, and Anja Boisen.
Nanomechanical infrared spectroscopy
with vibrating ﬁlters for pharmaceutical analysis. Angewandte Chemie International Edition,
56(14):3901–3905, 2017.
[7] Sanjukta Bose, Silvan Schmid, Tom Larsen, Stephan Sylvest Keller, Peter Sommer-Larsen,
Anja Boisen, and Kristoﬀer Almdal. Micromechanical string resonators: Analytical tool for
thermal characterization of polymers. A C S Macro Letters, 3(1):55–58, 2014.
[8] Eero Suihko, Jarkko Ketolainen, Antti Poso, Markku Ahlgren, Jukka Gynther, and Petteri
Paronen. Dehydration of theophylline monohydrate - a two step process. International Journal
of Pharmaceutics, 158(1):47–55, 1997.
72
==PAGE:78==
[9] Karin Kogermann. Understanding solid-state transformations during dehydration: new in-
sights using vibrational spectroscopy and multivariate modelling. PhD thesis, Faculty of Phar-
macy of the University of Helsinki, 2008.
[10] H. Moustafa F. H. H. Larsen S. P. A. Sauer J. Rantanen A. S. Larsen, M. A. Olsen and A. Ø.
Madsen. Cantilever-like micromechanical sensors. CrystEngComm, 2019.
[11] Anja Boisen, Søren Dohn, Stephan Sylvest Keller, Silvan Schmid, and Maria Tenje. Cantilever-
like micromechanical sensors. Reports on Progress in Physics, 74(3):036101, feb 2011.
[12] Silvan Schmid, Luis Guillermo Villanueva, and Michael Lee Roukes. Fundamentals of nanome-
chanical resonators. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[13] K. L. Ekinci, Y. T. Yang, and M. L. Roukes. Ultimate limits to inertial mass sensing based
upon nanoelectromechanical systems. Journal of Applied Physics, 2004.
[14] https://www.comsol.com/comsol-multiphysics.
[15] Yannan Lin, Zhenqi Shi, and Peter L.D. Wildfong.
Thermal conductivity measurements
for small molecule organic solid materials using modulated diﬀerential scanning calorimetry
(mdsc) and data corrections for sample porosity. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical
Analysis, 51(4):979 – 984, 2010.
[16] Frank P. Incropera. Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006.
[17] D.J. Tritton. Physical Fluid Dynamics. Oxford Science Publ. Clarendon Press, 1988.
[18] COMSOL.
Tutorial model:
Buoyancy ﬂow in air.
https://www.comsol.com/model/
buoyancy-flow-in-air-53441.
[19] http://www.substech.com/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=thermoset epoxy ep.
[20] Polytec. Msa-500 micro system analyzer: Technical document. https://www.polytec.com/
fileadmin/d/Vibrometrie/OM BR MSA-500 E 42121.pdf.
[21] https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sigma/t1633?lang=en&region=DK.
[22] Ali Shayanfar, Sitaram Velaga, and Abolghasem Jouyban. Solubility of carbamazepine, nicoti-
namide and carbamazepine–nicotinamide cocrystal in ethanol–water mixtures. Fluid Phase
Equilibria, 363:97 – 105, 2014.
[23] Bernard Dennis Cullity. Elements of X-Ray Diﬀraction. Addison-Wesley, 1978.
[24] https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Analytical Chemistry/
Supplemental Modules (Analytical Chemistry)/Instrumental Analysis/
Diffraction Scattering Techniques/Powder X-ray Diffraction.
73
==PAGE:79==
[25] Michael E. Brown. Introduction to Thermal Analysis, chapter 3. Thermogravimetry (TG).
Springer, Dordrecht, second edition edition, 2001.
[26] Michael E. Brown. Introduction to Thermal Analysis, chapter 4. Diﬀerential Thermal Analysis
(DTA) and Diﬀerential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). Springer, Dordrecht, second edition
edition, 2001.
[27] Kevin P. Menard. Dynamic Mechanical Analysis, Dynamic Mechanical Analysis: A Practical
Introduction. CRC Press, 2008.
[28] https://www.polytec.com/us/vibrometry/technology/.
[29] https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Theophylline.
[30] https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Carbamazepine.
[31] K. Kachrimanis and U. J. Griesser.
Dehydration kinetics and crystal water dynamics of
carbamazepine dihydrate. Pharmaceutical Research, 29(4):902–921, 2012.
[32] https://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/solutions/csd-system/components/csd/.
[33] Peter Ouma Okeyo, Oleksii Ilchenko, Roman Slipets, Peter Emil Larsen, Anja Boisen, Thomas
Rades, and Jukka Rantanen. Imaging of dehydration in particulate matter using raman line-
focus microscopy. Scientiﬁc Reports, 9(1):7525, 7525, 2019.
[34] Carol Livermore. Course materials for 6.777j / 2.372j design and fabrication of microelec-
tromechanical devices. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2007. MIT OpenCourseWare
(http://ocw.mit.edu/).
[35] F Haaf, A Sanner, and F Straub. Polymers of n-vinylpyrrolidone: Synthesis, characterization
and uses. Polymer Journal, 17(1):143, 1985.
74
==PAGE:80==
Appendix
8.1
Appendix A: Mesh Study
A mesh study was conducted using the simplest form of the model, and comparing the relative
temperature diﬀerences of the diﬀerent mesh qualities, using the mesh described in the simulation
section as a reference.
The mesh quality was varied by multiplying both the maximum and the minimum element
size with a scaling factor. It should be noted that COMSOL does mesh the geometry, even if the
minimum element size is larger than some aspects of the geometry, but the resolution is signiﬁcantly
reduced.
In order to calculate the relative temperature diﬀerence between simulations at diﬀerent reso-
lutions, the data was interpolated.
Figure 8.1: The relative temperature diﬀerence of the single particle resonator, simulated with
diﬀerent mesh scaling factor. The arc length indicate the length along the particle. The meshed
used throughout all the simulations was used as the point of reference. This reference mesh is
shown by ﬁgure 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3
75
==PAGE:81==
From ﬁgure 8.1 it is apparent that the relative diﬀerence in temperature between the diﬀerent
simulations is less than 0.5% all across the particle, even for a much rougher mesh. Additionally it
is worth noting that when the mesh is rough enough, the solution seems to converge to a somewhat
diﬀerent solution. These results are evidence that the mesh chosen for the simulations is ﬁne enough
to capture the physical behaviour of the system.
76
==PAGE:82==
8.2
Appendix B: Copper Cage
A solution to minimize the temperature diﬀerences along the particle was explored through the
simulation model.
The idea was to place a copper cage to cover the resonator, such that the
heating could be applied from all angles. Figure 8.2 shows how this idea was implemented in the
COMSOL model. The copper cage was modeled to the 1 mm thick and have a 3 mm diameter
hole directly above the particle. The hole must be directly above the particle, in order to have an
optical readout for PTMA.
Figure 8.2: Illustration of the Copper cage geometry applied to the model. The hole in the top of
the cage is necessary for PTMA readout.
The results of the simulations is shown by ﬁgure 8.3 and 8.4 for a set temperature of 70 ◦C
and 70 ◦C respectively. Adding the copper cage signiﬁcantly reduces the variation in temperature
along the particle resonator. Comparing to the corresponding simulations, with the copper cage on
ﬁgure 3.4 and 3.5, the maximum to minimum temperature discrepancy reduces from approximately
5 ◦C, to only 0.2 ◦C at a set temperature of 110 ◦C. At a set temperature of 70 ◦C the temperature
discrepancy reduces from approximately 2.5 ◦C to less than 0.1 ◦C.
If the temperature variation along the particle ever seems to be an issue, or is wished minimized
for other reasons, using a copper case seems to be a viable solution according to these simulations.
77
==PAGE:83==
Figure 8.3: Plot of the simulated temperature distribution along the length of the particle resonator
at a set temperature of 70 ◦C with a copper cage place over the resonator.
Figure 8.4: Plot of the simulated temperature distribution along the length of the particle resonator
at a set temperature of 110 ◦C with a copper cage place over the resonator.
78
==PAGE:84==
8.3
Appendix C: Raw Data of Resonance Response of An-
hydrous CBZ Particles.
The following plots show the raw data of multiple diﬀerent resonance modes of a single particle
CBZD resonator. The plots presented in this appendix is measurements of the anhydrous particle,
measured during a second temperature cycle from room temperature to 120 ◦C. The ﬁrst three
bending modes have been tracked, in addition to the ﬁrst torsional bending mode, shown by ﬁgure
8.5, 8.6, 8.7 and 8.8. These are the anhydrous equivalent of the measurements shown in ﬁgure 6.1,
6.2, 6.3 and 6.4.
Raw data from an identical experiment using another anhydrous particle resonator is presented
by ﬁgure 8.9 and 8.10. These measurements are the anhydrous equivalent of ﬁgure 6.10 and 6.11.
Raw data of a double clamped anhydrous CBZ particle is shown in ﬁgure 8.11. The equivalent
measurement of the hydrous particle is shown in ﬁgure 6.16.
Raw data of an anhydrous CBZ particle made in a solution containing PVP is shown in ﬁgure
8.12. The equivalent measurement of the hydrous particle is shown in ﬁgure 6.18.
Raw data of an anhydrous TPMH single particle is shown in ﬁgure 8.13.
The equivalent
measurement of the hydrous particle is shown in ﬁgure 6.20.
Figure 8.5: Raw data of the 1. bending mode of the anhydrous CBZ single particle.
79
==PAGE:85==
Figure 8.6: Raw data of the 2. bending mode of the anhydrous CBZ single particle.
Figure 8.7: Raw data of the 3. bending mode of the anhydrous CBZ single particle.
80
==PAGE:86==
Figure 8.8: Raw data of the 1. torsional bending mode of the anhydrous CBZ single particle.
Figure 8.9: Raw data of the 3. bending mode of the anhydrous CBZ single particle.
81
==PAGE:87==
Figure 8.10: Raw data of the 1. torsional bending mode of the anhydrous CBZ single particle.
Figure 8.11: Raw data of the 1. bending mode of a double clamped anhydrous CBZ single particle.
82
==PAGE:88==
Figure 8.12: Raw data of the 1. bending mode of an anhydrous CBZD + PVP single particle.
Figure 8.13: Raw data of the 1. bending mode of an anhydrous TPMH single particle.
83
