==PAGE:1==
Formal Language in Natural
Language Processing
Raja Shan Zaker Krenn
Kongens Lyngby 2019
Supervisor: Ole Winther, DTU Compute
Co-Supervisor: Alexander Rosenberg Johansen
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis is concerned with investigating modern methods in machine trans-
lation, in the context of formal language. It begins with an exposition of formal
language in the extent that it will be used further on. The methods behind
common paradigms in machine translation are then detailed, with an emphasis
on simplicity and a shared model for attention. In the experimental section,
two formal language tasks from diﬀerent positions in the Chomsky Hierarchy
are detailed.
Experiments on the generalization ability of a range of neural
architectures are then performed and compared with models utilizing several
diﬀerent tasks, to build a shared representation in the model.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at undersøge moderne metoder i maskinoversæt-
telse, i kontekst af formelle sprog. Den begynder ved en forklaring af formelle
sprog i det omfang det vil blive brugt senere hen. Metoderne bag gængse pa-
radigmer i maskinoversættelse bliver herefter gennemgået, med en fokus på de
simple aspekter og en fælles model for "attention". I den eksperimentelle sek-
tion bliver to opgaver fra forskellige steder i Chomsky hierarkiet vist. De bliver
brugt til at udføre eksperimenter omhandlende neurale arkitekturers evne til at
generalisere og sammenlignes til slut med modeller som er blevet bygget ved
hjælp af adskillige opgavr, for at bygge en fælles repræsentation i modellen.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in partial fulﬁlment of the require-
ments for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with the interplay between formal methods in Computer Science
and a more empirically founded style of analysis, as is usually found in modern
publications in the ﬁeld of Machine Learning.
The thesis consists of an introduction, theory sections on formal language and
machine translation, as well as a section on tools and implementation, results,
a discussion and a conclusion. In an added appendix, additional proofs and
consistency results are shown, but they are not essential for the main narrative.
At the very end is attached a copy of the original project plan, with added
comments, to give the reader an overview of the creation process.
Lyngby, 08-August-2019
Raja Shan Zaker Krenn
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor at DTU compute, Ole Winther, for valuable
insight and for cutting the proverbial red tape. I am very grateful for the enthu-
siasm and tenacity of Alexander Johansen, who has been a veritable wellspring
of ideas and encouragement. While his own story is inspiring and gives food
for thought, it is through his passion for Deep Learning that a community has
sprung up at DTU, that can support and inspire students, present and future.
Finally I would like to thank Anders Søgaard at DIKU, for coming up with
many of the ideas that constitute the foundation for this project, as well as
always constructuve advice.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Formal Language and Learning Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Formal Language
5
2.1
Language and Automata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Regular Language and Finite Automata . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Context-Free Language and Pushdown Automata . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Turing Machines and the Chomsky Hierarchy . . . . . . .
13
3
Machine Translation
17
3.1
Supervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Generalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Neural Machine Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Neural Networks, Encoders and Decoders . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Extensions to the neuron
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
Attention Mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.1
Self Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4
Multitask Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.5
Language recognition as learning problem . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Tools and Implementation
39
4.1
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Data Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3.1
Parity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.2
Dyck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3.3
Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3.4
Counting Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Results
51
5.1
Neural Machine Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.1.1
SRNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.1.2
Hidden Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.1.3
Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2.1
General Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2.2
Self Attention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.3
Multitask Neural Machine Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.1
Embedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
5.3.2
Training Window . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3.3
Rademacher Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6
Discussion
97
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7
Conclusion
101
A Consistency
103
B Project Plan
107
Bibliography
111
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Formal Language and Learning Algorithms
Natural language is a diverse and complicated phenomenon. Many attempts
have been made to formalize the very notion and provide a solid mathematical
background for the common notion of human language. One of the most suc-
cessful and widely applied attempts, has grown into the ﬁeld of formal language.
Formal language seeks to uncover the structure inherent in language, when seen
as a collection of symbols arranged in strings. The connection to computing
goes back to the origin of both ﬁelds and they continue to be closely related.
Modern Machine Learning methods, many falling under the umbrella term
"Deep Learning", are notoriously diﬃcult to analyze, dependent as they are
on huge amount of trainable parameters. New and exciting discoveries in the
ﬁeld abound, with applications being found in an ever wider array of ﬁelds.
Of these ﬁelds, a very active one is machine translation, where the automatic
translation of sequences in one domain into another is sought. In the modern
setting, there seems to be a hierarchy of models in machine translation, with
the ﬁeld gaining ever more results, ﬁrst using architectures based on LSTM’s,
then GRU’s and recently relying only on attention.
Much work has been done to associate Deep Learning and Formal Language
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Theory, but few of these are working with transduction models. In this thesis,
we seek to partially remedy this fact, by studying both the performance and
internal representation of a class of encoder-decoder models in the context of
formal language. These languages are beneﬁcial when seeking causal explana-
tions with complicated networks, as they have a very simple and well understood
structure. We test the ability of popular models in machine translation to learn
representations of languages that require memory and the ability to count. We
then look at how these abilities are expressed in some of the networks and how
they may lack. In the end, we use empirical complexity measures and weights
to show that multitask learning is an eﬀective regularizer when training net-
works to represent these formal languages. We begin this section with literature
review, motivation and a formal problem statement. We then go on to have
a section concerning the methods of formal language. After this, a methods
section on neural machine translation. After these are concluded, a section on
both the tools, implementation and data generation are presented. The ﬁrst two
show some of the considerations made, when computational tools were chosen
and to what degree the problem informed the choice of implementation. Data
generation concerns what data we will be working on, as well as some results and
considerations concerning said sets of data. After this, a section on experiments
and at the end, a discussion, a conclusion and an appendix.
1.2
Literature Review
Formal language methods in Deep Learning is still in its infancy. There are
several reasons for this.
The history of the connection between formal lan-
guage and machine learning goes back to the foundational texts in Computer
Science [MP43]. Notions such as computational complexity evolved in tandem
with tentative attempts understand and eventually emulate human intelligence
[TUR50]. While initially promising, methods based on neural networks saw a
steep decline in usability after early successes [Ros58], while the ﬁeld of formal
language found wide applicability, especially in Linguistics [Cho56]. Together
with faster hardware, new neural network architectures resurrected the ﬁeld in
the 90s [Elm90], [HS97], [BDVJ03]. Since then, neural networks have found
application in an ever wider array of ﬁelds and remain the go-to framework for
modern studies on machine learning in NLP [PSY+18].
Machine translation was once a ﬁeld of complex heuristics and extensive feature
engineering [Mad09].
This all changed with the advent of end-to-end train-
able Neural Machine translation Systems. These advances were made possible
by a proliferation of computing devices that allow eﬃcient parallel computing
[CWV+14].
The architectures pioneered in [BCB15], [CvMG+14] and many
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Motivation
3
others, led to a paradigm of end-to-end trained, encoder-decoder structured
models based on RNN’s. Only recently has this paradigm been challenged, by
a family of models, that only rely on attention, ﬁrst introduced in [VSP+17].
Investigation of the computational capabilities of these new methods, have
mainly followed the approach in [SS92] and [SS95], in that the problem of learn-
ing a formal language is construed as a problem of sequence prediction. The
work was followed up in [GS01]. The setting of machine translation is diﬀerent
and here, focus has mainly been on empirical methods of investigation, such as
those seen in [WGY18]. [Mer19]
Empirical measures of performance on speciﬁcally the Dyck languages has been
studied in [SBS19] and [SGBMS19]. In the ﬁrst, the ek measure is used to better
quantify generalization for that type of language. In the latter, the activations
of a network are used to show the simple structures that emerge in networks,
when trained on the structures in a formal language.
The parity problem for neural nets has been investigated in [SH96] and [Gra16].
Attempts to formalize RNN’s as approximations of formal language recognizers
have recently been made in [CGKM17] where RNN are considered as weighted
language recognizers, in [MSV+19], where attempts are made, to show that
the activations of an RNN can approximate the states and transitions found in
ﬁnite automata and [Mer19], where asymptotic bounds are sought for the state
complexity of a range of recurrent architectures.
Very similar to the thesis is the article [YVK19], where the attention is ﬁrmly
put on attention. Another is [STK18].
1.3
Motivation
If we are to properly assess the performance of modern methods in machine
learning, we need to know why they perform the way they do. The models
customarily used in Natural Language Processing are usually large and com-
plicated, serving as a barrier to interpretation. Fields such as Programming
Language Theory and Computational Linguistics make wide use of formalized
notions of complexity in the tasks that they consider. In NLP the data itself
can be a source of great complexity, as there are many complicated structures
present in natural language. By choosing to focus on few aspects of natural
language, namely the ability to count and the length of a dependence, we hope
to shed some light on how machine translation models manage to generalize on
these tasks. These notions are encoded in a class of language known as the Dyck
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
languages and they serve as our main object of study. These notions have been
studied for problems such as sequence prediction, but to the authors knowledge,
no study has applied machine translation models to the problem of context-free
transduction.
1.4
Problem Statement
The goal of this project is to investigate the computational capacity of Neural
Machine Translation in the context of learning formal languages. The language
classes most relevant to NLP, are postulated to be the classes of regular lan-
guages and context-free languages. As human language is thought to be located
mostly in the intersection between these classes, it is of relevance to assess how
well these languages are learnt my modern frameworks and to identify which
aspects of these languages are diﬃcult for the diﬀerent paradigms in machine
translation.
For this problem, it will be investigated how formal language can be used in
conjunction with NLP, in particular with Machine Learning. With a task from
the class of regular language and one from the context-free languages, we will
investigate the ability of neural methods to generalize to unseen data.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Formal Language
In the 1950’s a series of massive simpliﬁcations were suggested, for the then
very empirically founded domain of natural language. The work, spearheaded
by Chomsky, completely eschewed meaning in language and many factors such as
frequency and context dependence were similarly ignored. A crucial part of the
simplifying assumptions concerns the notion that restrictions on short strings
apply to strings of arbitrary length. Though the ﬁeld represents just one way
of looking at natural language, the success of the framework in Linguistics and
in such disparate ﬁelds as Computer Science and Molecular Biology, suggests
that it captures an essential aspect of the complexity found in natural language
and other computational systems. In the subsequent chapters, Language can
refer to any, structured, computational system, while Natural Language, refers
loosely to our every-day notion of Language, as a spoken, written or gestured
medium for communication between humans.
2.1
Language and Automata
In a formal setting, a language can be considered as a sequence of strings. The
symbols representing this language can, for example, be characters and words
in English, notes in Music Theory or amino-acid pairs and genes in Genomics.
==PAGE:18==
6
Formal Language
This notion serves as the basis for the ﬁeld of Formal Language theory and the
related ﬁeld of Automata [HMU14]. In the following, we seek to formalize these
notions and introduce the constituents with which we will be working.
Deﬁnition 2.1.1. An alphabet is a ﬁnite, non-empty set of symbols.
As a simple example, we can consider the Latin alphabet, used in English and
other natural languages. This is chosen because of the familiarity of the concept,
but the deﬁnition is much broader than this and can refer to any kind of encoding
that can be represented ﬁnitely.
Example 2.1. The Latin Alphabet consists of the set of lower and upper case
Latin letters. If we call the alphabet α
α = {A, B, C, ..., a, b, c, ..z}
(2.1)
Next is the concept of a String. Be it a sentence in human language or the
genetic code for a certain gene in mice, a string is formed by concatenating
symbols from an alphabet, to form a directed sequence of symbols from said
alphabet. Concatenation denotes the process of appending symbols end-to-end.
Deﬁnition 2.1.2. A string is a ﬁnite sequence of symbols, chosen from an
alphabet.
Example 2.2. ’Hello’, ’Goodbye’, ’red’, ’yellow’, and ’COMPUTATION’, are
all strings chosen from the alphabet α. Adding the < space > character, rep-
resented as ’ ’, allows us to form strings such as ’Where is the good robot’,
while further adding punctuation allows strings that can be seen as sentences in
a natural language. Thus, ’Where are you going, mr. robot.’ and ’Hey! Can
you give me an example of a computation?’ are both examples of strings from
english, with its added punctuation and spaces.
While we have not imposed any length restrictions on strings aside from being
ﬁnite, it may not be practical to reduce any phenomenon under scrutiny to a
single string. By considering a set of strings instead, we arrive at a more ﬂexible
framework.
Deﬁnition 2.1.3. A language is a set of strings, over some alphabet.
Example 2.3. A very simple language can be constructed from the strings in
the previous example.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Language and Automata
7
Even though the set of strings deﬁning a language can be inﬁnite, it would be
preferable to have a ﬁnite way of describing possible strings. This is usually
done by using a Grammar. Four things are needed to specify a grammar. First,
a ﬁnite vocabulary of symbols, that is, an alphabet. These are the symbols that
appear in the language described by the grammar. They are called Terminals.
Second, a ﬁnite vocabulary of extra symbols, called Non-Terminals, used to
make derivations in the grammar. Third, a special start symbols and fourth, a
ﬁnite set of rules. The nature of these rules is what distinguishes a grammar in
relation to others and decides its computational complexity.
Deﬁnition 2.1.4. A Grammar is a quadruple (VT , VN, S, R) , where VT is a
set of terminal symbols, VN is a set of non-terminal symbols, S is the initial
symbol and R is a set of rules.
Example 2.4. For notational convenience we will usually denote terminal sym-
bols with lower-case letters and non-terminals with upper-case letters. A simple
grammar can be constructed by letting, VT = {a, b}, VN = {S, A, B}, with S as
the initial symbol. The set of rules could then be the following.
R =



















S →ABS
S →
AB →BA
BA →AB
A →a
B →b
Given a grammar, we can specify a derivation of that grammar by a sequence
of strings, x1, x2, .., xn, so that x1 = S and for each 1 < i ≤n, xi is produced
from xi−1 by applying a rule of R. The language L generated by a grammar
G, abbreviated L(G), denotes the set of all the strings that can be generated
by that grammar. Grammars are not the only way to characterize languages.
There is a direct correspondence between grammars and abstract computing
devices called automata [PMW90].
Automata are implementation-agnostic abstractions of computing systems [Min67].
They are models, designed to capture speciﬁc aspects of computing systems. As
with other models in science, they are chosen to highlight certain aspects of a
natural phenomenon, but may be inaccurate in other respects. They are not
meant as speciﬁcations for designing real computing systems, but as useful ab-
stractions. Their main utility lies being able to provide a ﬁnite representation
for a language that may be an inﬁnite set. At their core, automata deal with in-
put and output, which in our case will we assumed to be discrete. Furthermore,
==PAGE:20==
8
Formal Language
we will not deal with automata with probabilistic behaviour. A fundamental
part of an automaton is the concept of a state. Serving as an abstraction of
the arrangement of bits in registers and memory in real computing devices, this
concept characterizes the input output relationship of the automaton and can
change during the course of computation. A last and crucial concept is mem-
ory. For the simplest machines, this consists of the states themselves. The more
powerful classes of automata may employ potentially unlimited memory. While
automata have many possible uses, we will mainly use them as language accep-
tors. That is, given a string, the automaton will accept strings from a language
while it will reject its complement. Equivalent is the concept of only generat-
ing strings belonging to some grammar. We say that a machine recognizes a
language that it accepts.
2.1.1
Regular Language and Finite Automata
The ﬁrst class of language we will consider, are the Regular Languages. The
set of regular languages can be enumerated by construction. We consider the
alphabet Σ.
• The empty language ∅and the language consisting of the empty string {}
are Regular.
• For every a ∈Σ, the language {a} is a Regular language.
• If X and Y are Regular languages, their union, their concatenation and
their Keene Closure are Regular languages.
The Regular languages are exactly the ones that can be expressed this way.
We can thus enumerate any possible Regular language over a given alphabet
recursively. We see that this class of language corresponds with the familiar
notion of a Regular Expression. From the perspective of a grammar, the regular
languages, are the languages that are generated, only using rules of the form
A →a or A →aB, where A, B denote arbitrary non-terminal symbols and a
denotes a terminal symbol. Being regular is thus a very heavy restriction on the
types of strings that can be formed.
Regular Languages can equivalently be considered as the class of Language that
can be recognized by a Finite Automaton. A Finite Automaton is a simple model
of a machine that has a very limited memory. We state the formal deﬁnition a
certain type of ﬁnite automaton, the deterministic ﬁnite automaton or DFA.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Language and Automata
9
• Q A ﬁnite set of States
• Σ A ﬁnite set of input symbols
• δ A Transition Function, taking an input symbol and a state as input
function. These are often represented as arcs between states, when con-
sidered graphically. When q is a state and a is an input symbol, δ(q, a) is
the state such that there is an arc labelled a from q to the new state.
• q0 An Initial State in Q.
• F A set of ﬁnal or Accepting States. This must be a subset of Q.
A DFA decides whether an input string is in the Language recognized by the
machine, by starting in the initial state q0.
The input string is a sequence
of symbols a1a2...an. It then reads the ﬁrst symbol in the input string. The
transition function is then consulted to ﬁnd the next state, say δ (q0, a1) = q1.
The DFA is in this new state before it begins to process the next symbol in the
sequence. This process is repeated until the string is exhausted. If the state
after processing of an, say qn is in F, the DFA is in an accepting state and the
string said to be "accepted". If qn /∈F, the string is said to be "rejected". This
very simple deﬁnition of computation will be a recurring theme throughout. A
DFA can be augmented by introducing -transitions, which can be made without
consulting the input string. They can thus represent branching decisions. If the
restrictions are loosened on the number
Figure 2.1: An example of a deterministic ﬁnite automaton.
This machine
accepts all bit strings with odd parity if the accepting state is set
to "odd" and all even parity strings if the accepting state is set to
"even".
As an example of a regular language pattern that occurs in natural language,
we consider the concept of iterated negation [HD96]. In a simpliﬁed setting, this
can be boiled down to testing a binary string for parity. Consider ﬁgure 2.1.
The machine is very simple and can be enumerated as follows. Q = {even, odd},
Σ = {0, 1}, q0 = even and F can be set to either even or odd. The transition
function can be enumerated by a table due to the small number of states.
==PAGE:22==
10
Formal Language
q
a
δ(q, a)
even
0
even
odd
1
even
even
1
odd
odd
0
odd
This automaton can thus be set to recognize the binary strings with equal parity,
binary strings woth odd parity or any binary string, according to which states
are set as accepting states. This speaks to the simplicity of this regular language.
It is a fundamental result in the theory of computation, that any regular lan-
guage has a Deterministic ﬁnite automaton that recognizes it [?].
Further-
more, it is also well established, that any deterministic ﬁnite state automaton
is completely equivalent with a nondeterministc ﬁnite automaton. This sim-
pliﬁes matters, as the deterministic ones are often easier to understand, while
nondeterministic automata allow for simple structure in the automaton.
2.1.2
Context-Free Language and Pushdown Automata
While we can express a large class of languages with the Regular languages,
they are limited by a memory. The ability of a ﬁnite automaton to look back in
a string is entirely dependent on the number of states in the machine. Regular
grammars can thus count, but only up to a certain number.
This number
may be very large, but it is ﬁnite. What is even more inhibiting, especially in
relation to natural language, is the inability of regular grammars to perform
unbounded length comparisons on strings. To see why this is, we will proceed
with an informal argument. To decide a string, for each regular grammar G, it
is possible to construct and algorithm (in this case a DFA), that has to read a
string from left to right and output ’yes’ if the string is in the language of the
grammar and ’no’ if not. If k is the number of non-terminals in the grammar, the
algorithm is at each point in one of k+1 states. Suppose then that L(G) = anbn
is regular. We further let K be a regular grammar, recognizing L, that has k∗
non-terminals. This means that the corresponding recognition algorithm has
k ∗+1 unique states.
We let i be a number, greater than k ∗+1.
Due to
the assumption, aibi is in L(G.
When the algorithm reads the string, more
speciﬁcally the a’s at the beginning of the string, it will, after at most k ∗+1
steps, visit the same state at least twice. So for the algorithm, a sequence of i
a’s, will be indistinguishable from i −k consecutive a’s. So if the string aibi is
accepted, so is ai−kbi. As this string is not in anbn, that is a contradiction and
so, anbn is not regular.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Language and Automata
11
What we have presented informally is often used to prove that a language is not
regular. In its formal deﬁnition, it is known as Pumping Lemma for Regular
Languages [Sip97]. This leads to a grammar, that is less constrained than the
regular grammar. This grammar consists of every rule, that can be stated as
A →φ, where A is any non-terminal and φ is any string. This leads to the
name Context-free Grammar. Formally a Context-free grammar is a quadruple
(V Σ, R, S), where, as previously seen, V is a ﬁnite set of non-terminals, Σ is a
ﬁnite set of terminals deﬁning the language of the grammar productions, R is a
relation governing possible transitions in the grammar.
As Context-Free Languages are intimately related to counting and memory, the
machine capable of recognizing them makes use of an additional structure. This
structure, essentially a tape, also called a Stack, helps the machine keep track
of the symbols seen to far. It works by the principle of "last in, ﬁrst out", the
last added element, is the ﬁrst to be removed.
The machine recognizing this class of languages is called a Pushdown Automa-
ton or PDA and consists of a ﬁnite automaton augmented with a stack. This
leads to a formal deﬁnition. A Pushdown Automaton is a septuple PDA =
(Q, Σ, Γ, δ, q0, Z0, F).
• Q: A ﬁnite set of states, as in a ﬁnite automaton
• Σ: A ﬁnite set of input symbols
• Γ: A ﬁnite set of symbols, deﬁning the stack alphabet.
• δ: A transition function
• q0: A start state
• Z: A Start symbol
• F: The set of accepting states
Like with ﬁnite automata, pushdown automata read an input left to right. The
diﬀerence comes when we consider the transitions. The PDA allows for the top
symbol of the stack to be read, removed, added to or left unchanged. A general
form of such a transition can be written (qi, a, s) →(qj, λ). qi, qj ∈Q are states
and can be diﬀerent or equal, a ∈Σ, s ∈Γ is a member of the stack alphabet
and λ ∈Γ is a string of symbols from the stack alphabet. The interpretation
is straightforward. When in state qi, the machine reads a from the input and
s from the top of the stack. It then goes to state qj and replaces s by λ. The
entire string λ is pushed to the stack, so the ﬁrst element in λ ends up furthest
==PAGE:24==
12
Formal Language
down in the stack. At the beginning of computation, the stack is assumed to
be empty. Acceptance of a language occurs when 3 conditions are met. 1. The
entire input is read, 2. the PDA is in a state marked as a ﬁnal state and 3. the
stack is empty.
Figure 2.2: An illustration of a pushdown automaton.
In the plethora of context free languages, we wish to choose a subclass of lan-
guage that has an interesting structure, when considered in the context of NLP.
The choice has fallen on the Dyck Languages, henceforth abbreviated as D.
These consists of languages where the strings consist of well-formed parenthesis
pairs, that is, parenthesis-pairs where each open parenthesis is closed by a paren-
thesis of the same kind. We ﬁrst consider D1, the version where there is only
one type of parenthesis in the language. For our purposes, we assume this pair
to be {(, )} When a string of this language is processed, it must be true that at
each step of the computation, the number of open parentheses must be greater
or equal to the number of closing ones. Consider the string x1, .., x2n If we let
the function f assign a value of 1 to an open parenthesis and −1 to a closed one,
then it must always be true at step j that j
i=1 f(xi) ≥0, with equality when
we reach the end of the string and j = 2n. The requisite PDA for recognizing
the D1 language is simple, in that the structure of the language lends itself well
to the stack data structure. All the PDA has to do is to push to the stack upon
reading an open parenthesis and pop from stack when reading a closed one.
We have seen earlier in this section that this can be done [CFMR68]. As with
the ﬁnite automaton, the PDA is equivalent with its nondeterministic version,
which we will not consider here, but which has greaat theoretical signiﬁcance
[Sip97].
As we would expect to have several dependencies in a sentence in natural lan-
guage, we can also consider Dyck languages with more types of parentheses.
These, we call the Dk languages, denoting languages composed of strings with
k types of parenthesis, each well-formed. D −k has greater signiﬁcance than
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Language and Automata
13
might be readily apparent, due to its position at the centre of context free lan-
guages. The following theorem is reproduced without proof from [CS63] and is
called the Chomsky-Schützenberger Theorem.
Theorem 2.1.1. Any Context-free language can be represented as a homeo-
morphism of the intersection between a Dk language and a regular language
R.
It is further proposed in [SGBMS19] that Dk is reducible to D2. This context-
free universality of D2 is why we choose it as a useful benchmark.
2.1.3
Turing Machines and the Chomsky Hierarchy
There are Languages that cannot be recognized by a push-down automaton and
are thus not context-free. A simple example is a pattern of the form anbbcn with
n ≥1. To recognize a language of this form, an automaton needs a memory
component that is more ﬂexible than the stack. A machine that can recognize
the language makes use of a control unit as before and a tape, with read and
write capabilities. The control unit can furthermore move both right and left of
the tape. This provides a lot of ﬂexibility and as the tape is assumed to be inﬁ-
nite, a lot of memory. The class of languages recognized by such a machine are
called the Context-sensitive languages. The class of automata able to recognize
this class of language is called a Turing Machine. The formal grammars thus
presented, represent diﬀerent levels of computational hierarchy [Cho56]. As-
cending in this hierarchy corresponds to removing more and more restrictions
from the grammars deﬁning each language class. There are languages that not
even a Turing Machine can recognize, but we are getting ahead of ourselves.
The elements presented thus far, concern any computational setting. The ques-
tion most pertinent to us, is where natural language is situated in the hierar-
chy of languages and computational models. This touches upon the structures
present in natural language. Some of the notions presented thus far, can be
illustrated by examples from human languages [Bra18]. As an example of a
supra-regular structure in English, we can consider the general pattern: anbn.
The dog ran
The dog [the girl liked] ran
The dog [the girl [the dinosaur stepped over] liked] ran
This embedding can be repeated ad inﬁnitum and still be grammatically cor-
rect. As the number of center embeddings rises, it becomes more and more
==PAGE:26==
14
Formal Language
diﬃcult for humans to process, but it is still a valid construction. That English
is context-free, has been proved by counterexample [Hig84]. That some natural
languages exhibit structures that cannot be captured by context-free grammars
has been proposed in [Shi85]. The canonical example of context sensitive phe-
nomena in natural language concerns cross-serial dependencies in Swiss-German
[JR12]. These are simply put, when the dependency relation between two series
of words cross. Of note however, is that it took a long time to ﬁnd evidence
for these structures in natural language. They are not intrinsic parts of every-
day utterances, but are rare and rather contrived structures. As an example,
consider the following snippet in swiss-german [JR12].
dass
mer
d’chind
em
Hans
es
Huus
lönd
hälfe
aanstriiche
.
Translated as: "that we let the children help Hans paint the house". We see that
the dependencies let-children, help-Hans, paint-house cross each other. Similar
structures have been postulated for Bambara and Dutch, but they do not seem
to be a universal feature of natural language.
To sum up, we present the Chomsky Hierarchy, in descending order of complex-
ity [Cho56]. As discussed, the position of natural language, while not certain,
is often assumed to be located in the murky waters between being regular and
context free.
In the following enumeration, capital letters denote terminal, while greek letters
can be strings of both terminals and non-terminals. Lowercase letters are only
terminals. If the greek letter γ is used, it means that the string is not empty.
• Type 0 or unrestricted
This class of language has unrestricted production rules in its grammars.
These are rules of the form αAβ →β
• Type 1 or context-sensitive The grammars for these languages have rules
of the form αAβ →αγβ
• Type 2 or context-free The class we are mainly concerned with, has pro-
duction rules of the form A →α
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Language and Automata
15
Figure 2.3: The Chomsky Hierarchy, with the middle circle being the class of
languages with the lowest complexity, ascending in complexity as
the outer part of the circle is reached.
• Type 3 or regular The simplest class, with production rules being the
restricted A →a and A →aB
We have now seen an explicit Deterministic ﬁnite automaton, that could solve
a simple problem that might appear in an NLP application. We have also seen
that Natural language might possess structure that cannot be processed in that
framework. A spoiler alert for later in the thesis, but the languages we will
consider are intimately related to counting. As the pushdown automata can
become very complicated, very fast, we will not try to make causal explanations
based on a general architecture. A family of machines that are close to the ﬁnite
automata, but which can still recognize languages that need a form of counting
are the counter machines [CFMR68]. We will describe a simpliﬁed variant, that
corresponds in some simple ways to the notion of a recurrent state updater as
we will meet in chapter 3. This is called a k-counter machine [CFMR68]. Deﬁne
the function z : Zk →{0, 1}k. Taking a vector of integers to a vector of zeros
and ones. It works by designating, for every n ∈Zk for i ∈[1, k], z(n)i = 0
only for ni = 0.
It masks the integers to only take into account zero-ness.
We deﬁne a vector of operations u ∈{−1, +1, ×0, ×1}k to serve as pontwise
applications of those operations. Thus if u is (−1, +1, ×0), applying it yields
o((1, 2, 3)) = (0, 3, 0).
Now the k-counter or KCM is a septuple, K = Σ, Q, q0, kδ, u, F	. All of these
parameters are identical to the ones deﬁned for the general Pushdown Automa-
==PAGE:28==
16
Formal Language
ton that was enumerated earlier in the chapter. New addition are k and u. k is
the number of counters. u is the update function, that was deﬁned earlier, but
is now dependent on the input symbol u : Σ →{+1, −1, ×1 × 0}. Now the set
of conﬁgurations of this machine is deﬁned as the cartesian product of the state
set Q and Zk. An initial conﬁguration can then be set as (q0, 0). The second
element is the counter and it is initialized to 0. We now deﬁne the transitions of
the machine. It takes a conﬁguration and an input. We can give these an index
t to highlight the sequential context. wt ∈Σ and ct = (q, n) where n ∈Zk.
The conﬁguration at the next time step is then δ(q, wt, z(n)), u(wt)(n)). The
language that this machine recognizes is the one that sets it into an accepting
conﬁguration.
Now we have deﬁned a hierarchy of language and machines, that given a string in
a language, can output a decision, either accept (recognize) or reject. A scholarly
consensus seems to have built, that human language is to be found in the area
at the edges of the regular and the context free languages. Our tasks in the
experimental part of the thesis will be chosen to reﬂect this. These are still very
wide classes of languages, as evidenced by their grammars, so we need to be even
more speciﬁc as to what our domain of study is. Two pertinent questions that
arise in natural language, are long-range dependencies and counting phenomena
[KCA17]. In the section on data generation, we describe a machine translation
task, that is designed to test both of these complications. The considerations
have deliberately been kept sparse, as only a few aspects of formal language
are relevant to the task. Originally we had included an example here of how to
convert a simple neural network to a ﬁnite automaton. It ended up being to
similar to [AS95], however. Instructions on how to do so can be found in [Sie99].
We refer instead to the parity calculator, which is shown as an automaton in
chapter 2 and as a recurrent neural net in chapter 5.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Machine Translation
Machine translation is the process of translating text or speech from one lan-
guage into another, using software. It can be considered a sub-ﬁeld of computa-
tional linguistics and has a long history, with a plethora of diﬀerent methods and
heuristics [Koe11]. The ﬁeld experienced signiﬁcant breakthrough around 2014,
with the introduction of end-to-end Neural Machine Translation as exempliﬁed
in for example [CvM+14], and [SVL14]. This led to the complete overhaul of
the ﬁeld, with complex systems relying on feature engineering, being replaced
with end-to-end sequence to sequence models.
In this chapter, we will introduce the formal setting of machine translation as
a supervised learning problem. This is followed by an exploration of a modern
paradigm in the ﬁeld, namely Neural Machine Translation, which seems to be
the leading architecture choice in modern applications.
3.1
Supervised Learning
Supervised learning is a Machine Learning scenario, in which the learner receives
labelled examples as training pairs. The goal of the learner is then to generalize
to unseen examples [MRT18]. We consider an input of N training examples:
{(x1, y1), ..(xN, yN)}. The inputs are taken from a set X, the labels from a set Y .
==PAGE:30==
18
Machine Translation
For i = 1..N, xi is a feature vector and yi is the corresponding label. The goal
of supervised learning is then to ﬁnd a function h, that takes the inputs into the
labels, h : X →Y [HTF01]. We call this function the hypothesis. Formally then,
a Learning Algorithm can be seen as a map A, from 
n∈N (X × Y)n →Yn. The
range of this map, i.e. the set of functions that can be expressed by the map
and thus, by the learning algorithm, forms a set F.
Some probabilistic assumptions are needed. All of the pairs (xi, yi) are seen as
random variables (Xi, Yi), independently and identically distributed according
to some measure P on X × Y. The corresponding Borel σ-algebra is assumed
to be composed of the Borel σ-algebras according to the usual topology [Sch05].
The aim of a learning algorithm is then to ﬁnd a good hypothesis h, with respect
to a chosen Loss Function L : Y × Y →R. This function measure how far h(x)
is from the corresponding y. To measure how good a hypothesis is, we can take
the average of the loss function over a set of examples. The smaller the average
loss, which is called the risk.
R(h) =

X×Y
L(y, h(x))dP(x, y)
(3.1)
The main problem here, is that the probability measure P is unknown. Using
the training data, we thus wish to minimize the risk, without the ability to
evaluate it directly. One helping feature is prior knowledge. This can be included
implicitly in the family of hypotheses under consideration F and the choice of
hyperparameters chosen during training. Secondly, even though the risk cannot
be evaluated, it can be estimated on a set of data. We also call this the sample
error.
ˆR(h) = 1
n
n

i=1
L(yi, h(xi))
(3.2)
A basic result in statistical inference states that no single learning algorithm
will produce optimal results on all problems [Wol96]. Choosing a function class
H, so that we not only minimize the sample error, but are able to generalize to
unseen examples motivates the next section.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Supervised Learning
19
3.1.1
Generalization
The usual supervised learning scenario composed of a ﬁnite set of examples, used
to hopefully make accurate predictions about unseen examples. The ability of
an algorithm to generalize to out of sample examples is termed its ability to
generalize and the concept is known as generalization. Generalization is related
to the ability of an algorithm to avoid overﬁtting to the problem at hand. This
is especially pertinent in modern Machine Learning models, where we can be
dealing with a great many parameters, many more than are needed to classify
a typical pattern seen during training [GBC16].
There are many ways to avoid overﬁtting to a problem. A basic way is to hold out
some data and use it as a proxy for generalization error during training. Another
is to split data into many folds, sequentially training a model on a random subset
of the data and testing the data on another. This process is a popular choice
and is called cross-validation [HTF01]. Another is to use Learning Theory to
bound the generalization error. There are several frameworks in common use,
including PAC-learnability and VC-dimension, see [MRT18], but we will focus
on Rademacher complexity of a function class. Function classes are here to be
understood as the models we encounter in machine learning. That is, given
an input, the models give a numerical output. This can be a binary number
for classiﬁcation or a real-valued output for a regression problem. If a class of
functions is rich, it is able to better ﬁt random labels. This is what Rademacher
Complexity measures.
We now introduce a random variable, that assigns a random label σi to each
data example. This variable is known as a Rademacher random variable. It
takes on a value of 1 or -1, each with probability 1/2. From this, one can form
a complexity measure, that is independent of the real labels of the data under
consideration. This is called the Rademacher Complexity. Given a set A ⊂Rm,
the Rademacher Complexity of A is deﬁned as.
R(A) = Eσ
	
max
a∈A
1
m

i
σiai

(3.3)
We now generalize from the broad deﬁnition of a hypothesis class A to the class
of real-valued function F : X →R. Sampling S = (xi, .., xn), xi ∈X, we can
thus deﬁne the Empirical Rademacher Complexity.
==PAGE:32==
20
Machine Translation
ˆRS (F) = Eσ
	
sup
f∈F
1
m
m

i=1
σif(xi)

(3.4)
The max has been replaced by a sup, as we are dealing with a possibly ﬁnite
function class. To satisfy ourselves that this deﬁnes a measure, we can consider
two edge cases. If H consists of only one function, the complexity is 0, as taking
the expectation over the σ’s will eliminate all of the terms. If, on the other
hand A is shattered by H [MRT18], the complexity is 1, as we can always ﬁnd a
hypothesis that matches all of the σ’s. Taking the expectation of the empirical
Rademacher Complexity over the distribution X yields the expected Rademacher
Complexity.
Rm (F) = ES

ˆRS (F)

(3.5)
The Rademacher complexity is used to provide generalization bounds for a
family of functions. Consider F as a family of functions f : Z →[0, 1] and
S = (xi, .., xn), is i.i.d and xi ∼X.
Now deﬁne ˜ES [f] =
1
m

i f(xi) and
Ex∼X [f(x)]. These are similar to the familiar notions of training and general-
ization error. With these and the Rademacher complexities earlier deﬁned, it is
proved in [MRT18], that with probability at least 1 −δ, then for all f ∈F.
E [] ≤˜ES [f] + 2Rm (F) + O

log
 1
δ

m
(3.6)
(3.7)
While Rademacher Complexity relies on the performance of models under scrutiny,
it does not tell us anything about what happens internally in the model during
training and inference. It can thus be used as a tool for comparison, but in the
naive form presented, it is agnostic as to the the form and dynamics of a learned
representation. In the case of Neural Networks and extensions to them, probing
the inner structure of a model can be a daunting task, but collective measures
such as the norm of a subset of weights, can be used to provide a rough window
into the model.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Neural Machine Translation
21
3.2
Neural Machine Translation
The setting in which we are discussing machine translation, is that of sequence-
to-sequence learning. Presented with a sequence of inputs, each tokenized ac-
cording to a given vocabulary, the translation system will output a sequence
of tokens in the same or another vocabulary. Thus, when we are speaking of
input, output or equivalently source and target, we mean a sequence of vectors,
each representing a vocabulary item for the language under scrutiny. Consider
input sequence (x1, ..xT ) and output sequence (y1, ..yS), where T and S are not
necessarily equal. What we want to estimate, is then the probability of a given
output sequence, conditioned on the input sequence. We will then choose the
most likely sequence and call it the translation.
p(y1, ..yS|x1, ..xT ) =
S

t=1
p(yt|c, y1, ..yt−1)
(3.8)
As
3.2.1
Neural Networks, Encoders and Decoders
At its most general, a Neural Network is an assembly of processing units or
"Neurons". We distinguish between a Neural Network in the context of Biology,
from where part of the inspiration for the concept originates, and the Artiﬁcial
Neural Network or ANN. In an ANN, each neuron compute a scalar activation
function of its input. This very simple relationship, is of the sort y = f(x, θ),
with y ∈R, x ∈Rn and f being the activation function.
This activation
function is usually chosen so that it represents a threshold, conditioned on the
input. Each unit is called a "node", to emphasize the network aspect. θ ∈Rd
is a vector of parameters [GBC16].
A common way to structure the network, is to place neurons in layers, where each
neuron in a given layer feeds into every neuron in the immediately succeeding
layer.
Each connection between Neurons is weighted by a weight value and
possibly a bias. A computation of this network consists of feeding an input to
every neuron in the ﬁrst layer, compute the activations and feeding the resulting
values into the next layer. This sort of network is called a Multilayer Perceptron
or less ambiguously, a Feedforward Neural Network [Nie18]. In the structure
presented thus far, no learning takes place. An input is presented to the network
and an output is calculated.
==PAGE:34==
22
Machine Translation
Figure 3.1: A simple sketch of how a Feedforward Neural Network is struc-
tured.
To make the network learn, it is situated in the setting of Supervised Machine
learning. We now have labeled examples of desired input-output pairs and wish
to construct a network that expresses the structure in the data. The amount
of "wrongness" or loss for a given input-output pair, can then be quantiﬁed
by a loss function, as previously discussed. A popular choice is cross-entropy.
As the output of a network habitually produces a probability distribution over
the next token, the loss function works by penalizing diﬀerence from the true
distribution. So for class i, for true probability distribution y and predicted
probability distribution y a loss measure can be deﬁned as follows.
L(y, y) = −

i
y
i log(yi)
(3.9)
To learn, the network needs to update the weights that quantify the connections
between its nodes. It does this by making wrong guesses. After data has been
propagated through the network during the forward pass, it is often not exactly
equal to the target. This discrepancy, quantiﬁed by the loss function, informs
the network of how best to update its parameters. In order to do this, it needs to
know how much each of the parameters contributed to the loss. This corresponds
to computing the partial derivatives of the loss function w.r.t the parameters of
the model. This leads to the Backpropagation Algorithm. It is an application
of the chain rule from analysis, but due to the large number of parameters in
neural models, stating it can be diﬃcult. With input z, we deﬁne the activation
of a neuron by f(z). As a shorthand, we introduce the output of the jth neuron
in a layer as oj.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Neural Machine Translation
23
oj = f(zj) = f
 n

k=1
wkjok

(3.10)
Thus it seen that zj is the weighted sum of all the neuron output in a previous
layer with n units. The weights wkj denote the connection between the a neuron
labelled k in a previous layer and one labelled j in the current one. To compute
the loss w.r.t to the weight, the chain rule is applied.
∂L
∂wij
= ∂L
∂oj
∂oj
∂zj
∂zj
∂wij
(3.11)
The last of the terms in the chain rule above is straightforward to calculate.
∂zj
∂∂wij
=
∂
∂wij
 n

k=1
wkjok

= oi
(3.12)
If oi is in the input layer, then oi = xi. The next term is determined by the
activation function used by the neuron.
∂oj
∂zj
=
∂
∂zj
f(zj)
(3.13)
This has the immediate consequence that the activation function should be
diﬀerentiable. For the last term, the result diﬀers in accordance to whether the
neuron output is from a hidden layer or from an output layer. If the latter is the
case, then this derivative is simply taken w.r.t. the prediction of the network.
If the former, we need to go through to layers, through the neurons that receive
input from oj.
∂L(oj)
∂oj
=
g

l=1
 ∂L
∂zl
∂zl
∂oj

(3.14)
==PAGE:36==
24
Machine Translation
In what is presently the canonical setting for this type of model, nodes are
optimized to learn the input/output relationship, by the use of Gradient Descent.
This is an optimization algorithm, aiming to minimize a loss function with
respect to the parameters λ of a model. It presupposes that the loss function
is diﬀerentiable. It works by moving the parameters in the opposite direction
of the gradient of the loss function, leading to parameter values that give a
smaller value of the loss function. It is iterative and at each step n, calculates
the parameter values as follows.
θn = θn−1 + α ∂
∂θL (θ)
(3.15)
The number α ∈R is called the learning rate and governs how large the steps
taken in parameter space are. Choosing this number is crucial, as too small a
value can slow down learning, while a value too large might lead to the algo-
rithm overshooting the optimum. It is computationally expensive to update the
parameters with respect to the entire training set. Instead, randomly chosen
examples of the training set can be used to estimate the gradient [KW52]. This
improves eﬃciency at the cost of increasing the variance of the estimate. A
compromise can be reached by using a random subset of the training data at
each update. This subset is then called a batch. One complete cycle through
the whole training set is then called an epoch. A popular variation on stochastic
gradient descent, Adaptive Momentum Estimation or Adam, uses an adaptive
estimation of moments, in order to speed of the optimization of the loss function
[KB14].
In order to represent structure present in sequential data, the simple neural
network fails to represent distance as well as eﬃciently dealing with variable
length sequences. In order to remedy these shortcomings, the Recurrent Neural
Network or RNN was developed independently several times, for example in
[Elm90]. The parameters in a RNN are shared across time steps. This is ac-
complished by using loops, the parameters from a previous time step feed into
the current. This structure is sketched in ﬁgure 3.2. This leads to the network
being able to be expressed as a dynamical system, with a state h and parameters
shared across time.
ht = f

ht−1; θ

(3.16)
The parameters of the network are usually taken as the weights that quantify the
connection between input and hidden state Wh, the connection between earlier
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Neural Machine Translation
25
Figure 3.2: A general view of a recurrent network structure. At time t, an
input is introduced, passed forward and the resulting hidden state
is fed back into the the model, ready for the next time step.
and current state Uh and a bias. A nonlinearity fh is usually applied to improve
the expressive power of the network. Finally bias units, bh, by are usually added
and an output is calculated based on current state and an activation function
fy.
ht = fh (Whxt + Uhht−1 + bh)
(3.17)
yt = fy (Whht + by)
(3.18)
A perhaps more intuitive view of the structure of the network can be obtained
by "unrolling" the network, making the computational graph explicit. This view
is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: n "unrolled" view of the structure of a recurrent neural network.
The network has been unrolled to the length of the input sequence,
outputting and propagating a hidden state at each step, calculated
by a function applied in A.
==PAGE:38==
26
Machine Translation
Recurrent neural networks are, like regular neural networks, trained by using
the gradients of the models parameters in order to optimize said parameters
for the problem considered. We saw earlier how this was accomplished by the
use of Backpropagation. Now, however, gradients have to be propagated throug
htime as well, hence the name of the algorithm for recurrent neural nets is
called Backpropagation Through Time or BPTT [GBC16]. BPTT is simplest
to explain when considering the network unrolled.
Consider the network in
ﬁgure 3.3. The gradient for the ith loss Li, with prediction yi w.r.t. to the
given target, is found by summing all the states that contribute by the chain
rule.
∂Li
∂W =
i

i=1
∂Li
∂yi
∂yi
∂hi
∂si
∂hk
∂hk
∂W
(3.19)
The RNN is very ﬂexible and can be applied for many diﬀerent types of sequen-
tial tasks. However, for some problems, it might not be beneﬁcial to produce
an output at every time step. Numerous modern Machine Translation models
utilize an encoder-decoder structure. This is a structure utilizing two separate
RNN networks. One serves as input and is called the encoder, while the other
serves as output and is called the decoder. The encoder processes a variable-
length input sequence X = (x1, ..., xn) into a ﬁxed size vector representation
c. It does this by applying some function g to the hidden states from the en-
coder. The decoder learns to take this representation and generates a sequence
of predictions Y = (y1, .., ym) comprising the output one by one. This ﬂexible
architecture allows for diﬀerent length input and output, which is important
for many tasks such as translation and summarization. The encoder-decoder is
jointly trained to maximize the conditional probability log p(Y |X) [SVL14].
3.2.2
Extensions to the neuron
Given inﬁnite precision and rational weights, RNN’s are universal computational
models [SS95]. That is, an RNN network can simulate a Turing Machine. In
an experimental setting, this is not a realistic assumption to make. The com-
putation is limited by vanishing/exploding gradient [Hoc98], [PMB12]. We will
introduce two alternative units, that while introducing computational overhead,
combat some of these diﬃculties.
The LSTM unit was an answer to some of these issues [HS97]. This unit uses
a set of internal gates to obtain selective memorization. It partially solves the
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Neural Machine Translation
27
vanishing gradient problem, by allowing gradient to ﬂow unchanged through
the network. While the exploding gradient problem is still present, it can be
remedied by clipping the gradient norm at an appropriate value throughout the
network. The component that allows information to ﬂow more freely, the cell,
is denoted ct at time t. Access to the cell is regulated by an input gate it, which
controls the amount of new information that gets written to the cell. The forget
gate ft, by contrast, controls how much previous information is retained. The
output gate controls how much the cell is used to compute the output activation
of the unit. Each gate is connected to the input and the previous hidden state
by weight matrices. An illustration of an LSTM cell is given in ﬁgure 3.4. A
◦denotes the Hadamard product in the subsequent equations, while σg is the
units activation function.
Figure 3.4: A schematic of the inner workings of an LSTM unit. Squares de-
note sigmoid and tanh neural network layers respectively. Circles
denote pointwise operations. Arrows are vector transfers, diver-
gent lines are copies and convergent lines are concatenations.
ft = σg (Wfxt + Ufht−1 + bf)
(3.20)
it = σg (Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
(3.21)
ot = σg (Woxt + Uoht−1 + bo)
(3.22)
ct = σg (Wcxt + Ucht−1 + bc)
(3.23)
˜ct = tanh (Wcxt + Ucht −1 + bc)
(3.24)
ht = ot ◦σh(ct)
(3.25)
A simpler and more computationally frugal cell, the gated recurrent unit or
GRU, has achieved comparable performance on many tasks [CvMG+14]. Instead
of the 3 gates in the LSTM, the GRU uses an update gate zt and a reset gate
==PAGE:40==
28
Machine Translation
rt to compute the hidden state ht. The internal working of the unit is shown in
ﬁgure 3.5. THe hidden state is computed as weighted sum of previous and new
information.
Figure 3.5: A schematic of the inner workings of a GRU unit. Squares denote
sigmoid and tanh neural network layers respectively. Circles de-
note pointwise operations. Arrows are vector transfers, divergent
lines are copies and convergent lines are concatenations.
zt = σg (Wzxt + Uzht−1 + bz)
(3.26)
rt = σg (Wrxt + Urht−1 + br)
(3.27)
ht = (1 −zt) ◦ht−1 + zt ◦σh (Whxt + Uh (rt ◦ht−1) + bh)
(3.28)
3.3
Attention Mechanisms
Attention is the name given to a part of neural architecture that enables the
network to dynamically highlight relevant aspects of the input data [GLT19].
This is done by computing a weight distribution over the sequence, with higher
values denoting more relevance. There a many forms of attention, but we will
focus on one of the ﬁrst [LPM15], due to its simplicity and historical signiﬁ-
cance. Afterwards we will present a more general model for attention, before
introducing a model built on self-attention. Consider an encoder, as presented
in section 3.2.
Given an input sequence, the encoder outputs a sequence of
hidden states.
(h1, ..hT ) = enc(x1, ..xT )
(3.29)
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Attention Mechanisms
29
The attention function is added in cascade with the decoder, as it was presented
in section 3.2. At each time step t, the attention function computes an embed-
ding of the input sequence ct, called a context vector. The subsequent RNN of
the decoder, characterized by a hidden state st, then computes a distribution
over the possible output symbols.
p(yt|y1, ..yt−1, x) = RNN(ct)
(3.30)
To compute the context, the attention function takes the previous hidden state
of the decoder RNN st−1 and the outputs from the encoder RNN h1, ..hT . These
are processed through an alignment model, to obtain a set of scalar values eti,
which score the matching between inputs at position i and outputs at position
t. The scores are then normalized by using a softmax function. This results in
a set of weights ati.
eti = f(st−1, hi)
(3.31)
ati =
exp (eti)
T
j=1 exp (etj)
(3.32)
At last, the context vector ct is computed as a weighted sum of the outputs
hi, weighted by ati. This relieves the encoder from having to encode the entire
input sequence, as it can rely on information gathered from the entire input
sequence.
ct =

i
atihi
(3.33)
Attention was used to great eﬀect in [LPM15] and [BCB15] and has since become
a mainstay in NMT. This has led to a multitide of diﬀerent models, but many
of them can be put into a shared framework. In ﬁgure 3.6 is an example of such
an attempt [GLT19].
==PAGE:42==
30
Machine Translation
Figure 3.6: A uniﬁed view of part of the calculation of alignment between the
keys and queries for a general attention model.
In preparation for the next section section, we present this view.
The core
component of the attention mechanism is the attention layer.
This maps a
sequence of dk vectors with dimension nk, the keys, to a distribution of dk
weights. The keys, gathered in K ∈Rnk×dk, encode the data to which we want
to apply attention. In the example above, these correspond to the hidden states
from the encoder. The input to the attention layer is called a query in many
architectures, q ∈Rnq. In the previous example, the query was the previous
hidden state of the decoder, but there are other possibilities. From keys and
queries a vector of energy scores is computed by applying a function f, called the
alignment function. Popular choices for this function include dot-product based
function f(q, K) = qT K and bilinear or general versions f(q, K) = qT WK.
These scores e ∈Rdk, are transformed using a distribution function g, usually
a softmax function, into a set of weights a ∈Rdk.
e = f(q, K)
(3.34)
a = g(e)
(3.35)
Beginning in [DRWR17], a new representation of the keys was introduced. In
these cases, it is common to have another input element. This element is called
the sequence of values with length dk, V ∈Rnv×dk. These represent the data
upon which the attention computed from K and q is to be applied. Each element
in V has a bijective relationship with an element in K. The example for general
attention does not distinguish between these two representations and the values
and keys are identical, i.e. the encoder hidden state. The values are combined
with the attention weights ai to obtain a weighted representation of V . How
this is done, is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.7.
==PAGE:43==
3.3 Attention Mechanisms
31
Figure 3.7: The full uniﬁed attention model,
3.3.1
Self Attention
As of the time of writing, transduction models based on RNN architectures seem
to slowly be falling out of favour. This is due to the introduction of sequence-
to-sequence models based entirely on the concept of self-attention.
Used to
great eﬀect in [VSP+17], the Transformer has become an important building
block in modern sequence based applications. In keeping with other competitive
transduction models, the transformer has an encoder-decoder structure and we
will detail them in turn.
==PAGE:44==
32
Machine Translation
Figure 3.8: The Transformer model.
The model is rather more complicated than the ones seen thus far and so, we will
begin with an illustration. This is found in ﬁgure 3.8. For reference, consider
ﬁgure 3.7, for an explanation of the nomenclature. The encoder consists of a
stack of Nx identical components, each composed of two sublayers. In ﬁgure
3.9 we detail each of the components.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Attention Mechanisms
33
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.9: (a) (b)
The attention model used is called scaled dot product attention. The keys have
dimension dk and the values have dimension dv. Attention is computed using
a dot-product, weighted by the root of the key dimension. To better facilitate
parallel computing, the calculation on each query is gathered together in a
matrix Q. This corresponds to a simultaneous application of the process detailed
in the previous section.
att(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√dk

V
(3.36)
In ﬁgure 3.9(b), we see the second peculiarity of the model, the multi-head atten-
tion. Instead of performing a single attention function on the keys, queries and
values, this component projects each of the 3 linearly, with learned projections.
On each of these projections, the attention function is applied in parallel. This
is done h times and the number h is termed the number of heads. The averaging
of the usual single-head attention mechanism might remove a lot of positional
information, the rationale goes. Using projection matrices W Q
i
∈Rdmodel×dk,
W K
i
∈Rdmodel×dk, W V
i
∈Rdmodel×dv and W O
i
∈Rhdv ×dmodel.
headi = att

QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i

(3.37)
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat (head1, .., headh) W O
(3.38)
==PAGE:46==
34
Machine Translation
In addition to the attention layers, the model uses fully connected feedforward
layers and positional encoding. To show how the latter works, we assume the
input sequence x ∈Rl×d, where l is the sequence length and d is the embedding
dimension. Then the input X ∈Rl×d is used to construct a positional encoding
layer, P ∈Rl×d with output P + X, where P is deﬁned as follows, where
i = [0, l −1] and j = [0, (d −1)/2
Pi,2j = sin

i/100002j/d
(3.39)
Pi,2j+1 = cos

i/100002j/d
(3.40)
3.4
Multitask Learning
Multitask learning is a sub-ﬁeld of machine learning, in which multiple tasks
contribute with their similarities and diﬀerences, to improve results. It is an
example of inductive transfer, storing information on one task to use as an
inductive bias on another [Car97].
By forcing a learning algorithm to learn
several related, but not identical tasks, can serve to force it into a representation
that is less prone to ﬁtting the noise in the data.
Two paradigms in Multi-task learning are Hard Parameter Sharing and Soft
Parameter sharing. The diﬀerence is that the former shares the hidden layers in
a model between the tasks, while the latter has a model for each sub-task, albeit
with a regularization penalty between the diﬀerence in representations used in
the diﬀerent models, leading to a correlation between parameters [Rud17]. A
conceptual overview of these frameworks is shown in ﬁgure 3.10.
There are multiple possible explanations for the eﬃcacy of MTL. One is the
aspect of Data Augmentation. Ideally, diﬀerent datasets would have diﬀerent
noise patterns and could therefore negative chance of overﬁtting to said noise.
On a more prosaic note, it simply increases the number of training examples
available. If relevant features are shared between tasks, MTL may also help a
model focus on the parts that are relevant for both tasks, again reducing the
risk of overﬁtting.
Finally representation bias and regularization are advantageous in many set-
tings. The ﬁrst can improve generalization performance, while the second, by
inductive bias, serves to reduce the ability of a model to ﬁt random noise, thus
reducing its Rademacher Complexity. These notions will explored in the last
section of the chapter on experiments.
==PAGE:47==
3.5 Language recognition as learning problem
35
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.10: Two paradigms in multitask learning. (a) Hard parameter shar-
ing, using a shared hidden layer between all of the tasks consid-
ered. (b) Soft parameter sharing, which has it own model for
each task, but with a regularization penalty between models to
encourage a shared representation.
3.5
Language recognition as learning problem
The computational power of RNN has been a subject of much study.
They
are usually presented as very strong learners in the domain of sequential data.
A range of results in [SS92] and [SS95] establish that an Elman-RNN [Elm90],
with rational weights, sigmoid activation functions and inﬁnite precision states,
can simulate a Turing Machine. This makes the RNN Turing complete, a very
powerful computational property. The results have been extended to ReLu acti-
vations as well [CGKM17]. These results make some assumptions, however, that
are most likely not fulﬁlled in practical applications. Some of these assumptions
are enumerated as follows.
• They assume that the entire input is read into the RNN state, whereafter
the computation is carried out.
• They rely on having inﬁnite precision in the RNN states.
In NLP applications however, the input is often fed into the RNN one token
or item at a time.
This immediately results in a new state vector that can
be passed on as input. This already adds a heavy restriction to the Turing-
completeness of the RNN, in that it restricts a Turing machine under the same
restriction to use an amount of tape that is linear in the input length [PMB12].
This reduces the power of the Turing Machine to recognition of context-free
languages [Sip97]. It is also a pressing concern that even though an RNN might
==PAGE:48==
36
Machine Translation
be carefully constructed to solve a given problem, there are no guarantees that
these solutions are found when using training based on backpropagation. .
Language recognition (or acceptance) can be considered the process of taking a
string and deciding membership in a language. Simply put, it is the problem of
answering "yes" or "no" to the question of whether a string belongs to a language
or not [For02]. We can set up a framework for this in the context of a single
RNN. The RNN is assumed to be input-bound and have ﬁnite precision states,
as is deemed realistic in an NLP setting [WGY18]. The RNN is a parametric
function that takes an input vector xt and a state vector ht−1 to return a state
vector ht.
ht = R(xt, ht−1)
(3.41)
This is used on a sequence x1, .., xn) by feeding an initial vector h0 and applying
equation 3.41. We consider a general input alphabet Σ and in general terms,
use a mapping E, from the vocabulary to a vector x. Each of the x’s thus has a
numerical representiation, one-hot embedded or otherwise. The ﬁnal state, after
applying the RNN is called RNN(x1, .., xn). To make this model a language
acceptor, an extra layer f is used on the ﬁnal state. This can be either a fully
connected feedforward neural network, a linear classiﬁer or a logistic classiﬁer.
What is important is, that is output a zero or a 1, based on the ﬁnal state and
the language under consideration. So we can say that an RNN recognizes a
language L ⊆Σ if f (RNN(w)) = 1 for w ∈L and 0 otherwise.
Now as the setting for the present project is machine translation, this concept
of language acceptance will have to be modiﬁed. We have just seen an example
of what we might call a "Neural acceptor". Another possibility is to output
the decision on a symbol-by-symbol basis, checking for correctness after each
recurrent step. Such a device has been called a "Neural Transducer". Finally a
sequence prediction framework could be used, where at each time step, a sym-
bol is output and a probability calculated, turning the RNN into a probabilistic
generator of the language, a "Neural Predictor" [Elm90], [For02]. None of these
correspond exactly to what we wish to accomplish. For one, translation is a
diﬃcult task, in that, contrary to the Neural Predictor and Neural Transducer,
the encoder-decoder has to reconstruct the entire target string from just a ﬁxed
state. For other, the languages considered are simple, and to base an estimate
of language acceptance on a measure such as BLEU [PRWZ02], would not accu-
rately represent learning. Another aspect is the fact that for the generalization
experiments to come, we record the length of failure, where most models reach a
training and validation accuracy of 100% but fail to generalize beyond a certain
==PAGE:49==
3.5 Language recognition as learning problem
37
point. There is a case to be made for n-gram evaluation metrics, but for this
work, we will be more loose in the evaluation. If a model has trained to perfect
accuracy on a training and validation data-set, then any further generalization
on longer strings than those seen during training, is seen as generalization. A
measure ek is used [SBS19], to quantify generalization. It measure the length
of the k’th string that the translation model fails to translate correctly. We
usually use values e1 and e5, i.e. the length of the ﬁrst and ﬁfth string on which
the translation is wrong. This is to not overly penalize possibly spurious wrong
guesses. If an ek value of 0 is reported, it means that the model did not correctly
translate a single string in the test set.
==PAGE:50==
38
Machine Translation
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Tools and Implementation
4.1
Tools
The adoption of Deep Learning methods in a multitude of ﬁelds, has in recent
years been made possible by advances in computing. The widespread use of
general purpose Graphical Processing Units or GPU’s, in particular, has made
it possible to eﬃciently facilitate large-scale parallel computations. Originally
built to perform computations on millions of pixels in a short span of time,
they are well suited for typical calculations in neural networks, where many of
the required computations consist of matrix multiplications, allowing for highly
parallelisable operations[HW10].
The Recent years have seen manifold spread and dissemination of Deep Learning
frameworks. Arguably the most well-know are Tensorﬂow [AAB+15], based on
Theano and Pytorch [PGC+17], based on Torch. They both allow for high-
speed tensor operations and eﬃcient implementations of the backpropagation
algorithm, both elements crucial to implementing working deep learning models.
Where they diﬀer is in the way they build graphs. Tensorﬂow relies on a static
computational graph, while Pytorch uses a dynamical one. Both operate on
tensors and implement models as directed acyclical graphs (DAG).
The choice for this project has fallen on Pytorch.
This is both due to the
==PAGE:52==
40
Tools and Implementation
authors familiarity with the framework, as well as the support for changing the
computational graph on the ﬂy.
This is especially relevant in RNN models,
where one can expect variable-length sentences as data. The extra ﬂexibility
at runtime compared with tensorﬂow does not make a huge diﬀerence, as the
models trained in the project are, for the most part, not so large as to necessitate
much memory hygiene, but for production code, the consensus seems to be a
preference for the static compilation in tensorﬂow.
Tensorboard is a tool for probing the inner workings of a network and visualizing
parameters. It was build for Tensorﬂow, but has been ported to Pytorch under
the name TensorboardX 1. It does not provide the same level of functionality as
it does in its native form, but it still allows for the logging of scalars, histogram
and many other parameters.
When working alone, the importance of version control does not disappear, but
its urgency is diminished somewhat. Github2 was used, both as a backup and
as version control, but limited thought was given to the readability of the code
in excess of what was deemed necessary for the author.
At ﬁrst glance, this project seems to be concerned with quite small problems,
compared with what is usually benchmarked in NLP applications. A pertinent
question is how much computational power is needed, when we are training
models with only 1,2 or 20 hidden units. The answer is that the computational
challenge lies in the number of models to train and the fact that for many of
the experiments, the models where used to translate on a source test set at
each epoch. This does change the computational considerations, in that of the
computational resources available to the author, the vast majority consist of
high performance cpu cores3.
4.2
Implementation
This project is not concerned with providing new architectures or improvements
to them. It is concerned with benchmarking the performance of existing archi-
tectures. This would make it prudent to use existing implementations, instead of
building everything from scratch. This is both due to the potential time used, as
well as making sure the code works. Some of the used frameworks like Opennmt,
have thousands of users, reporting bugs and debugging them in turn4. However,
1https://github.com/lanpa/tensorboardX
2https://github.com/
3https://www.hpc.dtu.dk/
4http://forum.opennmt.net/
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Implementation
41
the standard code provided by these frameworks, was not entirely suitable for
the task at hand. This means that a hierarchy of models was created for this
project. The hierarchy consists of 3 layers and they will be detailed in turn.
The top layer consists of the standard oﬀerings from Opennmt-py [KKD+17], the
python implementation of Opennmt. This is the most active version (compared
to the tensorﬂow and lua versions), measured on github commits and forum
activity. THe library implements highly eﬃcent machine translation models,
with an eﬃcient API5. Where these were lacking, was in the information they
could output. As a standard, they don’t output hidden states at each time step
as this would be ineﬃcient and not relevant for most applications. The hidden
units are saved in a memory-bank, however. The problem here is, that when
using models based on LSTM-cells, only the hidden units and not the cell units
were saved. As a great many of our arguments are based on the information
encoded in the activations of the cell states, it was paramount to device a way
to reliably obtain these activations. How the memory bank is created in the
encoder, is shown in ﬁgure 4.1(a).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1: (a) A code snippet from Openmt-py, showing the encoder class and
how the memory bank is created. (b) A code snippet showing the
beginning of a simple LSTM encoder, purposely built to output
activations in a printing friendly format.
This necessitated the second layer. Here we implemented each version of the
standard seq2seq architectures6, namely seq2seq, seq2seq with attention and the
transformer. This provided a valuable learning experience. In addition, it al-
lowed much more control over the parameters of the models, even at the sacriﬁce
of eﬃciency. In ﬁgure 4.1 is shown an example of a very simple encoder, made
for outputting every hidden state. That part is usually commented out during
5http://opennmt.net/
6seq2seq is a common shorthand for a model that takes sequences as input and outputs
sequences. Usually shorthand for some variation of encoder-decoder.
==PAGE:54==
42
Tools and Implementation
training and used for inference. Diﬀerent versions of all of the models where
made, to try and take advantage of the MTL-paradigms in the experiments to
follow. It was felt, however, that this obscured the argument.
Figure 4.2: An example of a shell script that takes advantage of the LSF sys-
tems on the DTU hpc systems. It trains
At the lowest level of the hierarchy, a custom version of an LSTM cell was made,
as it was the ambition to test the expression of memorization in such a cell, when
dependencies became long.
4.3
Data Generation
In natural language, a plethora of diﬀerent artifacts may contribute to the diﬃ-
culty of a learning task. Doubly so in the case of translation, where we consider
a language pair, as opposed to a single language corpus. The theory of formal
language gives the theoretical tools to classify data into a hierarchy of increasing
complexity, but as we have seen, there does not seem to be complete agreement
as to the placement of natural language in this hierarchy. Crudely, natural lan-
guage seems to be mostly regular, with many context free structures present
and rare context-sensitive structures in certain languages. The language classes
presented [ASH17], further show the diﬃculty in ranking natural language. We
thus specify data-sets that are very simple, but still represent well-deﬁned posi-
tions in the Chomsky Hierarchy [Cho56]. The ﬁrst is an example of concerns in
processing regular languages and is analogous to evaluating parity. The second
shows an archetypal context-free structure, in that the target language relies
on the ability to count. In the end, a discussion of palindromes is featured as
an example of a context-free structure, that cannot be recognized by a simple
counting machine. Input language is equivalently called source.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Data Generation
43
4.3.1
Parity
As a proxy for learning the parity function, we consider a random binary string
as as the source function. We then deﬁne a window size, k, which denotes the
number of steps from the current position in the binary vector, which we use
to calculate the parity. In essence how far back is looked to calculate parity
of the vector. We consider the alphabet γ, where γ =

1, 0

and strings are
formed by choosing a random integer from a uniform distribution over [0, max],
max being the maximum length of string we wish to consider. This string is
then populated with random draws of equal probability from the alphabet. We
call the language of these strings BIN. The target language is constructed by
deﬁning a window k. This window is an integer denoting the steps taken from a
given position in a string and a parity language with window k is called PARk.
yi = parity(xi−k+1, xi−k, .., xi)
BIN
PAR1
PAR2
[1, 0, 1, 0, 0]
[1, 1, 0, 0, 0]
[1, 1, 1, 0, 0]
A simple two-state Finite State Automaton can be used to recognize languages
with even or odd parities. We can construct such an automaton explicitly, by
deﬁning states, each signifying whether the last seen symbol was a "1" or a "0"
,see ﬁgure 2.1. We thus see that the memory requirement is very limited in such
a theoretical setting. Whether this is the case in a computational one is what
we want to investigate.
It is trivial for an RNN to recognize the problem of computing parity of a binary
vector [SH96], [Gra16], as it boils down to ﬂipping an internal switch, every time
the parity changes. This concerns computing a single value for the entire vector.
In our setting, it is a sequence prediction problem and so the result may diﬀer
and the experiment is the ﬁrst one considered in chapter 5.
4.3.2
Dyck
As a source language, we consider the alphabet consisting of a’s and b’s, with all
of the a’s always coming before any b. Over this alphabet, we consider the simple
pattern anbm, with m, n ∈N. As there are no restrictions put on the relative
number of n and m, this does not represent a language, where recognition can
be construed as counting as a model will have no prior knowledge of m and n
prior to encountering a source string.
Deﬁnition 4.3.1. SRC, has an alphabet consisting of a’s, b’s.
Calling this
alphabet α, we deﬁne a valid string as any ﬁnite string over α, where all the a’s
==PAGE:56==
44
Tools and Implementation
come before any occurrence of b. SRC is the language consisting of these well
formed strings.
α =

a, b

(4.1)
SRC =

{a}, {ab}, {aab}, {aaaabbbbbbb}, ...

(4.2)
We consider multiple target languages. They are all parenthesis languages, cho-
sen to show some of the diﬃcult structures that can be encountered in Natural
Language Processing and other tasks. Languages of balanced parentheses are
known as Dyck Languages [?]. Even though they are all context-free, the diﬃ-
culties they represent are diﬀerent. It has at various times been postulated, that
diﬃculties in Natural language can be quantiﬁed by long-range dependencies,
hierarchical dependencies and the counting properties characteristic of context-
free languages [KCA17], [TBM18].
Deﬁnition 4.3.2. TRG1, TRG2, TRG3 are all deﬁned over the alphabet con-
sisting of 2 diﬀerent kinds of parentheses. Strings in these languages are string
with only matching parentheses, subject to other structural constraints.
For
TRG1, this constraint is similar to SRC,
β =

{, }, (, )

(4.3)
TRG1 =

()

,

(){}

,

()(){}

,

()()()(){}{}{}{}{}{}

, ...

(4.4)
TRG2 =

()

,

(){}

,

(()){}

,

(((()))){{{{{{}}}}}}

, ...

(4.5)
TRG3 =

()

,

{()}

,

{(())}

,

{{{{{{(((())))}}}}}}

, ...

(4.6)
For a given length, the possible number of distinct strings in an unconstrained
Dyck language can easily be calculated [CF49]. We have, however constrained
our 3 target languages to have a certain structure and so, for given values of m
and n, there is only one unique string for a given target language.
Theorem 4.3.1. TRG1 is not regular.
Proof. We assume that TRG1 is regular.
As TRG1 is a Dyck Language, it
is composed of k diﬀerent kinds of well-formed parentheses.
As the regular
languages are closed under concatenation, we can write TRG1 as L ∩(∗)∗. But
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Data Generation
45
(∗)∗is just the language anbn for a= ( and b= ). This language is known to be
context-free [?]. As the regular langauages are closed under concatenation, we
arrive at a contradiction.
The proofs for the other languages are identical. That the target languages are
not context-sensitive, can be shown by constructing explicit grammars deﬁning
possible productions.
S −> Y
Y −> aYb | aY |
a
|
a −> ()
b −> {}
(a) TRG1
S −> X | Y | XY
X −> a
Y −> y
a −> ( a )
|
b −> {b}
|
(b) TRG2
S −> X
X −> a
| b
a −> ( a )
|
b −> {b}
|
( a )
|
(c) TRG3
Figure 4.3: Possible grammars for the target languages. Note that an empty
position denotes an -transition
We illustrate possible, small derivation in TRG
S
Y
a
()
aYb
ab
(){}
aY
aaYb
aab
()(){}
In ﬁgure 4.4, are presented a small sample of source-target pairs that are used
in the translation tasks. The source is the same for all targets.
As a primary concern is on the length of the sequences, we generate according to
a distribution over the lengths of the sequences, produced from the grammars.
In order to generate uniformly, a uniform distribution is used. We deﬁne drawing
a sample X from a uniform distribution U,
==PAGE:58==
46
Tools and Implementation
SRC
TRG1
TRG2
TRG3
ab



aab



aabb



Figure 4.4: Caption
P(x) =

1
N
for
x ∈{1, .., N}
0
Otherwise.
It has been postulated that having more long and short sentences can improve
generalization performance.[GS01] [RW97], [BW00]. While this was not system-
atically pursued, it was shown in [SBS19] that the performance was best for a
uniform distribution, followed closely by a U-shaped distribution, with a distri-
bution with a long tail to the left of the support was worst by far. We implement
the length distribution in the latter article to test this in the setting of machine
translation. These slanted distributions are constructed by choosing sentence
lengths according to a Beta-binomial distribution. An original contribution is
the ability to generate longer sequences on modest hardware by using a simple
log-transformation.
P(x) =
N
x
 B(x+α,N−x+β)
B(α,β)
0
B is the beta-function. This function is concisely described using Γ functions.
B(x, y) = Γ (x) Γ (y)
Γ (x + y)
(4.7)
The parametrization using α and β, allows for diﬀerent length distributions,
this is shown in ﬁgure 4.5.
To allow for the eﬃcient computation of very long strings to use as a test set, an
implementation using context-free grammars explicitly quickly run into prob-
lems with recursion depth. For this reason and to prevent numerical underﬂow,
we use a simple log-space transformation, when calculating the probability dis-
tribution.
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Data Generation
47
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5: Length distributions for the target Dyck language on support
[0,50] (a) Uniform distribution. (b) α = 5, β = 1 for a left-tailed
distribution. (c) α = 1, β = 5 for a right-tailed distribution. (d)
α = 0.25, β = 0.25 for a U-shaped distribution.
P(x) =
Γ(N + 1)Γ(α + x)Γ(N + β −k)Γ(α + β)
Γ(x + 1)Γ(N −x + 1)Γ(α + β + N)Γ(α)Γ(β)
(4.8)
(4.9)
= exp(Γ(N + 1) + Γ(α + x) + Γ(N + β −k) + Γ(α + β)
(4.10)
−Γ(x + 1) −Γ(N −x + 1) −Γ(α + β + N) −Γ(α) −Γ(β))
(4.11)
A ﬁnal consideration in the data creation concerns the diﬀerent nature of the
three target languages. They represent diﬀerent styles and length of dependen-
cies. While this does not represent a rigid complexity measure, it can provide
a heuristic to help explain the forthcoming results. The ﬁrst target language
can be said to be the most simple. Every opening parenthesis is followed by a
closing parenthesis of the same kind in the training and test data targets. A
model only has to remember one step and when to switch parenthesis type.
The second target language has the complication that an open parenthesis in
only closed after at most quarter of the string length has elapsed and at least
closed at the next step. The learner has to learn a dependency that is distributed
in length between 1 and L/4 with L being the length of the sequence.
The third language has a dependency at the length of the sequence, unless m =
0. Again the shortest dependency is 1, so the dependency length is distributed
between 1 and L. It is not inconceivable that this has an eﬀect on the optimal
choice of model and parameters to perform well on the three languages.
This describes the translation task that will be used throughout the thesis.
==PAGE:60==
48
Tools and Implementation
4.3.3
Encoding
Before introducing data to a machine learning model, this data needs to be
encoded into an appropriate format. A straightforward way to do this, is by
using one-hot encoding [HH12]. This encoding takes each token and assigns a
unique, binary vector to the token, where one element is a one, and the rest
are zero. This ensures orthogonality between the tokens and thus, it does not
preserve information on co-occurrence of tokens in a corpus or any kind of
meaning related similarity.
Token
0
1
1
Encoding

1
0


0
1


0
1

Another way to encoder data is by using an embedding function. Such a func-
tion can be used to represent discrete data as vectors in a continuous space
[GBC16]. A matrix of size N × M, denoting N examples of length M, can be
transformed to a tensor N × M × D, where D is the dimension of the embed-
ding. The dimensionality of this representation can be controlled and serves
as a hyperparameter. The matrix produced by the embedding function can be
updated during the optimization of the network to represent more meaningful
structure [BDVJ03]. More sophisticated models include the popular word2vec
models [MCCD13], but these methods are deemed unnecessary for the present
problem. On one hand, one of the problems with one-hot encoding is not present
for the problems considered here, as we have a tiny vocabulary size. The seman-
tic factors may still be present, however, for better or worse. For the opening
and closing of parentheses, we may imagine that it could be more fruitful to
have a discrete, orthogonal representation of the data, as the desired inference
is very ﬁne-grained. We thus use both one-hot encoding and an embedding layer
in the experiments to come and look at beneﬁts and drawbacks of both.
4.3.4
Counting Machine
From the discussion in section in chapter 2, we may be tempted to construct an
explicit k-counter machine, that is capable of recognizing a Dyck language. Such
a machine must be able to recognize a pattern on the form anbn, representing
the opening and closing of parentheses. We do not allow n to be 0. The alphabet
over which the machine will be working, we deﬁne as Σ = {a, b}. The set of
states Q = {qa, qb, qr}, the starting state is qa, the counter is initially set to 1.
We use the update function from chapter 2. u(a) = +1 and u(b) = −1. Now
we come to the transition function δ, which we will enumerate in a table. The
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Data Generation
49
accepting state is {(qb, 0}.
• δ(qa, a, z) = qa
• δ(qb, a, z) = qr
• δ(qr, a, z) = qr
• δ(qa, b, z) = qb
• δ(qb, b, z) = qb
• δ(qr, b, z) = qr
We see that the state qr acts as a sink, allowing rejections. Being in states
qa and qb keeps track of whether the string under processing is presently in
the a’s or b’s, while observing an a after ﬁrst observing a b, leads directly to
rejection. The counter deﬁned by u is seen to increment upon observation of
a and decrement on observation of b. Acceptance is when we reach the end of
the string and the counter has a value of 0, as quantiﬁed in the accepting state.
It is trivial to see that this machine accepts exactly the languages of the form
anbn.
As this machine only manipulates the counters in increments of 1, the maximum
an minimum value of the counter depend on the length of the input. Let w ∈Σ,
then |w| and −|w| are the maximum and minimum counter values. Each counter
k, can thus reach 2|w|+1 diﬀerent conﬁgurations when the input is read. For the
machine as a whole, this means that on a length N, the number of conﬁgurations,
dependent on the number of states, is |Q|(2n + 1)k.
To be more explicit. By designating a counter to both open and closed paren-
thesis in each parenthesis type in a Dyck language makes it so this automaton
recognizes the dyck languages.
Let us deﬁne Σ = {(, ), {, }} and the states
Q = {q(, q), q{, q}, qr1, qr2}. We now need 2 counters u and v, so that u(() = +1,
u()) = −1 and v({) = +1, v(}) = −1. An accepting state is then

(q), q}, 0

and the transition function is, similar to before.
• δ(q(, (, z) = q(
• δ(q), (, z) = qr1
• δ(qr, (, z) = qr1
• δ(q(, ), z) = q)
==PAGE:62==
50
Tools and Implementation
• δ(q), ), z) = q)
• δ(qr1, ), z) = qr1
• δ(q{, {, z) = q{
• δ(q}, {, z) = qr2
• δ(qr2, {, z) = qr2
• δ(q{, }, z) = q}
• δ(q{, }, z) = q}
• δ(qr2, }, z) = qr2
The transitions from states in the b equivalent parenthesis initiated by those in
the a equivalent can go to either of the sink states. It has been shown that a
machine of this type, cannot recognize palindrome languages to arbitrary length
[WGY18].
We thus have justiﬁcation for saying that TRG1 and TRG2 are
"easier" to process than TRG3. We also see by explicit construction, that they
belong to a subclass of the context-free languages. Two counters can simulate
a stack [CFMR68]. And two stacks can simulate a Turing machine [Sip97].
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Results
In this section, the experiments and corresponding results are presented. An
empirical evaluation of the generalization properties of diﬀerent, popular seq2seq
architectures is performed, showing the eﬀect of training on a multilingual cor-
pus. Generalization bounds are calculated for the function classes represented
by the diﬀerent network architectures. A causal explanation is sought by analyz-
ing the hidden representation of the data in the networks and how information
is propagated.
The section is divided into 3 overarching experiments. The ﬁrst concerns the
capacity and generalization of encoder-decoder models without an attention
mechanism. The second is concerned with the challenges associated with two
modern paradigms of attention; global attention and self attention, which com-
pletely eschews the recurrent nature of the former. The third section builds
upon the ﬁrst two, in that it introduces Multitask Learning and illustrates the
eﬀects that very simple multilingual adjustments can have on performance in a
formalized setting.
Unless otherwise speciﬁed, data is drawn from a uniform length distribution on
the source strings. The window for all tasks except the training window task
is strings in the source of length [1, 50]. Inference is run on string that go up
to 1500 in length in the target. For the sake of consistency, 8000 translation
examples is used as a data set, 2000 as validation and 1000 as test. This ensures
==PAGE:64==
52
Results
many duplicates, but is mostly to train to convergence in fewer epochs.
ek
is the target string length on which the model ﬁrst makes a wrong prediction
when working on the test set. An ek value of 0 means that not a single correct
prediction was made on the test set.
5.1
Neural Machine Translation
To asses the generalization properties of a sequence-to-sequence network in the
context of formal language, a modiﬁed version of the training and testing regimes
in [SBS18] is used. The training data is generated according to a chosen proba-
bility distribution over length, deﬁned on a ﬁxed interval. We call this interval
the training window. The testing data is then drawn from lengths greater than
the right endpoint of the length distribution of the training set.
This is to
test the ability of the model to learn the simple patterns found in regular and
context-free languages. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, models are encoder-decoder
models and are trained using cross-entropy and Adam.
5.1.1
SRNN
In order to set the stage, the ﬁrst experiment is a simple learning experiment,
using a simple variant of the recurrent, neural net; the Elman-RNN [Elm90],
which we abbreviate Simple RNN or SRNN. It is deﬁned as an aﬃne transform
of the input and previous state, followed by a tanh nonlinearity. At time t it
calculates a hidden state, based on current state and past input.
ht = tanh Wxt + Uht + b
(5.1)
I is well established that such a network, given two hidden units can compute
the parity of two binary input. One to compute the conjunction and one the
disjunction [Sie96].
In the classical setting, this boils down to outputting a
binary digit according to the parity of a binary input string. In a sequence to
sequence setting, we can scale the problem a bit diﬀerently. We consider an
input sentence, consisting of a random bit string. The target is then deﬁned,
by each position in the output being calculated according to the parity of the
input, calculated as far as a given window size. The bit strings are one-hot
encoded. To both source and target, a < sos > and a < eos > token are added
to indicate the beginning and the end of a sequence. Every string is padded to a
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
53
Figure 5.1: A possible RNN implementation of a network that computes the
parity function with one input and one output.
maximum length using a token < pad >. The strings are drawn from a uniform
distribution over their length. Stating this problem and solving it by hand is
very simple, but learning it might not be so. Changing just one binary digit in
the input, reverses the output at the given position. The problem is interesting
in that it is a well known problem, solvable by small DFA’s and RNN’s. We use
it as an example of analogies and caveats when the setting is moved to sequence
to sequence transduction.
The source and target strings are both one-hot encoded. We have a tiny vocab-
ulary and a random string, so no obvious relationship between the tokens. The
source strings are then fed to an encoder, which generates a hidden state, that
in turn, serves as input of a decoder. The decoder then generates the target,
one token at a time. We can construct an explicit recurrent neural network to
compute the parity function. One possible solution is shown in ﬁgure 5.1.
But what actually happens when situated in an encoder-decoder framework and
needing to learn an increasingly long dependence? First we consider how many
hidden units are needed to achieve a validation error of 0, when the problem is
very simple. We generate 5000 random binary sequences with a length uniformly
distributed on the interval [0, 10]. 20% of the sequences held in reserve as a
validation set. Using an encoder and a decoder with 1 hidden input in both
encoder and decoder, results in no convergence in 10000 epochs, even for a
window of size 1, that is, looking one step back to compute the parity. This
makes sense, as the network needs to implement the XOR function at every
step. With 2 hidden units, the network reaches a training and validation loss of
0. It does this, even as the input string becomes longer.
For this setup, we can take a closer look at what the model actually calculates.
We freeze the parameters of a model after training to convergence in the sense of
==PAGE:66==
54
Results
0 validation error. The numerical values of these weights, are not clean 1’s and
0.5’s as for the example in ﬁgure 5.1, but we will see whether they express some
of the same information. We begin with the encoder. As we want to look at the
transitions, we consider the simpliﬁed setting, where possible inputs are only
(1, 0)T and (0, 1)T , one hot encoding of 0 and 1. We then trace the encoding of
sentences with diﬀerent parities, to see how this diﬀerence is expressed in the
ﬁnal hidden state of the encoder. To keep it simple, we look at two sentences of
length 2. 01 encoded as (1, 0)T , (0, 1)T and 11 encoded as (0, 1)T , (0, 1)T . We
call the i’th hidden state at the j’th time step hi,j and similar notation for the
input ii,j, which represent the individual numbers in the encodings. As there
are two words in the sentence we are considering, the models runs over two
time steps, leading to an update of the activations in the hidden units. For
this example, the activations where very close to 0 for both hidden units before
this snippet of the input vector was encountered. The weights are stated to 2
signiﬁcant digits.
h1,1
h2,1

= tanh
14.87
14.47
14.99
−15.39
 i1,1
i2,1

+
 15.20
−15.64
−15.23
14.64
 h1,0
h2,0

+
15.57 −15.17
15.11 −15.18

(5.2)
h1,2
h2,2

= tanh
14.87
14.47
14.99
−15.39
 i1,2
i2,2

+
 15.20
−15.64
−15.23
14.64
 h1,1
h2,1

+
15.57 −15.17
15.11 −15.18

(5.3)
The calculation yields the following table of input-output relationships between
the two input words and what the ﬁnal hidden state of encoder is hF .
Input words
hF
(1, 0), (1, 0)
(1, 1)
(0, 1), (0, 1)
(1, 1)
(1, 0), (0, 1)
(1, −1)
(0, 1), (1, 0)
(1, −1)
It is clear that there is a qualitative diﬀerence in the ﬁnal state of the encoder,
corresponding to whether the input seen has even or odd parity. In the decoder,
we want to see what the model outputs for a given hidden vector from the
encoder.
We start from the output of the network.
Again using the frozen
parameters from the initial model.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
55
softmax

15.73
16.21
15.18
−15.56
 
h1
h2

+

11.49
14.80

(5.4)
= softmax
15.73h1 + 16.21h2 + 11.49
15.18h1 −15.56h2 + 14.80

(5.5)
=

exp(15.73h1 + 16.21h2)
15.73h1 + 16.21h2 + 15.18h1 −15.56h2
,
exp(15.18h1 −15.56h2)
15.73h1 + 16.21h2 + 15.18h1 −15.56h2

(5.6)
(5.7)
Enumerating the possible probabilities if the hidden units come from saturated
tanh functions, we see that the softmax function outputs a 1 or a 0 with high
probability depending on what the hidden state after the decoder is.
h
softmax
(1, 1)
(1, 0)
(−1, −1)
(0, 1)
(1, −1)
(0, 1)
(−1, 1)
(1, 0)
This leads to the ﬁnal step, an investigation into whether the network manages
to connect the input an the output in the decoder.
h1
h2

= tanh
−15.51
−11.69
11.06
12.89
 h1
h2

+
 9.81
−6.42

(5.8)
= tanh

−15.51h1 −11.69h2 + 9.81
11.06h1 + 12.89h2 −6.42

(5.9)
h
ﬁnal
(1, 1)
(−1, 1)
(−1, −1)
(1, −1)
(1, −1)
(1, −1)
(−1, 1)
(1, −1)
These results give us a connection between the ﬁnal hidden state of the encoder
and the probabilities over the binary vocabulary that ends up being the output
==PAGE:68==
56
Results
of the model. We see that the network manages to compute the parity of two
input vectors. To do this, it was crucial that information was expressed in the
ﬁnal state of the encoder. If not, the decoder would have to make an arbitrary
decision as to what to output. This example was quite artiﬁcial, but it highlights
how information ﬂows at inference in an encoder-decoder model. We now expand
the problem, to allow for longer binary strings. Now the output at each step
of the decoder has to compute parity from k steps back. The model ends up
performing very well, achieving 100% training and validation accuracy, with an
average of 97.6% accuracy on a held out test set, which has double the length
window of the training set. This would seem that the network has managed to
learn an eﬀective representation of the problem. As the length of sentence gets
longer, performance starts to drop, but this may be due to the instability of the
training scheme of the SRNN.
As a coda to this experiment, we tested the SRNN model on the problem which
we will consider for the remaining experiments. This is the task of translating
sentences of the form ambn, n, m ∈R to one of the three Dyck target languages
deﬁned in the section on data generation. The model was able to learn the
problem (after about 10000 epochs), but testing and validation accuracy never
got above 30%.
The inability of the SRNN to count can be seen from the update equation in
3.41. Considering a single dimension of the state ht[j], denotes the j’th element
in the state vector ht. dx denotes input dimension and dh state dimension.
ht[i] = tanh


dx

j=1
Wijx[j] +
dh

j=1
Uijht−1[j] + b[i]


(5.10)
From this update equation it is certainly possible to to get a dimension in h
to count, dependent on the value of x. Just consider the very simple setting of
weights that would result in ht[i] = tanh (ht−1[i] + wix + b[i]), a hidden state
clearly updated by a counting like mechanism. The problem is the nonlinear-
ity, as it squashes the state value to the interval [-1,1]. This would not be a
problem for few recurrent steps, but if we want unbounded counting, the SRNN
update will become unstable, unless we allow for inﬁnite precision in the state,
a concession we cannot possible make in practical applications. So from now,
we move on from the SRNN to the more popular choices, GRU and LSTM.
==PAGE:69==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
57
5.1.2
Hidden Units
We have seen, as lengths of strings become longer, the SRNN fails to generalize.
This lack of capacity might be remedied by the more complicated structure of
the GRU or the LSTM. Both of these are strictly more computationally powerful
than the SRNN, which can be seen immediately for the GRU by setting zt = 0
and rt = 1 in equation 3.28. This recovers the SRNN computation. In a similar
vein, by setting it = 1, ot = 1 and ft = 0 in equation 3.25 lets the LSTM
emulate an SRNN unit. An easy but contrived way to achieve this is to set the
matrices to 0 and the bias functions to the desired constant values. They can
thus be considered to be ﬁnite state acceptors in the same way the SRNN.
To investigate, the learning and generalization properties of LSTM and GRU are
tested on a translation experiment, where the target languages are generated by
a context-free grammar. More speciﬁcally, the targets will be Dyck languages
with 2 types of parentheses and as such, they should be recognized by a 2-counter
machine (chapter 4). We examine both networks, with 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 hidden
units respectively. A full search of the possible hyperparameter-space, would
surely be prohibitive, so a standardized encoder, decoder framework is used, with
a cross-entropy loss function and a random initialization of parameters. From
the considerations in [WGY18], we would expect a machine with 2 counters to
be able to recognize a language composed of 2 types of well-formed parentheses
in isolation. The complication comes from the decoder having to do the same
trick, but having a ﬁxed sized vector as the only information to use at inference.
We test generalization for diﬀerent choices of this vector.
The model under
consideration is trained to 100 epochs. At each epoch, the model parameters
are frozen and the model is used to translate a set of strings, taken from a
testing distribution, usually on a diﬀerent support from the training set. To
test the performance of the model at a given epoch, the length of the ﬁrst and
ﬁfth longest sentences at which the model fails, are recorded. These are called
e1 and e5. Both are important [SBS19], but to avoid clutter, we show the e1
values here and relegate the e5 values to the appendix as they may support
conclusions made in this section. A red line is used to indicate the maximum
sentence length encountered during training. We begin with small network. An
LSTM or a GRU cell in both encoder and decoder. All the models are trained
on 10 independent seeds and we report average and standard deviation. The
performance for small networks with 1, 2, 5 and 10 hidden units are shown in
ﬁgure 5.2 for TRG1.
==PAGE:70==
58
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.2: With TRG1 as the target Language. e1 values for LSTM and GRU
encoder-decoder architectures, using (a) a single hidden unit and
(b) 2 hidden units, (c) 5 hidden units, (d) 10 hidden units, in both
the encoder and the decoder.
It is seen immediately that the GRU exhibits abysmal performance, both with
1 and 2 hidden units. The LSTM is initially a little better with 1, but drops
to comparable performance with the GRU after less than 40 epochs. In fact,
it begins to stop recognizing any string, faster than the GRU. When 2 hidden
units are introduced, the picture changes. The LSTM is much better, while the
GRU does not improve. When introducing more hidden units, it is seen that the
performance of the LSTM appears unchanged, but that the GRU only shows
slight improvement, as the number of units increases. But how does the story
change when the nature of the target language does. Consider TRG2. For 1
unit, it is similar to TRG1, but with 2, the LSTM is much worse at generalizing.
For TRG2, the results are shown in ﬁgure 5.3.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
59
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: With TRG2 as the target Language. e1 values for LSTM and GRU
encoder-decoder architectures, using (a) a single hidden unit and
(b) 2 hidden units, (c) 5 hidden units, (d) 10 hidden units, in both
the encoder and the decoder.
Both the GRU and the LSTM are far worse than for TRG1, but we see a
consistent pattern of the GRU having a few successes early on and then failing
completely as training goes on. This may be related to the fewer parameters in
the GRU allowing it to "get lucky". The ﬁnal target, we would expect to be the
"hardest". The results are shown in ﬁgure 5.4.
==PAGE:72==
60
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: With TRG3 as the target Language. e1 values for LSTM and GRU
encoder-decoder architectures, using (a) a single hidden unit and
(b) 2 hidden units, (c) 5 hidden units, (d) 10 hidden units, in both
the encoder and the decoder.
It is between TRG1 and TRG2 in performance.
It is seen that the LSTM
outperforms the GRU by a wide margin in most cases by far.
This task in
particular, relies on the ability of the model to count. If it has not internalized
a useful representation of a counting machine, it would be far-fetched to expect
it to generalize well on much longer sentences. From the previous, theoretical
considerations, a Dyck language with n distinct types of parentheses can be rec-
ognized by a counting machine with n counters. Due to the squashing function
of the LSTM and GRU cells, ht, will always be constrained to lie in the interval
[0, 1]. The LSTM by contrast, has a cell state, that remains untouched by the
squashing function. What happens when the hidden state is comparably large
is shown in ﬁgure 5.5 for all of the target languages.
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
61
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.5: e1 values for LSTM and GRU encoder-decoder architectures using
20 hidden units, for (a) TRG1 (b) TRG2 (c) TRG3
More memory is beneﬁcial, except for TRG3. Hidden units are not the only way
to augment available memory. Modern models in NLP are often deep. One rea-
son for this is the eﬀective representation of hierarchical information [TBM18].
We test the LSTM encoder-decoder on the same languages as previously, but use
more layers in both the encoder and the decoder. The results are summarized
in ﬁgure 5.6. We use 1, 2, 3 and 4 layers respectively.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.6: Generalization error on an independent test-set, using 10 hidden
units and the number of layers indicated. (a) TRG1, (b) TRG2,
(c) TRG3. The red lines indicate maximum length seen during
training.
For TRG1 one layer is clearly best, which vibes well with the local nature
of the dependency expressed in the language. There is not much hierarchical
information to encode before beginning the decoding process. As more layers are
introduced, we generally see worse generalization performance for this language.
For TRG2, we begin to see the beneﬁt of several layers. 2 and 3 layers are
clearly better than 1. The same picture is seen in TRG3. That 4 layers shows
combarably bad generalization performance can be due to the very simple nature
of the dependencies. More memory and more distance between source and target
==PAGE:74==
62
Results
does not yield any beneﬁt. Another common paradigm in NLP is bidirectionality
[SKP97]. It works by connecting several hidden layers to the same input and
running the recurrence in opposite directions. The advantage of this is especially
apparent when we wish to consider the context of a given position in the input.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.7: Generalization error on an independent test set for a bidirectional
LSTM encoder-decoder.
For the short dependence in TRG1 we would expect to see a large eﬀect. This
seems to be the case, especially for more hidden units. The eﬀect is a bit harder
to interpret for the other languages, but it does seem to be an advantage to use
bidirectionality if we have 8 or more hidden units.
But how does the internal representation of this counting mechanism look. We
look at typical values for a network with 2 hidden units and one-hot encoding
of source and target. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 5.8
==PAGE:75==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
63
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.8: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation.
We see very sharp and transitions, but they do not seem to be directly in-
terpretable, in the sense that some of the transitions happen before shifting
parentheses, no counting when opening and closing the second type of paren-
thesis and having very ﬂat activation values over time. It should be said that
this type of model took longer to train than when using an embedding. With
an embedding layer, we carry out a more thorough investigation. In ﬁgure 5.9,
5.10, 5.11 we present an example with 4 hidden units for TRG1, TRG2, TRG3
respectively. It is for the sake of readability that we have used 4 units. This
conﬁguration seemed to give a bigger chance of units being "dedicated" to the
counting tasks. For 2 hidden units, we saw a more distributed representation of
the counting.
==PAGE:76==
64
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation. The sentence pair considered is with TRG1 as target.
(a) encoder hidden activations, (b) decoder hidden activations, (c)
encoder cell activations, (d) decoder cell activations.
We begin by considering TRG1, seen in ﬁgure 5.9. For the hidden state in the
encoder, we see a very sharp transition in h3 and h2, when the input symbol
changes. In the decoder we see very strong evidence of counting even in this
constrained space. We see the activations swinging between two discrete values,
depending on whether a paranthesis is to be opened or closed. A third state
seems to track the change in parenthesis type. The cell state also exhibits some
form of counting, but it is nowhere near as interpretable as what is seen in the
hidden state.
==PAGE:77==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
65
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.10: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation. The sentence pair considered is with TRG2 as target.
(a) encoder hidden activations, (b) decoder hidden activations,
(c) encoder cell activations, (d) decoder cell activations.
In the encoder, we see the same picture for the hidden state when considering
TRG2, as we do in ﬁgure 5.10.
In the decoder however, a diﬀerent type of
counter seems to be employed.
The RNN seems to have learned something
more akin to identifying the middle and the ends of each of the paranthesis
pairs. This is enough information to reconstruct the language, so this might not
be surprising. It does not need to track individual opening and closing. Again,
the cell state is slightly useless compared to the hidden state.
==PAGE:78==
66
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.11: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation. The sentence pair considered is with TRG3 as target.
(a) encoder hidden activations, (b) decoder hidden activations,
(c) encoder cell activations, (d) decoder cell activations.
For TRG3, much the same story plays out as for TRG2. This is illustrated in
ﬁgure 5.11. So why do we even need the cell state? To show an example of this,
we consider the picture when sequences become long. We will not be exhaustive
but show an example using TRG1. We use 10 hidden units and a much longer
sequence in ﬁgure 5.12.
==PAGE:79==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
67
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.12: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation. The sentence pair considered is with TRG1 as target.
(a) encoder hidden activations, (b) decoder hidden activations,
(c) encoder cell activations, (d) decoder cell activations.
The counting in the cell state is even more explicit if we consider the same setup,
for TRG3. This is seen in ﬁgure 5.11
==PAGE:80==
68
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.13: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation. The sentence pair considered is with TRG1 as target.
(a) encoder hidden activations, (b) decoder hidden activations,
(c) encoder cell activations, (d) decoder cell activations.
We see that the hidden state loses a lot of information in the encoder, where all
of the activations saturate to -1 and 1. The cell state by contrast manages to
still have separate values for the ﬁnal state and can thus help with the inference
in the decoder. In the decoder we see clear evidence of counting. We now look
at some of the arguments that lie behind these results.
The combination of the activation function and the interpolation in equation
3.28, makes sure that the values in the hidden state are restricted to the inter-
val [−1, 1]. This precludes any attempt at unbounded counting, as was amply
demonstrated in the preceding generalization experiments. The precision was
ﬁne grained enough to learn to count to the number of occurrences of the dif-
ferent tokens seen in training, but the diﬃculty in consistently setting zt, rt
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Neural Machine Translation
69
ht to values that are precise but not saturated at −1 and 1 seems to be an
insurmountable obstacle.
The LSTM by contrast has the cell state. It does not have an applied non-
linearity, that squashes the previous cell-state in the calculation of the present.
Thus, each of the k dimensions in the cell state c[k] can be used as counters.
When not counting, the weights in the LSTM can be set to get it = 0 and ft = 1.
This propagates the previous cell state forward one step in time. Through using
the tanh activation function in the calculation of ˜ct an increment can be deﬁned
by saturating the function towards −1 and 1. This is based on xt and ht−1,
so the increment is similar to the one for GRU, but it is not restricted in this
increment step. The counting is then done by setting it = ft = 1. Resetting the
counter is done by setting it = ft = 0. Only in the calculation of the hidden
state is the counter squashed.
5.1.3
Distribution
In the encoder-decoder architecture, the encoder has to condense the input
sentence into concise form, that still allows for reconstruction by the decoder.
It has to retain enough information. To test how well the encoder can perform
this task, we consider the length distributions considered in chapter 4. These
induce a bias as to the form of the strings seen during training. If mainly short
strings are seen during training, does this make the model unable to generalize
to longer sequences? The same testing scheme as in the previous section is used
and we plot the four distributions against each other. A single LSTM layer with
10 hidden units is used in the standard conﬁguration.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.14: Generalization error on an independent test-set, using the length
distributions indicated. Using a single LSTM Layer with 10 hid-
den units. (a) TRG1, (b) TRG2, (c) TRG3. The red lines indi-
cate maximum length seen during training.
==PAGE:82==
70
Results
In general it would seem that seeing both long and short sequences is important
for generalization performance. It may even be a disadvantage to see a lot of
string of middling length. This may be related to the granularity we have seen in
the counting mechanism of the LSTM. We do not observe smooth transitions in
the counting and so, the extra information from the middling strings may serve
only to result in less sharp internal representations. What may be surprising is
that the right-tailed distribution performs better than the left-tailed one. Many
short sequences in the training set, makes for better performance when testing
on long strings. This may be due to the simple counting relationship we are
trying to express across the encoder and decoder.
5.2
Attention
Attention serves multiple purposes. In the context of learning formal language,
we have seen previously that encoder-decoder structure changes makes it neces-
sary to increase the number of hidden units in a translation task, as opposed to
a sequence prediction task using a single RNN cell. At a ﬁrst glance, attention
would seem to help overcome this diﬃculty, by lessening the constraint imposed
by the information bottleneck in the interface between encoder and decoder,
but as we will see, the empirical results would suggest otherwise.
5.2.1
General Attention
Surprisingly, using few hidden units, the results are not encouraging.
For 1
hidden unit, the results were nigh indistinguishable from the results only using
the LSTM units. Attention did not help with only 1 hidden unit, as almost
no correct predictions where made.
We omit those results.
In ﬁgure 5.17,
we see that attention does not seem to help the information bottleneck for a
small number of hidden units in encoder and decoder. One immediate thing
that comes to mind is, that the very good performance of an LSTM on TRG1
compared with the other languages, does not seem to carry over to attention. It
performs bad on all the languages, possibly better on TRG2. This may be due
to the dependency being deep but localized and not as ﬁne grained as TRG1.
==PAGE:83==
5.2 Attention
71
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.15: Generalization error on an independent test-set, using an LSTM
layer equipped with general attention. For TRG1: (a) 2 hidden
units, (b) 5 hidden units, (c) 10 hidden units. For TRG2: (d) 2
hidden units, (e) 5 hidden units, (f) 10 hidden units. For TRG3:
(g) 2 hidden units, (h) 5 hidden units, (i) 10 hidden units.
We have seen that an LSTM can implement counting, but now we will look at
which computational beneﬁt might come from an attention layer. For n being
the length of the sequence and l the dimension of the embedding, the models
uses a query vector q ∈Rl, a matrix of values V ∈Rnk and a matrix of keys
K ∈Rnl. A softmax is used to compute a similarity score between key and
query.
att (q, K, V ) = softmax(qKT )V
(5.11)
==PAGE:84==
72
Results
The output of the attention layer can thus be said to be a weighted sum of
the values. With the framework above, we can consider the application of the
attention layer to the hidden output of an encoder. These hidden states vectors
we call h1, .., hn. They are gathered into a matrix Ht. In the framework of
equation 5.12, by attending over Ht, we are computing.
st = att (W qht, Ht, Ht)
(5.12)
st is a summary of the relevant information in the encoder states. W q is the
matrix that is used to select the query. In eﬀect, we have added memory to the
state of the model, by using Ht at each step and not the single state as before. At
saturation, this increases the memory by 2O(n) extra possible states. This adds
to the amount of diﬀerent conﬁgurations the state can be set to and thus, the
patterns it can represent. A lot of this is lost during the summarizing however-
It would seem, in this case, that this extra memory is more of a curse than a
blessing, maybe leading the state to a spurious conﬁguration that performs well
on the training set but fails to generalize.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.16: Generalization error on an independent test-set, using Bahdanau
Attention. Using a single LSTM Layer with 20 hidden units. (a)
TRG1, (b) TRG2, (c) TRG3. The red lines indicate maximum
length seen during training.
These results are puzzling, so the model was run for 20 seeds in all cases, double
the usual amount used in earlier models. In ﬁgure 5.16, we see results when
more hidden units are used. There we see better performance, but still worse
than when not using attention. We next consider a diﬀerent form of attention
and relegate a more thorough investigation of the attention alignment to when
it is considered with Multitask learning.
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Attention
73
5.2.2
Self Attention
An immediate obstacle when using the transformer model, is the optimal set-
ting of hyperparameters [LCFBK18]. With hidden size heads and many other
tunable parameters, it makes comparison with a relatively simpler, RNN based
architecture complicated. We tried to solve this conundrum in two ways. To be-
gin with, any non-state hyperparameters were set in accordance with [VSP+17].
That is the optimization method, the learning rate, the positional encoding and
so on. With a learning rate of 1, 500 warmup steps for the Noam optimizer
[SS18]. We used 2 and 4 heads and 16 hidden units, tiny for the transformer,
but we began to see results already at this number. We used 0.1 dropout and
an embedding size equal to the hidden size. Data is generated in window [1,50].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.17: Generalization error on an independent test-set, using an a trans-
former model on with 2 heads on (a) TRG1, (b) TRG2, (c) TRG3
and with 4 heads on (a) TRG1 (b) TRG2 and (c) TRG3.
We see that the addition of extra heads does not seem to improve performance
here. There is room for ample experimentation directions here, virtually any
aspect of the transformer can be tuned and as a result, it can yield dramatically
diﬀerent results. As a consequence of this, we will take a diﬀerent and data
centered angle on the transformer and postpone further analysis to the next
section, where multilingual machine translation is applied. It is interesting to
note, that the language where more heads where more eﬀective, is the one where
we have 2 distributed "centers" for the diﬀerent parentheses.
==PAGE:86==
74
Results
5.3
Multitask Neural Machine Translation
The lack of generalization performance in the encoder-decoder formalism is
thought to be due to the diﬃculty of obtaining a useful representation in the
constrained channel between the encoder and the decoder. As we have seen,
both too little and too much memory can be a disadvantage. We will attempt
to explore this information gap, using Multitask Learning. To set up an exper-
iment that takes into advantage the possible beneﬁts of soft parameter sharing,
we use the setup in [WSC+16] and [JSL+17], where a an encoder-decoder is
trained on multiple languages. In our experiments so far, we have used 3 dis-
tinct target language, but the same source language. To allow the to recognize
what language to translate into, we append a token to the end of each source
sentence. ”A” if the desired output is TRG1, ”B” if TRG2 and ”C” if TRG3.
We ﬁnd that appending yields better performance to prepending. This could
be related to the path length between source and target and the token being
very close to the last hidden state of the encoder. We begin by looking at the
embedding representation in the beginning and end of succesful training. After
this, we train a host of models on diﬀerent training windows and compare them
with their unilingual counterparts.
5.3.1
Embedding
In soft parameter sharing, it could be interesting to investigate the eﬀect of
trained embeddings. As this layer is quite simple in OpenNMT, we will mainly
look at the distance between diﬀerent embedding representations.
The em-
beddings are visualized using T-sne [vdMH08]. As a baseline, we consider the
embeddings after 1 epoch in ﬁgure 5.18 and again after 50 in ﬁgure 5.19.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
75
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.18: Embedding of model trained for 1 epoch on TRG1, (a) source,
(b) target, and a model trained on TRG1 TRG2 and TRG3 (c)
source, (d) target.
We see that apart from the language identiﬁcation tokens, the only real dif-
ference is the distance.
This makes sense as the embeddings are initialized
randomly. This was a consistent pattern seen over 10 seeds. The models was
trained for 50 epochs and the results are illustrated in ﬁgure 5.19.
==PAGE:88==
76
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.19: Embedding of model trained for 50 epochs on TRG1, (a) source,
(b) target, and a model trained on TRG1 TRG2 and TRG3 (c)
source, (d) target.
After training, we see that the embeddings of the single-language model seem
to cluster diﬀerently from what it did at initialization.The the multi-language
model is moved much closer together than before and are all situated in the
positive quadrant. The multi-language models are the only ones that are exclu-
sively in the positive quadrant in the T-sne projections, the signiﬁcance of this
is not known to the author. We consider trained models of models trained on
TRG2 and TRG3 in ﬁgure 5.20.
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
77
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.20: Embedding of model trained for 50 epochs on TRG2, (a) source,
(b) target, and a model trained on TRG3 (c) source, (d) target.
Apart from TRG3 being more distributed in the target, no dicernable patterns
seem to emerge. TRG2 seems to have opening an closing parentheses of the
same type closer to each other than the other languages.
5.3.2
Training Window
We use a rather large network, as we have seen previously that a large number
of hidden units is needed in order to generalize well, but the representations
learned do not seem to be stable. Here we focus on the training window. We
focus on input strings that are of length [1, N], where N is the size of the
window. This artiﬁcial limit on the data is chosen to simulate a situation of
data sparsity.
Our desired feature is an expression of counting.
As strings
become shorter, it is interesting to see how performance changes. In addition
==PAGE:90==
78
Results
to this, the diﬀerent windows also impose limits on the length of dependencies
that have to be learned during training. This is where Multitask learning comes
to the fore. As the data is sparse and the model is prone to overﬁt, it seems like
a good scenario for testing the regularization and data augmentation aspect of
multitask learning. We have three subtasks to investigate, one for each of the
Dyck target languages we have considered so far.
As the input strings are identical in form for the three subtasks, we need some
way for the model to distinguish them. We adopt the method used in [WSC+16]
and [JSL+17], where a single token is added to the source language, indicating
the desired target language.
Where they add the token to the front of the
sentence, we add it to the end, to fully take advantage of the path length between
the input and the target. We concatenate ’A’ to the end of source strings to
indicate desired target TRG1, ’B’ to indicate TRG2 and ’C’ for TRG3. We
begin by focusing on a model without attention. Based on the considerations
in previous experiments, we set the number of hidden units to 10. We include
bidirectionality and consider 2 layers, as a compromise between performance
on the diﬀerent target languages. The task is formally structured as follows.
The training examples are taken from a set X × Y, so that the training source
examples xi ∈X are paired with their translation yi ∈Y according to the setup
in chapter 4. We consider the probability distribution on X, PX , so that source
sentences are generated uniformly by length. The results are summarized in
ﬁgure 5.21 for TRG1.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
79
5.3.2.1
LSTM with no attention
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.21: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG1,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG1. No attention mechanism is used.
The training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e)
30, (f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
We see one immediate and clear result in the performance of MTL against only
training on a single task. Here we see that in our "data sparse" case, the case
with a small window for the training set, the performance is improved by a
large margin. However, for the other cases, the MTL version is not much worse
and sometimes even a little better. This is keeping in mind that a single model
handles all three targets in the MTL case. In ﬁgure 5.22, we see the results for
==PAGE:92==
80
Results
TRG2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.22: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG2,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG2. No attention mechanism is used.
The training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e)
30, (f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
Here the MTL model is again good on very small windows, but it is in the middle
windows, 15, 20 and 25, that the MTL model is much better and likewise for
window 50. Results for TRG3 are shown in ﬁgure 5.23.
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
81
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.23: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG3. No attention mechanism is used.
The training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e)
30, (f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
5.3.2.2
LSTM with attention
We now turn to models that are augmented with a general attention layer. The
better performance of MTL on TRG1 is clearer here, than for the case without
attention. We use the dot-product attention previously speciﬁed and the same
LSTM architeture as in the previous section.
==PAGE:94==
82
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.24: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG1,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG1.
General attention is used.
The
training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30,
(f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
83
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.25: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG2,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG2.
General attention is used.
The
training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30,
(f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:96==
84
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.26: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG3.
General attention is used.
The
training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30,
(f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
For the attention, it may be beneﬁcial to survey how the attention weights them-
selves look when inference is run on a model that was trained with a shorter
window. This is a proxy for assessing what happens when a model augmented
with attention manages to generalize. We consider the weights of successful
translations, when a model trained on a window of 4, is used to infer the trans-
lation of a string with window 8. The results for all target languages are shown
in ﬁgure 5.27.
==PAGE:97==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
85
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.27: Attention weights for a single task model, trained on window
with maximum length 4 and used to translate an input sequence
with double that length. Results are for (a), (b): TRG1, (c),(d):
TRG2, (e),(f): TRG3
A very interesting pattern emerges here. While the patterns are a bit less inter-
==PAGE:98==
86
Results
pretable and more, it would seem specialized for strings seen during training. As
if memorization was afoot. When inference is run on longer strings, the actual
patterns in the string are much more clearly discernable and it seems like the
model has learned an eﬀective representation of not only the input string, but
of the concepts inherent in it. The analyis was made for a multi-task model,
with identical setup, except that it was trained on language pairs from all three
tasks.
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
87
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.28: Attention weights for a multi-task model, trained on window with
maximum length 4 and used to translate an input sequence with
double that length. Results are for target (a), (b): TRG1, (c),(d):
TRG2, (e),(f): TRG3
The representations on the string seen during training seem to be less specialized.
==PAGE:100==
88
Results
There are still some deﬁnite patterns emerging, but they are less clearly deﬁned.
For inference on unseen string, TRG1 and TRG2 the representation is similar
to the single-task case, maybe less precise. For TRG3, there does not seem to
be a correspondence at all. We now attempt to probe the inner structure of a
network trained using multiple tasks. We consider the case with no attention.
For TRG1, one such example is shown in ﬁgure 5.29.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.29: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation for a multi-language model. The sentence pair consid-
ered is tested with TRG1 as target. (a) encoder hidden activa-
tions, (b) decoder hidden activations, (c) encoder cell activations,
(d) decoder cell activations.
We do seem to see a more eﬀective representation of counting in the cell state of
these representations. It almost seems like the hidden state is a bit worse and
the cell is a bit better. It perhaps relaxes some of the patterns that the hidden
state gets caught in, by the inductive bias introduced by the use of multiple
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
89
languages. Similar activations for TRG2 are shown in ﬁgure 5.30
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.30: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation for a multi-language model. The sentence pair consid-
ered is tested with TRG2 as target. (a) encoder hidden activa-
tions, (b) decoder hidden activations, (c) encoder cell activations,
(d) decoder cell activations.
Here the representations seem to be a bit less interpretable, than for the single-
language case. The results for TRG3 are shown in ﬁgure 5.31.
==PAGE:102==
90
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.31: Activation values for encoding and decoding of a sentence pair at
evaluation for a multi-language model. The sentence pair consid-
ered is tested with TRG3 as target. (a) encoder hidden activa-
tions, (b) decoder hidden activations, (c) encoder cell activations,
(d) decoder cell activations.
5.3.2.3
Transformer
A last model to consider is the transformer. We perform the same experiments
as earlier, using 4 heads as in the small transformer used in the dedicated ex-
periment on that architectue. The results are shown in ﬁgure A.1 for TRG1,
A.2 for TRG2 and A.3 for TRG3.
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
91
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.32: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG3. A transformer model is used. The
training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30,
(f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:104==
92
Results
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.33: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG3. A transformer model is used. The
training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30,
(f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:105==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
93
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure 5.34: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multi-
task model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer
than that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3,
the multitask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All
models are tested on TRG3. A transformer model is used. The
training window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30,
(f) 35, (g) 40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
The one immediate takeaway is that MTL seem to work exceptionally well on
the problem we consider. It seem that the transformer has a hard time per-
forming when data is sparse. This should come as no surprise, as it is built to
take advantage of huge corpora of data and eﬀective, fast computation. MTL
performs a lot better for both TRG1 and TRG2. That the case is more am-
biguous for TRG3 could have a connection to the mutliple heads of the model.
If distributed information is calculated in diﬀerent heads, it may have an eﬀect
on how long-range dependencies are learnt. As a ﬁnal tidbit and as a possible
direction for further study, consider ﬁgure 5.35. Here we see a short contrast
==PAGE:106==
94
Results
between the attention for a single-task model and a multi-task one. It would
be interesting to see the weights distributed on each of the heads, but here are
their aggregate. We see that attention has a much clearer interpretation in the
MTL context here, as opposed to the case with attention for an LSTM MTL
mode.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.35: Comparison of attention weights for two transformer models
trained on (a) TRG3 (b) TRG1, TRG2, TRG3
The e5 values for the transformer are interesting, in that they show that the
model does not continue to fail at the threshold at e1. The values can be found
in Appendix A.
5.3.3
Rademacher Complexity
As shown in the previous section, using multi-task learning seems to have an ef-
fect on the performance of the sequence-to-sequence models considered. We can
elucidate this eﬀect by considering more general bounds on the generalization
error, than those provided by held out data. One such method is Rademacher
complexity, which measures the richness of a class of functions [MRT18].
We use an alternative version of the procedure in [SG16], which in turn is
inspired by the approach in [ZGR09]. Here we consider the domain of interest
Xw, to be the set of input sequences of the form anbm, n, m ∈R, deﬁned on a
window [0, w], where w is the end of the window. Now to apply the theory, we
deﬁne a real-valued function f : X →R. This function denotes the application
==PAGE:107==
5.3 Multitask Neural Machine Translation
95
of an NMT model to the input, yielding an output sequence y ∈Y. The "ﬁt"
for a given function f ∈F is deﬁned as:
sup
f∈F
n

i=1
σif(xi)

(5.13)
So for a training example we are ﬁnding the best ﬁt in F. We quantify the
"ﬁt" of f by using the loss function for the network considered, (f(x), y). The
Rademacher complexity of a class of NMT models, can be stated as follows,
where F is the function class deﬁned by the NMT model.
R(F) = Eσx
	
sup
f∈F
1
n
n

i=1
σi(f(xi), yi)

(5.14)
This corresponds to measuring the average ﬁt to a random relabeling of the
data. As the Rademacher complexities in themselves are diﬃcult to interpret,
we report the Rademacher complexity relative to a baseline. As we are interested
in the eﬀect of MTL, we use identical models trained on a single task for a
baseline. The architecture used in the previous MTL experiments is used for all
cases.
LSTM
LSTM-att
Transformer
1.12
0.96
0.93
Figure 5.36: Comparison of Rademacher complexity of a MTL model relative
to an identical model trained on a single task. All with target
TRG1
LSTM
LSTM-att
Transformer
0.86
0.84
1.07
Figure 5.37: Comparison of Rademacher complexity of a MTL model relative
to an identical model trained on a single task. All with target
TRG2
==PAGE:108==
96
Results
LSTM
LSTM-att
Transformer
0.43
0.31
0.70
Figure 5.38: Comparison of Rademacher complexity of a MTL model relative
to an identical model trained on a single task. All with target
TRG3
In most cases, the function classes seem to get restricted by the MTL, which
would suggest that some form of regularization is taking place.
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In the initial experiment, we highlighted two things.
That when a problem
is computationally simple and uses short sequences, a simple RNN encoder-
decoder is suﬃcient to solve the problem on a training set and to generalize well
to unseen data. This was done to highlight the role of memory and simplicity
in the regular languages.
Though the language BIN is but one example of
a regular language, it is situated ﬁrmly in that sphere and that allowed us
to show the eﬀective leveraging over the gap between encoder and decoder,
shown by a simple RNN network.
The second thing is the learning setting
itself. As much of present research on formal language in NLP is concerned
with the more fundamental computational capabilities of the building blocks
of learning systems, the investigation in the encoder-decoder framework needed
some introduction.
This was to be a theme throughout, as the concept of
language acceptance in his setting has not received much attention in the modern
literature.
In comparing the LSTM with the GRU on the Dyck translation task, the com-
plete failure of the GRU to generalize has well-established theoretical justiﬁca-
tion. The LSTM performs better, but it is unable to match the performance
seen in experiments trained to learn languages of the form anbn, that also exhibit
counting [WGY18], [SBS19]. Best performance by far was on TRG1 and that
can be hypothesized to be due to the very short dependency in the Dyck lan-
guage. The behaviour for TRG3 matches what is claimed in [WGY18], in that
==PAGE:110==
98
Discussion
the palindrome structure of the language makes it diﬃcult to learn for a simple
counter machine. On the whole, more hidden units improved performance.
The number of layers used makes a large impact. For TRG1, 1 layer is best. The
relationship is simple and local, there is no need to encode more complicated
representations. This changes for TRG2, where 2 and 3 layers outperform the
single layer by a wide margin. This eﬀect is even more pronounced for TRG3,
where 2 layers is far better than any other comers. Bidirectionality improves
generalization performance, but only as more hidden units are added. These
architecture experiments informed the choice of experiment parameters for the
attention and Multi-task models. Even with the full power of the DTU hpc
server, it takes a long time to train models and run inference experiments.
Attention has a confusing legacy in this thesis. Just adding a general attention
layer does not seem to force a model to learn a generalized counting mechanism.
It seems to merely confuse the issue. However when the attention weights are
looked at, they seem to have a clear interpretative value, even when inference is
run on strings much longer than the ones seen during training. The attention
mechanism pays attention the right place, but maybe the layer gives the model
too much ﬂexibility.
For the transformer, we will only term this an initial
exploration. The problem with the transformer is that is has a lot of components
and a lot of parameters to tune. Results can be explained away by luck and
failures by the lack of it. We did see a systematic tendency to perform well on
a counting task when the centres are distributed across the target sentence as
in TRG2.
With Multitask learning, the very small vocabulary size made interpretation of
the embeddings diﬃcult. While we did see some patterns, the random initial-
ization and the diﬃculty in interpreting distance in a T-sne projection does not
make it advisable to state anything as certainty. With the training window,
we could truly test the counting behaviour of models.
It was interesting to
see these very simple networks show very good generalization properties, even
if the results are quite unstable, as evidenced by the high standard deviation
of the results for most of the models. On the whole, multitask learning im-
proved performance and especially did so for short training windows. Adding
attention improved performance for TRG1 and TRG2, but for TRG3 it failed
spectacularly, which it did not due without attention.
The attention weights show that the patterns on already seen examples are
very speciﬁc, with very ﬁne grained structure. This structure is smoothed to
a degree, when applied to strings not seen during training. Adding multitak
learning seems to function as a smoothing operation over the weights, both for
seen and unseen examples. Whether this is an advantage probably depends on
the pattern in question. For the transformer, the picture is reversed, but it is
==PAGE:111==
6.1 Future work
99
diﬃcult to interpret with many heads and may parameters. It is also an open
question whether the comparison between a transformer with 4 heads and 16
hidden states with a bidirectional LSTM with 2 layers and 10 hidden units is
fair, but that, we suppose, does not have a simple answer. We have chosen
parameters that perform well in the space we have investigated, but a much
more focused study is needed to ﬁnd the optimal ones.
THe Rademacher complexity seems to suggest some form of regularization. An
obvious ﬁrst step here would be to look at the weight norms of the network,
especially comparing encoder and decoder across single-task and MTL. Initial
results were not promising, but they used the entire network for comparison.
6.1
Future work
There are many other ways to improve MTL models than the data-centric and
very simple approach taken here. [Rud17] gives an overview over possible di-
rections one could take the experiments, some of them data-centric and some
involving diﬀerent architectures, made to take advantage
All neural networks works as information compression devices. This is even more
explicit in encoder-decoder architectures. It could be interesting toestimate the
mutual information between a given layer and input/output [SZT17], [TZ15],
[DHFLM+18]. One could imagine estimating it between input and ﬁnal hidden
state of the encoder and then again between ﬁnal hidden state and output. I
think this could shed some light on how exactly information is compressed in
the encoder-decoder for diﬀerent types of problems.
We have worked mainly with the ek measure as a generalization proxy. One
could imagine many other such measures, some even taking into consideration
language complexity [ASH17]. A stronger classiﬁcation of the languages consid-
ered than just the chomsky hierarchy is probably an advantage in these kinds of
projects, as the positions in the hierarchy are very broad. As natural language
seems to lie in the interface of two categories, it might be beneﬁcial to take a
close look at those classes of language [PMW90].
The transformer and performance on Dyck language could warrant an entire
thesis in itself. We have attempted some small experiments, using the intuition
that the number of heads was a key factor, but this is by no means certain.
More prosaically, of what the author would have liked to include, we can mention
a soft-parameter sharing model, to test the MTL paradigms against each other.
==PAGE:112==
100
Discussion
A weight matrix investigation was also considered. A look at the representations
in the models themselves and not the activations. It was attempted, but it did
not prove anything conclusive, maybe more time was needed, in that it might
not be every weight in a model that is worth considering. Some baselines would
have been nice, but that is diﬃcult to do with our task. It was attempted,
inspired by [STK18], but they use a probabilistic grammar to generate strings,
making it simpler to enumerate choices.
==PAGE:113==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The Dyck languages are context-free languages. When considered as targets of
a machine translation algorithm, they test the ability of said algorithm to count.
We can construct a machine that shows that even though they are context free,
you do not need a stack to eﬀectively recognize them. One counter is enough
for each parenthesis pair. A task using the Dyck language as a target and a
parenthesis pair "counter" as source can be set up with a Machine Learning
framework and train successfully.
The GRU does not have a parameter that it can designate as an unbounded
counter.
It is thus unable to generalize well, when presented with a target
Dyck language.
The LSTM has such a counter, the cell state, and is hence
able to perform much better on the translation task. It is able to encode a
representation of the counters in the source languages, to correctly infer the
dyck language target. The performance is not perfect, however and seems to
be unstable over several seeds. At a target string length of around 1000, most
models seem to fail. The advantage of the LSTM is most evident when the
sentence pairs become long. Here we see a lot of information loss in the hidden
state of the encoder.
As dependencies become longer range or more distributed, the advantage of more
layers and structures such as bidirectionality become evident as they improve
performance signiﬁcantly. The length distribution of training strings seem to
==PAGE:114==
102
Conclusion
have a large impact, with it being important that both long and short strings
are seen during training. Having only long or short leads to bad performance.
Attention tends to lead to worse results in the single-task setting. Given the
ubiquity of attention in practical application, this is thought to be due to the ar-
tiﬁcial structure of the data. The transformer has generally inconsistent results,
but tends to work better on TRG2 when equipped with more heads.
Data-centric MTL used as hard parameter-sharing has a consistent and some-
times dramatic eﬀect on the generalization results. It is especially in data-sparse
scenarios that MTL seems to force a model into a representation that gener-
alizes well, when confronted with translation pairs not seen during training.
The most dramatic improvement happens with the transformer, where our very
small transformer performs well, even when presented with very little data. The
single-task transformer does not generalize at all. The conclusions are supported
by Rademacher bounds, which are agnostic to the models considered.
==PAGE:115==
Appendix A
Consistency
For the most part, the e5 values are almost exactly the same as the e1 values.
This suggests that when a model fails, it fails on all of the strings that are
longer. The picture is diﬀerent for the transformer and thus, we reproduce the
e5 values here for the transformer when situated in the MTL framework.
==PAGE:116==
104
Consistency
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure A.1: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multitask
model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer than
that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3, the mul-
titask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All models
are tested on TRG3. A transformer model is used. The training
window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30, (f) 35, (g)
40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:117==
105
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure A.2: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multitask
model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer than
that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3, the mul-
titask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All models
are tested on TRG3. A transformer model is used. The training
window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30, (f) 35, (g)
40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:118==
106
Consistency
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Figure A.3: Comparison of generalization performance of single and multitask
model, trained on an interval and tested on strings longer than
that interval. The single-task model is trained on TRG3, the mul-
titask model is trained on TRG1, TRG2 and TRG3. All models
are tested on TRG3. A transformer model is used. The training
window length is (a) 10, (b), 15, (c) 20, (d) 25, (e) 30, (f) 35, (g)
40, (h) 45, (i) 50.
==PAGE:119==
Appendix B
Project Plan
Here is presented the original project plan, submitted at the initial project pro-
posal. Here we augment it with comments on the process as it happened during
the writing of the thesis.
This project aims to investigate the computational aspects and diﬃculties asso-
ciated with Natural Language Processing. Beginning with a view of computation
rooted in Automata Theory and Formal Languages, the initial step is to ﬁnd
some way to quantify the "diﬃculty" inherent in learning diﬀerent problems and
structures. A next step will be looking at the formalization of network archi-
tectures themselves, seeing to which extent the computation of neural networks
has parallels or correspondence with formal computational models. Based on
the insights achieved by these considerations, experiments can be carried out,
to shed light on theoretical ﬁndings. The plan, in general is very open, to allow
for greater leeway in the study and consolidation of material in both older and
newer literature.
==PAGE:120==
108
Project Plan
Project plan
Before the beginning of the project, a 5 ECTS special course in the Theory of
Computation was taken to prepare for the thesis. Before this, a project in rule
based inference was completed in the course 02456 Deep Learning.
1.- 28. February
General literature study concerning modern Deep Learning methods. Becoming
acquainted with the central methods in DL, including architecture, training
methods and diﬀerent paradigms, to decide on possible avenues of taking the
project. Close contact with supervisors at DTU, for discussion and demarcation
of possibilities.
Weekly meetings were had with a supervisor, where we did a literature study of
both [?] and the general literature on formal language in modern Deep learning.
An NLP community was also established at DTU, helping with weekly discussion
and bonding activities
1. - 31. March
Focused Literature study, where a focus will be put on the connection between
formal models and deep learning and machine learning in general. Toward the
end of the month, the goal is to have deﬁned a speciﬁc problem as well as setting
up a data-loader for running simple tests, focusing on the results from one or
two papers tp begin with. The most pressing problem will be the deﬁnition
of a dataset that captures some complicated relationship, in order to warrant
an investigation using formal language, while also being relevant in NLP. The
author expects to foster closer connections with the NLP and CL communities
at KU, as they have competency in diﬀerent aspects of these topics, than we
have at DTU.
With help from the NLP department at KU, we zeroed in on a problem. An
unexplored space in the sphere of formal language seems to be machine transla-
tion and so, a course in that ﬁeld was followed, while the literature study was
continued. By the end of the period, we had identiﬁed a particular problem and
a dataset had been created.
==PAGE:121==
109
1. April - 15. May
Mathematical considerations and programming. A deeper analysis of the dataset
chosen, using theory found in the literature. This means that diﬀerent methods
will be used to learn certain features of the data.
For example how well a
biLSTM-CRF performs with nested recursion, if deep recursions can be learnt
better using memory or whether attention makes any diﬀerence in the formalized
setting. These are just examples, but reﬂect where the project is headed at the
time of writing.
We ended up doing a large-scale study of the ability of LSTM, LSTM-att and
transformer to learn the context-free language we considered. Major complica-
tions where had here, as the author is a computer science novice (background
in physics). But eventually a pipeline was set up, for taking advantage of the
HPC infrastructure at DTU, models were trained and it was shown that MTL
worked.
16. May - 15. June
Results should have been obtained and can now be visualized and interpreted.
Concurrently the theory will be consolidated and dead ends pruned away. The
main part of writing should be done in this period. At the same time, work will
continue on especially the model building and programming parts of the project,
as a lot of time is expected to be used debugging complicated DL architectures
and data loaders.
This period was marked by trying to ﬁnd out which auxiliary and explanatory
tasks should be considered. We ended up concentrating on the aspect of counting,
as this is the main feature of the generated data. A lot of programming went on
here, as some models had to be implemented by hand, with custom features.
15. June - 08. August
Review of work done so far. The ambition is to stand with an almost ﬁnished
analysis, only missing some details. These details can then be ironed out and
quality control should be performed, both on analysis and presentation.
In reality, programming did not stop. Results had been found, but new ones kept
popping up. Here on the 8. of august, the results are ﬁnalized.
==PAGE:122==
110
Project Plan
List of papers
For a list of recent papers on the connection between formal language theory and
deep learning, the reader is referred to the ACL workshop: Deep Learning and
Formal Languages: Building Bridges, taking place August 2. 2019, as well as the
following attempts to connect modern DL architectures and formal languages.
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W18-5414
http://aclweb.org/anthology/W19-0128
This list has, in the course of the project, been augmented quite considerably.
See the bibliography
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
[AAB+15]
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo,
Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jef-
frey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfel-
low, Andrew Harp, Geoﬀrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia,
Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Lev-
enberg, Dan Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray,
Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya
Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay
Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Mar-
tin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng.
TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous sys-
tems, 2015. Software available from tensorﬂow.org.
[AS95]
R. Alquézar and A. Sanfeliu. An algebraic framework to represent
ﬁnite state machines in single-layer recurrent neural networks.
Neural Computation, 7(5):931–949, Sep. 1995.
[ASH17]
Enes Avcu, Chihiro Shibata, and Jeﬀrey Heinz. Subregular com-
plexity and deep learning, 2017.
[BCB15]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural
machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate.
CoRR, abs/1409.0473, 2015.
[BDVJ03]
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, Pascal Vincent, and Christian
Jauvin. A neural probabilistic language model. JOURNAL OF
MACHINE LEARNING RESEARCH, 3:1137–1155, 2003.
==PAGE:124==
112
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bra18]
António Branco. Computational complexity of natural languages:
A reasoned overview. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Linguis-
tic Complexity and Natural Language Processing, pages 10–19,
Santa Fe, New-Mexico, August 2018. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
[BW00]
Mikael Bodén and Janet Wiles.
Context-free and context-
sensitive dynamics in recurrent neural networks. Connection Sci-
ence, 12, 2000.
[Car97]
Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. Mach. Learn., 28(1):41–75,
July 1997.
[CF49]
Kai Lai Chung and W. Feller. On ﬂuctuations in coin-tossing.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 35(10):605–608, 1949.
[CFMR68]
Patrick C. Fischer,
Albert Meyer,
and Arnold Rosenberg.
Counter machines and counter languages.
Theory of Comput-
ing Systems, 2:265–283, 09 1968.
[CGKM17]
Yining Chen, Sorcha Gilroy, Kevin Knight, and Jonathan May.
Recurrent neural networks as weighted language recognizers.
CoRR, abs/1711.05408, 2017.
[Cho56]
Noam Chomsky. Three models for the description of language.
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 1956.
[CS63]
N. Chomsky and M.P. Schützenberger. The algebraic theory of
context-free languages*. In P. Braﬀort and D. Hirschberg, edi-
tors, Computer Programming and Formal Systems, volume 35 of
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 118
– 161. Elsevier, 1963.
[CvMG+14]
Kyunghyun Cho,
Bart van Merriënboer,
Caglar Gulcehre,
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua
Bengio.
Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder–
decoder for statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP), Doha, Qatar, October 2014. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[CvM+14]
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Fethi
Bougares, Holger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase
representations using rnn encoder-decoder for statistical machine
translation. In EMNLP, 2014.
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
113
[CWV+14]
Sharan Chetlur, CliﬀWoolley, Philippe Vandermersch, Jonathan
Cohen, John Tran, Bryan Catanzaro, and Evan Shelhamer.
cudnn:
Eﬃcient
primitives
for
deep
learning.
CoRR,
abs/1410.0759, 2014.
[DHFLM+18] R Devon Hjelm, Alex Fedorov, Samuel Lavoie-Marchildon, Karan
Grewal, Adam Trischler, and Y Bengio. Learning deep represen-
tations by mutual information estimation and maximization. 08
2018.
[DRWR17]
Michał Daniluk, Tim Rocktäschel, Johannes Welbl, and Sebas-
tian Riedel. Frustratingly short attention spans in neural lan-
guage modeling. 02 2017.
[Elm90]
Jeﬀrey L. Elman. Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science,
14(2):179 – 211, 1990.
[For02]
Mikel L. Forcada. Neural networks: Automata and formal models
of computation. 2002.
[GBC16]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville.
Deep
Learning. The MIT Press, 2016.
[GLT19]
Andrea Galassi, Marco Lippi, and Paolo Torroni.
Attention,
please! a critical review of neural attention models in natural
language processing, 2019.
[Gra16]
Alex Graves.
Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural
networks, 2016.
[GS01]
F. A. Gers and E. Schmidhuber. Lstm recurrent networks learn
simple context-free and context-sensitive languages. IEEE Trans-
actions on Neural Networks, 12(6), Nov 2001.
[HD96]
Paul Hagstrom and Lsa Meeting—san Diego.
Object shift in
korean negation, 1996.
[HH12]
David Harris and Sarah Harris. Digital Design and Computer
Architecture, Second Edition. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.,
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2nd edition, 2012.
[Hig84]
James Higginbotham. English is not a context-free language. The
Formal Complexity of Natural Language, pages pp 335–348, 1984.
[HMU14]
John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeﬀrey D. Ullman. In-
troduction to Automata Theory, volume 1. Pearson Education
Limited, 2014.
==PAGE:126==
114
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Hoc98]
Sepp Hochreiter. The vanishing gradient problem during learning
recurrent neural nets and problem solutions. Int. J. Uncertain.
Fuzziness Knowl.-Based Syst., 6(2):107–116, April 1998.
[HS97]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term mem-
ory. Neural computation, 9:1735–80, 12 1997.
[HTF01]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The
Elements of Statistical Learning.
Springer Series in Statistics.
Springer New York Inc., New York, NY, USA, 2001.
[HW10]
Georg Hager and Gerhard Wellein. Introduction to High Perfor-
mance Computing for Scientists and Engineers. CRC Press, Inc.,
Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1st edition, 2010.
[JR12]
Gerhard Jäger and James Rogers. Formal language theory: Re-
ﬁning the chomsky hierarchy. Philosophical transactions of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 367:1956–
70, 07 2012.
[JSL+17]
Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V. Le, Maxim Krikun,
Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat, Fernanda B. Viégas,
Martin Wattenberg, Gregory S. Corrado, MacduﬀHughes, and
Jeﬀrey Dean. Google’s multilingual neural machine translation
system: Enabling zero-shot translation. Transactions of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, 5:339–351, 2017.
[KB14]
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, 12 2014.
[KCA17]
Ákos Kádár, Grzegorz Chrupała, and Afra Alishahi. Representa-
tion of linguistic form and function in recurrent neural networks.
Computational Linguistics, 43(4):761–780, 2017.
[KKD+17]
Guillaume Klein, Yoon Kim, Yuntian Deng, Jean Senellart, and
Alexander M. Rush. OpenNMT: Open-source toolkit for neural
machine translation. In Proc. ACL, 2017.
[Koe11]
Philip Koehn. Statistical Machine Translation. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2011.
[KW52]
J. Kiefer and J. Wolfowitz. Stochastic estimation of the maximum
of a regression function. Ann. Math. Statist., 23(3):462–466, 09
1952.
==PAGE:127==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
115
[LCFBK18]
Surafel Melaku Lakew, Mauro Cettolo, Marcello Federico, and
Fondazione Bruno Kessler.
A comparison of transformer and
recurrent neural networks on multilingual neural machine trans-
lation. 08 2018.
[LPM15]
Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D. Manning. Eﬀec-
tive approaches to attention-based neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 1412–1421, Lisbon, Portugal,
September 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[Mad09]
Mathias Winther Madsen.
The limits of machine translation.
2009.
[MCCD13]
Tomas Mikolov, G.s Corrado, Kai Chen, and Jeﬀrey Dean. Ef-
ﬁcient estimation of word representations in vector space. pages
1–12, 01 2013.
[Mer19]
William Merrill.
Sequential neural networks as automata.
06
2019.
[Min67]
Marvin L. Minsky. Computation: Finite and Inﬁnite Machines.
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1967.
[MP43]
Warren S. McCulloch and Walter Pitts. A logical calculus of the
ideas immanent in nervous activity. The bulletin of mathematical
biophysics, 5(4):115–133, Dec 1943.
[MRT18]
Mohri Mehryar, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar.
Foundations of Machine Learning. The MIT Press, 2018.
[MSV+19]
Joshua J. Michalenko, Ameesh Shah, Abhinav Verma, Richard G.
Baraniuk, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Ankit B. Patel. Representing
formal languages: A comparison between ﬁnite automata and
recurrent neural networks. CoRR, abs/1902.10297, 2019.
[Nie18]
Michael A. Nielsen. Neural networks and deep learning, 2018.
[PGC+17]
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan,
Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison,
Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic diﬀerentiation in py-
torch. 2017.
[PMB12]
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Y Bengio. On the diﬃ-
culty of training recurrent neural networks. 30th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2013, 11 2012.
==PAGE:128==
116
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PMW90]
Barbara H Partree, Alice ter Meulen, and Robert E. Wall. Math-
ematical Methods in Linguistics. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1990.
[PRWZ02]
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu.
Bleu: A method for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02, pages 311–318. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
[PSY+18]
Samira Pouyanfar, Saad Sadiq, Yilin Yan, Haiman Tian, Yudong
Tao, Maria Presa Reyes, Mei-Ling Shyu, Shu-Ching Chen, and
S. S. Iyengar. A survey on deep learning: Algorithms, techniques,
and applications. ACM Comput. Surv., 51(5), September 2018.
[Ros58]
F. Rosenblatt.
The perceptron: A probabilistic model for in-
formation storage and organization in the brain. Psychological
Review, pages 65–386, 1958.
[Rud17]
Sebastian Ruder.
An overview of multi-task learning in deep
neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1706.05098, 2017.
[RW97]
Paul Rodriguez and Janet Wiles. Recurrent neural networks can
learn to implement symbol-sensitive counting. 01 1997.
[SBS18]
Mirac Suzgun, Yonatan Belinkov, and Stuart M. Shieber. On
evaluating the generalization of LSTM models in formal lan-
guages. CoRR, 2018.
[SBS19]
Mirac Suzgun, Yonatan Belinkov, and Stuart M. Shieber. On
evaluating the generalization of lstm models in formal languages.
pages 277–286, January 2019.
[Sch05]
René L. Schilling. Measures, Integrals and Martingales. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2005.
[SG16]
Anders Søgaard and Yoav Goldberg. Deep multi-task learning
with low level tasks supervised at lower layers. In Proceedings of
the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, volume 2, pages 231–235. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, 2016.
[SGBMS19]
Mirac Suzgun, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Belinkov, and Stu-
art M. Shieber. Lstm networks can perform dynamic counting.
06 2019.
[SH96]
Jürgen Schmidhuber and Sepp Hochreiter. Guessing can outper-
form many long time lag algorithms. 01 1996.
==PAGE:129==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
117
[Shi85]
Stuart M Shieber. Evidence against the context-freeness of natu-
ral language. In Philosophy, Language, and Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
pages 79–89. Springer, 1985.
[Sie96]
Hava T. Siegelmann. Recurrent neural networks and ﬁnite au-
tomata. Computational Intelligence, 12:567–574, 1996.
[Sie99]
Hava Siegelman. Neural Networks and Analog Computation: Be-
yond the Turing Limit. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC,
1999.
[Sip97]
Michael Sipser. Introduction to the Theory of Computation. PWS
Publishing Company., 1997.
[SKP97]
Mike Schuster and Kuldip K. Paliwal.
Bidirectional recurrent
neural networks.
Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on,
45:2673 – 2681, 12 1997.
[SS92]
Hava T. Siegelmann and Eduardo D. Sontag. On the computa-
tional power of neural nets. In COLT, 1992.
[SS95]
H.T. Siegelmann and E.D. Sontag. On the computational power
of neural nets.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences,
50(1):132 – 150, 1995.
[SS18]
Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning
rates with sublinear memory cost. CoRR, abs/1804.04235, 2018.
[STK18]
Natalia Skachkova, Thomas Trost, and Dietrich Klakow. Closing
brackets with recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the
2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Interpret-
ing Neural Networks for NLP, pages 232–239, Brussels, Belgium,
November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[SVL14]
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. Sequence to se-
quence learning with neural networks. In NIPS, 2014.
[SZT17]
Ravid Shwartz-Ziv and Naftali Tishby. Opening the black box of
deep neural networks via information. 03 2017.
[TBM18]
Ke Tran, Arianna Bisazza, and Christof Monz. The importance of
being recurrent for modeling hierarchical structure. pages 4731–
4736, 01 2018.
[TUR50]
A. M. TURING.
I.—COMPUTING MACHINERY AND IN-
TELLIGENCE. Mind, LIX(236):433–460, 10 1950.
==PAGE:130==
118
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[TZ15]
N. Tishby and N. Zaslavsky. Deep learning and the information
bottleneck principle. In 2015 IEEE Information Theory Work-
shop (ITW), April 2015.
[vdMH08]
Laurens van der Maaten and Geoﬀrey Hinton. Visualizing data
using t-SNE.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9:2579–
2605, 2008.
[VSP+17]
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit,
Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polo-
sukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, 2017.
[WGY18]
Gail Weiss, Yoav Goldberg, and Eran Yahav. On the practical
computational power of ﬁnite precision RNNs for language recog-
nition. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers),
July 2018.
[Wol96]
David H. Wolpert. The lack of a priori distinctions between learn-
ing algorithms. Neural Computation, 8(7):1341–1390, 1996.
[WSC+16]
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V. Le, Mo-
hammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan
Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, JeﬀKlingner, Apurva Shah,
Melvin Johnson, Xiaobing Liu, Lukasz Kaiser, Stephan Gouws,
Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith Stevens,
George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei Wang, CliﬀYoung, Jason
Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Gregory S.
Corrado, MacduﬀHughes, and Jeﬀrey Dean.
Google’s neural
machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human
and machine translation. CoRR, abs/1609.08144, 2016.
[YVK19]
Xiang Yu, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Jonas Kuhn. Learning the Dyck
language with attention-based Seq2Seq models. In Proceedings
of the 2019 ACL Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing and Inter-
preting Neural Networks for NLP, pages 138–146, Florence, Italy,
August 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[ZGR09]
Jerry Zhu, Bryan R. Gibson, and Timothy T Rogers. Human
rademacher complexity.
In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. D.
Laﬀerty, C. K. I. Williams, and A. Culotta, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 22, pages 2322–2330.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2009.
