==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quentin Prost - s172801 
Room geometry estimation using 
compact microphone array 
Master’s thesis 
 
Supervisors: 
Finn Agerkvist 
Efren Fernandez Grande 
 
==PAGE:2==
Room geometry estimation using compact microphone array 
 
Report written by: 
Quentin Arthur Prost – s172801 
 
Advisor(s): 
Finn Agerkvist – Efren Fernandez Grande 
 
 
DTU Elektro 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk  
 
Project period: 
 
04/02/2019 - 04/08/2019 
ECTS: 
 
35 
Education: 
 
M.Sc. Eng. 
Field: 
 
Engineering Acoustics 
Class: 
 
Public 
 
Edition: 
 
1. edition 
Remarks: 
 
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for graduation in the above education at the Technical 
University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Room geometry estimation has been a wide ﬁeld of research in the past few years with applications
such as sound source detection, localization of sound reﬂectors, dereverberation processing, or even
recently room adaptation purposes for compact loudspeakers. Room geometry estimation usually in-
volves the use of large microphone arrays and sound sources that are accordingly placed in a speciﬁc
conﬁguration to optimize the accuracy of the results. In this project, a solution is developed to derive
the room geometry using a compact loudspeaker incorporating a combination of woofer-tweeter and
a compact microphone array placed on top of this one. The geometry estimation is restrained to
the local surroundings of the speaker. The method, using a delay-and-sum beamforming and image
source model analysis based on impulse response measurement, is successively introduced. This re-
port also emphasizes on the processing to recover the impulse responses that compose the necessary
rudiment for the method developed. It also deals with the encountered constraints throughout the
study, namely the ﬁxed geometry of the system as well as the relatively small size of the microphone
array that limits the frequency range of investigation. Simulations, measurements in anechoic condi-
tions, measurements in a standardized listening room, and the limits of the method are successively
presented.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This report is part of the requirements to achieve a Master of Science in Engineering (MSc) in the
ﬁeld of Engineering Acoustics at the Technical University of Denmark. The project was done at the
Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering in association with the company Goertek
Europe. The report represents 35 ECTS points for the student. The project has been realized in
the period from beginning February 2019 to early August 2019.
Lyngby, August 4th 2019
Quentin Prost
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my appreciation to all those provided me the possibility to complete this
report. First of all, I would like to give special gratitude to my supervisor Finn Agerkvist, for his
support and suggestions throughout this semester in order to achieve this project.
Furthermore, I would like to thanks Morten Birkmose Søndergaard from Goertek Europe who per-
mitted me to use the required equipment and necessary facilities in order to undertake this project.
A special mention goes to Jonathan Alexander for all the valuable literature and his precious advice
for this project. Also, I would like to thanks the rest of my colleagues that helped me in any way,
in this particular situation that Goertek went through during this semester.
Eventually, a special thanks are sent to my family and friends that always supported me in this ﬁnal
work that will conclude my student life.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Nomenclature
↵
Absorption Coeﬃcient
λ
Wavelength [m]
µ
Mean value
!
Radial frequency [rad/s]
⇢
Density of air [kg.m−3]
σ
Standard deviation
σ2
Variance
✓
Steering angle of the beamformer
✓s
Direction of arrival of a reﬂector
Fs
Sampling frequency [Hz]
hm
Impulse response measured at the microphone m
Sf
Spectral Flux
c
Speed of sound [m.s−1]
DOA
Direction of arrival [◦]
DUT
Device under test
IR(s)
Impulse Response(s)
k
Wavenumber [m−1]
p
Acoustic pressure [Pa]
R
Reﬂection Coeﬃcient
r
Radius of the circular microphone array
SNR
Signal-to-Noise ratio [dB]
t
Time [s or samples]
TOA
Time of arrival [s]
iv
==PAGE:7==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Contents
Abstract
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
iv
1
Motivation of the project
3
2
Content and Goals of the project
4
3
Theoretical Background
7
3.1
Frequency analysis & Impulse Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Frequency Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.2
Impulse response & Deconvolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Reﬂections - Image Source Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Delay and Sum Beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Proposed Method
14
4.1
Detection and classiﬁcation of reﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.1
Detection of reﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.2
Classiﬁcation of reﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Beamforming Implementation and Orientation Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Implementation of delay and sum beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2.2
Derivation of the DOA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.3
Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Implementation of distance estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Measurements : Anechoic Room
30
5.1
Setup & Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Impulse responses measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Free-Field measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
One-wall scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2.3
Corner situation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Geometry estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
1
==PAGE:8==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
6
Measurements : Listening room
44
6.1
Setup & Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Impulse Responses measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Geometry estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.1
One-wall scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.2
Corner scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3.3
Inﬂuence of the background noise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Conclusion & Future works
62
8
Appendix
64
References
68
2
==PAGE:9==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
1
Motivation of the project
In the past few years, the democratization of portable loudspeakers has dramatically skyrocketed.
They are often composed of a two-ways type incorporating a combination of woofers and tweeters.
As a consequence, those devices allow to playback music via Bluetooth connection with a fair sound
reproduction quality keeping a relatively compact size.
However, most of them are mono-based
devices and therefore cannot reproduce the stereo image of most music signals.
These speakers
often have a cylindrical shape and are equipped with a circular array of tweeters. From this array
of tweeters, high-frequency sound beams can be generated to steer part of the signal in a speciﬁc
direction. This could allow to steer two diﬀerent high-frequencies beams, for instance, the right and
left channel of an audio signal. However, the sound beams should be steered accordingly depending
on the environment around the speaker. Especially, the issue is that we cannot tell in which direction
the beams should be sent unless we know where the speaker is placed in a room. This refers to localize
precisely the closest reﬂective surfaces around the speaker. The localization includes deriving the
orientation of the speaker in comparison to those reﬂective surfaces as well as their distance from
this one. Therefore, even though the question of how to generate the sound beams in accordance
with the local geometry is not covered in this project, the local room geometry must be estimated
beforehand. Indeed, the sound beams would not be steered in the same manner if the speaker is far
from any walls of the room or close to one or more reﬂective surfaces. Many recent smart-speakers
such as HomePod from Apple, Google Home, or even Alexa from Amazon incorporates an array of
microphones for voice-pick up detection. The idea is, from the use of a similar prototype with a
circular microphone array, to develop a solution that uses this array to estimate the geometry of the
room.
3
==PAGE:10==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
2
Content and Goals of the project
Overall the main challenge of room geometry estimation is that no prior information about the room
is known. The only information a priory known is the exact position of the microphones and receivers
that are used in the study. In this project, the relative distances between source and receivers is ﬁxed
and raise the complexity of the problem. Likewise, the geometry of the system involves diﬀraction
and scattering eﬀects that are usually limited in most common setup, where source and receivers
are wholly separated. The approach of the problem is to induce the room geometry from a given
set of impulse responses. The idea is to successively recover those diﬀerent impulse responses, which
are spatially dependent, and extract geometrical information from them. A prototype device was
provided by Goertek to realize the diﬀerent measurements that were necessary to undertake this
project. The prototype has a cylindrical shape and is composed of a ﬁve-inch woofer, and a tweeter
mounted on the same axis, pointing downward. A waveguide is placed in front of the membrane of
the tweeter, as shown in Figure 2.1b.
(a) Prototype speaker - Sticky tack is used
as some parts were not completely sealed.
(b) Speaker view from bottom - Woofer is
placed behind the tweeter.
A cylindrical microphone array is mounted on the top of the speaker. The back cavity of the woofer
is wholly separated from the microphone array. The microphone array is composed of 7 MEMS
microphones; one central microphone and six microphones equally spaced in a circular shape. The
radius of the cylindrical microphone array is equal to r = 4 cm.
Figure 2.2: Microphone array used in the project
The project consists of deriving the local geometry using the uniform circular array. The estimation
4
==PAGE:11==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
of the whole room is not needed as the essential point is to detect the closest reﬂective surfaces. For
the ﬁrst time, the idea would be to classify the environment of the speaker in three common realistic
scenarios. The ﬁrst scenario to consider is when the speaker is placed far from any walls of the room.
The so-called ”free-ﬁeld” scenario refers to this situation. A free-ﬁeld scenario can be consider if the
speaker is placed more than 1.5 m to any side walls of a room. The second case corresponds when
the speaker is close enough to only one reﬂective surface. The case will be called the "one-wall"
scenario. The third case will be when the speaker is placed in the corner of a room. It is referred to
as "corner scenario."
Figure 2.3 shows the three diﬀerent possible outcomes from the estimation. The direction of the
likely high-frequency sound beams for each scenarios are also schematically represented.
Figure 2.3: Three diﬀerent case scenarios for the local geometry estimation. A : free-ﬁeld scenario.
B : One-wall scenario. C : Corner scenario.
As soon as the speaker is classiﬁed into those three scenarios, the precise localization of the detected
surfaces need to be estimated,
1. Estimation of the orientation of the speaker compares to the detected surface(s). The esti-
mation uses a circular microphone array; therefore, the orientation estimation remains in the
horizontal plane.
2. Derivation of the distance of those reﬂectors from the speaker. The distance corresponds to
the distance between the central microphone position and the normal projection of this point
on the detected surface.
Some assumptions need to be made and are listed below,
• It is assumed that the speaker will always be placed vertically.
• The walls are assumed to be always vertical and not slanting.
• It is assumed that the room will always have a ceiling.
Firstly, the estimation of the local geometry will be estimated using test signals such as sweeps or
impulses. It will be easier to extract the impulse response with those test signals and come up with a
method that works for the points mentioned above. The ideal goal will be to estimate the geometry
by using continuous signals, such as music, as for an end-user is would be preferable to avoid using
5
==PAGE:12==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
test signals. In other words, the ﬁrst goal using test signals will in a ﬁrst time conﬁrm the possibility
to achieve a local geometry estimation using a relatively small microphone array. If the outcome of
this point proves to be feasible, consider developing a method that works with continuous signals.
Simulations, measurements in anechoic conditions and measurements in a room are successively
done to achieve the goals above-mentioned. The anechoic environment will allow us to get the ideal
signal to noise ratio for the recordings, and try the method developed in the simulation part. In
those situations, only the wanted reﬂections will be present. The three situations aforementioned
can be easily reproduced using panels of hard surfaces and constitute a starting point to investigate
potential ways to derive local geometry with real measurements.
6
==PAGE:13==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
3
Theoretical Background
The section will introduce the main theoretical points that have been necessary for the investigation
of the problem. It reminds of frequency analysis tools, image source model, and beamforming basic
theory.
3.1
Frequency analysis & Impulse Response
3.1.1
Frequency Analysis
Any signal as a function of time can be decomposed into its frequency component. The frequency
content of a signal can be accessed using the so-called Fourier transform. Mathematically, the Fourier
transform is a complex-valued function f as a function of the frequency. This function is expressed
thanks to an integral. For a continuous signal x(t), the Fourier transform and the inverse to go back
to the time domain is expressed as follows,
X(!) =
Z
R
x(t)e−j!tdt , x(t) =
Z
R
x(!)ej!td!
(1)
with ! = 2⇡f the angle speed in rad.s−1.
Dealing with discrete signals, the Fourier transform can be implemented numerically using the
Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT). For any digital signal x[n] of length N, sampled at a sampling
frequency Fs, the discretize spectrum is expressed as follows, [1]
X[k] = DFT(x[n]) =
N−1
X
n=0
x[n]e−j 2k
N kn,
k = 0, 1, ..., N −1
(2)
also, the inverse discrete Fourier Transform (IDFT),
x[n] = IDFT(x[n]) = 1
N
N−1
X
k=0
X[k]ej 2k
N kn,
n = 0, 1, ..., N −1
(3)
The frequency resolution of the DFT, ∆f = F s
N depends on the length of the signal and the sampling
frequency, and the corresponding frequency in Hz is equal to fk = ∆fk.
To increase the frequency resolution without changing the length of the signal to consider, this one
can be zero-padded. It corresponds to extend the signal xn by adding M −N zeros to the tail of
the vector. As a consequence, the new length of the signal is equal to M, and the new frequency
resolution becomes ∆f = F s
M .
For a periodic signal of period length N, the DFT can be implemented as expressed aforementioned.
However, for none periodic signal or N being diﬀerent from the actual period of the considered signal,
it is usual to apply a time window on the signal to avoid spectral leakage and reduce discontinuities
at the boundaries. Diﬀerent types of windows exist, all of them with their pros and cons in terms
of time and frequency characteristics.
The implementation of DFT can be done by directly applying Equation 2 in Matlab using the ﬀt
function. It refers to a class of algorithms that allows getting a faster implementation of the DFT.
7
==PAGE:14==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Usually, the length of the vector to consider should be a power of two and can be achieved by
zero-padding the signal until M = 2l with l an integer.
For none-continuous signals, the spectrogram of the signal can be expressed.
The spectrogram,
or short-time Fourier transform (STFT), is a function of the time and frequency of the signal
giving a 2D representation of the signal. The idea is to segment the signal x[n] into L time frames
x[n] = (x1[n], x2[n], ..., xL[n]) and then compute the DFT for each frame chopped. Each frame is
windowed, and some overlaps between them can be decided. The length of the window ﬁxes the
frequency and time resolution.
Figure 3.1: Spectrogram of a logarithmic sweep. A Hanning window of length 1024 has been used
to compute the stft.
3.1.2
Impulse response & Deconvolution
The impulse response is the output of a dynamic system when this one is excited with a brief input
signal called an impulse or ideally a Dirac function. Most of the dynamic system can be approximated
as a linear time-invariant system LTI. LTIs has the fundamental result that the impulse response
can fully described the behavior of a system. Mathematically, the output of the system y(t) from
any excitation signal x(t) is obtained by the convolution of the input x(t) with the impulse response
h(t),
y(t) = x(t) ⇤h(t) =
Z 1
−1
x(⌧)h(t −⌧)d⌧=
Z 1
−1
h(⌧)x(t −⌧)d⌧= h(t) ⇤x(t)
(4)
Respectively, in the frequency domain, the impulse response can be seen as a transfer function. The
relationship between time and frequency domain allows to re-write Equation 4 as follows :
Y (!) = H(!)X(!)
(5)
Recovering the impulse response of the system is necessary to investigate diﬀerent properties of the
device under investigation and its environment. In practical cases, diﬀerent methods exist to recover
impulse responses. Diﬀerent kinds of test signals can be used, such as white or pink noise, MLS
sequence, or sweeps. In any case, the input signal needs to cover the frequency range of interest.
This project uses an exponential sweep, and the method employed to recover the impulse response
is described in Figure 3.2.
8
==PAGE:15==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 3.2: Recovering the IR from non-white spectrum signal [2]
In our case, the DUT will be the system described in the previous section composed of the source
and the microphone array. The prototype plays the test signals, and the microphones record the
output. Successively, the spectrum of each recorded signals are computed. Likewise, the inverse
spectrum of the logarithmic sweep as well. Then two diﬀerent possibilities,
1. Compute the deconvolution ﬁlter into the time domain again and then convolve with the
recorded signals. For long sequences, the convolution is not optimized, and computational
cost can become long. The second option is preferred.
2. The inverse transfer function of the input signal can be directly multiplied by the spectrum of
the recorded signals before being computed back to the time domain.
However, in order to get the following equality,
y(t) = h(t) ⇤x(t) = =−1(H(!)X(!))
(6)
The signal h and x need to be zero-padded. Indeed, for signal h and x of diﬀerent length, the shorter
signal will see its tail added to the beginning of the signal y(t). As a consequence time aliasing
eﬀect will occur in the time domain. If signals x[n] and h[n] have a length of M and N samples
respectively, the two signals are zero-padded to a total length greater than L ≥M + N −1 to avoid
time aliasing eﬀects. Eventually, the impulse response for a microphone m is recovered as follows,
hm(t) = =−1(Ym(!)
X(!) )
(7)
The deconvolution applied in our case will be described in the anechoic condition measurements in
section 5.
3.2
Reﬂections - Image Source Model
The complex expression of a 3D plane wave in a free-ﬁeld condition, of frequency f =
!
2⇡= 2⇡f
c ,
propagating in the direction k = (kx ky kz)T , at a position r = (x y z)T can be written as follows,
ˆp(r, t) = piej(!t−k.r) = piej(!t−kxx+kyy+kzz)
(8)
9
==PAGE:16==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
With pi a constant that can be determined with boundaries conditions of the sound source. The
presence of reﬂective surfaces introduces reﬂections. For a reﬂector with a normal vector ~k, the
sound ﬁeld pressure will see the contribution of the reﬂection added to the current Equation 8. It is
mathematically expressed as,
ˆptot(r) = piej(!t−kr) + prej(!t−kr)
(9)
With pr the reﬂected pressure amplitude that depends on the reﬂection coeﬃcient of the reﬂector.
If the 1D case is considered as in Figure 3.3, the total sound pressure becomes can be written as,
ˆptot(x, t) = piej!t(ejkx + Re−jkx)
(10)
R = pr
pi being the reﬂection coeﬃcient of the reﬂector
Figure 3.3: Reﬂection of a plane waves of normal incidence on a rigid surface.
In a more general way, problems of room acoustics use diﬀerent approaches such as analytic, ge-
ometrical, or statistical. The geometrical approach is well adapted to the problem and is based
on ray-tracing methods. This method consists of considering a ﬁnite number of rays from a sound
source. Each ray will travel across the room and will reﬂect on the diﬀerent boundaries: walls, ﬂoor,
ceiling, furniture, etc. This method considers only specular reﬂections, and therefore, rays reﬂect
following the reﬂection law. In other words, the angle of the reﬂected wave compare to the normal
of the boundary, ✓r is equal to the angle of incidence from this same wave ✓i.
Figure 3.4: Ray tracing approach. Each rays will be emitted from a sound source and will reﬂect
on the diﬀerent room boundaries. [3]
To deal with this approach, the method called "Image Source Model" is often used. Indeed, when
10
==PAGE:17==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
a couple of source-receivers is deﬁned, only a few reﬂections need to be taken into consideration.
The idea of the image source model is presented in Figure 3.5. The principle is to consider diﬀerent
virtual sources si by computing the mirrored image of the source s compare to the ith boundary
considered. Hence, the reﬂected path from the source s will become the direct path from the virtual
source si to the receiver r. The two paths have the same distance. Likewise, to deal with paths that
introduce more than ﬁrst-order reﬂections before reaching the receiver, other virtual sources can be
derived from actual virtual sources. It assumes that the diﬀerent reﬂection coeﬃcients are frequency
independent and also do not depend on the incidence of the incoming wave (R(✓, f) = Rconstant).
Figure 3.5:
Image Source model - The source is placed at a position s and the receiver at a
position r. Diﬀerent virtual sources can be computed to trace the diﬀerent path taken by the wave
before reaching the receiver. rd is the distance of the direct path. rr,i is the distance of the path
that reﬂected on the ith reﬂector. Likewise, rr,ij is the distance of the path that reﬂected on both
reﬂector i and j.
Mathematically, the image source si of the ith reﬂector with a normal vector denoted ni is expressed
below. The function that associates the image source si for an initial source s is denoted I [4].
si = I(s) = s −2(~s.~ni)ni
(11)
Likewise, the second-order reﬂection image source sij is derived taking the function I with si as an
argument,
sij = I(si) = sji
(12)
The method assumes a plane wave propagation. More realistically, spherical waves would be con-
sidered, and the amplitude of the waves decreases proportionally with the factor 1
r. However, the
assumption to keep a plane wave is due to the size of the microphone array used in the study, where
amplitude diﬀerence between the diﬀerent microphones is negligible. The pressure p in a room ex-
cited with a pressure signal ps(t) from a sound source placed at position s, at a receiver r can be
written,
p(t) = ps(t) ⇤hs,r(t)
(13)
11
==PAGE:18==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
With hs,r the actual impulse response of the room measured with the sound source placed at position
s and receiver at position r. Figure 3.6 shows a example of the impulse response of a room.
Figure 3.6: Impulse response of a room. The diﬀerent component of RIR is the direct-sound, early
reﬂections and reverberation tail [5].
Using the image source model, the total sound pressure is decomposed among the diﬀerent paths,
the expression of the total sound pressure is,
ptot(r, t) =
X
i=0
ps(t) ⇤hs,r,i(t −⌧s,r,i)
(14)
With the hs,r,i the impulse response of the ith path associated with the ith reﬂector. ⌧s,r,i is the
time delay of the ray to travel the distance ri = c⌧s,r,i. The path for i = 0 corresponds to the direct
path and ⌧s,r,0 = cr0 with r0 the distance between the source and receiver. The image source model
can be used for geometrical estimation. Indeed, the diﬀerent times of arrival in the total impulse
response can be associated with a unique image source, and therefore, distances of the diﬀerent
reﬂector can be derived. The method used for this project will be presented in subsection 4.3.
3.3
Delay and Sum Beamforming
Beamforming is a signal processing method used with microphone arrays in a way that allows steering
received signals by combining and delaying those signals to result in a constructive or destructive
pattern. The most known is called Delay-and-Sum beamforming, and the principle is described in
Figure 3.7. Each microphone m receives and captures a certain pressure signal denoted pm(t). Each
signal is delayed by a certain delay ⌧m that depends on the geometry of the array and the considered
steering direction.
Then all the signals are added together, resulting in a function of time and
steering direction. If the steering angle matches the direction of arrival of the signal, constructive
interferences will occur, and the beamformer output will result in a high amplitude value.
12
==PAGE:19==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 3.7: Delay and Sum beamforming. The signals coming from the microphones are individ-
ually delayed before begin added together. !m are called weighting functions [6].
For a given steering direction denoted by ~k, and a microphone m positioned at ~rm, the expression
of delay associated at this microphone for the given direction with the speed of sound c is,
⌧m(~k) =
~k. ~rm
c
(15)
The vector ~k should be expressed in a speciﬁc referential. Here, if the spherical coordinates are used,
φ being the elevation angle and ✓the azimuth, ~k can be expressed as follows,
~k =
0
@
sin(φ)cos(✓)
sin(φ)sin(✓)
cos(φ)
1
A
(16)
For circular array, the elevation constantly stays at angles φ = 0 and the detection will focus only
on the azimuth plane. Eventually, the ﬁnal expression of the Delay-and-Sum Beamformer output is,
b(t, ✓) = 1
M
M
X
m=1
!mpm(t −⌧m(✓))
(17)
with M the number of microphones of the considered array. pm(t) is the received pressure signal
at the microphone m. !m are called weighting functions associated with a microphone m. For a
spherical wave approach, those weighting function will be derived in order to compensate the factor
1
r of spherical wave approach. In this case, the microphone array is relatively small, and therefore
the weighting functions can all be set to 1. Moreover, keeping those functions to unity will lead to
keeping a shift-invariant pattern of the beamformer output [6]. Some techniques of partial delays also
exist. It consists of up-sampling the received signal to obtain a better resolution for the diﬀerent
delays implemented and as a consequence, the geometry estimation. Up-sampling can be as the
microphone array is relatively small and provides short delays diﬀerences. However, this will be
considered only if the precision of the direction of arrival remains too approximative.
13
==PAGE:20==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
4
Proposed Method
This section will present the method used in the project to estimate the local geometry.
The
local geometry estimation entails the estimation of the orientation of the diﬀerent reﬂectors near
the speaker and their respective distances from the speaker. The idea is to build a method based
on the analysis of a set of recovered impulse responses. The microphone array is composed of 7
microphones meaning that seven diﬀerent impulse responses can potentially be recovered and used
to set up an estimation from the information contained in each of them. As an impulse response is
spatially dependent on source and receivers positions, the early reﬂections detected will contain the
information needed to derive the exact position of the diﬀerent reﬂectors in a given environment.
The method will follow a certain order described below:
1. Recover the diﬀerent impulse responses. Early reﬂections are detected and classiﬁed from the
actual set of IRs recovered. This part is treated in the section section 5 and section 6.
2. Derivation of the direction of arrival of the diﬀerent potentials reﬂector placed near the speaker
based on the reﬂection detected in step 1. The direction of arrival is estimated using a Delay-
and-Sum beamforming.
3. For every reﬂector detected the derivation of their respective distances from the speaker is
derived based on TOAs, DOAs and image source model.
The diﬀerent parts of this section introduce and deal with the tools used for the detection of reﬂec-
tions, beamforming implementation, orientation estimation, and distance estimation.
4.1
Detection and classiﬁcation of reﬂections
4.1.1
Detection of reﬂections
The diﬀerent peaks in a set of measured/simulated IRs are candidates to come from a boundary of
a room and need to be identiﬁed. However, looking only at the impulse response some peaks can be
hardly detected, due to noise or eﬀects from other items placed in a room, and therefore information
required to implement the geometry estimation is missing. Even though this report does not deal
with the automatic detection of reﬂection, manual detection requires the introduction of some tools
to detect potential reﬂections.
First of all, the absolute value and squared magnitude value of the impulse response can be visualized
to set potential negative value peaks in positive value and enhance weaker reﬂections. However, in
a more noisy environment using those methods also amplify the unwanted part of the signal. Other
methods are then considered using both temporal and frequency information. Looking also at the
frequency content of the impulse responses could give more information that can be relevant in
this case. Instead of using a discrete Fourier transform, the spectrogram of the impulse response is
derived and gives a function of both time and frequency. When a reﬂection reaches a microphone,
this one should capture a sudden change in the frequency content. The idea is to compute the
spectrogram with a relatively small time resolution and look at the diﬀerent successive time frames.
If the diﬀerence becomes large, this indicates a sudden change of frequency content at the time frame
considered. [7] The spectrogram of an impulse response hm(t) is denoted by Shm(k, t) with the k
the frequency bin and t the time instant.
14
==PAGE:21==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Knowing that the time and frequency resolution are inter-dependent, the number of frequency bins
in the spectrogram is derived from the length of the time window N used, and the sampling frequency
Fs.
Nk = Fmax
∆f
= Fs/2
Fs/N = N
2
(18)
And eventually, the spectral ﬂux Sfhm(t)(n) for a measured impulse response hm(t) is expressed,
Sfhm[n] = 2
N
v
u
u
t
N/2
X
k=0
*++Shm(t)(k + 1, n)
++ −
++Shm(t)(k, n)
++,2
(19)
Shm(t)(k, n) is the spectrogram of the impulse response hm(t) at the frequency bin k and time frame
n. Figure 4.1 shows an example of a measured impulse response. The impulse response can be, to
a certain extent, noisy making detection of reﬂections more complex. The use of the spectral ﬂux
alongside with the impulse response will help to detect the diﬀerent reﬂections if necessary.
Figure 4.1: Blue curve : Impulse response - Orange curve
: Spectral Flux. The peaks in the
spectral ﬂux corresponds to a sudden change in frequency content in the spectrum of the impulse
response. This can be associated to a reﬂection
4.1.2
Classiﬁcation of reﬂections
One of the main challenges is that a real environment places the speaker exposed to receive reﬂections
from various elements, such as the ceiling and ﬂoor, for instance. Therefore each reﬂection detected
in the IRs should be classiﬁed and associated with a unique reﬂector and spurious reﬂections must
be discarded.
The microphone array being cylindrical the geometry estimation will focus only on the horizontal
plane. However, reﬂections from the ceiling and the ﬂoor will be present in the IRs and need to be
removed. Diﬀerent assumptions can be made to discard those reﬂections.
15
==PAGE:22==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
1. The ﬁrst reﬂection from the ceiling is usually the strongest in the impulse response. Indeed,
as the microphone array is on top of the speaker, reﬂection from the ceiling provides a higher
amplitude. The strongest early reﬂections, excluding the direct-path, in the impulse response
might be a candidate to come from the ceiling.
2. Secondly, assuming a strong reﬂection has been detected in the set of IRs, comparing the
diﬀerent times of arrivals of this one can give further information. Indeed, reﬂections coming
from the ceiling should arrive approximately at the same time for all the microphones. A
slight delay on the diﬀerent TOA can occur due to the diﬀerent paths taken to reach each
microphone of the array and rounding due to the discretization. It assumes that if all the
TOAs are contained within a range of 5 samples (i.e.
4
F s = 0.1ms), the reﬂection is classiﬁed
as coming from the ceiling.
Figure 4.2 shows a set of impulse responses that have been recovered from recordings inside a listening
room. In all the sets, the detection discards the ceiling reﬂection.
Figure 4.2: Set of deconvolved impulse response from microphone 1 to 6. The squared value is
plotted. The high peak around 0.01s on all the IRs corresponds to the ceiling of the listening room.
4.2
Beamforming Implementation and Orientation Estimation
This section will present how the beamforming has been implemented to derive the direction of
arrival of an incoming reﬂection. The usual methodology involves applying the beamforming on
the pressure impinging the microphone array. When the beamformer is pointing towards the right
direction, the output shows a constructive pattern resulting in a high amplitude output value. Here
the idea remains the same; the only diﬀerence is that instead of using the pressure signals, the use of
recovered impulse responses as an input for the beamforming processing is considered. Assuming that
the impulse responses are recovered, and the diﬀerent reﬂections have been detected and classiﬁed,
applying the beamformer to this set of IRs around the time of arrival of a given reﬂection will
result in a constructive pattern when the steering vector matches with the direction of arrival of
16
==PAGE:23==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
this reﬂection. The steering angle that maximizes the beamformer output indicates the direction of
arrival of the considered reﬂection.
4.2.1
Implementation of delay and sum beamforming
First of all, a referential is deﬁned and was used throughout the analysis.
The referential < =
(O, ~x, ~y, ~z) is deﬁned with the origin O as the central microphone of the array. The diﬀerent mi-
crophone positions are denoted by a point Mm.
The x-axis is formed with the segment [OM1]
corresponding to the axis formed by the central microphone and microphone 1. The y-axis and z-
axis are consequently built in order to get a direct referential. From this referential calculation of the
cylindrical coordinates are done. In the case of a cylindrical microphone array with six microphones,
the positions vectors of the microphones are deﬁned as follows, R is the radius of the microphone
array,
~rm =
~
OMm = R
0
@
cos(✓m)
sin(✓m)
0
1
A = R
0
@
cos( 2⇡m
6 )
sin( 2⇡m
6 )
0
1
A
(20)
Likewise, the expression of steering vector ~k to a given steering direction ✓is,
~k =
0
@
cos(✓)
sin(✓)
0
1
A
(21)
Juggling with mathematical simpliﬁcations, the expression of the associated delay for a given mi-
crophone m and steering direction ✓is,
⌧m(✓) = ~k. ~rm = R
c cos(✓m −✓)
(22)
Furthermore, the central microphone being the origin of the referential is denoted as microphone 7
and is taken as the reference microphone. Its associated delay is equal to ⌧m(✓) = 0 for all steering
angles ✓. The diﬀerent delays derived from Equation 22 need to be discretized when the beamformer
is implemented numerically. Theoretically, the minimum delay that can be implemented corresponds
to ⌧min =
1
F s = 0.02 ms. In other words, any calculated delays within a range of 0.02 ms might end
up with the same numerical delay applied in the delay and sum. Therefore the sampling frequency
will limit the precision of the direction of arrival. For instance, assuming a wave that impinges
the array with an angle of ✓= 0, the delay associated to microphone 1 is equal to ⌧1 = R
c = 0.11
ms.
Likewise, the delay at microphone 2 is ⌧2 =
R
c cos( ⇡
3 ) =
R
2c = 0.058 ms.
As only integer
values of samples can be used, the nearest integer will be taken as the associated delay in samples.
Therefore, the two delays derived become respectively ⌧1 = [1.1e−4Fs] = [5.59] = 6 samples and
⌧2 = [5.8e−5Fs] = [2.7] = 2 samples. In case that more precision is needed, up-sampling the impulse
response can be considered to get more accurate results. Knowing the geometry of the array, the
theoretical maximum delay in samples that can occur is equal ∆⌧max =
⇥2R
c Fs
⇤
= 11 samples.
The impulse response at the mth microphone is denoted hm and eventually the delay and sum
17
==PAGE:24==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
beamforming is expressed below using Equation 17,
b(t, ✓) = 1
M
M
X
m=1
hm(t −⌧m(✓)) = 1
M
M
X
m=1
!mhm(t −R
c cos(✓m −✓))
(23)
The Matlab script is added in the appendix section.
4.2.2
Derivation of the DOA
A steering vector is implemented for a set of Nangle directions with ✓within a range from 0 to 2⇡.
As many reﬂections are present in the diﬀerent impulse responses, two approaches can be used to
implement the beamforming and derive the direction of arrival. In real situations, the second option
is preferred.
1. Detection of peaks for every hm(t) that belongs to a common reﬂector. Then apply a time
window on each impulse response, centered in the time of arrival of the central microphone
and then apply the beamforming on this set of IRs, taking only the contribution of the impulse
response within the window. Figure 4.3 shows an example of windowed IRs.
2. Applying the delay and sum beamforming directly on the set of IRs without any prior pro-
cessing. From the beamformer output, the diﬀerent possible reﬂection are extracted, and their
respective positioning in space are successively analyzed.
In both cases, the idea is to take only the contribution of the narrow time frame in order to keep
only one reﬂection in the analysis. If the time of arrival of a detected reﬂection is denoted tr, a
window ! of length L! is then deﬁned as follows,
⇢!r(t) = 1 ,
tr −L!
2 t tr + L!
2
!r(t) = 0 ,
otherwise
(24)
The windowed impulse response hw,m(t) for a microphone m and a reﬂection r detected becomes,
hr,m(t) = hm(t)!(t)
(25)
Moreover, the ﬁnal beamformer output for a reﬂection r is written as,
br(t, ✓) = !r(t)
M
M
X
m=1
hm(t −R
c cos(✓m −✓)) = 1
M
M
X
m=1
hr,m(t −R
c cos(✓m −✓))
(26)
18
==PAGE:25==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 4.3: Simulated Impulse responses - The diﬀerent peaks in the impulse are windowed ac-
cording to the time of arrival of the central microphone (Top Figure). The dashed curves correspond
to the diﬀerent windows derived from Equation 24. Those windows are centered from the time of
arrival of the central microphone. The IRs are truncated to display only the early reﬂections
Part of the MatLab code is attached in Appendix 1.
In both approaches, the direction of arrival can be estimated from the beamformer output br(t, ✓s).
However, some processing needs to be done to extract that information. As the delays calculated and
applied on the beamformer can slightly diﬀer from the actual ones, the constructive interferences do
not necessarily occur at the same time as it would have been in a hypothetical case. The direction
of arrival with the maximum likelyhood needs to be derived. In order to achieve this goal statistical
approach is used computing the variance of the delay and sum output. By taking the output of the
beamformer for a ﬁxed direction ✓s, the beamformer output becomes only a function of time b✓s(t).
The mean value of b✓s(t) is derived, and the variance will calculate the squared dispersion compared
to the mean value denoted µ(✓s). The variance is derived for every steering angle ✓s and can be
expressed as below :
σ2
r(✓s) =
1
N −1
N
X
t=1
|br(t, ✓s) −µr(✓s)|2
(27)
µr(✓s) = 1
N
N
X
t=1
br(t, ✓s)
(28)
With N being the number of observations in the beamforming processing.
Inversely, the same
reasoning can be done taking the beamformer at a ﬁxed time instant t. The variance, as well as the
19
==PAGE:26==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
mean value, are expressed below,
σ2
r(t) =
1
N −1
Nangle
X
✓s=1
|br(t, ✓s) −µr(t)|2
(29)
µr(t) =
1
Nangle
Nangle
X
✓s=1
br(t, ✓s)
(30)
Looking more precisely at the diﬀerent equations above-mentioned, it shows by developing that the
variance of the beamformer be none other than the deviation of the beamformer power output from
its mean value. As mentioned before, the window will be applied either directly on the impulse re-
sponses or on the beamformer output leading in both cases to the ﬁnal beamformer output described
in Equation 26. The only diﬀerence is that if the beamforming is applied with pre-windowed IRs,
it assumes that the correct detection and classiﬁcation of the reﬂections has been done beforehand.
In the second case, Equation 27 needs to be computed before to estimate the diﬀerent time instant
where potential reﬂections involve a constructive pattern in the beamformer output. The choice of
the method will depend on the success of detecting and classifying the diﬀerent peaks directly in
the impulse responses. In a more noisy environment, the second method is preferred. In both cases,
the direction of arrival of a reﬂection r is found by deriving the steering angle ✓s that maximizes the
value of the variance σ2(✓s). Eventually, ✓r can be written as follows,
✓r = arg max
✓s2[0;2⇡]
(σ2
r(✓s))
(31)
4.2.3
Simulations
To illustrate the method of deriving the direction of arrival, simulations have been realized.
In
principle, simulations allow getting simulated impulse responses for a pre-deﬁned room. Knowing
the exact geometry of the microphone array and the position of the source, the diﬀerent scenarios can
be easily simulated by placing sources and receivers at diﬀerent positions across the room. However,
the physical boundaries of the speaker are not implemented in those simulations. It discards potential
diﬀraction and scattering eﬀects in the impulse responses. The distance estimation is not treated
in this part as the real geometry of the speaker is not taken into account. The impulse responses
are recovered based on the image source model method using the ISM algorithm [8]. The diﬀerent
virtual sources can be computed knowing the geometry of the room and the position of the speaker.
Two diﬀerent rooms are deﬁned for the simulation. The ﬁrst one will be relatively small with small
coeﬃcients absorption on the ﬂoor, walls, and ceiling. The second will be similar to the listening
room where measurements were made and will be presented later in this report. The ﬁrst room has
dimensions 3 x 4 x 3.5 m3. The absorption coeﬃcients used are set to ↵walls = 0.3, ↵floor = 0.5
and ↵ceiling = 0.2. The absorption is assumed to be frequency independent. Also, only specular
reﬂections are considered, discarding any spurious reﬂections from the boundaries of the room. The
reverberation time T60 can be estimated using Sabine’s equation, knowing the volume V of the room
and the total absorption surface Stot for both rooms,
T60,room1 = 0.16V
Stot
= 0.46s T60,room2 = 0.16V
Stot
= 0.90s
(32)
20
==PAGE:27==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
The speed of sound is set to c = 343m/s and the sampling frequency to Fs = 48kHz. The signal-
to-noise ratio is set to +1 dB.
Room 1
The origin of the referential is deﬁned at the corner of the room.
A ﬁrst simulation was done
placing the source at coordinates Xsource = [0.4 1.7 1] to be similar to a ”one-wall” situation. The
microphones are then deﬁned accordingly from the source position.
(a) 3D View
(b) Top view
Figure 4.4: Room 1 - one wall scenario
The simulation goal is to derive the DOA of the wall compared to the source. This one was oriented
at ✓s = 180◦Figure 4.5 plots the corresponding impulse responses derived from both scenarios,
Figure 4.5: Simulated IRs - Room 1 one wall scenario. The ﬁrst high peak in both IRs corresponds
to the direct path. Source placed at Xsource = [0.4 1.7 1]
21
==PAGE:28==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Taking a closer look at the impulse responses, the diﬀerent reﬂections show a relatively fast decay.
Therefore, their contribution to the beamformer output will become insigniﬁcant after a certain time.
The diﬀerent reﬂections can be extracted from the ﬁgures. Indeed, discarding any scattering and
diﬀraction eﬀects, the peaks are sharp and distinct from each other and will be easily detected and
classiﬁed. As a matter of fact, only the need for detecting the early reﬂections is necessary. Following
the method developed previously, the beamformer is computed using the seven impulse responses
recovered from the simulations and gives an output matrix b(t, ✓). For all direction angles, the power
of the beamformer as a function of time is computed using Equation 29 and plotted in Figure 4.6.
Each peak in the ﬁgure needs to be identiﬁed as either coming from the sidewalls, the ﬂoor, or
the ceiling. As the interest inclines towards the local geometry, only the ﬁrst sidewalls reﬂections
need to be considered. Alongside with the impulse responses, reﬂections from the ceiling and ﬂoor
can be detected as explained in subsection 4.1 and do not need to be taken into consideration in
the beamformer implementation. The direct path can also be discarded being the ﬁrst peak in the
ﬁgure.
Figure 4.6:
σ2(t) - Simulation 1.
Green Line - Direct Path , Blue Lines - Wall reﬂection or
combination ﬂoor and side walls, Red Lines - Floor or Ceiling reﬂection
Once the reﬂections have been classiﬁed, windows derived from Equation 24 can be applied for
the diﬀerent reﬂections of interests.
The length of the window depends mainly on two factors:
sampling frequency and accuracy of the impulse responses. Rounding needs to be done when the
delays are computed in the beamforming loop and will necessarily impose a limit of precision for
the orientation estimation. Besides, in the simulation here, the impulse responses are recovered
based on a geometrical approach through the image source model. In reality, the measured time
of arrival of a reﬂection in a given impulse response might diﬀer from the expected one due to
various acoustics eﬀects such as scattering, reﬂections involving phase shifts, the directionality of the
microphones, which are, as mentioned before, discarded in the simulation. Thus, the contribution
of a given reﬂection might occur slightly after the expected TOAs in the beamforming loop. If
Equation 24 is applied directly on the beamformer output, a short length of the windows could be
used with simulated IRs. Whereas, real impulse responses might need a larger window to ensure the
contribution of every microphones in the beamforming processing. The window’s length was set in
order to give the most accurate results possible. The shorter the window, the better the precision
of the direction of arrival.
To better illustrate the case, the direction of arrival for the ﬁrst reﬂection coming from a side wall can
be found at t = 90 samples in Figure 4.6. The beamformer output is then windowed for every angle
✓s around this time instant. Eventually Equation 27 is computed and give a vector as a function of
✓s and is plotted below in Figure 4.7.
22
==PAGE:29==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 4.7: σ2(✓s) - Simulation 1 for ﬁrst reﬂection detected
The steering angle that maximizes the function is taken as the direction of arrival for this reﬂection,
here ✓r = 180◦degree and matches with what was expected. It can be noticed that σ2(✓s) shows a
perfect symmetrical pattern with respect to the axes ✓s = 180. Indeed, the microphone 4 aligns with
the sidewall, the pairs of microphones 3&5 and 2&6 are respectively placed at the same distance
from this wall providing identical IRs pattern for this reﬂection.
Moving now to a corner scenario, the simulation is done a second time with the source placed at the
coordinates Xsource = [0.3 0.2 1]. The expected DOA are respectively ✓r1 = 180◦and ✓r2 = 270◦.
Arbitrarily a direction of arrival is denoted ✓ri for the ith reﬂections detected in the impulse responses.
(a) 3D View
(b) Top view
Figure 4.8: Room 1 - Corner scenario
23
==PAGE:30==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 4.9: Simulated IRs - Room 1 one wall scenario. The ﬁrst high peak in both IRs correspond
to the direct-path. Source placed at Xsource = [0.3 0.2 1]
The two close peaks right after the direct-path correspond to the two walls. The beamforming is
once computed with the set of impulse responses, and the ﬁnal direction of arrival derived after
windowing the beamforming output based on the detected peaks in σ2(t) are plotted below.
Figure 4.10: σ2(✓s) for the two ﬁrst reﬂections coming from the two walls. Both curves has been
individually normalized as a matter of visibility for the plots.
The two direction of arrival are respectively found at ✓s1 = 180◦and ✓s2 = 270◦. No ambiguities
24
==PAGE:31==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
are present in the σ2(✓s) curves, and ✓s is estimated easily.
Room 2
A second case room is now simulated. The room has now the dimension 4 x 6.5 x 2.5 m3. The
absorption coeﬃcient used remains the same as in the ﬁrst room. In this case, the source and receiver
will be placed close to a corner of the room.
The particular case investigated here, is that the source is placed at the same distance from both
walls Xsource = (0.5 0.5 0.75). As a consequence, in an ideal case, the ﬁrst reﬂection from both walls
reaches at the same time the central microphone of the array. Distinct TOAs will be observed for
the rest of the array. The goal is to verify if the direction of arrival can be derived in this situation.
Especially, in this case the two direction of arrival are respectively ✓s1 = 180◦and ✓s2 = 270◦.
(a) 3D View
(b) Top view
Figure 4.11: Room 2 - Corner scenario
Figure 4.12: σ2(t) - Simulation 1 - Corner scenario. Green Line - Direct Path , Blue Lines - Wall
reﬂection or combination ﬂoor and side walls, Red Lines - Floor or Ceiling reﬂection
The same procedure is realized and σ2(t) is computed and plotted in Figure 4.12. The peak at
t = 145 samples correspond to the two reﬂections captures from the two walls. The next peak
at t = 200 samples is the virtual source that corresponds to the path that reﬂects on both walls
before reaching the microphone array. Later reﬂections correspond to other paths that might involve
either second or third-order reﬂections. All reﬂections can impinge on the microphone array with
a diﬀerent elevation, however as the microphone array is cylindrical, the direction of arrival will be
limited to the azimuth angle. Taking the ﬁrst peak, in this speciﬁc case, the length of the windows
25
==PAGE:32==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
to apply on the beamformer output will have an impact on the detection of both walls. Diﬀerent
windows length are used and shows the outcome of σ2(✓s) and are plotted in Figure 4.13.
(a) L! = 2
(b) L! = 4
(c) L! = 6
(d) L! = 8
Figure 4.13: Inﬂuence of the length of the window on the derivation of the DOA.
It can be seen that the shorter the window, the more precise the two walls can be distinguished from
each other. In Figure 4.13a and Figure 4.13b the two direction of arrival can be easily extracted
from the two local maximum respectively at ✓s1 = 180◦and ✓s2 = 270◦. Whereas a longer window
brings more uncertainties about the direction of arrival to extract.
To conclude this part, the method for the orientation estimation has been presented thanks to simu-
lated impulse responses. The diﬀerent theoretical results will help to start with real measurements.
It has to be kept in mind the diﬀerent assumptions that have been set for the simulation part.
Firstly, the simulated impulse responses do not take into account the diﬀerent elements that might
interact with the sound ﬁeld during the measurement, boundaries of the speaker, the support of
where the speaker is placed, diﬀraction from the edges of the speaker, or any other objects placed
nearby the prototype. Secondly, the reﬂectors have been simulated with ﬁxed absorption coeﬃcients.
As a consequence, the reﬂections will have the same contribution over the frequency range of inves-
tigation. Lastly, the signal to noise ratio is set to inﬁnity, meaning no background noise is present in
the recovered IRs. Therefore, the present peaks in the impulse responses appear clearly and always
at the expected time of arrival, leading to a high rate of success to derive the orientation. All those
elements need to be into account when the impulse responses are recovered from real measurements,
both in the anechoic room and listening room. section 5 and section 6 successively deal with the
26
==PAGE:33==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
processing to recover those impulse responses.
4.3
Implementation of distance estimation
Once the DOA was found through the delay and sum beamforming, the distance of a detected
reﬂection has to be estimated. Essentially, the distance estimation is based on the assumptions of
the image source model approach combined with the diﬀerent TOAs detected in the set of IRs.
Knowing, the direction of arrival of a reﬂection, the geometry of the speaker and the array, the path
took by the wave can be approximately known. The idea to derive the distance from the wall follows
the diﬀerent step mentioned below,
1. Derivation of the time of arrival at each microphone from the set of IRs.
2. Derivation of the distance from a microphone m to the wall denoted dm. The distance is deﬁned
as the minimal distance (i.e. normal projection) between the central microphone considered
and the wall.
3. For a pair of microphone m and n, build the circles of respective radius rm = dm and rn = dn.
The circles will intersect in two points, with one the two intersection belonging to a point
of a wall.
Repeat the operation for all the combination of microphones possible (i.e.
21
combinations).
4. Discard intersection points that seem to be out of range and take the average as the ﬁnal
distance.
Step 1
Once the set of impulse response has been recovered, those IRs gives temporal information of the
diﬀerent reﬂectors in the room considered. For a detected reﬂection, the distance d traveled by the
wave before reaching a microphone m at a time instance ⌧m is equal to,
d = c⌧m
(33)
It has been to be pointed out that the deconvolved-IRs automatically remove the direct-path from
the deconvolution in the frequency domain. As a consequence, the time of arrival detected is relative
to the time of arrival of the direct-path ∆⌧m. The time of arrival of the direct path, ⌧dp can be
estimated using geometrical consideration. Eventually, the time of arrival of a reﬂection to consider
is the sum of the direct path and the relative time of arrival,
⌧m = ⌧dp + ∆⌧m
(34)
The woofer and tweeter are pointing downwards.
Therefore, the direct-path correspond to the
distance traveled by the waves from the source to the microphone. Successively, the direct path is
composed of a reﬂection from the support of the speaker, then goes along the side of the speaker,
before bending over on the microphone array. The direct-path is estimated at tdp = 10 ms for the
central microphone, and tdp = 9 ms for the rest of the microphones. ∆⌧m is then estimated from the
TOA on a given impulse response and the total travelled distance d is estimated from Equation 33.
27
==PAGE:34==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Step 2
The path taken for a ﬁrst order reﬂection is explained in Figure 4.14.
Figure 4.14: Model to derive the distance of a given reﬂector. The total traveled distance is the
sum of d1, d2, d3 and d4. d4 is dependent of the microphone considered and the direction of arrival
✓s derived beforehand
Once all the traveled distance d has been derived, the distance of the reﬂectors can be estimated by
taking the normal projection of the microphone on the reﬂector. The distances d2 and d3 are equal
and estimated as follows,
d3 = d1 + d4
2
(35)
d1 and d4(✓s) are estimated from measured distances on the prototype and the direction of arrival
previously derived. Eventually, the distance of the wall from a microphone m, with h the height of
the loudspeaker, can be estimated from the following expression,
dwall,m =
r
d2
3 −(h
2 )2 + d4,m(✓s)
(36)
Step 3
Theoretically, the distances derived for each microphone should give a unique distance for a reﬂector.
However, due to the sampling frequency limitation, acoustic eﬀects, geometrical assumption, and
approximation, the distances dwall,m can slightly diﬀer from the theoretical value. Therefore, an
averaged distance should be taken to give a more consistent result. The idea is, for each microphone
m draw a circle with a radius dwall,m and center Mm(xm, ym). Each point x and y that belongs to
28
==PAGE:35==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
the circle are solutions of the following equation,
(x −xm)2 + (y −ym)2 = dwall,m
(37)
If the two circles intersect, it gives two points I1m,n and I2m,n. By deﬁnition, those points corre-
sponds respectively situated at a distance dwall,m and dwall,n from microphone m and n. Therefore,
one of the two points is a point that belongs to the detected wall. As the DOA is known, the point
to discard can be easily found. The operation is repeated for all the possible pair of microphones
resulting in 21 diﬀerent pairs of microphones. To illustrate Figure 4.15 shows the intersection points
for a wall oriented at ✓s = 240 degrees.
Figure 4.15: Intersection Points. The microphone array is represented with the blue crosses. The
two circles are built using the radius derived in the previous step. The dashed blue line represents
a normal vector based on the direction of arrival.
Eventually, the norm of the vector
~
OIm,n is computed for each intersection points found. The point
O corresponding to the central microphone and origin of the referential used. Then the average
value is then computed, giving the measured distance of the reﬂector.
davg = 1
I
M
X
n=1
M
X
m=1
kOIm,nk
(38)
It has to be mentioned that some intersection points can be signiﬁcantly far from the expected area
of intersections and will be discarded for the averaging.
29
==PAGE:36==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
5
Measurements : Anechoic Room
This section will successively present the diﬀerent measurements that were undertaken in anechoic
conditions. Those measurements come as the ﬁrst step to investigate the possibility to estimate
the local geometry in an environment where the signal to noise ratio is optimal.
The diﬀerent
measurements will allow recovering the diﬀerent impulse responses needed to apply the method
described previously. Usually, IR measurement is done using a single omnidirectional sound source
and diﬀerent receivers placed across the room and facing the source. Here the primary constraint
is that the sound source will not have an omnidirectional behavior, especially at high frequencies.
As it has been seen, the geometry of the system here does not provide omnidirectional behavior.
Notably, the reﬂection to detect will impinge on the microphone array with a negative elevation.
In usual cases, to get optimal results and successful IRs recovering, methods place the source and
receivers in an optimized conﬁguration. Here, the issue to bypass is the ﬁxed geometry of the whole
measurement chain. Undertaking measurements in anechoic conditions permits in a ﬁrst time to
measure the system in a free ﬁeld. This measurement serves to apply the principle of deconvolution
to remove the inﬂuence of the source and the microphone in the diﬀerent IRs recovered.
Afterward, large wood panels will be used to create reﬂections inside the anechoic room, and the
diﬀerent IRs recovered will constitute the ﬁrst set of IRs to apply the method with real measurements.
The wood panel has dimensions 1.1 x 1.5 m2. In terms of wavelength the length and the width
correspond respectively to a frequency of fheight = 230 Hz and fwidth = 311 Hz. For signals below
this frequency, the panel will not be seen as an ”inﬁnite wall” and will, therefore, be acoustically
transparent. The derivation of impulse responses in this condition will contain only reﬂections from
those panels within the frequency range 320 Hz until the limit of the working frequency of the
speaker. Also, reﬂections from the ﬂoor, ceiling, or other elements close to the speaker are discarded
as it would have been in a real room.
The wood panels were placed at diﬀerent distance and
orientation from the speaker to get diﬀerent case scenarios to analyze.
5.1
Setup & Calibration
The setup for those recordings includes :
1. Speaker prototype with the uniform circular microphone array composed of 6 MEMS micro-
phones + one central microphone as displayed in Figure 5.2b.
2. One MEMS box with batteries to supply the MEMS microphones.
3. One pre-ampliﬁer with ADAT output to send the seven signals of the microphone array via
one cable.
4. One audio interface RME-UCX with ADAT input and link to a laptop.
5. One digital cross-over ﬁlter with two outputs. The cross-over frequency is set to 3.6 kHz.
6. One compact ampliﬁer with two outputs to send the ﬁltered signal to woofer and tweeter.
30
==PAGE:37==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 5.1: Block diagram of the set-up used for the recordings
The software Adobe Audition has been used to realize the diﬀerent measurements. The speaker was
placed in the middle of the anechoic room on a turntable. Due to cable length limitation, pieces of
foam covered the gears of the setup near the speaker. It limits specular and spurious reﬂections from
the gear in the recordings. Moreover, it has to be mentioned than the anechoic room is not purely
anechoic in the low-frequency range, mainly due to the size of the wedges used and the volume of
the room. Eventually, it was assumed than frequency above 200 Hz will be considered in an anechoic
environment.
(a) Setup
(b) Microphone Array
Before starting to recover the diﬀerent impulse responses, a calibration step was done. White noise
was played through a speaker placed 3 meters away from the prototype, and the sound was recorded
for 30 seconds. As the speaker was placed relatively far from the prototype, it could be assumed that
the sound wave that reaches the microphone array is comparable to a plane wave. The prototype
still placed in the middle of the anechoic room has been rotated for the microphone array to face
the speaker playing the white noise. In this way, the wave impinged all the microphones at the same
time and with the same amplitude. The calibration is realized using Matlab. The script can be
found in the appendix section.
31
==PAGE:38==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 5.3: Calibration process
5.2
Impulse responses measurements
Diﬀerent methods to recover the impulse responses are possible such as MLS, IRS, time-stretched
pulse, and logarithmic sine sweeps. It has been decided to use a logarithmic sinus sweep for the
measurements since the other methods rely on the assumption of a pure LTI system.
[9].
The
whole setup can not be considered as a linear time-invariant system; this method provides a greater
signal to noise ratio after recovering IRs, and in this case discard part of the harmonics created in
the recovering [10]. The logarithmic or exponential sine sweep used goes from fstart = 20 Hz to
fstop = 20000 Hz. The length of the sweep is set to 5 seconds and is repeated ﬁve times in a row.
The sound is directly played from the prototype. The recordings have been recorded at a sampling
frequency of fs = 48 kHz. Figure 5.4 shows the spectrum of the sweep used. The input signal is
denoted as x(t) and its respective spectrum X(!).
Figure 5.4: Spectrum log sweep
32
==PAGE:39==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
The sound is recorded for all the microphones at the same time and provides a signal ym[n]. This
signal is chopped into ﬁve blocks, and the average value is held as the ﬁnal output signal. Ideally, as
described in Figure 3.2, the impulse response of the room for a microphone placed at position rm,
hroom(rm, t) will be simply recovered by taking the spectrum of the output ym(t) multiply by the
inverse spectrum of the input signal x(t). However, the inﬂuence of the source and the microphones
will be present in the recorded signal ym(t). Therefore, the pressure captured by the microphone
contained information from the behavior of the source and the microphone itself. The diagram below
described the system,
Figure 5.5: Block diagram of the DUT
If the measurements are done in the anechoic condition without any reﬂective surface placed around,
the DUT’s recordings are close to a hypothetical free-ﬁeld situation, which means that hroom(r, t)
will be close to 0 at any time and the spectrum of the system can be obtained. As a consequence,
the impulse response of the system for a microphone m hsystem,m(t) = hs(t) ⇤hmic,m(t) can be
measured. It serves to remove the inﬂuence of the speaker and the microphone from the captured
signal using the principle of deconvolution in the frequency domain.
ym(t) = (hs(t) ⇤hmic,m(t)) ⇤x(t) = hsystem(t) ⇤x(t)
(39)
The spectrum of the system is then derived from the spectrum of the output and input signal,
Hsystem,m(!) = Ym(!)
X(!)
(40)
However, as seen in section 3, the principle of deconvolution in the frequency domain has the
advantage to provide faster computational time than naively realizing the linear convolution in the
time domain. What corresponds to a convolution in the time domain is equal to a multiplication in
the frequency domain. Nevertheless in order to avoid time aliasing eﬀects, signal x(t) and y(t) need to
be zero-padded as explained in section 3. Once the zero-padding is accomplished, multiplications of
the signals in the frequency domain are possible. Part of the Matlab code is added in the appendix
section.
Finally, the impulse response is recovered, taking the inverse Fourier Transform of the
spectrum to be analyzed. Those curves are saved and are used later for the deconvolution in the
one-wall and corner scenarios.
5.2.1
Free-Field measurements
The ﬁrst step has been to undertake the measurement in a free-ﬁeld environment. The 5 repetitions
are averaged together for each microphone and give an output signal ym(t) as in Figure 5.6. Before
starting any processing on those recordings, the robustness of the recordings were checked. Each
33
==PAGE:40==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
recorded signal is chopped into ﬁves vectors containing each sweep repetition. The spectrum of
every vector is computed as well as then the mean spectrum and the variance. Figure 5.7 shows
the output mean spectrum Ym(!) for the microphone 1 and 7 (central microphone) with their
respectively superior and inferior limits deﬁned as the mean value +/−the standard deviation. The
SNR estimated from all the measurement in the anechoic room is around 70 dB.
Figure 5.6: Top ﬁgure : Input signal x(t) - Bottom Figure : Recorded signal at microphone 1. The
variation of amplitude in the recorded signal is due to the propagation of a sound wave in a plane
surface. It also depends on the frequency response of the microphone itself.
(a) Microphone 1
(b) Central Microphone
Figure 5.7: Mean spectrum of the recorded signal. Blue curve : Mean value - Dashed red curve :
Mean value +/- standard deviation. SNR = 70 dB.
The deviation from the mean value overall the frequency range of interest remains signiﬁcantly small,
almost equal for frequencies below 2 kHz, meaning that ﬁves repetitions is enough for the averaging.
Then using the transfer function of the system is derived. Figure 5.8 displays the outcome for the
microphone 1 and the central microphone,
34
==PAGE:41==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) Microphone 1
(b) Central Microphone
Figure 5.8: Frequency response of the system
For frequencies below 2 kHz, the two transfer functions look similar. However, the successive peaks
and dips (f1 = 220 Hz, f2 = 450Hz and f3 = 1kHz) are ampliﬁed for the microphone 1, whereas
the central microphone provides a ﬂatter response in this frequency range.
Similarly, in the high-frequency range, the spectrum diﬀers between the two microphones. For the
microphone 1, the pattern follows a succession of relatively signiﬁcant dips and peaks with important
oscillations. The high frequencies are attenuated of around 10 dB compare to the low-mid range.
This can be linked to the directivity behavior of the high frequencies. The source (woofer+tweeter)
is pointing in the opposite direction of the microphone array leading to more diﬃculties for those
frequencies to reach the diﬀerent microphones.
Also, various acoustic eﬀects such as diﬀraction
from the edges of the microphone array, propagation of the wave on a plane surface and scattering
eﬀect from the circular shape of the speaker are responsible for this behavior.
As a matter of
recovering impulse responses, high-frequency content might be close to the noise ﬂoor level for this
microphone and may lead to potentially missing or hidden information in the diﬀerent impulse
responses. Looking now at the central microphone, this one is still providing a ﬂatter response in
this frequency range before the amplitude starts to drop after 10 kHz. Moreover, the overall level of
this frequency range remains higher than for microphone 1. The central microphone being placed
right behind the woofer and tweeter, it might explain this rise of amplitude in this frequency range.
Even though the microphone array and the back cavity of the woofer are separated, the sound is
still transmitted through the boundaries. The same analysis can be made comparing the central
microphone with the other microphone of the array.
From those transfer functions, the set of impulse responses of the system are derived using the inverse
Fourier Transform. Figure 5.9 shows the respective impulse responses recovered from microphone 1
and the central microphone.
35
==PAGE:42==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) Microphone 1
(b) Central Microphone
Figure 5.9: Impulse response of the system hsystem,m(t). The slight delay before the actual starting
point of the IRs at t ⇡4 ms is introduced by the zeros-padding processing.
The two impulse responses look similar, but as expected, a smoother response is observed for the
central microphone. The ﬁrst peak in both IRs corresponds to the direct path. Both spectrum and
impulse responses are saved and were used for the deconvolution introduced later in this report.
5.2.2
One-wall scenario
To start with the easiest case, measurements with one reﬂective surface were done. The wood panel
used to create reﬂections is maintained by a steel duct of diameter d = 2 cm. For wavelength below
λ
2 < d or frequencies f <
c
2λ = 8575 Hz the duct will be acoustically transparent. The working
frequency range of the speaker being from 80 Hz to 10000 Hz, the inﬂuence of the duct should,
therefore, be small on the results.
Figure 5.10: One wall situation - Measurements Setup
36
==PAGE:43==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
The setup used remains the same as in the free-ﬁeld measurements As explained in the section 3, the
deconvolution theorem is applied to the diﬀerent recordings to recover the transfer function of the
room. In theory, if only one reﬂective surface is placed inside the anechoic chamber, the deconvolved
impulse response should display only one peak corresponding to the reﬂection from the wood plate.
The transfer function of the room for a microphone m is then deﬁned as follows :
Hroom,m(!) =
Ym(!)
Xm(!).Hsystem,m(!)
(41)
Figure 5.11 shows the transfer function Hroom,m(!) for the case 1 with the wall placed at d = 50
cm from the speaker.
(a) Microphone 1
(b) Microphone 7
Figure 5.11: Transfer function of the room derived with deconvolution
As expected, the diﬀraction is way more important in the high frequencies for the microphone 1,
whereas microphone 7 provides a smoother response.
The deconvolved impulse response is then recovered by computing the inverse Fourier Transform.
The none-deconvolved impulse response is also recovered, using the inverse Fourier transform of the
output spectrum over the input signal spectrum.
(a) IR - Microphone 1
(b) IR - Microphone 7
Figure 5.12: Deconvolved Impulse response with wall placed at d = 50 cm. The peak at t ⇡3.5
ms comes from the wood panel.
37
==PAGE:44==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) IR - Microphone 1
(b) IR - Microphone 7
Figure 5.13: Deconvolved Impulse response with wall placed at d = 50 cm. The impulse response
plotted are normalized individually.
The deconvolution removes automatically the direct-path contribution, and the actual impulse re-
sponse starts right after the direct-path has reached the microphone array. Figure 5.12 shows the
outcome of the deconvolution. For both microphones, the peak of the wall is located at a time
of arrival (TOA) of t ⇡3.5 ms. This TOA corresponds to the diﬀerence of the time between the
direct-path and the ﬁrst reﬂection. However, it can be pointed out that the deconvolution leads
to some "smearing" and "noisy" eﬀects in the impulse responses. The reﬂection can still be easily
extracted from those IRs and will be required for both the orientation and distance estimation. The
interest to also recover the none-deconvolved IRs is to get support if the deconvolution might blur a
reﬂection. As it can be seen on Figure 5.13 the similar pattern is observed as in Figure 5.9 from the
system IR. The reﬂection is extracted from the peak located at t = 7.4 ms in the impulse response
of microphone 1. Nevertheless, weaker amplitude of reﬂections from the none-deconvolved IR might
lead to diﬃculty to extract reﬂection as in Figure 5.13b. The absolute value of the impulse response
or the squared value can be computed to enhance and detect the expected reﬂection.
The measurement with one-wall has been realized for diﬀerent distances and orientations of the
speaker.
The set of measurements will serve to test the robustness of the geometry estimation
presented in subsection 5.3.
5.2.3
Corner situation
The same procedure has been done placing a new wood panel perpendicular to the ﬁrst one to
create a "corner" scenario. As for the one wall scenario, diﬀerent distances and orientations of the
speaker compare to the wall needed to be measured to constitute a set of IRs to analyze afterward.
Unlike as for the one wall situation, three diﬀerent peaks can be extracted from the recovered
IRs. One microphone will ﬁrst capture the reﬂection of the closest wall, then from the second one
and eventually the second-order path combining reﬂection from both walls. The impulse responses
captured from the speaker placed at respective distances d1 = 62 cm and d2 = 52 cm.
38
==PAGE:45==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) IR - Microphone 1
(b) IR - Microphone 7
Figure 5.14: Deconvolved Impulse response with wall placed at d1 = 62 cm and d2 = 52 cm.
The instantaneous squared value of the IR is computed. The detected peak are indicated with the
dashed red lines.
The same observations that have been made previously, the IRs are subjected to imperfections and
provides incertitude for the reﬂections peaks to extract from the data. The peaks can be extracted
more easily from the central microphone, and accordingly, the times of arrival extracted from this
microphone were taken as references. Knowing the geometry of the array, the expected range of
TOAs for a given reﬂection among the rest of the array can help to detect the reﬂection in the
rest of the impulse responses.
As seen in Figure 5.14a many peaks occurred in a narrow time
frame, leading to many potential candidates that might correspond to the given reﬂection under
investigation.
5.3
Geometry estimation
Once the diﬀerent impulse responses for the diﬀerent scenarios were recovered, the diﬀerent results
can be deduced with the method described. The robustness needs to be tested using diﬀerent mea-
surements with diﬀerent orientation and distance of the reﬂectors. As the impulse responses derived
in anechoic conditions are composed with only the reﬂections to consider, the impulse responses
are directly windowed around the diﬀerent identiﬁed peaks before applying the beamforming. To
illustrate the ﬁrst case, results with only one reﬂective surface are presented. The speaker was placed
at a ﬁxed distance, and the orientation of the speaker was changed for the diﬀerent recordings with
the following angles : 0, 10, 30, 90, 150, 240, 270 and 350 degrees. It has to be kept in mind that the
orientation of the speaker was done by eve. Thus, the actual orientation might be slightly diﬀerent
than the one expressed. The beamformer variance is plotted on Figure 5.15 for the case-oriented at
240◦. Both variances of the deconvolved IRs and none-deconvolved IRs are plotted.
39
==PAGE:46==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 5.15: Beam-former variance output - Blue curve : σ2(✓) - Dashed red curve : Actual DOA
- Green dot : Measured DOA
It can be noticed that in both cases, the direction of arrival is relatively close to the expected
value. As explained in the previous section, the deconvolved impulse responses seem to create some
smearing eﬀects that might aﬀect the detection of reﬂections. Indeed by observation, the beamformer
applied on the none-deconvolved impulse response gives more certainties with a sharper curve when
approaching the actual DOA to estimate. Nevertheless, the deconvolution is needed to estimate the
distance of the reﬂector detected. The time of arrival of these reﬂections is taken on each impulse
response before averaging the distance using the circle method described in subsection 4.3. The
results for all the diﬀerent orientations are summed up in the table below,
Table 5.1: Results - One wall scenario. ✓s in degree and distances in meters.
Case
Actual ✓s
Measured ✓s
Actual dwall [m]
Measured dwall [m]
1
240
237,80
0,73
0,731
2
270
273,4
0,73
0,72
3
150
146,1
0,73
0,716
4
90
87,1
0,73
0,723
5
30
30,04
0,73
0,711
6
0
356
0,73
0,701
7
350
340
0,73
0,71
8
10
9,51
0,73
0,715
It can be pointed out that the orientation estimation shows both negative or positive error. In
general, the orientation remains close enough to the actual value of ✓s. Keeping in mind, the initial
need for deriving the geometry around the speaker, the tolerated range of errors could be deﬁned in
future works. However, as an indicator of performance, relative errors are derived and displayed in
Figure 5.16.
40
==PAGE:47==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) ✓s estimation
(b) dwall estimation
Figure 5.16: Relative error in % for orientation and distance estimation. The mean value for the
distance estimation is davg = 71.59 cm
Concerning the distance estimation, most of the measurement shows an underestimation of the
distance. This can be due to undervaluing the time of arrival of the direct path used in the distance
estimation algorithm. The actual distance dwall is subject to uncertainties as well due to manual
rotation of the speaker for each test case. Overall the results provide a fair estimation of the position
of the wood panel with a relative error below 5% in both orientation and distance estimation. The
corner scenario is now introduced in the next section.
Corner situation
To this point, the impulse responses were containing only one reﬂection.
By placing a second
reﬂector in the anechoic room, the impulse response will contain two more reﬂections. In this case,
the beamformer is directly applied to the set of none-deconvolved IRs without any prior windowing.
The variance of the output is taken as a function of the time using Equation 29. The speaker was
placed at respective distances d1 = 66 cm and d2 = 56 cm with orientation ✓s1 = 90◦and ✓s2 = 180◦.
The diﬀerent peaks that appear in the beamformer are candidates to be a reﬂector. Figure 5.17a
shows the output with the diﬀerent peaks identiﬁed. From this point, the beamformer output is
windowed around the time instant detected in Figure 5.17a and the variance as a function of the
steering angle is computed and plotted in Figure 5.17b for the three reﬂections identiﬁed.
(a) Variance output as a function of time
(b) Variance output as a function of ✓
Figure 5.17: Beamforming output for the corner situation. The three reﬂections are identiﬁed and
their respective direction of arrival are extracted. The speaker was placed at orientation ✓1 = 90◦
and ✓2 = 180◦with respective distance d1 = 66 cm and d2 = 56 cm.
As for the one wall situation, the DOA is correctly derived taking the angle that maximizes σ2(t).
The reﬂection 1 is estimated at an angle of ✓s1 = 90.12◦.. The reﬂection 2 is estimated at an angle
of ✓s2 = 171, 23◦. The third reﬂection is the second order reﬂection that reﬂected on both walls.
41
==PAGE:48==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
The estimation of this one is measured at ✓12 = 136.5◦. The distance estimation gave the following
values : d1 = 66.5 cm and d2 = 53.9 cm. From the distance estimation, the second order reﬂection
(reﬂection 3) could be estimated as well. ↵is denoted as the relative angle between ✓1 and ✓12 (i.e
↵= |✓1 −✓12|), the
↵= arctan(d1
d2
) = 50◦
(42)
and then ✓12 = ✓1 + ↵= 140.12◦. A diﬀerence of 5◦is obversed, but remains close enough to ensure
that the estimation was not totally false. Other measurements are analyzed, and the results are
summed-up below.
Table 5.2: Result - Corner scenario. DOAs in degrees and distances in meters
Case
✓s1
Measured ✓s1
dwall,1
Measured dwall,1
✓s2
Measured ✓s2
dwall,2
Measured dwall,2
1
150
NaN
0,66
0,656
240
NaN
0,56
0,52
2
120
122,6
0,66
0,657
210
210,3
0,56
0,558
3
90
90,12
0,66
0.665
180
171,23
0,56
0,539
4
60
56,07
0,66
0,68
150
146,2
0,56
0,517
5
30
30,04
0,66
0,653
120
117,6
0,56
0,53
6
0
0
0,66
NaN
90
93,6
0,56
0,525
7
330
326,9
0,66
0,672
60
58,08
0,56
0,538
8
300
297
0,66
0,677
30
30,04
0,56
0,522
9
270
266,8
0,66
0,672
0
0
0,56
NaN
10
240
237,8
0,66
0,677
330
330,4
0,56
0,52
11
210
206,7
0,66
0,7
300
297,9
0,56
0,52
12
180
177,2
0,66
0,73
270
266,8
0,56
0,53
Case 1 is the only case where the method could not derive the orientation of both walls. The ﬁnal
rate of success for the DOA estimation is around 92%. Likewise, for the distance estimation, the
rate of success is around 87,5%. For the rest of the values in the table, the relative error er is plotted
for both orientation and distance estimation.
(a) ✓s estimation
(b) dwall estimation
Figure 5.18: Relative error in % for orientation and distance estimation. Blue crosses corresponds
to ✓s1 and dwall,1 estimation. Green crosses corresponds to ✓s2 and dwall,2 estimation. The mean
value for the distance estimation is davg,1 = 67.6 cm and davg,2 = 52.9 cm.
It can be noticed that errors in the distance estimation are higher for the closest wall plotted in
green than the furthest wall displayed in blue. Another interesting point is that most of the distance
42
==PAGE:49==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
derived from the wall 1 provides an overestimation, whereas for the second wall the distance is
underestimated.
In a nutshell, the results in anechoic conditions seem to match with the simulation results. The
impulse responses provide the expected reﬂection, and both orientation and distance estimation
provide high rate of success. However, it has been seen that the geometry of the system is the main
factor that aﬀects the impulse response and will, therefore diﬀer from the simulated ones. Scattering
eﬀects can not be avoided and creates artifact when the IRs are recovered from measurements. Two
diﬀerent ways to recover the IRs were presented: with and without deconvolution. Both ways can
be used for geometry estimation. On the one hand, the none-deconvolution keeps information from
the system in the IR, but in most of the cases, the orientation estimation can still be applied to
this set and give accurate results. However, for close reﬂection, oscillations in the IR are responsible
for driving the detection of reﬂection more complex. On the other hand, the deconvolution aims
to remove the inﬂuence of the sound source, geometry, and microphone transfer function in the
ﬁnal impulse response. Nevertheless, this processing creates unwanted artifacts that might make
the detection of reﬂection also tricky. Indeed, scattering eﬀects tend to be a random process, and
therefore the deconvolution with the transfer function of the free-ﬁeld recordings does not precisely
cancel out this inﬂuence of the system. Alternatively, more averaging, for both free-ﬁeld and the
actual case scenario under investigation, would be needed to cancel out the inﬂuence of the system
more properly. Nonetheless, in every measurement the reﬂection detection is successful. It can be
added that a high reﬂection coeﬃcient characterizes the wood plates used. Hence, reﬂections are
barely absorbed by the material and impinge the microphone array with relatively high amplitude.
It constitutes one of the points that will be treated in the next section when reﬂectors with a higher
absorption coeﬃcients are used. Others potential issues will necessarily be the presence of the ceiling
but also of many other items that may usually be placed near the speaker in a real situation. In the
anechoic condition, reﬂections from the setup gears seem not signiﬁcantly to aﬀect the sound ﬁeld
and thus the results.
43
==PAGE:50==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
6
Measurements : Listening room
As for the measurement in anechoic measurement, this section will successively present the diﬀerent
recordings that have been realized inside a standardized listening room. Impulse responses recovering
is ﬁrst treated before introducing the diﬀerent results of the diﬀerent case scenarios possible. Finally,
the limits of the method will be exposed and discussed.
6.1
Setup & Calibration
The setup for the measurement remained the same as for the anechoic room.
Figure 6.1: Listening Room - Setup
The room is rectangular with the respective dimensions 5.65 x 3.68 x 2.4 m3. A couch is placed in
the middle of the room. Absorptive panels are placed on the walls and can be removed if needed.
Both cases were investigated with and without panel absorbers. A carpet is also placed on the
ﬂoor. Two Dynaudio speakers are placed in two corners of the room and were used to play some
background noise to get a set of diﬀerent SNR for the recording treated in the last section.
6.2
Impulse Responses measurements
The diﬀerent scenarios have been measured, placing the speaker at diﬀerent positions across the
room. The speaker was placed on a stool composed of cork with a height of 45 cm and diameter
d = 35 cm. Frequency below f =
c
λ = 980Hz will be acoustically transparent for the seat. This
might have an impact of the impulse response, are part of the working range of the speaker is not
reﬂected on the stool.
It was also considered measurements where the speaker stood on bigger
surfaces.
However, the anechoic condition does not hold anymore and more averaging might be needed.
To verify this, one measurement with the speaker placed roughly in the middle of the room was
undertaken to check the consistency of the measurement once again. The deviation of the mean
value and the standard deviation are plotted below,
44
==PAGE:51==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.2: Mean value and standard deviation from output spectrum - Central microphone
Looking at the deviation from the mean value after averaging, it shows that ﬁve repetitions remain
enough to recover the diﬀerent impulse response needed for the investigation. The standard deviation
remains low in the frequency range between 80 and 1000 Hz.
The current signal-to-noise ratio
measured in the listening room is around 35 dB. Consequently, all the measurements will keep an
average of 5 sweeps with this current SNR. The deconvolved IRs are plotted in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: Impulse responses for the speaker placed in the middle of the listening room. SNR =
35 dB.
Unlike as in the anechoic room, various reﬂection can be seen on the impulse response. The presence
of the reverberation tail is also present. Reﬂections reach the noise ﬂoor level approximately after
0.2s. The output gain could have been increased to get higher reﬂections amplitudes. The actual
output gain was set to the maximum gain before audible distortion was perceptible. The room is
relatively small, all the absorptive panels were mounted on the walls leading to a short reverberation
time is short.
45
==PAGE:52==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
The one wall situation and the corner situation are now considered, and the impulse responses are
recovered in the same way as seen before. A few examples of one wall and corner scenario are plotted
below. Both impulse response with and without deconvolution are also displayed in Figure 6.4 to
compare the detection of reﬂections.
Panel absorbers near the speaker were removed for those
measurements. Still, the deconvolution does not provide better impulse responses. Even though
the reﬂections remain detectable in most of the cases, some speciﬁc situation can lead to potential
issues.
Figure 6.4: Central microphone IRs. The top one is recovered without deconvolution. The bottom
one use the deconvolution process. The direct-path has been manually removed from the none-
deconvolved IR. The speaker is placed close to a wall located at a distance d = 1 m. SNR = 35
dB. The wall reﬂection is identiﬁed at t = 229 samples. The ceiling is clearly detected at t = 465
samples.
46
==PAGE:53==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.5: Microphone 5 recovered impulse responses. The top one is recovered without any
deconvolution process. The bottom one use the deconvolution process. The direct-path has been
manually removed from the none-deconvolved IR. The speaker is placed close to a wall located at a
distance d = 1 m. SNR = 35 dB. The wall reﬂection is identiﬁed at t = 225 samples. The ceiling is
clearly detected at t = 465 samples.
In both ﬁgures, it can be noticed that the recovering introduces artifacts that make reﬂection less
clear to detect. However, the relative time of arrival (i.e ∆⌧m = ⌧m −⌧dp, see Equation 34) remains
the same and both will serve as temporal cues for the geometry estimation. The ceiling reﬂection
can be identiﬁed at t = 454 samples corresponding to a time of arrival of t = 9.45 ms. The ﬁrst
sidewall reﬂection is identiﬁed at t = 225 samples in Figure 6.5 and t = 229 samples in Figure 6.4.
Nevertheless, the wall reﬂection is damped in both impulse response and does not seem to be a
trivial reﬂection. The computation of the spectral ﬂux in Figure 6.6 alongside with the impulse
response makes the identiﬁcation easier.
47
==PAGE:54==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.6: Spectral ﬂux for microphone 5. The reﬂection are more easily detected with the use
of frequency information. The deviation of Sf(t) from the ﬂoor value indicate a sudden change of
frequency, here in this case a reﬂection from the side walls or ceiling.
The amplitude of the reﬂection depends on the orientation of the system. In this measurement,
the furthest microphone to the sidewall was microphone 5. Due to the geometry of the array, the
closest microphone will show a higher amplitude of the sidewall reﬂection compares to the rest of
the microphones. Indeed, reﬂections coming from the sidewall, impinge the microphone array with
a negative elevation, forcing the sound wave to bend over the plane surface and create unavoidable
attenuation eﬀects. That processing is then necessary to classify and identify all the reﬂection needed
for the implementation of the geometry estimation.
Likewise, the same procedure is done for measurements with the speaker placed in the corner of the
room. Still, panel absorbers were removed from the wall near the speaker. The diﬀerent reﬂections
are identiﬁed and presented in the ﬁgure below. The speaker has been placed at a respective distance
d1 = 52.5 cm and d2 = 63.5 m from both walls.
48
==PAGE:55==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.7: Central microphone impulse responses. The top one is recovered without deconvo-
lution from the system IR. The bottom one use the deconvolution process. The direct-path has
been manually removed from the none-deconvolved IR. The blue dashed curves are the side-walls
identiﬁcations. The red dashed curve is the ceiling reﬂection.
Figure 6.8: Microphone 5 recovered impulse responses. The top one is recovered without any
deconvolution process. The bottom one use the deconvolution process. The direct-path has been
manually removed from the none-deconvolved IR. The absolute value is plotted. The blue dashed
curves are the side-walls identiﬁcations. The red dashed curve is the ceiling reﬂection.
Still, in this case, on the one hand, Figure 6.8 shows that peaks detection for the deconvolved IR
is subject to ambiguities. The help of spectral ﬂux alongside with the none-deconvolved IR allows
identifying the diﬀerent peaks expected as it can be seen on the top ﬁgure. On the other hand, for
close reﬂection, reﬂections can occur at the time of arrival of fewer than 300 samples. In this time
range, the inﬂuence of the system in the none-deconvolved IR is still exhibited. It might prevent to
detect reﬂection for instance, for the central microphone in Figure 6.7. The use of the deconvolved
IRs is then again justiﬁed.
49
==PAGE:56==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Until now, the impulse responses plotted were recovered with the none presence of panel absorbers
close to the speaker. The walls of the listening room are made of concrete with painting. The
absorption coeﬃcient ↵of this material remains relatively low over the whole audible spectrum. It
has been seen than the reﬂections, in most of the cases, are easily detected. Adding panel absorbers
on the wall will damp those reﬂections and lead to lower peaks amplitude in the IRs. The inﬂuence of
the presence of absorptive material is then considered and investigated. Other recordings were made
for a ﬁxed position with and without panel absorbers. The diﬀerences are highlighted in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.9:
Impulse response for speaker placed at d = 40 cm from the wall.
Both central
microphone (Left side) and microphone 4 (Right side) are plotted. The x-axis is truncated to the
300 ﬁrst samples. The impulse response are deconvolved with the transfer function of the system.
The reﬂection from the wall are indicated with the red crosses.
As expected, the reﬂection is damped when the panel absorber is mounted on the wall.
Even
though the detection is still successful for higher distances, the reﬂection might be blurred in the
background noise and lead to a none-detection of the reﬂection. The same impulse responses without
the deconvolution process are plotted below,
50
==PAGE:57==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.10:
Impulse response for speaker placed at d = 40 cm from the wall.
Both central
microphone (Left side) and microphone 4 (Right side) are plotted. The x-axis is truncated to the
300 ﬁrst samples. The impulse response is not deconvolved with the transfer function of the system.
The reﬂection from the wall are indicated with the red crosses.
The reduction of amplitude is still visible, however, even with the panel absorber, the peak can be
extracted more easily than with the deconvolution IRs.
6.3
Geometry estimation
6.3.1
One-wall scenario
The impulse responses for diﬀerent case scenarios are recovered. The analysis is also following the
same procedure as presented in the anechoic conditions measurements. To illustrate some results,
the analysis is detailed for the case with the speaker placed at d = 1 m from the left sidewall. The
speaker has been oriented at an angle ✓= 120◦compare to this same one. No panels absorbers
are mounted on the wall. The orientation estimation is computed with both deconvolved and none-
deconvolved impulse responses and is compared. To achieve this, the beamformer is in a ﬁrst time
computed. Then, Equation 29 is applied, and the time of arrival that corresponds to the sidewall
reﬂection is identiﬁed, and eventually, Equation 27 is computed to extract the orientation estimation.
51
==PAGE:58==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.11: Beamforming variance output - The two curves have been normalized individually.
Red curve : DOA estimation from deconvolved IR with it respective measured DOA. Blue Curve
: DOA estimation from none-deconvolved IR with it respective measured DOA. The Green dashed
curve is the expected direction of arrival from the wall reﬂection.
The two DOAs derived respectively with the deconvolved IRs and none-deconvolved IRs are 105.8◦
and 111.4◦. It can be seen that the deconvolution shows a sharper curve when approaching the
matching angle to maximize the beamformer output. Whereas, the none-deconvolution provides a
larger peak that can be lead to more uncertainties to extract the angle of arrival. ✓s is based on
the angle that maximizes the function plotted, however, this maximum is taken as the ﬁrst angle
that maximizes this function. It can be noticed that this same maximum value (Here 0 dB in the
ﬁgure, as the curves have been normalized individually) is reached from a narrow-angle range. For
instance, for the deconvolved beamformer output, the maximum is reached for values of ✓between
105.8◦and 110.5◦. The precision is limited by the sampling frequency Fs and could be improved by
up-sampling the signal before applying the diﬀerent delays in the beamforming.
In those measurements the speakers is placed on the cork seat with relatively small diameter d = 35
cm. In a more realistic case, the speaker might be positioned on large furniture or tables with a
higher dimension than the seat used in the previous measurements. In this case, a broader part
of the low-frequency range is reﬂected in that furniture and might aﬀect the impulse response
outcome. Another measurement of the one-wall scenario was done placing the speaker on a big
desk of dimensions 80x160 cm2. Those dimensions corresponds respectively to frequencies limits of
f1 = 430 Hz and f2 = 214 Hz. In this case reﬂections from the table occur for a broader band of
the spectrum than when the speaker were placed on the stool seat. The outcome of the impulse
responses recovering for the speaker placed on this desk and located at d = 63 cm from the wall is
displayed below,
52
==PAGE:59==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) IRs - Microphone 4
(b) dwall estimation
Figure 6.12: IRs - Deconvolved and none-deconvolved one for a speaker placed on a large desk
and located at d = 63 cm. Direct-path has been truncated.
The impulse responses still provides clear reﬂections, side-wall at t = 134 samples and ceiling at
t = 355 samples in Figure 6.12a.
Reﬂection from the table composes the direct path, as wave
reﬂects ﬁrst on the table to then reach the microphone array. The rest of the peaks are not treated
as the DOA, and distance estimation is focused on the closest wall. The DOA estimation is achieved,
and the output power of the beamformer is plotted in Figure 6.13.
Figure 6.13: DOA estimation for the speaker placed on the desk estimated at ✓s = 311.5◦. The
actual DOA is around 320◦.
Rest of the measurements is analyzed and the results are summed-up in the table below,
Table 6.1: Results - One wall scenario - Listening Room
Case
Actual ✓s (◦)
Measured ✓s (◦)
dwall [m]
Measured dwall [m]
Information
1
240
242,8
0,49
0,47
w/o panel
2
120
111,1
1
0,96
w/o panel
3
260
259,1
0,44
0,44
w/o panel
4
180
182,7
0,4
0,4
with panel
5
180
182,7
0,4
0,39
w/o panel
6
60
62,5
1
0,99
with panel
7
60
62,6
1
0,98
w/o panel
53
==PAGE:60==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Once again, the distance estimation is derived using the method described in subsection 4.3. No
deviant estimation is observed.
Case 4&5, as well as case 6&7, highlight the inﬂuence of the panels absorbers.
The speaker is
placed at the same distance and orientation for both pairs of cases with and without absorbers.
No diﬀerences are observed for the orientation estimation with or without panel absorbers. Slight
diﬀerences are, however, observed for the distance estimation. Indeed the presence of the absorbers
shifts the time of arrival of 1 or 2 samples in the impulse responses positively, increasing the estimated
value of the distance. The relative errors of the geometry estimation are plotted in Figure 6.14.
(a) ✓s estimation
(b) dwall estimation
Figure 6.14: Relative error in % for orientation and distance estimation.
As in the anechoic condition, most of the relative error remains below 8%, slightly higher than in
anechoic condition. Likewise, dwall estimation shows an underestimation of the placement of the
wall due to the undervaluing of the direct-path.
6.3.2
Corner scenario
The corner scenario is now considered. The example below shows results for a case where the speaker
has been placed respectively to a distance d1 = 47 cm and d2 = 35.5 cm from the two walls. As for
the corner situation in the anechoic room, the beamformer is applied on the set of IRs recovered,
and the contribution of each reﬂection is taken separately from σ2(t) (still using Equation 29). The
height of the speaker remained the same as before.
(a) Variance output - Orientation 1
(b) Variance output - Orientation 2
Figure 6.15: Beamforming output for the corner situation in the listening room. For both ﬁg-
ures, the two reﬂections detected are respectively plotted with the expected DOA. The curves are
normalized individually.
The left ﬁgure shows an estimation of the DOA around ✓s1 = 146◦and ✓s2 = 237◦. The right
54
==PAGE:61==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
ﬁgure estimates the two walls at ✓s1 = 237◦and ✓s2 = 330.1◦. Deconvolved IRs were used in the
beamforming processing. The none-deconvolved ones give similar results. Processing remains the
same as for the one-wall scenario, and results remain in a satisfying range of estimation.
To follow up with measurements in a corner situation, an interesting case was to consider the same
scenario done in the simulation part; where the system is placed at the same distance from two walls.
In this case, the ﬁrst reﬂection from both walls reaches the microphone array almost at the same time.
The diﬀerence is that when σ2(t) is computed the ﬁrst peak in the curve will have the contribution of
both walls (Dashed blue line in Figure 6.16). Hence, when σ2(✓s) is computed, two local maximums
need to be taken, corresponding respectively to the two directions of arrival to estimate. The speaker
was placed at a distance d = d1 = d2 = 30 cm from both walls. The orientation was respectively
✓s1 = 90◦and ✓s2 = 180◦. In this case, the reﬂections in the impulse response are close to each
other. In theory, the two reﬂections should arrive at the same time instant to the central microphone,
whereas for the rest of the array, two peaks should be distinguished. However, the scattering eﬀects
have a blurred eﬀect on the impulse response and make the distinction between the two peaks tricky.
Reﬂection is hardly detected, and time of arrival for the distance estimation cannot be precisely
picked up. However, the beamforming is still directly applied to the set of impulse responses. Then,
plotting the output of Equation 29, the contribution of the two walls appears at t = in Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16: σ2(t) output normalized. The diﬀerent peak corresponds to the contribution of the
reﬂection in the beamforming. Peak at t = 245 samples and t = 280 samples are taken to derive the
direction of arrival using Equation 27.
Moreover, after picking up the relevant time instant, the direction of arrival is derived and plotted
below,
55
==PAGE:62==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Figure 6.17: Beamforming output σ2(✓s). The two DOAs derived are respectively found at ✓s1 =
90.5◦and ✓s2 = 177.5◦. Each curves has been normalized individually.
As expected, the contribution of both walls happened at the same time and therefore the direction of
arrival is derived directly from a single power output. The third reﬂection correspond to the second-
order reﬂection and is found at ✓s = 137.5◦. As the time of arrival on the diﬀerent microphone
are hardly detected, the time of arrival of the peak in Figure 6.16 in taken as a single TOA for the
distance estimation. The distance is estimated at d = 27 cm and remains close to the actual distance
(dwall = 30 cm). The results for the corner scenario are summed up in Table 6.2 below,
Table 6.2: Corner Situation - Results Listening Room
Case
✓s1
Measured ✓s1
dwall,1
Measured dwall,1
✓s2
Measured ✓s2
dwall,2
Measured dwall,2
1
90
90,5
0,3
0,27
180
177,5
0,3
0,27
2
150
146
0,47
0,44
240
237
0,355
0,359
3
240
237
0,525
0,49
330
330,1
0,635
0,60
4
240
242
0,665
0,649
330
330,1
0,52
0,504
(a) ✓s estimation
(b) dwall estimation
Figure 6.18: Relative error in % for orientation and distance estimation - Corner scenario
Comparing the results with the ones from the anechoic room, the diﬀerences are not signiﬁcantly
high, and the relative errors remain in the same accuracy range. The reﬂections can still be detected
56
==PAGE:63==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
and the geometry estimation processes in the same way as in the anechoic room. The presence of
various items in the room or the presence of the reverberation tail does not seem to aﬀect as much
the processing. Indeed, as the geometry estimation is focused on the local geometry, only the very
few ﬁrst reﬂections in the IRs are relevant and therefore automatically discard later specular and
spurious reﬂections from various items in the room (Couch, desk, setup gears, seats). Reﬂections
from the ﬁrst sidewalls, ceiling, and ﬂoor are preponderant. The scattering eﬀect from the system
still aﬀects the deconvolution and can lead to issues in a particular situation as the one in the corner
with the same distance from both walls. It can be noticed that this case is the only one to provide a
relative error above 10% for the distance estimation. Nevertheless, the orientation derivation remains
accurate, and the method still detects the speaker in a corner position. One point to rise is that the
geometry of the microphone array is not the best alternative for room geometry estimation. As said
before, this geometry was initially designed for voice pick-up purposes wherein usual cases sound
waves impinge the microphone array with positive elevation. It automatically discards part of the
scattering eﬀects involved when sound waves reach the microphone array with a negative elevation,
as it is always the case from sidewalls reﬂection. Even though the results show accurate geometry
estimation, the analysis could give a better estimation if the microphone array would have designed
for room geometry estimation purposes.
6.3.3
Inﬂuence of the background noise
Until this point, all the measurements were providing an ideal signal-to-noise ratio in both anechoic
and listening room. To push the limits and test the robustness of the method, measurements with
diﬀerent signal to noise ratios were undertaken. Measurements in the listening room without any
background noise provided a signal-to-noise ratio of approximately 35 dB. To obtain diﬀerent SNR,
measurements were done with two additional speakers placed at the corner of the room. Those were
playing white noise simultaneously when the system was recording the sweep signal. The white
noise has been played at a diﬀerent level to attain diﬀerent SNR and compare the inﬂuence on the
recovered IRs, orientation, and distance estimation. To illustrate the case, the speaker was placed at
a distance d = 44 cm from a side-wall and oriented at ✓s = 270◦. Four diﬀerent SNR were reached,
respectively 35, 10, 1, and - 5 dB. Both IRs deconvolved and without deconvolution are displayed
below,
57
==PAGE:64==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) SNR = 35 dB
(b) SNR = 10 dB
(c) SNR = 1 dB
(d) SNR = -5 dB
Figure 6.19: Inﬂuence of the background noise on the none-deconvolved impulse responses. The
impulse response are taken from the central microphone.
58
==PAGE:65==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) SNR = 35 dB
(b) SNR = 10 dB
(c) SNR = 1 dB
(d) SNR = -5 dB
Figure 6.20: Inﬂuence of the background noise on the deconvolved Impulse responses. The impulse
response are taken from the central microphone.
It can be pointed out that the deconvolution is very sensitive to the background noise. Looking at
Figure 6.20b, Figure 6.20c, and Figure 6.20d the noise amplify signiﬁcantly the artifact introduced
with the deconvolution. For a signal to noise ratio below 1 dB, the reﬂections can barely be identiﬁed.
On the other hand, the impulse responses without applying any deconvolution seem to be more
robust and less sensitive to the background noise. The amplitude of the reﬂection decrease for lower
SNR but those ones still stay above the noise ﬂoor level even for negative signal-to-noise.
The
deconvolution becomes ineﬀective in a noisy environment, and therefore, none-deconvolved Impulse
responses are preferably used. To get closer to a real situation, another type of background noise
was employed. It has been chosen to use using random speeches from male and female talkers,
scenarios that might happen for an end-user utilization, such as home utilization. The recovering
of the impulse response gives accurate IRs without deconvolution but blurred the deconvolved one.
Figure 6.21 shows the outcome of the impulse response for microphone 5 with diﬀerent SNR.
59
==PAGE:66==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) SNR = 39 dB
(b) SNR = 13 dB
(c) SNR = -5 dB
Figure 6.21: None-deconvolved Impulse responses recovered for diﬀerent SNR with speeches back-
ground noise
There are no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between all the impulse response, and peaks are still detectable,
and the method seems to be robust for a diﬀerent type of background noise.
The orientation estimation is computed form the impulse response recovered with white-noise back-
ground noise the diﬀerent beamformer power output are plotted for each diﬀerent SNR,
Figure 6.22: Derivation of the orientation estimation from the diﬀerent IRs recovered with diﬀerent
SNR. For all the cases, the orientation is estimated at ✓s = 259.8◦indicated with the red dot in the
ﬁgure.
As it was expected, the background noise does not aﬀect the orientation estimation, and for each
SNR the wall is estimated at an angle of ✓s = 259.8◦for an actual orientation at ✓actual = 270◦.
The distance of the corresponding wall is estimated at d = 42 cm for an actual distance of 44 cm.
To follow-up, corner scenarios measurements with diﬀerent SNRs are also recorded. The beam-
former power output is shown for the two sidewalls detected. The speaker was roughly placed at an
orientation of ✓s1 = 160◦and ✓s2 = 230◦.
60
==PAGE:67==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
(a) DOA estimation - First Reﬂection
(b) DOA estimation - Second Reﬂection
Figure 6.23: Beamforming power output for the ﬁrst reﬂections. The respective DOA measured
are ✓s1 = 157.1◦and ✓s2 = 238.5◦for every signal-to-noise ratio cases.
Same analysis is observed with no real inﬂuence on the orientation estimation with diﬀerent SNR.
All the cases estimated the same direction of arrival for both walls.
In a nutshell, background noise seems not to aﬀect the recovering of impulse response using the
spectrum of the recorded signals directly.
Deconvolution with the system introduces signiﬁcant
ampliﬁcation of the noise and are rapidly impracticable to apply the method to derive the room
geometry.
61
==PAGE:68==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
7
Conclusion & Future works
The main goal of this project was to develop a method that estimates the local geometry from
a loudspeaker that incorporates a compact microphone array. The interest of this project comes
from the idea to estimate the precise localization of the speaker in a room to accordingly send
high-frequency sound beams in order to create a stereo image from a supposedly mono device. Two
goals have been set initially: Develop a method that uses test-signals and in a second time, another
method that uses continuous signals.
The ﬁrst one has been introduced thoroughly in this report.
The analysis of recovered impulse
responses constitutes the base of the method. After which all the diﬀerent steps on the method were
successively detailed: Test of the method using simulated impulse responses, processing to recover
the impulse response, and real application of the method ﬁrst in anechoic condition and then in a
relatively small listening room. To begin with, manual detection of reﬂection in impulse responses
has been introduced in order to extract the time of arrival (TOA). Consequently, the distance of
potential reﬂectors was estimated using those temporal indicator TOAs based on the image source
model. Alongside, the localization of potential reﬂectors and their respective azimuth compare to the
system was done using a Delay-and-Sum beamforming. Simulated impulse response served to test
delay and sum beamforming. Impulse responses were simulated with similar positions of the source
and microphone from the current prototype used in the project. One of the main assumptions of
the simulation is that it did not take into account the inﬂuence of scattering eﬀects from the circular
shape of the loudspeaker.
Thereby, this constitutes an issue that was then encountered in the
processing to recover the impulse responses. Deconvolution algorithm was implemented to remove
the inﬂuence of those scattering eﬀects in the impulse responses with lukewarm success.
Even
though the deconvolution removes the inﬂuence of the source and microphone, this one brought
artifacts that in some cases blurred the reﬂections. As a consequence, both deconvolved and none-
deconvolved impulse responses were used simultaneously, keeping the best estimation from one of
the two. In the end, the geometry estimation managed to estimate and placed, with acceptable
precision, the diﬀerent reﬂectors identiﬁed in the space. The relative errors are contained within a
range of +/- 10% for both distances and orientations. The inﬂuence of the background noise has a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the deconvolution, but the geometry estimation remains accurate with the
none-deconvolved impulse responses. Last but not least, the microphone array used in this project
was not necessarily the best option for room estimation purposes as it was initially designed for
voice-pick up detection. Even though some issues have been partially resolved, another placement
of the diﬀerent microphones might lead to less scattering eﬀects in the IRs and consequently more
precise localization of the reﬂectors.
In the end, some points initially planned have not been covered in the project, such as automatic
detection of reﬂection and method to estimation the local geometry from continuous signals. Those
points constitute future works to be considered.
• The automatic detection of reﬂection could be achieved by using a combination of the diﬀerent
points that have introduced, such as the spectral ﬂux. The introduction of a robust adaptive
threshold will be necessary.
• The method using continuous signals such as music or speech can also be considered in the
future. One idea that arises is to recover the impulse responses in the same way as presented in
this report but using music signal directly. The diﬀerence would be to use a longer average time
in order to get a good estimation of the impulse responses. From that, the same implementation
of the delay-and-sum beamforming and image source model may be successful. The choices of
the continuous signal might aﬀect this averaging. For instance, music signals with low dynamic
62
==PAGE:69==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
range might give better estimation due to a more constant sound pressure level than with high
dynamic range music signals.
• A current method exists to estimate in real-time in which scenario the speaker is placed. The
method relies on the instantaneous radiation impedance measurement, and by comparing with
reference values, rough placement of the speaker can be guessed. In a one-wall scenario, the
presence of the wall will double the radiation impedance, and likewise, the corner situation
will measure a radiation impedance four times higher than in a free-ﬁeld situation. The precise
localization of the reﬂector are not measured but this method can be used as a support of the
geometry estimation method.
63
==PAGE:70==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
8
Appendix
Contents
• Delay-and-sum beamforming
• Zeros-Padding - Deconvolution
• Calibration Microphone array
Delay-and-sum beamforming
Start = 20 ; % Start time instant to avoid negative indice
Nsample = 2000 ; % Number of samples to compute with the beamforming
Nsteer_angle = 720 ; % Number of steering angle directions
t = (Start:Start+Nsample-1) ; % Time vector for beamformer output
steer_theta = linspace(0,2*pi,Nsteer_angle) ; % Steering vector
% Angle vector of the different microphones.
% Microphone 7 is taken as a reference.
theta_m = 2*pi*(0:M-1)/M ;
% Initialization of the beamformer output
b = zeros(Nsample,Nsteer_angle) ;
% Initialization delays vectors
tau_e = zeros(Nsteer_angle,7) ; tau_e_samples = zeros(Nsteer_angle,7) ;
for ti=1:Nsample % For every time instant
for theta=1:Nsteer_angle % For every steering angle
for m=1:7 % For every microphone m
if m<=6
% Tau in seconds
tau_e(theta,m) = (R/c)*cos(steer_theta(theta)-theta_m(m)) ;
% Tau in samples
tau_e_samples(theta,m) = ceil(tau_e(theta,m)*Fs) ;
else
tau_e(theta,m) = 0 ;
tau_e_samples(theta,m) = 0 ;
end
b(ti,theta) = b(ti,theta) + (abs(h(t(ti) - tau_e_samples(theta,m),m))) ;
% Beamforming loop. The absolute value of the
impulse response is taken.
end
end
end
% Normalization beamformer output
b1 = (1/M)*b ;
64
==PAGE:71==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Zeros-Padding - Deconvolution
Nb = 5 ; % Number of repition of the sweep
Lx = length(x) ; % x is the exponential sweep input signal
Ly = N ; % Length of the total output signals y_m(t)
% Averaging of the recordings
y1 = reshape(y(:,1),[Ly Nb]) ; y1_mean = mean(y1,2) ; clear y1
y2 = reshape(y(:,2),[Ly Nb]) ; y2_mean = mean(y2,2) ; clear y2
y3 = reshape(y(:,3),[Ly Nb]) ; y3_mean = mean(y3,2) ; clear y3
y4 = reshape(y(:,4),[Ly Nb]) ; y4_mean = mean(y4,2) ; clear y4
y5 = reshape(y(:,5),[Ly Nb]) ; y5_mean = mean(y5,2) ; clear y5
y6 = reshape(y(:,6),[Ly Nb]) ; y6_mean = mean(y6,2) ; clear y6
y7 = reshape(y(:,7),[Ly Nb]) ; y7_mean = mean(y7,2) ; clear y7
% y_m(t) for every microphone
y = [y1_mean y2_mean
y3_mean y4_mean y5_mean y6_mean y7_mean] ;
clear y1_mean y2_mean y3_mean y4_mean y5_mean y6_mean y7_mean
M = length(y(:,1)) ; % Length of the averaged output signal
L = M + N ; % Total lenght after zeros-padding
x = vertcat(x,zeros(L-N,1)) ; % Zero-padding the input signal
y = vertcat(y,zeros(L-M,7)) ; % Zero-padding output signal
Y = fft(y) ; % FFT output signal
X = fft(x) ; % FFT input signal
% Transfer function of the system. Y_ff is the spectrum of the free-field
% recordings
H_system = Y_ff./X ; h_system = ifft(H_system) ;
% Transfer function of the room
H_room = Y./(H_system.*X) ; h_room = ifft(H_room) ;
% Transfer function without deconvolution
H = Y./X ; h = ifft(H) ;
65
==PAGE:72==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
Calibration Microphone array
nr_mics = 7; % Number of microphones of the array
for i=1:nr_mics % Import recorded signals
[x, Fs] = audioread([’calibration_Microphone ’,num2str(i),’.wav’]) ;
end
filter_length = 2048 ; % Length of the output filter
mu = 0.5; % Coefficient for the adapation algorithm
% Total number of samples in the algorithm loop
nr_samples = Fs*20;
% Reference delay to avoid negative indice in the algorithm
reference_delay = 15;
% Reference input taken from central microphone
ref_input = [zeros(reference_delay,1); x(1:end-reference_delay,7)];
% Initialization vector of the filter output
h = zeros(filter_length, nr_mics);
% Initialization
equalised_output = zeros(nr_samples, nr_mics);
error_vect = zeros(nr_samples, nr_mics+1);
norm_factor = 1;
for i = filter_length : nr_samples % For time samples
for ch_index = 1:nr_mics % For every microphone of the array
equalised_output(i, ch_index) = ...
x(i:-1:i-filter_length+1,ch_index)’*h(:,ch_index);
% Filter operation, output is the estimate
of the noise at the reference input
error_vect(i, ch_index) = ref_input(i) - equalised_output(i, ch_index);
% The adaptation algorithm based on the error value
gradient = mu*x(i:-1:i-filter_length+1,ch_index)...
*error_vect(i,ch_index)/(norm_factor+0.1) ;
h(:,ch_index) = h(:,ch_index) + gradient;
end
end
H = fft(h);
save h.mat
save H.mat
66
==PAGE:73==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
67
==PAGE:74==
Quentin Prost - s172801
MSc Thesis
References
[1] Tobias May. 31210 lecture notes : Fourier analysis, 2017 - Technical University of Denmark.
[2] Swen Müller. Measuring Transfer-Functions and Impulse Responses. Handbook of Signal Pro-
cessing in Acoustics. ISBN 978-0-387-77698-9. Springer New York, 2008, p. 65, 2008.
[3] David Oliva Elorza. Room acoustics modeling using the ray- tracing method: implementation
and evaluation. PhD thesis, University of Turku, 2005.
[4] Flávio Ribeiro Dinei Florêncio Demba Ba Cha Zhang. Geometrically constrained room modeling
with compact microphone arrays. IEEE Transaction on audio, speech, and language processing,
20(5):1449 – 1460, July 2012.
[5] Martin F. Muller Steven M. Schimmel and Norbert Dillier. A fast and accurate “shoebox” room
acoustics simulator. Laboratory for Experimental Audiology, University of Zurich, May 2009.
[6] Elisabet Tiana Roig. Eigenbeamforming array systems for sound source localization. PhD thesis,
Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
[7] Diego Caviedes Nozal. Experimental in-situ estimation of room surface properties; system design
and development. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[8] Eric
A.
Lehmann.
Fast
simulation
of
acoustic
room
impulse
responses
(image-
source
method).
https://se.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/
25965-fast-simulation-of-acoustic-room-impulse-responses-image-source-method,
March 2012.
[9] STAN Guy-Bart, Embrechts Jean-Jacques, and Archambeau Dominique. Comparison of diﬀer-
ent impulse response measurement techniques. JAES, 50:249 – 262, April 2002.
[10] Swen Müller Paulo Massarani.
Transfer-function measurement with sweeps.
J.AES, pages
443–471, June 2001.
68
