==PAGE:1==
 
English Project Title: 
Implementation of Scanning Technology in Waste Sorting 
 
Danish Project Title: 
Implementation af Skanningsteknologi til Affaldssortering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master’s Thesis in Msc. Design and Innovation 
Testing and implementation of nudging theory in waste sorting 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
4​th ​of february through 14​th​ of August 
 
30 ECTS Points 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________ 
 
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135145 
Stud.MSc.Eng. Design & Innovation 
DTU Management Engineering 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Abstract 
This report documents the master’s thesis “implementation of scanning technology for waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sorting” at DTU Management, Technical University of Denmark from 4​th of February
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through 14​th of August. The thesis is written by Rune Reedtz Nedergaard with lector Claus
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thorp Hansen as guidance counselor. The project is developed in cooperation with DTU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environment, contact person Vincent Maklawe Essonanawe Edjabou.  
 
As waste sorting is increasingly becoming an issue in the modern society, developing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions which help enable or encourage citizens to sort their waste is similarly becoming an
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
increasingly attractive activity. This is especially true for areas currently dealing with large
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste management issues, such as Roskilde Festival. The unique culture at Roskilde Festival
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
causes many participants to no longer care about environmental effects once on the festival.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In response to this lack of proper waste management at Roskilde Festival, “Vincent”
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maklawe Essonanawe Edjabou from DTU Environment has had the idea of utilising nudging
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
theory and/or scanning technology in waste bins, as to affect festival participants to properly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
sort their waste while on the festival.  
 
This report documents an iterative process covering the development of possible solutions to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the waste management issue at Roskilde Festival. These solutions are developed through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conceptualisation theory, with the goal of using nudging theory to improve festival
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participants’ waste sorting behaviours. Though the report does not document the finalisation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of such a concept, it does describe the process leading up to the development of potential
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
final concepts, and describe the future work required to finalise such a concept, an activity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
which is planned between the hand in of this report and the presentation of the project. 
 
 
1 
==PAGE:3==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Learning objectives and competences  
 
General Learning Objectives 
A graduate of the MSc Eng. programme from DTU…  
●
has insight into and understanding off the internal interaction between the various 
engineering domains and other competencies in connection with solving specific 
engineering problems  
●
possesses knowledge about sustainability, innovation and entrepreneurship  
●
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to 
take a holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, put it into a broader 
academic and societal perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible 
actions  
●
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for 
solving technological problems  
●
can discuss technological issues with various types of stakeholder 
●
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the 
capacity to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of 
timetables, design, solution and documentation 
 
Programme Specific Competences 
A Master of Science in Engineering (Design and Innovation) can…  
●
identify and define complex societal needs to design products, services and systems 
that successfully address those  
●
evaluate and reframe design challenges and problems to navigate the needs and 
interests of various stakeholders of different background 
●
manage multiple stakeholders and priorities in design and innovation processes 
 
Unique Learning Objectives  
After this project, the student will be capable of…  
●
displaying knowledge of different types of scanning technology and their usage and 
limits  
●
displaying knowledge of different types of waste sorting in private, public and 
enterprise contexts  
●
displaying knowledge of the concept of nudging and its uses  
●
collecting data through field work in relation to waste sorting and user behaviour  
●
utilising found data to draw conclusions based on analysis  
●
utilising conclusions from data to establish requirements, criteria and a problem 
formulation  
●
creating concepts that fulfil the established problem formulation  
●
using conceptualisation theory to improve upon created concepts  
●
using user experience theory to test the improved concepts and improve them based 
on findings  
●
critically evaluating the concepts regarding implementation feasibility and adjust 
concepts accordingly 
 
2 
==PAGE:4==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to extend a thank you to all the individuals who helped me during the making of
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this project. 
 
Thank you to Claus Thorp Hansen for providing supervision under the report. In the same
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vein, a thanks to Vincent Maklawe Essonanawe Edjabou for providing the project and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information about it, and always keeping in touch. 
 
I would like to thank Cecilie Gudsoe and Anna Hollænder for providing the groundwork for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project. Additionally, I would again like to thank Cecilie, as well as Enrico Tolotto and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kilian Speiser for collaborating to test the prototype and proof of concept at Roskilde
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Festival. 
 
A special thanks to Nanna Lykke Rickers Kristensen for entertaining cooperation throughout
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project. And finally, thanks to Torbjørn Westh for providing me with information
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding waste bins in Gentofte Municipality. 
 
3 
==PAGE:5==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Table of Contents 
Abstract
1 
Learning objectives and competences
2 
Acknowledgements
3 
Table of Contents
4 
1. Introduction
6 
1.1 Project background
6 
1.2 Project goal
6 
1.3 Motivation
7 
1.4 Methodology
7 
2. Problem Scoping
9 
2.1 Problem Definition
9 
3. Project and report structure
10 
3.1 Overarching design strategy
10 
3.1.1 The project as an iterative process
11 
3.2 Report structure
12 
3.3 Reading Guide
14 
4. Data index
16 
4.1 Description of initial prototype
16 
4.1.1 Questionnaire survey
19 
4.2 Interview with Torbjørn Westh from Gentofte Municipality
20 
4.3 Literature review
22 
4.3.1 About Waste Management
22 
4.3.2 User behaviour
23 
4.3.2.1 Factors influencing user decisions
24 
4.3.3 Nudging
24 
4.3.4 Contextual Nudging
25 
5. Exploration Loop
26 
5.1 Importance of exploration
26 
5.2 Exploration methodology
27 
5.3 Exploration of Need interpretation
29 
5.4 Exploration of Technology
30 
5.4.1 “Sensor bins”
30 
5.4.2 “Interactive bins”
31 
5.4.3 “Sorting bins”
32 
4 
==PAGE:6==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
5.5 Exploration of Context
33 
5.5.1 Problematic Areas
33 
5.5.2 Design Paradoxes
33 
6. Idea Loop (3s)
36 
6.1 idea generating methods
36 
6.2 Themes/baseline of ideas
36 
6.3 Examples of ideas
37 
sub-conclusion
37 
7. Testing at Roskilde Festival
38 
7.1 Results of intermediary testing
39 
7.1.1 Waste sampling
39 
7.1.2 User survey
41 
8. Further Concept Development
43 
9. Discussion
44 
8.1 Reliability of data
44 
8.2 About the usage of conceptualisation theory
44 
9.2 About quality of Ideas and Concepts
45 
10. Reflection
45 
About my working approach
46 
Personal opinions on project result
47 
Goal of the project vs. result of the project
47 
Conclusion
47 
References
48 
 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:7==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Project background 
(Sections from the project plan which are only slightly altered are in quotation marks) 
“Waste sorting is currently a large point of discussion. Statistics from European Environment
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agency show that in 2018, only five countries in the European Union recycled above 50% of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their municipal waste (European Environment Agency 2018), – a goal set by the EU for all
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries come 2022 (DR 2018), followed by 55% in 2025, 60% in 2030 and 65% in 2035
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(European Commission 2018). Currently, in Denmark 42% of municipal waste is recycled,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
just slightly higher than the country average in the EU of 39%. A publication by Danmarks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Statistik in 2017 states that 77% of commercial waste is recycled, whereas only 44% of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
household waste is (Danmarks Statistik 2017).  
 
With proper disposal of waste being important for the future of the planet, these statistics put
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into perspective how important waste sorting is currently. There is thus a need for sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
solutions. As a designer, one possible activity which can satisfy this need is to create
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions which eases the process of sorting waste or motivates the populace to sort. With the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
development of new technologies, new solutions become possible, and one such technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is currently being developed at DTU Environment. Maklawe Essonanawe Edjabou
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(“Vincent”) from DTU Environment has the idea of employing sensor technology for use in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
public waste bins, with the intent of easing the process of waste sorting for the public. This is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
a charitable idea but requires technology which DTU Environment has yet to begin working
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on, although Vincent expresses a desire to do so later. As a contemporary concept, he
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
together with Cecilie Gudsoe and Anna Hollænder, two girls working on a science project as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
part of their bachelor’s degree, have developed an initial prototype of a waste bin, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
utilises “nudging” as to indirectly encourage the user to sort their waste properly. The initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prototype is thoroughly described in section 4.1. Using nudging to better waste-sorting is also
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
a well-intended idea. but if a bin similar to the initial prototype would have to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented in a real-world scenario, there are several underlying questions that need to be
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accounted for first.“ 
 
1.2 Project goal 
“The goal of this project is to elaborate on the current concept created at DTU Environment,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and to shape this concept into a holistic socio-technical solution, which is as close as possible
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to being implementable in a real-world scenario as the scope of the project allows.  
 
The project goal is attained through the utilisation of conceptualisation theory and user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
testing at DTU and Roskilde Festival. The solution must better the identified problem e.g. by
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivating or helping the user sort their waste and must be unintrusive to the users’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
==PAGE:8==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
experience. The solution should also fit into a specific given context where it would make
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
sense, such as a festival context or a public context.” 
 
The differing title between the overall project and the report itself stems from a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
misunderstanding from the beginning of the project. It was assumed that the project work
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
would include finding applicable areas to utilise the scanning technology being developed at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DTU Environment. However, as it became clear that this technology was not close to being
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fully developed, the project scope changed to expanding on DTU Environment’s current
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project of waste bins using nudging as a means to improve waste sorting at the festival. 
 
The final result of the project includes recommendations for actions which Roskilde
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Festival’s administration could take, based on the results of testing at the festival. The result
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
should include a final solution for a socio-technical solution, and discussions on how such a
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
solution could be integrated into the actual context. Finally, the result should include a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
projection of what a solution could look like, should it be changed to make use of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
not-yet-created scanning technology, which DTU Environment is allegedly working on. 
 
1.3 Motivation 
“I became interested in the project, as it involves several competences I have as a design
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
engineer. I can answer the questions posed in the project idea section, and can create feasible
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts and prototypes, utilising input from potential users to improve them. Thus, I’m able
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
to contribute to the project in a way which improves the odds of the overarching project’s
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
result being applicable and usable in real-life scenarios.” User-oriented design allows a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
designer to ensure that concepts actually do fulfill the end-user’s needs, and thus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incorporating user-oriented design in any project dealing with concept-development should in
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
theory yield more applicable solutions. 
 
“The possibility to contribute to fixing a growing problem in the form of proper waste sorting
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
speaks to me, and the project lines up with my qualifications in a way which lets me
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
contribute in such a manner.” Roskilde Festival is also a prime location to perform user
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
testing in a contextual environment, and the opportunity to get to  
 
1.4 Methodology 
The project plan described, that the project would follow a typical iterative design process,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
spanning over four phases; a research and analysis phase, a concept development phase, a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
testing phase and a concept improvement phase. In reality, the project has followed these
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phases, but not in a manner of either-or. As is typical with most projects, activities overlap
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and interconnect, meaning these phases do not function as individual sections, but rather as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
parts of a whole process. With that said, the phases can still give some insight into how the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project work has progressed. 
7 
==PAGE:9==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
The first phase is described through section 4 and 5. “The first phase consisted of research,
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis and scoping and delved into how waste sorting is currently performed in different
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
communes in Denmark, as well as in different public contexts. The phase also sought to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investigate currently existing technologies that resemble the technology being developed by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Environment, and those technologies’ use scenarios. The phase also tried to analyse the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
found information, as to identify possible solvable problems, and to identify relevant scoping
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
possibilities. The goal of the first phase was to identify in which contexts usage of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution would be of interest, and to identify what the requirements for the solution would be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be used in said contexts. The phase also sought to use found information to set up project
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
boundaries. The information required to complete this stage was attained through dialogue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with relevant actors regarding private, public and organisational contexts. Additionally,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information was attained through international research relevant to the project’s topics.” 
 
The second phase is depicted through sections 6 through 8. “The second phase consisted of
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating ideas for products which may solve the defined problem definition, and of using
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conceptualisation theory to develop these ideas into concepts, to a point where they may be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
applicable in practice. The goal of this phase was to create one or more tangible, well thought
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out concepts, which are based on the current prototype at DTU Environment, are possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within the project scope and limits, and solves, or partly solves the identified problem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
definition. This goal was to be obtained through expanding the solution space through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creative and systematic methods, and by creating concepts through idea-generation, concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concretisation and conceptualisation framework.” 
 
The third and fourth phase are described in section 9. “The third phase consisted of testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the concept(s), with the intent of determining how well they solve the problem definition in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practice, and with the intent of identifying areas of improvement. The goal of this phase was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to ensure that the final idea is of interest to the targeted user group, and that the concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
works as well as possible within the limits of the project. This is achieved through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionnaires and general dialogue with actors at Roskilde Festival. A fourth interconnected
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
phase sought to use the evaluated knowledge to improve the final concept, as well as ensure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the concept makes sense from a commercial standpoint, i.e. ensure that the payoff for
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
producing the concept is worth the expenses, and that the product logistically makes sense.” 
 
The overarching design strategy and thesis structure is more in depth described in section 3,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the different activities are displayed, and the structure of the thesis is shown to fit. 
 
8 
==PAGE:10==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
2. Problem Scoping 
The overarching goal of the project, in accordance with UN’s Sustainable Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
goals, could be defined as contributing towards saving the world by improving waste sorting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(United Nations, 2019). This is of course not a very tangible goal, but it serves as a reminder
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
for why working with sorting waste is an important practice. 
 
A more tangible goal would be to reduce the amount of unsorted waste in a festival context
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(specifically Roskilde Festival). This is a significant problem area due to lack of opportunity
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and encouragement, but also an area which Roskilde Festival has allegedly been attempting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to improve for the past several years. As Roskilde Festival has over 130.000 participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every year, any solution which causes at least some of those participants to sort their waste
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would have a significant impact. 
 
Roskilde Festival does only last a bit over a week every year. Though creating solutions for
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the festival would help improve waste sorting during that time slot, it would do nothing for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the remainder of the year. To remedy this, creating a solution which could be translated to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
another context similar to the festival - such as public spaces in Danish municipalities - could
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
be a worthwhile task as well. 
2.1 Problem Definition 
Based on the above-mentioned problem scope, a problem definition is created as so: 
 
How can festival participants, through the use of a tangible 
solution, be nudged towards better sorting their waste? 
 
Additionally, a question for further developing a solution can be stated as so: 
 
How can this solution be translated to a municipal context? 
 
 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:11==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
3. Project and report structure 
This chapter covers how the project itself has been structured as a sociotechnical iterative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
design process. The chapter seeks to give insight into the overall structure of the design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategy, as well as how the design strategy has shaped the report structure. The chapter also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
includes a reading guide, which briefly outlines the order of each section based on the design
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategy, and the subject of each section. 
 
3.1 Overarching design strategy 
As described in section 2.1, the goal of this project has been defined as creating a concept,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
which helps nudge festival participants towards better sorting their waste, with an additional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
task of translating said solution to a municipal context. Creating a design from scratch is an
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
arduous undertaking, which requires several different subjects to be accounted for. To help
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ensure that no element is missing from the design process, designers often employ
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frameworks in the form of models. 
 
In order to visualise the framework for the design strategy of this project, the encapsulation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design model has been employed (Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015). This model displays the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
entire design process in rough sequences, starting from task definition, and ending with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
usage. As a part of the holistic perspective this project aims to incorporate, the project aims to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
include all steps of the encapsulation design model, though the later steps becomes less
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
certain, as more guesswork is involved. 
 
 
Figure 1: The encapsulation design model (Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015) 
 
The encapsulation design model broadens as the phases progress. As described by Andreasen,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
M. M. et.al., 2015, the model can be metaphorically viewed as a matryoshka doll. With a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
strong core of exploration defined by a task, the remaining steps build upon the core to better
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
define the strategy. Without the inner parts, the usefulness of the outer parts becomes more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
questionable. 
 
10 
==PAGE:12==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 2: A metaphor of the encapsulation design model (Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015). 
 
The majority of this project is focused on Exploration and Concept Synthesis sections of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encapsulation design model. Product Synthesis, Product Development and Product life
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synthesis are all elements possessing relevant insights, but are also ultimately somewhat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
outside the author’s area of expertise. Thus, they are accounted for in the report, but largely
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consists of educated guesswork, and therefore are not as detailed as exploration and Concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synthesis. 
 
3.1.1 The project as an iterative process 
A design process is rarely as black and white as to have one task, exercise or challenge be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
completely decided by the first iteration. Design challenges are often tackled in a similar
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
way; once discovered and defined, a mixture of literature search, methodology, data
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collection, testing and defining the problem area are applied by the designer, until a point
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
comes where a solution to that challenge is defined - this solution rarely being the perfect
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
one, but merely one which the designer has denoted appropriate. The notion that a designer is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
technically never truly finished with a task, as it’s always possible to further expand upon that
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
task is what often defines an iterative process. Note that not all solutions are required to finish
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
a design challenge; for example literature search rarely necessary for idea generation, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may be required before or after. 
 
11 
==PAGE:13==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 3: The iterative design process 
 
This report features several loops - the Exploration loop, the Idea loop, the Design Task
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formulation loop and the Concept loop - all of which could be defined as their own closed
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iterative processes. The entire design process itself could also be described as a loop, though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
it is an abstract and large enough process that it is difficult to relate to it. 
 
3.2 Report structure 
A common approach in structuring design projects is the double diamond model. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described by Design Council (2019), creative processes usually follow phases of divergent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and convergent thinking - divergent being open-minded to new ideas, often used during idea
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and concept generation, and convergent being a more narrow, scrutinising thought process, in
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
which ideas and concepts are evaluated. The double diamond acts as a visualisation of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
process as it commonly appears in design projects, wherein the first diamond shows the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process of identifying the problem, and the second diamond presents the process of designing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the solution for said problem. 
 
12 
==PAGE:14==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 4: The classic double-diamond model (Dreamerux, 2017) 
 
The traditional double diamond model consists of four phases; ​Discover in which the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem area is expanded and researched, ​Define ​where the problem area is narrowed down
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
into a defined problem, ​Develop​, during which an ideation process helps create several ideas
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for solving the problem, and ​Deliver​, during which the ideas are condensed into a final
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
concept or solution. Overall, the double diamond offers a solid way of examining the entirety
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of a design process. 
 
Though the double diamond is a solid representation of a typical design process, it is
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
important to keep in mind that the model is still a simplified, incomplete way of observing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
design process. The Double Diamond does not account for deviations in the design process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
itself. With that said, it still functions as a baseline to structure project work, and would in
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this report function as a baseline structure for the report itself. However, the double diamond
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model can be expanded upon. In this project, and in many other design projects, the designer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
rarely arrives at a refined solution from the identified problem after just one round of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divergent and convergent thinking. Rather, the designer swaps between divergent and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
convergent thinking multiple times, as is required of an iterative design process, while the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution is reiterated over and over. To this end, for this project, the double diamond model
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has been expanded into a triple diamond model: 
 
 
Figure 5: The triple-diamond model 
13 
==PAGE:15==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
In this triple diamond model, another, central diamond has been added, containing the phases
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliver​, which describes the ideation process, and ​Determine​, during which the results of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideation are condensed into a temporary solution. ​Develop now instead describes the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
refinement of the temporary solution, and ​Deliver covers using the results of the refinement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
phase to create the final solution. 
 
This so-called triple diamond model more acutely describes the structure of this report, as the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process of creating a final concept has included a convergent, idea-generation phase (​Devise)​,
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
a divergent phase in which ideas are combined and condensed into concepts (​Determine)​, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
phase in which a chosen concept has been further expanded upon and refined (​Develop​) and a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
final phase in which the chosen concept has been defined into a final concept (​Deliver​). 
 
The triple diamond model is still an inaccurate representation of a design project. In reality,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the model should consist of a myriad of smaller diamonds, as the designer is rarely utilising
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
one mindset for an extended period of time, and instead constantly swapping between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
divergent and convergent thinking. Aside from this, many activities are not as black and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
white as to be defined as a strictly divergent or convergent activity. Testing a prototype, for
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
example, is convergent in that it helps find flaws in the design, which can be solved for the
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
final solution. It is however also divergent, as issues and user input may bring up other
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
potential solutions or possibilities which would need to be further explored, should they be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implemented. With this said, the triple diamond model still functions adequately as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
simplified visualisation of the report structure. 
 
3.3 Reading Guide 
●
Section 4, the Data Index, covers the main primary and secondary data obtained prior
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the testing session. This includes a description of the initial prototype, an interview
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with Torbjørn Westh of Gentofte Municipality, and a literature review. 
●
Section 5, the Exploration Loop, covers the first and second section of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
triple-diamond model - that is, the entire first diamond. This section seeks to give an
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
overview of all the collected data, and present it in a manageable fashion. It also seeks
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
to analyse said data, as to identify important elements, actors and problems, which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be taken into account for the remaining loops. This is attained through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different principles and models, described in section 4. 
●
Section 6, the Idea Loop, marks the beginning of the design work, and covers section
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 of the triple-diamond model. The idea loop describes the different categories, from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which ideas were generated, and describes the methods used to generate said ideas.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The generated ideas can be found in appendix A. 
●
Section 7, Testing at Roskilde Festival, describes the results of testing the proof of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept at Roskilde Festival. 
14 
==PAGE:16==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
●
Section 8, Further Project Development describes which further steps are necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the rest of the project to be finished, and for the entirety of the triple-diamond
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
model to be covered. 
●
Section 9, Discussion, examines the project and result with scrutiny, and proposes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible further work to improve upon the result of the project. 
●
Section 10, Reflection, includes the author’s personal opinions of the project results,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including a critical look at what worked and what did not throughout the project. 
●
Conclusion and Recommendations finishes the report, with the final concept and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommendations towards Roskilde Festival and DTU Environment. 
 
Additionally, these sections are missing from the report, but will be the focus of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presentation: 
 
●
The Design Task Formulation Loop the midway point between section 3 and 4 of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
triple-diamond model. It is a brief loop. which seeks to analyse the results of the Idea
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Loop, to define which needs should be addressed by the concepts, and condense this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into a design task formulation. 
●
The Concept Loop covers section 4 of the triple-diamond model., and consists of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
condensation of several ideas into just a few concepts, ending with a temporary final
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
concept. 
●
The Further Concept Development, covers section 5 and 6 of the triple-diamond
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
model. In this section, the chosen concept from the Concept Loop is further evolved
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and elaborated upon, in a holistic perspective. The end result is a final “solution”, the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
end result of the project. 
 
15 
==PAGE:17==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
4​. ​Data index 
This section seeks to cover a majority of the primary and secondary data utilised throughout
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project, until the testing phase at Roskilde Festival, which is covered in section 8. It does
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
not cover individual internet sources used in the exploration loop The section covers primary
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data from Cecilie and Anna’s prior project, information from an interview with Torbjørn
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Westh of Gentofte Municipality, and secondary data which was gathered as part of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
literature review. 
4.1 Description of initial prototype 
Prior to, and during this master’s thesis, Anna Marie Blank Hollænder (s174542) and Cecilie
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lundgaard Gudsoe (s163259) have been working on their own project in the course 12203
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Science Project. Said science project, with Maklawe Essoanawe Ediabou and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Alessio Boldrin as counsellors, laid part of the groundwork for the master’s thesis. 
The goal of the project was to contribute towards attaining the 12​th UN sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development goal, Responsible Consumption and Production, through creating a larger focus
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
on waste sorting and optimising the quality of source-sorting by nudging the population. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project was conducted within the confines of DTU Environment, with the goal of testing a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
prototype of an intelligent waste bin. As thus, their problem statement read: 
Can the waste sorting habits of the employees at DTU Environment be affected by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation of an intelligent waste bin, with implemented sensor technology? 
The goal of the project was to create an intelligent waste bin with the ability to determine the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
weight of the added waste and play a message regarding waste sorting, when someone comes
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
near the bin. This goal was attained through sensor technology, by utilising two double
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bending beam load cells (DBBLC) sensors, which could measure the weight of the waste in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the bin, plus an ultrasonic sensor that can detect motion in front of the bin. The bin was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programmed through an Arduino and a Raspberry Pi and was tested at one of five kitchens in
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
DTU Environment. The prototyped was tested for 13 days. 
 
Figure 6: Components of the sensor setup 
16 
==PAGE:18==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 7a and 7b: The box with the sensor setup and the full setup of the intelligent waste bin.  
The full setup consisted of a general waste bin and an eco-waste bin, alongside a speaker
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
which talked when the ultrasonic sensor sensed motion, or when the DBBLC sensed change
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the weight of the bin. The Ultrasonic sensor notices movement and sends signals through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Raspbetty Pi and Arduino, triggering the amplifier. The DBBLC notices weight changes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similarly sending signals through the Raspberry and Arduino, causing the amplifier to speak,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and the display on the screen to update. The wooden sheet serves as the contact point
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the DBBLC and the mass of waste above it. 
Prior to the implementation of the sensors, there was a large degree of missorted waste, with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
mostly paper towels accounting for the majority of the mis sorting in the organic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fraction, as can be seen in figure 9a and 9b. The amount of missorted waste prior to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation of the sensors as an aggregate over three weeks can be seen on figure 10a and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10b. 
 
Fig 8a and 8b: General waste and Organic waste before implementation 
17 
==PAGE:19==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 9a: Missorted general waste on each kitchen, K5 being the kitchen with the sensor 
setup 
 
Figure 9b: Missorted organic waste on each kitchen, K5 being the kitchen with the sensor 
setup. 
After implementing the sensors, a couple of conclusions were drawn. First off, the amount of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste stayed the same, proving that the current setup of sensors did not nudge users into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generating less waste (though this was not a focus of the prototype). Second off, the kitchen
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in question experienced a reduction in both missorted general waste and organic waste.  
18 
==PAGE:20==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 10a: Percentage change in the mean values of missorted general waste 
 
Figure 10b: Percentage change in the mean values of missorted organic waste 
4.1.1 Questionnaire survey 
In accordance with the prototype testing, the author of this project assisted Cecilie and Anna
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in sending a survey out to employees of DTU environment. 26 employees responded, of
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which 18 had noticed the bins. 
When deeming their general satisfaction on a scale from 1-5, the average was 2.6. Anna and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cecilie theorise that this is likely due to the fact that 73.3 % of respondents feeling very or
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
moderately annoyed by the waste bin talking to them. Additionally, there had been some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
==PAGE:21==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
issues with the sensor, causing the bin to talk more than intended, which could contribute to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
this factor. They also theorise that it could just be due to the users being annoyed when
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external forces intervene with their everyday environment and routines. All in all, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observation shows that one should be careful when designing products with voice
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication, as having malfunctions or other forms of issues with these functions may
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actually worsen the experience for the user of the product, rather than improve it. 
The end of the questionnaire included a free-typing form, in which the user could comment
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with their preferred communication form, in which a majority preferred communication
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
through lights or through a graphic interface, as seen in figure 11.  
 
Figure 11: Results of preferred communication form 
Another point of feedback was for the respondents to have been provided additional
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information regarding the prototype prior to its implementation. 23.5 % felt that the bins had
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actively improved their sorting, where Anna and Cecilie theorise that those 23.5 % could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either be the people sorting poorly to start, or that perhaps the remaining 76.5 % simply felt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that they had no problems sorting waste in the first place—they did test the prototype at DTU
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Environment, after all. 
 
4.2 Interview with Torbjørn Westh from Gentofte Municipality 
As part of researching potential other use scenarios apart from Roskilde Festival, the author
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
took contact to Torbjørn Bochsen Westh from Gentofte Municipality, Gentofte Ejendomme.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The entire interview can be read in appendix 2. 
 
Torbjørn Westh is a graduate from the Design and Innovation master’s course at DTU. He
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
currently works with implementing sustainable solutions for waste management in municipal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
properties in Gentofte Municipality.  
 
20 
==PAGE:22==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
As part of his work, Torbjørn works a lot with user-oriented design and user behaviour. His
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pilot project, which he has been working on since he graduated and started working for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gentofte Municipality, has been to install waste bins at two schools and two daycares in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipality. Along with implementing the waste bins, he has been working on educational
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material, such as design games, posters, stickers etc. As part of this project, he has had a lot
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of difficulties and unforeseen problems, that he chose to share. 
 
Decidedly the biggest roadblock for implementing waste systems was in Torbjørns
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience communication, both internally in the municipality, but also somewhat externally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the end users. As Gentofte Municipality, and most other municipalities, are somewhat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hieratically built, it means that applying for money, or for permission to implement things
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
takes a long time, as these requests will have to go through several people and back again.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are also issues with communication when searching for contract, material, transport, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology providers, as it takes a while to work out the best deals. This was by far his
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
number one takeaway, which is important when considering implementing any sort of system
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
or physical products in a municipality. Externally, there are also communication issues, as
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end users often do not think it will take that long to set up a couple of waste bins, though it
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
always takes longer than anticipated, as shown by his pilot project, which took two years
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rather than the six months originally assumed. 
 
When creating products for an end user, there is also the manner of clashing schedules and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerns. Though a school may want to better sort waste, it is not their primary concern.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Implementing waste sorting systems which require the input of many users thus often end up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
taking longer than anticipated, and requiring more of the end-user than they may have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
thought.  
 
When talking about the educational material he has been working on, one of his main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pointers was, that things such as stickers may not be too complex. Whatever the sticker
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
depicts needs to be recognizable by the end user from their everyday life - if making stickers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
for a product for Roskilde Festival, that would mean the stickers would have to depict types
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of trash often found on the festival. The usage of design games has allowed for active
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
participation from the end-users side, which has helped him ensure conversation with all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actors, and has helped the actors participate in decision making regarding the management of
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the waste system. 
 
With all of these issues outlined, Torbjørn’s pilot project was still a success. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation of these four municipal properties has worked so well, that the district
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
council decided to implement it in all municipal properties in Gentofte Municipality by the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
end of 2020. For the future work, Torbjørn describes that they want to inform the users of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what the impact of the waste being sorted is. He points out that one shouldn’t underestimate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the impact of informing users of their impact, and being transparent with the sorted waste will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
definitely make users more aware of their waste sorting tendencies. He also points out that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
==PAGE:23==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
there are generally fewer and fewer opportunities to sort ones’ waste in public, now that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste management has moved to people’s own doorstep, and that he thus sees the potential in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
a solution, which lets users sort their waste while in public spaces. 
4.3 Literature review 
This section aims to document relevant pieces of literature, obtained through sites like DTU
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Findit, Google Scholar and Scopus, which stands to form the basis of the project’s design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
decisions. The literature chosen is meant to help answer the following research questions: 
 
-
What constitutes solid waste management? 
-
What constitutes user behaviour, and how can one influence user decisions? 
-
What constitutes nudging, and how is nudging applicable in design solutions? 
-
How has nudging previously been utilised in solid waste management initiatives, in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
either municipal or festival contexts? 
 
Section 4.3.1 covers the basics of waste management, identifying what constitutes solid waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management, why solid waste management is important and what advantages and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disadvantages solid waste management holds. 
 
Section 4.3.2 seeks to describe some basics of user behaviour, defining why users take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specific actions, and how nudging can be utilised as a designer to influence these actions. 
 
Section 4.3.3 defines what nudging is, why nudging is a useful tool when designing solutions,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
methods to ensure the user’s interest when utilising nudging, as well as different types of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interventions and techniques usable when nudging users. 
 
Section 4.3.4 covers contextual usage of nudging regarding waste management in municipal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and festival contexts and includes some case studies of prior initiatives. 
 
4.3.1 About Waste Management 
Given the world’s limited resource supply, and the limitations this supply places on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumptive growth, there exist doubt as to whether this method of growth is sustainable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
long term (Steffen et.al., 2015). In this context, the significance of resource-efficient
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economy is becoming more desirable by both policy-makers, scholars and experts. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
particular, landfilling has been recognised as the worst waste management option for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biodegradable waste at the EU level, with most EU Member states increasingly shifting focus
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to waste prevention and recycling (Melece et.al., 2018). In 2015, the European Parliament
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
proposed severe restrictions on incineration of biodegradable and recyclable waste by 2020,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as a ban on landfilling on 2030. This is in addition to increasing the target for
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recycling to at least 60 % of municipal waste in 2025 and 65 % in 2030 (European
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament, 2015). 
 
22 
==PAGE:24==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
With two polarizing interests consisting of consumeristic societies and global sustainability, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
has been established that waste management techniques are the best method to mediate these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
interests (Kimberly et al., 2018). Waste management is seen as a main driver of green
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
economy,
with
a
new
paradigm
being
formed
by
sustainability,
innovation
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
competitiveness, in which waste becomes a resource through reuse, recycling and waste
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
recovery (Melece et.al., 2018). The conversion of waste into a resource plays a significant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
part in reaching circular economy (Gregson et.al., 2015). An alternative management
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technique to disposing solid waste is to instead identify constituents which can be recycled in
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the waste, as this is an efficient method for both using natural resources and for diverting
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste material from landfills (EPA, 2017). A study performed by Björklund and Finnveden
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2005), comparing energy and resource inputs for products what were either recycled,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incinerated or stored on a landfill indicates, that materials produces from virgin resources are
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
more energy intensive than materials made using recycled resources. Another report by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lazarevic et. al. (2010) backs up this claim, further stating that specifically for plastic,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recycling is the preferred disposal option. Effective waste disposal is however a difficult task
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
to tackle, as waste possesses a high degree of complexity due to the different components.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, the composition of waste can differ from place to place (Hershkowitz, 1987). 
 
4.3.2 User behaviour 
Many sustainability problems which the world faces today, such as global warming or lack of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste management, stems from human behaviour (Vlek et. al., 2007). To avoid potentially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disastrous global environmental change, promoting pro-environmental behaviour has to be a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
high priority, as even behaviour changes which seem small can have a large aggregate impact
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(Linder et.al., 2018). For example, by applying relatively minor alterations in behaviour
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(switching to showerheads with lower flow, using more efficient water heaters, or more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fuel-efficient vehicles), it’s possible to reach an emission reduction of 123 million tons of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
carbon dioxide per year over ten years. Changing user behaviour is however a difficult
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
endeavour; as an example, information-based campaigns are often utilised as a means to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
promote behaviour change, but often fall short of achieving their goal when evaluated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(McKenzie-Mohr, 2013). Large-scale advertising campaigns also tend to be costly, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
introspection shows that the link between user receiving information and acting on said
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
information is weak (Coltrane et al., 1986). 
 
Despite these issues, Linder N et. al. (2018) made good use of an information leaflet in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experiment in Hökarängen, Sweden involving 2.900 apartments, with the intent of testing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
whether an information intervention could be effective in promoting food recycling in an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
urban area. Linder N et. al. cited a “statistically significant increase in food waste recycled
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compared to a control group in the research area”. In addition, the data indicates that the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change in behaviour persisted for at least eight months. Linder N et.al. emphasizes the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
importance of testing and adapting interventions to the context and target group, in that some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
of the barriers in the pilot study was highly contextual, and demographical traits likely had a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
strong contributing factor to the seeming success. 
23 
==PAGE:25==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
4.3.2.1 Factors influencing user decisions 
When a user is faced with a choice of two or more courses of actions, they will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subconsciously choose one of these actions. Collan, M. (2007) proposes a theory called the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
“lazy user behaviour”, which suggests that a user with most often choose the solution which
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fulfils their needs with the least effort. Collan describes, that the user need and the user state
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(the circumstances surrounding the user at the moment of the user need) defines the set of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible solutions which fulfil the need, and that the selection of the solution is based on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
which solution requires the lowest level of effort, effort being in the form of e.g. time,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
money, workload, or a combination of these. In conclusion to this theory, ensuring the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
success of a solution to a user-based problem requires the solution to fulfil the user need
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the path of least resistance. 
 
There exist several other factors influencing user decisions. Cass R. et al. (2015) describes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that behavioural scientists have evidence of users being ”loss averse”, meaning they tend to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dislike losses proportionally more than they like gains. It is described, that an experiment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
involving taxing a user 5 cent when purchasing a grocery bag is much more likely to have an
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
effect, than giving users 5 cent for bringing their own bag. Sharot T. (2011) describes, that
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users tend to be unrealistically optimistic, especially when it comes to their own prospects.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, Ayres I. (2010) describes, that users may sometimes be aware of their own
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biases and may be willing to precommit to certain courses of action, if these will counteract
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
their biases. 
 
4.3.3 Nudging 
Thaler and Sunstein (2009) introduced nudge theory in 2008. Nudging, often defined as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“soft” or “asymmetric” paternalism, has through behavioural research begun exploring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
methods of influencing people to make better life decisions (Balebako, et. al., 2011). This is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
done through interventions, which based on behavioural insights can be created through
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding what motivates an individual (Thaler, et. al., 2009). A central intervention,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which can be thought of as a nudge, is called choice architecture, which Thaler and Sunstein
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identify as the design of different ways in which choices can be shown to individuals, as well
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
as those choices’ impact on decision-making. An example of such a choice architecture could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
be the effective position of recycling bins to better encourage recycling among users
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Kimberly et al., 2018). Another example of the usage of nudging in recent years could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Milford et. al. (2015), who utilised educational pamphlets to improve residential recycling
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rates, or John et. al. (2011), who reported similar increases in recycling rates by advocating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
residents through door-to-door contact, at higher rates than through written interventions. 
There exist several types of nudging interventions. One example consists of simply informing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the user of an initiative or goal, others may focus on making systems easier to use and some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
may focus on countering specific cognitive and behavioural biases by altering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual’s perception of costs and benefits associated with the initiative (Balebako, et. al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011) 
24 
==PAGE:26==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
4.3.4 Contextual Nudging 
Shen L. et.al. (2019) describes well-educated, young people as the most important target
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
audience for municipal solid waste sorting, stating that their behavioural intentions are crucial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to the future living environment’s sustainability. Shen L. et.al. also states, that developing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipal solid waste sorting habits is a long-term process, describing that cultivating
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
awareness of waste sorting in the younger generation should be a bigger focus. Through a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
questionnaire in Hebei Province, China, with 524 respondents, Shen L. et.al. discovered, that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
among a list of defined factors, personal moral obligation, the subjective judgment of an
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual to decide whether or not to act in a certain way, alongside perceived behaviour
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
control, an individuals’ perception of the difficulty involved in performing a specific
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
behaviour, were the main factors influencing young people’s municipal solid waste sorting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intentions. This was followed by subjective norm, defined as the extent that social pressure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has on a person’s behaviour. 
 
A case study in the municipality of Podkowa Leśna in Warsaw, Poland shows, that a majority
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
of respondents are interested in sorting their own waste, even if unsorted waste could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
collected at no extra costs (Czajkowski et al., 2012). When offered different waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management options for their household, 70 % of respondents indicated that the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
determinant for their choice was economic reasons, with 28 % indicating environmental and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 % citing burdensomeness. Of the respondents who did not currently sort their waste, 28 %
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defined the main reason as them being unconvinced of the impact of home sorting, 38 %
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responded that the process was too time-consuming, 23 % stated that the process of sorting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
took up too much space, and 19 % stated that it was too expensive. 
 
A survey covering 1009 household in Latvian municipalities Liepaja and Valmiera show, that
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
household
residents are more environmentally concerned than the government and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
municipalities are, stating the need for an appropriate intervention system (Melece et. al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018). More than 50 % of respondents from these municipalities state, that the main barrier
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for them to establish eco-friendly behaviour was the lack of waste sorting containers. 
 
 
25 
==PAGE:27==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
5. ​Exploration Loop 
Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015 defines exploration as “the upfront design activity that leads to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the initiation and argumentation for a project. It is also the continuous process that supplies
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
data, information, and knowledge.” - that is, the initial, and underlying process, which
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provides data for all other decisions taken throughout the project. 
 
This section seeks to cover the exploration loop. The section describes in which ways
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exploration is important and which feed chains can serve as initiation points for clarification.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The section then seeks to explore need interpretation, technology and context surrounding the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, with the goal of defining Design Paradoxes, which created ideas have to solve. 
 
5.1 Importance of exploration 
In this project, the problem space is already somewhat predefined; designing a solution for
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
waste management at Roskilde Festival. Exploring the problem space is still interesting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
however, as acutely defining what solution needs to be created, how and why to create that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solution, who the solution is for, and what context the solution fits in are all important parts
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the design process- 
 
Described by Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015, a new product requires at least three factors:
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
business, need and ideas. For a product to have merit, there must: 
-
Exist a person or group who can and will create the product or the business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
surrounding it. 
-
Exist a target audience who is interested in the product enough to purchase it. 
-
Exist ideas, knowledge or technology which can be utilised to develop the product. 
 
In this case, all three merits are somewhat met: 
-
Vincent and his group from DTU Environment are interested in creating the product,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and with the assistance of various students from DTU, capable of creating the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product.  
-
The organizers of Roskilde Festival must be at least somewhat interested in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
product, given the large focus on sustainable solutions for waste management
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displayed at Roskilde Festival. 
-
Ideas and knowledge exists through the combined efforts of DTU participants, while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advanced scanning-technology is planned for development at DTU Environment. 
This is not to say that all parts are covered, however. Though Vincent and his group are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in creating the product, an actual business opportunity will only present itself if the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
final product is feasible and valuable to the target audience. Though the organizers of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roskilde Festival may be interested in the concept, there exist similar requirements for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept as a product; it must be feasible and have a real impact. And finally, though ideas
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
exist and technology is being developed, the existing ideas and developed technology must
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
==PAGE:28==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
adhere to the requirements, elements and logistics of Roskilde Festival. If an idea or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technology theoretically perfectly solves the problem, but costs too much or requires a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
complete change of infrastructure, it will not be feasible to implement. 
Additionally, in terms of target audience, Roskilde Festival is not the only possibility.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Researching other possible implementation options could also open up possibilities for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
additional business possibilities, especially seeing as Roskilde Festival only lasts ten days
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
every year. 
 
5.2 Exploration methodology 
As the importance of the exploration loop has been defined, it’s possible to define a goal for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the loop. Mentioned by Andreasen,
M. M. et.al., 2015, the exploration activity plays a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
critical role in ensuring that the correct end product is created. To this end, they mention the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following dimensions of importance which are integral for creating the ​right product, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be researched in the exploration phase: 
 
-
Developing the right ​product ​(ensuring the product fits an existing need and market) 
-
Using the right ​knowledge and technology ​(ensuring the product is based on correct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
information and knowledge) 
-
Correctly ​developing the product (ensuring that design process, production, sales and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
distribution are in line with the product and the company) 
-
Account for the products ​lifecycle (ensuring that the final product is ‘fit for life’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout the entire lifecycle) 
 
The goal of the exploration loop thus becomes to answer these dimensions as though they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were research questions. In order to tackle these dimensions, Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describes five feed chains which can be used as starting points for conceptualisation, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shows it through an exploration model: 
 
 
Figure 12: Five potential feed chains from which exploration may start (Andreasen,  M. M. 
et.al., 2015) 
27 
==PAGE:29==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
-
The ​need interpretation feed chain can be initiated to define and articulate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
designer’s interpretation of a need. That is, define needs based on values identified
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through users and actors. 
-
The ​perception of ideals feed chain refers to discussion with stakeholders regarding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
what constitutes a ‘good solution’. Initiating with this chain could constitute to further
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
define the ‘good solution’ as qualities and values. 
-
The ​problem formulation seeks to properly define an identified problem. Initiating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through this chain leads to a well-defined problem, and may help identify a further
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
chain of problems that could be tackled. 
-
The ​task perception and formulation chain leads to a well-defined task, illuminating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
feasibility of ideas or other possible business opportunities. 
-
The ​technology and idea elements chain can help form the main drivers for a project.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Initiating through this chain can help identify solution elements from prior designs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that may prove useful in the current one. 
 
The process of conceptualisation can be initiated from any feed chain, even ones not on this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
list. The exploration model serves as a guideline, displaying possible initiation chains. It is
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
important to note that initiating through one feed chain does not relegate other feed chains to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
being unusable or unnecessary, but simply just not the starting point of the conceptualisation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process. The main output of the exploration process is the concept synthesis, which ideally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
consists of goal formulation, synthesis, evaluation and choice (Andreasen,
M. M. et.al.,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015). 
 
This project’s conceptualisation process will be initiated through need interpretation. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, Vincent has presented involves creating an intelligent waste bin for Roskilde
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Festival. However, the most optimal context may not be Roskilde Festival, and the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
optimal product may not be an intelligent waste bin. Initiating the conceptualisation process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through need interpretation ensures that there is a market for the product, helps identify other
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possible use scenarios, and ensures that the product being designed suits a need which exists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
for certain.  
 
Andreasen, M. M. et.al., 2015 describes, that needs are subjective, and thus does not possess
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an objective, independent existence. Therefore, the things that make a product attractive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
differs based on stakeholder. Where Vincent’s group values experience and experimentation,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Roskilde Festival’s administration likely has a more result-oriented approach to the product,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and festival participants probably value ease of use the most. A product which fulfills all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identified stakeholder values would be preferable to one that only identified a select few. 
 
Past need interpretation lies exploration of technology. As a product is likely to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technologically dependant if taking the ‘intelligent waste bin’ route, exploring the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
possibilities of technology, especially state of the art level, can provide a valuable baseline of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
inspiration, as well as pointers on what to do and what not to do in a design. 
28 
==PAGE:30==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Finally comes exploration of context. This section seeks to outline the important actors,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem areas and problematic situations identified during the exploration loop. These
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
elements form the basis of the features or elements, which developed ideas and concepts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be capable of satiating. 
 
5.3 Exploration of Need interpretation 
As to ensure the existence of a need, the context of Roskilde Festival, as well as the context
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of public spaces in danish municipalities were explored. Roskilde Festival’s own homepage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
states, that they set themselves an objective to increase their amount of waste sorted by 10%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each year from 2016 to 2018 (Roskilde Festival, 2019a). Not only did this goal not get
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accomplished, only 12.9% of the total waste was sorted in 2018, down from 14.7% and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.8% in 2016 and 2017, respectively. “The ambition and intention is, that you should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
able to see a waste bin, regardless of where you stand in the camping area” says Anna
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hjortdal of Orange Press, mentioning how 2019 has had 5000 waste bins, up from 3500 last
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
year. Roskilde Festival themselves even have a guide on their homepage on how to be
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sustainable at the festival (Roskilde Festival, 2019b).  
 
It seems obvious that there is a definitive need for solutions at the Festival, whether
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encouraging participants to toss out their waste or to sort it. What may be more interesting is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
whether there is a similar need outside of the festival, in contexts similar to the festival
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context. Torbjørn Westh did mention that encouraging more waste sorting in public spaces
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through sustainable solutions would have merit, and the field work documented in appendix
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C saw a distinct lack of possibilities to sort waste in public spaces. 
 
Vejle Municipality is just now starting to implement waste sorting in the public space (Holm,
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2018), and Vejle does not seem like the only interested municipality. Ninna Hedeager Olsen,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copenhagen Municipality’s mayor of technics and environment says that she believes most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens will embrace the possibility of sorting waste in the public space, mentioning that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copenhageners are super good at sorting at home, and that sorting in public spaces is a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
natural extension of this (Politiken, 2018). Elmholm, L. et.al. (2019) mentions, that though
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
citizens are currently required to sort all kinds of waste at home, there are very few
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities to do so in public. They cite the efforts of multiple municipalities, describing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e.g. how Torben Lollike, chairman of climate and environment in Ringsted Municipality is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
proud of the efforts put towards waste management in private contexts, but also somewhat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ashamed of not having thought public spaces into these efforts, mentioning that it is the next
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
natural step. 
 
In addition to the lack of effort put towards incorporating waste sorting in public spaces, there
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
seems to be a general confusion about the topic. Grøn Forskel mentions, that the sorting of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste depends on municipality, with some municipalities having different guidelines than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
==PAGE:31==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
others (Ørsted, Malene 2018). As an example, glass with metal lids can be tossed out together
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in a glass container in Copenhagen Municipality, but has to be separated into glass and small
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
metal in Gladsaxe Municipality (Copenhagen Municipality, 2019) (Gladsaxe, 2019). 
 
To summarize, there is an opening market in public spaces in various danish municipalities,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to the success of public waste sorting. Perhaps more importantly, a product designed for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Roskilde Festival would have to function outside, and thus would likely be easier to translate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to a public context. One primary focus point of such a product could be to reduce confusion
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
by clearly labeling what should be tossed in which containers.  
 
To conclude on the need exploration, there currently exist several contexts in which a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sustainable solution for waste management is not only useful, but downright required.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Designing for Roskilde Festival is a good opportunity, as the festival already has a large
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
focus on waste management, and as it is already looking for sustainable solutions. Designing
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
for a municipal context is also intriguing, as such a design would suit the same environment. 
 
5.4 Exploration of Technology 
With a baseline of a technologically-dependant concept, it makes sense to look at how not
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
only nudging has been used, both in a general sense and in terms of waste management, but
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also how scanning technology and ‘smart-products’ has been implemented in waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management in other situations in the world. This phase seeks to investigate currently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
existing technologies that resemble the technology being developed by DTU Environment,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and those technologies’ use scenarios.  
 
5.4.1 “Sensor bins” 
Sensor bins refers to bins using some sort of sensor technology, often times for managing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste already collected in them, or simply for opening the bin automatically without direct
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contact.  
 
An example could be a VonHaus 50L Hands-Free Motion
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Sensor
Bin.
This is a battery-driven bin which opens
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automatically when the user moves close. There exist a lot of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
these kinds of bins, and they usually seem to be for private
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
use, in a kitchen or similar. They can be brought for anywhere
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from 38$ to 60$. (Amazon, 2019) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: The VonHaus 50L Hands-Free Bin (Amazon, 2019) 
30 
==PAGE:32==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Another, larger example could be the Intelligent Hospital Waste Bin by Suqian Bests
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advertising Media Co., Ltd. (Alibaba, 2019a). This bin is a large, advanced bin made for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
commercial use. It can measure the amount of trash through sensor technology, or spray the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trash with a sterilizing deodorization system. The same company offers other, similar
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products with differing functions, such as the “solar powered intelligent smart trash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
compactor street trash bin”, which is powered by sunlight and has a compressor mechanism,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
to flatten the collected trash.similar products can be found from anywhere between
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
900$-3600$. 
 
Figure 14 and 15: Intelligent Hospital Waste Bin, and the Compressing Street Trash Bin 
(Alibaba, 2019a and 2019b) 
 
5.4.2 “Interactive bins” 
Interactive bins refer to bins which interacts with the user, granting information regarding the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste they just sorted, or directly helping them sort their waste. A prime example is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
EvoBin, “an interactive system that shows users how to sort their waste.” (EvoEco, 2019)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The EvoBin shows messages, sometimes informative and sometimes quirky, when the user
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tosses their waste. Interestingly, the bin has a focus on financial value of waste sorted,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
displaying information regarding the amount of money saved. “We are finding that with its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unique, interactive digital screen, the EvoBins engage people in a way that causes them to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
stop, consider and sort items correctly” says Nicole Dubee, property manager for Columbia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Property Trust in San Francisco. William Zhou, CEO and founder of EvoEco also describes,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that their largest mistake so far was not raising money at an earlier stage, citing some
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenging situations which could have been solved faster with stronger finances, resonating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with Torbjørn’s experiences. 
31 
==PAGE:33==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
Figure 16: The feedback screen on the EvoBin (EvoEco, 2019) 
 
The EvoBin seems to be having a real impact, as testing at the University of Washington
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Masters of Human Computer Interaction and Design displayed a correct composting rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
increase of 20%, and an incorrect recycling rate decrease of 15%. The overall amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste correctly diverted from landfill increased to 8%, up from 1-2% in 2009-13, and 3-5%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in 2013-15 (SEGD, 2017). 
 
5.4.3 “Sorting bins” 
Sorting bins refer to bins which sort the waste for the user. Currently, only one commercially
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available product seems to be in development; the Bin-e. “Bin-e uses artificial intelligence to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
identify the type of waste that is being disposed of, segregates the waste, compresses it, and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
places it in the relevant chamber automatically” (Digital Trends, 2017). The Bin-E is clearly
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
designed for business usage. Allegedly it should work flawlessly, but there is little known
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
information regarding the actual use scenario of it, as it is not purchasable yet. It does
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
however prove, that a bin which can recognize materials and sort them for the user is possible
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to build.  
 
 
Figure 17: Bin-e flowchart (Smartbins 2019) 
32 
==PAGE:34==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
5.5 Exploration of Context 
This section covers the search for which problem areas, ideas and concepts should tackle, and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research on those problem areas. 
5.5.1 Problematic Areas 
A few problem areas were identified as standing out. A list of these can be seen below: 
 
●
Lack of opportunity to sort waste (For festival participants) 
●
Lack of information of how/where to sort waste (For festival participants) 
●
Lack of reason to sort waste (For festival participants) 
●
Potentially lack of access to waste bag (For sanitation workers) 
●
Missorted waste (For sanitation workers) 
●
Difficulty of implementation (For designers and Roskilde Festival) 
These are all potential problem areas, which ideas and could attempt to improve upon. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
biggest issues that stood out was the first three. As will be described in section 5.5.2, solving
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
issues for the festival participant is also key to solving issues for other actors. Thus, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following three problematic situations for festival participants were defined: 
 
1. There is a distinct lack of possibilities to sort waste at Roskilde Festival 
2. Festival participants sometimes mis-sort waste due to lack of information 
3. ​Festival participants do not feel motivated to sort waste or engaged in the process 
 
These situations somewhat of tie in with each other; lack of motivation could be caused by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lack of information. Lack of motivation as well as lack of information could also be caused
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the lack of ability to sort in the first place. Decidedly, a proper idea should strive to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
improve one of these three problematic situations. 
 
5.5.2 Design Paradoxes 
As to acutely get a sense of which actors are present in the context of the festival, a list of
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
actors and their discourses and need statements has been made. These discourses and needs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are specifically in relation to waste; for example it could be argued that a festival participant’s
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
actual discourse is “wanting to enjoy the festival”. However for this analysis, discourses are
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
based on the disposal of waste. 
 
Actor 
Discourse 
Need statement 
Festival participants 
Want to dispose of waste 
quickly 
Need ease of access to bin at 
any location, or will toss 
over the shoulder 
33 
==PAGE:35==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Food stand workers 
Wants cleaner surroundings 
Need participants to toss 
their waste 
Roskilde volunteers (trash 
collectors) 
Want ability to effectively 
clean festival square 
Need the ability to 
effectively collect waste, or 
need less waste in general 
Sanitation workers 
Want to effectively empty 
waste bin 
Need easy access to bin and 
waste bag, and easy access 
to waste containers 
Post-festival volunteers 
Want effective method of 
collecting and sorting waste 
Need effective collecting 
and sorting process 
Roskilde staff 
Want sorted waste for better 
environmental effects and 
image 
Need better solutions for 
festival participants to sort 
their own waste 
Head of roskilde festival 
administration 
Want sorted waste for better 
environmental effects. Want 
cheap solutions. 
Need better, cost-efficient 
solutions for festival 
participants to sort their own 
waste 
Roskilde backers/founders 
Want better image by 
backing environmentally 
aware event. Want cheap 
solutions. 
Need better, cost-efficient 
solutions for festival 
participants to sort their own 
waste 
Waste transporters 
Want easy access to 
properly sorted waste 
containers 
Need sanitation workers to 
properly sort waste bags in 
containers 
Incinerator workers 
Want waste to be properly 
sorted when delivered 
Need waste transporters to 
deliver properly sorted 
waste 
Incinerator managers 
Want workers to effectively 
perform tasks 
Need waste transporters to 
deliver properly sorted 
waste 
Roskilde municipality 
Want to pride themselves at 
environmentally aware event 
Generally need more sorting 
of waste at Roskilde Festival 
Government 
Want to keep EU’s goals 
sorted waste 
Generally need more sorting 
of waste at Roskilde Festival 
EU 
Want to save the world 
Need sustainable solutions 
across the globe 
 
 
34 
==PAGE:36==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
It could be relevant to discern between participants in the festival square and outside it, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they may have slightly differing discourses and needs. Ultimately, for this table, participants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
would always want to dispose of their waste quickly, but participants inside the festival
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
square may be more prone to sorting their waste if given the opportunity, as they may not be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stuck in the “Roskilde-mindset”.. 
 
Some of the needs and discourses of the actors go against one another. Interestingly, these all 
come back to festival participants, as festival participants are seemingly the only actor who 
does not care about environmental effects on the list. 
Design Paradoxes 
1 
Festival participants want to dispose of their waste quickly, and festival volunteers and workers 
want effective solutions, whereas RF administration and backers want functional but cheaper 
solutions 
2 
Festival participants will toss waste anywhere, whereas food stand workers and volunteers 
want less waste lying around 
3 
Festival participants want easy access to bins (e.g. more bins), whereas sanitation workers want 
to efficiently transport waste from multiple bins to container (fewer bins = better) 
4 
Festival participants generally do not feel the need to sort their waste, whereas almost every 
other actor benefits from it 
 
These design paradoxes mark the starting point of the design activities. As all design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paradoxes come back to the festival participants, any implemented solution is dependant on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the actions of festival participants to function. This by extension means that if a solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
either makes the process of sorting waste so easy that participants want to do it, or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encourages them well enough that they want to do it, most of the needs of other actors get
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
alleviated, if not completely fulfilled (in the context of waste management specifically). It
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
does not really make sense to design solutions for volunteers and sanitation workers to more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
efficiently collect waste, if making festival participants toss out their own waste yields a
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
larger result and indirectly reduces the amount of waste the volunteers have to collect. 
 
35 
==PAGE:37==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
6. ​Idea Loop 
The idea loop is a short loop, in which the author utilises the results of the exploration loop to
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
begin answering the problem definition. This section will cover how the idea generation was
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structured and performed, and present the results of the process. 
6.1 Baseline for idea generation 
Designing with no constraints is often more difficult than having at least some constraints. In
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
this case, it was decided that an idea would have to solve at least one of the identified
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problematic situations from section 5.5.1. In order to further constrain the idea generation, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
few factors was brought up, which could help generate ideas; 
 
-
An idea could either be an opportunity to sort waste, or an opportunity to easier toss
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out waste 
-
An idea could either be placed inside the festival square or in the camping area 
-
An idea could either encourage, reward, or force the user to sort or toss waste 
-
An idea could either incorporate electronic elements or not 
 
Adjusting these factors functioned as inspiration to create ideas, as setting up an arbitrary set
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of rules for an idea could lead to something completely different than anticipated. As this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process was a solo-endeavor, the number of creative methods usable was very limited, so the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
factors helped the brainstorming session work better. 
 
From this idea generation process sprang several ideas. Ideas were in this case defined as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tangible solutions, which either helps festival participants sort their waste, or helps them toss
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
out their waste more easily. Defining ideas as mostly tangible solutions was important, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they needed to be in line with the project boundaries. Making sweeping changes to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
structure of the entire event is for example not feasible. 
 
This process resulted in several ideas, all of which can be seen in appendix A. 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:38==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
7. Testing at Roskilde Festival 
As a part of testing the proof of concept in the actual context, the author along with Cecilie
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gudsøe, Enrico Tolotto and Kilian Speiser built and tested two prototypes of the so-called
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Bintelligent”, the successor to Anna Hollænder and Cecilie Gudsøe’s initial prototype which
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was tested at DTU Environment. 
 
 
Figure 18: Final prototypes at Roskilde Festival 
 
The goal of this intermediate project was to test whether the concept itself actually worked in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the context it was designed for. The bin also had the goal of increasing awareness of waste
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sorting at the festival. Additionally, user data was collected as to get a better feel for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
users’ opinion of the bin, and of other waste-sorting options on the festival. One bin was for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organic waste, while the other was for general waste. The bins were tested in Food Court on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the festival square, the place on the festival with the highest density of food stalls. 
 
 
Figure 19 and 20: Placement of the Bintelligents at Roskilde Festival, as well as a sample bag 
37 
==PAGE:39==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
The bin was capable of verbally communicating to the user, which kind of waste should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deposited in the bin when approached. Through a display, it showed the user how much
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
energy the waste would produce, and translated this to number of iPhone charges. Finally, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
bin had clear visual icons, displaying which kinds of waste counted as organic and which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
kinds counted as general waste. 
 
The sensor setup in these prototypes were similar to those of the initial prototype tested at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DTU Environment. This prototype used load cell amplifier sensors instead of a DBBLC to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
measure the weight of the waste, with the same result, but higher consistency given the use of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
multiple sensors. A LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) sensor was used as a motion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
sensor, instead of the ultrasonic sensor. The LIDAR measures distance through laser pulses.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The setup also used a touch display for information, rather than the desktop screen of the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
initial prototype. 
 
The total cost of the prototype was 370$, a number wildly exacerbated due to the number of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sensors and kits which were vastly overqualified for the job, as well as a 115$ bill in wood
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
alone.  
 
7.1 Results of intermediary testing 
7.1.1 Waste sampling 
As a part of identifying, how well users at the festival were capable of sorting their waste, the
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste collected through the Bintelligents, as well as two sample bins equipped with only the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
signage, was collected.  
 
Figure 21: Missorted waste in percentage from the Bintelligents and the reference bin 
 
Before concluding anything from the results, it is important to note that the sample size is
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
very small due to only having four days of testing with varying amounts of technical issues.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusions can be made on these results, but they may not be entirely correct. 
 
38 
==PAGE:40==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
As indicative by figure 21, the Bintelligents actually had a higher percentage of missorted
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
waste in both the organic and general compartments. For the organic waste specifically, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is due to a huge outlier on the first day, where apparently a large amount of waste was sorted
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
wrongly. Whether this means that the Bintelligents are actually detrimental to the waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sorting habits of users is up for debate, and is likely due to the large amount of technical
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issues which occurred with both the display, mobility sensor and speaker while testing. 
 
The most missorted fraction was food wrapping, as some of the food wrapping and cutlery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
available at the festival is organic and some of it is not. This is not indicated anywhere on the
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
food wrapping either. Results do indicate that festival users did not mind sorting their waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at the festival square, though the visual elements may have to be updated to more accurately
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
represent which kinds of food wrapping and cutlery goes in which bin. 
 
7.1.2 User survey 
In addition to the waste sampling, a small user survey of 15 respondents was conducted. The
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sample size should have been higher, but the technical issues occuring with the bin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
throughout the week prevented the group from asking many more, in addition to possible
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
respondents actively avoiding using the bin when the group was attempting to ask questions. 
 
80% of respondents said, that they were required to sort municipal waste at home. More than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
half felt they were better than average at sorting their waste. When asked about waste sorting
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
habits at the festival, 73% answered that they felt like they did worse than at home. 60% felt
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
that they had not had proper opportunities to sort their waste at the festival, though some felt
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
that the existence of areas such as “leave no trace” gave the opportunities. 
 
Even with the additional amounts of missorted waste, respondents still liked using the bin.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When asked, 53% mentioned that they would not mind having a similar concept on a larger
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
scale at the festival. 
 
Figure 22: How respondents generally felt about the bin on a scale from 1-5 
 
39 
==PAGE:41==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
 
8. Further Project Development 
This is a description of the remaining work necessary to properly answer the problem
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
definition. This work is planned between the hand in of this report and the presentation on the
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19th. 
 
-
Create more idea​s: Currently, the amount of ideas is a bit lacking. Several of them
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
remind a lot of each other. Creating a few more ideas will result in a lot more variety
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
to choose from when developing concepts. 
-
Define a design task through a Design Task Formulation Loop​: The design task
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
formulation should be a combination of the problem definition and the results of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exploration loop. Creating a design task will serve as a baseline for concept creation. 
-
Create concepts​: Concepts are created through combining the best parts of several
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas, possibly through a morphology table or another similar model.  
-
Define concepts​: Concepts will be concretized through defining the idea in, idea with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and difference that matters for each individual concept. The concepts will also be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
defined through activity and organ domain, and through identifying strengths and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weaknesses. 
-
Define final solution​: Whichever of the concepts best fulfill the design task with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fewest compromises elsewhere will be chosen as the final solution. The final solution
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be redefined through activity, organ and part domain, and will be analysed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through the seven universal virtues. The final solution will also be redefined in a way
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
that fits a municipal context, and both results will be evaluated in terms of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environmental effects, feasibility, price etc. 
 
40 
==PAGE:42==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
9. Discussion 
The goal of this section is to provide some criticism of the results of the project from an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
objective viewpoint. The section seeks to discuss how (un-)reliable the data used in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project is, and per extension, how feasible the ideas and concepts in the report are. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
author’s subjective criticism of the project work and results can be found in section 10. 
9.1 Reliability of data 
In general, this project uses less primary data for the basis of its conclusions than should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generally be acceptable. As an example, only a single interview was conducted for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
exploration loop. This interview did hold very relevant information in regards to the idea of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
utilising a solution in other contexts, but surely there were more actors whom it would have
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
been relevant to speak to. 
 
Sanitation workers, or garbage truck drivers could for example have been very relevant to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
speak to. Not only would this have provided insight into how the chain of waste-disposal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
functions, speaking with an actor who is directly involved with the process would surely have
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided relevant information regarding what they would value in a solution. 
 
Another actor that certainly should have been involved in the process would be a contract
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
person between DTU and Roskilde Festival. This is certainly not the first project in Roskilde
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
Festival Powered by DTU Students which seeks to improve waste management at the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
festival. Interviewing someone who has had interaction with prior projects would give insight
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into which concepts and elements have previously worked at the festival, and which have not.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This would in turn allow for a better conceptualisation phase, as ideas and concepts would
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have a better defined basis of what direction would be better. 
 
In addition to lack of qualitative data, the quantitative data used for conclusions in this project
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
is also quite lacking. The lack of quantitative data is less preventable, as it was primarily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
caused by technical issues, but it is still important to keep in mind. A continuation of this
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project should probably strive to obtain more data from user surveys, to ensure more accurate
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
results. 
 
With this said, the qualitative research done at Roskilde Festival was not strictly quantitative,
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
as users were also asked for freeform input. As the design team were talking face-to-face with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
users, it was possible to pick up more data than simply what the questionnaire asked for.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Griffin and Hauser describes that when performing qualitative research, the designer will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reach a threshold at about 5-7 respondents, at which point answers will start being repeated
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Ulrich, K. T., et.al. 2008). Obviously, it’s never possible to have too much data, but it could
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
be argued that the qualitative parts of the questionnaire had a satisfactory amount of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
respondents. 
41 
==PAGE:43==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
9.2 About the usage of conceptualisation theory 
It is important to note that this project was originally intended to go in a different direction
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
due to a misunderstanding, hence the difference in project and report title. Initially, the aim of
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the project was intended to be finding application possibilities for the scanning technology,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which DTU Environment was allegedly developing. As it turned out that this technology was
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
nowhere close to being ready yet, the focus of the project switched to creating concepts with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the same nudging theory currently in use, with the intent of taking a closer look at a holistic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
perspective, and how the final concept could be implemented. 
 
This means that the usage of conceptualisation theory, which was originally intended for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating ideas and concepts based on a technology, instead ended up being used for creating
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ideas and concepts more based on an existing concept. Essentially, the theory used for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project was less suited than what was originally anticipated. 
 
The usage of conceptualisation theory still yielded some acceptable ideas, but with a low
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
amount of variation - most of the ideas ended up being simple waste bins with different
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communication methods or reward systems in them. Comparatively, creating ideas and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts for a technology rather than an existing concept would likely have yielded more
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different ideas, which increases the odds of original, novel solutions. In general, an issue with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generating ideas for waste bins, is that there is not that many variations doable, as a waste bin
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
is generally lacking in possible ways to edit the base structure. 
 
 
42 
==PAGE:44==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
10. Reflection 
This section seeks to cover my personal opinions on the result of the project work, and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
report itself. In this section, I attempt to cover why the project ended up not panning out as
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was initially planned, what the working structure has looked like for the project to end up like
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
it did, and the key takeaways in terms of learning. 
 
10.1 About my working approach 
In general, I do not have a health working ethic towards myself, not am I good at keeping
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
time schedules. If the only obligations I have are towards myself, I have a very hard time
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
motivating myself. As a person, I am relatively apathetic towards my own predicaments - if
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
something is an issue for me alone, I am not proficient at solving it. If others are involved,
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
e.g. if I’m writing a group report, I am a lot better at taking matters into my own hands -
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
others should not be inconvenienced by my approach to tasks and responsibilities. 
 
I think I did all right as far as project work is concerned, with decent exploration, and a fine
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
idea loop. I also know that I will also do all right on the upcoming further project
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development, which will be presented. I only wish that I had gotten myself more motivated
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
and finished it already. 
 
10.2 Goals of a Master’s Thesis 
A master’s thesis is supposed to display the skills of a student, based on the learning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
objectives. The goal is to show the student’s ability to apply a large amount of the things
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
they’ve learned throughout their education in a real project. To that end, I would argue that
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the project does show my ability to utilise main theories which I have used throughout my
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
education, or at least my ability to figure them out as I go. The thesis certainly does not show
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
my ability to keep timetables though..  
 
 
 
43 
==PAGE:45==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
11. Conclusion 
The problem definition of how to nudge festival participants towards better sorting their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste through the use of a tangible solution is inconclusive. Due to the current lack of a final
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
solution, the problem definition cannot be answered. However, the foundation for creating
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such a solution has been created, which means that the problem definition will certainly be
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
answered by the time, the project is presented. 
11.1 Recommendation to Roskilde Festival 
Though testing at Roskilde Festival did not yield good results for the Bintelligent waste bins,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it did give much insight into the waste sorting behaviours of festival participants. A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recommendation for Roskilde Festival based on these insights would be to implement organic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
waste bins in the festival square, or at least by Food Court, while standardizing cutlery and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
food wrapping in the area. Testing results indicated that participants are both capable of and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
willing to sort their organic waste, but are impaired by lack of knowledge on whether food
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wrapping is organic or not. Standardising food wrapping and installing organic waste bins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should yield low enough missorting rates for most organic waste tossed out in the area to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
recycled. 
 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:46==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
References 
Online Sources 
AliBaba (2019b) “Intelligent Waste Bins Indoor Trash Cans Electronic Bins “ 
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/Intelligent-Waste-Bins-Indoor-Trash-Cans_60823992684.htm
l?spm=a2700.7724857.normalList.19.be7615b6HNNsNW&s=p (Visited 02/08/2019) 
AliBaba (2019b) “Solar powered intelligent smart trash compactor street trash bin” 
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/Solar-powered-intelligent-smart-trash-compactor_608191868
59.html?spm=a2700.details.maylikehoz.8.b125276asYE5F7 (Visited 02/08/2019)  
Copenhagen Municipality, (2019)  “Sorteringsguide” 
https://www.kk.dk/sites/default/files/sorteringsguide_dk_uk_a4_2019.pdf (Visited 01/08/2019) 
Danske Kommuner (2018) “Vejle indfører affaldssortering i byens rum”, Holm, R. 
http://www.danskekommuner.dk/Nyhedsarkiv/2018/Juni/08/Vejle-indforer-affaldssortering-i-byens-r
um/ (Visited 01/08/2019) 
Design Council (2019) “Designers across disciplines share strikingly similar approaches to the 
creative process, which we’ve mapped out as ‘the Double Diamond’.” 
https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/news-opinion/design-process-what-double-diamond (visited 
01/08/2019) 
Digital Trends (2017) “Space age Bin-e trash can scans, sorts, and compacts your rubbish 
automatically” https://www.digitaltrends.com/cool-tech/smart-bin-e-trash-can/ (Visited 02/08/2019) 
DR (2019) “Pap, plast og bio: Vi sorterer flittigt derhjemme, men i parker og byer må vi ikke” 
Elmhoff, L. W. & Würtz, J. 
https://www.dr.dk/nyheder/regionale/sjaelland/pap-plast-og-bio-vi-sorterer-flittigt-derhjemme-men-i-
parker-og-byer-maa (Visited 30/07/2019) 
Dreamerux (2017) “Lecture 2 : What Is The Design Process?” 
https://www.dreamerux.com/articles/aghp2kfpgjwxd3b4fstha379p32dax (Visited 04/08/2019) 
EPA (2018) “Advancing sustainable materials management: facts and figures” 
https://www.epa.gov/facts-and-figures-about-materials-waste-and-recycling/advancing-sustainable-m
aterials-management (visited 27/05/2019) 
European Parliament (2015) “Moving towards a circular economy” (2014/2208(INI)) 
http://europarl.europa.eu (visited 27/05/2019)  
EvoEco (2019) “The Evo Bin” http://evoeco.com/ (Visited 02/08/2019)  
Geekwire (2017) “Startup Spotlight: EvoEco uses digital, interactive bins to solve the riddle of where 
to toss your trash” 
https://www.geekwire.com/2017/startup-spotlight-evoeco-uses-digital-interactive-bins-solve-riddle-to
ss-trash/ (Visited 02/08/2019) 
45 
==PAGE:47==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Gladsaxe, (2019) “Sorteringsguide” 
https://www.gladsaxe.dk/Admin/Public/DWSDownload.aspx?File=%2fFiles%2fFiles%2fBMF%2fAf
fald%2fAffaldssorteringsguide-11-fraktioner-2017-Folder-A5-web.pdf (Visited 01/08/2019) 
Grøn Forskel (2018) “Alt du skal vide om affaldssortering”, Ørsted, M. 
https://groenforskel.dk/affaldssortering/ (Visited 01/08/2019) 
Milford, A.B., Øvrum, A., Helgesen, H. (2015) ”Nudges to increase recycling and reduce waste”, 
Norwegian Agricultural Research Institute, 
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/d396/a4c23b0b4600860cb55b60b83d806be6a7b3.pdf (visited 
31-05-2019) 
Orangepress (2019) “Bæredygtighedskaptajnens yndlingsidéer”, Hjortdal, A. 
https://www.roskilde-festival.dk/media/2807/orangepress_06-07-2019.pdf (Visited 01/08/2019)  
Politiken (2018) “Nu skal københavnerne også sortere affald i gaderne” 
https://www.avisen.dk/top-nu-skal-koebenhavnerne-ogsaa-sortere-affald-i-ga_507132.aspx (Visited 
01/08/2019) 
Roskilde Festival (2019a) “Waste and Recycling” 
https://www.roskilde-festival.dk/en/about/sustainability/waste-recycling/ (Visited 31/07/2019) 
Roskilde Festival (2019b) “How to be sustainable at Roskilde Festival” 
https://www.roskilde-festival.dk/en/years/2019/news/baeredygtigt-paa-festival-den-groenne-studenter
bevaegelse/roskilde festival (Visited 31/07/2019) 
SEGD (2017) “Merit Award 2017” https://segd.org/smart-bins (Visited 02/08/2019) 
Smartbins (2019) “Smartbins” https://smartbins.se/ (Visited 04/08/2019) 
United Nations (2019) “Sustainable Development Goals” 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/ (Visited 31/07/2019) 
 
Literature 
Andreasen, M. M., Hansen, C. T., & Cash, P. (2015). Conceptual Design. Interpretations, Mindset and 
Models. Springer 
Ayres, I. (2010) “Carrots and sticks” New York: Random House 
Balebako, Rebecca & Leon, Pedro & Almuhimedi, Hazim & Kelley, Patrick & Mugan, Jonathan & 
Acquisti, Alessandro & Cranor, Lorrie & Sadeh, Norman. (2011). “Nudging Users Towards Privacy 
on Mobile Devices” 722. 
Björklund, A., Finnveden, G. (2005) “Recycling revisited—life cycle comparisons of global warming 
impact and total energy use of waste management strategies”, Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, Vol.44 No. 4 pp. 309-317 
46 
==PAGE:48==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Cass, R., Sunstein, J.D. (2015) “Nudging Smokers” N. Engl. J. Med. Vol. 372 No. 22 
Collan, M. (2007) “Lazy User Behaviour” MRPA No. 4320 
Coltrane, S., Archer, D., Aronson, E. (1986) “The social-psychological foundations of successful 
energy conservation programmes” Ener. Policy 14, pp. 133-148. Doi: 10.1016/0301.4215(86)90124-2 
Czajkowski, M., Kądziela, T., Hanley, N. (2012). "We want to sort! – assessing households’ 
preferences for sorting waste," Working Papers 2012-07, Faculty of Economic Sciences, University of 
Warsaw 
Gregson N., Crang M. (2015) “From waste to resource: the trade in wastes and global recycling 
economies” Annual Review of Environment and Resources, vol. 40, pp. 151-176 
Hershkowitz, A. (1987) “Municipal Waste”, Science, Vol. 236 No. 4807 pp. 1409 
John, P., Cotterill, S., Richardson, L., Smith, G., Moseley, A., Stoker, G., Wales, C., Liu, H., Nomura, 
H. (2011) “Nudge, Nudge, Think, Think” Bloomsbury Academy, New York, NY 
Kimberly McCoy, Justin J. Oliver, D. Scott Borden, Scott I. Cohn, (2018) "Nudging waste diversion 
at Western State Colorado University: application of behavioral insights", International Journal of 
Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 19 Issue: 3, pp.608-621, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-05-2017-0063 
Lazarevic, D., Aoustin, E., Buclet, N., Brandt, N. (2010) “Plastic waste management in the context of 
a European recycling society: comparing results and uncertainties in a life cycle perspective”, 
Resource, Conservation and Recycling, Vol. 55 No. 2 pp. 97-104 
Linder, N., Lindahl, T., Borgström, S. (2018) “Using Behavioural Insights to Promote Food Waste 
Recycling in Urban Households—Evidence From a Longitudinal Field Experiment” Front. Psychol. 
9:352. Doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00352 
McKenzie-Mohr, D. (2013) “Fostering Sustainable Behavior: An Introduction to Community-Based 
Social Marketing” Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers 
Melece, Ligita, Brizga, Janis, Ernsteins, Raimonds (2018) “Municipal Waste Management Issues”, 
Engineering for Rural Development — 2018, Vol. 17 
Sharot, T. (2011) “The optimism bias: a tour of the irrationally positive brain” New York: Knopf 
Doubleday 
Shen, L., Si, H., Yu, L., Si, H. (2019) “Factors Influencing Young People’s Intention toward 
Municipal Solid Waste Sorting” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 1708. 
Steffen, W., K. Richardson, J. Rockström, S.E. Cornell, I. Fetzer, E.M. Bennett, R. Biggs, S.R. 
Carpenter, W. De Vries, C.A. De Wit, C. Folke, D. Gerten, J. Heinke, G.M. Mace, L.M. Persson, V. 
Ramanathan, B. Reyers, S. Sörlin. (2015). “Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a 
changing planet”, Science, Vol. 347 No. 736 pp. 1259855 
47 
==PAGE:49==
Rune Reedtz Nedergaard S135415
           04-08-2019 
Master’s Thesis 
Thaler, R.H., Sunstein, C.R. (2009) ”Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth and 
Happiness”, Penguin Group, New York, NY. 
Ulrich, K. T. , Eppinger, S. D. (2008) “Product Design and Development”. McGraw Hill International 
Edition 
Vlek, C., Steg, L. (2007) “Human behavior and environmental sustainability: problems, driving 
forces, and research topics”, J. Soc. Issues 63, 1-19 
48 
