==PAGE:1==
August 13, 2019
Master’s thesis
Detecting slope instabilities in Greenland
with Sentinel-1 Synthetic Aperture Radar
imagery
Author:
Mónica Coppo Frías (S173591)
Supervisors:
John Peter Merryman Boncori (DTU Space)
Kristian Svennevig (GEUS)
==PAGE:2==
“Fear tends to come from ignorance. Once I knew what the
problem was, it was just a problem, nothing to fear.“
Patrick Rothfuss, The Name of the Wind
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Landslides have been a proliferating source of study for the scientiﬁc community for many years,
intending to prevent and mitigate the eﬀects of this natural hazards on society. The appearance
of earth observation satellites in the late 21st century facilitates the study of landslides due to
its capacity to cover extensive areas. Sentinel-1 is a constellation of earth observation synthetic
aperture radar satellites, Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-1B, whose output data permits to apply ad-
vanced techniques to measure ground deformation for the detection of slope instabilities. Most
commonly used methods on Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data are Diﬀerential Interferometric
SAR (DInSAR) and oﬀset tracking for single-pair acquisitions, that can be used as building blocks
for multi-temporal techniques such as Small Baseline Time Series (SBAS) or Pixel-Oﬀset SBAS
(PO-SBAS).
This thesis studies the performance of multi-temporal (interferometric SBAS and PO-SBAS) and
single-pair results from DInSAR and oﬀset tracking, applied to two diﬀerent data types from
Sentinel-1, ascending track data, and descending track data which is available since the 29th of
June 2017. The project focuses on the North wall of Karrat Fjord in western Greenland, where on
the 17th of June 2017 a massive landslide generated a tsunami that hit the village of Nuugaatsiaq
resulting in human losses. The hard seasonal conditions in the area during winter, where single-pair
DInSAR and oﬀset tracking results are unsatisfactory, make summer periods the optimal to apply
multi-temporal techniques, where consecutive sets of single-pair results are available. Therefore,
this thesis focuses on summer acquisitions to apply multi-temporal methods, considering the two
diﬀerent data types of Sentinel-1 and seasonal conditions of the area. For ascending track data
intervals from mid-May until mid-June 2017 and from mid-June 2017 until September 2017 are
analyzed, to study deformation rates before and after Nuugaatsiaq landslide. For descending track
data, the summer period of 2017 from the end of July, and the summer period of 2018 are studied.
Among all the results obtained, the performance of SBAS and PO-SBAS on descending track is
in general considerably better than when using ascending track data. The results gathered with
SBAS are completed with PO-SBAS outputs in most of the cases, in areas where larger deformation
rates destroy the coherence of interferometric measurements.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Jonh Peter Merryman Boncori, for his patience and guidance
during this thesis, providing me with the support and knowledge that I needed at every moment.
I would like to thank also to my supervisor Kristian Svennevig, for his insights in the study of
landslides.
To all my friends that helped me during this master, a big thanks.
Especial mention to my
ﬂatmates and to my library-mates for giving me constructive opinions and proofreading my thesis.
And ﬁnally to my family, that motivates and helps me in everything I do. Thanks a lot to my
boyfriend Imanol, for being the best support I could have.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The area of interest: Karrat Fjord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Motivation and other studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Sentinel-1 data
6
3
Theory and methods
10
3.1
Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Atmospheric eﬀect
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.2
DInSAR processing of Sentinel-1 Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3
Phase unwrapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.4
Adaptive ﬁltering for phase unwrapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Oﬀset tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Geocoding from SAR to map geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Velocity maps generation: SBAS method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
SAR resolution and sensitivity indices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Study approach and parameters
23
4.1
DInSAR approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Oﬀset tracking approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
SAR resolution and sensitivity on Karrat Fjord
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Results
29
5.1
Results on ascending track . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.1.1
Before Nuugaatsiaq landslide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.2
After Nuugaatsiaq landslide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Results on descending track . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2.1
Summer 2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.2
Summer 2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Interpretation and Discussion
60
iii
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
0.0
7
Conclusion
62
A Appendix
63
A.1 Single-pair results before Nuugaatsiaq landslide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Single-pair results after Nuugaatsiaq landslide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.3 Single-pair results from summer 2017 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.4 Single-pair results from summer 2018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
List of Figures
78
List of Tables
82
Bibliography
83
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
0.0
Abbreviations
AOI Area of Interest
CR-InSAR Corner Reﬂectors InSAR
CRs Corner Reﬂectors
DEM digital elevation model
DInSAR Diﬀerential Interferometric SAR
EO Earth observations
GTC Geocoded Terrain Corrected
InSAR Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar
IW Interferometric Wide swath
LoS Line of sight
MCF minimum cost ﬂow
PO-SBAS Pixel-Oﬀset SBAS
PS-InSAR Permanent Scatterers InSAR
Ri Resolution Index
RTI repeat-track interferometry
SAR Synthetic Aperture Radar
SBAS Small Baseline Time Series
Si Sensitivity Index
SLC single look complex
TOPS Terrain observations by Progressive Scans
v
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Landslides occur throughout the world, under all climatic conditions, and they are the cause
of thousands of deaths, injuries and monetary losses. The prevention of these natural hazards
is a prominent ﬁeld of study where many diﬀerent techniques can be applied.
Mitigation of
unstable slopes is helpful to prepare under the possibility of landslides.
It is hence useful to
observe movement rates around unstable areas to determine possible risks.
Many landslides around Greenland has been detected along years, which are inﬂuenced by per-
mafrost and glacial ice. Some examples of signiﬁcant landslides are accompanied by tsunamis,
which caused severe damages in the areas where they are produced. On November 21st 2000, a
massive landslide occurred in the south coast of Nuuussuaq, central West Greenland, where rocks
falling entered the sea, creating a tsunami. Giant waves hit the village of Saqqaq destroying 10
boats Pedersen et al. (2002). Another important event occurred in Karrat Fjord on June 17th,
2017. A landslide generated a tsunami that heated the village of Nuugaatsiaq, West Greenland,
leaving 4 people missing, Gauthier et al. (2017). This natural hazard had a high media impact
due to its magnitude, making it the focus of many scientiﬁc studies (Gauthier et al. (2017), Paris
et al. (2019), Butler (2019)).
Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) methods exploit phase changes on the scattered
signals from the ground, which are routinely used at mid-latitude areas for the study of landslides.
Applying these methods in Greenland is challenging due to its tough seasonal conditions. The
climate is arctic along the north-central coast, characterized by long extreme winters and short
cool summers, with very variable scattering properties in the ground. So far, there is no published
study about InSAR methods applied on Greenland for the study of landslides, so that there are no
deﬁned steps to follow when using those methods in the country. Diﬀerent considerations have to
be established which adapt to the conditions and properties of the Area of Interest (AOI) to deﬁne
a suitable approach. The purpose of this thesis is to provide a method to detect slope instabilities
in Greenland with Sentinel-1 data using InSAR and oﬀset tracking. Single-pair results will be
used in multi-temporal approaches as SBAS or PO-SBAS.
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1. THE AREA OF INTEREST: KARRAT FJORD
1.1
1.1
The area of interest: Karrat Fjord
This thesis focus on the area of Karrat Fjord, where in June 2017 a landslide generated a tsunami.
The tsunami hit the village of Nuugaatsiaq, causing serious damage. This area is located on the
West coast of Greenland, near 71.640◦N and 52.344◦W, around 32 km northeast of Nuugaatsiaq
and 30 km southwest of Rink glacier (see ﬁgure 1).
The landslide occurred in the North wall of Karrat Fjord. This area can be observed in ﬁgure 2
(b). The mountain slope is shout facing, having a vertical relief greater than 2100 meters from sea
level to ridge-top and a horizontal distance of 3100 meters. The ridge-top area is covered by snow.
It is calculated that between 35 to 51 million of cubic meters released from the wall (Gauthier
et al. (2017)), during Nuugaatsiaq landslide generating a tsunami.
On this same area, earlier events took place as presented by Gauthier et al. (2017) in ﬁgure 2
(a). The West landslide was ﬁrstly observed on imagery back o to 16th of May 2016. The Main
and East landslides are spatially associated, but East landslide was ﬁrst observed much earlier, in
imagery dating back to 28th of April 2011 (Bessette (2017)).
Figure 1: Karrat Fjord, taken from Gauthier et al. (2017). The AOI is squared in white. Nuugaatsiaq
village is situated South-west from the AOI, and North-east there is Rink Glacier.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.2. MOTIVATION AND OTHER STUDIES
1.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Optical image of the North wall of Karrat Fjord, where Nuugaatsiaq landslide took place
taken from Gauthier et al. (2017). The West and East landslide are also seen. (b) Aerial image of the
North wall of Karrat Fjord.
1.2
Motivation and other studies
The use of Earth observations (EO) techniques can be very useful in support of landslide risk
reduction phase and prevention of disasters. Satellite remote sensed data is beneﬁcial to map
extensive areas.
InSAR is a remote sensing technique, which exploits the phase diﬀerence between two SAR acqui-
sitions over the same area at diﬀerent times. This technique is explained with details in section
3.1. InSAR measures one-dimensional displacement in the direction of the satellite’s line of sight
Paul A.Ronsen (2000), however some studies such as B. D. Bechor & A. Zebker (2006) developed
a new method to study two dimensional movement, one along with the line of sight and the other
along-track direction.
Within InSAR methods, DInSAR removes the topological contribution to isolate the deformation
term of the phase (see section 3.1). The capability of DInSAR to cover large areas and its precision,
detecting movement at sub-centimetre level makes this technique widely used to monitor ground
deformations and landslide detection.
Xie et al. (2016) applied DInSAR to monitor landslide
deformation on the Wudonge hydropower reservoir, studying the soil movement. The possible
atmospheric eﬀects are one of the major limitations on DInSAR (see section 3.1.1), this errors are
3
==PAGE:11==
1.2. MOTIVATION AND OTHER STUDIES
1.2
mitigated by using two advanced InSAR methods, Permanent Scatterers InSAR (PS-InSAR) and
Corner Reﬂectors InSAR (CR-InSAR) which remove eﬀects not associated with soil movement.
Most landslides collapse suddenly producing large deformations.
This characteristic is mostly
found on rocky or mountain areas. Large deformations in a small period of time produce phase
decorrelation (see 3.1), and the resulting measurements are noise-like, which is a limitation pointed
out in Xie et al. (2016). Decorrelated areas are unsuitable for measuring deformation amounts.
Even if landslide collapse is characterized by fast and large movement, slow deformation measure-
ments are handy when preventing landslide disaster. Studies such as Bejar et al. (2017), created a
methodology applied to an urban area of Cádiz in the Shout of Spain to create maps of slow-moving
landslides aﬀecting buildings, using ascending and descending Sentinel-1A SAR for InSAR. An ex-
ample of a study that uses single InSAR to measure displacement is in B. D. Bechor & A. Zebker
(2006), in which a two-dimensional movement is measured by exploiting the displacement vector
along the radar’s line of sight and along-track direction.
CR-InSAR is another InSAR technique widely used in recent years. CR-InSAR uses DInSAR and
artiﬁcial Corner Reﬂectors (CRs), which are devices installed in the area of interest with a strong
response in SAR acquisitions. CRs are useful for areas where the coherence is lost. An example of
a landslide study which uses this method is the one by Crosetto et al. (2013). The study describes
deformation monitoring of the Vallcebre landslide (Eastern Pyrenees, Spain), where the advantages
of corner reﬂectors came out due to its high sensitivity to deformations. However, the performance
of CRs is limited when historical analysis needs to be made, based on SAR acquisitions previous
to the installation of these devices. Apart from this limitation, the use of CR-InSAR is beneﬁcial
in mountain areas were vegetation, or other factors can cause decorrelation.
The most harmful eﬀects on DInSAR are produced by the atmosphere, resulting in decorrela-
tion and phase distortion (see section 3.1.1). Atmospheric eﬀects motivate the development of
new InSAR techniques. These eﬀects can be reduced when using multi-temporal interferometric
techniques, using long-temporal series of SAR acquisitions. Multi-temporal InSAR methods are
extensively used in landslide mapping; an example of such methods is PS-InSAR. This method
uses persistent scatters such as man-made structures, rocks, and outcrops, to have persistent mea-
surement points. Casagli et al. (2016) or Roberts et al. (2019) are examples of studies where
PS-InSAR, is used to monitor landslide areas. PS-InSAR analyzes large temporal stacks of SAR
data to provide annual velocities and time series of ground deformation, Casagli et al. (2016).
However, this method can be limited in mountain or rural areas, due to the lack of persistent
measurement points, Dong et al. (2016).
A diﬀerent multi-temporal technique which is being applied to many studies on landslides is SBAS,
(see section 3.4). This technique uses stacks of DInSAR single-pair results of the same location,
with a short separation in time and a small perpendicular baseline to mitigate the eﬀects of
temporal and spatial decorrelation, Andrew Sowter (2013). Zhang et al. (2018) applied this method
to slow-moving landslides in the area of Zhouqu region of China, where SBAS technique detected
ground deformation rates of 100 mm/year. Hu & Wu (2018) applied this same technique to a
landslide in the area of Danba County in China, getting deformation rates 120 mm/year to 300
4
==PAGE:12==
1.2. MOTIVATION AND OTHER STUDIES
1.2
mm/year.
Another common technique in the study of landslides is Oﬀset tracking. This method uses ampli-
tude information from SAR data to measure deformation along the azimuth and range directions
with sub-pixel precision, Zhang et al. (2015).
This estimation is made calculating the cross-
correlation coeﬃcient between acquisitions in regular matching windows (see section 3.2). Zhang
et al. (2015) applied this method to the Three Gorges Area, where it was useful to monitor large
displacement in the Shuping landslide. Oﬀset tracking depends on the resolution of the satellite
radar, which is promising thanks to the improvement made in recent years. A later study by
Jiehua Cai & Wang (2017) developed an adaptive oﬀset tracking method for Landslide Displace-
ment monitoring that was tested on Slumgullion landslide located in southwestern Colorado, USA.
This new method increases the accuracy of displacement, which can be interesting to use in future
studies to measure landslide’s displacement. Multi-temporal analysis can be implemented on Oﬀ-
set tracking results. PO-SBAS was proposed by Casu et al. (2011), to generate displacement time
series in areas where large deformation rates are typical. This method can complete deformation
measurement that can not be tracked by interferometric SBAS, where large movements destroy
coherence.
This thesis builds on this previous work made around landslide events. According to the conditions
of the AOI described in section 1.1 and taken into account the available software for processing,
the thesis focus on DInSAR, for which SBAS is applied to measure multi-temporal deformation
rates. Oﬀset tracking is also used to exploit the amplitude of SAR acquisitions, to calculate the
multi-temporal deformation rate with PO-SBAS. These two approaches are compared to see how
they can complete each other’s information. PO-SBAS is suitable to measure large deformation
rates and interferometric SBAS have sub-centimetre precision.
5
==PAGE:13==
2
Sentinel-1 data
The data analyzed in this thesis is taken from Sentinel-1, with Interferometric Wide swath (IW)
mode, which acquires data with a 250 km swath width, with a single look spatial resolution of 5×20
meters at a wavelength of 5.55 cm, and an incidence angle between 30 to 46 degrees. IW mode
captures data of three sub-swaths using Terrain observations by Progressive Scans (TOPS) SAR
acquisition mode (Nestor Yague-Martinez (2016)). A graphic representation of this acquisition
mode can be seen in ﬁgure 3.
Figure 3: Scan pattern of Sentinel-1 IW mode as in Nestor Yague-Martinez (2016). The overlap between
burst in azimuth direction and between sub-swaths in range direction are represented.
Each sub-swath image consists of a series of bursts, where each burst has been processed as
a separate single look complex (SLC) image.
Each burst has an overlap area in the azimuth
direction with the consecutive burst. For consecutive sub-swath, the case is the same in the range
direction, where there is an overlap area between sub-swaths. The burst location for the 3 diﬀerent
6
==PAGE:14==
2.0
sub-swaths for Sentinel-1 descending track 25, together to the satellite ﬂight direction on Karrat
Fjord, can be seen in ﬁgure 4. Here, the coverage of each burst and sub-swath can be observed.
The overlap areas in the azimuth and range direction are also visible.
Figure 4: (a) Burst location of each sub-swath for ascending track 90. (b) Ascending track ﬂight direction
of the satellite over Karrat Fjord.
The burst location for the 3 diﬀerent sub-swaths for Sentinel-1 ascending track 90, and the ﬂight
direction of the satellite over Karrat Fjord, can be seen in ﬁgure 5.
Figure 5: (a) Burst location of each sub-swath for descending track 90.
(b) Descending track ﬂight
direction of the satellite over Karrat Fjord .
Example of SLC acquisitions can be seen in ﬁgure 6 in which the pixel spacing is 2.33 meters
in range direction and 13.85 meters in the azimuth direction. These examples include track 25
7
==PAGE:15==
2.0
of Sentinel 1 on 2017/07/29, ﬁgure 6 (a), above the area of Karrat Fjord. Two diﬀerent bursts
for the same sub-swath can be seen, which correspond to IW3, burst 3 and 4 in ﬁgure 6. The
overlap area is also appreciated: the bottom area of the ﬁrst burst corresponds to the top area of
the second burst. Figure 6 (b) shows an SLC acquisition above Karrat Fjord on 2017/06/03 from
Sentinel-1 ascending track, corresponding to IW2, burst 6 and 7. Figure 6 (b) appears upside
down and 6 (a) is reversed with respect the true location of Karrat Fjord, this is a consequence
of the diﬀerent satellite ﬂying directions and acquisition geometries. In ﬁgure 6 (b) the overlap
between burst is also seen. Correct processing needs to deal with the overlapping areas, as is
explained in section3.1.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6: (a) Descending track SLC image over Karrat Fjord. This area correspond to IW3, burst 3 and
4. (b) Ascending track SLC image over Karrat Fjord. This area correspond to IW2, burst 6 and 7.
The revisit time of Sentinel-1 is 6-12 days.
Sentinel-1 consist on a two satellite consteltion,
Sentinel-1A and Sentinel-1B, a revisit time of 6 days is possible when observations from diﬀerent
satellites are taken. Examples of the data ﬁles that can be acquired from Copernicus Open Acces
hub can be seen below:
S1A_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161117T204739_20161117T204806_013987_01688C_D4A7.SAFE
S1B_IW_SLC__1SSH_20161111T204657_20161111T204724_002916_004F24_1185.SAFE
The ﬁrst ﬁle is acquired by Sentinel 1A and the second one by Sentinel 1B. The acquisition mode
is indicated by IW term, which corresponds to wide swath mode. The starting and ending time of
the acquisition is also indicated in the name of the ﬁle.
In addition to the SLC images, a digital elevation model (DEM) is needed to remove the topo-
graphic contribution (see section 3.1). Two diﬀerent DEMs are used in this thesis. The ﬁrst one
8
==PAGE:16==
2.0
(see Fig.7 (a)) is used for the period before Nuugaatsiaq landslide happened (1.1) taken from Arctic
DEM Mosaic with a 10 meters resolution, where the elevation is given in meters and referenced
to the WGS84 ellipsoid. The second one (see Fig.7 (b)) is used for the period after Nuugaatsiaq
landslide, whit a 5-meter resolution referenced to the WGS84 ellipsoid, modiﬁed for the area of
the landslide, where 200 meters of the cliﬀfell.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: (a) Arctic DEM before Nuugaatsiaq landslide of the North wall of Karrat Fjord. (b) Corrected
Arctic DEM after Nuugaatsiaq landslide for the 200 meters of the cliﬀthat fell down.
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Theory and methods
This thesis aims to provide a method which can detect ground movement related to slope instabil-
ities and landslides in Greenland. To measure this deformation, velocity maps are generates with
SBAS (3.4), with a selection of unwrapped diﬀerential interferograms (3.1, 3.1.3). Seasonal con-
ditions or fast movement can produce temporal and geometrical decorrelation. SBAS can reduce
these eﬀects using SAR image combinations with a short temporal baseline and a small perpendic-
ular baseline (Casagli et al. (2016)). Also, oﬀset tracking single-pair results are used to implement
PO-SBAS to cover the areas were fast movement occurs Casu et al. (2011). The following steps
are deﬁned in the processing stage of DInSAR and oﬀset tracking to implement a robust SBAS
and PO-SBAS estimation:
1. DInSAR single-pair are processed, combining SLC acquisitions with a temporal baseline of
6 days between them.
2. The diﬀerent single-pair results are analyzed to see where the seasonal or atmospheric eﬀects
have an impact, making results too noisy.
3. Select results where unwrapping can be applied, and process diﬀerential interferograms with
longer temporal baselines if necessary (12, 18, 24 or 30 days).
4. Oﬀset tracking is applied to cover the information where unwrapping does not give outputs.
The temporal baselines for oﬀset tracking are 6,12, 18, 24 or 30 days.
5. Calculate velocity deformation maps for each period with SBAS technique building blocks
of unwrapped interferograms or oﬀset tracking single-pair results using PO-SBAS.
Each method has a diﬀerent accuracy and capacity to measure motion magnitude. The idea to use
diﬀerent methods is to cover the extent of possibilities in the detection of movement. The following
sections explain in details these methods. The fundamental theory of interferometry and DInSAR
processing, together with the unwrapping method that is used in this study, can be seen in section
3.1. Section 3.1.1 explain the possible atmospheric eﬀects on interferometric results. Section 3.2
explain oﬀset tracking processing method. Finally, section 3.4 presents SBAS and PO-SBAS.
10
==PAGE:18==
3.1. SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INTERFEROMETRY
3.1
3.1
Synthetic Aperture Radar Interferometry
SAR Interferometry is an imaging technique which uses SLC images, acquired from two diﬀerent
passes through the same area with a certain time diﬀerence to measure deformation/motion. The
measurements are on the direction of satellite’s Line of sight (LoS). This technique is know as
repeat-track interferometry (RTI), see ﬁgure 8 (Paul A.Ronsen (2000)). Measurements are made
by exploiting the diﬀerence in phase of the two SLC images. The interferometric phase has con-
tributions from several sources, topography, φtopo, the contributions from a ﬂat Earth elevation
reference, φflat, the contribution due to displacement/motion φdis, the contributions due to atmo-
spheric eﬀect, φatm, and a noise term due to uncorrelated areas, φdecorr. The interferometric phase
is a combination of these terms, as in equation 1. This phase is related to the diﬀerence in range
within passes, ∆R, as in equation 2.
φint = φtopo + φflat + φdis + φatm + φdecorr (1)
φint = −4π
λ

R1
0 −R2
0

= 4π
λ · ∆R
(2)
Figure 8: Geometry of RTI interferometry. R1
0 cor-
responds to the slant range of the ﬁrst pass and R2
0
corresponds to the slant range of the second pass.
The only contribution in which we are interested in measuring deformation is φdis. If the ﬂight
pass is repeated perfectly, the interferogram is not sensitive to topography, and we can isolate the
radial motion. Hence, the deformation phase is as in equation 3 which is also sensitive to the
projection of the 3D deformation onto the radar LoS vector, −−→
LoS =
−→
R1
0 /|
−→
R1
0 |.
11
==PAGE:19==
3.1. SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INTERFEROMETRY
3.1
φdis = −4π
λ

R1
0 −R2
0

= 4π
λ · −→
D · −−→
LoS
(3)
Figure 9: Geometry of RTI in the case of zero base-
line term, where the second pass is made at the same
point of the ﬁrst pass. −→
D , represents the displace-
ment vector.
If the displacement rate is deﬁned as dLoS = R1
0 −R2
0, and using 3, it can be related to the phase
displacement as in equation 4. With this deﬁnition, negative values of dLoS indicate movement
away from the radar and positive values of dLoS indicate movement towards the radar.
dLoS = R1
0 −R2
0 = −−→
D · −−→
LoS = −λ
4π
(4)
In case of a steady deformation, the changes in phase are proportional to the temporal baseline
δt = t2 −t1, that is deﬁned as the time within acquisitions. The displacement rate can be related
to velocity as in equation 5.
dLoS = δt · vLoS
(5)
The previous situation is considering zero-baseline term, which is not very usual. The normal
baselines of the two interferometric passes are not the same, and measurements in RTI have
a topographic contribution. The geometry and formulation for the topographic contribution is
given in ﬁgure 10 and equation 6 respectively. To remove the topographic contribution in the
interferometric phase, DInSAR technique is used.
12
==PAGE:20==
3.1. SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INTERFEROMETRY
3.1
φtopo = −4π
λ
Bn
R1
0 sin(θlook)h
(6)
Figure 10: Perpendicular baseline Bn geometry for
the case when the passes are not equal. The interfer-
ometric phase has a topographic contribution.
The topographic contribution is derived from another data source, such as a DEM of the area,
which can be calculated thanks to travel path variations as a function of the satellite position and
time of the acquisition (Alessandro Ferretti (2007)).
The changes measured in the previous situations are given module 2π, the phase fringes correspond
to a 2π phase change, i.e. all the values are in an interval of (−π,π], which is the result given by a
wrapped phase. The deformation amount in this fringe depends on the wavelength of the satellite,
the deformation in a phase fringe between the two SAR acquisitions is of λ/2. An essential factor
in interferometric results is the critical baseline. The critical baseline is the aperture separation
perpendicular to the look direction at which the interferometric correlation becomes zero. The
critical baseline is deﬁned as in equation 7,
Bn,crit ∝λ
∆Rtan(θlook −S)
(7)
where θlook is the SAR look angle and S is the terrain slope over the radar. When the critical
baseline is reached the relative phase of scatterers across a resolution element changes by a full
cycle, consequently coherence is destroyed. In our case, it is important to point out, that if the
terrain slope S is close to the SAR look angle, the coherence is also destroyed, even if the baseline
is very small.
The interferometric coherence is deﬁned as in equation 8, where zi represent the SAR return at
each pass (Paul A.Ronsen (2000)).
13
==PAGE:21==
3.1. SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INTERFEROMETRY
3.1
γ =
E(z1z2)∗
q
E(|z1|2)
q
E(|z2|2)
(8)
The coherence magnitude |γ| is a statistical indicator which measures similarity giving values
between [0,1] interval, where values close to one represent high similarity, and values close to zero
represent low similarity. For high coherent areas, the uncorrelated term in the interferometric
phase deﬁned in equation 1 can be set to zero.
3.1.1
Atmospheric eﬀect
In equation 1, there is an atmospheric contribution for the interferometric signal, φatm. In repeat
pass interferometry, the atmosphere can aﬀect the results, mainly caused bu the troposphere and
the ionosphere. The troposphere slows down electromagnetic waves depending on its humidity. On
the other hand, ionosphere tends to accelerate waves when they propagate, proportionally to the
total electron content of the ionosphere. These eﬀects are explained with details in Ding Xiao-Li
(2008).
Tropospheric eﬀects are quite interesting in the study of DInSAR results. When interferometric
phase fringes are correlated with topographic height, the results can be interpreted as tropospheric
contribution instead of deformation, as presented in Beauducel et al. (2000).
3.1.2
DInSAR processing of Sentinel-1 Data
In section 2, the TOPS SAR acquisition mode was presented. This mapping technique requires
special consideration in the processing of DInSAR due to the sensitivity of the interferometric
phase to azimuth registration. An overview of how DInSAR processing of Sentinel-1 data works
is presented in this section, as proposed by Nestor Yague-Martinez (2016).
For DInSAR processing, two acquisitions taken at diﬀerent dates are necessary, which are referred
to as master image and slave image, together with a DEM to remove the topographic contribution.
Master and slave SLC data products are selected at a burst level.
A coregistration process is implemented. Coregistration is an essential step for the accurate de-
termination of phase diﬀerence and noise reduction, which consists of aligning the two images
acquired in diﬀerent passes. The ﬁrst step is to use the external DEM and orbit information to
perform a geometric coresgistration. Then, a reﬁnement of the shifts exploiting the SLC images is
implemented, by computing the oﬀsets in range and azimuth between master and slave, to make
the slave perfectly match the master image. When the local oﬀsets have been estimated for a num-
ber of small areas, a polynomial is generated which is used to resampling the slave SLC to match
the geometry of the master SLC (Alessandro Ferretti (2007)). When misalignment occurs, the
14
==PAGE:22==
3.1. SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR INTERFEROMETRY
3.1
interferogram can present phase jumps between burst, being problematic for phase unwrapping. If
this happens, the oﬀset reﬁnement can be avoided, and only the DEM and orbits are used for the
coregistration process. The misalignments in the coregistration step occur mostly in the azimuth
direction.
Diﬀerent burst and sub-swaths have to be put together. This step is known as mosaicking. The
mosaicking process is performed by joining at a speciﬁc azimuth point of the overlap area between
bursts of the same swath or joining at a certain range point of the overlap area of the diﬀerent
sub-swaths. The data from only one of the burst is taken in the overlap regions between burst and
sub-swaths (Sentinel-1 processing with GAMMA software (2017)).
When the mosaic of the interferogram is generated the ﬂat Earth phase, and DEM simulated phase
can be subtracted. The last step is to apply multi-looking. Multi-looking consists of applying a
local spatial ﬁlter to the complex interferogram. An area of the pixel is taken as a box-ﬁltering,
in which the values are averaged.
3.1.3
Phase unwrapping
DInSAR phase diﬀerence result is wrapped into the interval (π,π], i.e φwrapped = mod(φ,2π),
leading into an ambiguity problem. Phase unwrapping consists of calculating the correct integer
number, N that needs to be added to each phase measurement, as presented in equation 9. This
way, the correct slant range values can be calculated.
φ = φwrapped + 2πN
(9)
Phase unwrapping is a delicate process, which can be problematic when discontinuities or inconsis-
tencies due to noise, or in low coherence areas are encountered. The loss of coherence can generate
phase jumps greater than π radians between neighbouring pixels, causing phase unwrapping errors.
Before proceeding with the phase unwrapping, it is recommendable to mask low coherence values
and smaller areas in which we are interested, for example, avoiding water areas.
The unwrapping method that is used in this thesis is minimum cost ﬂow (MCF) as proposed by
Chen & Zebker (March 2000). The MCF algorithm is an optimization technique in which the
unwrapping is formulated as a network ﬂow problem. Diﬀerent ﬂow arcs connect each pixel and
are associated with the phase gradient in the wrapped interferogram; the ﬂow in a particular arc
represents the diﬀerence in cycles between it’s associated unwrapped and wrapped phase gradient.
The goal of this algorithm is to ﬁnd the feasible ﬂow with the smallest total cost, using the
diﬀerence in arc cost functions. The problem to minimize the magnitude of ﬂow cost on an arc is
described on the minimization objective function from equation 10:
minimize
nX
i,j
w(x)
i,j |∆φ(x)
i,j −∆ψ(x)
i,j | +
X
i,j
w(y)
i,j |∆φ(y)
i,j −∆ψ(y)
i,j |
o
(10)
15
==PAGE:23==
3.2. OFFSET TRACKING
3.2
where w(x)
i,j and w(y)
i,j are assigned weights to particular gradient diﬀerences and ∆φ(x)
i,j , ∆ψ(x)
i,j , ∆φ(y)
i,j ,
∆ψ(y)
i,j are the x and y components of the unwrraped and wrapped phase respectively. For more
details about MCF method see Chen & Zebker (March 2000).
3.1.4
Adaptive ﬁltering for phase unwrapping
Unwrapping is a delicate process which can be very aﬀected by phase noise. The deformation on a
DInSAR interferogram determine part of the local fringe rate, and in regions of large deformations,
the phase noise and local fringe rate increase considerably. These factors can damage unwrapping,
and Goldstein & Werner (1998) proposed an adaptive ﬁltering algorithm sensitive to the local
phase noise and fringe rate. In this ﬁlter, the interferogram is divided into overlapping patches to
compute the power spectrum, Z(u,v), for each patch. The response of the adaptive ﬁlter, H(u,v)
is computed from the power spectrum as in equation 11.
H(u,v) = |Z(u,v)α|
(11)
The exponent α is the ﬁltering coeﬃcient for which useful values lie between 0.2 and 1. For more
details on the adaptive ﬁltering, see Goldstein & Werner (1998).
3.2
Oﬀset tracking
Oﬀset tracking technique can measure large deformations along both, the azimuth and the range
directions. This method considers the cross-correlation coeﬃcient of the real valued image intensity.
A correlation ﬁeld is built by moving a small matching window in a search window from another
image and calculating the cross-correlation for each window shift. For a matching window of M×N
the normalized cross-correlation is deﬁned as in Jiehua Cai & Wang (2017) in equation 12.
C =
|PM
i=1
PN
j=1(mi,j −µm)(si,j −µs)|
qPM
i=1
PN
j=1(mi,j −µm)2
qPM
i=1
PN
j=1(si,j −µs)2
(12)
with, mi,j and si,j are intensity values at pixel (i,j) within the the ﬁeld of the master image and
the slave image respectively, and µm, µs are the mean of the correlation ﬁeld of master and slave
respectively.
To build the correlation ﬁeld, the small matching window moves from the master image, in a
search window to the slave image. The matching window from the master image and the search
window from the slave image can have the same or diﬀerent sizes, in the case of diﬀerent sizes,
the matching window has to be smaller than the search window. Then, the cross-correlation is
16
==PAGE:24==
3.3. GEOCODING FROM SAR TO MAP GEOMETRY
3.3
calculated for each window shift. The correlation is assigned to the centre pixel of the overlap
between the two windows for each iteration, and the result is a correlation ﬁeld. The distance
between the maximum correlation point and the ﬁeld’s centre is the oﬀset estimates of this location
(centre pixel). For purposes of eﬃciency, these calculations are made in spatial frequency, then
the resulting correlation ﬁeld at the ﬁled centre is translated to the ground range and azimuth
dimension, given the range and azimuth displacement.
An schematic representation of the correlation ﬁeld can be seen in ﬁgure 11 as represented by
Remko de Lange & Murray (2007). In ﬁgure 11 (a) the search window over the matching window
is represented, in the centre of the search window, a correlation value has been assigned to the
centre pixel in the search window. In ﬁgure 11 (b), the whole correlation ﬁeld has been determined,
and the correlation surface can be seen, the distance d between the centre of the search window,
P, and the location of the correlation peak, P ′, is the estimated oﬀset for location P .
Figure 11: Schematic representation of a correlation ﬁeld as given by Remko de Lange & Murray (2007):
(a) shows the search window around the matching window, a correlation values has been determined and
assigned to the center pixel. (b) Correlation ﬁeld where the correlation surface is represented.
3.3
Geocoding from SAR to map geometry
The results from DInSAR (3.1) and oﬀset tracking (3.2) are given in the radar geometry, range-
azimuth coordinates. Geocoding is the process of resampling an image from SAR geometry to a
regular grid in map geometry of geographic coordinates.
A DEM, which is given in the map geometry, is used for this transformation to generate Geocoded
Terrain Corrected (GTC) products. An eﬃcient method to geocode is to use a geocoding lookup
table between SAR geometry and map geometry. The generation of the lookup table is based on
17
==PAGE:25==
3.4. VELOCITY MAPS GENERATION: SBAS METHOD
3.4
the orbital state vectors, the SAR image and the DEM parameters (GAMMA Remote Sensing AG
(2017)).
An example of interferometric coherence in SAR and map geometry can be seen in ﬁgure 12.
Figure 12 left corresponds to SAR geometry, while ﬁgure 12 right corresponds to the image in map
geometry after geocoding has been implemented.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
2800
3000
3200
3400
3600
3800
4000
4200
4400
4600
Figure 12: Left: Interferometric coherence on SAR Geometry over the area of Karrat Fjord. Right: Same
interferometric coherence result resampled to map geometry.
3.4
Velocity maps generation: SBAS method
SBAS method is used to calculate mean deformation velocity maps over a long period of time, which
permits to study the temporal evolution of the displacement for a particular area. This method
uses a series of unwrapped interferograms, which are characterized by a small spatial separation,
measure with the perpendicular baseline, and a small temporal baseline between acquisitions.
On this thesis SBAS is applied as in Andrew Sowter (2013). Each interferogram is considered
separately selecting an unwrapped pixel above the coherence threshold, see section 3.1.3. Being
(i,j) the row and column coordinates, the equation for the kth interferogram that is used to
estimate the velocity vLoS,ij and height error δhij at each point is:
φk
ij = −4π
λ
 
δtkvLoS,ij +
Bk
n
Rijsinθij
δhij
!
(13)
18
==PAGE:26==
3.4. VELOCITY MAPS GENERATION: SBAS METHOD
3.4
where φk
ij is the unpwraped phase, λ is the radar wavelength, δtk is the time diﬀerence between
interferograms (temporal baseline), Bk
n is the perpendicular baseline, Rij is the slant range to the
target and θij is the incidence angle of the radar with the gravity normal. Equation 13 combines
the displacement term, previously deﬁned by equation 4 and the topographic term, deﬁned in
equation 6 (see section 3.1).
Tho estimate the linear velocity vLoS,ij and height error δhij from equation 13, a Least Squares
inversion is performed. The forward problem, given N unwrapped interferograms is deﬁned as
follows:


φ(1)
ij
φ(2)
ij...
φ(N)
ij


|     {z     }
d
= −4π
λ


δt1
B1
⊥
Rijsinθij
1
δt2
B2
⊥
Rijsinθij
1
...
...
...
δtN
BN
⊥
Rijsinθij
1


|                      {z                      }
G


vLoSij
δhij
e


|       {z       }
m
where e correspond to the estimation error. With the deﬁnition of forward problem, the least
squares inversion to estimate m is given by m = (GTG)−1GTd.
The SBAS technique can also be adapted to use it with oﬀset tracking results. This was previously
done by Casu et al. (2011), where they called this approach PO-SBAS. Oﬀset tracking measures
the deformation in azimuth or range direction, d, as presented in section 3.2. The displacement
rate, d = R1
0 −R2
0 , measured by single-pair oﬀset tracking results can be related with the phase
as in 14:
d = −λ
4πφ
(14)
Using equation 13 and removing the baseline term, the PO-SBAS problem to estimate the mean
velocity of deformation is proposed as follows:
d(k)
ij = δtkvij
(15)
where the mean velocity, vij in the azimuth or range direction, can be calculated with a least
square inversion, deﬁning the forward problem:
19
==PAGE:27==
3.5. SAR RESOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY INDICES
3.5


d(1)
ij
d(2)
ij...
d(N)
ij


|     {z     }
d
=


δt1
1
δt2
1
...
...
δtN
1


|        {z        }
G
"
vij
e
#
|  {z  }
m
For each point (i,j), the number of layers (k) with an unwrapped phase is diﬀerent. If we deﬁne m
as the number of layers selected for point (i,j), the value of m has to be at least, the same as the
number of elements in the model vector m. As proposed in Andrew Sowter (2013), a threshold M
can be set over the number of selected layers m, so that only points (i,j) where m > M are used in
the analysis. The selection of threshold M has to be a trade-oﬀbetween reducing uncertainty in
the solution and increasing spatial distributions of points. When M is very small, the uncertainty
of the solution increases. If M is very big, the spatial distribution of the solution can present many
gaps, since it is unlike that all the points (i,j) have a big number of layers k.
3.5
SAR resolution and sensitivity indices
The analysis of interferometry in the study of ground deformation is related to the conditions of the
terrain, the SAR viewing geometry, and the terrain slope inclination and direction. Quantiﬁcation
of these characteristics can be very useful when deformation on the ground want to be analyzed,
to detect possible signatures non-related to deformation. Two useful parameters that can be used
for the analysis are the Resolution Index (Ri) and the Sensitivity Index (Si).
The Ri as the ratio between the slant range (SAR geometry distance) and the ground range (Earth
surface distance). This parameter is calculated as in equation (Notti et al. (2014)).
Ri = ρr
ρg
(16)
20
==PAGE:28==
3.5. SAR RESOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY INDICES
3.5
Notti et al. (2014) tested this ratio resulting in 4 diﬀerent classes:
1. Ri ≤0: No visibility due to layover.
2. 0 < Ri < 0.3: Poor visibility. In this case, the topog-
raphy of the area is primarily responsible for inter-
ferometric measurements. Foreshortening eﬀects can
occur when the values are close to 0.
3. 0.3 < Ri < 0.5: Acceptable visibility. The topogra-
phy plays a moderate role in interferometric measure-
ments; hence, the results depend primarily on defor-
mation.
4. 0.5 < Ri < 1: Good visibility. Interferometric mea-
surements mostly depend on deformation.
5. Ri = 1: No visibility due to shadow.
Figure 13: Geometric representation of
the slant range ρr and the ground range
ρg
An schematic representation of this eﬀects can be seen in ﬁgure 14. Figure 14 (a) shows layover
eﬀect, in the case of Ri equal 0. Figure 14 (b) is a representation of foreshortening eﬀect, this
heppens when the values of Ri are close to 0. The shadowing eﬀect can be seen in ﬁgure 14 (c),
which is the case when the value of Ri is equal 1.
Figure 14: Diﬀerent possibilities of distortion produced on SAR acquisitions: (a) Layover eﬀect (b)
Foreshortening eﬀect and (c) Shadow eﬀect.
The Si index measures the steepest slope direction onto the radar’s LoS. If nLoS is the unity vector
in the direction of the radar LoS and nS is the unity vector of the steepest slope direction, the Si
index is deﬁned as in equation 17.
21
==PAGE:29==
3.5. SAR RESOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY INDICES
3.5
Si = nLoS · nS
(17)
Depending on the values of Si 3 classes can be diﬀerentiated:
1. Si = 0: The steepest slope is orthogonal to the radar’s LoS.
2. Si = 1: The steepest slope is parallel to the LoS, sloping towards the radar.
3. Si = −1: The steepest slope is parallel to the LoS sloping away from the radar.
22
==PAGE:30==
4
Study approach and parameters
The diﬀerent methods presented in section 3 are implemented with GAMMA software and MAT-
LAB. GAMMA software is a powerful tool to process SAR raw data into displacement maps
products. Hence, this tool is used to process DInSAR single-pair results, followed by the calcu-
lation of the unwrapped phase and oﬀset tracking, methods described in sections 3.1, 3.1.3 and
3.2 respectively. To solve the SBAS and PO-SBAS problems described in section 3.4 MATLAB is
used which is a powerful numerical analysis environment, including matrix calculations.
The combination study of both DInSAR and oﬀset tracking results is made due to the diﬀerent
ability to measure motion. Interferometric results measure motion magnitudes of the fraction of
millimetres with an accuracy of the fraction of centimetres (Paul A.Ronsen (2000)). In the case
of oﬀset tracking results, the motion magnitude that can measure is of centimetres, with accuracy
around 1/10 of the pixel spacing (Remko de Lange & Murray (2007)), making this accuracy change
depending on the direction of the measurements, in range or azimuth.
4.1
DInSAR approach
For DInSAR results, multi-looking is applied to reduce speckle. The spatial resolution of Sentinel 1
data IW mode is 5 meters in range and 20 meters in azimuth (see section 2), then a proportionality
of 4 by 1 times box for multi-looking ﬁltering is appropriate to have less noise and an approximate
square pixel spacing after being converted from slant range to ground range. In this thesis, multi
looking is made with 12 range looks, and 3 azimuth looks.
In the SBAS method, temporal and spatial continuity are necessary (see 3.4). Spatial continuity
is fundamental to unwrap the phase, since the loss of coherence can generate phase jumps greater
than π radians between adjacent pixels, causing errors on phase unwrapping. This happens when
the deformation of a phase fringe between two SAR acquisitions overtake the value λ
2 ≈2.75 cm
(see section 3.1).
The adaptive ﬁlter described in section 3.1.4 is applied before unwrapping with a ﬁltering coeﬃcient
of α equals 0.8. Moreover, an appropriate reference point is necessary. In this thesis, the reference
point to start the unwrapping (see section 3.1.3) is taken as the maximum coherence point in the
selected results for SBAS. Some visual inspection is also necessary to choose a point close enough
23
==PAGE:31==
4.1.
APPROACH
4.2
to the features that we want to study. Taking this into account, the starting point was selected on
52.509◦W and 71.6456◦N where coherence has a value above 0.8. The unwrapping is made on SAR
geometry, which is diﬀerent for each interferometric results. To be consistent with the unwrapping
starting point, the starting latitude and longitude in geographic coordinates need to be converted
to the corresponding SAR pixel coordinates using the speciﬁc parameters of the radar geometry.
To proceed with the MCF problem, the weights are deﬁned by the interferometric coherence.
Moreover, the water and snow areas need to be avoided for a successful unwrapping, due to their
unstable scattering properties, which produce noise areas. Besides, the areas with low coherence
are masked. In the unwrapping, only the points with a coherence above 0.25 are taken. A mask
around the part of the cliﬀin which we are interested is applied, taking only the points with
coherence above 0.25 (see ﬁgure 15).
Figure 15: Left: Interferometric phase before masking the area of interest.Rigth: Interferometric phase
after masking the area of interest.
Coherence is maintained mostly during pairs of images within the same season, and when the
temporal baseline is small, 6 or 12 days, however, larger temporal baselines of 18 or 24 days
are also used. To apply SBAS, the regularity of the period is essential, selecting a sequence of
acquisitions where there are not long temporal gaps in the data. The values of the perpendicular
baseline, Bn, are expected to be below 200 meters (Andrew Sowter (2013)).
In addition, the
threshold M = 70% is set as the minimum number of layers necessary to solve SBAS, as described
in section 3.4.
The SBAS problem is solved, taking into account GAMMA software convention, where negative
values mean a movement away from the radar and positive values mean movement towards the
radar, (see section 3.1).
24
==PAGE:32==
4.2. OFFSET TRACKING APPROACH
4.2
4.2
Oﬀset tracking approach
Oﬀset tracking results in this thesis are using the same matching window and search window. The
size of the matching window has to be enlarged by the number of pixels in range direction and
azimuth direction, again the range to azimuth ratio of 1 by 4 pixels related to the resolution is
taken into account (Remko de Lange & Murray (2007) ). Here, three matching window sizes are
tested, 16×64, 32×128 and 64×256 referring to azimuth pixel by range pixels. The step window
chosen for the study is 3×12, corresponding to 41.43 meters in azimuth and 27.84 meters in range.
The oﬀset is estimated in azimuth and range using intensity tracking with a cross-correlation
threshold of 0.05, points with a value below this threshold are masked out. The results for the
diﬀerent matching windows can be seen in ﬁgure 16, in this case, the range oﬀset tracking estimate
is provided.
Figure 16 (a) shows the results for a 64 × 256 matching window, where the values are smooth as
it seems that the peak values are averaged out. Figure 16 (b), uses a matching window 32 × 128,
the features are better seen than in the previous case, and the peak values of the cross-correlation
ﬁeld are present. Finally, ﬁgure 16 (c) present results using a matching window of 16 × 64, where
the spatial pattern becomes noise, and the cross-correlation peaks are diﬃcult to identify.
Figure 16: Oﬀset tracking results with diﬀerent matching windows sizes: (a) 64 × 256, (b) 32 × 128 and
(c) 16 × 64.
25
==PAGE:33==
4.3. SAR RESOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ON KARRAT FJORD
4.3
Figure 17 shows an example of the range results (ﬁgure 17 (a)) compared to the azimuth results
(ﬁgure 17 (b)). Azimuth results are noisier than range results, due to the limited azimuth resolution
of TOPS acquisition mode. The accuracy of both directions are also diﬀerent, a tenth of the pixel
spacing in the range direction is around 0.23 meters, while for azimuth oﬀset tracking it is around
1.38 meters.
Therefore, only results from range oﬀset tracking are presented in the following
sections.
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: (a) Example of range oﬀset tracking single-pair result. (b) Example of azimuth oﬀset tracking
single-pair result.
From the previous observation, the best results are for range oﬀset tracking direction with a
matching window of 32 × 128 corresponding to 441.92 meters in azimuth and 298.18 meters in
range. The temporal continuity is also important as for the interferometric case, long gaps in the
data are avoided, taking acquisitions over the same temporal season. The threshold for PO-SBAS
is also set as a threshold M = 70%, where points with a smaller percentage of layers with data are
not solved (see section 3.4).
The PO-SBAS is solved, taking into account the GAMMA software convention where negative
values meaning movement away from the radar and positive values mean movement towards the
radar as deﬁned in section 3.4.
4.3
SAR resolution and sensitivity on Karrat Fjord
Ri and Si indices are calculated over the area of Karrat Fjord, focusing on the North wall where
Nuugaatsiaq landslide took place, courtesy of A. Kusk, DTU.
26
==PAGE:34==
4.3. SAR RESOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ON KARRAT FJORD
4.3
Figure 18 shows the results for Sentinel-1 ascending track 90 of Ri index (18 (a)) and Si index (18
(b)). Many areas on the cliﬀhave Ri equal or close to zero meaning low or non visibility, mostly
in the West part. The east part has better values for Ri, which are close or above 0.5 meaning
good visibility. The Si index on ﬁgure Ri index 18 (a), shows many areas in which Si is close to
zero, meaning that the steepest slope is orthogonal to the LoS, which can produce decorrelation
in some cases (see section 3.1).
(a)
(b)
Figure 18: (a)Ri index from ascending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord.
(b)Si index from
ascending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord.
The results from Sentinel-1 descending track 25 are more promising. Figure 19 (a) shows that the
value of Ri index is between 0.5 and 1 in most of the cliﬀ, meaning good visibility, apart from some
localized areas with Ri equal 0. The Si index on ﬁgure 19 (a) present a uniform area, with values
between -0.5 and 0, meaning that the cliﬀis sloping away from the radar. There are some areas
with values close to 0 (orthogonal to radar’s LoS). The north-west part close to the top of the cliﬀ
is one example with Si close to 0, this value is also observable in small localized areas around the
cliﬀ.
27
==PAGE:35==
4.3. SAR RESOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ON KARRAT FJORD
4.3
(a)
(b)
Figure 19: (a)Ri index from descending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord. (b)Si index from from
descending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord.
28
==PAGE:36==
5
Results
Results form the diﬀerent methods explained in section refsec:Method are presented in here. The
diﬀerent parameters and approaches used are described in section 4. For this thesis, almost 2 years
of data are processed. The data is taken from Sentinel-1 ascending and descending track. Acqui-
sitions from ascending track 90 from October 2016 until October 2017 are used. For descending
track 25, the data is taken since it started to be available on 29th of July 2017 until October 2018.
Results focus on the North wall of the area of Karrat Fjord, described in section 1.1.
5.1
Results on ascending track
Ascending track acquisitions from December 2016 until October 2017 are processed with both
oﬀset tracking and . Three concrete areas are looked into details since they have and uncoherent
pattern in most of the results. These areas are marked with dashed lines (see ﬁgures 21 (a) and
(b), and 22), corresponding to the area of Nuugaatsiaq landslide, the area of the West landslide
and the left bottom part of the cliﬀ, which also appear uncoherent.
In this period, Nuugaatsiaq Landslide is ﬁrst observed on single-pair interferometric results. Fig-
ures 21 (a) and (b), represent the wrapped phase between the periods from 2017/06/15 to 2017/06/21
and 2017/06/15 to 2017/06/27, respectively. This feature is observed as a big noise area on the
east part of the cliﬀ. The huge movement from the landslide destroyed the coherence from inter-
ferometric results, making visible this event.
The conditions of the area, described in section 1.1, make results on the winter period diﬃcult to
read, looking very noisy in general. Even if some individual results present signatures of movement
in the wrapped phase, the temporal discontinuity in those interferograms makes inaccurate the
possible results from SBAS. The individual results of the wrapped phase can be seen in ﬁgure 22.
The West landslide appears since the ﬁrst result, between 2016/10/12 and 2016/10/18 (22 (a))
and is visible as an uncoherent area in all the others.
29
==PAGE:37==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
It is also interesting to look at the area of Nu-
ugaatsiaq landslide on ﬁgures 22 (d), (e) and
(f), where a small area on the middle-left part
is uncoherent in the three results. This decor-
relation can indicate large deformation gradi-
ents.
Unfortunately, results on oﬀset track-
ing during the winter period, have a spatial
noise pattern making it diﬃcult to measure
signatures of movement. An example of a typ-
ical oﬀset tracking output for this period can
be seen in ﬁgure 20, between 2017/01/16 and
2017/01/28.
Figure 20:
Oﬀset tracking single-pair between
2017/01/16 and 2017/01/28.
Summer periods are more reliable to apply SBAS. Weather conditions make temporal continuity
between interferometric results more likely. Summer acquisitions are divided into two periods, the
period before Nuugaatsiaq landslide and the period after the landslide (see 1.1). The following
sections present the results on these periods.
30
==PAGE:38==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
Figure 21:
Interferometric phase change between 2017/06/15 and 2017/06/21, (a), and between
2017/06/15 and 2017/06/27, (b). Nuugaatsiaq landslide is ﬁrst observed in interferometric results as
a big uncoherent area.
31
==PAGE:39==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
Figure 22: Interferometric results for the winter period.
The diﬀerent ﬁgures present phase changes
between (a) 2016/10/12 and 2016/1018, (b) 2016/11/11 and 2016/11/17, (c) 2016/11/23 and 2016/11/29,
(d) 2016/12/17 and 2016/12/23, (e) 2017/02/15 and 2017/02/21, and (f) 2017/03/05 and 2017/03/17.
5.1.1
Before Nuugaatsiaq landslide
In this period, there is a suﬃcient number of consecutive single-pairs results to apply SBAS. The
period between mid-May until mid-June can be studied to identify possible signatures of movement
as an indicator for the landslide.
First results from SBAS can be seen in ﬁgure 23. The red circle indicates the point from which the
unwrapping is made, hence the estimated deformation on the cliﬀis relative to this point. These
results presented a particular feature around the area of Nuugaatsiaq landslide. Two diﬀerent
combinations of unwrapped interferograms were used in here. Atmospheric eﬀects are very present
all around the cliﬀ.
On ﬁgure 23 (b) the phase fringes, produced by atmospheric eﬀects are
32
==PAGE:40==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
correlated with height (see section 3.1.1). Atmospheric eﬀects can be avoided by taking better
results on individual interferograms where atmospheric eﬀects are not that pronounced or using
a big number of layers on SBAS problem. However, the number of layers for this period was
limited. In ﬁgure 23 (a) a jump from green to red can be also observed. This jump is produced
by coregistration problem on azimuth direction between overlapped burst areas (see section 3.1.2).
The jump was corrected for future results removing the ﬁlter made on the coregistration process.
On ﬁgure 23 (a) a masked area can be observed in the bottom part of the area of the landslide,
which means coherence is destroyed in that area. On ﬁgure 23 (b) an exciting feature in the same
area is present, the velocity map indicates movement of -0.6 to 0.8 mm/day approximately, i.e. in
the opposite direction of the satellite.
(a)
(b)
Figure 23: (a) SBAS results for the period before the landslide.
A jump in phase is present due to
coregistration problems in azimuth. The bottom area of the landslide appears masked. (b) SBAS result
for the period before the landslide. The bottom part of the landslide area presents a big movement of
-0.6 to 0.8 mm/day.
At ﬁrst sight, these two results can be interpreted as a signature of movement in the area of Nuu-
gaatsiaq landslide, but when further investigation is made this loss of coherence is a consequence
of the terrain slope S being very close to the look angle. Figure 24 shows examples of this eﬀect.
Figures 24 (e) and (f) are examples where the bottom part of landslide’s area is masked out. Fig-
ures 24 (a) and (c) correspond to the multilooked intensity images of the two acquisitions used for
24 (e), taken on 2017/05/22 and 2017/06/03. In the intensity images can be observed that this
area appears quite bright in both acquisitions, which means that the intensity is quite high. Here
the signal is returned almost perpendicular to the radar, which makes this intensity being quite
prominent. This eﬀect is a consequence of the SAR look angle being very close to the slope S.
Figures 24 (b), (d) and (f) are other examples where this is happening. These results are in good
33
==PAGE:41==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
agreement with the Ri index presented on section 4.3, ﬁgure 18 (a). For this area the Ri index is
0 or close to 0, meaning that there is no visibility of limited visibility, due to layover.
Figure 24: Amplitude images, where layover can be observed in the bottom part of the landslide area
(red line) as a big bright area, on ﬁgures (a), (b), (c) and (d). Layover eﬀects on the unwrapped phase
on the bottom part of Nuugaatsiaq landslide, (e) and (f), where this area appears masked.
34
==PAGE:42==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
For this period SBAS problem is solved with
6 unwrapped interferograms.
The selection of
these results is made trying to avoid pronounced
atmospheric eﬀects and the masked areas due
to layover observed in ﬁgure 24.
The de-
tails of these interferograms are in table 5.1,
and the complete set of ﬁgures can be seen in
appendix A.1.
The unwrapped and wrapped
phase of this set does not give any information
about movement, but one interesting example of
a single-pair unwrapped phase result, together
with its wrapped interferogram can be seen in
ﬁgure 25. Here results between 2017/06/03 and
2017/06/15 are presented, being 2017/06/15 the
last acquisition before the landslide.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
Bn [ m ]
18
20170510
20170528
-60.37
12
20170510
20170522
-3.11
6
20170522
20170528
-57.26
18
20170528
20170615
-31.67
18
20170522
20170609
14.51
12
20170603
20170615
-9
Table 5.1:
Unwrapped interferograms used for
SBAS with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition
date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisi-
tion date for the second SLC image, Date 2. The
perpendicular baseline values, Bn can be seen.
The area of Nuugatsiaq landslide presents features of movement in the wrapped phase, ﬁgure 25
(a), on blue and purple, and the unwrapped phase, ﬁgure 25 (b), appears masked in this area. This
means that the movement has overcome the value of λ/2, destroying coherence. Oﬀset tracking
can give some information on these areas. However, Ri index in that area is below 0.5 (see Fig.
18 (a)), hence it is diﬃcult to say if this results id due to movement or foreshortening eﬀects, (see
section 4.3).
(a)
(b)
Figure 25: Results between 2017/06/03 and 2017/06/15: (a) wrapped phase, (b) unwrapped phase.
Figure 26 shows the results from SBAS. The West landslide and the bottom-left part area appear
masked as expected. SBAS problem also estimates the height error δh and the residual error
35
==PAGE:43==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
e. The map of this estimations can be seen in ﬁgures 27 (a) and (b) respectively. The height
error estimation looks quite noise, mostly in the top part of the cliﬀ. The values on this area are
close to 200 meters and negative values that go up to -200 meters, which is an implausible result
considering the values of perpendicular baselines Bn, presented on table 5.1, which are below 61
meters in absolute value. Also, on velocity estimation (ﬁgure 26) the top of the cliﬀhas a noise
spatial distribution. The period in which interferograms are processed (mid-May until mid-June)
it is still unstable due to seasonal eﬀects and some of the interferograms present many masked
areas. The SBAS problem is solved for the points that at least have 4 values with data. The peak
values are due to the masked areas in the points without data, the small number of layers used in
the inversion increases uncertainty in the estimation (see section 3.4).
Figure 26: SBAS velocity map estimation for the period before the landslide, using the unwrapped
interferograms listed in table 5.1. Values of deformation go from -1.2 to 1.2 mm/day.
36
==PAGE:44==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
(a)
(b)
Figure 27: Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period before
the landslide
The residual error on ﬁgure 26 present strong phase fringes, which appear correlated with height,
going from 4.5 to -4.5 mm/day progressively from bottom to the top of the cliﬀ. This is a char-
acteristic of tropospheric eﬀects (see section 3.1.1).
Tropospheric eﬀects are present from the
unwrapping layers used for SBAS problem, that clings to the residual error term in the inversion.
In addition to the problems presented before, the results on the area of Nuugaatsiaq landslide are
not very promising. There are not clear signatures of movement, apart from a masked area on top,
which is close to the noise area on top of the cliﬀ, which makes vague the interpretation of this
feature.
The lack of good single-pair unwrapped interferograms on this period implicates a poor result on
SBAS, with many uncertain areas as well as the atmospheric eﬀects, that can be observed in the
bottom close part to the area of the landslide.
SBAS is also implemented with oﬀset tracking results, what we call PO-SBAS. The velocity map
estimation from PO-SBAS can be seen in ﬁgure 28. In this case, 7 single-pair oﬀset tracking results
are used. These results can be seen in appendix A.1. In this case, the baseline term was despised.
The standard error is presented for the results as an analysis tool.
37
==PAGE:45==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
The results on PO-SBAS, ﬁgure 28, for ascend-
ing track, are not very reliable, since the noise
ﬂoor is in between -10 to 10 mm in many areas,
and no signatures of movement can be observed
around. The top areas correspond to snowy ar-
eas on top of the cliﬀ, so those signatures are
despicable from the results.
Single-pair oﬀset
tracking results presented this characteristic in
general, so a PO-SBAS result like this can be
expected.
The error on ﬁgure 29 (b) is between -50 and 50
cm, but its spatial patter does not give much in-
formation. The standard error on ﬁgure 29 (b),
is close to zero in most of the cliﬀbut from lo-
calized areas where this error is close or above
70 mm/day.
This localized areas in the stan-
dard error corresponding to the areas with big
movement on ﬁgure 28.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
12
20170510
20170522
6
20170522
20170528
12
20170522
20170603
6
20170528
20170603
12
20170528
20170609
12
20170603
20170615
6
20170609
20170615
Table 5.2: Oﬀset tracking results used for SBAS
with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for
the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition date
for the second SLC image, Date 2.
Figure 28: PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period before the landslide, using oﬀset tracking
results listed in table 5.2. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
38
==PAGE:46==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem
before the landslide.
5.1.2
After Nuugaatsiaq landslide
After Nuugatsiaq landslide, the cliﬀfall around 200 meters from its original form (see 1.1). In the
results presented in this section, a new DEM is used, in which the height diﬀerence is corrected,
(see section 2, Fig. 7). The results from SBAS for this period can be seen in ﬁgure 30. Again
the red circle marks the unwrapping starting point. Some atmospheric eﬀects around the cliﬀare
still observable, which were present in many of the unwrapped interferograms that can be seen in
appendix A.2. The peak values are not that visible in this results, since here at least 70% of data
for each point is taken, if this is not fulﬁlled the point is masked out, which means that at least
11 unwrapped interferograms with data are necessary for SBAS calculation. The larger amount
of unwrapped interferogram reduces the uncertainty in the results (3.4) and also helps to average
out atmospheric eﬀects even if they are still visible.
Figure 31 (a) present the estimated height error, where atmospheric eﬀects can be observed, mostly
in the top and bottom east part, with values between 100 and 200 meters, which are unlikely values
taking into account that the normal baselines for all the results are below 100 meters in absolute
value, except for the results between 2017/08/08 and 2017/08/14, which is -151.35. The residual
error can be seen in ﬁgure 31 (b), where again, phase fridges related to tropospheric eﬀects are
visible.
At ﬁrst sight, on the area of the Nuugaatsiaq landslide, some signatures of movement can be
appreciated, with rates between -04 and -0.6 mm/day, but in general, the spatial pattern is noise,
and it is diﬃcult to conclude that these values are due to movement. The top of the cliﬀpresents
many jumps, due to the unwrapped interferograms that do not have data available for these points.
39
==PAGE:47==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
However, the jumps are much smaller than in ﬁgure 26, where we only had 6 available unwrapped
interferograms.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
Bn [m]
18
20170621
20170709
25.97
12
20170627
20170709
63.34
12
20170703
20170715
-59.84
6
20170627
20170703
-11.83
6
20170715
20170721
85.6
12
20170715
20170727
81.75
6
20170721
20170727
-3.85
6
20170727
20170802
-10.52
12
20170727
20170808
53.07
12
20170802
20170814
-87.75
24
20170802
20170826
-9.64
6
20170802
20170808
63.59
6
20170808
20170814
-151.35
12
20170814
20170826
78.12
6
20170820
20170826
-34.79
Table 5.3: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS results after the landslide, with the temporal baseline
δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date
2. The perpendicular baseline values, Bn can be seen.
The West landslide and bottom left part appear masked as expected, but there are no clear
signatures of movement around. Even with more layers, the results are not very promising, which
can be a consequence of the reduced resolution index in this area for ascending track acquisitions.
40
==PAGE:48==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
Figure 30: SBAS velocity map estimation for the period after the landslide, using the unwrapped inter-
ferograms listed in table 5.3. Values of deformation go from -1.2 to 1.2 mm/day.
(a)
(b)
Figure 31: Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period after
the landslide.
PO-SBAS results can be seen in ﬁgure 33. For this estimation, 15 oﬀset tracking results are used,
41
==PAGE:49==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
same ones as listed in table 5.3, but removing the baseline term. The complete set of single-pair
oﬀset tracking results used in the PO-SBAS plroblem can be seen in A.2. There are two examples
of single-pair oﬀset tracking results that can be interesting to observe. Figure 32 (a) present large
deformation rate on a small circle in the area of Nuugaatsiaq landslide, whit a value below -85
mm/day, just upward this feature movement around -55 mm/day, and on the bottom part of this
area, with values around 65 mm/day. In the results on ﬁgure 32 (b) deformation rates from 25
to 45 mm/day can be seen in the left bottom part, and in the bottom part of the main landslide
there is a blue area with values above 75 mm/day.
Figure 32: Examples on oﬀset tracking results used in the PO-SBAS problem, between: (a)2017/06/21
and 2017/07/09, and (b) 2017/08/14 and 2017/08/26.
Figure 33 appears less noise than results before the landslide (ﬁgure 28). A big movement, around
-70 mm/day, is appreciated in the area of the landslide, which is also seen in the single-pair result
on ﬁgure 32 (a). The standard error can be seen in ﬁgure 34 (a), where the values are close to zero
in most of the area, apart from some values on top of the cliﬀbetween 30 and 70 mm/day, and
the small area on the landslide which presented movement, with values around 60 mm/day.
42
==PAGE:50==
5.1. RESULTS ON ASCENDING TRACK
5.1
Figure 33: PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period after the landslide, using oﬀset tracking
results listed in table 5.4. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
The resolution index Ri for ascending track on this area, presented on 18 (a), is not very good.
The dependence of the oﬀset tracking results in the SAR resolution can be an indicator for the
poor results presented in this section. For this period, more observations are available, taking
the results between the 21st of June 2017 until the 26th of August 2017, where 15 unwrapped
interferograms are available, see table 5.3.
43
==PAGE:51==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 34: Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem for
the period after the landslide.
5.2
Results on descending track
In this section, results from descending track data of Sentinel 1 are presented. Descending track
acquisition mode is available since the 29th of June 2017. Data from the 29th of June 2017 until the
16th of October 2018 is processed, but the winter period has limitations to apply SBAS. However,
some individual wrapped interferograms can be studied.
Some good results from the Winter
period of the wrapped phase can be seen in ﬁgure 35. Results from six single-pair DInSAR are
presented: (a)2017/12/20-2017/12/26, (b) 2018/01/07-2018/01/13, (c) 2018/01/19-2018/01/25,
(d) 2018/01/25-2018/01/31, (e) 2018/03/14-2018/03/26 and (f) 2018/04/01-2018/04/07. On these
six results, the West landslide appears uncoherent, and also the left bottom part. Figures 35 (a),
(d), (e) y (f), present a clear uncoherent area on Nuugaatsiaq landslide section, in the middle left
part.
Figure 35 (e) is a clear example of tropospheric eﬀects related with height (see section 3.1.1) ,
where the phase fringes appear correlated with the altitude of the cliﬀ, going progressively from
green to purple.
44
==PAGE:52==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 35: Interferometric results for the winter period on descending track acquisitions. The diﬀerent
ﬁgures present phase changes between (a) 2017/12/20 and 2017/12/26, (b) 2018/01/07 and 2018/01/13,
(c) 2018/01/19 and 2018/01/25, (d) 2018/01/25 and 2018/01/31, (e) 2018/03/14 and 2018/03/26, and
(f) 2018/04/01 and 2018/04/07.
Again, winter results on oﬀset tracking presented a noise spatial pattern, and movement rates are
diﬃcult to see. Two examples of typical outputs on this period can be seen in ﬁgure 36.
45
==PAGE:53==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 36: Results on oﬀset tracking from descending track during winter. Single-pair results are calcu-
lated between: (a) 2017/12/26 and 2018/01/19, and (b) 2018/03/12 and 2018/03/14.
5.2.1
Summer 2017
To apply SBAS on the period between 2017/07/29 and 2017/10/15, 13 unwrapped interferograms
are used, with a diﬀerence between acquisitions of 6, 12, 18 and 24 days. The unwrapped interfer-
ograms used for SBAS problem are listed in table 5.4. The complete set of interferograms listed
in this table can be seen in appendix A.3.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
Bn [ m ]
12
20170729
20170810
50.54
6
20170729
20170804
60.2116
6
20170804
20170810
-9.6177
12
20170810
20170822
-32.9181
6
20180822
20170828
-31.46
18
20180810
20180828
-64.2269
12
20170822
20170903
14.4362
24
20170810
20170903
-18.4825
24
20170822
20170915
-10.7777
6
20170903
20170909
27.6646
6
20170927
20171003
65,5885
6
20171009
20171015
-29,5831
Table 5.4: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem in the period of summer 2017, descending
track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition
date for the second SLC image, Date 2. The perpendicular baseline values, Bn can be seen.
Examples of the unwrapped interferograms can be seen in ﬁgure 37. On this period, atmospheric
eﬀects are present in most of the interferograms to a greater or a lesser extent, for 2017/08/22-
46
==PAGE:54==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
2017/08/28, ﬁgures 37 (c) and (d), the atmospheric eﬀects are quite strong in most of the cliﬀ,
but some movement can be observed in the left bottom area. For results between 2017/08/10 and
2017/08/22, 37 (a) and (b) , and between 2017/08/22 and 2017/0828, 37 (e) and (f) the atmospheric
eﬀects are less present and the movement can be better distinguish. Between 2017/08/10 and
2017/08/22 (37 (a)) there is movement in the area of the main landslide of above -0.5 mm/day,
the top of the left bottom area also present some movement around -0.5 mm/day. A similar pattern
can be observed between 2017/08/22-2017/08/28. Comparing the unwrapped phase, ﬁgures 37 (a),
(c) and (d), with its corresponding wrapped phase, ﬁgures 37 (b), (d) and (f), the noisy areas where
coherence its lost appear as masked areas on the unwrapping.
Figure 37: Interferometric results between 2017/08/10 and 2017/08/22, 2017/08/22 and 2017/08/28 and
2017/08/22 and 2017/09/03: (a), (c), (e) show the unwrapped phase, and (b), (d) and (f) show the
corresponding wrapped phase.
Results from SBAS can be seen in ﬁgure 38. It can be observed that the bottom left area and the
West landslide are masked out, and also some parts of the landslide´s area, in good agreement with
the individual results presented on ﬁgure 37. Also, the Ri index presented in ﬁgure 19 (a) section
47
==PAGE:55==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
4.3 has values between 0.5 and 1 on those areas, which means there is good visibility. Atmospheric
eﬀects appear weaker even when results such as the one in ﬁgure 37 (c) is used, but the presence
of these results is visible on the big blue area on the right part of the cliﬀ. A good peculiarity
of SBAS method is that when many observations are taken, the atmospheric eﬀects of a certain
observation can be averaged out.
Figure 38: SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2017 on descending track, using the
unwrapped interferograms listed in table 5.4. Values of deformation go from -1.2 to 1.2 mm/day.
48
==PAGE:56==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 39: Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period of
Summer 2017.
Figures 39 (a) and (b) present the estimated height error (δh) and residual error (e) estimated by
SBAS model, respectively. Both estimations are characterized by atmospheric error. On the height
error, ﬁgure 39 (a), there are some peak values above 200 meters, which apart from being aﬀected
by atmospheric error, can give information about particular results of movement, the values of this
errors can be observed to go from values close to 0 on the bottom of the cliﬀto values above 200
meters on top of the cliﬀ, the result for the height error appears to be too aﬀected by tropospheric
errors related to height . The residual error goes from -2.5 to 2.5 mm/day, it is also characterized
by the atmospheric eﬀect being the values on the bottom of the cliﬀclose to -2.5 mm/day to
2.5 mm/day on top of the cliﬀ. The top of the cliﬀis the area which is presented with more
irregularities as it is close to the snowy part, that is more unstable.
Regarding deformation results on ﬁgure 38, the left bottom part presents signatures of movement on
top of the masked area with a magnitude between -0.2 to -0.6 mm/day, which means the movement
is away from the radar. The area of the landslide present movement signatures away from the radar,
with a magnitude around -0.2 mm/day. On this area, there are also some peak values in dark blue
and red that do not give reliable information. Figure 39 (a) has some outstanding values in this
area, which might be related to the observed peaks in the movement.
49
==PAGE:57==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
To apply PO-SBAS, 11 oﬀset tracking results
are used in the period from 2017/07/29 to
2017/09/09.
This oﬀset tracking results are
listed on table 5.5, and can be seen in appendix
A.3. The temporal baselines of the diﬀerent re-
sults are 6, 12, 18, 24 and 30 days.
Exam-
ples of these individual results can be seen in
40, where 3 oﬀset tracking results are presented:
2017/08/04-2017/08/10 with 6 days diﬀerence,
2017/08/10-2017/08/28 with 18 days diﬀerence
and 2017/08/28-2018/09/09 with 12 days diﬀer-
ence. Figures 40 (b) and (c) present a clear move-
ment on the left bottom part, which is masked
out on the interferometric results. The movement
on 40 (b) is around 85 mm/day, i.e towards the
radar, and in 40 (c) it is around -70 mm/day, i.e
away from the radar. These results are in con-
secutive periods, and the movement is going in
the opposite direction, which seems an unlikely
result.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
6
20170729
20170804
6
20170804
20170810
12
20170804
20170816
12
20170810
20170822
18
20170810
20170828
12
20180822
20170903
6
20180828
20180903
12
20170828
20170909
6
20170903
20170909
30
20170810
20170909
24
20170810
20170903
Table 5.5: Oﬀset tracking results used for SBAS
problem in the period of summer 2017, descending
track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition
date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisi-
tion date for the second SLC image, Date 2.
Figure 40 (b) present an interesting signature in between the West landslide and the main landslide
areas. A movement of around -65 mm/day is followed by eastwards movement around 80 mm/day.
Similar patterns are presented in ﬁgures 40 (b) and (c). Figure 40 (b) has movement between -45
to -60 mm/day in the area of the West landslide followed by a positive movement between 55 and
75 mm/day in between the West and main landslide. The pattern in ﬁgure 40 (c) it is similar to
ﬁgure 40 (b) but this last one present more noisy areas close to the West landslide which can make
the results less reliable, also the movement in the West landslide is above -85 mm/day.
50
==PAGE:58==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 40:
Examples on oﬀset tracking results used
in the PO-SBAS problem, between:
(a)2017/08/08 and
2017/08/10, (b) 2017/08/10 and 2017/08/28, and (c)
2017/08/28 and 2017/09/09
The velocity map from PO-SBAS is in
ﬁgure 41. It is interesting to observe how
the noise ﬂoor decreases when using de-
scending track data, being close to 0 in
most of the areas. The area of the West
landslide where two main signatures of
movement are visible, on the left in the
dark blue, corresponding to a movement
of 50 mm/day, i.e. towards the radar,
and on the right in orange, correspond-
ing to a movement of -40 mm/day, i.e
away from the radar.
In the left bot-
tom part, a movement of 30 to 40 mm/-
day can be observed, corresponding to
the masked area in ﬁgure 38, which has
an opposite direction to the deformation
on the top area on interferometric SBAS
(see ﬁgure 38). For PO-SBAS the heigh
error is not estimated. Results from the
standard error of the data and the resid-
ual error can be seen in ﬁgures 42 (a)
and (b) respectively. The standard er-
ror map has signiﬁcant values above 70
mm/day, mostly on the top of the cliﬀ,
which is close to snow areas. Some val-
ues of the standard error have to be high-
lighted in the area of the West land-
slide, and the bottom-left part, with val-
ues around 30 mm/day, the rest of the
cliﬀhas a standard error very close to 0
mm/day.
For the residual error, we can observe values between -250 mm/day and 250 mm/day, with high
value in the left bottom part, below -250 mm/day in a big area. On the West landslide area, the
error value is around 150 mm/day, and there is a pronounced small red area in which the error
is below -250 mm/day. The error is signiﬁcant on top of the cliﬀand also presented with a noisy
pattern.
51
==PAGE:59==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 41: PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2017, using oﬀset tracking results
listed in table 5.5. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem for
the period of summer 2017.
52
==PAGE:60==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
5.2.2
Summer 2018
Descending track acquisition mode fully covered the summer period of 2018. For SBAS, 20 un-
wrapped interferograms are good to use in the estimation of the velocity map. The list of the
diﬀerent unwrapped interferograms can be seen in table 5.6. The complete set of interferograms
used can be seen in appendix A.4.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
Bn [m]
6
20180612
20180618
-120.62
18
20180612
20180630
2.58
12
20180630
20180712
-21.18
6
20180712
20180718
-105.50
6
20180724
20180730
-8.25
12
20180730
20180811
88.45
12
20180811
20180823
-107.42
6
20180817
20180823
32.69
6
20180823
20180829
-19.95
12
20180823
20180904
-2.09
12
20180829
20180910
107
12
20180904
20180916
-5.01
12
20180910
20180922
-27.25
6
20180910
20180916
-94.15
6
20180916
20180922
66.87
18
20180829
20180916
12.85
12
20180922
20181004
-51.88
12
20181004
20181016
-9.52
6
20181004
20181010
-97.86
6
20181010
20181016
-107.38
Table 5.6: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem in the period of summer 2018, descending
track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition
date for the second SLC image, Date 2. The perpendicular baseline values, Bn can be seen.
Examples of the unwrapped phase with its corresponding wrapped phase, used to solve SBAS
can be seen in ﬁgure 43. Four diﬀerent individual results are presented: 2018/06/12-2018/0630,
2018/06/30-2018/07/12, 2018/07/24-2018/07/30. A common movement feature can be observed
in the left bottom part, above the masked area dashed with lines. The 4 dates present a movement
between -0.4 and -1 mm/day in this area, that can be seen in ﬁgures 43 (a), (c), (e) and (g).
Figures 5.6, (b), (d), (f) and (h) also present the typical phase fringes characteristic of deformation
in this area.
Figure 37 (e) is an example of unwrapped interferogram with strong atmospheric eﬀects on top
53
==PAGE:61==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
of the cliﬀ, but still some movement in the left bottom part is visible. This eﬀect is expected to
be averaged out when applying multi-temporal SBAS. Figure 5.6 (g) presents a movement of -0.5
mm/day on the area of the main landslide, which can be also appreciates in the wrapped phase
on ﬁgure 5.6 (h). In all the examples on 5.6, the unwrapped phase present masked areas which in
the wrapped interferograms appear as uncoherent.
Figure 43: Interferometric results between 2018/06/12 and 2018/06/30, 2018/06/12 and 2018/06/30,
2018/07/24 and 2018/07/30, and 2018/09/16 and 2018/09/22: (a), (c), (e) and (g) show the unwrapped
phase, while (b), (d), (f) and (h) show the corresponding wrapped phase.
54
==PAGE:62==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 44 shows SBAS velocity estimation for the period between 2018/06/12 and 2018/10/16.
The atmospheric eﬀects on this result are rarely seen, and the signatures of movement on the left
bottom part are quite clear, presenting deformation -0.2 and -0.7 mm/day. In the area of the main
landslide, some weak movement can be observed, of around -0.2 mm/day; however, this was better
appreciated on ﬁgure 5.6 (g).
Figure 44: SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2018 on descending track, using the
unwrapped interferograms listed in table 5.6. Values of deformation go from -1.2 to 1.2 mm/day.
55
==PAGE:63==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 45: Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period of
summer 2018.
The estimated height error is presented in ﬁgure 45 (a). This error is smaller in general terms to
the ones observed so far, with values between -100 and 100 meters, but the values are between -20
and 20 meters in most of the areas. Atmospheric eﬀects are present, giving values on top of the cliﬀ
around 40-50 meters, and the bottom part around -20 to -50 meters. The residual error presented
in ﬁgure 45 (b), with values between -2.5 and 2.5 mm/day. In the residual error, atmospheric
eﬀects are quite clear in the east part of the cliﬀ, where a blue area with values around 2 mm/day
is present.
56
==PAGE:64==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
This period was the one with the most number of
layers to perform PO-SBAS, with 22 good oﬀset
tracking single-pair results.
The details of these
results can be seen in table 5.7, and the corre-
sponding set of images is available on appendix
A.4.
However, the period analyzed in PO-SBAS
results is shorter than the one from SBAS, going
from 2018/06/12 to 2018/09/22.
Results after
2018/09/22 were quite noise, so they were excluded.
Five examples of the oﬀset tracking results can
be seen in ﬁgure 46: (a) 2018/06/18-2018/06/30,
(b)
2018/06/24-2018/06/30,
(c)
2018/07/18-
2018/07/30, (d) 2018/07/30-2018/08/17 and (e)
2018/09/10-2018/09/22.
Figures 46 (a), (b), (d)
and (e) have a movement towards the radar in area
of the West landslide, with values from 55 to more
than 85 mm/day. In ﬁgure 46 (c) the movement
on this area go away from the radar, with a value
around -65 mm/day, followed by a blue area of
values around 45 mm/day. In the left bottom part,
some signatures of movement are also evident.
Figure 46 (c) presents a movement from 65 to
85 and above mm/day towards the radar. In the
case of ﬁgure 46 (d), the movement on that area
is going away from the radar, with values around
-45 mm/day.
This characteristic was previously
observed on oﬀset tracking results in section 5.2.1,
where consecutive single-pair results presented
diﬀerent direction movement in this area.
δt
Date 1
Date 2
12
20180612
20180624
12
20180618
20180630
24
20180618
20180712
6
20180618
20180624
6
20180624
20180630
12
20180630
20180712
12
20180712
20180724
6
20180712
20180718
12
20180718
20180730
6
20180724
20180730
12
20180730
20180811
18
20180730
20180817
12
20180811
20180823
12
20180817
20180829
6
20180817
20180823
6
20180823
20180829
12
20180823
20180904
12
20180829
20180910
12
20180904
20180916
12
20180910
20180922
18
20180829
20180916
6
20180916
20180922
Table 5.7: Oﬀset tracking results used for SBAS
problem in the period of summer 2018, descend-
ing track, with the temporal baseline δt, acqui-
sition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and
acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date
2.
The estimation of deformation rates from PO-SBAS can be seen in ﬁgure 47. The movement in
the area of the West landslide is seen, whit values from 20 to 30 mm/day towards the radar. In the
bottom left area, some movement around 15 mm/day can be appreciated. However, the movement
in this last area is better seen in some single-pair oﬀset tracking results (Fig. 46 (c) and (d)).
57
==PAGE:65==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 46: Examples on oﬀset tracking results used in the PO-SBAS problem, between: (a)2018/06/18
and 2018/06/30, (b) 2018/06/24 and 2018/06/30, (c) 2018/07/18 and 2018/07/30, (d) 2018/07/30 and
2018/08/17, and (e) 2018/09/10 and 2018/09/22
The standard error of the data used for PO-SBAS can be seen in ﬁgure 48. The values are close
to zero in most of the cliﬀ, apart from the area of the West landslides, where values around 30
mm/day can be seen. The top of the cliﬀhas big values, above 70 mm/day which correspond to
the unstable snow areas. On ﬁgure 48 (b) the residual error is presented, with values between -150
and 150 mm/day, which are considerably smaller than in previous results from section 5.1.1, 5.1.2
and 5.2.1. However, the error is quite big in the area of the West landslide and the bottom left
part with values above 150 mm/day.
58
==PAGE:66==
5.2. RESULTS ON DESCENDING TRACK
5.2
Figure 47: PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2018, using oﬀset tracking results
listed in table 5.7. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
(a)
(b)
Figure 48: Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem for
the period of summer 2018.
59
==PAGE:67==
6
Interpretation and Discussion
As expected from the conditions of the AOI, most of the methods applied during winter periods
give poor results. Only DInSAR wrapped phase gives some information for this period. Figure 22
presents the results from ascending track data for the winter period 2016/2017, where the West
landslide is recognized in all of them, as an uncorrelated area. In addition, some uncorrelated
local features are visible in the main landslide area. A similar result can be seen from descending
track acquisitions. Figures 35 present the best results from the winter period 2017/2018, where
the West landslide is also present. The left bottom part, and some localized areas on Nuugaatsiaq
landslide appear uncoherent . However, deformation fringes are not present as they were on ﬁgure
43 (b), (d), (f) and (h). Summer periods present the ideal conditions when SBAS is used. Outputs
from interferometric SBAS give good results when a suitable number of layers is available, which
is the case for both summer periods that were studied. Results on section 5.2.2 (ﬁgure 44) with 20
unwrapped phase layers, is the best result that we obtained if we compare to the period of summer
2017 (section 5.2.1 ﬁgure 38) with 12 layers and the two descending track results on ﬁgures 26 and
30 with 6 and 15 layers respectively.
A better performance of descending track 25 data was expected on Karrat Fjord from the resolution
index and sensitivity index presented in section 4.3, which is the case when SBAS results are
presented. Even if the period after the landslide with ascending track 90 data (5.1.2) uses more
layers than the summer of 2017 with descending track 25 data (5.2.1), the results on the ﬁrst are
poorer than in the second. Figure 38 presents an apparent movement in the upper part of the
bottom left area with rates between -0.2 to -0.4 mm/day which on an annual basis correspond
to values between -73 to -146 mm/year, and this area is not visible on 30. Besides, the area of
Nuugaatsiaq landslide presents a movement rate around 70 mm/year on 38 but on 30 this same
area appears unstable, and the results are diﬃcult to interpret.
The presence of a larger number of layers in same quality resolution acquisitions implies an im-
provement on interferometric SBAS, averaging out atmospheric eﬀects and measuring steady de-
formation rates. On ﬁgure 44, where 20 layers of unwrapped interferograms were used, the upper
part of the left bottom area present a clear deformation rate between -73 and -255 mm/year. In
the area of the landslide, the deformation is not that clear, but still, some movement around 70
mm/year can be expected. In ﬁgure 44 atmospheric eﬀects seem soften with respect to the summer
2017, ﬁgure 38, where atmospheric eﬀects are still visible. This improvement is due both to the
lower presence of atmospheric eﬀects in the unwrapped interferograms from summer 2018 and to
the greater number of observations that were available for this period, which allowed to average
60
==PAGE:68==
6.0
out the eﬀects.
Another consideration to be made to estimate velocity with SBAS is to avoid inadequate data,
which can present processing problems or be aﬀected by layover, shadow or foreshortening. On
section 5.1.1, the results from ﬁgure 23 (a) present jumps due to coregistration problems on the az-
imuth direction (3.1.2), and on ﬁgure 23 (b) result are bias by masked areas that do not correspond
to deformation but layover (3.1 and 4.3).
The resolution of the two diﬀerent tracks has an impact when applying oﬀset tracking. The oﬀset
tracking results used for PO-SBAS give considerably better estimations when using descending
track 25 acquisitions. Results from ﬁgures 41, with 12 layers, and 47, with 22 layers, present
clear movement on the area of the West landslide. The movement rate on this area is around 25
mm/day on summer 2018. Summer 2017 present two types of movement on the West landslide in
two small localized areas, towards the radar with a magnitude of 60-70 mm/day, and away from
the radar with a magnitude from 30 to 40 mm/day. This same period presents a clear deformation
rate of 25 to 40 mm/day in the left bottom part of the cliﬀ, which appeared to be masked out on
the unwrapped phase. For the ascending track 90 data, PO-SBAS results presented in ﬁgures 33
and 33 do not give any reliable information about movement. These two results are using 7, and
15 oﬀset tracking layers respectively on the PO-SBAS problem. The number of layers might be
an agent in the poor results, but single-pair results from oﬀset tracking do not give much useful
information on those periods either.
It is interesting to point out, that even if PO-SBAS results from descending track 25 acquisitions
are successful, some individual oﬀset tracking results might give extra information that can be
averaged out on PO-SBAS least-squares inversion. Figures 46 (c) and (d) present a clear blue and
red area on the left bottom part, corresponding to a movement rate of 70 mm/day (blue) and -55
mm/day (red). The movement of this area on PO-SBAS results from ﬁgure 47 is barely seen.
The diﬀerent motion’s magnitudes which DInSAR and oﬀset tracking can measure, makes these
two methods complement each other. Results from PO-SBAS appear to give outputs in some
areas were SBAS has no data, due to the masked areas of the unwrapped phase, at least for
descending track results. Figure 38 misses output estimations for the West landslide area and the
left bottom part. In this last part, the combination of both results is quite interesting since ﬁgure
38 is presenting a movement of -0.2 to -0.4 mm/day above the masked area, that is on the direction
away from the radar. On the other hand, ﬁgure 41 presents a movement in the masked area of 20
to 40 mm/day towards the radar. In addition, ﬁgure 38 presents a clear signature of movement on
the West landslide area.
61
==PAGE:69==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis, Sentinel-1 data over the area of Karrat Fjord, Greenland was processed. DInSAR and
oﬀset tracking single-pair results were processed with GAMMA software, to measure deformation
in the radar’s LoS in more than 300 SAR acquisition pairs, covering two years. Single-pair results
were stuck together to apply multi-temporal techniques, interferometric SBAS and PO-SBAS, over
diﬀerent periods, to calculate the average deformation rates.
From the results presented in section 5, it can be concluded that descending track 25 data provides
better information than ascending track 90 does. The resolution indices 4.3, are more promising
for descending track on the North wall of Karrat Fjord, where even for similar periods of data,
descending track results presented movement features that were not visible with ascending track
results.
Summer is the best period to apply SBAS and PO-SBAS , where the seasonal eﬀects are not
that present and a suitable set of individual layers with temporal continuity is available for the
inversion. The results are optimal when at least 13 layers are available. Descending track data give
better results on SBAS and PO-SBAS due to the superior resolution of the acquisitions and the
larger number of layers available. Besides, SBAS is an excellent approach to reduce atmospheric
eﬀects, that are averaged out when combining single-pair unwrapped interferograms.
For winter periods, the only method that gives some information about deformation is DInSAR
interferometry. The wrapped phase presents signatures of movement in the form of uncorrelated
areas and local phase fringes.
The unwrapping was unsuccessful in most of the cases, due to
decorrelated areas that limit the performance of the MCF algorithm.
The ability of oﬀset tracking to measure larger deformation rates make PO-SBAS a good com-
plement for SBAS, where the data gaps on SBAS results could be completed in some cases by
PO-SBAS. When a masked area on SBAS results is present due to big movement, the same area
presented a movement rate of fractions of centimetres in PO-SBAS. For smaller movement rates,
of fractions of millimetres, the features could be tracked with SBAS.
Future results on this area are promising, thanks to the new acquisition mode available, descending
track, which markedly improves results on oﬀset tracking and DInSAR. The combination of both
multi-temporal, SBAS and PO-SBAS methods can give meaningful information to analyze land
movement. The winter periods are the main limitation of the presented techniques, where only
the wrapped phase shows some information on sauteed dates.
62
==PAGE:70==
A
Appendix
A.1
Single-pair results before Nuugaatsiaq landslide
Figure 49: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/05/10 and 2017/06/15.
63
==PAGE:71==
A.1. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS BEFORE NUUGAATSIAQ LANDSLIDE
A.2
Figure 50: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/05/10 and 2017/06/15.
64
==PAGE:72==
A.2. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS AFTER NUUGAATSIAQ LANDSLIDE
A.2
A.2
Single-pair results after Nuugaatsiaq landslide
Figure 51: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26.
65
==PAGE:73==
A.2. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS AFTER NUUGAATSIAQ LANDSLIDE
A.2
Figure 52: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26.
66
==PAGE:74==
A.2. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS AFTER NUUGAATSIAQ LANDSLIDE
A.2
Figure 53: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26.
67
==PAGE:75==
A.2. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS AFTER NUUGAATSIAQ LANDSLIDE
A.3
Figure 54: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26.
68
==PAGE:76==
A.3. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2017
A.3
A.3
Single-pair results from summer 2017
Figure 55: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/10/15.
69
==PAGE:77==
A.3. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2017
A.3
Figure 56: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/10/15.
70
==PAGE:78==
A.3. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2017
A.3
Figure 57: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/09/03.
71
==PAGE:79==
A.3. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2017
A.4
Figure 58: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/09/03.
72
==PAGE:80==
A.4. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2018
A.4
A.4
Single-pair results from summer 2018
Figure 59: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2018/06/12 and 2018/10/16.
73
==PAGE:81==
A.4. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2018
A.4
Figure 60: Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2018/06/12 and 2018/10/16.
74
==PAGE:82==
A.4. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2018
A.4
Figure 61: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/12 and 2018/09/22.
75
==PAGE:83==
A.4. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2018
A.4
Figure 62: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/12 and 2018/09/22.
76
==PAGE:84==
A.4. SINGLE-PAIR RESULTS FROM SUMMER 2018
A.4
Figure 63: Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/12 and 2018/09/22.
77
==PAGE:85==
List of Figures
1
Karrat Fjord, taken from Gauthier et al. (2017). The AOI is squared in white. Nu-
ugaatsiaq village is situated South-west from the AOI, and North-east there is Rink
Glacier.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
(a) Optical image of the North wall of Karrat Fjord, where Nuugaatsiaq landslide took
place taken from Gauthier et al. (2017). The West and East landslide are also seen.
(b) Aerial image of the North wall of Karrat Fjord. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Scan pattern of Sentinel-1 IW mode as in Nestor Yague-Martinez (2016). The overlap
between burst in azimuth direction and between sub-swaths in range direction are
represented. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
(a) Burst location of each sub-swath for ascending track 90. (b) Ascending track ﬂight
direction of the satellite over Karrat Fjord. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
(a) Burst location of each sub-swath for descending track 90. (b) Descending track
ﬂight direction of the satellite over Karrat Fjord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
6
(a) Descending track SLC image over Karrat Fjord. This area correspond to IW3, burst
3 and 4. (b) Ascending track SLC image over Karrat Fjord. This area correspond to
IW2, burst 6 and 7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
7
(a) Arctic DEM before Nuugaatsiaq landslide of the North wall of Karrat Fjord. (b)
Corrected Arctic DEM after Nuugaatsiaq landslide for the 200 meters of the cliﬀthat
fell down.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
8
Geometry of RTI interferometry. R1
0 corresponds to the slant range of the ﬁrst pass
and R2
0 corresponds to the slant range of the second pass. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
9
Geometry of RTI in the case of zero baseline term, where the second pass is made at
the same point of the ﬁrst pass. −→
D , represents the displacement vector. . . . . . . . . .
12
10
Perpendicular baseline Bn geometry for the case when the passes are not equal. The
interferometric phase has a topographic contribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
11
Schematic representation of a correlation ﬁeld as given by Remko de Lange & Murray
(2007): (a) shows the search window around the matching window, a correlation values
has been determined and assigned to the center pixel. (b) Correlation ﬁeld where the
correlation surface is represented. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
12
Left: Interferometric coherence on SAR Geometry over the area of Karrat Fjord. Right:
Same interferometric coherence result resampled to map geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
78
==PAGE:86==
List of Figures
A.4
13
Geometric representation of the slant range ρr and the ground range ρg
. . . . . . . .
21
14
Diﬀerent possibilities of distortion produced on SAR acquisitions: (a) Layover eﬀect
(b) Foreshortening eﬀect and (c) Shadow eﬀect. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
15
Left: Interferometric phase before masking the area of interest.Rigth: Interferometric
phase after masking the area of interest.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
16
Oﬀset tracking results with diﬀerent matching windows sizes: (a) 64×256, (b) 32×128
and (c) 16 × 64. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
17
(a) Example of range oﬀset tracking single-pair result. (b) Example of azimuth oﬀset
tracking single-pair result. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
18
(a)Ri index from ascending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord. (b)Si index from
ascending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
19
(a)Ri index from descending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord. (b)Si index from
from descending track data over the area of Karrat Fjord.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
20
Oﬀset tracking single-pair between 2017/01/16 and 2017/01/28. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
21
Interferometric phase change between 2017/06/15 and 2017/06/21, (a), and between
2017/06/15 and 2017/06/27, (b). Nuugaatsiaq landslide is ﬁrst observed in interfero-
metric results as a big uncoherent area. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
22
Interferometric results for the winter period. The diﬀerent ﬁgures present phase changes
between (a) 2016/10/12 and 2016/1018, (b) 2016/11/11 and 2016/11/17, (c) 2016/11/23
and 2016/11/29, (d) 2016/12/17 and 2016/12/23, (e) 2017/02/15 and 2017/02/21, and
(f) 2017/03/05 and 2017/03/17. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
23
(a) SBAS results for the period before the landslide. A jump in phase is present due to
coregistration problems in azimuth. The bottom area of the landslide appears masked.
(b) SBAS result for the period before the landslide. The bottom part of the landslide
area presents a big movement of -0.6 to 0.8 mm/day.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
24
Amplitude images, where layover can be observed in the bottom part of the landslide
area (red line) as a big bright area, on ﬁgures (a), (b), (c) and (d). Layover eﬀects on
the unwrapped phase on the bottom part of Nuugaatsiaq landslide, (e) and (f), where
this area appears masked.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
25
Results between 2017/06/03 and 2017/06/15: (a) wrapped phase, (b) unwrapped phase. 35
26
SBAS velocity map estimation for the period before the landslide, using the unwrapped
interferograms listed in table 5.1. Values of deformation go from -1.2 to 1.2 mm/day.
.
36
27
Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period
before the landslide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
28
PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period before the landslide, using oﬀset
tracking results listed in table 5.2. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
.
38
29
Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem
before the landslide.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
30
SBAS velocity map estimation for the period after the landslide, using the unwrapped
interferograms listed in table 5.3. Values of deformation go from -1.2 to 1.2 mm/day.
.
41
79
==PAGE:87==
List of Figures
A.4
31
Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period
after the landslide. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
32
Examples on oﬀset tracking results used in the PO-SBAS problem, between: (a)2017/06/21
and 2017/07/09, and (b) 2017/08/14 and 2017/08/26.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
33
PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period after the landslide, using oﬀset track-
ing results listed in table 5.4. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
. . . .
43
34
Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem
for the period after the landslide. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
35
Interferometric results for the winter period on descending track acquisitions.
The
diﬀerent ﬁgures present phase changes between (a) 2017/12/20 and 2017/12/26, (b)
2018/01/07 and 2018/01/13, (c) 2018/01/19 and 2018/01/25, (d) 2018/01/25 and
2018/01/31, (e) 2018/03/14 and 2018/03/26, and (f) 2018/04/01 and 2018/04/07. . . .
45
36
Results on oﬀset tracking from descending track during winter. Single-pair results are
calculated between: (a) 2017/12/26 and 2018/01/19, and (b) 2018/03/12 and 2018/03/14. 46
37
Interferometric results between 2017/08/10 and 2017/08/22, 2017/08/22 and 2017/08/28
and 2017/08/22 and 2017/09/03: (a), (c), (e) show the unwrapped phase, and (b), (d)
and (f) show the corresponding wrapped phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
38
SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2017 on descending track,
using the unwrapped interferograms listed in table 5.4. Values of deformation go from
-1.2 to 1.2 mm/day. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
39
Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period
of Summer 2017.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
40
Examples on oﬀset tracking results used in the PO-SBAS problem, between: (a)2017/08/08
and 2017/08/10, (b) 2017/08/10 and 2017/08/28, and (c) 2017/08/28 and 2017/09/09 .
51
41
PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2017, using oﬀset tracking
results listed in table 5.5. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
. . . . . .
52
42
Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem
for the period of summer 2017.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
43
Interferometric results between 2018/06/12 and 2018/06/30, 2018/06/12 and 2018/06/30,
2018/07/24 and 2018/07/30, and 2018/09/16 and 2018/09/22: (a), (c), (e) and (g) show
the unwrapped phase, while (b), (d), (f) and (h) show the corresponding wrapped phase. 54
44
SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2018 on descending track,
using the unwrapped interferograms listed in table 5.6. Values of deformation go from
-1.2 to 1.2 mm/day. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
45
Height error estimation δh (a) and residual error (b) from SBAS problem, for the period
of summer 2018.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
46
Examples on oﬀset tracking results used in the PO-SBAS problem, between: (a)2018/06/18
and 2018/06/30, (b) 2018/06/24 and 2018/06/30, (c) 2018/07/18 and 2018/07/30, (d)
2018/07/30 and 2018/08/17, and (e) 2018/09/10 and 2018/09/22
. . . . . . . . . . . .
58
47
PO-SBAS velocity map estimation for the period of summer 2018, using oﬀset tracking
results listed in table 5.7. Values of deformation go from -70 to 70 mm/day.
. . . . . .
59
80
==PAGE:88==
List of Figures
A.4
48
Standard error of the data (a), and residual error estimation (b) from PO-SBAS problem
for the period of summer 2018.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
49
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/05/10 and 2017/06/15. 63
50
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/05/10 and 2017/06/15. 64
51
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26. 65
52
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26. 66
53
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26. 67
54
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/21 and 2017/08/26. 68
55
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/10/15. 69
56
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/10/15. 70
57
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/09/03. 71
58
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/07/29 and 2017/09/03. 72
59
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2018/06/12 and 2018/10/16. 73
60
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem between 2018/06/12 and 2018/10/16. 74
61
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/12 and 2018/09/22. 75
62
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/12 and 2018/09/22. 76
63
Oﬀset tracking results used on PO-SBAS problem between 2017/06/12 and 2018/09/22. 77
81
==PAGE:89==
List of Tables
5.1
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition
date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition date for the second SLC image,
Date 2. The perpendicular baseline values, Bn can be seen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Oﬀset tracking results used for SBAS with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date
for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date 2. 38
5.3
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS results after the landslide, with the temporal
baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1, and acquisition date for
the second SLC image, Date 2. The perpendicular baseline values, Bn can be seen.
. .
40
5.4
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem in the period of summer 2017, de-
scending track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image,
Date 1, and acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date 2. The perpendicular
baseline values, Bn can be seen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.5
Oﬀset tracking results used for SBAS problem in the period of summer 2017, descending
track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1,
and acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.6
Unwrapped interferograms used for SBAS problem in the period of summer 2018, de-
scending track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image,
Date 1, and acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date 2. The perpendicular
baseline values, Bn can be seen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.7
Oﬀset tracking results used for SBAS problem in the period of summer 2018, descending
track, with the temporal baseline δt, acquisition date for the ﬁrst SLC image, Date 1,
and acquisition date for the second SLC image, Date 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
82
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
Alessandro Ferretti, Andrea Monti-Guarnieri, C. P. F. R. D. d. E. e. I. P. d. M. I. D. M. C. T. F.
(2007), ‘Insar principles: Guidelines for sar interferometry processing and interpretation’, ESA
Publications ESTEC .
Andrew Sowter, Luke Bateson, P. S. K. A. . M. F. S. (2013), ‘Sinsar estimation of land motion using
intermittent coherence with applications to the south derbyshire and leicestershire coalﬁelds’,
Remote Sensing Letters 4(10), 979–987.
Arctic DEM (n.d.), https://www.pgc.umn.edu/data/arcticdem/. Accessed: 2019-04-28.
B. D. Bechor, N. & A. Zebker, H. (2006), ‘Measuring two-dimensional movements using a single
insar pair’, Geophysical Research Letters - GEOPHYS RES LETT 331.
Beauducel, F., Briole, P. & Froger, J.-L. (2000), ‘Volcano-wide fringes in ers synthetic aperture
radar interferograms of etna (1992–1998): Deformation or tropospheric eﬀect?’.
Bejar, M., Notti, D., Mateos, R., Ezquerro, P., Centolanza, G., Herrera, G., Bru, G., Sanabria,
M., Solari, L., Duro, J. & Fernandez, J. (2017), ‘Mapping vulnerable urban areas aﬀected by
slow-moving landslides using sentinel-1 insar data’, Remote Sensing 9, 876.
Bessette (2017).
Butler, R. (2019), ‘Seismic precursors to a 2017 nuugaatsiaq, greenland, earthquake–landslide–
tsunami event’, Natural Hazards 96(2), 961–973.
Casagli, N., Cigna, F., Bianchini, S., Hölbling, D., Füreder, P., Righini, G., Conte, S. D., Friedl,
B., Schneiderbauer, S., Iasio, C., Vlcko, J., Greif, V., Proske, H., Granica, K., Falco, S., Lozzi,
S., Mora, O., Arnaud, A., Novali, F. & Bianchi, M. (2016), ‘Landslide mapping and monitoring
by using radar and optical remote sensing: Examples from the ec-fp7 project safer’, Remote
Sensing Applications: Society and Environment 4, 92 – 108.
URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352938516300635
Casu, F., Manconi, A., Pepe, A. & Lanari, R. (2011), ‘Deformation time-series generation in areas
characterized by large displacement dynamics: The sar amplitude pixel-oﬀset sbas technique’,
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 49(7), 2752–2763.
83
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A.4
Chen, C. & Zebker, H. (March 2000), ‘Network approaches to two-dimensional phase unwrapping:
intractability and two new algorithms’, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 17(3).
Copernicus Open Acces hub (n.d.), https://scihub.copernicus.eu/. Accessed: 2019-01-24.
Crosetto, M., Gili, J. A., Monserrat, O., Cuevas-González, M., Corominas, J. & Serral, D. (2013),
‘Interferometric sar monitoring of the vallcebre landslide (spain) using corner reﬂectors’, Natural
Hazards and Earth System Sciences 13(4), 923–933.
URL: https://www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/13/923/2013/
Ding Xiao-Li, Li Zhi-Wei, Z. J.-J. F. G.-C. L. J.-P. (2008), ‘Atmospheric eﬀects on insar measure-
ments and their mitigation’, Molecular Diversity Preservation International (MDPI) 8(9), 5426–
5448.
Dong, J., Gong, J., Liao, M., Zhang, L., Shi, X. & Liu, Y. (2016), Landslides analysis in western
moutainous areas of china using distributed scatterers based insar, in ‘2016 IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS)’, pp. 5773–5776.
GAMMA Remote Sensing AG, Worbstrasse 225, C.-. G. S. (2017), ‘Diﬀerential interferometry and
geocoding software – diﬀgeo’, GAMMA Remote Sensing 2.
Gauthier, D., A. Anderson, S., Fritz, H. & Giachetti, T. (2017), ‘Karrat fjord (greenland) tsunami-
genic landslide of 17 june 2017: initial 3d observations’, Landslides 15.
Goldstein, R. M. & Werner, C. L. (1998), ‘Radar interferogram ﬁltering for geophysical applica-
tions’.
Hu, B. & Wu, Y. (2018), ‘Time-series displacement of landslide in danba county (china) monitored
by the small baseline subset (sbas) technique’.
Jiehua Cai, Changcheng Wang, X. M. & Wang, Q. (2017), ‘An adaptative oﬀset tracking method
with sar images for landslide displacement monitoring’, MDPI 9(830).
Nestor Yague-Martinez, Pau Prats-Iraola, S. M. I. F. R. G. R. B.-M. I. R. S. S. M. I. D. G. M. E.
S. M. (2016), ‘Interferometric processing of sentinel-1 tops data’, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTESENSING 54(4).
Notti, D., Herrera, G., Bianchini, S., Meisina, C., García-Davalillo, J. C. & Zucca, F. (2014), ‘A
methodology for improving landslide psi data analysis’, International Journal of Remote Sensing
35(6), 2186–2214.
URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01431161.2014.889864
Paris, A., Okal, E. A., Guérin, C., Heinrich, P., Schindelé, F. & Hébert, H. (2019), ‘Numerical
modeling of the june 17, 2017 landslide and tsunami events in karrat fjord, west greenland’,
Pure and Applied Geophysics 176(7), 3035–3057.
84
==PAGE:92==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A.4
Paul A.Ronsen, Scott Hensley, I. R. F. K. L. S. N. E. R. R. M. (2000), ‘Synthetic aperture radar
interferometry’, IEEE 88(3).
Pedersen, S., Larsen, L., Dahl-Jensen, T., Jepsen, H., Pedersen, G., Nielsen, T., Pedersen, A.,
von Platen-Hallermund, F. & Weng, W. (2002), ‘Tsunami-generating rock fall and landslide
on the south coast of nuussuaq, central west greenland’, Geology of Greenland Survey Bulletin
191, 73–83.
Remko de Lange, A. L. & Murray, T. (2007), ‘Improvement of satellite radar feature tracking for
ice velocity derivation by spatial frequency ﬁltering’, IEEE 45(7).
Roberts, N. J., Rabus, B. T., Clague, J. J., Hermanns, R. L., Guzmán, M.-A. & Minaya, E. (2019),
‘Changes in ground deformation prior to and following a large urban landslide in la paz, bolivia,
revealed by advanced insar’, Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 19(3), 679–696.
URL: https://www.nat-hazards-earth-syst-sci.net/19/679/2019/
Sentinel-1 processing with GAMMA software (2017), GAMMA REMOTE SENSING, GAMMA
Remote Sensing AG, Worbstrasse 225, CH-3073 Gümligen, Switzerland tel: +41-31-951 70 05,
fax: +41-31-951 70 08, email: gamma@gamma-rs.ch.
Xie, M., Huang, J., Wang, L., Huang, J. & Wang, Z. (2016), ‘Early landslide detection based
on d-insar technique at the wudongde hydropower reservoir’, Environmental Earth Sciences
75(8), 717.
Zhang, L., Liao, M., Balz, T., Shi, X. & Jiang, Y. (2015), Monitoring Landslide Activities in the
Three Gorges Area with Multi-frequency Satellite SAR Data Sets, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 181–208.
Zhang, Y., Meng, X., Jordan, C., Novellino, A., Dijkstra, T. & Chen, G. (2018), ‘Investigating slow-
moving landslides in the zhouqu region of china using insar time series’, Landslides 15(7), 1299–
1315.
85
==PAGE:93==
DTU Space
National Space Institute
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, building 327+328+356 and Ørsteds
Plads, building 348
DK-2800 Kgs.Lyngby
www.space.dtu.dk
